Oracle Corporation is an American multinational computer technology company headquartered in Austin, Texas, United States. In 2020, Oracle was the third-largest software company in the world by revenue and market capitalization. In 2023, the company’s seat in Forbes Global 2000 was 80. The company sells database software (particularly the Oracle Database) and cloud computing. Oracle's core application software is a suite of enterprise software products, such as enterprise resource planning (ERP) software, human capital management (HCM) software, customer relationship management (CRM) software, enterprise performance management (EPM) software, Customer Experience Commerce(CX Commerce) and supply chain management (SCM) software. Larry Ellison co-founded Oracle Corporation in 1977 with Bob Miner and Ed Oates under the name Software Development Laboratories (SDL). Ellison took inspiration from the 1970 paper written by Edgar F. Codd on relational database management systems (RDBMS) named "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks." He heard about the IBM System R database from an article in the IBM Research Journal provided by Oates. Ellison wanted to make Oracle's product compatible with System R, but failed to do so as IBM kept the error codes for their DBMS a secret. SDL changed its name to Relational Software, Inc (RSI) in 1979, then again to Oracle Systems Corporation in 1983, to align itself more closely with its flagship product Oracle Database. The name also drew from the 1977 CIA project codename, which was also Oracle's first customer. At this stage, Bob Miner served as the company's senior programmer. On March 12, 1986, the company had its initial public offering. In 1989, Oracle moved its world headquarters to the Redwood Shores neighborhood of Redwood City, California, though its campus was not completed until 1995. In 1995, Oracle Systems Corporation changed its name to Oracle Corporation, officially named Oracle, but is sometimes referred to as Oracle Corporation, the name of the holding company. Oracle acquired the following technology companies: PeopleSoft (2005), an ERP company Siebel (2006), a CRM company BEA Systems (2008), an enterprise infrastructure software company Sun Microsystems (2010), a computer hardware and software company (noted for its Java programming language). On July 15, 2013, Oracle transferred its stock listing from the Nasdaq to the NYSE. At the time, it was the largest-ever U.S. market transfer. In an effort to compete with Amazon Web Services and its products, Oracle announced in 2019 it was partnering with former rival Microsoft. The alliance called that Oracle Cloud and Microsoft Azure would be directly connected, allowing customers of each to store data on both cloud computing platforms and run software on either Oracle or Azure. Some saw this not only as an attempt to compete with Amazon but also with Google and Salesforce, which acquired Looker and Tableau Software, respectively. On December 11, 2020, Oracle announced that it was moving its world headquarters from Redwood Shores to Austin, Texas. On December 20, 2021, Oracle announced the acquisition of Cerner, a health information technology company. The next day, on December 21, Oracle made public the acquisition of Federos, an AI and automation tools company for network performance. The acquisition of Cerner was completed on June 8, 2022, for $28.3 billion in cash. On March 31, 2020, Oracle announced that it has entered into an agreement to acquire LiveData Utilities. The acquisition extends Oracle Utilities' Network Management System by adding a long-standing partner that provides leading operational technology (OT) middleware solutions and SCADA capabilities to monitor and control utility equipment while reducing the complexity of real-time systems. In October 2022, Oracle completed the acquisition of certain assets of Smartvid.io, Inc. (d/b/a Newmetrix). The acquisition included specific intellectual property underlying Newmetrix's AI-enabled construction safety product suite, which Oracle intends to incorporate into its Construction Intelligence Cloud. On May 16, 2018, Oracle announced it has entered into an agreement to acquire DataScience.com. On August 23, 2022, Oracle was hit with a class action lawsuit, which alleges that Oracle has been operating a "surveillance machine" which tracks in real-time and records indefinitely the personal information of hundreds of millions of people. In February 2023, the company announced it was going to invest $1.5 billion into the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as a part of the ongoing tech investment in the country. As a part of the investment, Oracle will be opening a data centre in the country's capital, Riyadh. Oracle designs, manufactures, and sells both software and hardware products and offers services that complement them (such as financing, training, consulting, and hosting services). Many of the products have been added to Oracle's portfolio through acquisitions. Oracle's E-delivery service (Oracle Software Delivery Cloud) provides generic downloadable Oracle software and documentation. Oracle Database Release 10: In 2004, Oracle Corporation shipped release 10g (g standing for "grid") as the then latest version of Oracle Database. (Oracle Application Server 10g using Java EE integrated with the server part of that version of the database, making it possible to deploy web-technology applications. The application server was the first middle-tier software designed for grid computing. The interrelationship between Oracle 10g and Java allowed developers to set up stored procedures written in the Java language, as well as, those written in the traditional Oracle database programming language, PL/SQL.)[citation needed] Release 11: Release 11g became available in 2007. Oracle Corporation released Oracle Database 11g Release 2 in September 2009. This version was available in four commercial editions—Enterprise Edition, Standard Edition, Standard Edition One, and Personal Edition—and in one free edition—the Express Edition. The licensing of these editions shows various restrictions and obligations that were called complex by licensing expert Freirich Florea. The Enterprise Edition (DB EE), the most expensive of the Database Editions, has the fewest restrictions—but nevertheless has complex licensing. Oracle Corporation constrains the Standard Edition (DB SE) and Standard Edition One (SE1) with more licensing restrictions, in accordance with their lower price. Release 12: Release 12c (c standing for "cloud") became available on July 1, 2013. Oracle Corporation has acquired and developed the following additional database technologies: Berkeley DB, which offers embedded database processing Oracle Rdb, a relational database system running on OpenVMS platforms. Oracle acquired Rdb in 1994 from Digital Equipment Corporation. Oracle has since made many enhancements to this product and development continues as of 2008[update]. TimesTen, which features in-memory database operations Oracle Essbase, which continues the Hyperion Essbase tradition of multi-dimensional database management MySQL, a relational database management system licensed under the GNU General Public License, initially developed by MySQL AB Oracle NoSQL Database, a scalable, distributed key-value NoSQL database Oracle Fusion Middleware is a family of middleware software products, including (for instance) application server, system integration, business process management (BPM), user interaction, content management, identity management and business intelligence (BI) products. Oracle Secure Enterprise Search (SES), Oracle's enterprise-search offering, gives users the ability to search for content across multiple locations, including websites, XML files, file servers, content management systems, enterprise resource planning systems, customer relationship management systems, business intelligence systems, and databases. Released in 2008, the Oracle Beehive collaboration software provides team workspaces (including wikis, team calendaring and file sharing), email, calendar, instant messaging, and conferencing on a single platform. Customers can use Beehive as licensed software or as software as a service ("SaaS"). Following a number of acquisitions beginning in 2003, especially in the area of applications, Oracle Corporation as of 2008[update] maintains a number of product lines: Oracle E-Business Suite PeopleSoft Enterprise PeopleSoft EnterpriseOne (Later renamed, JD Edwards EnterpriseOne) PeopleSoft World (Later renamed, JD Edwards World) Siebel JD Edwards Merchandise Operations Management (Formerly Retek) Planning & Optimisation Store Operations (Formerly 360Commerce) Development of applications commonly takes place in Java (using Oracle JDeveloper) or through PL/SQL (using, for example, Oracle Forms and Oracle Reports/BIPublisher). Oracle Corporation has started a drive toward "wizard"-driven environments with a view to enabling non-programmers to produce simple data-driven applications. Oracle Corporation works with "Oracle Certified Partners" to enhance its overall product marketing. The variety of applications from third-party vendors includes database applications for archiving, splitting and control, ERP and CRM systems, as well as more niche and focused products providing a range of commercial functions in areas like human resources, financial control and governance, risk management, and compliance (GRC). Vendors include Hewlett-Packard, Creoal Consulting, UC4 Software, Motus, and Knoa Software. Oracle Enterprise Manager (OEM) provides web-based monitoring and management tools for Oracle products (and for some third-party software), including database management, middleware management, application management, hardware and virtualization management and cloud management. The Primavera products of Oracle's Construction & Engineering Global Business Unit (CEGBU) consist of project-management software. Oracle Corporation's tools for developing applications include (among others): Oracle Designer – a CASE tool which integrates with Oracle Developer Suite Oracle Developer – which consists of Oracle Forms, Oracle Discoverer and Oracle Reports Oracle JDeveloper, a freeware IDE NetBeans, a Java-based software-development platform Oracle Application Express – also known as APEX; for web-oriented development Oracle SQL Developer, an integrated development environment for working with SQL-based databases Oracle SQL*Plus Worksheet, a component of Oracle Enterprise Manager (OEM) OEPE, Oracle Enterprise Pack for Eclipse Open Java Development Kit Oracle Developer Studio – a software generation system for the development of C, C++, Fortran, and Java software Oracle Visual Builder Studio Many external and third-party tools make the Oracle database administrator's tasks easier. ZFS combines file-system and logical volume management functionality. BtrFS "B-tree File-System" is meant to be an improvement over the existing Linux ext4 filesystem, and offer features approaching those of ZFS. Oracle Corporation develops and supports two operating systems: Oracle Solaris and Oracle Linux. The Sun hardware range acquired by Oracle Corporation's purchase of Sun Microsystems Oracle SPARC T-series servers and M-series mainframes developed and released after Sun acquisition Engineered systems: pre-engineered and pre-assembled hardware/software bundles for enterprise use Exadata Database Machine – hardware/software integrated storage Exalogic Elastic Cloud – hardware/software integrated application server Exalytics In-Memory Machine – hardware/software integrated in-memory analytics server Oracle Database Appliance Big Data Appliance – integrated map-reduce/big data solution SPARC SuperCluster T4-4 – a general purpose engineered system Oracle Cloud is a cloud computing service offered by Oracle Corporation providing servers, storage, network, applications and services through a global network of Oracle Corporation managed data centers. The company allows these services to be provisioned on demand over the Internet. Oracle Cloud provides Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), Software as a Service (SaaS) and Data as a Service (DaaS). These services are used to build, deploy, integrate and extend applications in the cloud. This platform supports open standards (SQL, HTML5, REST, etc.) open-source solutions (Kubernetes, Hadoop, Kafka, etc.) and a variety of programming languages, databases, tools and frameworks including Oracle-specific, free and third-party software and systems. Software as a Service (SaaS) Enterprise applications: SCM, EPM, HCM, ERP and CX SaaS offerings Oracle sells a SaaS suite of Oracle Fusion Applications business applications. On July 28, 2016, Oracle bought NetSuite, the first cloud company, for $9.3 billion. NetSuite provides cloud ERP, CRM, supply chain and e-commerce software to small and medium-sized businesses. It is regarded as the first fully cloud company in the world and is an industry leader in its own right. Platform as a Service (PaaS) Oracle has branded its Platform as a Service as Oracle Cloud Platform. Oracle Cloud Platform include Data Management, Application Development, Integration, Content and Experience, Business Analytics, Management and Security. Platform services on which to build and deploy applications or extend SaaS applications: database, Java application server, mobile, business analytics, integration, process, big data, Internet of Things, Node.js etc. Data as a Service (DaaS) Oracle Data Cloud is composed of several acquisitions including AddThis, BlueKai, Crosswise, Datalogix, Grapeshot, and Moat. Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) Oracle has branded its Infrastructure as a Service as Oracle Cloud Infrastructure (OCI). Oracle Cloud Infrastructure offerings include the following services. Compute Service Storage Service Network Service On May 16, 2018, Oracle announced that it had acquired DataScience.com, a privately held cloud workspace platform for data science projects and workloads. Oracle Consulting – technical and business expert services Oracle Financing Oracle Marketing & Support Product support: Oracle Corporation identifies its customers and their support entitlements using CSI (Customer Support Identifier) codes. Registered customers can submit Service Requests (SRs)—usually via the web-accessible My Oracle Support (MOS), a re-incarnation of Oracle Metalink with web access administered by a site Customer User Administrator (CUA). Critical Patch Updates: since 2005 Oracle Corporation has grouped collections of patches and security fixes for its products each quarter into a "Critical Patch Update" (CPU), released each January, April, July and October. Oracle Configuration Manager (OCM, previously Customer Configuration repository or CCR) gathers and uploads details of the configuration of Oracle software. Oracle Auto Service Request (ASR) automatically creates Service Requests for specific hardware faults on qualified Oracle server, storage, Oracle Exadata, and Oracle Exalogic products. My Oracle Support Community (MOSC) Oracle University (training in Oracle products) Oracle Certification Program NetSuite Social Impact program assists nonprofits with moving operations to the cloud. In October 2018, Oracle announced the expansion of the program to include product donation, pro bono expansion and online community building. As of September 13, 2020, Oracle acquired a trade deal with the ByteDance owned social video platform TikTok. This was the result of an executive order issued by U.S. president Donald Trump stating that TikTok must be sold to a U.S. company by September 15, 2020. The exact nature of the agreement is still unknown, but it implies that Oracle will become TikTok's technology partner and assume responsibility for the company's U.S. user data. The agreement is still pending approval from regulatory government bodies. In 1990, Oracle laid off 10% (about 400 people) of its work force because of accounting errors. This crisis came about because of Oracle's "up-front" marketing strategy, in which sales people urged potential customers to buy the largest possible amount of software all at once. The sales people then booked the value of future license sales in the current quarter, thereby increasing their bonuses. This became a problem when the future sales subsequently failed to materialize. Oracle eventually had to restate its earnings twice, and also settled (out of court) class-action lawsuits arising from its having overstated its earnings. Ellison stated in 1992 that Oracle had made "an incredible business mistake". In 1994, Informix overtook Sybase and became Oracle's most important rival. The intense war between Informix CEO Phil White and Ellison made front-page news in Silicon Valley for three years. Informix claimed that Oracle had hired away Informix engineers to disclose important trade secrets about an upcoming product. Informix finally dropped its lawsuit against Oracle in 1997. In November 2005, a book detailing the war between Oracle and Informix was published, titled The Real Story of Informix Software and Phil White. It gave a detailed chronology of the battle of Informix against Oracle, and how Informix Software's CEO Phil White landed in jail because of his obsession with overtaking Ellison. Once it had overcome Informix and Sybase, Oracle Corporation enjoyed years of dominance in the database market until the use of Microsoft SQL Server became widespread in the late 1990s and IBM acquired Informix Software in 2001 (to complement its Db2 database). Today[update] Oracle competes for new database licenses on UNIX, GNU, and Windows operating systems primarily against IBM's Db2 and Microsoft SQL Server. IBM's Db2 still[update] dominates the mainframe database market. In 2004, Oracle's sales grew at a rate of 14.5% to $6.2 billion, giving it 41.3% and the top share of the relational-database market (InformationWeek – March 2005), with market share estimated at up to 44.6% in 2005 by some sources. Oracle Corporation's main competitors in the database arena remain IBM Db2 and Microsoft SQL Server, and to a lesser extent Sybase and Teradata, with free databases such as PostgreSQL and MySQL also having a significant share of the market. EnterpriseDB, based on PostgreSQL, has recently[update] made inroads by proclaiming that its product delivers Oracle compatibility features[clarification needed] at a much lower price-point. In the software-applications market, Oracle Corporation primarily competes against SAP. On March 22, 2007, Oracle sued SAP, accusing them of fraud and unfair competition. In the market for business intelligence software, many other software companies—small and large—have successfully competed in quality with Oracle and SAP products. Business intelligence vendors can be categorized into the "big four" consolidated BI firms such as Oracle, who has entered BI market through a recent trend of acquisitions (including Hyperion Solutions), and the independent "pure play" vendors such as MicroStrategy, Actuate, and SAS. Oracle Financials was ranked in the Top 20 Most Popular Accounting Software Infographic by Capterra in 2014, beating out SAP and a number of their other competitors. From 1988, Oracle Corporation and the German company SAP AG had a decade-long history of cooperation, beginning with the integration of SAP's R/3 enterprise application suite with Oracle's relational database products. Despite the SAP partnership with Microsoft, and the increasing integration of SAP applications with Microsoft products (such as Microsoft SQL Server, a competitor to Oracle Database), Oracle and SAP continue their cooperation. According to Oracle Corporation, the majority of SAP's customers use Oracle databases. In 2004, Oracle began to increase its interest in the enterprise-applications market (in 1989, Oracle had already released Oracle Financials). A series of acquisitions by Oracle Corporation began, most notably with those of PeopleSoft, Siebel Systems and Hyperion. SAP recognized that Oracle had started to become a competitor in a markets where SAP had the leadership, and saw an opportunity to lure in customers from those companies that Oracle Corporation had acquired. SAP would offer those customers special discounts on the licenses for its enterprise applications. Oracle Corporation would resort to a similar strategy, by advising SAP customers to get "OFF SAP" (a play on the words of the acronym for its middleware platform "Oracle Fusion for SAP"), and also by providing special discounts on licenses and services to SAP customers who chose Oracle Corporation products. Currently[update] Oracle and SAP (the latter through its recently acquired subsidiary TomorrowNow) compete in the third-party enterprise software maintenance and support market. On March 22, 2007, Oracle filed a lawsuit against SAP. In Oracle Corporation v. SAP AG Oracle alleged that TomorrowNow, which provides discount support for legacy Oracle product lines, used the accounts of former Oracle customers to systematically download patches and support documents from Oracle's website and to appropriate them for SAP's use. Some analysts have suggested the suit could form part of a strategy by Oracle Corporation to decrease competition with SAP in the market for third-party enterprise software maintenance and support. On July 3, 2007, SAP admitted that TomorrowNow employees had made "inappropriate downloads" from the Oracle support website. However, it claims that SAP personnel and SAP customers had no access to Oracle intellectual property via TomorrowNow. SAP's CEO Henning Kagermann stated that "Even a single inappropriate download is unacceptable from my perspective. We regret very much that this occurred." Additionally, SAP announced that it had "instituted changes" in TomorrowNow's operational oversight. On November 23, 2010, a U.S. district court jury in Oakland, California found that SAP AG must pay Oracle Corp $1.3 billion for copyright infringement, awarding damages that could be the largest-ever for copyright infringement. While admitting liability, SAP estimated the damages at no more than $40 million, while Oracle claimed that they are at least $1.65 billion. The awarded amount is one of the 10 or 20 largest jury verdicts in U.S. legal history. SAP said they were disappointed by the verdict and might appeal. On September 1, 2011, a federal judge overturned the judgment and offered a reduced amount or a new trial, calling Oracle's original award "grossly" excessive. Oracle chose a new trial. On August 3, 2012, SAP and Oracle agreed on a judgment for $306 million in damages, pending approval from the U.S. district court judge, "to save time and expense of [a] new trial". After the accord has been approved, Oracle can ask a federal appeals court to reinstate the earlier jury verdict. In addition to the damages payment, SAP has already paid Oracle $120 million for its legal fees. "Information driven" For the Oracle Database: "Can't break it, can't break in" and "Unbreakable" Enabling the Information Age Enabling the Information Age Through Network Computing" As of 2008[update]: "The Information Company" As of 2010: "Software. Hardware. Complete." As of late 2010: "Hardware and Software, Engineered to Work Together" As of mid 2015: "Integrated Cloud Applications and Platform Services" Oracle Corporation produces and distributes the "Oracle ClearView" series of videos as part of its marketing mix. Oracle was ranked No. 82 in the 2018 Fortune 500 list of the largest United States corporations by total revenue. According to Bloomberg, Oracle's CEO-to-employee pay ratio is 1,205:1. The CEO's compensation in 2017 was $108,295,023. Oracle is one of the approved employers of ACCA and the median employee compensation rate was $89,887. Oracle reported total carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) emissions (direct + indirect) for the twelve months ending December 31, 2020 at 428 kilotonnes (+63/+17% year over year) and plans to reduce emissions 26% by 2025 from a 2015 base year. In 2000, Oracle attracted attention from the computer industry and the press after hiring private investigators to dig through the trash of organizations involved in an antitrust trial against Microsoft. The Chairman of Oracle Corporation, Larry Ellison, staunchly defended his company's hiring of an East Coast detective agency to investigate groups that supported rival Microsoft Corporation during its antitrust trial, calling the snooping a "public service". The investigation reportedly included a $1,200 offer to janitors at the Association for Competitive Technology to look through Microsoft's trash. When asked how he would feel if others were looking into Oracle's business activities, Ellison said: "We will ship our garbage to Redmond, and they can go through it. We believe in full disclosure." In 2002, Oracle Corporation marketed many of its products using the slogan "Can't break it, can't break in", or "Unbreakable". This signified a claim of information security. Oracle Corporation also stressed the reliability of networked databases and network access to databases as major selling points. However, two weeks after its introduction, David Litchfield, Alexander Kornbrust, Cesar Cerrudo and others demonstrated a whole suite of successful attacks against Oracle products. Oracle Corporation's chief security officer Mary Ann Davidson said that, rather than representing a literal claim of Oracle's products' impregnability, she saw the campaign in the context of fourteen independent security evaluations that Oracle Corporation's database server had passed. In 2004, then-United States Attorney General John Ashcroft sued Oracle Corporation to prevent it from acquiring a multibillion-dollar intelligence contract. After Ashcroft's resignation from government, he founded a lobbying firm, The Ashcroft Group, which Oracle hired in 2005. With the group's help, Oracle went on to acquire the contract. Computer Sciences Corporation, as the prime contractor, reportedly spent a billion dollars developing the Expeditionary Combat Support System for the United States Air Force. It yielded no significant capability, because, according to an Air Force source, the prime contractor "was simply not up to the task of adapting" the Oracle software, on which the system was based, to meet the specialized performance criteria. Oracle Corporation was awarded a contract by the State of Oregon's Oregon Health Authority (OHA) to develop Cover Oregon, the state's healthcare exchange website, as part of the U.S. Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. When the site tried to go live on October 1, 2013, it failed, and registrations had to be taken using paper applications until the site could be fixed. On April 25, 2014, the State of Oregon voted to discontinue Cover Oregon and instead use the federal exchange to enroll Oregon residents. The cost of switching to the federal portal was estimated at $5 million, whereas fixing Cover Oregon would have required another $78 million. Oracle president Safra Catz responded to Cover Oregon and the OHA in a letter claiming that the site's problems were due to OHA mismanagement, specifically that a third-party systems integrator was not hired to manage the complex project. In August 2014, Oracle Corporation sued Cover Oregon for breach of contract, and then later that month the state of Oregon sued Oracle Corporation, in a civil complaint for breach of contract, fraud, filing false claims and "racketeering". In September 2016, the two sides reached a settlement valued at over $100 million to the state, and a six-year agreement for Oracle to continue modernizing state software and IT. On August 23, 2022, Oracle was hit with a class action lawsuit by Lieff Cabraser representing Michael Katz-Lacabe, Dr. Jennifer Golbeck and Dr. Johnny Ryan, the latter of which is a senior fellow at the Irish Council for Civil Liberties. The lawsuit, which demands a jury trial, alleges that Oracle has engaged in "deliberate and purposeful surveillance of the general population via their digital and online existence", specifically focusing on Oracle operating a surveillance machine which tracks in real-time and records indefinitely the personal information of hundreds of millions of people. The litigants against Oracle argue that through such surveillance, the company violates the Federal Electronic Communications Privacy Act, California's state constitution, the California Invasion of Privacy Act, competition law, and California Common Law. in 2012 Oracle agreed to pay about $2 million to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The SEC at the time alleged that the company's India subsidiary structured transactions with foreign governments in a way that enabled them to hold about $2.2 million of the proceeds inside funds that could be used for unauthorized purposes and therefore being a violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. In 2022 the Securities and Exchange Commission announced settled charges requiring Oracle Corporation to pay more than $23 million to resolve charges that it violated provisions of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act when subsidiaries in Turkey, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), and India created and used slush funds to bribe foreign officials in return for business between 2016 and 2019. Larry Ellison, the founder of Oracle Corporation, has made substantial donations to Israeli causes, including more than $26 million to Friends of the Israel Defense Forces as of 2024. In January 2010, Oracle completed its acquisition of Sun Microsystems—valued at more than $7 billion—a move that transformed Oracle from solely a software company to a manufacturer of both software and hardware. The acquisition was delayed for several months by the European Commission because of concerns about MySQL, but was unconditionally approved in the end. In September 2011, U.S. State Department Embassy cables were leaked to WikiLeaks. One cable revealed that the U.S. pressured the E.U. to allow Oracle to acquire Sun. The Sun acquisition was closely watched by free software users and some companies, due to the fear that Oracle might end Sun's traditional support of free projects. Since the acquisition, Oracle has discontinued OpenSolaris and StarOffice, and sued Google over the Java patents Oracle acquired from Sun. On July 29, 2010, the United States Department of Justice (DoJ) filed suit against Oracle Corporation alleging fraud. The lawsuit argues that the government received deals inferior to those Oracle gave to its commercial clients. The DoJ added its heft to an already existing whistleblower lawsuit filed by Paul Frascella, who was once senior director of contract services at Oracle. It was settled in 2011. Oracle, the plaintiff, acquired ownership of the Java computer programing language when it acquired Sun Microsystems in January 2010. The Java software includes sets of pre-developed software code to allow programs and apps to accomplish common tasks in a consistent manner. The pre-developed code is organized into separate "packages" which each contain a set of "classes". Each class contains numerous methods, which instruct a program or app to do a certain task. Software developers "became accustomed to using Java's designations at the package, class, and method level". Oracle and Google (the defendant) tried to negotiate an agreement for Oracle to license Java to Google, which would have allowed Google to use Java in developing programs for mobile devices using the Android operating system. However, the two companies never reached an agreement. After negotiations failed, Google created its own programming platform, which was based on Java, and contained 37 copied Java packages as well as new packages developed by Google. In 2010, Oracle sued Google for copyright infringement for the use of the 37 Java packages. The case was handled in U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California and assigned to Judge William Alsup (who taught himself how to code computers). In the lawsuit, Oracle sought between $1.4 billion and $6.1 billion. In June 2011 the judge had to force Google through a judicial order to make public the details about Oracle's claim for damages. By the end of the first jury trial (the legal dispute would eventually go on to another trial) the arguments made by Oracle's attorneys focused on a Java function called "rangeCheck": The argument centered on a function called rangeCheck. Of all the lines of code that Oracle had tested—15 million in total—these were the only ones that were 'literally' copied. Every keystroke, a perfect duplicate. – The Verge, 10/19/17 Although Google admitted to copying the packages, Judge Alsup found that none of the Java packages were covered under copyright protection, and therefore Google did not infringe. After the case was over, Oracle appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (750 F.3d 1339 (2014)). On May 9, 2014, the appeals court partially reversed Judge Alsup's decision, finding that Java APIs are copyrightable. API stands for "application programming interface" and are how different computer programs or apps communicate with each other. However, the appeals court also left open the possibility that Google might have a "fair use" defense. On October 6, 2014, Google filed a petition to appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, but the Supreme Court denied the petition. The case was then returned to the U.S. District Court for another trial about Google's fair use defense. Oracle sought $9 billion in damages. In May 2016, the trial jury found that Google's use of Java's APIs was considered fair use. In February 2017, Oracle filed another appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. This time it was asking for a new trial because the District Court "repeatedly undermined Oracle's case", which Oracle argued led the jury to make the wrong decision. According to ZDNet, "For example, it [Oracle] says the court wrongly bought Google's claim that Android was limited to smartphones while Java was for PCs, whereas Oracle contends that Java and Android both compete as platforms for smart TVs, cars, and wearables." On August 13, 2010, an internal Oracle memo leaked to the Internet cited plans for ending the OpenSolaris operating system project and community. With Oracle planning to develop Solaris only in a closed source fashion, OpenSolaris developers moved to the Illumos and OpenIndiana project, among others. As Oracle completed their acquisition of Sun Microsystems in February 2010, they announced that OpenSSO would no longer be their strategic product. Shortly after, OpenSSO was forked to OpenAM. and will continue to be developed and supported by ForgeRock. On September 6, 2010, Oracle announced that former Hewlett-Packard CEO Mark Hurd was to replace Charles Phillips, who resigned as Oracle co-president. In an official statement made by Larry Ellison, Phillips had previously expressed his desire to transition out of the company. Ellison had asked Phillips to stay on through the integration of Sun Microsystems Inc. In a separate statement regarding the transition, Ellison said "Mark did a brilliant job at HP and I expect he'll do even better at Oracle. There is no executive in the IT world with more relevant experience than Mark." On September 7, 2010, HP announced a civil lawsuit against Mark Hurd "to protect HP's trade secrets", in response to Oracle hiring Hurd. On September 20, Oracle and HP published a joint press release announcing the resolution of the lawsuit on confidential terms and reaffirming commitment to long-term strategic partnership between the companies. A number of OpenOffice.org developers formed The Document Foundation and received backing by Google, Novell, Red Hat, and Canonical, as well as some others, but were unable to get Oracle to donate the brand OpenOffice.org, causing a fork in the development of OpenOffice.org with the foundation now developing and promoting LibreOffice. Oracle expressed no interest in sponsoring the new project and asked the OpenOffice.org developers that started the project to resign from the company due to "conflicts of interest". On November 1, 2010, 33 of the OpenOffice.org developers gave their letters of resignation. On June 1, 2011, Oracle donated OpenOffice.org to the Apache Software Foundation. On June 15, 2011, HP filed a lawsuit in California Superior Court in Santa Clara, claiming that Oracle had breached an agreement to support the Itanium microprocessor used in HP's high-end enterprise servers. Oracle called the lawsuit "an abuse of the judicial process" and said that had it known SAP's Léo Apotheker was about to be hired as HP's new CEO, any support for HP's Itanium servers would not have been implied. On August 1, 2012, a California judge said in a tentative ruling that Oracle must continue porting its software at no cost until HP discontinues its sales of Itanium-based servers. HP was awarded $3 billion in damages against Oracle in 2016. HP argued Oracle's canceling support damaged HP's Itanium server brand. Oracle had announced that it would appeal both the decision and damages, but the decision stayed. On August 31, 2011, The Wall Street Journal reported that Oracle was being investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for paying bribes to government officials in order to win business in Africa, in contravention of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA). In September 2022, Oracle settled with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) without admitting or denying its findings, by agreeing to pay $23 million to settle the charges. The SEC announced that Oracle violated the FCPA between 2014 and 2019 when its subsidiaries in India, Turkey and UAE created slush funds to bribe foreign officials in order to win business. On April 20, 2012, the US General Services Administration banned Oracle from the most popular portal for bidding on GSA contracts for undisclosed reasons. Oracle has previously used this portal for around four hundred million dollars a year in revenue. Oracle previously settled a lawsuit filed under the False Claims Act, which accused the company of overbilling the US government between 1998 and 2006. The 2011 settlement forced Oracle to pay $199.5 million to the General Services Administration. On September 13, 2020, Bloomberg News reported that Oracle won a bidding war with other U.S.-based companies to take over social media company TikTok's operations in the United States following the company's pressure to forcibly be shut down by the Trump administration. Oracle was described as a "trusted tech partner" by TikTok, suggesting the deal may not be as structured as an outright sale. On September 19, 2020, the Trump administration approved of the sale of TikTok's US operations to Oracle "[delaying] — by one week — restrictions that were originally to take effect" on September 20 as indicated by the United States Department of Commerce. On February 10, 2021, The Wall Street Journal reported, citing a source familiar with the matter, the Biden administration would be backing off from banning TikTok and shelving the sale of TikTok indefinitely, as the U.S. Commerce Department began reviewing whether or not Trump's claims about TikTok can justify the attempts to ban it. On February 27, 2023 Biden changed his "indefinite" stance on TikTok as he echoed Trump's 2020 claims of disapproval. Biden said Federal agencies have thirty days to remove TikTok from all federal devices. Federal contractors must meet the same standard in ninety days. On March 8, 2024 Biden said he would sign a bipartisan bill banning TikTok in the United States if the Chinese company ByteDance didn't divest. Larry Ellison: executive chairman and CTO (since September 2014), co-founder of the company, previously CEO (1977–2014), previously chairman (1990–2004). As of September 2021, he owns 42.4% of the company. Safra Catz: CEO (since September 2014), previously co-president (since 2004) and CFO. In 2016, she was ranked tenth on Fortune's Most Powerful Women list. Jeff Henley: vice chairman (since September 2014), previously chairman (2004–2014) and CFO (1991–2004). Mark Hurd: former CEO (2014–2019), previously co-president (2010–2014). In 2007, Mark Hurd was ranked No. 16 on Fortune's list of the 25 Most Powerful People in Business. He died in 2019. Charles Phillips: former co-president and director (2003–2010); replaced by Mark Hurd. Bob Miner: co-founder of the company and co-architect of Oracle Database. Led product design and development for Oracle Database (1977–1992). Spun off a technology group within Oracle in 1992. Oracle board member until 1993. He died in 1994. Ed Oates: co-founder of the company. Retired from Oracle in 1996. Umang Gupta: former vice president and general manager (1981–1984). Wrote the first business plan for the company. He died in 2022. Bruce Scott: The first hired employee (after the co-founders; employee number 4) at Oracle (then Software Development Laboratories). Scott served as the co-author and co-architect of the Oracle database up to Version 3. He left Oracle in 1982. Marc Benioff: former protégé of Ellison and the youngest to be promoted to vice president at the time; left to found and lead Salesforce in 1999. Since December 2020, Oracle Corporation's world headquarters has been located in Austin, Texas. Oracle has plans to build its largest office hub, with 8500 jobs, in Nashville within the next few decades. Oracle has a large office complex located on the San Francisco Peninsula in the Redwood Shores area of Redwood City. This complex was home to Oracle world headquarters from 1989 to 2020. It is located on the former site of Marine World/Africa USA, which moved from Redwood Shores to Vallejo in 1986. Oracle Corporation originally leased two buildings on the Oracle Parkway site, moving its finance and administration departments from the corporation's former headquarters on Davis Drive, Belmont, California. Eventually, Oracle purchased the complex and constructed four additional buildings. The distinctive Oracle Parkway buildings, nicknamed the Emerald City, served as sets for the futuristic headquarters of the fictional company "NorthAm Robotics" in the Robin Williams film Bicentennial Man (1999). The campus also represented the headquarters of Cyberdyne Systems in the movie Terminator Genisys (2015). 300 Oracle Parkway in Redwood Shores Oracle Offices in Redwood Shores, with Oracle Plaza building in left foreground Oracle Conference Center in Redwood Shores Fountain in the Oracle lake, Redwood Shores Oracle has a major business campus at Thames Valley Park in Reading in England Oracle Aoyama Center Building, with Lexus International Gallery Aoyama Oracle in Markham, Ontario Oracle office in Melbourne, Australia Oracle Corporation operates in multiple markets and has acquired several companies which formerly functioned autonomously. In some cases these provided the starting points for global business units (GBUs) targeting particular vertical markets. Oracle Corporation GBUs include: Communications Construction and engineering - formerly the Primavera GBU Financial services Food and Beverages Health sciences Hospitality Retail Energy and Water On October 20, 2006, the Golden State Warriors and the Oracle Corporation announced a 10-year agreement in which the Oakland Arena would become known as the Oracle Arena. The agreement ended after the 2018–2019 NBA season when the Warriors relocated to the Chase Center in San Francisco. Larry Ellison's sailing team competes as Oracle Team USA. The team has won the America's Cup twice, in 2010 (as BMW Oracle Racing) and in 2013, despite being penalized for cheating. Sean Tucker's "Challenger II" stunt biplane is sponsored by Oracle and performs frequently at air shows around the US. In January 2019, the San Francisco Giants entered into a 20-year agreement to rename their stadium Oracle Park. From the 2022 Formula One season, Oracle signed a 5-year deal worth $500m to become title sponsors of Red Bull Racing, after already being a sponsor effective from the 2021 season. In 1994 and 1995, Oracle sponsored Benetton. It was revealed in July 2022 that NASCAR's Joe Gibbs Racing team tried to sign a sponsorship with Oracle after Mars Inc. would announce they would leave JGR after the 2022 season, but the deal reportedly fell through. Portals:  San Francisco Bay Area  Companies  Telecommunication  Electronics  Technology List of acquisitions by Oracle Oracle Applications Oracle Certification Program Oracle Clinical Oracle Database Oracle Linux Oracle User Group Cover Oregon Oracle, FAQ; orafaq.com. Bort, Julie (September 18, 2014). "Where Are They Now? Look What Happened to the Co-founders of Oracle". Business Insider. Retrieved March 29, 2018. "Oracle Corporation §Security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management". Securities and Exchange Commission. "Oracle Corporation 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2023". U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. June 20, 2023. Bursztynsky, Jessica (December 11, 2020). "Oracle is moving its headquarters from Silicon Valley to Austin, Texas". CNBC. Retrieved December 12, 2020. "The World's Biggest Public Companies, Software/Programming". Forbes. Retrieved January 14, 2020. "The Global 2000 2023". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 29, 2024. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Vickers, Marques (2016). The Architectural Elevation of Technology: A Photo Survey of 75 Silicon Valley Headquarters. Marquis Publishing. p. 97. "Oracle's 30th Anniversary" (PDF). Profit. Oracle Corporation. May 2007. p. 26. Retrieved July 16, 2010. Codd, E. F. (1970). "A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks". Communications of the ACM. 13 (6): 377–387. doi:10.1145/362384.362685. S2CID 207549016. Niemiec, Richard (2003). Oracle9i Performance Tuning Tips & Techniques. New York: McGraw-Hill/Osborne. ISBN 978-0-07-222473-3. "Oracle Corporation - Oracle FAQ". www.orafaq.com. Retrieved March 7, 2020. "Larry Ellison's Oracle Started As a CIA Project". gizmodo.com/. September 19, 2014. Retrieved December 3, 2021. "Investor Relations". investor.oracle.com. Retrieved August 10, 2017. Cerny, Susan Dinkelspiel (2007). An Architectural Guidebook to San Francisco and the Bay Area. Salt Lake City: Gibbs Smith. p. 164. ISBN 978-1-58685-432-4. Retrieved February 13, 2023. "Oracle Systems Corporation Renamed 'Oracle Corporation'" (Press release). Oracle Corporation. June 1, 1995. Archived from the original on March 15, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2015. Frequently Asked Questions | Investor Relations. Oracle. Retrieved July 14, 2013. McCrank, John (June 20, 2013). "Oracle to move listing to Big Board from Nasdaq in coup for NYSE". Reuters. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Duffy, Clare (June 13, 2019). "Why rivals Microsoft and Oracle are teaming up to take on Amazon | CNN Business". CNN. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Li, Roland (December 11, 2020). "Oracle to move headquarters from California to Austin, in latest loss for Silicon Valley". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved February 13, 2023. Lohr, Steve (December 20, 2021). "Oracle takes a big move toward health with a deal to buy Cerner for $28.3 billion". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2021. "Oracle buys Federos". Oracle Corporation. December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Headlee, Peyton (June 7, 2022). "Oracle finalizes deal to buy Cerner for $28.3 billion". KMBC. Retrieved June 8, 2022. "Class-Action Lawsuit Accuses Oracle of Tracking 5 Billion People". PCMAG. Retrieved August 24, 2022. "Oracle Earns Billions Illegally Selling Net User Data, Suit Says - Law360". www.law360.com. Retrieved August 24, 2022. Mukherjee, Supantha; Yaakoubi, Aziz El (February 6, 2023). "Oracle to invest $1.5 billion in Saudi Arabia, open data centre in Riyadh". Reuters. Retrieved February 6, 2023. Radhakrishna, Kishor; Shanmugam, Ravisankar (2015). "1.4 Additional documentation". Oracle E-Business Suite 12.2.4 Installation and Upgrade on IBM Power S824 (1 ed.). IBM Redbooks. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-7384-5454-2. Retrieved July 31, 2016. Oracle software and documentation can be downloaded from the Oracle Software Delivery Cloud website at: edelivery.oracle.com/ You need to have a valid license agreement with Oracle Corporation to download any software from the Oracle E-Delivery location. "Top 60 Licensing Pitfalls For Oracle Databases And Oracle Technology Products". OMT-CO Operations Management Technology Consulting GmbH. Retrieved April 21, 2013. "Oracle Announces General Availability of Oracle Database 12c, the First Database Designed for the Cloud" (Press release). Oracle Corporation. July 1, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2013. Taft, Darryl K (October 18, 2011). "Oracle to Boost Data Management With Endeca Buy". eWeek. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on January 22, 2013. Retrieved November 3, 2011. Oracle also announced the Oracle NoSQL Database, a distributed, highly scalable, key-value database. Lai, Eric (May 4, 2009). "Oracle aims at Microsoft with upgraded Beehive collaboration". Computerworld. Archived from the original on March 2, 2007. Retrieved May 15, 2009. "Working with Extensions to Oracle Enterprise Scheduler - 11g Release 7 (11.1.7)". docs.oracle.com. Retrieved June 8, 2023. Help center, Oracle. "Application Development". Oracle. "Oracle SQL Developer Data Modeler User's Guide". Oracle Help Center. Retrieved June 8, 2023. "uc4.html". www.oracle.com. Retrieved May 11, 2018. "Motus Integration - Motus - Oracle Cloud Marketplace". cloud.oracle.com/marketplace. Retrieved February 2, 2017. "Knoa Experience and Performance Manager (EPM) for Oracle Siebel CRM". Oracle Corporation. Archived from the original on October 18, 2013. Jackson, Joab (July 2, 2013). "Oracle Enterprise Manager 12c gears up for the private cloud". InfoWorld. Retrieved March 12, 2014. Harris, Paul Eastwood (2010). Project Planning and Scheduling Using Primavera P6: For All Industries Including Version 4 to 7 ; Planning and Progressing Project Schedules with and Without Roles and Resources in an Established Enterprise Environment. Eastwood Harris Pty Ltd. pp. 2–1. ISBN 978-1-921059-34-6. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Primavera is an Enterprise Project Management software package that enables many projects to be managed in one database. "Concepts for Database Administrators - 11g Release 2 (11.2)". docs.oracle.com. Retrieved June 8, 2023. Grancher, Eric (May 15, 2009). "Oracle and storage IOs, explanations and experience at CERN" (PDF). CERN-IT-Note-2009-005. Geneva: CERN. p. 4. Retrieved January 17, 2010. The Oracle Exadata storage server version 1 is a solution developed by Oracle and HP in which part of the processing, normally performed by the database instance, is performed at the storage system level. King, Rachel (July 15, 2013). "Oracle Exalytics in-memory machine updated to analyze larger data sets". ZDNet. Retrieved March 12, 2014. Vijayan, Jaikumar (September 22, 2011). "New Oracle database appliance aims at small, mid-size firms: Analysts don't expect Database Appliance to cannibalize Oracle's Exadata enterprise offering". Computerworld. Retrieved January 8, 2012. The tightly integrated hardware, software and storage bundle features Oracle Database11g Release 2 and Real Application Clusters software running on a 2-node, 24-processor core, Sun Fire server cluster hardware. "Oracle Unveils the Oracle Big Data Appliance" (Press release). Oracle Corporation. October 3, 2011. Retrieved April 17, 2015. "Oracle Unveils the World's Fastest General Purpose Engineered System - the SPARC SuperCluster T4-4" (Press release). Oracle Corporation. September 26, 2011. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Saygili, Okcan Yasin (2017). Oracle IaaS: Quick Reference Guide to Cloud Solutions. Apress. ISBN 978-1-4842-2832-6. Safonov, Vladimir O. (2016). Trustworthy Cloud Computing. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-119-11351-5. "Enterprise Cloud Computing SaaS, PaaS, IaaS". Oracle. Retrieved December 18, 2014. "Oracle Applications Cloud". Oracle. Retrieved March 13, 2014. Cao, Jing; Womack, Brian (July 29, 2016). "Oracle Purchase of NetSuite Will Help It Vie With Cloud Rivals". Bloomberg. Di Martino, Beniamino; Cretella, Giuseppina; Esposito, Antonio (2015). "4.3 Oracle PaaS". Cloud Portability and Interoperability: Issues and Current Trends. SpringerBriefs in Computer Science. Springer. p. 68. ISBN 978-3-319-13701-8. Retrieved September 20, 2016. The Oracle cloud platform [...] is a portfolio of products that can be used to build applications to publish as services on both private and public clouds. The platform is based on the Oracle Grid technologies, as well as on applications that include WebLogic Server, Coherence in-memory datagrid, and JRockit JVM. In terms of infrastructure, the platform is based on the Oracle IaaS offer that contains Oracle Solaris, Oracle Enterprise linux, and Oracle VM for virtualization, Sun SPARC and Storage. "Platform as a Service | Oracle Cloud". cloud.oracle.com. Retrieved November 15, 2017. "Oracle (ORCL) Announces New Cloud Platform Additions". Street Insider. June 22, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2016. With more than 24 new cloud services, the Oracle Cloud Platform extends Oracle's leadership with the world's broadest and deepest portfolio of SaaS, PaaS and IaaS. Newly available Oracle Cloud services include, Oracle Database Cloud – Exadata, Oracle Archive Storage Cloud, Oracle Big Data Cloud, Oracle Integration Cloud, Oracle Mobile Cloud, and Oracle Process Cloud. "Oracle Data Cloud". "Infrastructure as a Service | Oracle Cloud". cloud.oracle.com. Retrieved November 16, 2017. "Oracle acquires machine learning platform Datascience.com". VentureBeat. May 16, 2018. Retrieved May 24, 2018. "Global Customer Support Security Practices" (PDF). Oracle Corporation. April 1, 2008. p. 1. Retrieved August 25, 2008. Your registration on MetaLink uses a unique Customer Support Identifier (CSI) linked to your Support contract. "Global Customer Support Security Practices" (PDF). Oracle Corporation. April 1, 2008. p. 1. Retrieved August 25, 2008. GCS is a global operation, with Service Request (SR) management based on global competencies "Oracle Introduces Next-generation Customer Support Platform: My Oracle Support" (Press release). California: Oracle Corporation. September 22, 2008. Archived from the original on October 2, 2008. Retrieved September 25, 2008. My Oracle Support integrates Oracle's [...] support portal, Oracle MetaLink, with its [...] configuration management platform, Oracle Software Configuration Manager, to deliver [..] support capabilities Prusinski, Ben; Phillips, Steve; Chung, Richard (2011). Expert Oracle GoldenGate. Apresspod Series. Apress. pp. 111–112. ISBN 978-1-4302-3566-8. Retrieved July 24, 2012. You can verify the [...] supported [...] platforms [...] by logging into the My Oracle Support (MOS) site online at http://support.oracle.com [...] Compare: Jeffries, John P. (2011). Oracle GoldenGate 12c Implementer's Guide (2 ed.). Birmingham: Packt Publishing Ltd (published 2015). p. 22. ISBN 978-1-78398-077-2. Retrieved August 24, 2017. The full comprehensive list of all the certified platforms and databases is available at the My Oracle Support website: support.oracle.com (formerly Metalink). "My Oracle Support Help, Release 15.3". docs.oracle.com. Oracle. 2017. Retrieved August 24, 2017. My Oracle Support customer user accounts are managed by individuals within your organization in the role of Customer User Administrator (CUA). "Critical Patch Updates and Security Alerts". Oracle Corporation. Archived from the original on October 28, 2006. Douglas, Williams; et al. (November 2010). "Oracle Real Application Clusters Installation Guide, 11g Release 2 (11.2) for Linux and UNIX" (PDF). Oracle Corporation. p. xxi. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 16, 2010. Retrieved November 22, 2010. Oracle Configuration Manager: This feature [...] was previously named Customer Configuration repository (CCR). It is an optional component for database and client installations. Oracle Configuration Manager gathers and stores details relating to the configuration of the software stored in database Oracle home directories. "Oracle Auto Service Request for Sun Systems". Oracle Corporation. April 2011. Oracle Auto Service Request for Sun Systems. "Themes – Oracle Community". Oracle Corporation. Retrieved August 10, 2014. My Oracle Support Community (MOSC) "Oracle University". Oracle Corporation. "Oracle NetSuite Expands Pro Bono Tech Help". The NonProfit Times. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Echo Wang; Greg Roumeliotis (September 14, 2020). "ByteDance drops TikTok's U.S. sale, to partner with Oracle - sources". Reuters. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Brian Fung and Rob McLean. "TikTok will partner with Oracle in the United States after Microsoft loses bid". CNN. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Oracle cuts rewards for last-minute deals Archived December 19, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Gilbert, Alorie (June 20, 2002). CNET News.com via zdnetasia.com Abelson, Ree (June 23, 1996). "Truth or Consequences? Hardly". The New York Times. Galante, Suzanne (June 9, 1997). "Informix drops Oracle lawsuit". CNET. "Infrastructure | Oracle Analyst Reports" (PDF). Oracle.com. September 7, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 31, 2008. Retrieved July 7, 2011. DB-Engines Ranking - popularity ranking of database management systems. Db-engines. Retrieved July 14, 2013. Lai, Eric (November 20, 2006). "Vonage places call for EnterpriseDB database". Computerworld. Archived from the original on May 27, 2007. Pang, Albert (December 24, 2021). "Top 10 ERP Software Vendors, Market Size and Market Forecast 2020-2025". Apps Run The World. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Pang, Albert (December 24, 2021). "Top 10 Utilities Software Vendors, Market Size and Market Forecast 2020-2025". Apps Run The World. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Gullo, Karen & Guglielmo, Connie (March 22, 2007). "Oracle Claims Rival SAP Stole Software and Data (Update4)". Bloomberg. Retrieved March 22, 2007. Pendse, Nigel (March 7, 2008). "Consolidations in the BI industry". The OLAP Report. "Best Donation Management Software - 2015 Reviews of the Most Popular Systems". Retrieved April 17, 2015. "Oracle – the No.1 Database for Deploying SAP Applications". Oracle Corporation. Retrieved November 11, 2008. Two thirds of SAP customers around the world, in every industry, choose to run their applications on Oracle databases. "Oracle Helping SAP Customers to get 'OFF SAP'" (Press release). Oracle Corporation. June 14, 2005. "Oracle sues SAP". Oracle Corporation. July 3, 2007. Gohring, Nancy; Montalbano, Elizabeth. "Maintenance Contracts at Heart of Oracle, SAP Dispute". CIO India. Archived from the original on May 19, 2008. Retrieved June 9, 2008. The lawsuit As barometer: SAP finally scores big with TomorrowNow Archived March 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Joshua Greenbaum, March 22, 2007, ZDNet steve.curtis@supportrevolution.com (September 23, 2020). "Oracle & SAP are waging a secret war against third-party support". Support Revolution. Retrieved June 8, 2023. "SAP Responds to Oracle Complaint" (PDF) (Press release). SAP. July 3, 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 26, 2009. Retrieved September 2, 2016. Levine, Dan (November 23, 2010). "SAP to pay Oracle $1.3 billion in landmark decision". Reuters. Retrieved November 23, 2010. "Judge overturns Oracle's $1.3B award against SAP". ITworld. September 1, 2011. Retrieved September 5, 2011. "Oracle Says SAP to Pay $306 Million in Copyright Deal". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. August 3, 2012. Archived from the original on August 3, 2012. Retrieved August 6, 2012. Aryal, Mina (May 24, 2015). "Best Slogans of Information Technology Companies". ICT Frame Technology. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "A List of 120+ Slogans of Information Technology Companies". Advergize. June 12, 2014. Retrieved January 19, 2019. Lemos, Robert (February 6, 2002). "Guru says Oracle's 9i is indeed breakable". CNET News. Retrieved October 5, 2011. Davidson, Mary Ann (February 2002). "Unbreakable: Oracle's Commitment to Security" (PDF). An Oracle White Paper. Redwood Shores, California: Oracle Corporation. p. 2. Retrieved March 21, 2010. Beginning in November 2001, Oracle began a marketing campaign: Unbreakable. The security portions of the campaign reference Oracle's 14 independent security evaluations [...] "Oracle8 Database Messaging". CIO. 10 (21): 7. September 15, 1997. "Oracle Discoverer User Guide". gkmc.utah.edu. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved January 19, 2019. Hummeltenberg, Wilhelm (April 9, 2013). Information Management for Business and Competitive Intelligence and Excellence: Proceedings der Frühjahrstagung Wirtschaftsinformatik '98 (in German). Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-322-84950-2. "Developer/2000 Guidelines for Building Applications". Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved August 5, 2020. Farber, Dan (December 9, 2004). "Oracle joins or refashions the information age". ZDNet. Retrieved October 9, 2014. Group, Yankee (July 14, 2010). "Oracles introduces new 10GbE products. Software. Hardware. Complete?". Electronic Component News. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "Oracle Engineered Systems-The Newest Flavor of IT Systems". Database Trends and Applications. September 26, 2012. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "Hardware and Software, Engineered to Work Together" (PDF). July 17, 2014. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "Oracle Brand | Oracle Tagline Lockup". www.oracle.com. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "Executive Strategy Weekly Edition". Oracle Information inDepth Newsletters. Oracle Corporation. January 7, 2009. Retrieved September 21, 2009. In the first installment of the Oracle ClearView video series, host Richard Levitt explains how Oracle Exadata—the combination of superfast HP hardware and supersmart Oracle software—is bringing powerful benefits to the enterprise. "Oracle Net Income 2006-2018 | ORCL". Macrotrends. Retrieved October 22, 2018. "Fortune 500 Companies 2018: Who Made the List". Fortune. Archived from the original on November 10, 2018. Retrieved November 10, 2018. Melin, Anders. "Oracle's $108 Million Comp for Hurd and Catz Distorts CEO Pay Ratio". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Retrieved November 13, 2018. "Oracle's ESG Datasheet for 2020Q4" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2021. Alt URL "Oracle's Sustainability Report for 2020Q4" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 17, 2021. Alt URL "Oracle's ESG Datasheet for 2019Q4" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 11, 2021. Alt URL "Oracle's ESG Datasheet for 2020Q4" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2021. Alt URL "Oracle's ESG Datasheet for 2020Q4" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2021. Alt URL On July 3, 2007, SAP admitted that TomorrowNow employees had made "inappropriate downloads" from the Oracle support web site. However, it claims that SAP personnel and SAP customers had no access to Oracle intellectual property via TomorrowNow. SAP's CEO Henning Kagermann stated that "Even a single inappropriate download is unacceptable from my perspective. We regret very much that this occurred." Additionally, SAP announced that it had "instituted changes" in TomorrowNow's operational oversight Oracle Rethinks Its Dumpster-Diving Ways April 29, 2004, Lisa Vaas, eweek.com Swing Shift Column, San Jose Mercury News (San Jose, California) (via Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News) (December, 2000) "Bugs bust open 'unbreakable' Oracle 9i". ZDNet. February 7, 2002. Archived from the original on March 8, 2012. "Oracle security claim". The Register. January 16, 2002. "How to hack unbreakable Oracle". The Register. February 7, 2002. "Oracle list of major Security certifications" (PDF). Oracle Corporation. "Ashcroft breaks with tradition by lobbying, has earned $269,000". Chicago Tribune. January 10, 2006. "How the Air Force blew $1B on a dud system". Air Force Times. November 2012. Archived from the original on February 15, 2013. Retrieved April 17, 2015. "Cover Oregon: State moves to federal exchange, but Oracle technology lives on". The Oregonian. May 7, 2014. Retrieved April 17, 2015. "Oracle blasts Oregon for spreading Cover Oregon 'false narrative'". The Oregonian. April 17, 2014. Retrieved April 17, 2015. "Oregon health exchange technology troubles run deep due to mismanagement, early decisions". The Oregonian. December 14, 2013. Retrieved April 17, 2015. Manning, Jeff (August 8, 2014). "Cover Oregon: Oracle comes out swinging, files lawsuit, accuses Kitzhaber of 'campaign'". Oregon Live. Retrieved August 27, 2014. Gallagher, Sean (August 25, 2014). "Oregon Attorney General sues Oracle for 'racketeering activity'". Ars Technica. Retrieved August 27, 2014. Foden-Vencil, Kristian (September 15, 2016). "Oregon, Oracle Reach $100 Million Settlement Over Cover Oregon Healthcare Exchange. News | OPB". Oregon Public Broadcast. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved September 16, 2016. Lucas, Dan. "Who's to blame for the Cover Oregon failure?". Statesman Journal. Retrieved November 13, 2020. Budnick and Manning, Nick and Jeff (March 19, 2014). "Oracle's Contracts for Cover Oregon Health Insurance Exchange Bypassed Standard Rules, Lacked Teeth". www.govtech.com. Retrieved November 13, 2020. Turner, Grace-Marie. "Oregon's Failed ObamaCare Exchange Is A Warning For Other States". Forbes. Retrieved November 13, 2020. "SEC.gov | SEC Charges Oracle Corporation With FCPA Violations Related to Secret Side Funds in India". www.sec.gov. Retrieved September 28, 2022. Kunert, Paul. "Oracle pays $23 million to the SEC to settle bribery charges". www.theregister.com. Retrieved September 28, 2022. "Hollywood gala raises a record $33 million for IDF". The Times of Israel. November 8, 2014. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved November 16, 2014. Record $53.8 million raised for IDF soldiers at Beverly Hills gala, November 5, 2017, Jewish Telegraphic Agency. "Mergers: Commission clears Oracle's proposed acquisition of Sun Microsystems" (Press release). European Commission. January 21, 2010. Retrieved April 17, 2015. Mick, Jason (September 1, 2011). "U.S. Pressured EU to Approve the Oracle's Acquisition of Sun". Daily Tech. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved September 2, 2011. Vance, Ashlee (September 21, 2010). "Oracle Growth Plans Worry Rivals and Customers". The New York Times. Widenius, Monty. "Save MySQL!". Retrieved January 31, 2010. [Signer hereby asks] competition authorities around the world to block Oracle's acquisition of Sun unless one of the structural solutions selected by [signer] below is put in place as a legally binding requirement: (select at least one; all combinations are possible) MySQL must be divested to a suitable third party that can continue to develop it under the GPL. Oracle must commit to a linking exception for applications that use MySQL with the client libraries (for all programming languages), for plugins and libmysqld. MySQL itself remains licensed under the GPL. Oracle must release all past and future versions of MySQL (until December 2012) under the Apache Software License 2.0 or similar permissive license so that developers of applications and derived versions (forks) have flexibility concerning the code. Paul, Ryan (April 20, 2009). "Oracle buys Sun: understanding the impact on open source". Ars Technica. Retrieved March 6, 2011. Fiveash, Kelly (March 9, 2010). "Open source boss quits Oracle". The Register. Paul, Ryan (August 14, 2010). "Oracle's Java lawsuit undermines its open source credibility". Ars Technica. Retrieved March 6, 2011. Weintraub, Seth (August 12, 2010). "Oracle files suit over Android's use of Java". CNN. Archived from the original on November 19, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2011. Skillings, Jon (July 30, 2010). "Justice Department sues Oracle, alleging fraud". CNET. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Gross, Grant (October 6, 2011). "Oracle to pay $199.5 million in gov't contracting settlement". Network World. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Levine, Dan (June 18, 2011). Eastham, Todd (ed.). "Oracle seeks up to $6.1 billion in Google lawsuit". Reuters. Retrieved January 29, 2018. "Oracle America, Inc. v. Google, Inc". Quimbee. Retrieved January 29, 2018. Jeong, Sarah (October 19, 2017). "How the judge on Oracle v. Google taught himself to code". The Verge. Retrieved January 29, 2018. "Oracle v. Google". Electronic Frontier Foundation. May 22, 2013. Retrieved January 29, 2018. Tung, Liam (February 13, 2017). "Just as you thought Java-Android row was over, it all kicks off again". ZDNet. Retrieved January 29, 2018. Stallion, Steven (August 13, 2010). "OpenSolaris is Dead". Iconoclastic Tendencies. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved September 7, 2011. Larabel, Michael (September 10, 2010). "OpenIndiana – Another OpenSolaris Fork – Coming Next Week". Phoronix. Retrieved September 13, 2010. "Oracle kills OpenSSO Express – ForgeRock steps in". The H Open Source – H-online.com. February 24, 2010. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved July 7, 2011. "Charles Phillips Resigns as President of Oracle". www.oracle.com. Retrieved September 14, 2017. Robertson, Jordan. "Oracle names ex-HP CEO Mark Hurd co-president". sandiegouniontribune.com. AP Technology. Retrieved September 14, 2017. "Court Filing: HP Civil Complaint Against Mark Hurd". Archived from the original on September 9, 2010 – via Scribd. "HP and Oracle Reaffirm Commitment to Long-term Strategic Partnership" (Press release). September 20, 2010. Retrieved September 5, 2011. "And So The Exodus Begins – 33 Developers Leave OpenOffice.org". Digitizor.com. November 1, 2010. Retrieved July 7, 2011. "Oracle Donates OpenOffice to the Apache Software Foundation". ReadWriteWeb. June 1, 2011. Archived from the original on September 2, 2011. Retrieved September 5, 2011. Clark, Jack (June 16, 2011). "HP unleashes lawyers on Oracle over Itanium support". ZDNet UK. Retrieved June 17, 2011. "HP, Oracle exchange court jabs in escalating Itanium support showdown". ZDNet. July 7, 2011. Retrieved September 5, 2011. "Oracle fires back at HP in Itanium suit, doesn't mince words". ZDNet. August 30, 2011. Retrieved September 5, 2011. Gallagher, Sean (August 1, 2012). "HP wins judgment in Itanium suit against Oracle". Ars Technica. Retrieved July 1, 2016. McMillan, Robert (August 1, 2012). "HP Wins Big Victory Over Oracle in Battle of the Itanium". Wired. Retrieved August 6, 2012. Bright, Peter (June 30, 2016). "HP awarded $3B in damages from Oracle over Itanium database cancelation". Ars Technica. Retrieved July 1, 2016. Brittain, Blake (June 15, 2021). "Oracle loses bid to upend HP's $3 billion win". Reuters. Quach, Katyanna (May 17, 2022). "Oracle really does owe HPE $3b after Supreme Court snub". The Register. Farrar, James (August 31, 2011). "Oracle under fire over ethics again: Feds investigating bribery for business in Africa". ZDNet. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Stempel, Jonathan (September 27, 2022). "Oracle to pay about $23 mln to resolve a second SEC bribery case". Reuters. Hoover, J. Nicholas (April 20, 2012). "Feds Banish Oracle From Popular Contract Vehicle". InformationWeek. Retrieved October 4, 2017. "Oracle to Pay $199.5 Million to Settle Overbilling Charges". The New York Times. Bloomberg News. October 7, 2011. Retrieved September 16, 2013. Banjo, Shelly; Bass, Dina; Mohsin, Saleha (September 13, 2020). "Oracle Wins Deal for TikTok's U.S. Operations". Bloomberg. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Fung, Brian (September 19, 2020). "Trump says he has approved a deal for purchase of TikTok". CNN. Retrieved September 19, 2020. Arbel, Tali; O'Brien, Matt (February 10, 2021). "Biden backs off on TikTok ban in review of Trump China moves". AP NEWS. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Hardy, Quentin (September 18, 2014). "Larry Ellison to Step Down as Oracle's Chief". The New York Times. Retrieved September 19, 2014. Hickens, Michael (March 21, 2013). "New Rivals Clip Oracle's Wings". The Wall Street Journal (paper). pp. B1–2. Retrieved March 23, 2013. "Safra Catz". Fortune. September 8, 2016. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved September 14, 2017. "25 most powerful people in business". Fortune. Retrieved April 17, 2015. "Scott/Tiger in Oracle". September 8, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2020. Kim, Eugene (August 12, 2015). "The epic 30-year bromance of billionaire CEOs Larry Ellison and Marc Benioff". Insider. "Larry ups the ante". The Economist. February 5, 2004. Rich, Laura (July 23, 2010). "When it comes to acquistion [sic] plans, it's Oracle vs Oracle". CNNMoney.com. Archived from the original on August 27, 2010. Retrieved March 27, 2011. "Trivia for Bicentennial Man". Internet Movie Database. Retrieved March 27, 2011. "Trivia for Terminator Genisys". Internet Movie Database. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Sanati, Cyrus (August 16, 2016). "Inside Oracle's Acquisition Machine". Fortune. Retrieved December 18, 2017. "Golden State Warriors, Oracle Reach Arena Naming Rights Agreement". Warriors.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. October 20, 2006. Retrieved June 14, 2019. Harrington, Jim (September 3, 2019). "With Warriors gone, the new name of Oracle Arena in Oakland is…". The Mercury News. Retrieved October 17, 2020. Shankland, Stephen (February 16, 2010). "Ellison's team wins long-sought sailing trophy". CNET. Archived from the original on March 13, 2014. Retrieved October 5, 2010. "Oracle Team USA stages massive comeback to win 34th America's Cup". America's Cup. September 25, 2013. Archived from the original on March 12, 2014. Retrieved March 12, 2014. "Oracle hit with stiff penalty" (PDF). www.bizjournals.com. September 3, 2009. Retrieved November 14, 2019. CNBC (August 26, 2013). "Did Larry Ellison cheat in the America's Cup?". www.cnbc.com. "Team Oracle Sponsors and Suppliers". Oracle Corporation. "Giants' home has been renamed Oracle Park". ESPN.com. January 10, 2019. "Red Bull F1 clinches new $500M title sponsorship with Oracle". AP NEWS. February 9, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Fair, Asher (July 26, 2022). "NASCAR: Potential Joe Gibbs Racing sponsor revealed". Beyondtheflag.com. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Mendelsohn, Andrew (April–June 2013). "The Oracle Story: 1984–2001". IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 35 (2): 10–23. doi:10.1109/MAHC.2012.56. S2CID 17907189. INSPEC Accession Number 13640647. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Oracle Corporation. Official website Business data for Oracle Corporation: Google SEC filings Yahoo! Oracle Corporation companies grouped at OpenCorporates 37°31′46″N 122°15′57″W﻿ / ﻿37.5294°N 122.265966°W﻿ / 37.5294; -122.265966