Antakalnis (literally Lithuanian: 'the place on the hills'; Polish: Antokol) is an eldership in Vilnius, Lithuania. Antakalnis is one of the oldest, and largest historical suburbs of Vilnius. It is in the Eastern section of Vilnius, along the left bank of the Neris, with the river running along the whole Western side of the district. Antakalnis Eldership is the second-largest in Vilnius, with an area of 77.14 km2 (29.78 sq mi). One of the greatest Lithuanian Baroque masterpieces, the Roman Catholic Church of St. Peter and St. Paul, is in Antakalnis, as is Sapieha Palace (Sapiegų rūmai). Sapieha Palace is surrounded by the only surviving Baroque-style park in Lithuania, which contains the oldest linden tree in Vilnius. Antakalnis is home to the historically important Antakalnis Cemetery, where victims of the January Events in 1991, killed by the Soviet Army, are buried; their graves are often visited, as they are considered national heroes of Lithuania. Antakalnis Eldership includes the recreational area and prestigious cottage district Valakampiai, where two river beaches have been established. The current and former president of Lithuania, the prime minister of Lithuania, and other state officials reside in the Turniškės neighborhood of Antakalnis. The Botanical Garden of Vilnius University lies in Kairėnai, the settlement in the Eastern part of the district. The Jewish surnames Antokolec, Antokolsky and variants derive from the Polish pronunciation of the district's name. Antakalnis is one of the oldest parts of Vilnius. Historically, the suburb of Antakalnis developed along a road to Aukštaitija and Viršupis, the summer palace of the grand dukes. Antakalnis eldership includes these city parts: Aukštagiris, Aukštieji Karačiūnai, Antakalnis, Antaviliai, Baniškės, Didieji Pupojai, Dvarčionys, Galgiai, Gvazdikai, Kalnai, Kairėnai, Liepynė, Mažieji Pupojai, Meiriškės, Mileišiškės, Pečiukai, Pylimėliai, Sapieginė, Saulėtekis, Smėlynė, Šilas, Šilėnai, Turniškės, Vaguva, Valakampiai, Aukštoji Veržuva, Žemoji Veržuva, Vinciūniškės, Vismalai, Vismaliukai, Vyriai, Žemieji Karačiūnai. The district is one of the growing in the city. It is estimated that in the last 20 years, the population of the district has increased by almost 10 percent. In 2001, the population of Antakalnis was 39,697, with a decrease to 38,940 in 2011 and an increase to 39,242 in 2021. As of 2023, Antakalnis Eldership is predominantly populated by Lithuanians, Belarussians, Russians, and Ukrainians, where Lithuanians making 5/6 of the entire population. Pavilniai Regional Park Antakalnis Park of Benches UNO Park Vilnius Colorful Springs Famous Lithuanians having lived in Antakalnis eldership: Valdas Adamkus, former President of Lithuania Mark Antokolski, sculptor Algirdas Brazauskas, former president and Prime Minister of Lithuania Janina Degutytė, poet Vytautas Kernagis, actor and composer Andrius Kubilius, former Prime Minister of Lithuania Andrius Mamontovas, a rock singer Virgilijus Noreika, an opera singer Rolandas Paksas, former President of Lithuania Paulius Širvys, poet Sofija Veiverytė, artist/painter Ingrida Šimonytė, former Minister of Finance and Prime Minister of Lithuania Jurga Ivanauskaitė, writer [1] Stravinskienė, Vitalija (2015). "The Territorial expansion of Vilnius: plans and their realisation (1916-1940)". Lithuanian Historical Studies. 20. Lithuanian Institute of History: 131, 133. ISSN 1392-2343.; "Vilnius". Encyclopædia Britannica: A New Survey of Universal Knowledge. Vol. 23. Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. 1964. p. 166. Archived from the original on 29 June 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2021. (in Lithuanian) "Vilniaus mikrorajonas Antakalnis" Archived 2015-09-01 at the Wayback Machine Antakalnis eldership official website. Retrieved 25 September 2013. Vykintas Vaitkevičius. Neris. 2007 metų ekspedicija. Trečia knyga. Vilnius: Mintis, 2013. (in Lithuanian) Antakalnis photogallery (in English) Visitor's guide to Antalkalnis Cemetery