A transgender person (often shortened to trans person) is someone whose gender identity differs from that typically associated with the sex they were assigned at birth. Some transgender people who desire medical assistance to transition from one sex to another identify as transsexual. Transgender is also an umbrella term; in addition to including people whose gender identity is the opposite of their assigned sex (trans men and trans women), it may also include people who are non-binary or genderqueer. Other definitions of transgender also include people who belong to a third gender, or else conceptualize transgender people as a third gender. The term may also include cross-dressers or drag kings and drag queens in some contexts. The term transgender does not have a universally accepted definition, including among researchers. Being transgender is distinct from sexual orientation, and transgender people may identify as heterosexual (straight), homosexual (gay or lesbian), bisexual, asexual, or otherwise, or may decline to label their sexual orientation. The opposite of transgender is cisgender, which describes persons whose gender identity matches their assigned sex. Accurate statistics on the number of transgender people vary widely, in part due to different definitions of what constitutes being transgender. Some countries, such as Canada, collect census data on transgender people. Generally, fewer than 1% of the worldwide population are transgender, with figures ranging from <0.1% to 0.6%. Many transgender people experience gender dysphoria, and some seek medical treatments such as hormone replacement therapy, gender-affirming surgery, or psychotherapy. Not all transgender people desire these treatments, and some cannot undergo them for financial or medical reasons. The legal status of transgender people varies by jurisdiction. Many transgender people experience transphobia, or violence or discrimination towards transgender people, in the workplace, in accessing public accommodations, and in healthcare. In many places, they are not legally protected from discrimination. Several cultural events are held to celebrate the awareness of transgender people, including Transgender Day of Remembrance and International Transgender Day of Visibility, and the transgender flag is a common transgender pride symbol. Before the mid-20th century, various terms were used within and beyond Western medical and psychological sciences to identify persons and identities labeled transsexual, and later transgender from mid-century onward. Imported from the German and ultimately modeled after German Transsexualismus (coined in 1923), the English term transsexual has enjoyed international acceptability, though transgender has been increasingly preferred over transsexual. The word transgender acquired its modern umbrella term meaning in the 1990s. Psychiatrist John F. Oliven of Columbia University used the term transgenderism in his 1965 reference work Sexual Hygiene and Pathology, writing that the term which had previously been used, transsexualism, "is misleading; actually, 'transgenderism' is meant, because sexuality is not a major factor in primary transvestism." The term transgender was then popularized with varying definitions by transgender, transsexual, and transvestite people, including Christine Jorgensen and Virginia Prince, who used transgenderal in the December 1969 issue of Transvestia, a national magazine for cross-dressers she founded. By the mid-1970s both trans-gender and trans people were in use as umbrella terms, while transgenderist and transgenderal were used to refer to people who wanted to live their lives as cross-gendered individuals without gender-affirming surgery. Transgenderist was sometimes abbreviated as TG in educational and community resources; this abbreviation developed by the 1980s. By 1984, the concept of a "transgender community" had developed, in which transgender was used as an umbrella term. In 1985, Richard Elkins established the "Trans-Gender Archive" at the University of Ulster. By 1992, the International Conference on Transgender Law and Employment Policy defined transgender as an expansive umbrella term including "transsexuals, transgenderists, cross dressers", and anyone transitioning. Leslie Feinberg's pamphlet, "Transgender Liberation: A Movement Whose Time has Come", circulated in 1992, identified transgender as a term to unify all forms of gender nonconformity; in this way transgender has become synonymous with queer. In 1994, gender theorist Susan Stryker defined transgender as encompassing "all identities or practices that cross over, cut across, move between, or otherwise queer socially constructed sex/gender boundaries", including, but not limited to, "transsexuality, heterosexual transvestism, gay drag, butch lesbianism, and such non-European identities as the Native American berdache or the Indian Hijra". Between the mid-1990s and the early 2000s, the primary terms used under the transgender umbrella were "female to male" (FtM) for men who transitioned from female to male, and "male to female" (MtF) for women who transitioned from male to female. These terms have been superseded by "trans man" and "trans woman", respectively. This shift in preference from terms highlighting biological sex ("transsexual", "FtM") to terms highlighting gender identity and expression ("transgender", "trans man") reflects a broader shift in the understanding of transgender people's sense of self and the increasing recognition of those who decline medical reassignment as part of the transgender community. Transgender can also refer specifically to a person whose gender identity is opposite (rather than different from) the sex the person had or was identified as having at birth. Transfeminine is a term for any person, binary or non-binary, who was assigned male at birth and has a predominantly feminine gender identity or presentation. Transmasculine refers to a person assigned female at birth who has a predominantly masculine gender identity or presentation. Transgendered is a common term in older literature. Many within the transgender community deprecate it on the basis that transgender is an adjective, not a verb. Organizations such as GLAAD and The Guardian also state that transgender should never be used as a noun (e.g., "Max is transgender" or "Max is a transgender man", not "Max is a transgender"). "Transgender" is also a noun for the broader topic of transgender identity and experience. Although the term "transgenderism" was once considered acceptable, it has come to be viewed as offensive, according to GLAAD. In 2020 the International Journal of Transgenderism changed its name to the International Journal of Transgender Health "to reflect a change toward more appropriate and acceptable use of language in our field." Health-practitioner manuals, professional journalistic style guides, and LGBT advocacy groups advise the adoption by others of the name and pronouns identified by the person in question, including present references to the transgender person's past. In contrast, people whose sense of personal identity corresponds to the sex and gender assigned to them at birth – that is, those who are neither transgender nor non-binary or genderqueer – are called cisgender. Inspired by Magnus Hirschfeld's 1923 term seelischer Transsexualismus, the term transsexual was introduced to English in 1949 by David Oliver Cauldwell and popularized by Harry Benjamin in 1966, around the same time transgender was coined and began to be popularized. Since the 1990s, transsexual has generally been used to refer to the subset of transgender people who desire to transition permanently to the gender with which they identify and who seek medical assistance (for example, sex reassignment surgery) with this. Distinctions between the terms transgender and transsexual are commonly based on distinctions between gender and sex. Transsexuality may be said to deal more with physical aspects of one's sex, while transgender considerations deal more with one's psychological gender disposition or predisposition, as well as the related social expectations that may accompany a given gender role. Many transgender people reject the term transsexual. Christine Jorgensen publicly rejected transsexual in 1979 and instead identified herself in newsprint as trans-gender, saying, "gender doesn't have to do with bed partners, it has to do with identity." Some have objected to the term transsexual on the basis that it describes a condition related to gender identity rather than sexuality.[better source needed][failed verification] Some transsexual people object to being included in the transgender umbrella. In his 2007 book Imagining Transgender: An Ethnography of a Category, anthropologist David Valentine asserts that transgender was coined and used by activists to include many people who do not necessarily identify with the term and states that people who do not identify with the term transgender should not be included in the transgender spectrum. Leslie Feinberg likewise asserts that transgender is not a self-identifier (for some people) but a category imposed by observers to understand other people. According to the Transgender Health Program (THP) at Fenway Health in Boston, there are no universally-accepted definitions, and confusion is common because terms that were popular at the turn of the 21st century may have since been deemed offensive. The THP recommends that clinicians ask clients what terminology they prefer, and avoid the term transsexual unless they are sure that a client is comfortable with it.[undue weight? – discuss] Harry Benjamin invented a classification system for transsexuals and transvestites, called the Sex Orientation Scale (SOS), in which he assigned transsexuals and transvestites to one of six categories based on their reasons for cross-dressing and the relative urgency of their need (if any) for sex reassignment surgery. Contemporary views on gender identity and classification differ markedly from Harry Benjamin's original opinions. Sexual orientation is no longer regarded as a criterion for diagnosis, or for distinction between transsexuality, transvestism and other forms of gender-variant behavior and expression. Benjamin's scale was designed for use with heterosexual trans women, and trans men's identities do not align with its categories. Gender, gender identity, and being transgender are distinct concepts from sexual orientation. Sexual orientation is an individual's enduring pattern of attraction, or lack thereof, to others (being straight, lesbian, gay, bisexual, asexual, etc.), whereas gender identity is a person's innate knowledge of their own gender (being a man, woman, non-binary, etc.). Transgender people can have any orientation, and generally use labels corresponding to their gender, rather than assigned sex at birth. For example, trans women who are exclusively attracted to other women commonly identify as lesbians, and trans men exclusively attracted to women would identify as straight. Many trans people describe their sexual orientation as queer, in addition to or instead of, other terms. For much of the 20th century, transgender identity was conflated with homosexuality and transvestism. In earlier academic literature, sexologists used the labels homosexual and heterosexual transsexual to categorize transgender individuals' sexual orientation based on their birth sex. Critics consider these terms "heterosexist", "archaic", and demeaning. Newer literature often uses terms such as attracted to men (androphilic), attracted to women (gynephilic), attracted to both (bisexual), or attracted to neither (asexual) to describe a person's sexual orientation without reference to their gender identity. Therapists are coming to understand the necessity of using terms with respect to their clients' gender identities and preferences. The 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey reported that of the 27,715 transgender and non-binary respondents, 21% said queer best described their sexual orientation, 18% said pansexual, 16% said gay, lesbian, or same-gender-loving, 15% said straight, 14% said bisexual, and 10% said asexual. A 2019 Canadian survey of 2,873 trans and non-binary people found that 51% described their sexual orientation as queer, 13% as asexual, 28% as bisexual, 13% as gay, 15% as lesbian, 31% as pansexual, 8% as straight or heterosexual, 4% as two-spirit, and 9% as unsure or questioning. A 2009 study in Spain found that 90% of trans women patients reported being androphilic and 94% of trans men patients reported being gynephilic. Some non-binary (or genderqueer) people identify as transgender. These identities are not specifically male or female. They can be agender, androgynous, bigender, pangender, or genderfluid, and exist outside of cisnormativity. Bigender and androgynous are overlapping categories; bigender individuals may identify as moving between male and female roles (genderfluid) or as being both masculine and feminine simultaneously (androgynous), and androgynes may similarly identify as beyond gender or genderless (agender), between genders (intergender), moving across genders (genderfluid), or simultaneously exhibiting multiple genders (pangender). Non-binary gender identities are independent of sexual orientation. A transvestite is a person who cross-dresses, or dresses in clothes typically associated with the gender opposite the one they were assigned at birth. The term transvestite is used as a synonym for the term cross-dresser, although cross-dresser is generally considered the preferred term. The term cross-dresser is not exactly defined in the relevant literature. Michael A. Gilbert, professor at the Department of Philosophy, York University, Toronto, offers this definition: "[A cross-dresser] is a person who has an apparent gender identification with one sex, and who has and certainly has been birth-designated as belonging to [that] sex, but who wears the clothing of the opposite sex because it is that of the opposite sex." This definition excludes people "who wear opposite sex clothing for other reasons", such as "those female impersonators who look upon dressing as solely connected to their livelihood, actors undertaking roles, individual males and females enjoying a masquerade, and so on. These individuals are cross dressing but are not cross dressers." Cross-dressers may not identify with, want to be, or adopt the behaviors or practices of the opposite gender and generally do not want to change their bodies medically or surgically. The majority of cross-dressers identify as heterosexual. The term transvestite and the associated outdated term transvestism are conceptually different from the term transvestic fetishism, as transvestic fetishist refers to those who intermittently use clothing of the opposite gender for fetishistic purposes. In medical terms, transvestic fetishism is differentiated from cross-dressing by use of the separate codes 302.3 in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) and F65.1 in the ICD.[needs update] Drag is clothing and makeup worn on special occasions for performing or entertaining, unlike those who are transgender or who cross-dress for other reasons. Drag performance includes overall presentation and behavior in addition to clothing and makeup. Drag can be theatrical, comedic, or grotesque. Drag queens have been considered caricatures of women by second-wave feminism. Drag artists have a long tradition in LGBT culture. Generally the term drag queen covers men doing female drag, drag king covers women doing male drag, and faux queen covers women doing female drag. Nevertheless, there are drag artists of all genders and sexualities who perform for various reasons. Drag performers are not inherently transgender. Some drag performers, transvestites, and people in the gay community have embraced the pornographically derived term tranny for drag queens or people who engage in transvestism or cross-dressing; this term is widely considered an offensive slur if applied to transgender people. A precise history of the global occurrence of transgender people is difficult to assess because the modern concept of being transgender, and of gender in general in relation to transgender identity, did not develop until the mid-1900s. Historical depictions, records and understandings are inherently filtered through modern principles, and were largely viewed through a medical and (often outsider) anthropological lens until the late 1900s. Some historians consider the Roman emperor Elagabalus to have been transgender. Elagabalus was reported to have dressed in a feminine manner, preferred to be called "Lady" instead of "Lord" and may have even sought a primitive form of gender-affirming surgery.[excessive citations] Worldwide, a number of societies have had traditional third gender roles, some of which continue in some form into the present day.The Hippocratic Corpus (interpreting the writing of Herodotus) describes the "disease of the Scythians" (regarding the Enaree), which it attributes to impotency due to riding on a horse without stirrups. This reference was well discussed by medical writings of the 1500s–1700s. Pierre Petit writing in 1596 viewed the "Scythian disease" as natural variation, but by the 1700s writers viewed it as a "melancholy", or "hysterical" psychiatric disease. By the early 1800s, being transgender separate from Hippocrates' idea of it was claimed to be widely known, but remained poorly documented. Both trans women and trans men were cited in European insane asylums of the early 1800s. One of the earliest recorded transgender people in America was Thomas(ine) Hall, a seventeenth century colonial servant. The most complete account of the time came from the life of the Chevalier d'Éon (1728–1810), a French diplomat. As cross-dressing became more widespread in the late 1800s, discussion of transgender people increased greatly and writers attempted to explain the origins of being transgender. Much study came out of Germany, and was exported to other Western audiences. Cross-dressing was seen in a pragmatic light until the late 1800s; it had previously served a satirical or disguising purpose. But in the latter half of the 1800s, cross-dressing and being transgender became viewed as an increasing societal danger. William A. Hammond wrote an 1882 account of transgender Pueblo "shamans" [sic] (mujerados), comparing them to the Scythian disease. Other writers of the late 1700s and 1800s (including Hammond's associates in the American Neurological Association) had noted the widespread nature of transgender cultural practices among native peoples. Explanations varied, but authors generally did not ascribe native transgender practices to psychiatric causes, instead condemning the practices in a religious and moral sense. Native groups provided much study on the subject, and perhaps the majority of all study until after WWII. Critical studies first began to emerge in the late 1800s in Germany, with the works of Magnus Hirschfeld. Hirschfeld coined the term "transvestite" in 1910 as the scope of transgender study grew. His work would lead to the 1919 founding of the Institut für Sexualwissenschaft in Berlin. Though Hirscheld's legacy is disputed, he revolutionized the field of study. The Institut was destroyed when the Nazis seized power in 1933, and its research was infamously burned in the May 1933 Nazi book burnings. Transgender issues went largely out of the public eye until after World War II. Even when they re-emerged, they reflected a forensic psychology approach, unlike the more sexological that had been employed in the lost German research. People who experience discord between their gender and the expectations of others or whose gender identity conflicts with their body may benefit by talking through their feelings in depth. While individuals may find counseling or psychotherapy helpful, it is no longer recommended as a prerequisite for further transition steps. Research on gender identity with regard to psychology, and scientific understanding of the phenomenon and its related issues, is relatively new.[needs update?] The term gender incongruence is listed in the ICD by the WHO. In the American (DSM), the term gender dysphoria is listed under code F64.0 for adolescents and adults, and F64.2 for children. France removed gender identity disorder as a diagnosis by decree in 2010, but according to French trans rights organizations, beyond the impact of the announcement itself, nothing changed. In 2017, the Danish parliament abolished the F64 Gender identity disorders. The DSM-5 refers to the topic as gender dysphoria (GD) while reinforcing the idea that being transgender is not considered a mental illness. Transgender people may meet the criteria for a diagnosis of gender dysphoria "only if [being transgender] causes distress or disability." This distress may manifest as depression or inability to work and form healthy relationships with others. This diagnosis is often misinterpreted as implying that all transgender people suffer from GD, which has confused transgender people and those who seek to either criticize or affirm them. Transgender people who are comfortable with their gender and whose gender is not directly causing inner frustration or impairing their functioning do not suffer from GD. Moreover, GD is not necessarily permanent and is often resolved through therapy or transitioning. Feeling oppressed by the negative attitudes and behaviours of such others as legal entities does not indicate GD. GD does not imply an opinion of immorality; the psychological establishment holds that people with any kind of mental or emotional problem should not receive stigma. The solution for GD is whatever will alleviate suffering and restore functionality; this solution often, but not always, consists of undergoing a gender transition. Clinical training lacks relevant information needed in order to adequately help transgender clients, which results in a large number of practitioners who are not prepared to sufficiently work with this population of individuals. Many mental healthcare providers know little about transgender issues. Those who seek help from these professionals often educate the professional without receiving help. This solution usually is good for transsexual people but is not the solution for other transgender people, particularly non-binary people who lack an exclusively male or female identity. Instead, therapists can support their clients in whatever steps they choose to take to transition or can support their decision not to transition while also addressing their clients' sense of congruence between gender identity and appearance. Research on the specific problems faced by the transgender community in mental health has focused on diagnosis and clinicians' experiences instead of transgender clients' experiences. Therapy was not always sought by transgender people due to mental health needs. Prior to the seventh version of the Standards of Care (SOC), an individual had to be diagnosed with gender identity disorder in order to proceed with hormone treatments or sexual reassignment surgery. The new version decreased the focus on diagnosis and instead emphasized the importance of flexibility in order to meet the diverse health care needs of transsexual, transgender, and all gender-nonconforming people. The reasons for seeking mental health services vary according to the individual. A transgender person seeking treatment does not necessarily mean their gender identity is problematic. The emotional strain of dealing with stigma and experiencing transphobia pushes many transgender people to seek treatment to improve their quality of life, as one trans woman reflected: "Transgendered individuals are going to come to a therapist and most of their issues have nothing to do, specifically, with being transgendered. It has to do because they've had to hide, they've had to lie, and they've felt all of this guilt and shame, unfortunately usually for years!" Many transgender people also seek mental health treatment for depression and anxiety caused by the stigma attached to being transgender, and some transgender people have stressed the importance of acknowledging their gender identity with a therapist in order to discuss other quality-of-life issues. Rarely, some choose to detransition. Problems still remain surrounding misinformation about transgender issues that hurt transgender people's mental health experiences. One trans man who was enrolled as a student in a psychology graduate program highlighted the main concerns with modern clinical training: "Most people probably are familiar with the term transgender, but maybe that's it. I don't think I've had any formal training just going through [clinical] programs ... I don't think most [therapists] know. Most therapists – Master's degree, PhD level – they've had ... one diversity class on GLBT issues. One class out of the huge diversity training. One class. And it was probably mostly about gay lifestyle." Many health insurance policies do not cover treatment associated with gender transition, and numerous people are under- or uninsured, which raises concerns about the insufficient training most therapists receive prior to working with transgender clients, potentially increasing financial strain on clients without providing the treatment they need. Many clinicians who work with transgender clients only receive mediocre training on gender identity, but introductory training on interacting with transgender people has recently been made available to health care professionals to help remove barriers and increase the level of service for the transgender population. In February 2010, France became the first country in the world to remove transgender identity from the list of mental diseases. A 2014 study carried out by the Williams Institute (a UCLA think tank) found that 41% of transgender people had attempted suicide, with the rate being higher among people who experienced discrimination in access to housing or healthcare, harassment, physical or sexual assault, or rejection by family. A 2019 follow-up study found that transgender people who wanted and received gender-affirming medical care had significantly lower rates of suicidal thoughts and attempts. However, a study on the impact of parental support on trans youth found that among trans children with supportive parents, only 4% attempted suicide, a 93% decrease. Autism is more common in people who are gender dysphoric. It is not known whether there is a biological basis. This may be due to the fact that people on the autism spectrum are less concerned with societal disapproval, and feel less fear or inhibition about coming out as trans than others.[better source needed] Medical and surgical procedures exist for transsexual and some transgender people, though most categories of transgender people as described above are not known for seeking the following treatments. Hormone replacement therapy for trans men induces beard growth and masculinizes skin, hair, voice, and fat distribution. Hormone replacement therapy for trans women feminizes fat distribution and breasts, as well as diminishes muscle mass and strength. Laser hair removal or electrolysis removes excess hair for trans women. Surgical procedures for trans women feminize the voice, skin, face, Adam's apple, breasts, waist, buttocks, and genitals. Surgical procedures for trans men masculinize the chest and genitals and remove the womb, ovaries, and fallopian tubes. The acronyms "Gender-affirming surgery (GAS)" and "sex reassignment surgery" (SRS) refer to genital surgery. The term "sex reassignment therapy" (SRT) is used as an umbrella term for physical procedures required for transition. Use of the term "sex change" has been criticized for its emphasis on surgery, and the term "transition" is preferred. Availability of these procedures depends on degree of gender dysphoria, presence or absence of gender identity disorder, and standards of care in the relevant jurisdiction. Trans men who have not had a hysterectomy and who take testosterone are at increased risk for endometrial cancer because androstenedione, which is made from testosterone in the body, can be converted into estrogen, and external estrogen is a risk factor for endometrial cancer. Detransition refers to the cessation or reversal of a sex reassignment surgery or gender transition. Formal studies of detransition have been few in number, of disputed quality, and politically controversial. Estimates of the rate at which detransitioning occurs vary from less than 1% to as high as 13%. Those who undergo sex reassignment surgery have very low rates of detransition or regret. The 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey, with responses from 27,715 individuals who identified as "transgender, trans, genderqueer, [or] non-binary", found that 8% of respondents reported some kind of detransition. "Most of those who de-transitioned did so only temporarily: 62% of those who had de-transitioned reported that they were currently living full time in a gender different than the gender they were thought to be at birth." Detransition was associated with assigned male sex at birth, nonbinary gender identity, and bisexual orientation, among other cohorts. Only 5% of detransitioners (or 0.4% of total respondents) reported doing so because gender transition was "not for them"; 82% cited external reason(s), including pressure from others, the difficulties of transition, and discrimination. "The most common reason cited for de-transitioning was pressure from a parent (36%)." Legal procedures exist in some jurisdictions which allow individuals to change their legal gender or name to reflect their gender identity. Requirements for these procedures vary from an explicit formal diagnosis of transsexualism, to a diagnosis of gender identity disorder, to a letter from a physician that attests the individual's gender transition or having established a different gender role. In 1994, the DSM IV entry was changed from "Transsexual" to "Gender Identity Disorder". In 2013, the DSM V removed "Gender Identity Disorder" and published "Gender Dysphoria" in its place. In many places, transgender people are not legally protected from discrimination in the workplace or in public accommodations. A report released in February 2011 found that 90% of transgender people faced discrimination at work and were unemployed at double the rate of the general population, and over half had been harassed or turned away when attempting to access public services. Members of the transgender community also encounter high levels of discrimination in health care. 36 countries in Europe require a mental health diagnosis for legal gender recognition and 20 countries require sterilisation. In April 2017, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that requiring sterilisation for legal gender recognition violates human rights. Jurisdiction over legal classification of sex in Canada is assigned to the provinces and territories. This includes legal change of gender classification. On June 19, 2017, Bill C-16, having passed the legislative process in the House of Commons of Canada and the Senate of Canada, became law upon receiving Royal Assent, which put it into immediate force. The law updated the Canadian Human Rights Act and the Criminal Code to include "gender identity and gender expression" as protected grounds from discrimination, hate publications and advocating transgender genocide. The bill also added "gender identity and expression" to the list of aggravating factors in sentencing, where the accused commits a criminal offence against an individual because of those personal characteristics. Similar transgender laws also exist in all the provinces and territories. In the United States, transgender people are protected from employment discrimination by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Exceptions apply to certain types of employers, for example, employers with fewer than 15 employees and religious organizations. In 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court affirmed that Title VII prohibits discrimination against transgender people in the case R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes Inc. v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Nicole Maines, a trans girl, took a case to Maine's supreme court in June 2013. She argued that being denied access to her high school's women's restroom was a violation of Maine's Human Rights Act; one state judge has disagreed with her, but Maines won her lawsuit against the Orono school district in January 2014 before the Maine Supreme Judicial Court. On May 14, 2016, the United States Department of Education and Department of Justice issued guidance directing public schools to allow transgender students to use bathrooms that match their gender identities. On June 30, 2016, the United States Department of Defense removed the ban that prohibited transgender people from openly serving in the US military. On July 27, 2017, President Donald Trump tweeted that transgender Americans would not be allowed to serve "in any capacity" in the United States Armed Forces. Later that day, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Joseph Dunford announced, "there will be no modifications to the current policy until the president's direction has been received by the Secretary of Defense and the secretary has issued implementation guidance." Joe Biden later reversed Trump's policy when he became president in 2021. In April 2014, the Supreme Court of India declared transgender to be a 'third gender' in Indian law. The transgender community in India (made up of Hijras and others) has a long history in India and in Hindu mythology. Justice KS Radhakrishnan noted in his decision that, "Seldom, our society realizes or cares to realize the trauma, agony and pain which the members of Transgender community undergo, nor appreciates the innate feelings of the members of the Transgender community, especially of those whose mind and body disown their biological sex". Hijras have faced structural discrimination including not being able to obtain driving licenses, and being prohibited from accessing various social benefits. It is also common for them to be banished from communities. Despite the distinction between sexual orientation and gender, throughout history gay, lesbian and bisexual subcultures were often the only places where gender-variant people were socially accepted in the gender role they felt they belonged to; especially during the time when legal or medical transitioning was almost impossible. This acceptance has had a complex history. Like the wider world, the gay community in Western societies did not generally distinguish between sex and gender identity until the 1970s, and the role of the transgender community in the history of LGBT rights is often overlooked. According to a study done at University of California, Los Angeles in 2011, conducted in part by Gary J. Gates, 3.5% of adults across the United States identify as either gay, lesbian, or bisexuals whereas only 0.3% of adults identify as transgender. Transgender individuals have been part of various LGBT movements throughout history, with significant contributions dating back to the early days of the gay liberation movement. The LGBT community is not a monolithic group, and there are different modes of thought on who is a part of this diverse community. The changes that came with the Gay Liberation Movement and Civil Rights movement saw many gay, lesbian, and bisexual people making headway within the public sphere, and gaining support from the wider public, throughout the latter half of the twentieth century. The trans community only experienced a similar surge in activism during the start of the twenty-first century. Due to the many different groups that make up the broader LGBT movement, there are those within the larger community who do not believe that the trans community has a place within the LGBT space. The Vatican’s doctrine department has issued a recent ruling that allows Catholic baptism for transgender individuals and infants born to same-sex couples. Dated October 31, 2023, these new regulations stem from questions submitted by Brazilian bishop Giuseppe Negri to the dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith (DDF). The responses, addressing specific sacraments, were published on the Vatican’s website in Italy. Concerning transgender individuals, the document states that they can undergo baptism like any other adult, as long as there is no potential for causing scandal or disorientation among other Catholics. If children identifying as transgender are adequately prepared and willing, they can receive baptism, according to the document. Additionally, it mentions that transgender individuals, including those who have undergone gender reassignment, can serve as godparents and witnesses in Catholic weddings under appropriate conditions. The document also allows the baptism of children from same-sex couples, provided there is a well-founded hope that they will receive Catholic religious education. The document emphasizes that individuals in same-sex relationships are regarded as committing a sin, and baptism is conditional upon repentance for such actions. Several sermons by Pope Francis are referenced in the document to support this ruling. The Church of England passed a motion at the 2017 General Synod, which would ensure Anglican churches accepted transgender people, even suggesting on their website that transgender people could be gifted a Bible with their new name inscribed to support them. Feminist views on transgender women have changed over time, but have generally become more positive. Second-wave feminism saw numerous clashes opposed to transgender women, since they were not seen as "true" women, and as invading women-only spaces. Though second-wave feminism argued for the sex and gender distinction, some feminists believed there was a conflict between transgender identity and the feminist cause; e.g., they believed that male-to-female transition abandoned or devalued female identity and that transgender people embraced traditional gender roles and stereotypes. By the emergence of third-wave feminism (around 1990), opinions had shifted to being more inclusive of both trans and gay identities. Fourth-wave feminism (starting around 2012) has been widely trans-inclusive, but trans-exclusive groups and ideas remain as a minority, though one that is especially prominent in the UK. Feminists who do not accept that trans women are women have been labeled "trans-exclusionary radical feminists" (TERFs) or gender-critical feminists by opponents. Transgender individuals experience significant rates of employment discrimination. Approximately 90% of trans people have encountered some form of harassment or mistreatment in their workplace. Moreover, 47% have experienced some form of adverse employment outcome due to being transgender; of this figure, 44% were passed over for a job, 23% were denied a promotion, and 26% were terminated on the grounds that they were transgender. Studies in several cultures have found that cisgender women are more likely to be accepting of trans people than cisgender men. The start of the twenty-first century saw the rise in transgender activism and with it an increase in support. Within the United States, groups such as the Trevor Project have been serving the wider LGBT community including people who identify with the term transgender. The group offers support in the form of educational resources including research, advocacy, and crisis services. The American Civil Liberties Unions (ACLU) is another group that fights legal battles in support of many different groups including those in the trans community. Other groups within the United States specifically advocate for transgender rights. One of these groups directly related to transgender support is the National Center for Transgender Equality (NCTE), which is committed to advocating for policy changes that protect transgender people and promote equality. Through their research, education, and advocacy efforts, the NCTE works to address issues such as healthcare access, employment discrimination, and legal recognition for transgender individuals. One prominent organization within Europe is Transgender Europe (TGEU), a network of organizations and individuals committed to promoting equality and human rights for transgender people within European borders. TGEU works to challenge discrimination, improve transgender healthcare access, advocate for legal recognition of gender identity, and support the well-being of transgender communities. Little is known about the prevalence of transgender people in the general population and reported prevalence estimates are greatly affected by variable definitions of transgender. According to a recent systematic review, an estimated 9.2 out of every 100,000 people have received or requested gender affirmation surgery or transgender hormone therapy; 6.8 out of every 100,000 people have received a transgender-specific diagnoses; and 355 out of every 100,000 people self-identify as transgender. These findings underscore the value of using consistent terminology related to studying the experience of transgender, as studies that explore surgical or hormonal gender affirmation therapy may or may not be connected with others that follow a diagnosis of "transsexualism", "gender identity disorder", or "gender dysphoria", none of which may relate with those that assess self-reported identity. Common terminology across studies does not yet exist, so population numbers may be inconsistent, depending on how they are being counted. A study in 2020 found that, since 1990, of those seeking sex hormone therapy for gender dysphoria there has been a steady increase in the percentage of trans men, such that they equal the number of trans women seeking this treatment. In Thailand and Laos, the term kathoey is used to refer to male-to-female transgender people and effeminate gay men. However, many transgender people in Thailand do not identify as kathoey. Transgender people have also been documented in Iran, Japan, Nepal, Indonesia, Vietnam, South Korea, Jordan, Singapore, and the greater Chinese region, including Hong Kong, Taiwan, and the People's Republic of China. The cultures of the Indian subcontinent include a third gender, referred to as hijra in Hindi. In India, the Supreme Court on April 15, 2014, recognized a third gender that is neither male nor female, stating "Recognition of transgenders as a third gender is not a social or medical issue but a human rights issue." In 1998, Shabnam Mausi became the first transgender person to be elected in India, in the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh. According to Amnesty International, 1.5 million transgender people live in the European Union (as at 2017), making up 0.3% of the population. A 2011 survey conducted by the Equality and Human Rights Commission in the UK found that of 10,026 respondents, 1.4% would be classified into a gender minority group. The survey also showed that 1% had gone through any part of a gender reassignment process (including thoughts or actions). In the England and Wales section of the 2021 United Kingdom census, 0.5% of respondents aged 16 and over indicated that their gender identity was different from their sex assigned at birth. The 2021 Canadian census released by Statistics Canada found that 59,460 Canadians (0.19% of the population) identified as transgender. According to the Survey of Safety in Public and Private Spaces by Statistics Canada in 2018, 0.24% of the Canadian population identified as transgender men, women or non-binary individuals. The Social Security Administration has tracked the sex of United States citizens since 1936. A 1968 estimate, by Ira B. Pauly, estimated that about 2,500 transsexual people were living in the United States, with four times as many trans women as trans men. One effort to quantify the modern population in 2011 gave a "rough estimate" that 0.3% of adults in the US are transgender. More recent studies released in 2016 estimate the proportion of Americans who identify as transgender at 0.5 to 0.6%. This would put the total number of transgender Americans at approximately 1.4 million adults (as of 2016[update]). In the United States and Canada, some Native American and First Nations cultures traditionally recognize the existence of more than two genders, such as the Zuni male-bodied lhamana, the Lakota male-bodied winkte, and the Mohave male-bodied alyhaa and female-bodied hwamee. These traditional people, along with those from other North American Indigenous cultures, are sometimes part of the contemporary, pan-Indian two-spirit community. Historically, in most cultures who have alternate gender roles, if the spouse of a third gender person is not otherwise gender variant, they have not generally been regarded as other-gendered themselves, simply for being in a same-sex relationship. In Mexico, the Zapotec culture includes a third gender in the form of the Muxe. Mahu is a traditional third gender in Hawai'i and Tahiti. Mahu are valued as teachers, caretakers of culture, and healers, such as Kapaemahu. Diné (Navajo) have Nádleehi. In Latin American cultures, a travesti is an individual who has been assigned male at birth and who has a feminine, transfeminine, or "femme" gender identity. Travestis generally undergo hormonal treatment, use female gender expression including new names and pronouns from the masculine ones they were given when assigned a sex, and might use breast implants, but they are not offered or do not desire sex-reassignment surgery. Travesti might be regarded as a gender in itself (a "third gender"), a mix between man and woman ("intergender/androgynes"), or the presence of both masculine and feminine identities in a single person ("bigender"). They are framed as something entirely separate from transgender women, who possess the same gender identity of people assigned female at birth. Other transgender identities are becoming more widely known, as a result of contact with other cultures of the Western world. These newer identities, sometimes known under the umbrella use of the term "genderqueer", along with the older travesti term, are known as non-binary and go along with binary transgender identities (those traditionally diagnosed under the obsolete label of "transsexualism") under the single umbrella of transgender, but are distinguished from cross-dressers and drag queens and kings, that are held as nonconforming gender expressions rather than transgender gender identities when a distinction is made. Transgender people vary greatly in choosing when, whether, and how to disclose their transgender status to family, close friends, and others. The prevalence of discrimination and violence against transgender persons can make coming out a risky decision. Fear of retaliatory behavior, such as being removed from the parental home while underage, is a cause for transgender people to not come out to their families until they have reached adulthood.[citation needed] Parental confusion and lack of acceptance of a transgender child may result in parents treating a newly revealed gender identity as a "phase" or making efforts to change their children back to "normal" by utilizing mental health services to alter the child's gender identity.[better source needed] The internet can play a significant role in the coming out process for transgender people. Some come out in an online identity first, providing an opportunity to go through experiences virtually and safely before risking social sanctions in the real world. In 2014, the United States reached a "transgender tipping point", according to Time. At this time, the media visibility of transgender people reached a level higher than seen before. Since then, the number of transgender portrayals across TV platforms has stayed elevated. Annual marches, protests or gatherings take place around the world for transgender issues, often taking place during the time of local Pride parades for LGBT people. These events are frequently organised by trans communities to build community, address human rights struggles, and create visibility. International Transgender Day of Visibility is an annual holiday occurring on March 31 dedicated to celebrating transgender people and raising awareness of discrimination faced by transgender people worldwide. The holiday was founded by Michigan-based transgender activist Rachel Crandall in 2009. Transgender Day of Remembrance (TDOR) is held every year on November 20 in honor of Rita Hester, who was killed on November 28, 1998. Her murder remains unsolved, but was described in 2022 as "a result of transphobia and anti-trans violence" by the Office of the Mayor of Boston, Michelle Wu. TDOR memorializes victims of hate crimes and prejudice and raises awareness of hate crimes committed upon living transgender people. Transgender Awareness Week is a one-week celebration leading up to TDOR, dedicated to educating about transgender and gender non-conforming people and the issues associated with their transition or identity. Several trans marches occur in cities around the world, including Paris, San Francisco, and Toronto, in order to raise awareness of the transgender community. There are also significant portrayals of transgender people in the media. Transgender literature includes literature portraying transgender people, as well as memoirs or novels by transgender people, who often discuss elements of the transgender experience. Several films and television shows feature transgender characters in the storyline, and several fictional works also have notable transgender characters. A common symbol for the transgender community is the Transgender Pride Flag, which was designed by the American transgender woman Monica Helms in 1999, and was first shown at a pride parade in Phoenix, Arizona, in 2000. The flag consists of five horizontal stripes: light blue, pink, white, pink, and light blue Other transgender symbols include the butterfly (symbolizing transformation or metamorphosis), and a pink/light blue yin and yang symbol. Several gender symbols have been used to represent transgender people, including ⚥ and ⚧. Transgender portal LGBT portal Transgender at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource List of transgender and transsexual fictional characters List of transgender people List of transgender publications List of transgender-related topics List of transgender-rights organizations List of people killed for being transgender Transgender history * In April 1970, TV Guide published an article which referenced a post-operative transsexual movie character as being "transgendered."("Sunday Highlights". TV Guide. April 26, 1970. Archived from the original on 4 June 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2012. [R]aquel Welch (left), moviedom's sex queen soon to be seen as the heroine/hero of Gore Vidal's transgendered "Myra Breckinridge"...) In the 1974 edition of Clinical Sexuality: A Manual for the Physician and the Professions, transgender was used as an umbrella term and the Conference Report from the 1974 "National TV.TS Conference" held in Leeds, West Yorkshire, UK used "trans-gender" and "trans.people" as umbrella terms.(Oliven, John F. (1974). Clinical sexuality: A Manual for the Physician and the Professions (3rd ed.). Lippincott. "Transgender deviance" p 110, "Transgender research" p 484, "transgender deviates" p 485, Transvestites not welcome at "Transgender Center" p 487. ISBN 9780397503292. OCLC 563898062. Archived from the original on 2015-12-05.), (2006). The Transgender Phenomenon (Elkins, Richard; King, Dave (2006). The Transgender Phenomenon. Sage. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-7619-7163-4. Archived from the original on 2015-09-26.) A Practical Handbook of Psychiatry (1974) references "transgender surgery" noting, "The transvestite rarely seeks transgender surgery, since the core of his perversion is an attempt to realize the fantasy of a phallic woman."(Novello, Joseph R. (1974). A Practical Handbook of Psychiatry. Springfield, Illinois: C. C. Thomas. p. 176. ISBN 9780398028688. OCLC 643581864. Archived from the original on 2015-09-19.) Magnus Hirschfeld coined the German term Transsexualismus in 1923, which Cauldwell translated into English. The recurring concern that transsexual implies sexuality stems from the tendency of many informal speakers to ignore the sex and gender distinction and use gender for any male/female difference and sex for sexual activity. (Liberman, Mark. "Single-X Education". Language Log. Archived from the original on 15 April 2012. Retrieved 28 June 2012.) "A glossary: Defining transgender terms". American Psychological Association. 49 (8): 32. September 2018. Archived from the original on 2023-07-12. Retrieved 2023-07-24. Bevan, Dana J. (17 November 2014). The Psychobiology of Transsexualism and Transgenderism. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-Clio/Greenwood Publishing. p. 42. ISBN 9781440831270. OCLC 1021404840. Archived from the original on 15 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2022. The term transsexual was introduced by Cauldwell (1949) and popularized by Harry Benjamin (1966) [...]. The term transgender was coined by John Oliven (1965) and popularized by various transgender people who pioneered the concept and practice of transgenderism. It is sometimes said that Virginia Prince (1976) popularized the term, but history shows that many transgender people advocated the use of this term much more than Prince. Polly, Ryan; Nicole, Julie (March 2011). "Understanding transsexual patients: culturally sensitive care in emergency nursing practice". Advanced Emergency Nursing Journal. 33 (1): 55–64. doi:10.1097/TME.0b013e3182080ef4. PMID 21317698. S2CID 2481961. Archived from the original on 2022-03-11. Retrieved 2022-05-14. The use of terminology by transsexual individuals to self-identify varies. As aforementioned, many transsexual individuals prefer the term transgender, or simply trans, as it is more inclusive and carries fewer stigmas. There are some transsexual individuals, however, who reject the term transgender; these individuals view transsexualism as a treatable congenital condition. Following medical and/or surgical transition, they live within the binary as either a man or a woman and may not disclose their transition history. Forsyth, Craig J.; Copes, Heith (2014). Encyclopedia of Social Deviance. SAGE Publications. p. 740. ISBN 978-1483364698. Archived from the original on December 1, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Transgender is an umbrella term for people whose gender identities, gender expressions, and/or behaviors are different from those culturally associated with the sex that they were assigned at birth. "GLAAD Media Reference Guide – Transgender". Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD). 9 September 2011. Archived from the original on 13 May 2019. Retrieved 25 November 2020. An umbrella term for people whose gender identity and/or gender expression differs from what is typically associated with the sex they were assigned at birth [...] Transgender should be used as an adjective, not as a noun. Do not say, 'Tony is a transgender,' or 'The parade included many transgenders.' [...] The adjective transgender should never have an extraneous '-ed' tacked onto the end. An '-ed' suffix adds unnecessary length to the word and can cause tense confusion and grammatical errors. It also brings transgender into alignment with lesbian, gay, bisexual, and queer. You would not say that Elton John is 'gayed' or Ellen DeGeneres is 'lesbianed,' therefore you would not say Chaz Bono is 'transgendered.' Bilodeau, Brent (21 October 2008). "Beyond the Gender Binary: A Case Study of Two Transgender Students at a Midwestern Research University". Journal of Gay & Lesbian Issues in Education. 3 (1). Routledge: 29–44. doi:10.1300/J367v03n01_05. S2CID 144070536. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 14 May 2022. Yet Jordan and Nick represent a segment of transgender communities that have largely been overlooked in transgender and student development research – individuals who express a non-binary construction of gender. Stryker, Susan; Whittle, Stephen; Aizura, Aren Z. (18 October 2013). The Transgender Studies Reader. New York: Routledge; Hoboken: Taylor & Francis. p. 666. ISBN 978-1135398842. OCLC 1120816658. Archived from the original on 15 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2022. The authors note that, increasingly, in social science literature, the term 'third gender' is being replaced by or conflated with the newer term 'transgender.' Chrisler, Joan C.; McCreary, Donald R. (12 March 2010). Handbook of Gender Research in Psychology, Volume 1. New York; London: Springer Publishing. p. 486. ISBN 9781441914651. OCLC 647897357. Archived from the original on 15 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2022. Transgender is a broad term characterized by a challenge of traditional gender roles and gender identity [...] For example, some cultures classify transgender individuals as a third gender, thereby treating this phenomenon as normative. Reisner, S. L.; Conron, K.; Scout, N.; Mimiaga, M. J.; Haneuse, S.; Austin, S. B. (13 March 2014). "Comparing In-Person and Online Survey Respondents in the U.S. National Transgender Discrimination Survey: Implications for Transgender Health Research". LGBT Health. 1 (2): 98–106. doi:10.1089/lgbt.2013.0018. PMID 26789619. Archived from the original on 23 October 2021. Retrieved 14 May 2022. Transgender was defined broadly to cover those who transition from one gender to another as well as those who may not choose to socially, medically, or legally fully transition, including cross-dressers, people who consider themselves to be genderqueer, androgynous, and… "Transgender". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 2022-06-14. Retrieved 2022-06-14. "The Many Styles Of Drag Kings, Photographed In And Out Of Drag". HuffPost. 2019-11-12. Archived from the original on 2021-03-08. Retrieved 2020-06-03. "Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Health: Transgender Persons". CDC. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. September 29, 2020. Archived from the original on 18 February 2021. Retrieved 21 November 2020. Blank, Paula (2014-09-24). "Will the Word "Cisgender" Ever Go Mainstream?". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 2018-05-13. Retrieved 2021-08-14. Factsheet: Trans People in the UK (PDF) (Report). gov.uk. 3 July 2018. ISBN 9781786556738. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 April 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2022. Easton, Rob (27 April 2022). "'Historic' census data sheds light on number of trans and non-binary people for the first time". CBC.ca. Archived from the original on 27 April 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2022. M.H. (Sep 1, 2017). "Why transgender people are being sterilised in some European countries". The Economist. Archived from the original on 2018-03-22. Retrieved 2022-05-22. "What Percentage of the Population is Transgender 2022". World Population Review. Archived from the original on 2022-05-22. Retrieved 2022-05-22. "Counting Trans Populations". Division of Prevention Science. Archived from the original on 2022-05-13. Retrieved 2022-05-22. Maizes, Victoria; Low Dog, Tieraona (19 November 2015). Integrative Women's Health. Oxford University Press. p. 745. ISBN 978-0190214807. Many transgender people experience gender dysphoria – distress that results from the discordance of biological sex and experienced gender. Treatment for gender dysphoria, considered to be highly effective, includes physical, medical, and/or surgical treatments [...] some [transgender people] may not choose to transition at all. "Understanding Transgender People FAQ". National Center for Transgender Equality. 1 May 2009. Archived from the original on 22 April 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. Lombardi, Emilia L.; Anne Wilchins, Riki; Priesing, Dana; Malouf, Diana (October 2008). "Gender Violence: Transgender Experiences with Violence and Discrimination". Journal of Homosexuality. 42 (1): 89–101. doi:10.1300/J082v42n01_05. PMID 11991568. S2CID 34886642. "Groundbreaking Report Reflects Persistent Discrimination Against Transgender Community". Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation. February 4, 2011. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved December 14, 2021. Bradford, Judith; Reisner, Sari L.; Honnold, Julie A.; Xavier, Jessica (2013). "Experiences of Transgender-Related Discrimination and Implications for Health: Results From the Virginia Transgender Health Initiative Study". American Journal of Public Health. 103 (10): 1820–1829. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2012.300796. PMC 3780721. PMID 23153142. Whittle, Stephen (2002). Respect and equality : transsexual and transgender rights. London Portland, OR: Cavendish Pub. ISBN 978-1-85941-743-0. OCLC 810082841. Sudborough, Susannah (2022-06-22). "Rita Hester's murder and legacy are important to Boston, so she's getting a mural in Allston". Boston.com. Archived from the original on 2023-05-30. Retrieved 2023-10-15. "Nenshi proclaims Trans Day of Visibility". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on April 4, 2013. Retrieved April 4, 2013. Ford, Zack (August 27, 2014). "Transgender Pride Flag Designer Applauds Smithsonian LGBT Artifacts Collection". ThinkProgress. United States of America. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved December 4, 2015. DiGuglielmo, Joey (11 May 2016). "Querry: Bianca Rey". Washington Blade. Archived from the original on 7 October 2020. Retrieved 28 November 2020. Griggs, Brandon (1 June 2015). "America's transgender moment". CNN. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 28 November 2020. Hayden Mora, deputy chief of staff at the Human Rights Campaign and a transgender man.... Polly, Nicole J (2011). "Understanding the transsexual patient: culturally sensitive care in emergency nursing practice". Advanced Emergency Nursing Journal. 33 (1): 55–64. doi:10.1097/TME.0b013e3182080ef4. PMID 21317698. S2CID 2481961. Hirschfeld, Magnus (1923). "Die Intersexuelle Konstitution" [The Intersexual Constitution]. Jahrbuch für sexuelle Zwischenstufen [Yearbook for Intermediate Sexual Types] (in German). "Answers to your questions about transgender people". www.apa.org. American Psychological Association. 2014. Archived from the original on 15 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. According to the APA Style guide, the term "transsexual" is largely outdated... Mills, Robert (2015). Seeing Sodomy in the Middle Ages. The University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226169262. Indeed, it is arguably only since the 1990s, with the coining of the umbrella term "transgender," that gender variance has come to be understood, in certain activist and institutional settings, as being ontologically different from homosexuality. Transgender rights. Phyllis Randolph Frye, Paisley Currah, Richard M. Juang, Shannon Minter. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 2006. ISBN 0-8166-4311-3. OCLC 68221085. Archived from the original on 2020-06-12. Retrieved 2023-01-17. From signifying a subject position between cross-dresser and transsexual, the meaning of transgender expanded radically in the early 1990s to include them, along with other cross-gender practices and identities.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: others (link) Thomas E. Bevan, The Psychobiology of Transsexualism and Transgenderism (2014, ISBN 1440831270, pages 42, 61: "The term transsexual was introduced by Cauldwell (1949) and popularized by Harry Benjamin (1966) [...]. The term transgender was coined by John Oliven (1965) and was popularized by various transgender people who pioneered the concept and practice of transgenderism....Oliven, J. (1965, June). Transgenderism = transsexualism. Sexual Hygiene and Pathology, 514. Simon, Ray (2017). "Stirring up the origin of the 'alphabet soup'". Erie Gay News. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. "According to scholars, the word first appeared in print in John F. Oliven's 1965 book, "Sexual Hygiene and Pathology." Oliven writes: Where the compulsive urge reaches beyond female vestments, and becomes an urge for gender ('sex') change, transvestism becomes 'transsexualism.' The term is misleading; actually, 'transgenderism' is what is meant, because sexuality is not a major factor in primary transvestism. Although Oliven's understanding of "transgender"is not the same as our understanding of it today, his use of it is still significant. As K.J. Rawson and Cristan Williams note in their book, "Transgender*: The Rhetorical Landscape of a Term," Oliven didn't use the word in the book's 1955 edition; it was added later, when the second edition was revised and published. Gradually, some members of this marginalized community began to apply the word "transgender"to themselves. For example, Virginia Charles Prince, publisher of the long-running periodical "Transvestia," occasionally used a variation of the word, "transgenderal."" Oliven, John F. (1965). Sexual hygiene and pathology: a manual for the physician and the professions. Lippincott. Archived from the original on 2020-10-02. Retrieved 2020-08-22. Oliven, John F. (1965). "Sexual Hygiene and Pathology". The American Journal of the Medical Sciences. 250 (2): 235. doi:10.1097/00000441-196508000-00054. S2CID 71768943.: "Where the compulsive urge reaches beyond female vestments, and becomes an urge for gender ("sex") change, transvestism becomes "transsexualism." The term is misleading; actually, "transgenderism" is what is meant, because sexuality is not a major factor in primary transvestism. Psychologically, the transsexual often differs from the simple cross-dresser; he is conscious at all times of a strong desire to be a woman, and the urge can be truly consuming.", p. 514 Rawson, K. J.; Williams, Cristan (2014). "Transgender: The Rhetorical Landscape of a term". Present Tense: A Journal of Rhetoric in Society. 3 (2). Archived from the original on 2017-05-15. Retrieved 2017-05-18. Blakemore, Erin (2022-06-24). "How historians are documenting the lives of transgender people". National Geographic. Retrieved 2024-01-14. Prince, Virginia (1969). "Change of Sex or Gender". Transvestia. IX (60). Chevalier Publications: 65. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021.: "I, at least, know the difference between sex and gender and have simply elected to change the latter and not the former. If a word is necessary, I should be termed a “transgenderal.”" Elkins, Richard; King, Dave (2006). The Transgender Phenomenon. Sage. pp. 13–14. ISBN 978-0-7619-7163-4. Archived from the original on 2015-09-26. Ekins, Richard; King, Dave (1999). "Towards a Sociology of Transgendered Bodies". The Sociological Review. 47 (3): 580–602. doi:10.1111/1467-954X.00185. S2CID 144738527. Virginia Prince pioneered the term 'transgenderist' and 'transgenderal' (Prince, 1976: 145) to refer to people who lived full-time in the gender opposite their biological sex, but did not seek sex/gender re-assignment surgery. Richard Ekins established the Trans-Gender Archive, at the University of Ulster, in 1986 (Ekins, 1988). The term was chosen to provide an umbrella concept which avoided such medical categories as transsexual and transvestite; which included the widest possible range of transgender phenomena; and which took the sociological view that aspects of sex, sexuality and gender (not just gender), including the binary divide, all have socially constructed components. Not long afterwards, the 'transgender community' came to be used as an umbrella term to include transsexuals, transvestites, transgenderists, drag queens, and so on, as well as (in some uses) to include their partners and friends and professional service providers. Rayner, Claire (2 June 1979). "Crossing Over". Radio Times. BBC Radio 4 (published 6 June 1979). Archived from the original on 7 June 2023. Retrieved 6 June 2023. Dame-Griff, Avery (2023). The Two Revolutions: A History of the Transgender Internet. NYU Press. pp. 9, 22. ISBN 9781479818341.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: date and year (link) Peo, TV-TS Tapestry Board of Advisors, Roger E (1984). "The 'Origins' and 'Cures' for Transgender Behavior". The TV-TS Tapestry. No. 2. Archived from the original on 7 April 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2012. "First International Conference on Transgender Law and Employment Policy (1992)". organizational pamphlet. ICTLEP/. 1992. Archived from the original on 30 March 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2012. Transgendered persons include transsexuals, transgenderists, and other crossdressers of both sexes, transitioning in either direction (male to female or female to male), of any sexual orientation, and of all races, creeds, religions, ages, and degrees of physical impediment. Stryker, Susan (1 January 2008). "Transgender History, Homonormativity, and Disciplinarity". Radical History Review. 2008 (100): 145–157. doi:10.1215/01636545-2007-026. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 4 April 2023. Currah, Paisley (2006). "Gender Pluralisms under the Transgender Umbrella". In Currah, P.; Juang, R.M.; Minter, S. (eds.). Transgender Rights. University of Minnesota Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-8166-4312-7. Archived from the original on 2021-05-04. Retrieved 2021-03-22. Myers, Alex (14 May 2018). "Trans Terminology Seems Like It's Changing All the Time. And That's a Good Thing". Slate Magazine. Archived from the original on 15 May 2018. Retrieved 15 May 2018. Mallon, Gerald P. (1998). "Appendix: Definitions of Key Terms". In Gerald P. Mallon (ed.). Foundations of Social Work Practice with Lesbian and Gay Persons. Harrington Park Press. pp. 275–276. ISBN 1-56023-101-7. LCCN 97-13382. OCLC 37361633. "Transgender: Is a person whose gender identity is different from her/his biological gender. Many transgender individuals are persons who report feeling trapped in the wrong body. These people psychologically identify themselves with the opposite biological gender and desire to be a person of that gender." "transgender". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. 2017. Archived from the original on 13 April 2017. "especially : of, relating to, or being a person whose gender identity is opposite the sex the person had or was identified as having at birth" "Transgenderism no longer a mental illness: WHO". France 24. 19 June 2018. Archived from the original on 19 June 2018. "Transgender people, who identify as the opposite gender to the one they were born with," Gazzaniga, Michael S. (2018). "Human Development". Psychological Science (6th ed.). W. W. Norton. p. 367. ISBN 978-0-393-64040-3. OCLC 992709311. "A transgender person was born as one biological sex but feels that her true gender identity is that of the other sex." Mardell, Ashley (2016). The ABC's of LGBT+. Coral Gables, Florida: Mango Media Inc. p. 96. ISBN 978-1-63353-408-7. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 14 December 2019. Vincent, Ben (2020). Non-Binary Genders: Navigating Communities, Identities, and Healthcare. Bristol, UK: Policy Press. p. 17, note 10. doi:10.2307/j.ctv138wrbg. ISBN 978-1-4473-5192-4. JSTOR j.ctv138wrbg. S2CID 225850961. "Guardian and Observer style guide: T". London: Guardian News & Media. 20 November 2015. Archived from the original on 2017-07-09. [U]se transgender [...] only as an adjective: transgender person, trans person; never 'transgendered person' or 'a transgender'. "transgender, adj. and n.". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. March 2003. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) "GLAAD Media Reference Guide - Transgender Terms". GLAAD. 2022-02-22. Archived from the original on 2023-09-28. Retrieved 2022-07-28. "Online Anti-LGBTQ Hate Terms Defined: "Transgenderism"". GLAAD. Retrieved 9 March 2024. Bouman, Walter Pierre (8 January 2020). "Sumamus exordio: International Journal of Transgender Health". International Journal of Transgender Health. 21 (1): 1–2. doi:10.1080/15532739.2020.1709316. PMC 7430473. PMID 33015654. See paragraph 5. Glicksman, Eve (April 2013). "Transgender terminology: It's complicated". Monitor on Psychology. 44 (4). American Psychological Association: 39. Archived from the original on 25 September 2013. Retrieved 17 September 2013. Use whatever name and gender pronoun the person prefers "Meeting the Health Care Needs of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) People: The End to LGBT Invisibility". The Fenway Institute. p. 24. Archived from the original (PowerPoint Presentation) on 2013-10-20. Retrieved 2013-09-17. Use the pronoun that matches the person's gender identity Martin, Katherine. "New words notes June 2015". Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 14 August 2015. Retrieved 2 August 2015. Transgender Rights (2006, ISBN 0-8166-4312-1), edited by Paisley Currah, Richard M. Juang, Shannon Minter Alegria, Christine Aramburu (April 2011). "Transgender identity and health care: Implications for psychosocial and physical evaluation: Transgender identity and health care". Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners. 23 (4): 175–182. doi:10.1111/j.1745-7599.2010.00595.x. PMID 21489011. S2CID 205909330. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 4 April 2023. Transgender, Umbrella term for persons who do not conform to gender norms in their identity and/or behavior (Meyerowitz, 2002). Transsexual, Subset of transgenderism; persons who feel discordance between natal sex and identity (Meyerowitz, 2002) For example, Virginia Prince used transgender to distinguish cross-dressers from transsexual people ("glbtq > social sciences >> Prince, Virginia Charles". glbtq.com. Archived from the original on 2015-02-11.), writing in Men Who Choose to Be Women (in Sexology, February 1969) that "I, at least, know the difference between sex and gender and have simply elected to change the latter and not the former." "Sex -- Medical Definition". medilexicon.com. Archived from the original on 2014-02-22.: defines sex as a biological or physiological quality, while gender is a (psychological) "category to which an individual is assigned by self or others...". "UNCW: Developing and Implementing a Scale to Assess Attitudes Regarding Transsexuality" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 21, 2014. A Swenson, Medical Care of the Transgender Patient, in Family Medicine (2014): "While some transsexual people still prefer to use the term to describe themselves, many transgender people prefer the term transgender to transsexual." Parker, Jerry (October 18, 1979). "Christine Recalls Life as Boy from the Bronx". Newsday/Winnipeg Free Press. Archived from the original on 25 April 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2012. If you understand trans-genders," she says, (the word she prefers to transsexuals), "then you understand that gender doesn't have to do with bed partners, it has to do with identity. "News From California: 'Transgender'". Appeal-Democrat/Associate Press. May 11, 1982. pp. A–10. Archived from the original on 12 April 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2012. she describes people who have had such operations' "transgender" rather than transsexual. "Sexuality is who you sleep with, but gender is who you are," she explained "Glossary of Gender and Transgender Terms" (PDF). Boston, Mass.: Fenway Health. January 2010. p. 15. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 October 2013. Valentine, David (2007). "Imagining Transgender: An Ethnography of a Category". Duke University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822390213. ISBN 978-0-8223-9021-3. Stryker, Susan. "Introduction". In Stryker and S. Whittle (eds.), The Transgender Studies Reader, New York: Routledge, 2006. pp. 1–17. ISBN 1-135-39884-4. Winters, Kelley (2008). Gender Madness in American Psychiatry : essays from the struggle for dignity. Dillon, Colorado: GID Reform Advocates. p. 198. ISBN 9781439223888. Some Transsexual individuals also identify with the broader transgender community; others do not. Benjamin, H. (1966). The transsexual phenomenon. New York: Julian Press, page 23. Ekins, Richard (2005). Science, politics and clinical intervention: Harry Benjamin, transsexualism and the problem of heteronormativity Sexualities July 2005 vol. 8 no. 3 306-328 doi:10.1177/1363460705049578 Hansbury, Griffin (2008). The Middle Men: An Introduction to the Transmasculine Identities. Studies in Gender and Sexuality Volume 6, Issue 3, 2005 doi:10.1080/15240650609349276 Answers to Your Questions About Transgender Individuals and Gender Identity Archived 2010-06-15 at the Wayback Machine report from the website of the American Psychological Association - "What is the relationship between transgender and sexual orientation?" Bockting, Walter; Benner, Autumn; Coleman, Eli (28 March 2009). "Gay and Bisexual Identity Development Among Female-to-Male Transsexuals in North America: Emergence of a Transgender Sexuality". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 38 (5): 688–701. doi:10.1007/s10508-009-9489-3. PMID 19330439. S2CID 27207925. "The Report of the 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey" (PDF). National Center for Transgender Equality. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 December 2016. Retrieved 6 March 2016. "Trans PULSE Canada Report No. 1 or 10". 10 March 2020. Archived from the original on 14 March 2020. Retrieved 10 March 2020. Haefele-Thomas, Ardel (5 February 2019). Introduction to transgender studies. Combs, Thatcher,, Rains, Cameron,, Stryker, Susan,, Clifford, Jo, 1950-. New York, NY, US. pp. 107–110. ISBN 978-1-939594-28-0. OCLC 1048658263.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Gill-Peterson, Julian (23 October 2018). Histories of the transgender child. Minneapolis. pp. 80–90. ISBN 978-1-4529-5815-6. OCLC 1027732161.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Blanchard, Ray (1989). "The classification and labeling of nonhomosexual gender dysphorias". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 18 (4): 315–334. doi:10.1007/BF01541951. PMID 2673136. S2CID 43151898. Bagemihl, B. (1997). "Surrogate phonology and transsexual faggotry: A linguistic analogy for uncoupling sexual orientation from gender identity". In Livia, Anna; Hall, Kira (eds.). Queerly Phrased: Language, Gender, and Sexuality. Oxford University Press. pp. 380–401. doi:10.1093/oso/9780195104707.003.0023. ISBN 0195104714. Wahng SJ (2004). Double Cross: Transmasculinity Asian American Gendering in Trappings of Transhood. in Aldama AJ (ed.) Violence and the Body: Race, Gender, and the State. Indiana University Press. ISBN 025334171X Leiblum SR, Rosen RC (2000). Principles and Practice of Sex Therapy, Third Edition. ISBN 1-57230-574-6, Guilford Press of New York, c2000. APA task force (1994) "...For sexually mature individuals, the following specifiers may be noted based on the individual's sexual orientation: Sexually Attracted to Males, Sexually Attracted to Females, Sexually Attracted to Both, and Sexually Attracted to Neither..." in DSM-IV: Sections 302.6 and 302.85 Archived 2007-02-11 at the Wayback Machine published by the American Psychiatric Association. Retrieved via Mental Health Matters Archived 2007-04-07 at the Wayback Machine on 2007-04-06. Goethals, Susanne C.; Schwiebert, Valerie L. (September 2005). "Counseling as a Critique of Gender: On the Ethics of Counseling Transgendered Clients". International Journal for the Advancement of Counselling. 27 (3): 457–469. doi:10.1007/s10447-005-8206-8. S2CID 143746919 – via springerlink.com/. ...counselors to rethink their assumptions regarding gender, sexuality and sexual orientation. In addition, they supported counselors' need to adopt a transpositive disposition to counseling and to actively advocate for transgendered persons... Gómez-Gil, Esther; Trilla, Antoni; Salamero, Manel; Godás, Teresa; Valdés, Manuel (June 2009). "Sociodemographic, Clinical, and Psychiatric Characteristics of Transsexuals from Spain". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 38 (3): 378–392. doi:10.1007/s10508-007-9307-8. ISSN 0004-0002. PMID 18288600. S2CID 8700968. McCrea, Amy. Under the Transgender Umbrella: Improving ENDA's Protections, in the Georgetown Journal of Gender and the Law (2013): "This article will begin by providing a background on transgender people, highlighting the experience of a subset of non-binary individuals, bigender people, ..." Wilchins, Riki Anne (2002) 'It's Your Gender, Stupid', pp.23–32 in Joan Nestle, Clare Howell and Riki Wilchins (eds.) Genderqueer: Voices from Beyond the Sexual Binary. Los Angeles:Alyson Publications, 2002. Nestle, J. (2002) "...pluralistic challenges to the male/female, woman/man, gay/straight, butch/femme constructions and identities..." from Genders on My Mind, pp.3–10 in Genderqueer: Voices from Beyond the Sexual Binary, edited by Joan Nestle, Clare Howell and Riki Wilchins, published by Los Angeles:Alyson Publications, 2002:9. Retrieved 2007-04-07. Lindqvist, Anna (18 Feb 2020). "What is gender, anyway: a review of the options for operationalising gender". Psychology & Sexuality. 12 (4): 332–344. doi:10.1080/19419899.2020.1729844. "Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Definitions". Archived from the original on 2019-04-30. Retrieved 2020-07-10. Adams, Cydney (March 24, 2017). "The difference between sexual orientation and gender identity". CBS News. Viacom CBS. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 21 November 2020. E. D. Hirsch, Jr., E.D., Kett, J.F., Trefil, J. (2002) "Transvestite: Someone who dresses in the clothes usually worn by the opposite sex." in Definition of the word "transvestite" Archived 2007-10-12 at the Wayback Machine from The New Dictionary of Cultural Literacy, Third Edition Archived August 18, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-08-13. various (2006) "trans·ves·tite... (plural trans·ves·tites), noun. Definition: somebody who dresses like opposite sex:" in Definition of the word "transvestite" Archived 2007-11-09 at the Wayback Machine from the Encarta World English Dictionary (North American Edition) Archived April 10, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-08-13. Raj, R (2002) "transvestite (TV): n. Synonym: crossdresser (CD):" in Towards a Transpositive Therapeutic Model: Developing Clinical Sensitivity and Cultural Competence in the Effective Support of Transsexual and Transgendered Clients from the International Journal of Transgenderism 6,2. Retrieved 2007-08-13. Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Hall, B. et al. (2007) "...Many say this term (crossdresser) is preferable to transvestite, which means the same thing..." and "...transvestite (TV) – same as cross-dresser. Most feel cross-dresser is the preferred term..." in Discussion Paper: Toward a Commission Policy on Gender Identity Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine from the Ontario Human Rights Commission Archived 2007-08-13 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-08-13. Green, E., Peterson, E.N. (2006) "...The preferred term is 'cross-dresser', but the term 'transvestite' is still used in a positive sense in England..." in LGBTTSQI Terminology Archived 2013-09-05 at the Wayback Machine from Trans-Academics.org Archived 2007-04-24 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-08-13. Gilbert, Michael A. (2000). "The Transgendered Philosopher". International Journal of Transgenderism. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved December 16, 2015. Gilbert, Michael 'Miqqi Alicia' (2000) "The Transgendered Philosopher" in Special Issue on What is Transgender? Archived 2007-10-11 at the Wayback Machine from The International Journal of Transgenderism, Special Issue July 2000 Archived 2007-10-11 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-10-09. Docter, Richard F.; Prince, Virginia (1997). "Transvestism: A survey of 1032 cross-dressers". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 26 (6): 589–605. doi:10.1023/a:1024572209266. PMID 9415796. S2CID 43816859. World Health Organization (1992) "...Fetishistic transvestism is distinguished from transsexual transvestism by its clear association with sexual arousal and the strong desire to remove the clothing once orgasm occurs and sexual arousal declines...." in ICD-10, Gender Identity Disorder, category F65.1 Archived 2009-04-22 at the Wayback Machine published by the World Health Organization Archived 2016-07-05 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-08-13. APA task force (1994) "...The paraphiliac focus of Transvestic Fetishism involves cross-dressing. Usually the male with Transvestic Fetishism keeps a collection of female clothes that he intermittently uses to cross-dress. While cross dressed, he usually masturbates..." in DSM-IV: Sections 302.3 Archived 2007-02-11 at the Wayback Machine published by the American Psychiatric Association. Retrieved 2007-08-13. "Understanding Drag". National Center For Transgender Equality. 28 April 2017. Archived from the original on 10 March 2018. Retrieved 3 September 2020. "How Drag Queens Work". HowStuffWorks. 2012-11-12. Archived from the original on 2021-02-25. Retrieved 2020-06-03. Janssen, Diederik F. (2020-04-21). "Transgenderism Before Gender: Nosology from the Sixteenth Through Mid-Twentieth Century". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 49 (5): 1415–1425. doi:10.1007/s10508-020-01715-w. ISSN 0004-0002. PMID 32319033. S2CID 216073926. Stryker, Susan (2008). Transgender history. Berkeley, CA: Seal Press. ISBN 978-1-58005-690-8. OCLC 1162214303. Abbie E. Goldberg, Genny Beemyn, The SAGE Encyclopedia of Trans Studies (2021), page 32 M. Nugent, Helios 35 (2008) pages 171-172 Varner, Eric (2008). "Transcending Gender: Assimilation, Identity, and Roman Imperial Portraits". Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome. Supplementary Volume. 7. Ann Arbor, Michigan, US: University of Michigan Press: 200–201. ISSN 1940-0977. JSTOR 40379354. OCLC 263448435. Elagabalus is also alleged to have appeared as Venus and to have depilated his entire body. ... Dio recounts an exchange between Elagabalus and the well-endowed Aurelius Zoticus: when Zoticus addressed the emperor as 'my lord,' Elagabalus responded, 'Don't call me lord, I am a lady.' Dio concludes his anecdote by having Elagabalus asking his physicians to give him the equivalent of a woman's vagina by means of a surgical incision. Godbout, Louis (2004). "Elagabalus" (PDF). GLBTQ: An Encyclopedia of Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Culture. Chicago: glbtq, Inc. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 6 August 2007. Benjamin, Harry (1966). "The Transsexual Phenomenon". Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences. 29 (4). New York: The Julian Press Inc.: 428–430. doi:10.1111/j.2164-0947.1967.tb02273.x. ISBN 978-0-446-82426-2. PMID 5233741. Archived from the original on 24 April 2005. Retrieved 27 April 2005. "The Trans History You Weren't Taught in Schools". YES! Magazine. Archived from the original on 2022-01-23. Retrieved 2022-01-23. Hickman, H.; Porfilio, B.J. (2012). The New Politics of the Textbook: Problematizing the Portrayal of Marginalized Groups in Textbooks. Constructing Knowledge: Curriculum Studies in Action. SensePublishers. p. 235. ISBN 978-94-6091-912-1. Archived from the original on 2023-01-10. Retrieved 2023-01-10. "Holocaust Memorial Day Trust | 6 May 1933: Looting of the Institute of Sexology". Archived from the original on 2022-03-07. Retrieved 2022-03-20. LeVay, Simon (1996). Queer Science: The Use and Abuse of Research into Homosexuality. MIT Press. doi:10.7551/mitpress/5726.001.0001. ISBN 9780262278201. Archived from the original on 2017-12-13. Retrieved 2022-11-17 – via The Washington Post. Coleman, E.; Radix, A. E.; et al. (WPATH) (19 August 2022). "Standards of Care for the Health of Transgender and Gender Diverse People, Version 8". International Journal of Transgender Health. 23 (Suppl 1): S1–S259. doi:10.1080/26895269.2022.2100644. ISSN 2689-5269. PMC 9553112. PMID 36238954. Brown, M.L. & Rounsley, C.A. (1996) True Selves: Understanding Transsexualism – For Families, Friends, Coworkers, and Helping Professionals Jossey-Bass: San Francisco ISBN 0-7879-6702-5 American Psychiatric Association (18 March 2022). "Gender Dysphoria". Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed., text rev. ed.). American Psychiatric Association Publishing. doi:10.1176/appi.books.9780890425787.x14_Gender_Dysophoria. ISBN 978-0-89042-575-6. Atwill, Nicole (2010-02-17). "France: Gender Identity Disorder Dropped from List of Mental Illnesses | Global Legal Monitor". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 2017-05-11. Retrieved 2017-10-18. "La transsexualité ne sera plus classée comme affectation psychiatrique" [Transsexuality will no longer be classified as a psychiatric condition]. Le Monde (in French). May 16, 2009. Archived from the original on February 26, 2018. Retrieved March 14, 2018. "La France est très en retard dans la prise en charge des transsexuels". Libération (in French). 2011-05-17. Archived from the original on 2014-11-30. En réalité, ce décret n'a été rien d'autre qu'un coup médiatique, un très bel effet d'annonce. Sur le terrain, rien n'a changé. Garloch, Karen (9 May 2016). "What it means to be transgender: Answers to 5 key questions". Charlotte Observer. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2016. Answers to Your Questions About Transgender Individuals and Gender Identity Archived 2010-06-15 at the Wayback Machine report from the website of the American Psychological Association - "Is being transgender a mental disorder?" Carroll, L.; Gilroy, P.J.; Ryan, J. (2002). "Transgender issues in counselor education". Counselor Education and Supervision. 41 (3): 233–242. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2002.tb01286.x. Kozee, H. B.; Tylka, T. L.; Bauerband, L. A. (2012). "Measuring transgender individuals' comfort with gender identity and appearance: Development and validation of the Transgender Congruence Scale". Psychology of Women Quarterly. 36 (2). SAGE Publications: 179–196. doi:10.1177/0361684312442161. S2CID 10564167. Benson, Kristen E (2013). "Seeking support: Transgender client experiences with mental health services". Journal of Feminist Family Therapy. 25 (1): 17–40. doi:10.1080/08952833.2013.755081. S2CID 144491629. "Standards of care for the health of transsexual, transgender, and gender nonconforming people – 7th version" (PDF). The World Professional Association for Transgender Health. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2014. Detransition estimates: "Detransitioning after surgical interventions ... is exceedingly rare. Research has often put the percentage of regret between 1 and 2% ... Detransitioning is actually far more common in the stages before surgery, when people are still exploring their options. 'There are people who take hormones and then decide to go off hormones,' says Randi Ettner, a therapist who has served on the board of the World Professional Association for Transgender Health. 'That is not uncommon.'" Clark-Flory 2015 "There were 15 (5 [female-to-male] and 10 [male-to-female]) regret applications corresponding to a 2.2% regret rate for both sexes. There was a significant decline of regrets over the time period." (Dhejne et al. define "regret" as "application for reversal of the legal gender status among those who were sex reassigned" which "gives the person the right to treatment to reverse the body as much as possible."), "the median time lag until applying for a reversal was 8 years." Dhejne et al. 2014 Hanssmann, C.; Morrison, D.; Russian, E. (2008). "Talking, gawking, or getting it done: Providing trainings to increase cultural and clinical competence for transgender and gender-nonconforming patients and clients". Sexuality Research and Social Policy. 5: 5–23. doi:10.1525/srsp.2008.5.1.5. S2CID 52025741. "France: Transsexualism will no longer be classified as a mental illness in France". ilga.org. Archived from the original on 2013-09-10. "Le transsexualisme n'est plus une maladie mentale en France" [Transsexualism is no longer a mental illness in France]. Le Monde.fr (in French). December 2, 2010. Archived from the original on February 13, 2010. Retrieved February 12, 2010. Haas, Ann P.; Rodgers, Philip L.; Herman, Jody L. (2014). Suicide Attempts among Transgender and Gender Non-Conforming Adults: Findings of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey (PDF). American Foundation for Suicide Prevention and the Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Law and Public Policy. pp. 2–3, 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 8, 2017. Retrieved October 9, 2017. Herman, Jody L.; Brown, Taylor N.T.; Haas, Ann P. (September 2019). "Suicide Thoughts and Attempts Among Transgender Adults" (PDF). Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Law and Public Policy. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 13, 2020. Retrieved May 13, 2020. Travers, Robb; Bauer, Greta; Pyne, Jake; Bradley, Kaitlin; Gale, Lorraine; Papadimitriou, Maria (2 October 2012). "Impacts of Strong Parental Support for Trans Youth" (PDF). TransPulse Canada. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 June 2023. Retrieved 7 June 2023. Urquhart, Evan (March 21, 2018). "A Disproportionate Number of Autistic Youth Are Transgender. Why?". Slate. Archived from the original on March 21, 2018. Retrieved January 10, 2018. Pfäfflin F., Junge A. (1998) "...This critique for the use of the term sex change in connection to sex reassignment surgery stems from the concern about the patient, to take the patient seriously...." in Sex Reassignment: Thirty Years of International Follow-Up Studies: A Comprehensive Review, 1961–1991 from the Electronic Book Collection of the International Journal of Transgenderism. Retrieved 2007-09-06. APA task force (1994) "...preoccupation with getting rid of primary and secondary sex characteristics..." in DSM-IV: Sections 302.6 and 302.85 Archived 2007-02-11 at the Wayback Machine published by the American Psychiatric Association. Retrieved via Mental Health Matters Archived 2007-04-07 at the Wayback Machine on 2007-04-06. Committee on Health Care for Underserved Women (2011). "Committee Opinion No. 512". Obstetrics & Gynecology. 118 (6): 1454–1458. doi:10.1097/AOG.0b013e31823ed1c1. PMID 22105293. "There is a paucity of literature." Danker et al. 2018 "We urgently need systematic data on this point in order to inform best practice clinical care." Zucker 2019 "The research on outcomes post-transition is mixed at best." Marchiano 2017 "[R]esearch in this field is extremely controversial." Danker et al. 2018 "Detransitioning after surgical interventions ... is exceedingly rare....Detransitioning is actually far more common in the stages before surgery, when people are still exploring their options." Clark-Flory 2015 Hall, R.; Mitchell, L.; Sachdeva, J. (1 October 2021). "Access to care and frequency of detransition among a cohort discharged by a UK national adult gender identity clinic: retrospective case-note review". BJPsych Open. 7 (6): e184. doi:10.1192/bjo.2021.1022. ISSN 2056-4724. PMC 8503911. PMID 34593070. Rates of detransitioning are unknown, with estimates ranging from less than 1% to 8%. Turban, Jack L.; Loo, Stephanie S.; Almazan, Anthony N.; Keuroghlian, Alex S. (2021-06-01). "Factors Leading to "Detransition" Among Transgender and Gender Diverse People in the United States: A Mixed-Methods Analysis". LGBT Health. 8 (4): 273–280. doi:10.1089/lgbt.2020.0437. ISSN 2325-8292. PMC 8213007. PMID 33794108. Bustos, Valeria P.; Bustos, Samyd S.; Mascaro, Andres; Del Corral, Gabriel; Forte, Antonio J.; Ciudad, Pedro; Kim, Esther A.; Langstein, Howard N.; Manrique, Oscar J. (2021-03-19). "Regret after Gender-affirmation Surgery: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Prevalence". Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery - Global Open. 9 (3): e3477. doi:10.1097/GOX.0000000000003477. ISSN 2169-7574. PMC 8099405. PMID 33968550. Boslaugh 2018, p. 43; James et al. 2016, pp. 111, 292–294 Boslaugh, Sarah (3 August 2018). Transgender Health tIssues. ABC-CLIO. pp. 43–44. ISBN 9781440858888. OCLC 1031430413. Archived from the original on 3 April 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. Currah, Paisley; M. Juang, Richard; Minter, Shannon Price, eds. (2006). Transgender Rights. Minnesota University Press. pp. 51–73. ISBN 978-0-8166-4312-7. Archived from the original on 2021-05-04. Retrieved 2020-11-07. Nokoff, Natalie J. (2022-01-19). "Table 2. [DSM-5 Criteria for Gender Dysphoria ()]". www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Archived from the original on 2023-03-31. Retrieved 2023-03-26. Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation. "IN THE LIFE Follows LGBT Seniors as They Face Inequality in Healthcare" Archived 2011-08-04 at the Wayback Machine, "GLAAD", US, November 3, 2010. Retrieved 2011-02-24. "– Trans Rights Europe Map & Index 2017". tgeu.org. 18 May 2017. Archived from the original on 2017-10-19. Retrieved 2017-10-18. "HUDOC - European Court of Human Rights". hudoc.echr.coe.int. Archived from the original on 2017-10-19. Retrieved 2017-10-18. "LEGISinfo". www.parl.ca. Archived from the original on May 22, 2016. "LEGISinfo - House Government Bill C-16 (42-1)". www.parl.ca. Archived from the original on December 24, 2016. Tasker, John Paul (June 16, 2017). "Canada enacts protections for transgender community". CBC News. Archived from the original on June 17, 2017. Retrieved June 16, 2017. "Overview of Human Rights Codes by Province and Territory in Canada" (PDF). Canadian Center for Diversity and Inclusion. January 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-09-19. Retrieved 2020-09-03. "Civil Rights Act of 1964 – CRA – Title VII – Equal Employment Opportunities – 42 US Code Chapter 21". finduslaw. Archived from the original on October 21, 2010. Retrieved June 6, 2010. Neidig, Harper (June 15, 2020). "Workers can't be fired for being gay or transgender, Supreme Court rules". The Hill. Archived from the original on June 15, 2020. Retrieved June 15, 2020. June, Daniel (13 June 2013). "Transgender Girl in Maine Seeks Supreme Court's Approval to Use School's Girls Room". JD Journal. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 13 June 2013. Sharp, David (January 31, 2014). "Maine Court Rules In Favor Of Transgender Pupil". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on December 12, 2015. Retrieved December 16, 2015. Grinberg, Emanuella (May 14, 2016). "Feds issue guidance on transgender access to school bathrooms". CNN. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Cronk, Terri Moon (June 30, 2016). "Transgender Service Members Can Now Serve Openly, Carter Announces". Archived from the original on August 10, 2017. Retrieved August 9, 2017. "Trump: Transgender people 'can't serve' in US military". BBC News. July 26, 2017. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved August 9, 2017. Kube, Courtney; Rafferty, Andrew; Mandell, Meredith (2017-07-26). "The Joint Chiefs say there'll be no transgender policy changes until Trump clarifies his Tweets". NBC News. Archived from the original on 2017-08-09. Retrieved 2017-08-09. Kate Sullivan (25 January 2021). "Biden lifts transgender military ban". CNN. Archived from the original on 2021-11-03. Retrieved 2021-08-18. "Biden to transgender Americans: 'Your president has your back'". NBC News. Archived from the original on 2021-08-18. Retrieved 2021-08-18. "India recognises transgender people as third gender". The Guardian. 15 April 2014. Archived from the original on 15 April 2014. Retrieved 15 April 2014. McCoy, Terrence (15 April 2014). "India now recognizes transgender citizens as 'third gender'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 15 April 2014. Retrieved 15 April 2014. Mahapatra, Dhananjay (15 April 2014). "Supreme Court recognizes transgenders as 'third gender'". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 15 April 2014. Retrieved 15 April 2014. "Why transgender not an option in civil service exam form: HC". The Times of India. 15 June 2015. Archived from the original on 2015-12-03. "Why transgender not an option in civil service exam form: HC". The Economic Times. 2015-06-15. Archived from the original on 2016-01-25. "In the Supreme Court of India Civil Original Jurisdiction Writ Petition (Civil) No.400 of 2012" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-06-25. Retrieved 2019-06-19. "Hijras: The Battle for Equality". 29 January 2014. Archived from the original on 23 June 2019. Retrieved 23 June 2019. Retro Report (2015-06-15). "Transforming History". Retro Report. Archived from the original on 10 July 2015. Retrieved 15 July 2015. thisisloyal.com, Loyal |. "How Many People are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender?". Williams Institute. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-04-25. Retrieved 2023-05-19. Morris, Bonnie J. (July 21, 2017). "A brief history of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender social movements". www.apa.org. American Psychological Association. Archived from the original on 2023-05-19. Retrieved 26 May 2023. Jazayeri, Naveed. "Transgender Exclusion within the LGBTQ Movement: An Introductory Analysis" (PDF). University of Florida. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2023-05-19. Retrieved 2023-05-19. Gamson, Joshua (1995). "Must Identity Movements Self-Destruct? A Queer Dilemma". Social Problems. 42 (3): 390–407. doi:10.2307/3096854. ISSN 0037-7791. JSTOR 3096854. Archived from the original on 2023-05-19. Retrieved 2023-05-19. Nadeau, Barbie Latza (2023-11-09). "Vatican rules some transgender people and babies of same-sex couples can be baptized". CNN. Retrieved 2023-11-09. "Guidance for welcoming transgender people published". The Church of England. Archived from the original on 2022-08-04. Retrieved 2022-08-04. Goldberg, Michelle (2014-07-28). "What Is a Woman?". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 2019-11-13. Retrieved 2022-01-23. Marcus, Eric (2002). Making Gay History: The Half-Century Fight for Lesbian and Gay Equal Rights. New York: Harper. p. 156. ISBN 9780060933913. OCLC 1082454306. Hines, Sally (2007). TransForming Gender: Transgender Practices of Identity, Intimacy and Care. Bristol: Policy Press. pp. 85–101. ISBN 978-1861349163. Grady, Constance (20 June 2018). "The waves of feminism, and why people keep fighting over them, explained". Vox. Archived from the original on 5 April 2019. Retrieved 26 April 2019. Yenor, Scott (31 July 2017). "The Rolling Revolution in Sex and Gender: A History". Public Discourse. Witherspoon Institute. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 21 April 2019. Flaherty, Colleen (2018-06-06). "By Any Other Name". Inside Higher Ed. Archived from the original on 19 May 2019. Retrieved 2019-05-06. Lewis, Sophie (7 February 2019). "Opinion | How British Feminism Became Anti-Trans". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 15 November 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2019. Stryker, Susan; Bettcher, Talia (2016). "Introduction: Trans/Feminisms". Transgender Studies Quarterly. 3 (1–2). Duke University Press. doi:10.1215/23289252-3334127. Archived from the original on 5 April 2019. Retrieved 17 September 2020. Zanghellini, Aleardo (April 2020). "Philosophical Problems With the Gender-Critical Feminist Argument Against Trans Inclusion" (PDF). SAGE Open. 10 (2): 215824402092702. doi:10.1177/2158244020927029. S2CID 219733494. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-11-03. Retrieved 2022-06-19. Krehly, Jeff; Buns, Crosby (2011-06-03). "Gay and Transgender People Face High Rates of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment". Generation Progress. Archived from the original on 2021-04-21. Retrieved 2021-03-23. Carrera-Fernández, María Victoria; Almeida, Ana; Cid-Fernández, Xosé Manuel; Vallejo-Medina, Pablo; Rodríguez-Castro, Yolanda (18 December 2019). "Patrolling the Boundaries of Gender: Beliefs, Attitudes and Behaviors Toward Trans and Gender Diverse People in Portuguese Adolescents". International Journal of Sexual Health. 32 (1): 40–56. doi:10.1080/19317611.2019.1701170. S2CID 214355852. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2021. Konopka, Karolina; Prusik, Monika; Szulawski, Michał (2020). "Two Sexes, Two Genders Only: Measuring Attitudes toward Transgender Individuals in Poland". Sex Roles. 82 (9–10): 600–621. doi:10.1007/s11199-019-01071-7. S2CID 199862108. Landau, Nitsan; Hamiel, Uri; Latzer, Itay Tokatly; Mauda, Elinor; Levek, Noah; Tripto-Shkolnik, Liana; Pinhas-Hamiel, Orit (2020). "Paediatricians' attitudes and beliefs towards transgender people: a cross-sectional survey in Israel". BMJ Open. 10 (4): e031569. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2019-031569. PMC 7204925. PMID 32341041. Archived from the original on 2021-06-10. Retrieved 2021-08-21. Hackimer, Laura; Chen, Cliff Y.-C.; Verkuilen, Jay (5 March 2021). "Individual factors and cisgender college students' attitudes and behaviors toward transgender individuals". Journal of Community Psychology. 49 (6): 2023–2039. doi:10.1002/jcop.22546. ISSN 0090-4392. PMID 33667012. S2CID 232121524. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 21 August 2021. Trevor Project. "Guiding Principles". Archived from the original on 2023-05-14. Retrieved 2023-05-20. "Transgender Rights". American Civil Liberties Union. Archived from the original on 2023-05-20. Retrieved 2023-05-20. "National Center for Transgender Equality". transequality.org. National Center for Transgender Equality. 2023-05-12. Archived from the original on October 18, 2009. Retrieved 2023-05-26. "About us". TGEU. Archived from the original on 2023-05-18. Retrieved 2023-05-20. Collin, Lindsay; Reisner, Sari L.; Tangpricha, Vin; Goodman, Michael (2016). "Prevalence of Transgender Depends on the "Case" Definition: A Systematic Review". The Journal of Sexual Medicine. 13 (4): 613–626. doi:10.1016/j.jsxm.2016.02.001. PMC 4823815. PMID 27045261. Leinung, Matthew C (2020). "Changing Demographics in Transgender Individuals Seeking Hormonal Therapy: Are Trans Women More Common Than Trans Men?". Transgender Health. 11 (5): 241–245. doi:10.1089/trgh.2019.0070. PMC 7906237. PMID 33644314. Doussantousse, S. (2005) "...The Lao Kathoey's characteristics appear to be similar to other transgenders in the region..." in Male Sexual Health: Kathoeys in the Lao PDR, South East Asia – Exploring a gender minority Archived 2007-08-19 at the Wayback Machine from the Transgender ASIA Research Centre Archived 2007-08-23 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-07-22. Jackson, P. (2003) Performative Genders, Perverse Desires: A Bio-History of Thailand's Same-Sex and Transgender Cultures Archived 2007-04-03 at the Wayback Machine in Intersections: Gender, History and Culture in the Asian Context, Issue 9, August 2003. Winter, S. and Udomsak, N. (2002) Male, Female and Transgender: Stereotypes and Self in Thailand in the International Journal of Transgender, Volume 6, Number 1, January – March 2002. Archived February 28, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Winter, Sam (2003). Research and discussion paper: Language and identity in transgender: gender wars and the case of the Thai kathoey. Paper presented at the Hawaii conference on Social Sciences, Waikiki, June 2003. Article online Archived 29 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Harrison, F. (2005) "...He shows me the book in Arabic in which, 41 years ago, Ayatollah Khomeini wrote about new medical issues like transsexuality. "I believe he was the first Islamic scientist in the world of Islam who raised the issue of sex change," says Hojatulislam Kariminia. The Ayatollah's ruling that sex-change operations were allowed has been reconfirmed by Iran's current spiritual leader..." in Iran's sex-change operations Archived 2007-08-17 at the Wayback Machine, from the BBC Archived 1999-04-21 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-07-22. Mitsuhashi, J. (2006). "The transgender world in contemporary Japan: the male to female cross-dressers' community in Shinjuku". Inter-Asia Cultural Studies. 7 (2). Translated by Hasegawa, K.: 202–227. doi:10.1080/14649370600673847. S2CID 143080943. "...the male to female cross-dressing (MTFCD) community in Shinjuku, Tokyo, which plays an important role in the overall transgender world and how people in the community think and live..." Haviland, C. (2005) "...The Gurung people of western Nepal have a tradition of men called maarunis, who dance in female clothes..." in Crossing sexual boundaries in Nepal Archived 2007-08-28 at the Wayback Machine, from the BBC Archived 1999-04-21 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-07-22. Graham, S. (2002) "...Among the Bugis of South Sulawesi, possibly four genders are acknowledged plus a fifth para-gender identity. In addition to male-men (oroane) and female-women (makunrai)..., there are calalai (masculine females), calabai (feminine males), and bissu..." in Priests and gender in South Sulawesi, Indonesia Archived 2007-10-11 at the Wayback Machine from the Transgender ASIA Research Centre Archived 2007-08-23 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-07-22. Walters, I. (2006) "...In Vietnam, male to female (MtF) transgender people are categorised as lai cai, bong cai, bong lai cai, dong co, or be-de..." in Vietnam Some notes by Ian Walters Archived 2007-10-11 at the Wayback Machine from the Transgender ASIA Research Centre Archived 2007-08-23 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-07-22. Shim, S. (2006) "...Rush, catering especially to crossdressers and transgenders, is a cafe owned by a 46-year-old man who goes by the female name Lee Cho-rong. "...Many people in South Korea don't really understand the difference between gay and transgender. I'm not gay. I was born a man but eager to live as a woman and be beautiful," said Lee..." in S. Korea in dilemma over transgender citizens right to choose Archived 2007-08-17 at the Wayback Machine from the Yonhap News Agency Archived 2007-07-17 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-07-22. "News reporting an average of 2-3 Jordanians per year officially change their gender". Ammon News (in Arabic). Archived from the original on 2018-06-16. Retrieved 2020-08-31. Heng, R. (2005) "...Even if we take Bugis Street as a starting point, we should remember that cross-dressing did not emerge suddenly out of nowhere. Across Asia, there is a tradition of cross-dressing and other forms of transgender behaviour in many places with a rich local lexicon and rituals associated with them...." in Where queens ruled! - a history of gay venues in Singapore Archived 2007-10-11 at the Wayback Machine from IndigNation. Retrieved 2007-07-22. Emerton, R. (2006). "Finding a voice, fighting for rights: the emergence of the transgender movement in Hong Kong". Inter-Asia Cultural Studies. 7 (2): 243–269. doi:10.1080/14649370600673896. S2CID 145122793. "...Hong Kong's transgender movement at its current stage, with particular reference to the objectives and activities of the Hong Kong Transgender Equality and Acceptance Movement..." Hung, L. (2007) "...there are many archetypal flamboyant embodiments of female-to-male transgender physicality living and displaying their unrestrained, dashing iconic presence..." in Trans-Boy Fashion, or How to Tailor-Make a King Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine from the Gender Studies programme of The Chinese University of Hong Kong Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 2007-07-22. Ho, J. (2006). "Embodying gender: transgender body/subject formations in Taiwan". Inter-Asia Cultural Studies. 7 (2): 228–242. doi:10.1080/14649370600673888. S2CID 43951816. "...specificities of Taiwanese transgender existence in relation to body- and subject-formations, in hope to not only shed light on the actualities of trans efforts toward self-fashioning, but also illuminate the increasing entanglement between trans self-construction and the evolving gender culture that saturates it..." Hahn, L. (2005) "...Aware that he often felt more like a woman than a man, Jin Xing underwent a sex change in 1995; a daring move in a conservative Chinese society..." in Jin Xing TalkAsia Interview Transcript – June 13, 2005 Archived October 11, 2007, at the Wayback Machine from CNN Archived 2001-09-11 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-07-22. Goldkorn, J. (2006) "...At one point in 2003, there was so much media coverage of transsexuals in China that Danwei started a special section for it..." in Transsexuals in the Chinese media again Archived 2007-08-27 at the Wayback Machine from Danwei Archived 2007-07-05 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 2007-07-22. Ghosh, Deepshikha, ed. (April 15, 2014). "Transgenders are the 'third gender', rules Supreme Court". NDTV. Archived from the original on April 15, 2014. Retrieved April 15, 2014. "Telangana assembly elections 2018: Chandramukhi eyes Goshamahal glory, ready for tryst with 1st transgender party". The Times of India. November 22, 2018. Archived from the original on November 22, 2018. Retrieved November 22, 2018. M.H. (1 September 2017). "Why transgender people are being sterilised in some European countries". The Economist. Archived from the original on 1 September 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2017. Glen, Fiona; Hurrell, Karen (2012). "Technical note: Measuring Gender Identity" (PDF). Equality and Human Rights Commission. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2019. Retrieved 30 May 2019. "Gender identity, England and Wales: Census 2021". Office for National Statistics. 6 January 2023. Archived from the original on 19 May 2023. Retrieved 21 May 2023. Easton, Rob (2022-04-27). "'Historic' census data sheds light on number of trans and non-binary people for first time". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 2022-04-27. Retrieved 2022-04-28. Government of Canada, Statistics Canada (July 20, 2020). "Sex at birth and gender: Technical report on changes for the 2021 Census". www12.statcan.gc.ca. Archived from the original on July 17, 2021. Retrieved September 27, 2021. Harris, Benjamin Cerf (2015). "Likely Transgender Individuals in U.S. Federal Administrative Records and the 2010 Census" (PDF). Census.gov. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2019-08-23. Retrieved 2019-08-23. Pauly, Ira B. (1968). "The Current Status of the Change of Sex Operation". The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease. 147 (5): 460–471. doi:10.1097/00005053-196811000-00003. ISSN 0022-3018. PMID 5726920. S2CID 42050429. Miller, Claire Cain (June 8, 2015). "The Search for the Best Estimate of the Transgender Population". Archived from the original on February 24, 2017 – via NYTimes.com. thisisloyal.com, Loyal. "How Many People are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender?" (PDF). Williams Institute. Archived from the original on April 25, 2015. Steinmetz, Katy (30 June 2016). "1.4 Million Americans Identify as Transgender, Study Finds". Time. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 30 June 2016. "How Many Adults Identify as Transgender in the United States" (PDF). The Williams Institute. June 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-07-18. Retrieved 2016-08-25. Crissman, Halley P.; Berger, Mitchell B.; Graham, Louis F.; Dalton, Vanessa K. (2016). "Transgender Demographics: A Household Probability Sample of US Adults, 2014". American Journal of Public Health. 107 (2): 213–215. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2016.303571. PMC 5227939. PMID 27997239. FAAD, Marie Benz MD. "About 1 in 189 US Americans Identify as Transgender". Archived from the original on January 3, 2017. Fulton, Robert; Anderson, Steven W. (1992). "The Amerindian "Man-Woman": Gender, Liminality, and Cultural Continuity". Current Anthropology. 33 (5): 603–10. doi:10.1086/204124. ISSN 1537-5382. JSTOR 2743927. S2CID 145077361. Parsons, Elsie Clews (1916). "The Zuñi Ła'mana". American Anthropologist. 18 (4): 521–8. doi:10.1525/aa.1916.18.4.02a00060. ISSN 1548-1433. JSTOR 660121. Of these 'men-women' .... Medicine, B. (2002) Directions in Gender Research in American Indian Societies: Two Spirits and Other Categories Archived 2003-03-30 at the Wayback Machine, taken from Online Readings in Psychology and Culture Center for Cross-Cultural Research, Unit 3, Chapter 2, Western Washington University. Parker, H. N. (2001). "The Myth of the Heterosexual: Anthropology and Sexuality for Classicists". Arethusa. 34 (3): 313–362. doi:10.1353/are.2001.0016. S2CID 161526282. Stephen, Lynn (2002). "Sexualities and Genders in Zapotec Oaxaca". Latin American Perspectives. 29 (2): 41–59. doi:10.1177/0094582x0202900203. ISSN 0094-582X. JSTOR 3185126. S2CID 145808692. Kulick, Don (1998). Travesti : Sex, Gender, and Culture among Brazilian Transgendered Prostitutes. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-46099-1. OCLC 38842085. Archived from the original on 2009-05-16. Retrieved 2021-09-27. Schulman, Michael. "A nova geração gay nas universidades dos EUA - 17/02/2013". Folha de S.Paulo (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. João W. Nery: Viagem solitária: Memórias de um transexual 30 anos depois; São Paulo: Leya, 2012, p. 293.(in Portuguese) Campaign, Human Rights. "Transgender Children & Youth: Understanding the Basics | Human Rights Campaign". Human Rights Campaign. Archived from the original on 2017-09-10. Retrieved 2017-08-23. Marciano, A. (2014). "Living the VirtuReal: Negotiating transgender identity in cyberspace". Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. 19 (4): 824–838. doi:10.1111/jcc4.12081. S2CID 206022665. Steinmetz, K. (May 28, 2014). "The transgender tipping point". Time. Archived from the original on 2017-08-13. Retrieved August 13, 2017. Snow, N. (May 8, 2015). "Laverne Cox: 'Time' magazine's 'transgender tipping point' cover girl". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 2017-05-20. Retrieved August 13, 2017. Townsend, M. (November 3, 2016). "GLAAD's 'Where We Are on TV' report finds progress in LGBTQ representation on TV, but much work still to be done". GLAAD. Archived from the original on 2017-08-16. Retrieved August 13, 2017. "Trans March on Friday". Jun 21, 2006. Archived from the original on 10 July 2020. Retrieved 10 July 2020. "Transgender and Intersex Community Marks 20 Years of Marching in Paris (Video)". www.advocate.com. 2016-10-19. Archived from the original on 2020-08-08. Retrieved 10 June 2020. Paul, Gallant (June 18, 2009). "Trans march 'overdue'". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 10 July 2020. Retrieved 11 June 2020. "London's first Trans Pride support 'overwhelming'". bbc.com. 14 September 2019. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 11 June 2020. "Model: Why I came out as transgender". KSPR News. 31 March 2014. Archived from the original on 3 April 2014. Retrieved 31 March 2014. "A time to celebrate". The Hamilton Spectator. 27 March 2014. Archived from the original on 3 April 2014. Retrieved 31 March 2014. Carreras, Jessica. "Transgender Day of Visibility plans erupt locally, nationwide". PrideSource. Archived from the original on March 27, 2013. Retrieved April 3, 2013. "About TDOR at Transgender Day of Remembrance". Transgenderdor.org. 1998-11-28. Archived from the original on 2011-07-23. Retrieved 2011-07-06. "Transgender Awareness Week". GLAAD. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019. Retrieved 3 April 2019. W., M. L. (2018-10-13). "Trans et intersexes mobilisés contre les interventions chirurgicales non consenties". leparisien.fr (in French). AFP. Retrieved 2023-12-15. Allday, Erin (2023-06-24). "S.F. Trans March draws thousands of participants". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 2023-12-15. "Trans visibility through literature". USC Annenberg Media. 2023-06-21. Retrieved 2023-12-15. "Trans people have never been so visible — or so vulnerable". Washington Post. 2023-04-13. Retrieved 2023-12-15. "I'm Scared to Be a Woman". Human Rights Watch. 24 September 2014. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2015. a 22-year-old transgender woman sports a tattoo of a butterfly – a transgender symbol signifying transformation Sperry, Len (2016). Mental health and mental disorders : an encyclopedia of conditions, treatments, and well-being. Santa Barbara, California: Greenwood. p. 1150. ISBN 9781440803826. OCLC 915943054. "Symbols". glbtq.com. Archived from the original on August 4, 2008. Petronzio, Matt (June 13, 2014). "A Storied Glossary of Iconic LGBT Flags and Symbols". Mashable. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved April 3, 2019. Clark-Flory, Tracy (15 June 2015). "Detransitioning: Going From Male To Female To Male Again". Vocativ. Archived from the original on 31 August 2017. Retrieved 1 September 2017. Danker, Sara; Narayan, Sasha K.; Bluebond-Langner, Rachel; Schechter, Loren S.; Berli, Jens U. (August 2018). "A Survey Study of Surgeons' Experience with Regret and/or Reversal of Gender-Confirmation Surgeries". Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery – Global Open. 6 (9 Suppl): 189. doi:10.1097/01.GOX.0000547077.23299.00. ISSN 2169-7574. PMC 6212091. Dhejne, Cecilia; Öberg, Katarina; Arver, Stefan; Landén, Mikael (November 2014). "An Analysis of All Applications for Sex Reassignment Surgery in Sweden, 1960–2010: Prevalence, Incidence, and Regrets". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 43 (8): 1535–45. doi:10.1007/s10508-014-0300-8. PMID 24872188. S2CID 24755434. James, Sandy E.; Herman, Jody L.; Rankin, Susan; Keisling, Mara; Mottet, Lisa; Anafi, Ma'ayan (2016). "De-Transitioning" (PDF). The Report of the 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey (Report). Washington, DC: National Center for Transgender Equality. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-01-21. Retrieved 2019-03-18. Marchiano, Lisa (6 Oct 2017). "Outbreak: On Transgender Teens and Psychic Epidemics". Psychological Perspectives. 60 (3): 345–366. doi:10.1080/00332925.2017.1350804. Zucker, Kenneth J. (2019). "Adolescents with Gender Dysphoria: Reflections on Some Contemporary Clinical and Research Issues". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 48 (7): 1983–1992. doi:10.1007/s10508-019-01518-8. PMID 31321594. S2CID 197663705. Bettcher, Talia Mae; Lombardi, Emilia (2005). "Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender/Transsexual Individuals". In Levy, Barry; Sidel, Victor (eds.). Social Injustice and Public Health. Oxford University Press. Sellers, Mitchell D. (2011). "Discrimination and the Transgender Population: A Description of Local Government Policies that Protect Gender Identity or Expression". Applied Research Projects. Texas State University-San Marcos. Archived from the original on 2012-03-11. Thanem, Torkild; Wallenberg, Louise (2016). "Just doing gender? Transvestism and the power of underdoing gender in everyday life and work". Organization. 23 (2): 250–271. doi:10.1177/1350508414547559. S2CID 144150015. Lerario, Z Paige, "Voice Training for Transgender People: Speech therapy and language strategies can help save lives", Scientific American, vol. 328, no. 1 (January 2023), p. 55. "Voice training is less costly and invasive than a throat operation... Through sessions with a licensed speech-language pathologist, transgender people learn to control pitch, resonance, word choice and other vocal behaviors.... Such training can improve quality of life, reduce voice-related disability and boost self-confidence."