"Der gute Kamerad" ("The Good Comrade"), also known by its incipit as "Ich hatt' einen Kameraden" ("I had a comrade"), is a traditional German soldiers' lament. The lyrics were written by German poet Ludwig Uhland in 1809. Its immediate inspiration was the deployment of Badener troops against the Tyrolean Rebellion. In 1825, the composer Friedrich Silcher set it to music, based on the tune of a Swiss folk song and in honor of those who fell during the more recent Wars of Liberation against Napoleon Bonaparte. The song is about the immediate experience of a soldier losing a buddy in combat, while completely detached from any political or nationalist ideology. As a result, its use has never been limited to any one particular faction and was sung or cited by representatives of all political backgrounds throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, and was translated for use in numerous fighting forces, French, Dutch, Spanish, and Japanese amongst others. Ernst Busch used the tune for his eponymous Spanish Civil War song about the death of Hans Beimler. German playwright Carl Zuckmayer in 1966 used the song's line "Als wär's ein Stück von mir" as the title for his autobiography (English title: A Part of Myself). "The Good Comrade" still plays an important ceremonial role in the German armed forces and is an integral part of a military funeral, continuing a tradition started at some point around 1871. The song has also become traditional in obsequies of the Military of Austria and the Austrian firebrigades. In the German-speaking Italian province of South Tyrol, the piece is played at funerals of volunteer firefighters and during remembrance ceremonies held by the Schützenbund. The Chilean Armed Forces and the National Army of Colombia also utilize it, though Chile does not exclusively use it for funerals or remembrance ceremonies. The song has been adopted by the French Foreign Legion at least by the 19th century. Occasionally the song is played at civilian funeral ceremonies, most often when the deceased had been affiliated with the military. Its use was also common in the formerly German-speaking region surrounding St. Cloud, Minnesota, which was largely settled in the 1850s by Catholic immigrants invited by local missionary Fr. Francis Xavier Pierz. According to local historian Fr. Colman J. Barry, during the traditional parish feast day picnics and old country festivals that, very similarly to the Pennsylvania Dutch Fersommling, were very much a central pillar of "Stearns County German culture", it was particularly common at for German-American Union Army veterans of the American Civil War to stand up and sing, Ich hatt' einen Kameraden, with tears and intense emotion, in honor of their fallen friends. (see German Americans in the American Civil War). On 22 May 2009, an all-Flemish band performed the lament on the Great Highland bagpipes and drums during a joint Belgian, British, and German memorial ceremony at the Langemark German war cemetery in Belgium. In addition to the flying ace Werner Voss (1897-1917), the cemetery contains the graves of more than 44,000 German and 2 British soldiers who fell during the First World War. It is also commonly sung at the funerals of members of a Studentenverbindung. The song is often played on the trumpet during the annual wreath laying ceremonies at the Neue Wache along Unter den Linden, Germany's national war memorial, on Volkstrauertag or Remembrance Day and every 20 July at the Memorial to the German Resistance inside the courtyard of the Bendlerblock in Berlin. This is because the legacy of the 20 July plot to assassinate Adolf Hitler and overthrow the Nazi Party has permanently changed the ideology of the German armed forces. Since its creation during West German rearmament in the 1950s, the modern Bundeswehr holds that military officers and enlisted men have a moral duty (German: Innere Führung) which goes beyond blind obedience to superior orders, and that the Wehrmacht and Abwehr officers who plotted to kill Hitler were not traitors, but heroes, martyrs, and national icons who died trying to save the German people from continued rule by a genocidal police state. The above text is Uhland's original version. Various variants have been recorded over the years. Heymann Steinthal in an 1880 article in Zeitschrift für Völkerpsychologie noted a variant he heard sung by a housemaid, "Die Kugel kam geflogen / Gilt sie mir? Gilt sie dir?" (i.e. "the bullet came flying" instead of "a bullet". Steinthal argued that this version was an improvement over Uhland's text, making reference to the concept of a "fateful bullet" in military tradition and giving a more immediate expression of the fear felt by the soldier in the line of fire. Silcher (1825): "aus der Schweiz, in 4/4 Takt von mir verändert" ([melody] from Switzerland, changed to 4 4 time by me", cited after Suevica [de] 4 (1983), p. 76). Oesterle, Kurt (1998). "Die heimliche deutsche Hymne". Bundesverband Digitalpublisher und Zeitungsverleger [de] (in German). Archived from the original on 18 October 2014. "Ernst Busch: 'Ich hatt' einen Kameraden'". erinnerungsort.de. Archived from the original on 7 December 2009. Retrieved 11 September 2022. R. Oeding, Das deutsche Totensignal, 2013 "J'avais un camarade | French Foreign Legion Information". Retrieved 4 January 2024. Coleman J. Barry (1956), Worship and Work: Saint John's Abbey and University 1856-1956, Order of St. Benedict, Collegeville, Minnesota. Pages 89-90. "Ich hatte einem Kameraden" at Langemarck German military cemetery In Flanders Fields "Ich hatt einem Kameraden (The Good Comrade) Die Konzeption der Inneren Führung (German), Zentrum Innere Führung (Center of Leadership Development and Civic Education) Uli Otto, Eginhard König: Ich hatt' einen Kameraden..., Mainz 1999. (reviews) (in German) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ich hatt’ einen Kameraden. Ich hatt' einen Kameraden , old recording by the French Foreign Legion (MP3 format) "Der gute Kamerad" (Silcher): Scores at the International Music Score Library Project "Ich hatt' einen Kameraden ..." postcards, in German Translation into several languages, including English