Conservatism is a cultural, social, and political philosophy and ideology, which seeks to promote and preserve traditional institutions, customs, and values. The central tenets of conservatism may vary in relation to the culture and civilization in which it appears. In Western culture, depending on the particular nation, conservatives seek to promote a range of institutions, such as the nuclear family, organized religion, the military, the nation-state, property rights, rule of law, aristocracy, and monarchy. Conservatives tend to favour institutions and practices that guarantee social order and historical continuity. Edmund Burke, an 18th-century Anglo-Irish statesman who opposed the French Revolution but supported the American Revolution, is credited as one of the forefathers of conservative thought in the 1790s along with Savoyard statesman Joseph de Maistre. The first established use of the term in a political context originated in 1818 with François-René de Chateaubriand during the period of Bourbon Restoration that sought to roll back the policies of the French Revolution and establish social order. Conservatism has varied considerably as it has adapted itself to existing traditions and national cultures. Thus, conservatives from different parts of the world—each upholding their respective traditions—may disagree on a wide range of issues. Historically associated with right-wing politics, the term has been used to describe a wide range of views. Conservatism may be either libertarian or authoritarian, populist or elitist, progressive or reactionary, moderate or extreme. Some political scientists, such as Samuel P. Huntington, have seen conservatism as situational. Under this definition, conservatives are seen as defending the established institutions of their time. According to Quintin Hogg, the chairman of the British Conservative Party in 1959: "Conservatism is not so much a philosophy as an attitude, a constant force, performing a timeless function in the development of a free society, and corresponding to a deep and permanent requirement of human nature itself." Conservatism is often used as a generic term to describe a "right-wing viewpoint occupying the political spectrum between [classical] liberalism and fascism". Not all conservatives consider a free society an important part of conservative philosophy, some having a more skeptical view of human nature. According to the Encyclopedia Britannica: Edmund Burke, often called the father of conservative philosophy, shocked his contemporaries by insisting with brutal frankness that 'illusions' and 'prejudices' are socially necessary. He believed that most human beings are innately depraved, steeped in original sin, and unable to better themselves with their feeble reason. Better, he said, to rely on the 'latent wisdom' of prejudice, which accumulates slowly through the years, than to 'put men to live and trade each on his own private stock of reason.' Among such prejudices are those that favour an established church and a landed aristocracy; members of the latter, according to Burke, are the 'great oaks' and 'proper chieftains' of society, provided that they temper their rule with a spirit of timely reform and remain within the constitutional framework.'[excessive quote] Despite the lack of a universal definition, certain themes can be recognised as common across conservative thought. According to Michael Oakeshott: To be conservative […] is to prefer the familiar to the unknown, to prefer the tried to the untried, fact to mystery, the actual to the possible, the limited to the unbounded, the near to the distant, the sufficient to the superabundant, the convenient to the perfect, present laughter to utopian bliss. Such traditionalism may be a reflection of trust in time-tested methods of social organisation, giving 'votes to the dead'. Traditions may also be steeped in a sense of identity. In contrast to the tradition-based definition of conservatism, some left-wing political theorists like Corey Robin define conservatism primarily in terms of a general defense of social and economic inequality. From this perspective, conservatism is less an attempt to uphold old institutions and more "a meditation on—and theoretical rendition of—the felt experience of having power, seeing it threatened, and trying to win it back". On another occasion, Robin argues for a more complex relation: Conservatism is a defense of established hierarchies, but it is also fearful of those established hierarchies. It sees in their assuredness of power the source of corruption, decadence and decline. Ruling regimes require some kind of irritant, a grain of sand in the oyster, to reactivate their latent powers, to exercise their atrophied muscles, to make their pearls. In Conservatism: A Rediscovery (2022), political philosopher Yoram Hazony argues that, in a traditional conservative community, members have importance and influence to the degree they are honoured within the social hierarchy, which includes factors such as age, experience, and wisdom. Conservatives often glorify hierarchies, as demonstrated in an aphorism by conservative philosopher Nicolás Gómez Dávila: "Hierarchies are celestial. In hell all are equal." The word hierarchy has religious roots and translates to 'rule of a high priest.' Conservatism has been called a "philosophy of human imperfection" by Noël O'Sullivan, reflecting among its adherents a negative view of human nature and pessimism of the potential to improve it through 'utopian' schemes. The "intellectual godfather of the realist right", Thomas Hobbes, argued that the state of nature for humans was "poor, nasty, brutish, and short", requiring centralised authority. Authority is a core tenet of conservatism. More specifically, conservatives tend to believe in traditional authority. This form of authority, according to Max Weber, is "resting on an established belief in the sanctity of immemorial traditions and the legitimacy of those exercising authority under them". Alexandre Kojève distinguishes between two different forms of traditional authority: The Authority of the Father—represented by actual fathers as well as conceptual fathers such as priests and monarchs. The Authority of the Master—represented by aristocrats and military commanders. Robert Nisbet acknowledges that the decline of traditional authority in the modern world is partly linked with the retreat of old institutions such as guild, order, parish, and family—institutions that formerly acted as intermediaries between the state and the individual. Hannah Arendt claims that the modern world suffers an existential crisis with a "dramatic breakdown of all traditional authorities," which are needed for the continuity of an established civilisation. Reactionism is a tradition in right-wing politics that opposes policies for the social transformation of society. In popular usage, reactionism refers to a staunch traditionalist conservative political perspective of a person who supports the status quo and opposes social, political, and economic change. Some adherents of conservatism, rather than opposing change, seek to return to the status quo ante and tend to view the modern world in a negative light, especially concerning mass culture and secularism, although different groups of reactionaries may choose different traditional values to revive. Some political scientists, such as Corey Robin, treat the words reactionary and conservative as synonyms. Others, such as Mark Lilla, argue that reactionism and conservatism are distinct worldviews. Francis Wilson defines conservatism as "a philosophy of social evolution, in which certain lasting values are defended within the framework of the tension of political conflict". Thus some reactionaries favor a return to the status quo ante, the previous political state of society, which that person believes possessed positive characteristics absent from contemporary society. An early example of a powerful reactionary movement was German Romanticism, which centered around concepts of organicism, medievalism, and traditionalism against the forces of rationalism, secularism, and individualism that were unleashed in the French Revolution. In political discourse, being a reactionary is generally regarded as negative; Peter King observed that it is "an unsought-for label, used as a torment rather than a badge of honor". Despite this, the descriptor has been adopted by writers such as the Italian esoteric traditionalist Julius Evola, the Austrian monarchist Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn, the Colombian political theologian Nicolás Gómez Dávila, and the American historian John Lukacs. In Great Britain, the Tory movement during the Restoration period (1660–1688) was a form of proto-conservatism that supported a hierarchical society with a monarch who ruled by divine right. However, Tories differ from most later, more moderate, mainstream conservatives in that they opposed the idea of popular sovereignty and rejected the authority of parliament and freedom of religion. Robert Filmer's royalist treatise Patriarcha (published in 1680 but written before the English Civil War of 1642–1651) became accepted as the statement of their doctrine. However, the Glorious Revolution of 1688 damaged this principle by establishing a constitutional government in England, leading to the hegemony of the Tory-opposed Whig ideology. Faced with defeat, the Tories reformed their movement. They adopted more moderate conservative positions, such as holding that sovereignty was vested in the three estates of Crown, Lords, and Commons rather than solely in the Crown. Richard Hooker (1554–1600), Marquess of Halifax (1633–1695) and David Hume (1711–1776) were proto-conservatives of the period. Halifax promoted pragmatism in government whilst Hume argued against political rationalism and utopianism. Edmund Burke (1729–1797) has been widely regarded as the philosophical founder of modern conservatism. He served as the private secretary to the Marquis of Rockingham and as official pamphleteer to the Rockingham branch of the Whig party. Together with the Tories, they were the conservatives in the late 18th century United Kingdom. Burke's views were a mixture of conservatism and republicanism. He supported the American Revolution of 1775–1783 but abhorred the violence of the French Revolution of 1789–1799. He accepted the conservative ideals of private property and the economics of Adam Smith (1723–1790), but thought that economics should remain subordinate to the conservative social ethic, that capitalism should be subordinate to the medieval social tradition, and that the business class should be subordinate to aristocracy. He insisted on standards of honour derived from the medieval aristocratic tradition and saw the aristocracy as the nation's natural leaders. That meant limits on the powers of the Crown, since he found the institutions of Parliament to be better informed than commissions appointed by the executive. He favored an established church, but allowed for a degree of religious toleration. Burke ultimately justified the social order on the basis of tradition: tradition represented the wisdom of the species, and he valued community and social harmony over social reforms. Another form of conservatism developed in France in parallel to conservatism in Britain. It was influenced by Counter-Enlightenment works by philosophers such as Joseph de Maistre (1753–1821) and Louis de Bonald (1754–1840). Many continental conservatives do not support separation of church and state, with most supporting state cooperation with the Catholic Church, such as had existed in France before the Revolution. Conservatives were also early to embrace nationalism, which was previously associated with liberalism and the Revolution in France. Another early French conservative, François-René de Chateaubriand (1768–1848), espoused a romantic opposition to modernity, contrasting its emptiness with the 'full heart' of traditional faith and loyalty. Elsewhere on the continent, German thinkers Justus Möser (1720–1794) and Friedrich von Gentz (1764–1832) criticized the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen that came of the Revolution. Opposition was also expressed by German idealists such as Adam Müller (1779–1829) and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1771–1830), the latter inspiring both leftist and rightist followers. Both Burke and Maistre were critical of democracy in general, though their reasons differed. Maistre was pessimistic about humans being able to follow rules, while Burke was skeptical about humans' innate ability to make rules. For Maistre, rules had a divine origin, while Burke believed they arose from custom. The lack of custom for Burke, and the lack of divine guidance for Maistre, meant that people would act in terrible ways. Both also believed that liberty of the wrong kind led to bewilderment and political breakdown. Their ideas would together flow into a stream of anti-rationalist, romantic conservatism, but would still stay separate. Whereas Burke was more open to argumentation and disagreement, Maistre wanted faith and authority, leading to a more illiberal strain of thought. Liberal conservatism is a variant of conservatism that is strongly influenced by liberal stances. It incorporates the classical liberal view of minimal economic interventionism, meaning that individuals should be free to participate in the market and generate wealth without government interference. However, individuals cannot be thoroughly depended on to act responsibly in other spheres of life; therefore, liberal conservatives believe that a strong state is necessary to ensure law and order, and social institutions are needed to nurture a sense of duty and responsibility to the nation. Originally opposed to capitalism and the industrial revolution, the conservative ideology in many countries adopted economic liberalism, especially in countries where liberal economic ideas have been the norm such as the United States. Fiscal conservatism is the economic philosophy of prudence in government spending and debt. In Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790), Edmund Burke argued that a government does not have the right to run up large debts and then throw the burden on the taxpayer: [I]t is to the property of the citizen, and not to the demands of the creditor of the state, that the first and original faith of civil society is pledged. The claim of the citizen is prior in time, paramount in title, superior in equity. The fortunes of individuals, whether possessed by acquisition or by descent or in virtue of a participation in the goods of some community, were no part of the creditor's security, expressed or implied...[T]he public, whether represented by a monarch or by a senate, can pledge nothing but the public estate; and it can have no public estate except in what it derives from a just and proportioned imposition upon the citizens at large. National conservatism is a political term used primarily in Europe to describe a variant of conservatism which concentrates more on national interests than standard conservatism as well as upholding cultural and ethnic identity, while not being outspokenly ultra-nationalist or supporting a far-right approach. National conservatism is oriented towards upholding national sovereignty, which includes limited immigration and a strong national defence. In Europe, national conservatives are usually eurosceptics. Yoram Hazony has argued for national conservatism in his work The Virtue of Nationalism (2018). Traditionalist conservatism, also known as classical conservatism, emphasizes the need for the principles of natural law, transcendent moral order, tradition, hierarchy, organicism, agrarianism, classicism, and high culture as well as the intersecting spheres of loyalty. Some traditionalists have embraced the labels reactionary and counter-revolutionary, defying the stigma that has attached to these terms since the Enlightenment. Having a hierarchical view of society, many traditionalist conservatives, including a few notable Americans such as Ralph Adams Cram, William S. Lind, and Charles A. Coulombe, defend the monarchical political structure as the most natural and beneficial social arrangement. Cultural conservatives support the preservation of a cultural heritage and cultural values, either of a nation or a shared culture that is not defined by national boundaries. The shared culture may be as divergent as Western culture or Chinese culture. In the United States, the term "cultural conservative" may imply a conservative position in the culture war. Cultural conservatives hold fast to traditional ways of thinking even in the face of monumental change, strongly believing in traditional values and traditional politics. Social conservatives believe that society is built upon a fragile network of relationships which need to be upheld through duty, traditional values, and established institutions; and that the government has a role in encouraging or enforcing traditional values or practices. A social conservative wants to preserve traditional morality and social mores, often by opposing what they consider radical policies or social engineering. Some social-conservative stances are the following: Support of a culture of life and opposition to the destruction of human life at any stage, including abortion, embryonic stem cells research, and euthanasia. Support of bioconservatism and opposition to both eugenics and transhumanism. Support of traditional family values, viewing the nuclear family model as society's foundational unit. Support of a traditional definition of marriage as being one man and one woman, and opposition to expansion of civil marriage and child adoption to couples in same-sex relationships. Support of public morality with prohibition of drugs and prostitution and censorship of pornography. Support of organized religion and opposition to atheism and secularism, especially when militant. Religious conservatism principally applies the teachings of particular religions to politics—sometimes by merely proclaiming the value of those teachings, at other times by having those teachings influence laws. In most democracies, political conservatism seeks to uphold traditional family structures and social values. Religious conservatives typically oppose abortion, LGBT behaviour (or, in certain cases, identity), drug use, and sexual activity outside of marriage. In some cases, conservative values are grounded in religious beliefs, and conservatives seek to increase the role of religion in public life. Paternalistic conservatism is a strand in conservatism which reflects the belief that societies exist and develop organically and that members within them have obligations towards each other. There is particular emphasis on the paternalistic obligation (noblesse oblige) of those who are privileged and wealthy to the poorer parts of society, which is consistent with principles such as duty, organicism, and hierarchy. Paternal conservatives support neither the individual nor the state in principle, but are instead prepared to support either or recommend a balance between the two depending on what is most practical. Paternalistic conservatives historically favour a more aristocratic view and are ideologically related to High Tories.[citation needed] In more contemporary times, its proponents stress the importance of a social safety net to deal with poverty, supporting limited redistribution of wealth along with government regulation of markets in the interests of both consumers and producers. Paternalistic conservatism first arose as a distinct ideology in the United Kingdom under Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli's "One Nation" Toryism. There have been a variety of one-nation conservative governments in the United Kingdom with exponents such as Prime Ministers Disraeli, Stanley Baldwin, Neville Chamberlain, Winston Churchill, and Harold Macmillan. In 19th-century Germany, Chancellor Otto von Bismarck adopted a set of social programs, known as state socialism, which included insurance for workers against sickness, accident, incapacity, and old age. The goal of this conservative state-building strategy was to make ordinary Germans, not just the Junker aristocracy, more loyal to state and Emperor. Chancellor Leo von Caprivi promoted a conservative agenda called the "New Course". In the United States, Theodore Roosevelt has been identified as the main exponent of progressive conservatism. Roosevelt stated that he had "always believed that wise progressivism and wise conservatism go hand in hand". The Republican administration of President William Howard Taft was progressive conservative, and he described himself as a believer in progressive conservatism. President Dwight D. Eisenhower also declared himself an advocate of progressive conservatism. In Canada, a variety of conservative governments have been part of the Red Tory tradition, with Canada's former major conservative party being named the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada from 1942 to 2003. Prime Ministers Arthur Meighen, R. B. Bennett, John Diefenbaker, Joe Clark, Brian Mulroney, and Kim Campbell led Red Tory federal governments. Authoritarian conservatism refers to autocratic regimes that center their ideology around national conservatism, rather than ethnic nationalism, though certain racial components such as antisemitism may exist. Authoritarian conservative movements show strong devotion towards religion, tradition, and culture while also expressing fervent nationalism akin to other far-right nationalist movements. Examples of authoritarian conservative statesmen include Miklós Horthy in Hungary, Ioannis Metaxas in Greece, António de Oliveira Salazar in Portugal, Engelbert Dollfuss in Austria, and Francisco Franco in Spain. Authoritarian conservative movements were prominent in the same era as fascism, with which it sometimes clashed. Although both ideologies shared core values such as nationalism and had common enemies such as communism and materialism, there was nonetheless a contrast between the traditionalist nature of authoritarian conservatism and the revolutionary, palingenetic, and populist nature of fascism—thus it was common for authoritarian conservative regimes to suppress rising fascist and Nazi movements. The hostility between the two ideologies is highlighted by the struggle for power in Austria, which was marked by the assassination of the ultra-Catholic dictator Engelbert Dollfuss by Austrian Nazis. Likewise, Croatian fascists assassinated King Alexander I of Yugoslavia. In Romania, as the fascist Iron Guard was gaining popularity and Nazi Germany was making advances on the European political stage, King Carol II ordered the execution of Corneliu Zelea Codreanu and other top-ranking Romanian fascists. The exiled German Emperor Wilhelm II was an enemy of Adolf Hitler, stating that Nazism made him ashamed to be a German for the first time in his life and referring to the Nazis as "a bunch of shirted gangsters" and "a mob … led by a thousand liars or fanatics". Political scientist Seymour Martin Lipset has examined the class basis of right-wing extremist politics in the 1920–1960 era. He reports: Conservative or rightist extremist movements have arisen at different periods in modern history, ranging from the Horthyites in Hungary, the Christian Social Party of Dollfuss in Austria, Der Stahlhelm and other nationalists in pre-Hitler Germany, and Salazar in Portugal, to the pre-1966 Gaullist movements and the monarchists in contemporary France and Italy. The right extremists are conservative, not revolutionary. They seek to change political institutions in order to preserve or restore cultural and economic ones, while extremists of the centre [fascists/nazis] and left [communists/anarchists] seek to use political means for cultural and social revolution. The ideal of the right extremist is not a totalitarian ruler, but a monarch, or a traditionalist who acts like one. Many such movements in Spain, Austria, Hungary, Germany, and Italy have been explicitly monarchist […] The supporters of these movements differ from those of the centrists, tending to be wealthier, and more religious, which is more important in terms of a potential for mass support. Edmund Fawcett claims that fascism is totalitarian, populist, and anti-pluralist, whereas authoritarian conservatism is somewhat pluralist but most of all elitist and anti-populist. He concludes: "The fascist is a nonconservative who takes anti-liberalism to extremes. The right-wing authoritarian is a conservative who takes fear of democracy to extremes." During the Cold War, right-wing military dictatorships were prominent in Latin America, with most nations being under military rule by the middle of the 1970s. One example of this was General Augusto Pinochet, who ruled over Chile from 1973 to 1990. In the 21st century, the authoritarian style of government experienced a worldwide renaissance with conservative statesmen such as Vladimir Putin in Russia, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in Turkey, Viktor Orbán in Hungary, Narendra Modi in India, and Donald Trump in the United States. Conservative parties vary widely from country to country in the goals they wish to achieve. Both conservative and classical liberal parties tend to favour private ownership of property, in opposition to communist, socialist, and green parties, which favour communal ownership or laws regulating responsibility on the part of property owners. Where conservatives and liberals differ is primarily on social issues, where conservatives tend to reject behaviour that does not conform to some social norm. Modern conservative parties often define themselves by their opposition to liberal or socialist parties. The United States usage of the term conservative is unique to that country.[further explanation needed] Indian politics has long been dominated by aristocratic and religious elites in one of the most hierarchically organized nations in the world. In modern times, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), led by Narendra Modi, represents conservative politics. With over 170 million members as of October 2022, the BJP is by far the world's largest political party. It promotes Hindu nationalism, quasi-fascist Hindutva, a hostile foreign policy against Pakistan, and a conservative social and fiscal policy. Singapore's only conservative party is the People's Action Party (PAP). It is currently in government and has been since independence in 1965. It promotes conservative values in the form of Asian democracy and Asian values. South Korean politician and army general Park Chung Hee seized power in the May 16 coup of 1961, after which he was elected as the third President of South Korea. He introduced the highly authoritarian Yushin Constitution, ushering in the Fourth Republic. He ruled the country as a dictator until his assassination in 1979. South Korea's major conservative party, the People Power Party, has changed its form throughout its history. First it was the Democratic-Liberal Party and its first head was Roh Tae-woo, who was the first President of the Sixth Republic of South Korea. Democratic-Liberal Party was founded by the merging of Roh Tae-woo's Democratic Justice Party, Kim Young Sam's Reunification Democratic Party and Kim Jong-pil's New Democratic Republican Party. Kim Young-sam became the fourteenth President of Korea. When the conservative party was beaten by the opposition party in the general election, it changed its form again to follow the party members' demand for reforms. It became the New Korea Party, but it changed again one year later since the President Kim Young-sam was blamed by the citizen for the International Monetary Fund.[clarification needed] It changed its name to Grand National Party (GNP). Since the late Kim Dae-jung assumed the presidency in 1998, GNP had been the opposition party until Lee Myung-bak won the presidential election of 2007. European conservatism has taken many different expressions. During the first half of the 20th century, as socialism was gaining power around the world, conservatism in countries such as Austria, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Portugal, and Spain transformed into the far-right, becoming more authoritarian and extreme. European nations, with the exception of Switzerland, have had a long monarchical tradition throughout history. Today, existing monarchies are Andorra, Belgium, Denmark, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Some reactionary movements in republican nations, such as Action Française in France, the Monarchist National Party in Italy, and the Black-Yellow Alliance in Austria, have advocated a restoration of the monarchy. Austrian conservatism originated with Prince Klemens von Metternich (1773–1859), who was the architect behind the monarchist and imperialist Conservative Order that was enacted at the Congress of Vienna in the aftermath of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars. The goal was to establish a European balance of power that could guarantee peace and suppress republican and nationalist movements. During its existence, the Austrian Empire was the third most populous monarchy in Europe after the Russian Empire and the United Kingdom. Following its defeat in the Austro-Prussian War, it transformed into the Austro-Hungarian Empire, which was the most diverse state in Europe with twelve nationalities living under a unifying monarch. The Empire was fragmented in the aftermath of World War I, ushering in the democratic First Austrian Republic. The Austrian Civil War in 1934 saw a series of skirmishes between the right-wing government and socialist forces. When the insurgents were defeated, the government declared martial law and held mass trials, forcing leading socialist politicians, such as Otto Bauer, into exile. The conservatives banned the Social Democratic Party and replaced parliamentary democracy with a corporatist and clerical constitution. The Patriotic Front, into which the paramilitary Heimwehr and the Christian Social Party were merged, became the only legal political party in the resulting authoritarian regime, the Federal State of Austria. While having close ties to Fascist Italy, which was still a monarchy as well as a fellow Catholic nation, rightist Austria harboured strong anti-Prussian and anti-Nazi sentiment. Austria's most influential conservative philosopher, the Catholic aristocrat Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn, published many books in which he interpreted Nazism as a leftist, ochlocratic, and demagogic ideology, opposed to the traditional rightist ideals of aristocracy, monarchy, and Christianity. Austria's dictator Engelbert Dollfuss saw Nazism as another form of totalitarian communism, and he saw Adolf Hitler as the German version of Joseph Stalin. The conservatives banned the Austrian Nazi Party and arrested many of its activists. Later that same year, Dollfuss was assassinated by Nazi enemies who sought revenge. In response, Benito Mussolini mobilised a part of the Italian army on the Austrian border and threatened Hitler with war in the event of a German invasion of Austria. In 1938, when Nazi Germany annexed Austria in the Anschluss, conservative groups were suppressed: members of the Austrian nobility and the Catholic clergy were arrested and their properties were confiscated. Following World War II and the return to democracy, Austrian conservatives abandoned the authoritarianism of its past, believing in the principles of class collaboration and political compromise, while Austrian socialists also abandoned their extremism and distanced themselves from the totalitarianism of the Soviet Union. The conservatives formed the Austrian People's Party, which has been the major conservative party in Austria ever since. In contemporary politics, the party was led by Sebastian Kurz, whom the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung nicknamed the "young Metternich". Having its roots in the conservative Catholic Party, the Christian People's Party retained a conservative edge through the 20th century, supporting the King in the Royal Question, supporting nuclear family as the cornerstone of society, defending Christian education, and opposing euthanasia. The Christian People's Party dominated politics in post-war Belgium. In 1999, the party's support collapsed, and it became the country's fifth-largest party. Since 2014, the Flemish nationalist and conservative New Flemish Alliance is the largest party in Belgium. Danish conservatism emerged with the political grouping Højre (literally "Right"), which due to its alliance with King Christian IX of Denmark dominated Danish politics and formed all governments from 1865 to 1901. When a constitutional reform in 1915 stripped the landed gentry of political power, Højre was succeeded by the Conservative People's Party of Denmark, which has since then been the main Danish conservative party. Another Danish conservative party was the Free Conservatives, who were active between 1902 and 1920. Traditionally and historically, conservatism in Denmark has been more populist and agrarian than in Sweden and Norway, where conservatism has been more elitist and urban. The Conservative People's Party led the government coalition from 1982 to 1993. The party had previously been member of various governments from 1916 to 1917, 1940 to 1945, 1950 to 1953, and 1968 to 1971. The party was a junior partner in governments led by the Liberals from 2001 to 2011 and again from 2016 to 2019. The party is preceded by 11 years by the Young Conservatives (KU), today the youth movement of the party. The Conservative People's Party had a stable electoral support close to 15 to 20% at almost all general elections from 1918 to 1971. In the 1970s it declined to around 5%, but then under the leadership of Poul Schlüter reached its highest popularity level ever in 1984, receiving 23% of the votes. Since the late 1990s the party has obtained around 5 to 10% of the vote. In 2022, the party received 5.5% of the vote. Conservative thinking has also influenced other Danish political parties. In 1995, the Danish People's Party was founded, based on a mixture of conservative, nationalist, and social-democratic ideas. In 2015, the party New Right was established, professing a national-conservative attitude. The conservative parties in Denmark have always considered the monarchy a central institution in Denmark. The conservative party in Finland is the National Coalition Party. The party was founded in 1918, when several monarchist parties united. Although right-wing in the past, today it is a moderate liberal-conservative party. While advocating economic liberalism, it is committed to the social market economy. There has been strong anti-Russian and anti-communist sentiment in Finland due to its long history of being invaded and conquered by Russia and the Soviet Union. In the Finnish Civil War of 1918, the rightist White Finland defeated the leftist Red Finland. The paramilitary White Guard, led by Baron Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim, was assisted by the German Imperial Army at the request of the Finnish civil government. The far-right Lapua movement continued to terrorize communists in post-war Finland, but it was banned after a failed coup d'etat attempt in 1932. Early conservatism in France focused on the rejection of the secularism of the French Revolution, support for the role of the Catholic Church, and the restoration of the monarchy. After the first fall of Napoleon in 1814, the House of Bourbon returned to power in the Bourbon Restoration. Louis XVIII and Charles X, brothers of the executed King Louis XVI, successively mounted the throne and instituted a conservative government intended to restore the proprieties, if not all the institutions, of the Ancien Régime. After the July Revolution of 1830, Louis Philippe I, a member of the more liberal Orléans branch of the House of Bourbon, proclaimed himself as King of the French. The Second French Empire saw an Imperial Bonapartist regime of Napoleon III from 1852 to 1870. The Bourbon monarchist cause was on the verge of victory in the 1870s, but then collapsed because the proposed king, Henri, Count of Chambord, refused to fly the tri-colored flag. The turn of the century saw the rise of Action Française – an ultraconservative, reactionary, nationalist, and royalist movement that advocated a restoration of the monarchy. Religious tensions between Christian rightists and secular leftists heightened in the 1890–1910 era, but moderated after the spirit of unity in fighting World War I. An authoritarian form of conservatism characterized the Vichy regime of 1940–1944 with heightened antisemitism, opposition to individualism, emphasis on family life, and national direction of the economy. Conservatism has been the major political force in France since World War II, although the number of conservative groups and their lack of stability defy simple categorization. Following the war, conservatives supported Gaullist groups and parties, espoused nationalism, and emphasized tradition, social order, and the regeneration of France. Unusually, post-war conservatism in France was formed around the personality of a leader—army officer Charles de Gaulle who led the Free French Forces against Nazi Germany—and it did not draw on traditional French conservatism, but on the Bonapartist tradition. Gaullism in France continues under The Republicans (formerly Union for a Popular Movement), a party previously led by Nicolas Sarkozy, who served as President of France from 2007 to 2012 and whose ideology is known as Sarkozysm. In 2021, the French intellectual Éric Zemmour founded the nationalist party Reconquête, which has been described as a more elitist and conservative version of Marine Le Pen's National Rally. Germany was the heart of the reactionary Romantic movement that swept Europe in the aftermath of the progressive Age of Enlightenment and its culmination in the anti-conservative French Revolution. German Romanticism was deeply organicist and medievalist, finding expression philosophically among the Old Hegelians and judicially in the German historical school. Prominent conservative exponents were Friedrich Schlegel, Novalis, Wilhelm Heinrich Wackenroder, Friedrich Carl von Savigny, and Adam Müller. During the second half of the 19th century, German conservatism developed alongside nationalism, culminating in Germany's victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War, the creation of the unified German Empire in 1871, and the simultaneous rise of Otto von Bismarck on the European political stage. Bismarck's "balance of power" model maintained peace in Europe for decades at the end of the 19th century. His "revolutionary conservatism" was a conservative state-building strategy, based on class collaboration and designed to make ordinary Germans—not just the Junker aristocracy—more loyal to state and Emperor. He created the modern welfare state in Germany in the 1880s. According to scholars, his strategy was: granting social rights to enhance the integration of a hierarchical society, to forge a bond between workers and the state so as to strengthen the latter, to maintain traditional relations of authority between social and status groups, and to provide a countervailing power against the modernist forces of liberalism and socialism. Bismarck also enacted universal manhood suffrage in the new German Empire in 1871. He became a great hero to German conservatives, who erected many monuments to his memory after he left office in 1890. During the interwar period—after Germany's defeat in World War I, the abdication of Emperor Wilhelm II, and the introduction of parliamentary democracy—German conservatives experienced a cultural crisis and felt uprooted by a progressively modernist world. This angst was expressed philosophically in the Conservative Revolution movement with prominent exponents such as historian Oswald Spengler, jurist Carl Schmitt, and author Ernst Jünger. The major conservative party of this era was the reactionary German National People's Party, who advocated a restored monarchy. With the rise of Nazism in 1933, traditional agrarian movements faded and were supplanted by a more command-based economy and forced social integration. Adolf Hitler succeeded in garnering the support of many German industrialists; but prominent traditionalists, including military officers Claus von Stauffenberg and Henning von Tresckow, pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Bishop Clemens August Graf von Galen, and monarchist Carl Friedrich Goerdeler, openly and secretly opposed his policies of euthanasia, genocide, and attacks on organized religion. The former German Emperor Wilhelm II was highly critical of Hitler, writing in 1938: There's a man alone, without family, without children, without God ... He builds legions, but he doesn't build a nation. A nation is created by families, a religion, traditions: it is made up out of the hearts of mothers, the wisdom of fathers, the joy and the exuberance of children ... This man could bring home victories to our people each year, without bringing them either glory or danger. But of our Germany, which was a nation of poets and musicians, of artists and soldiers, he has made a nation of hysterics and hermits, engulfed in a mob and led by a thousand liars or fanatics. Post-World War II Germany developed a special form of conservatism called ordoliberalism, which is centered around the concept of ordered liberty. Neither socialist nor capitalist, it promotes a compromise between state and market, and argues that the national culture of a country must be taken into account when implementing economic policies. Alexander Rüstow and Wilhelm Röpke were two prominent exponents of this economic theory, and its implementation is largely credited as a reason behind the German miracle—the rapid reconstruction and development of the war-wrecked economies of West Germany and Austria after World War II. More recently, the work of conservative Christian Democratic Union leader and Chancellor Helmut Kohl helped bring about German reunification, along with the closer European integration in the form of the Maastricht Treaty. Today, German conservatism is often associated with politicians such as Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose tenure was marked by attempts to save the common European currency (Euro) from demise. The German conservatives were divided under Merkel due to the refugee crisis in Germany, and many conservatives in the CDU/CSU opposed the immigration policies developed under Merkel. The 2020s also saw the rise of the right-wing populist Alternative for Germany. The main inter-war conservative party was called the People's Party (PP), which supported constitutional monarchy and opposed the republican Liberal Party. Both parties were suppressed by the authoritarian, arch-conservative, and royalist 4th of August Regime of Ioannis Metaxas in 1936–1941. The PP was able to re-group after the Second World War as part of a United Nationalist Front which achieved power campaigning on a simple anti-communist, nationalist platform during the Greek Civil War (1946–1949). However, the vote received by the PP declined during the so-called "Centrist Interlude" in 1950–1952. In 1952, Marshal Alexandros Papagos created the Greek Rally as an umbrella for the right-wing forces. The Greek Rally came to power in 1952 and remained the leading party in Greece until 1963. After Papagos' death in 1955, it was reformed as the National Radical Union under Konstantinos Karamanlis. Right-wing governments backed by the palace and the army overthrew the Centre Union government in 1965 and governed the country until the establishment of the far-right Greek junta (1967–1974). After the regime's collapse in August 1974, Karamanlis returned from exile to lead the government and founded the New Democracy party. The new conservative party had four objectives: to confront Turkish expansionism in Cyprus, to reestablish and solidify democratic rule, to give the country a strong government, and to make a powerful moderate party a force in Greek politics. The Independent Greeks, a newly formed political party in Greece, has also supported conservatism, particularly national and religious conservatism. The Founding Declaration of the Independent Greeks strongly emphasises in the preservation of the Greek state and its sovereignty, the Greek people, and the Greek Orthodox Church. The dominance of the political right of inter-war Hungary, after the collapse of a short-lived Communist regime, was described by historian István Deák: Between 1919 and 1944 Hungary was a rightist country. Forged out of a counter-revolutionary heritage, its governments advocated a "nationalist Christian" policy; they extolled heroism, faith, and unity; they despised the French Revolution, and they spurned the liberal and socialist ideologies of the 19th century. The governments saw Hungary as a bulwark against bolshevism and bolshevism's instruments: socialism, cosmopolitanism, and Freemasonry. They perpetrated the rule of a small clique of aristocrats, civil servants, and army officers, and surrounded with adulation the head of the state, the counterrevolutionary Admiral Horthy. Horthy's authoritarian conservative regime suppressed communists and fascists alike, banning the Hungarian Communist Party as well as the fascist Arrow Cross Party. The fascist leader Ferenc Szálasi was repeatedly imprisoned at Horthy's command. Founded in 1924 as the Conservative Party, Iceland's Independence Party adopted its current name in 1929 after the merger with the Liberal Party. From the beginning, they have been the largest vote-winning party, averaging around 40%. They combined liberalism and conservatism, supported nationalization of infrastructure, and advocated class collaboration. While mostly in opposition during the 1930s, they embraced economic liberalism, but accepted the welfare state after the war and participated in governments supportive of state intervention and protectionism. Unlike other Scandanivian conservative (and liberal) parties, it has always had a large working-class following. After the financial crisis in 2008, the party has sunk to a lower support level at around 20–25%. After unification, Italy was governed successively by the Historical Right, which represented conservative, liberal-conservative, and conservative-liberal positions, and the Historical Left. After World War I, the country saw the emergence of its first mass parties, notably including the Italian People's Party (PPI), a Christian-democratic party that sought to represent the Catholic majority, which had long refrained from politics. The PPI and the Italian Socialist Party decisively contributed to the loss of strength and authority of the old liberal ruling class, which had not been able to structure itself into a proper party: the Liberal Union was not coherent and the Italian Liberal Party came too late. In 1921, Benito Mussolini founded the National Fascist Party (PNF), and the next year, through the March on Rome, he was appointed Prime Minister by King Victor Emmanuel III. Fascism originated as a populist, revolutionary, anti-royalist, anti-clerical, and anti-conservative ideology, viewed by many socialists as a leftist heresy rather than a rightist opponent; but it transformed and became distinctly right-wing when it made compromises with the conservative establishment in order to consolidate authority and suppress communist movements. Mussolini commented on the dynamic pragmatism of fascism: "We would like to be aristocrats and democrats, conservatives and liberals, reactionaries and revolutionaries, legalists and illegalists, depending on the circumstances of time, place and environment." In 1926, all parties were dissolved except the PNF, which thus remained the only legal party in the Kingdom of Italy until the fall of the regime in July 1943. By 1945, fascists were discredited, disbanded, and outlawed, while Mussolini was executed in April that year. In 1946, a referendum was held concerning the fate of the monarchy. While southern Italy and parts of northern Italy were royalist, other parts, especially in central Italy, were predominantly republican. The outcome was 54–46% in favour of a republic, leading to a collapse of the monarchy. After World War II, the centre-right was dominated by the centrist party Christian Democracy (DC), which included both conservative and centre-left elements. With its landslide victory over the Italian Socialist Party and the Italian Communist Party in 1948, the political centre was in power. In Denis Mack Smith's words, it was "moderately conservative, reasonably tolerant of everything which did not touch religion or property, but above all Catholic and sometimes clerical". It dominated politics until DC's dissolution in 1994. Among DC's frequent allies, there was the conservative-liberal Italian Liberal Party. At the right of the DC stood parties like the royalist Monarchist National Party and the post-fascist Italian Social Movement. In 1994, entrepreneur and media tycoon Silvio Berlusconi founded the liberal-conservative party Forza Italia (FI). He won three elections in 1994, 2001, and 2008, governing the country for almost ten years as Prime Minister. FI formed a coalitions with several parties, including the national-conservative National Alliance (AN), heir of the MSI, and the regionalist Lega Nord (LN). FI was briefly incorporated, along with AN, in The People of Freedom party and later revived in the new Forza Italia. After the 2018 general election, the LN and the Five Star Movement formed a populist government, which lasted about a year. In the 2022 general election, a centre-right coalition came to power, this time dominated by Brothers of Italy (FdI), a new national-conservative party born on the ashes of AN. Consequently, FdI, the re-branded Lega, and FI formed a government under FdI leader Giorgia Meloni. Luxembourg's major conservative party, the Christian Social People's Party, was formed as the Party of the Right in 1914 and adopted its present name in 1945. It was consistently the largest political party in Luxembourg and dominated politics throughout the 20th century. Liberalism has been strong in the Netherlands. Thus, rightist parties are often liberal-conservative or conservative-liberal. One example of this is the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy. Even the right-wing populist and far-right Party for Freedom, which dominated the 2023 election, supports liberal positions such as gay rights, abortion, and euthanasia. The Conservative Party of Norway (Norwegian: Høyre, literally "Right") was formed by the old upper-class of state officials and wealthy merchants to fight the populist democracy of the Liberal Party, but it lost power in 1884, when parliamentarian government was first practiced. It formed its first government under parliamentarism in 1889 and continued to alternate in power with the Liberals until the 1930s, when Labour became the dominant party. It has elements both of paternalism, stressing the responsibilities of the state, and of economic liberalism. It first returned to power in the 1960s. During Kåre Willoch's premiership in the 1980s, much emphasis was laid on liberalizing the credit and housing market and abolishing the NRK TV and radio monopoly, while supporting law and order in criminal justice and traditional norms in education. Under Vladimir Putin, the dominant leader since 1999, Russia has promoted explicitly conservative policies in social, cultural, and political matters, both at home and abroad. Putin has criticized globalism and economic liberalism, claiming that "liberalism has become obsolete" and that the vast majority of people in the world oppose multiculturalism, free immigration, and rights for LGBT people. Russian conservatism is special in some respects as it supports a mixed economy with economic intervention, combined with a strong nationalist sentiment and social conservatism which is largely populist. As a result, Russian conservatism opposes right-libertarian ideals such as the aforementioned concept of economic liberalism found in other conservative movements around the world. Putin has also promoted new think tanks that bring together like-minded intellectuals and writers. For example, the Izborsky Club, founded in 2012 by Alexander Prokhanov, stresses Russian nationalism, the restoration of Russia's historical greatness, and systematic opposition to liberal ideas and policies. Vladislav Surkov, a senior government official, has been one of the key ideologues during Putin's presidency. In cultural and social affairs, Putin has collaborated closely with the Russian Orthodox Church. Under Patriarch Kirill of Moscow, the Church has backed the expansion of Russian power into Crimea and eastern Ukraine. More broadly, The New York Times reports in September 2016 how the Church's policy prescriptions support the Kremlin's appeal to social conservatives: A fervent foe of homosexuality and any attempt to put individual rights above those of family, community, or nation, the Russian Orthodox Church helps project Russia as the natural ally of all those who pine for a more secure, illiberal world free from the tradition-crushing rush of globalization, multiculturalism, and women's and gay rights. In the early 19th century, Swedish conservatism developed alongside Swedish Romanticism. The historian Erik Gustaf Geijer, an exponent of Gothicism, glorified the Viking Age and the Swedish Empire, and the idealist philosopher Christopher Jacob Boström became the chief ideologue of the official state doctrine, which dominated Swedish politics for almost a century. Other influential Swedish conservative Romantics were Esaias Tegnér and Per Daniel Amadeus Atterbom. Early parliamentary conservatism in Sweden was explicitly elitist. Indeed, the Conservative Party was formed in 1904 with one major goal in mind: to stop the advent of universal suffrage, which they feared would result in socialism. Yet, it was a Swedish admiral, the conservative politician Arvid Lindman, who first extended democracy by enacting male suffrage, despite the protests of more traditionalist voices, such as the later Prime Minister, the arch-conservative and authoritarian statesman Ernst Trygger, who railed at progressive policies such as the abolition of the death penalty. Once a democratic system was in place, Swedish conservatives sought to combine traditional elitism with modern populism. Sweden's most renowned political scientist, the conservative politician Rudolf Kjellén, coined the terms geopolitics and biopolitics in relation to his organic theory of the state. He also developed the corporatist-nationalist concept of Folkhemmet ('the home of the people'), which became the single most powerful political concept in Sweden throughout the 20th century, although it was adopted by the Social Democratic Party who gave it a more socialist interpretation. After a brief grand coalition between Left and Right during World War II, the centre-right parties struggled to cooperate due to their ideological differences: the agrarian populism of the Centre Party, the urban liberalism of the Liberal People's Party, and the liberal-conservative elitism of the Moderate Party (the old Conservative Party). However, in 1976 and in 1979, the three parties managed to form a government under Thorbjörn Fälldin—and again in 1991, this time under aristocrat Carl Bildt and with support from the newly founded Christian Democrats, the most conservative party in contemporary Sweden. In modern times, mass immigration from distant cultures caused a large populist dissatisfaction, which was not channeled through any of the established parties, who generally espoused multiculturalism. Instead, the 2010s saw the rise of the right-wing populist Sweden Democrats, who were surging as the largest party in the polls on several occasions. The party was ostracized by the other parties until 2019, when Christian Democrat leader Ebba Busch reached out for collaboration, after which the Moderate Party followed suit. In 2022, the centre-right parties formed a government with support from the Sweden Democrats as the biggest party. The subsequent Tidö Agreement, negotiated in Tidö Castle, incorporated authoritarian policies such as a stricter stance on immigration and a harsher stance on law and order. In some aspects, Swiss conservatism is unique, as Switzerland is an old federal republic born from historically sovereign cantons, comprising three major nationalities, and adhering to the principle of Swiss neutrality. There are a number of conservative parties in Switzerland's parliament, the Federal Assembly. These include the largest ones: the Swiss People's Party (SVP), the Christian Democratic People's Party (CVP), and the Conservative Democratic Party of Switzerland (BDP), which is a splinter of the SVP created in the aftermath to the election of Eveline Widmer-Schlumpf as Federal Council. The SVP was formed from the 1971 merger of the Party of Farmers, Traders and Citizens, formed in 1917, and the smaller Democratic Party, formed in 1942. The SVP emphasized agricultural policy and was strong among farmers in German-speaking Protestant areas. As Switzerland considered closer relations with the European Union in the 1990s, the SVP adopted a more militant protectionist and isolationist stance. This stance has allowed it to expand into German-speaking Catholic mountainous areas. The Anti-Defamation League, a non-Swiss lobby group based in the United States has accused them of manipulating issues such as immigration, Swiss neutrality, and welfare benefits, awakening antisemitism and racism. The Council of Europe has called the SVP "extreme right", although some scholars dispute this classification. For instance, Hans-Georg Betz describes it as "populist radical right". The SVP has been the largest party since 2003. The authoritarian Ukrainian State was headed by Cossack aristocrat Pavlo Skoropadskyi and represented the conservative movement. The 1918 Hetman government, which appealed to the tradition of the 17th–18th century Cossack Hetman state, represented the conservative strand in Ukraine's struggle for independence. It had the support of the proprietary classes and of conservative and moderate political groups. Vyacheslav Lypynsky was a main ideologue of Ukrainian conservatism. Modern English conservatives celebrate Anglo-Irish statesman Edmund Burke as their intellectual father. Burke was affiliated with the Whig Party, which eventually split amongst the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party, but the modern Conservative Party is generally thought to derive primarily from the Tories, and the MPs of the modern conservative party are still frequently referred to as Tories. Shortly after Burke's death in 1797, conservatism was revived as a mainstream political force as the Whigs suffered a series of internal divisions. This new generation of conservatives derived their politics not from Burke, but from his predecessor, the Viscount Bolingbroke (1678–1751), who was a Jacobite and traditional Tory, lacking Burke's sympathies for Whiggish policies such as Catholic emancipation and American independence (famously attacked by Samuel Johnson in "Taxation No Tyranny"). In the first half of the 19th century, many newspapers, magazines, and journals promoted loyalist or right-wing attitudes in religion, politics, and international affairs. Burke was seldom mentioned, but William Pitt the Younger (1759–1806) became a conspicuous hero. The most prominent journals included The Quarterly Review, founded in 1809 as a counterweight to the Whigs' Edinburgh Review, and the even more conservative Blackwood's Magazine. The Quarterly Review promoted a balanced Canningite Toryism, as it was neutral on Catholic emancipation and only mildly critical of Nonconformist dissent; it opposed slavery and supported the current poor laws; and it was "aggressively imperialist". The high-church clergy of the Church of England read the Orthodox Churchman's Magazine, which was equally hostile to Jewish, Catholic, Jacobin, Methodist and Unitarian spokesmen. Anchoring the ultra-Tories, Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine stood firmly against Catholic emancipation and favoured slavery, cheap money, mercantilism, the Navigation Acts, and the Holy Alliance. Conservatism evolved after 1820, embracing free trade in 1846 and a commitment to democracy, especially under Benjamin Disraeli. The effect was to significantly strengthen conservatism as a grassroots political force. Conservatism no longer was the philosophical defense of the landed aristocracy, but had been refreshed into redefining its commitment to the ideals of order, both secular and religious, expanding imperialism, strengthened monarchy, and a more generous vision of the welfare state as opposed to the punitive vision of the Whigs and liberals. As early as 1835, Disraeli attacked the Whigs and utilitarians as slavishly devoted to an industrial oligarchy, while he described his fellow Tories as the only "really democratic party of England", devoted to the interests of the whole people. Nevertheless, inside the party there was a tension between the growing numbers of wealthy businessmen on the one side and the aristocracy and rural gentry on the other. The aristocracy gained strength as businessmen discovered they could use their wealth to buy a peerage and a country estate. Some conservatives lamented the passing of a pastoral world where the ethos of noblesse oblige had promoted respect from the lower classes. They saw the Anglican Church and the aristocracy as balances against commercial wealth. They worked toward legislation for improved working conditions and urban housing. This viewpoint would later be called Tory democracy. However, since Burke, there has always been tension between traditional aristocratic conservatism and the wealthy liberal business class. In 1834, Tory Prime Minister Robert Peel issued the "Tamworth Manifesto", in which he pledged to endorse moderate political reform. This marked the beginning of the transformation from High Tory reactionism towards a more modern form of conservatism. As a result, the party became known as the Conservative Party—a name it has retained to this day. However, Peel would also be the root of a split in the party between the traditional Tories (by the Earl of Derby and Benjamin Disraeli) and the "Peelites" (led first by Peel himself, then by the Earl of Aberdeen). The split occurred in 1846 over the issue of free trade, which Peel supported, versus protectionism, supported by Derby. The majority of the party sided with Derby whilst about a third split away, eventually merging with the Whigs and the radicals to form the Liberal Party. Despite the split, the mainstream Conservative Party accepted the doctrine of free trade in 1852. In the second half of the 19th century, the Liberal Party faced political schisms, especially over Irish Home Rule. Leader William Gladstone (himself a former Peelite) sought to give Ireland a degree of autonomy, a move that elements in both the left and right-wings of his party opposed. These split off to become the Liberal Unionists (led by Joseph Chamberlain), forming a coalition with the Conservatives before merging with them in 1912. The Liberal Unionist influence dragged the Conservative Party towards the left as Conservative governments passed a number of progressive reforms at the turn of the 20th century. By the late 19th century, the traditional business supporters of the Liberal Party had joined the Conservatives, making them the party of business and commerce as well. After a period of Liberal dominance before the First World War, the Conservatives gradually became more influential in government, regaining full control of the cabinet in 1922. In the inter-war period, conservatism was the major ideology in Britain as the Liberal Party vied with the Labour Party for control of the left. After the Second World War, the first Labour government (1945–1951) under Clement Attlee embarked on a program of nationalization of industry and the promotion of social welfare. The Conservatives generally accepted those policies until the 1980s. In the 1980s, the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher, guided by neoliberal economics, reversed many of Labour's social programmes, privatised large parts of the UK economy, and sold state-owned assets. The Conservative Party also adopted soft eurosceptic politics and opposed Federal Europe. Other conservative political parties, such as the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP, founded in 1971), and the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP, founded in 1993), began to appear, although they have yet to make any significant impact at Westminster. As of 2014, the DUP is the largest political party in the ruling coalition in the Northern Ireland Assembly, and from 2017 to 2019 the DUP provided support for the Conservative minority government under a confidence-and-supply arrangement. Conservative elites have long dominated Latin American nations. Mostly, this has been achieved through control of civil institutions, the Catholic Church, and the military, rather than through party politics. Typically, the Church was exempt from taxes and its employees immune from civil prosecution. Where conservative parties were weak or non-existent, conservatives were more likely to rely on military dictatorship as a preferred form of government. However, in some nations where the elites were able to mobilize popular support for conservative parties, longer periods of political stability were achieved. Chile, Colombia, and Venezuela are examples of nations that developed strong conservative parties. Argentina, Brazil, El Salvador, and Peru are examples of nations where this did not occur. Louis Hartz explained conservatism in Latin American nations as a result of their settlement as feudal societies. Conservatism in Brazil originates from the cultural and historical tradition of Brazil, whose cultural roots are Luso-Iberian and Roman Catholic. More traditional conservative historical views and features include belief in political federalism and monarchism. The military dictatorship in Brazil was established on 1 April 1964, after a coup d'état by the Brazilian Army with support from the United States government, and it lasted for 21 years, until 15 March 1985. The coup received support from almost all high-ranking members of the military along with conservative sectors in society, such as the Catholic Church and anti-communist civilian movements among the Brazilian middle and upper classes. The dictatorship reached the height of its popularity in the 1970s with the so-called Brazilian Miracle. Brazil's military government provided a model for other military regimes throughout Latin America, being systematized by the "National Security Doctrine", which was used to justify the military's actions as operating in the interest of national security in a time of crisis. In contemporary politics, a conservative wave began roughly around the 2014 Brazilian presidential election. According to commentators, the National Congress of Brazil elected in 2014 may be considered the most conservative since the re-democratization movement, citing an increase in the number of parliamentarians linked to more conservative segments, such as ruralists, the military, the police, and religious conservatives. The subsequent economic crisis of 2015 and investigations of corruption scandals led to a right-wing movement that sought to rescue ideas from economic liberalism and conservatism in opposition to socialism. At the same time, fiscal conservatives such as those that make up the Free Brazil Movement emerged among many others. National-conservative candidate Jair Bolsonaro of the Social Liberal Party was the winner of the 2018 Brazilian presidential election. Chile's conservative party, the National Party, disbanded in 1973 following a military coup and did not re-emerge as a political force after the return to democracy. During the military dictatorship of Chile, the country was ruled by a military junta headed by General Augusto Pinochet. His ideology, known as Pinochetism, was anti-communist, militaristic, nationalistic, and laissez-faire capitalistic. Under Pinochet, Chile's economy was placed under the control of a group of economists known collectively as the Chicago Boys, whose liberalising policies have been described as neoliberal. The Colombian Conservative Party, founded in 1849, traces its origins to opponents of General Francisco de Paula Santander's 1833–1837 administration. While the term "liberal" had been used to describe all political forces in Colombia, the conservatives began describing themselves as "conservative liberals" and their opponents as "red liberals". From the 1860s until the present, the party has supported strong central government and the Catholic Church, especially its role as protector of the sanctity of the family, and opposed separation of church and state. Its policies include the legal equality of all men, the citizen's right to own property, and opposition to dictatorship. It has usually been Colombia's second largest party, with the Colombian Liberal Party being the largest. Canada's conservatives had their roots in the Tory loyalists who left America after the American Revolution. They developed in the socio-economic and political cleavages that existed during the first three decades of the 19th century and had the support of the mercantile, professional, and religious elites in Ontario and to a lesser extent in Quebec. Holding a monopoly over administrative and judicial offices, they were called the Family Compact in Ontario and the Chateau Clique in Quebec. John A. Macdonald's successful leadership of the movement to confederate the provinces and his subsequent tenure as prime minister for most of the late 19th century rested on his ability to bring together the English-speaking Protestant aristocracy and the ultramontane Catholic hierarchy of Quebec and to keep them united in a conservative coalition. The conservatives combined pro-market liberalism and Toryism. They generally supported an activist government and state intervention in the marketplace, and their policies were marked by noblesse oblige, a paternalistic responsibility of the elites for the less well-off. The party was known as the Progressive Conservatives from 1942 until 2003, when the party merged with the Canadian Alliance to form the Conservative Party of Canada. The conservative and autonomist Union Nationale, led by Maurice Duplessis, governed the province of Quebec in periods from 1936 to 1960 and in a close alliance with the Catholic Church, small rural elites, farmers, and business elites. This period, known by liberals as the Great Darkness, ended with the Quiet Revolution and the party went into terminal decline. By the end of the 1960s, the political debate in Quebec centered around the question of independence, opposing the social democratic and sovereignist Parti Québécois and the centrist and federalist Quebec Liberal Party, therefore marginalizing the conservative movement. Most French Canadian conservatives rallied either the Quebec Liberal Party or the Parti Québécois, while some of them still tried to offer an autonomist third-way with what was left of the Union Nationale or the more populists Ralliement créditiste du Québec and Parti national populaire, but by the 1981 provincial election politically organized conservatism had been obliterated in Quebec. It slowly started to revive at the 1994 provincial election with the Action démocratique du Québec, who served as Official opposition in the National Assembly from 2007 to 2008, before merging in 2012 with François Legault's Coalition Avenir Québec, which took power in 2018. The modern Conservative Party of Canada has rebranded conservatism and, under the leadership of Stephen Harper, added more conservative policies. Yoram Hazony, a scholar on the history and ideology of conservatism, identified Canadian psychologist Jordan Peterson as the most significant conservative thinker to appear in the English-speaking world in a generation. The meaning of conservatism in the United States is different from the way the word is used elsewhere. As historian Leo P. Ribuffo notes, "what Americans now call conservatism much of the world calls liberalism or neoliberalism". However, the prominent American conservative writer Russell Kirk, in his influential work The Conservative Mind (1953), argued that conservatism had been brought to the United States and he interpreted the American Revolution as a "conservative revolution" against royalist innovation. American conservatism is a broad system of political beliefs in the United States, which is characterized by respect for American traditions, support for Judeo-Christian values, economic liberalism, anti-communism, and a defense of Western culture. Liberty within the bounds of conformity to conservatism is a core value, with a particular emphasis on strengthening the free market, limiting the size and scope of government, and opposing high taxes as well as government or labor union encroachment on the entrepreneur. The 1830s Democratic Party became divided between Southern Democrats, who supported slavery, secession, and later segregation, and the Northern Democrats, who tended to support the abolition of slavery, union, and equality. Many Democrats were conservative in the sense that they wanted things to be like they were in the past, especially as far as race was concerned. They generally favored poorer farmers and urban workers, and were hostile to banks, industrialization, and high tariffs. The post-Civil War Republican Party elected the first People of Color to serve in both local and national political office. The Southern Democrats united with pro-segregation Northern Republicans to form the Conservative Coalition, which successfully put an end to Blacks being elected to national political office until 1967, when Edward Brooke was elected Senator from Massachusetts. Conservative Democrats influenced US politics until 1994's Republican Revolution, when the American South shifted from solid Democrat to solid Republican, while maintaining its conservative values. In late 19th century, the Democratic Party split into two factions; the more conservative Eastern business faction (led by Grover Cleveland) favored gold, while the South and West (led by William Jennings Bryan) wanted more silver in order to raise prices for their crops. In 1892, Cleveland won the election on a conservative platform, which supported maintaining the gold standard, reducing tariffs, and taking a laissez-faire approach to government intervention. A severe nationwide depression ruined his plans. Many of his supporters in 1896 supported the Gold Democrats when liberal William Jennings Bryan won the nomination and campaigned for bimetalism, money backed by both gold and silver. The conservative wing nominated Alton B. Parker in 1904, but he got very few votes. The major conservative party in the United States today is the Republican Party, also known as the GOP (Grand Old Party). Modern American conservatives often consider individual liberty as the fundamental trait of democracy, as long as it conforms to conservative values, small government, deregulation of the government, economic liberalism, and free trade—which contrasts with modern American liberals, who generally place a greater value on social equality and social justice. Other major priorities within American conservatism include support for the traditional family, law and order, the right to bear arms, Christian values, anti-communism, and a defense of "Western civilization from the challenges of modernist culture and totalitarian governments". Economic conservatives and libertarians favor small government, low taxes, limited regulation, and free enterprise. Some social conservatives see traditional social values threatened by secularism; so, they support school prayer, and oppose abortion and homosexuality. Neoconservatives want to expand American ideals throughout the world, and show a strong support for Israel. Paleoconservatives oppose multiculturalism and press for restrictions on immigration. Most US conservatives prefer Republicans over Democrats, and most factions favor a strong foreign policy and a strong military. The conservative movement of the 1950s attempted to bring together the divergent conservative strands, stressing the need for unity to prevent the spread of "godless communism", which Reagan later labeled an "evil empire". During the Reagan administration, conservatives also supported the so-called Reagan Doctrine, under which the US as part of a Cold War strategy provided military and other support to guerrilla insurgencies that were fighting governments identified as socialist or communist. The Reagan administration also adopted neoliberalism and Reaganomics (pejoratively referred to as trickle-down economics), resulting in the 1980s economic growth and trillion-dollar deficits. Other modern conservative positions include anti-environmentalism. On average, American conservatives desire tougher foreign policies than liberals do. In the United States, libertarian conservatism describes certain political ideologies that combine libertarian economic issues with conservative stances. The agorist philosopher Samuel Edward Konkin III labeled this ideology right-libertarianism, while Frank Meyer coined the term fusionism to describe this ideological hybrid. Some scholars, such as conservative philosopher Russell Kirk, have highlighted the contrasts between the two ideologies: "What else do conservatives and libertarians profess in common? The answer to that question is simple: nothing. Nor will they ever. To talk of forming a league or coalition between these two is like advocating a union of ice and fire." Libertarian activist Jerome Tuccille wrote: "Libertarianism is basically Aristotelian (reason, objectivity, individual self-sufficiency) while conservatism is just fundamentally Platonic (privileged elitism, mysticism, collective order)." The Tea Party movement, founded in 2009, proved a large outlet for populist American conservative ideas. Their stated goals included rigorous adherence to the US constitution, lower taxes, and opposition to a growing role for the federal government in health care. Electorally, it was considered a key force in Republicans reclaiming control of the US House of Representatives in 2010. The Liberal Party of Australia adheres to the principles of social conservatism and liberal conservatism. It is liberal in the sense of economics. Commentators explain: "In America, 'liberal' means left-of-center, and it is a pejorative term when used by conservatives in adversarial political debate. In Australia, of course, the conservatives are in the Liberal Party." The National Right is the most organised and reactionary of the three faction within the party. Other conservative parties are the National Party of Australia (a sister party of the Liberals), Family First Party, Democratic Labor Party, Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party, Australian Conservatives, and the Katter's Australian Party. The largest party in the country is the Australian Labor Party, and its dominant faction is Labor Right, a socially conservative element. Australia undertook significant economic reform under the Labor Party in the mid-1980s. Consequently, issues like protectionism, welfare reform, privatization, and deregulation are no longer debated in the political space as they are in Europe or North America. Political scientist James Jupp writes that "[the] decline in English influences on Australian reformism and radicalism, and appropriation of the symbols of Empire by conservatives continued under the Liberal Party leadership of Sir Robert Menzies, which lasted until 1966". Historic conservatism in New Zealand traces its roots to the unorganised conservative opposition to the New Zealand Liberal Party in the late 19th century. In 1909 this ideological strand found a more organised expression in the Reform Party, a forerunner to the contemporary New Zealand National Party, which absorbed historic conservative elements. The National Party, established in 1936, embodies a spectrum of tendencies, including conservative and liberal. Throughout its history, the party has oscillated between periods of conservative emphasis and liberal reform. Its stated values include "individual freedom and choice" and "limited government". In the 1980s and 1990s both the National Party and its main opposing party, the traditionally left-wing Labour Party, implemented free-market reforms. The New Zealand First party, which split from the National Party in 1993, espouses nationalist and conservative principles. The Big Five Personality Model has applications in the study of political psychology. It has been found by several studies that individuals who score high in Conscientiousness (the quality of working hard and being careful) are more likely to possess a right-wing political identification. Since conscientiousness is positively related to job performance, a 2021 study found that conservative service workers earn higher ratings, evaluations, and tips than social liberal ones. A number of studies have found that disgust is tightly linked to political orientation. People who are highly sensitive to disgusting images are more likely to align with the political right and value traditional ideals of bodily and spiritual purity, tending to oppose, for example, abortion and gay marriage. Research in the field of evolutionary psychology has also found that people who are more disgust sensitive tend to favour their own in-group over out-groups. A proposed reason for this phenomenon is that people begin to associate outsiders with disease while associating health with people similar to themselves. The higher one's disgust sensitivity is, the greater the tendency to make more conservative moral judgments. Disgust sensitivity is associated with moral hypervigilance, which means that people who have higher disgust sensitivity are more likely to think that suspects of a crime are guilty. They also tend to view them as evil, if found guilty, thus endorsing them to harsher punishment in the setting of a court. The right-wing authoritarian personality (RWA) is a personality type that describes somebody who is highly submissive to their authority figures, acts aggressively in the name of said authorities, and is conformist in thought and behaviour. According to psychologist Bob Altemeyer, individuals who are politically conservative tend to rank high in RWA. This finding was echoed by Theodor W. Adorno in The Authoritarian Personality (1950) based on the F-scale personality test. A study done on Israeli and Palestinian students in Israel found that RWA scores of right-wing party supporters were significantly higher than those of left-wing party supporters. However, a 2005 study by H. Michael Crowson and colleagues suggested a moderate gap between RWA and other conservative positions, stating that their "results indicated that conservatism is not synonymous with RWA". According to political scientist Karen Stenner, who specializes in authoritarianism, conservatives will embrace diversity and civil liberties to the extent that they are institutionalized traditions in the social order, but they tend to be drawn to authoritarianism when public opinion is fractious and there is a loss of confidence in public institutions. In 1973, British psychologist Glenn Wilson published an influential book providing evidence that a general factor underlying conservative beliefs is "fear of uncertainty". A meta-analysis of research literature by Jost, Glaser, Kruglanski, and Sulloway in 2003 found that many factors, such as intolerance of ambiguity and need for cognitive closure, contribute to the degree of one's political conservatism and its manifestations in decision-making. A study by Kathleen Maclay stated that these traits "might be associated with such generally valued characteristics as personal commitment and unwavering loyalty". The research also suggested that while most people are resistant to change, social liberals are more tolerant of it. Social dominance orientation (SDO) is a personality trait measuring an individual's support for social hierarchy and the extent to which they desire their in-group be superior to out-groups. Psychologist Felicia Pratto and her colleagues have found evidence to support the claim that a high SDO is strongly correlated with conservative views and opposition to social engineering to promote equality. Pratto and her colleagues also found that high SDO scores were highly correlated with measures of prejudice.[citation needed] However, David J. Schneider argued for a more complex relationships between the three factors, writing that "correlations between prejudice and political conservatism are reduced virtually to zero when controls for SDO are instituted, suggesting that the conservatism–prejudice link is caused by SDO". Conservative political theorist Kenneth Minogue criticized Pratto's work, saying: It is characteristic of the conservative temperament to value established identities, to praise habit and to respect prejudice, not because it is irrational, but because such things anchor the darting impulses of human beings in solidities of custom which we do not often begin to value until we are already losing them. Radicalism often generates youth movements, while conservatism is a condition found among the mature, who have discovered what it is in life they most value. A 1996 study by Pratto and her colleagues examined the topic of racism. Contrary to what these theorists predicted, correlations between conservatism and racism were strongest among the most educated individuals, and weakest among the least educated. They also found that the correlation between racism and conservatism could be accounted for by their mutual relationship with SDO. In his book Gross National Happiness (2008), Arthur C. Brooks presents the finding that conservatives are roughly twice as happy as social liberals. A 2008 study suggested that conservatives tend to be happier than social liberals because of their tendency to justify the current state of affairs and to remain unbothered by inequalities in society. A 2012 study disputed this, demonstrating that conservatives expressed greater personal agency (e.g., personal control, responsibility), more positive outlook (e.g., optimism, self-worth), and more transcendent moral beliefs (e.g., greater religiosity, greater moral clarity). William Pitt the Younger John Adams Klemens von Metternich Otto von Bismarck Benjamin Disraeli Lord Salisbury Stanley Baldwin Engelbert Dollfuß Ioannis Metaxas Winston Churchill Konrad Adenauer Charles de Gaulle Francisco Franco Margaret Thatcher Ronald Reagan Conservatism in Australia Conservatism in Bangladesh Conservatism in Brazil Conservatism in Canada Conservatism in Colombia Conservatism in Germany Conservatism in Hong Kong Conservatism in India Conservatism in Malaysia Conservatism in New Zealand Conservatism in Pakistan Conservatism in Peru Conservatism in Russia Conservatism in Serbia Conservatism in South Korea Conservatism in Taiwan Conservatism in Turkey Conservatism in the United Kingdom Conservatism in the United States Authoritarian conservatism Black conservatism Corporatist conservatism Cultural conservatism Feminist conservatism Fiscal conservatism Green conservatism LGBT conservatism Liberal conservatism Libertarian conservatism Moderate conservatism National conservatism Neoconservatism Paternalistic conservatism Pragmatic conservatism Progressive conservatism Populist conservatism Social conservatism Traditionalist conservatism Ultraconservatism Christian democracy Christian right Communitarianism Counter-revolutionary Familialism Historism Reactionary Right realism Small-c conservative Toryism Traditionalist Catholicism Hamilton, Andrew (2019). "Conservatism". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Encyclopædia Britannica: "Conservatism, political doctrine that emphasizes the value of traditional institutions and practices." Heywood 2004, pp. 166–167: "In particular, conservatives have emphasized that society is held together by the maintenance of traditional institutions such as the family and by respect for an established culture, based upon religion, tradition and custom." O'Hara, Kieron (2011). Conservatism. London: Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1-86189-812-8. It is clear that conservatives are influenced not only by their ideology, but also by the political context – no surprise there – but contexts vary and so, therefore, do conservatives. Giubilei 2019, p. 37: "Conservatives aim to conserve the natural and fundamental elements of society, which are: private property, family, the homeland, and even religion […] the right-wing conservative is such not because he wants to conserve any regime and any institutions, but rather specific institutions and particular values." Encyclopædia Britannica. Fawcett 2020, pp. 3–18. Muller 1997, p. 26. Heywood 2012, p. 66. Vincent, Andrew (2009). Modern Political Ideologies. John Wiley & Sons. p. 79. ISBN 978-1-4443-1105-1. Heywood 2017, p. 74: "While contemporary conservatives are keen to demonstrate their commitment to democratic, particularly liberal-democratic, principles, there is a tradition within conservatism that has favoured authoritarian rule, especially in continental Europe." Micklethwait, John; Wooldridge, Adrian (2004). The Right Nation: Conservative Power in America. ISBN 1594200203. Americans who describe themselves as 'conservatives' nevertheless disagree on almost all the most fundamental questions of life. […] The Straussians at the Weekly Standard are philosophical elitists who believe that the masses need to be steered by an educated intelligentsia. The antitax crusaders who march behind Grover Norquist are populists who believe that pointy-headed intellectuals need to be given a good ducking Heywood 2017, p. 63: "The Canadian Conservative Party adopted the title Progressive Conservative precisely to distance itself from reactionary ideas." Fawcett 2020, p. 59: "Conservatives can be radical or moderate. It depends on the state of the contest, on the stakes in the contest, and on which party is attacking, which defending." Winthrop, Norman (1983). Liberal Democratic Theory and Its Critics. Croom Helm Ltd. pp. 163–166. ISBN 978-0-7099-2766-2. Hogg Baron Hailsham of St. Marylebone, Quintin (1959). The Conservative Case. Penguin Books. Encyclopedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/topic/conservatism/Intellectual-roots-of-conservatism Heywood 2004, p. 346. Heywood 2017, p. 66. Robin, Corey (January 8, 2012). "The Conservative Reaction". The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved December 23, 2016. Finseraas, Henning (2010). "What if Robin Hood is a social conservative? : How the political response to increasing inequality depends on party polarization". Socio-Economic Review. 8 (2): 283–306. doi:10.1093/ser/mwp012. Farrell, Henry (February 1, 2018). "Trump is a typical conservative". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 29, 2023. Hazony, Yoram (2022). Conservatism: A Rediscovery. Swift Press. pp. 125–133. ISBN 9781800752344. Gómez Dávila, Nicolás (2004) [1977]. "Escolios a un Texto Implicito". "hierarchy". Online Etymology Dictionary. Heywood 2017, p. 67. Fawcett 2020, p. 48. Giubilei 2019, pp. 18–19. Ashford, Nigel; Davies, Stephen, eds. (2011). A Dictionary of Conservative and Libertarian Thought. Routledge. pp. 14–17. ISBN 978-0-415-67046-3. Kruger, Danny (2007). On Fraternity : Politics Beyond Liberty & Equality. Institute for the Study of Civil Society. p. 13. ISBN 9781903386576. Weber, Max (1922). Economy and Society. p. 215. Reinhard, Bendix (1977). Max Weber: An Intellectual Portrait. University of California Press. p. 295. ISBN 978-0-520-03194-4. Kojève 2020, pp. 14–28. Nisbet, Robert A. (1993) [1966]. The Sociological Tradition. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-56000-667-1. Kojève 2020, p. xvii. Arendt, Hannah (1954). Between Past and Future: Six Exercises in Political Thought. Viking Press. pp. 91–92. Kojève 2020, pp. xviii–xix. Bullock, Alan; Trombley, Stephen; Lawrie, Alf (1999). The New Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought (3 ed.). HarperCollins Publishers. p. 729. ISBN 978-0-00-255871-6. "reactionary". Merriam-Webster. May 9, 2023. McLean & McMillan 2009. Robin, Corey (2018). The Reactionary Mind: Conservatism from Edmund Burke to Donald Trump. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0190692001. This book is about the second half of the story, the demarche, and the political ideas –– variously called conservative, reactionary, revanchist, counterrevolutionary –– that grow out of and give rise to it. Lilla, Mark (2016). "Introduction". The Shipwrecked Mind: On Political Reaction. New York Review Books. pp. xii. ISBN 978-1590179024. Reactionaries are not conservatives. This is the first thing to be understood about them. They are, in their way, just as radical as revolutionaries and just as firmly in the grip of historical imaginings. Wilson, Francis (1951). The Case for Conservatism. Transaction Publishers. p. 2. ISBN 978-1412842341. Siegfried, Heit; Johnston, Otto W. (1980). "German Romanticism: An Ideological Response to Napoleon". Consortium on Revolutionary Europe 1750–1850: Proceedings. Vol. 9. pp. 187–197. King, Peter (2012). Reaction: Against the Modern World. Andrews UK Limited. Ferraresi, Franco (1987). "Julius Evola: Tradition, Reaction, and the Radical Right". European Journal of Sociology. 28 (1): 107–151. doi:10.1017/S0003975600005415. Campbell, Francis Stuart. "Credo of a Reactionary". The American Mercury. Lukacs, John (2000). Confessions of an Original Sinner. St. Augustine's Press. ISBN 9781890318123. Eccleshall 1990, pp. ix, 21 Wolin, Sheldon S. (September 2, 2013). "Hume and Conservatism". American Political Science Review. 48 (4): 999–1016. doi:10.2307/1951007. Heywood, Andrew (2003). Political Ideologies: An Introduction (3 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. p. 74. ISBN 978-0-333-96178-0. Lock, F. P. (2006). Edmund Burke. Volume II: 1784–1797. Clarendon Press. p. 585. Stanlis, Peter J. (2009). Edmund Burke: Selected Writings and Speeches. Transaction Publishers. p. 18. Auerbach 1959, p. 33. Kopalyan, Nerses (2010). In Defense of Edmund Burke's Aristocratic Order. Lambert Academic Publishing. ISBN 9783843375436. Auerbach 1959, pp. 37–40. Auerbach 1959, pp. 52–54. Auerbach 1959, p. 41. Adams, Ian (2002). Political Ideology Today (2 ed.). Manchester University Press. p. 46. Fawcett 2020, p. 20. Fawcett 2020, pp. 25–30. Fawcett 2020, pp. 5–7. Grigsby, Ellen (2008). Analyzing Politics. Cengage Learning. pp. 108–109, 112, 347. ISBN 978-0-495-50112-1. McAnulla, Stuart (2006). British Politics: A Critical Introduction. A&C Black. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-8264-6155-1. Giubilei 2019, p. 21. Nisbet, Robert (2017). Conservatism: Dream and Reality. Routledge. pp. 28–31. ISBN 9781351526487. Ribuffo, Leo P. (January 14, 2011). "Twenty Suggestions for Studying the Right Now that Studying the Right Is Trendy". Historically Speaking. 12 (1): 6. doi:10.1353/hsp.2011.0013. Freeman, Robert M. (1999). Correctional Organization and Management: Public Policy Challenges, Behavior, and Structure. Elsevier. p. 109. ISBN 978-0-7506-9897-9. Mandal, V.C. (2007). Dictionary of Public Administration. Sarup & Sons. p. 306. ISBN 978-81-7625-784-8. Eliot, T.S. (1984). Notes Towards the Definition of Culture. Faber & Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-26533-6. Freeden, Michael; Sargent, Lyman Tower; Stearstitle, Marc; et al. (2013). Oxford Handbook of Political Ideologies. pp. 465–469. ISBN 0199585970. "Parties and Elections Resources and Information". www.parties-and-elections.de. Traynor, Ian (April 4, 2006). "The EU's weary travellers". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 7, 2006. "In Defense of Nations". National Review. September 13, 2018. Archived from the original on June 22, 2022. Retrieved October 29, 2018. Frohnen 2006, pp. 870–875. Cram, Ralph Adams (1936). "Invitation to Monarchy". Lind, William S. (2006). "The Prussian Monarchy Stuff". LewRockwell.com. Center for Libertarian Studies. Leslie Wayne (January 6, 2018). "What's the Cure for Ailing Nations? More Kings and Queens, Monarchists Say". The New York Times. Seaton, James (1996). Cultural Conservatism, Political Liberalism: From Criticism to Cultural Studies. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-10645-5. Heywood 2017, p. 69. The Next Digital Divide Archived 2011-06-06 at the Wayback Machine (utne article) "The World & I". The World & I. Vol. 1, no. 5. Washington Times Corp. 1986. Retrieved August 19, 2011. militant atheism was incompatible with conservatism Peter Davies; Derek Lynch (2002). The Routledge Companion to Fascism and the Far Right. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-415-21494-0. In addition, conservative Christians often endorsed far-right regimes as the lesser of two evils, especially when confronted with militant atheism in the USSR. Peter L. Berger; Grace Davie; Effie Fokas (2008). Religious America, Secular Europe?: A Theme and Variations. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-6011-8. Retrieved August 19, 2011. If anything the reverse is true: moral conservatives continue to oppose secular liberals on a wide range of issues. Andersen, Margaret L., Taylor, Howard Francis. Sociology: Understanding a Diverse Society Archived December 5, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Cengage Learning, 4th Ed. (2005), pp. 469–470. ISBN 978-0-534-61716-5 "So Christians do not approve of the taking of illegal drugs, including most recreational drugs, especially those which can alter the mind and make people incapable of praying or being alert to God". Archived from the original on October 20, 2017. Petersen, David L. (2005). "Genesis and Family Values". Journal of Biblical Literature. 124 (1). Heywood, Andrew (2013). Politics. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 34. ISBN 978-1-137-27244-7. Heywood 2012, p. 80. Dunleavy, Patrick; et al. (2000). British Political Science: Fifty Years of Political Studies. Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 107–108. Robert Blake (1967). Disraeli (2 ed.). Eyre & Spottiswoode. p. 524. Russel, Trevor (1978). The Tory Party: Its Policies, Divisions and Future. Penguin. p. 167. John Alden Nichols. Germany after Bismarck, the Caprivi era, 1890–1894: Issue 5. Harvard University Press, 1958. p. 260 Jonathan Lurie. William Howard Taft: The Travails of a Progressive Conservative. New York, New York, US: Cambridge University Press, 2012. p.196 Bischof, Günter, ed. (1995). Eisenhower: A Centenary Assessment. LSU Press. p. 98. ISBN 9780807119426. Hugh Segal. The Right Balance. Victoria, British Columbia, Canada: Douglas & McIntyre, 2011. pp. 113–148 Pinto, António; Kallis, A. (2014). Rethinking Fascism and Dictatorship in Europe. Springer. ISBN 978-0-7190-2354-5. Lewis, David. Illusions of Grandeur: Mosley, Fascism, and British Society, 1931-81. Manchester University Press. p. 218. Freeden, Michael; Sargent, Lyman; Stears, Marc (August 15, 2013). The Oxford Handbook of Political Ideologies. OUP Oxford. pp. 294–297. ISBN 978-0-19-958597-7. Michael H. Kater. Never Sang for Hitler: The Life and Times of Lotte Lehmann, 1888–1976. Cambridge University Press, 2008. p. 167 Lojkó, Miklós (2005). Meddling in Middle Europe: Britain and the 'Lands Between, 1919–1925. Central European University Press. p. 180. ISBN 9637326235. Sørensen, Gert; Mallett, Robert (2002). International Fascism,1919-45 (1st ed.). Routledge. p. 159. ISBN 978-0714682624. Howard J. Wiarda, Margaret MacLeish Mott. Catholic Roots and Democratic Flowers: Political Systems in Spain and Portugal. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group, 2001. p. 49 Bischof 2003, p. 26. Stanley G. Payne. Fascism in Spain, 1923–1977. Madison: Wisconsin University Press, 1999. pp. 77–102. Blinkhorn 1990, p. 10. Cyprian Blamires. World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2006. p. 21 Tomasevich, Jozo (2001). War and Revolution in Yugoslavia, 1941–1945: Occupation and Collaboration. Stanford University Press. pp. 33–34. ISBN 978-0-8047-3615-2. Butnaru, Ion C., The Silent Holocaust: Romania and Its Jews (1992), Praeger/Greenwood: Westport, pp. 62–63 Balfour, Michael (1964). The Kaiser and his Times. Houghton Mifflin. p. 409. "The Kaiser on Hitler" (PDF). Ken. December 15, 1938. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Seymour M. Lipset, "Social Stratification and 'Right-Wing Extremism'" British Journal of Sociology 10#4 (1959), pp. 346–382 on-line Archived April 22, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Fawcett 2020, p. 263. Remmer 1989, p. 10. Remmer 1989, pp. 5–6. Rachman, Gideon (2022). The Age of The Strongman. Vintage Publishing. ISBN 9781847926418. Ware 1996, pp. 31–33. "Right wing politics in India, by Archana Venkatesh". osu.edu. October 1, 2019. Retrieved March 14, 2024. Rao, Jaithirth (2019). The Indian Conservative : A History of Indian Right-Wing Thought. Juggernaut Press. p. 280. ISBN 978-9353450625. "BJP v CCP: The rise of the world's biggest political party". Sydney Morning Herald. October 16, 2022. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "How BJP became world's largest political party in 4 decades". The Times of India. April 16, 2022. Archived from the original on June 28, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "Narendra Modi's Message to America". National Review. June 23, 2022. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. His Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP, or "Indian People's Party") is on the right of the Indian political spectrum. It is the largest political party in the world, with more members than the Chinese Communist Party, and supports Hindu nationalist ideology and economic development. Abhilasha Kumari; Sabina Kidwai (1998). Crossing the Sacred Line: Women's Search for Political Power. Orient Blackswan. p. 83. ISBN 978-81-250-1434-8. BJP propounds and extends the ideology of cultural nationalism. Hussin Mutalib (2004). Parties and Politics. A Study of Opposition Parties and the PAP in Singapore. Marshall Cavendish Adademic. p. 20. ISBN 981-210-408-9. Byung-Kook Kim., & Vogel, E. F (2013). The Park Chung Hee Era: The Transformation of South Korea. Harvard University Press. pp. 200–205. ISBN 978-0-674-06106-4. Blinkhorn 1990, p. 7. Gordon Craig, "The System of Alliances and the Balance of Power." in J.P.T. Bury, ed., The New Cambridge Modern History, Vol. 10: The Zenith of European Power, 1830–70 (1960), p. 266. von Kuehnelt-Leddihn 1943, pp. 139–140. Brook-Shepherd, Gordon (1996). The Austrians: A Thousand-Year Odyssey. HarperCollins. p. 283. ISBN 0-00-638255-X. Pyrah, Robert (2007). "Enacting Encyclicals? Cultural Politics and 'Clerical Fascism' in Austria, 1933–1938". Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions. 8 (2): 369–382. doi:10.1080/14690760701321338 – via Taylor & Francis Online. Congdon, Lee (March 26, 2012). "Kuehnelt-Leddihn and American Conservatism". Crisis Magazine. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Binder, Dieter A. (2009). The Christian Corporatist State. Routledge. p. 73. ISBN 9781351315203. Bischof 2003. von Kuehnelt-Leddihn 1943, p. 210. Jelavich, Barbara (1989). Modern Austria: Empire & Republic 1815–1986. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-31625-1. "Sebastian Kurz, der "junge Metternich"". kurier.at (in German). January 16, 2014. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved December 15, 2023. Annesley 2005, p. 124. Zig Layton-Henry, ed. Conservative Politics in Western Europe (St. Martin's Press, 1982) Paul Lucardie and Hans-Martien Ten Napel, "Between confessionalism and liberal conservatism: the Christian Democratic parties of Belgium and the Netherlands Archived June 23, 2020, at the Wayback Machine." in David Hanley, ed. Christian Democracy in Europe: A Comparative Perspective (London: Pinter 1994) pp. 51–70 Philippe Siuberski (October 7, 2014). "Belgium gets new government with Michel as PM". Yahoo News. AFP. Retrieved November 7, 2014. Skov, Christian Egander. "Konservatisme". danmarkshistorien.dk (in Danish). Retrieved July 17, 2023. euconedit (September 17, 2023). "Nordic Conservative Homecoming". europeanconservative.com. Retrieved December 3, 2023. Annesley 2005, p. 68. Kosiara-Pedersen, Karina (July 10, 2023). "Det Konservative Folkeparti". Den Store Danske (in Danish). Retrieved July 17, 2023. Abildlund, Andreas (October 9, 2015). "Den konservative højrefløj er gået i udbrud". Information (in Danish). Critique – Idédebat og kulturkamp, 2 December 2010: "Konservatismen og kongedømmet" Archived March 19, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Folketinget: "Partiernes historie" Archived March 13, 2020, at the Wayback Machine Berlingske, 8 July 2014: "Kongehuset bringer danskerne sammen" Archived March 18, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Det Konservative Folkeparti: "Vi elsker Kongehuset" Archived March 19, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Siaroff 2000, p. 243. Helsingin Sanomat, 11 October 2004, International poll: Anti-Russian sentiment runs very strong in Finland. Only Kosovo has more negative attitude Jussi M. Hanhimäki (1997). Containing Coexistence: America, Russia, and the "Finnish Solution". Kent State UP. p. 4. ISBN 9780873385589. The Finnish Civil War 1918: History, Memory, Legacy. BRILL. 2014. p. 166. ISBN 978-90-04-28071-7. Levitsky, Steven; Ziblatt, Daniel (2018). How Democracies Die. Crown. ISBN 9781524762933. Woodwards, E. L. (1963). Three Studies In European Conservatism: Metternich, Guizot, The Catholic Church In The Nineteenth Century. Archon Books. ISBN 9780714615295. Fawcett 2020, pp. 20–21. Roger Price (2005). A Concise History of France. Cambridge UP. p. 225. ISBN 978-0-521-84480-2. Judaken, Jonathan (2005). "Action Française". In Richard S. Levy (ed.). Antisemitism: A Historical Encyclopedia of Prejudice and Persecution. ABC-CLIO. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-85109-439-4. Maurice Larkin, Religion, politics and preferment in France since 1890: La Belle Epoque and its legacy (Cambridge University Press, 2002) Stanley Hoffmann, "The Vichy Circle of French Conservatives" in Hoffmann, Decline or Renewal? France since 1930s (1974) pp. 3–25 Viereck, Peter (2005). Conservatism Revisited: The Revolt Against Ideology. Transaction Publishers. p. 205. ISBN 978-0-7658-0576-8. Richard Vinen, "The Parti républicain de la Liberté and the Reconstruction of French Conservatism, 1944–1951", French History (1993) 7#2 pp. 183–204 Ware 1996, p. 32. Hauss, Charles (2008). Comparative Politics: Domestic Responses to Global Challenges. Cengage Learning. p. 116. ISBN 978-0-495-50109-1. "Eric Zemmour: Meet the right-wing TV pundit set to shake up France's presidential race". euronews.com. October 13, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2021. Liedke, Herbert R. (1958). "The German Romanticists and Karl Ludwig von Haller's Doctrines of European Restoration". The Journal of English and Germanic Philology. 57 (3): 371–393. ISSN 0363-6941. Tingsten, Herbert (1966). "De kontrarevolutionära idéerna i Tyskland". De konservativa idéerna. Aldus/Bonniers. pp. 42–73. OCLC 1166587654. Retrieved August 29, 2023. Eyck, Erich (1964). Bismarck and the German Empire. pp. 58–68. Steinberg, Jonathan (2011). Bismarck: A Life. Oxford University Press. pp. 416–417. ISBN 978-0-19-978252-9. Kersbergen, Kees van; Vis, Barbara (2013). Comparative Welfare State Politics: Development, Opportunities, and Reform. Cambridge UP. p. 38. ISBN 978-1-107-65247-7. Moore, Robert Laurence; Vaudagna, Maurizio (2003). The American Century in Europe. Cornell University Press. p. 226. ISBN 978-0-8014-4075-5. Frankel, Richard (2003). "From the Beer Halls to the Halls of Power: The Cult of Bismarck and the Legitimization of a New German Right, 1898–1945". German Studies Review. 26 (3): 543–560. doi:10.2307/1432746. JSTOR 1432746. Stern, Fritz (1961). The Politics of Cultural Despair: A Study in the Rise of the Germanic Ideology. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0520026261. Woods, Roger (1996). The Conservative Revolution in the Weimar Republic. St. Martin's Press. p. 29. ISBN 0-333-65014-X. Ringer, Fritz K. (1990). The Decline of the German Mandarins: The German Academic Community, 1890–1933. University Press of New England. p. 201. Shirer, William L. (1960). The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich. New York City: Simon and Schuster. p. 372. ISBN 0671624202. Sally, Razeen (2002). Classical Liberalism and International Economic Order. Routledge. p. 106. ISBN 0-415-16493-1. Gregg, Samuel (2010). Wilhelm Röpke's Political Economy. Edward Elgar Publishing Limited. p. 29. ISBN 978-1-84844-222-1. "The Maturing of a Humane Economist Modern Age". March 23, 2007. Archived from the original on March 23, 2007. Retrieved July 11, 2021. Michael John Williams (February 12, 2020). "The German Center Does Not Hold". New Atlanticist. Archived from the original on June 20, 2020. Retrieved March 7, 2020. "Germany bewildered about how to halt the rise of the AfD". POLITICO. October 3, 2023. Retrieved March 14, 2024. Penniman, Howard Rae. Greece at the polls: the national elections of 1974 and 1977. Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1981. ISBN 978-0-8447-3434-7 pp. 49–59 "Ανεξάρτητοι Έλληνες – 404 error". anexartitoiellines.gr. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved August 30, 2020. Deák, István (1963). "Hungary". In Roger, Hans (ed.). The European Right: A Historical Profile. p. 364. Grofman, Bernard and Lijpart, Arend, editors. The evolution of electoral and party systems in the Nordic countries. New York: Agathon Press, 2002. "The Icelandic electoral system 1844–1999" by Olafur Th. Hardarson ISBN 978-0-87586-138-8, pp. 107–108 Parlato, Giuseppe (2008). La sinistra fascista: storia di un progetto mancato [Fascist left: history of a failed project.] (in Italian). Il Mulino Ricerca. ISBN 978-8815127051. De Grand, Alexander (2000). Italian Fascism: its Origins and Development (3rd ed.). University of Nebraska Press. p. 145. Sternhill, Zeev (1998). "Fascism". In Griffin, Roger (ed.). International Fascism: Theories, Causes, and the New Consensus. London, England; New York: Arnold Publishers. p. 32. Fella, Stefano; Ruzza, Carlo (2009). Re-inventing the Italian Right: Territorial Politics, Populism and 'Post-Fascism'. Routledge. Bocca, Giorgio (1981). Storia della Repubblica italiana (in Italian). Rizzoli. pp. 14–16. Pepijn Corduwener, The Problem of Democracy in Postwar Europe: Political Actors and the Formation of the Postwar Model of Democracy in France, West Germany and Italy (Taylor & Francis, 2016), pp. 15, 17, 27, 40, 42. Denis Mack Smith, Modern Italy: A Political History (1997), pp. 491––496. Daniele Albertazzi, et al., eds. Resisting the tide: cultures of opposition under Berlusconi (2001–06) (Bloomsbury Publishing USA, 2009). Antonino Castaldo, and Luca Verzichelli. "Technocratic populism in Italy after Berlusconi: The trendsetter and his disciples." Politics and Governance 8.4 (2020): 485–495. Urwin, Derek W. A Dictionary of European History and Politics, 1945–1995. London: Pearson, 1996. ISBN 978-0-582-25874-7 p. 76 "Netherlands: Geert Wilders, the Dutch "Cricket"". March 21, 2013. Archived from the original on January 26, 2022. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Heidar, Knut (2001). Norway: Elites on Trial. Boulder Westview Press. pp. 66–67. ISBN 978-0-8133-3200-0. Francis Sejersted Høyrebølgen Archived December 19, 2013, at the Wayback Machine Store norske leksikon. Retrieved December 18, 2013 (in Norwegian) Sergei Prozorov, "Russian conservatism in the Putin presidency: The dispersion of a hegemonic discourse." Journal of Political Ideologies 10.2 (2005): 121–143 online Archived June 6, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. Tiounine, Margot; Hannen, Tom, eds. (June 27, 2019). "Liberalism 'has outlived its purpose' — President Putin speaks exclusively to the Financial Times". Financial Times. Retrieved October 14, 2023. Marlene Laruelle, "The Izborsky Club, or the new conservative avant‐garde in Russia." The Russian Review 75.4 (2016): 626–644. Sirke Mäkinen, "Surkovian narrative on the future of Russia: making Russia a world leader." Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 27#2 (2011): 143–165. Michel, Casey (February 9, 2017). "How Russia Became the Leader of the Global Christian Right". Politico. Paterson, Tom (November 9, 2021). "Why Putin Goes to Church". The Cambridge Language Collective. Mark Woods, "How the Russian Orthodox Church is backing Vladimir Putin's new world order" Christian Today March 3, 2016 Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Andrew Higgins, "In Expanding Russian Influence, Faith Combines With Firepower", New York Times Sept 13, 2016 Archived November 10, 2019, at the Wayback Machine Rodhe, Edvard (1942). Geijer och samhället : en studie i svensk tradition. p. 131. OCLC 873899895. Retrieved December 17, 2023. Book review of Philosophy of Religion by Christopher Jacob Bostrom, trans. Victor E. Beck and Robert N. Beck. The Philosophical Quarterly, Vol. 14, No. 57. (October 1964), p. 381. Söderbaum, Jakob E:son (2020). Modern konservatism. Borås: Recito. p. 289. ISBN 978-91-7765-497-1. Abrahamsson, Christian (December 18, 2023). "Den organiska statsteorin". Radikalkonservatismens rötter – Rudolf Kjellén och 1914 års idéer. Timbro. pp. 43–56. ISBN 978-91-7703-243-4. OCLC 1241263181. Retrieved December 17, 2023. Isaksson, Anders (1985). Per Albin. Stockholm: Wahlström & Widstrand. p. 184. ISBN 978-91-46-15026-8. Söderbaum, Jakob E:son (October 4, 2022). "KD är det mest konservativa partiet". strengnastidning.se. Retrieved December 17, 2023. Uvell, Markus (2018). Bakslaget: radikalt etablissemang, konservativa medborgare. Stockholm: Timbro förlag. ISBN 978-91-7703-129-1. Cornucopia (June 21, 2018). "Yougov: SD största parti med 28.5% av väljarstödet". Retrieved December 23, 2023. Majlard, Jan (November 15, 2019). "SD största parti i ny mätning". Svenska Dagbladet (in Swedish). ISSN 1101-2412. Retrieved December 23, 2023. SVT Nyheter (March 21, 2019). "KD-ledaren öppnar för SD-samarbete". SVT Nyheter (in Swedish). Retrieved December 17, 2023. SVT Nyheter (October 14, 2022). "L, KD och M ska ingå i regeringen – SD får stort inflytande". SVT Nyheter (in Swedish). Retrieved December 17, 2023. Oscarsson, Tea (October 14, 2022). "'Tidöavtalet' – här är viktigaste punkterna". Svenska Dagbladet (in Swedish). ISSN 1101-2412. Retrieved December 17, 2023. Ziebertz, Hans-Georg (2011). How Teachers in Europe Teach Religion: An International Empirical Study: An International Empirical Study in 16 Countries. Lit Verlag. p. 237. ISBN 978-3-643-10043-6. Juravich, Tom (2000). Ravenswood: The Steelworkers' Victory and the Revival of American Labor. Cornell University Press. p. 133. ISBN 978-0-8014-8666-1. Schwok, René (2009). Switzerland – European Union: An Impossible Membership?. Peter Lang. p. 143. ISBN 978-90-5201-576-7. Siaroff 2000, p. 446. The Stephen Roth Institute. Anti-semitism worldwide Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2002 ISBN 0-8032-5943-3 p. 120 Hainsworth, Paul (2008). The Extreme Right in Western Europe. Routledge. pp. 44 and 74. ISBN 978-0-415-39682-0. "Conservatism". encyclopediaofukraine.com. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Sack, J. J. (1987). "The Memory of Burke and the Memory of Pitt: English Conservatism Confronts Its Past, 1806–1829". The Historical Journal. 30 (3): 623–640. doi:10.1017/S0018246X00020914. Gregory Claeys, "Political Thought", in Chris Williams, ed., A Companion to 19th-Century Britain (2006). p. 195 Charles Richmond; Paul Smith (1998). The Self-Fashioning of Disraeli, 1818–1851. Cambridge UP. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-521-49729-9. Auerbach 1959, pp. 39–40. Eccleshall 1990, p. 83 Eccleshall 1990, p. 90 Eccleshall 1990, p. 121 Eccleshall 1990, pp. 6–7 Stuart Ball, "Baldwin, Stanley, first Earl Baldwin of Bewdley (1867–1947)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography 2004. Ross McKibbin, Parties and people: England, 1914–1951 (Oxford, 2010). Garside, W.R.; Greaves, J.I. (1997). "Rationalisation and Britain's industrial Malaise: The interwar years revisited Archived February 25, 2021, at the Wayback Machine". Journal of European Economic History. 26 (1): 37–68. McLean & McMillan 2009, p. 364. Remmer 1989. Middlebrook, Kevin J. Conservative parties, the right, and democracy in Latin America. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000 ISBN 978-0-8018-6386-8 pp. 1–52. Fierlbeck, Katherine. Political thought in Canada: an intellectual history. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2006. ISBN 978-1-55111-711-9 pp. 87–88 Freyre, Gilberto (1943). "Em Torno Do Problema De Uma Cultura Brasileira". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research. 4 (2): 167–171. doi:10.2307/2103064. JSTOR 2103064. Gonzalez, Eduardo (December 6, 2011). "Brazil Shatters Its Wall of Silence on the Past". International Center for Transitional Justice. Retrieved March 18, 2012. Boulos, Guilherme. "Onda Conservadora". Folha de S. Paulo. Retrieved January 4, 2024. "Lula lidera, e Bolsonaro se consolida em 2º, aponta Datafolha". Poder. December 2, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017. Oppenheim, Lois Hecht (2007). Politics in Chile: Socialism, Authoritarianism, and Market Democracy. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-4227-6 Guy-Meakin, Amelia (September 17, 2012). "Augusto Pinochet and the Support of Chilean Right-Wing Women". E-International Relations. Valdes, Juan Gabriel (August 17, 1995). Pinochet's Economists: The Chicago School of Economics in Chile. Cambridge University Press. p. 81. ISBN 978-0-521-45146-8. Osterling, Jorge P. (1989). Democracy in Colombia: Clientelist Politics and Guerrilla Warfare. Transaction Publishers. p. 180. ISBN 978-0-88738-229-1. Grant, George (2005) [1965]. Lament for a Nation: The Defeat of Canadian Nationalism. McGill-Queen's Press. ISBN 9780773530102. Kornberg, Allan and Mishler, William. Influence in Parliament, Canada. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1976. p. 38 Schultze, Rainer-Olaf; Sturm, Roland and Eberle, Dagmar. Conservative parties and right-wing politics in North America: reaping the benefits of an ideological victory?. Germany: VS Verlag, 2003. ISBN 978-3-8100-3812-8 p. 15 Panizza, Francisco. Populism and the mirror of democracy. London: Verso, 2005. ISBN 978-1-85984-489-2 p. 180 Conway, John Frederick. Debts to pay: the future of federalism in Quebec. Toronto: James Lorimer & Company, 2004. ISBN 978-1-55028-814-8 pp. 57, 77 Hazony, Yoram (June 15, 2018). "Jordan Peterson and Conservatism's Rebirth". Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Kirk, Russell (2001). The Conservative Mind. Regnery Publishing. pp. 6, 63. ISBN 978-0-89526-171-7. "Reconstruction: Radicalism versus Conservatism". www.andrewjohnson.com. Michael Kazin, What It Took to Win: A History of the Democratic Party (2022) p xii. Lyman, Brian. "Fact check: Yes, historians do teach that first Black members of Congress were Republicans". USA TODAY. Retrieved May 1, 2022. Haught, By James A. (September 15, 2016). "How Democrats and Republicans switched beliefs [Opinion]". Houston Chronicle. See David T. Beito and Linda Royster Beito. "Gold Democrats and the Decline of Classical Liberalism, 1896–1900" Archived March 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. John M. Pafford, The Forgotten Conservative: Rediscovering Grover Cleveland (Simon and Schuster, 2013). (Schneider 2009, pp. 4–9, 136): "The label (conservatism) is in frequent use and has come to stand for a skepticism, at times an outright hostility, toward government social policies; a muscular foreign policy combined with a patriotic nationalism; a defense of traditional Christian religious values; and support for the free market economic system." Sherwood Thompson, Encyclopedia of Diversity and Social Justice p. 7: "Historically...social justice became associated with liberalism in which equality is the ideal.", Rowman & Littlefield, 2014, ISBN 978-1-4422-1604-4. Schneider 2009, p. xii. Cal Jillson (February 22, 2011). Texas Politics: Governing the Lone Star State. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-203-82941-7. Retrieved January 19, 2012. Social conservatives focus on moral or values issues, such as abortion, marriage, school prayer, and judicial appointments. Frohnen 2006, pp. ix–xiv. Michael Foley (2007). American credo: the place of ideas in US politics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-152833-0. Retrieved January 18, 2012. Against accusations of being pre-modern or even anti-modern in outlook, paleoconservatives press for restrictions on immigration, a rollback of multicultural programmes, the decentralization of the federal polity, the restoration of controls upon free trade, a greater emphasis upon economic nationalism and isolationism in the conduct of American foreign policy, and a generally revanchist outlook upon a social order in need of recovering old lines of distinction and in particular the assignment of roles in accordance with traditional categories of gender, ethnicity, and race. Gottfried, Paul E. (2007). Conservatism in America: Making Sense of the American Right. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 9. ISBN 9781403974327. Post-war conservatives set about creating their own synthesis of free-market capitalism, Christian morality, and the global struggle against Communism Gottfried, Paul Edward (January 1, 1995). Theologies and Moral Concern. Transaction Publishers. p. 12. Jacques, Peter J.; Dunlap, Riley E.; Freeman, Mark (May 20, 2008). "The organisation of denial: Conservative think tanks and environmental scepticism". Environmental Politics. 17 (3): 349–385. doi:10.1080/09644010802055576. Gries, Peter Hayes (2014). The Politics of American Foreign Policy: How Ideology Divides Liberals and Conservatives over Foreign Affairs. Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804790925. "Interview With Samuel Edward Konkin III". www.spaz.org. Dionne, Jr., E.J. (1991). Why Americans Hate Politics. Simon & Schuster. p. 161. Kirk, Russell (1981). "Libertarians: Chirping Sectaries". Modern Age. 25 (4): 345–51. Tuccille, Jerome (1971). Radical Libertarianism: A Right Wing Alternative. Bobbs-Merrill. p. 6. ISBN 0672512327. Williamson, Vanessa; Skocpol, Theda (2012). The Tea Party and the Remaking of Republican Conservatism. Oxford University Press. pp. 45–82. ISBN 9780199832637. "Katie Couric Interviews Tea Party Leaders". CBS News. January 25, 2010. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2012. Dennis Raphael (2012). Tackling Health Inequalities: Lessons from International Experiences. Canadian Scholars' Press. p. 66. ISBN 978-1-55130-412-0. David Mosler; Robert Catley (1998). America and Americans in Australia. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 83. ISBN 978-0-275-96252-4. Massola, James (March 21, 2021). "Who's who in the Liberals' left, right and centre factions?". The Sydney Morning Herald. James Jupp (2004). The English in Australia. Cambridge University Press. p. 172. ISBN 978-0-521-54295-1. James, Colin (June 20, 2012). "National Party – Formation and rise". Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Retrieved December 9, 2023. James, Colin (June 20, 2012). "National Party – Party principles". Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Boston, Jonathan; Eichbaum, Chris (July 2014). "New Zealand's Neoliberal Reforms: Half a Revolution". Governance. 27 (3): 373–376. doi:10.1111/gove.12092. David Hall (2021). "Rhetoric and reality in New Zeland's climate leadership". In Rüdiger K.W. Wurzel; Mikael Skou Andersen; Paul Tobin (eds.). Climate Governance across the Globe: Pioneers, Leaders and Followers. Routledge. p. 81. ISBN 978-1-000-320381. Gerber AS, et al. (2010). "Personality and Political Attitudes: Relationships across Issue Domains and Political Contexts". The American Political Science Review. 104: 111–133. doi:10.1017/S0003055410000031. Sweetser KD (2014). "Partisan Personality: The Psychological Differences Between Democrats and Republicans, and Independents Somewhere in Between". American Behavioral Scientist. 58 (9): 1183–94. doi:10.1177/0002764213506215. Fatke M (2017). "Personality Traits and Political Ideology: A First Global Assessment". Political Psychology. 38 (5): 881–99. doi:10.1111/pops.12347. Brown, T. J., Mowen, J. C., Donavan, D. T., & Licata, J. W. (2002). The customer orientation of service workers: Personality trait effects on self-and supervisor performance ratings. Journal ofMarketing Research, 39, 110–119. Neal, A., Yeo, G., Koy, A., & Xiao, T. (2012). Predicting the form and direction of work role performance from the Big 5 model of personality traits. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 33, 175–192. Davidson, A., & Theriault, D. A. (2021). How Consumer Experience Is Shaped by the Political Orientation of Service Providers. Journal of Consumer Psychology. Inbar, Yoel, et al. (2012). "Disgust sensitivity, political conservatism, and voting". Social Psychological and Personality Science. 3 (5): 537–544. doi:10.1177/1948550611429024. Ahn, Woo-Young, et al. (November 2014). "Nonpolitical Images Evoke Neural Predictors of Political Ideology". Current Biology. 24 (22): 2693–2699. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2014.09.050. PMC 4245707. Dan Jones. "Left or right-wing? Brain's disgust response tells all". New Scientist. Retrieved July 18, 2023. Y. Inbar; et al. (2008). "Conservatives are more easily disgusted than liberals" (PDF). Cognition and Emotion. 23 (4): 714–725. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.372.3053. doi:10.1080/02699930802110007. Navarrete, Carlos David; Fessler, Daniel M.T. (2006). "Disease avoidance and ethnocentrism: The effects of disease vulnerability and disgust sensitivity on intergroup attitudes". Evolution and Human Behavior. 27 (4): 270–282. doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2005.12.001. David, B.; Olatunji, B.O. (2011). "The effect of disgust conditioning and disgust sensitivity on appraisals of moral transgressions". Personality and Individual Differences. 50 (7): 1142–1146. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2011.02.004. "Right-wing authoritarianism (RWA)". dictionary.apa.org. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association. 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Altemeyer, Bob (1981). Right-Wing Authoritarianism. University of Manitoba Press. ISBN 978-0-88755-124-6. Rubinstein, G. (1996). "Two Peoples in One Land: A Validation Study of Altemeyer's Right-Wing Authoritarianism Scale in the Palestinian and Jewish Societies in Israel". Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology. 27 (2): 216–230. doi:10.1177/0022022196272005. Crowson, H. Michael; Thoma, Stephen J.; Hestevold, Nita (August 7, 2010). "Is Political Conservatism Synonymous With Authoritarianism?". The Journal of Social Psychology. 145 (5): 571–592. doi:10.3200/SOCP.145.5.571-592. Stenner, Karen (2009). "Three Kinds of "Conservatism" (PDF). Psychological Inquiry. 20 (2–3): 142–159. doi:10.1080/10478400903028615. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 12, 2013. Retrieved June 2, 2012. Wilson, Glenn D. (2013). The Psychology of Conservatism. Routledge. ISBN 9781135094454. Jost, John T.; Glaser, Jack; Kruglanski, Arie W.; Sulloway, Frank J. (2003). "Political conservatism as motivated social cognition". Psychological Bulletin. 129 (3): 339–375. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.129.3.339. Chan, EY; Ilicic, J (2019). "Political ideology and brand attachment". International Journal of Research in Marketing. 36 (4): TBD. doi:10.1016/j.ijresmar.2019.04.001. "Researchers help define what makes a political conservative". 2003. Pratto, Felicia; Sidanius, Jim; Stallworth, Lisa M.; Malle, Bertram F. (1994). "Social dominance orientation: A personality variable predicting social and political attitudes". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 67 (4): 741–763. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.67.4.741. Schneider, David J. (April 7, 2005). The Psychology of Stereotyping. Guilfold Press. p. 275. Kuper, Adam (May 13, 2013). The Social Science Encyclopedia (2nd ed.). Routledge. pp. 155–156. Sidanius, J; Pratto, F; Bobo, L (1996). "Racism, conservatism, affirmative action, and intellectual sophistication: A matter of principled conservatism or group dominance?" (PDF). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 70 (3): 476–490. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.474.1114. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.70.3.476. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 17, 2015. Brooks, Arthur C. (2008). Gross National Happiness: Why Happiness Matters for America—and How We Can Get More of It. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-1-5113-9186-3. Napier, J.L.; Jost, J.T. (2008). "Why Are Conservatives Happier Than Liberals?". Psychological Science. 19 (6): 565–572. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02124.x. Schlenker, Barry; Chambers, John; Le, Bonnie (April 2012). "Conservatives are happier than liberals, but why? Political ideology, personality and life satisfaction". Journal of Research in Personality. 46 (2): 127–146. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2011.12.009. Retrieved July 31, 2021. Annesley, Claire (2005). A Political and Economic Dictionary of Western Europe. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-85743-214-5. Auerbach, M. Morton (1959). The Conservative Illusion. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-598-37476-9. Bischof, Günter J., ed. (2003). The Dollfuss/Schuschnigg Era in Austria: A Reassessment. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 9781412821896. Blinkhorn, Martin (1990). Fascists and Conservatives: The Radical Right and the Establishment in Twentieth-Century Europe. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-04-940087-0. Eccleshall, Robert (1990). English Conservatism since the Restoration: An Introduction and Anthology. Unwin Hyman. ISBN 978-0-04-445346-8. "Conservatism". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved May 1, 2022. Fawcett, Edmund (2020). Conservatism: The Fight for a Tradition. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-17410-5. Frohnen, Bruce; et al. (2006). American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia. ISI Books. ISBN 978-1-932236-43-9. Giubilei, Francesco (2019). The History of European Conservative Thought. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781621579090. Heywood, Andrew (2004). Political Theory: An Introduction (3 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 9780333961803. Heywood, Andrew (2012). Political Ideologies: An Introduction. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-36994-8. Heywood, Andrew (2017). Political Ideologies: An Introduction. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-60604-4. Kojève, Alexandre (2020) [1942]. The Notion of Authority: A Brief Presentation. Verso Books. ISBN 9781788739610. von Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik (1943). The Menace of the Herd; or, Procrustes at Large. Ludwig von Mises Institute. OCLC 733805752. McLean, Iain; McMillan, Alistair (2009). Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199207800. Muller, Jerry Z. (1997). Conservatism: An Anthology of Social and Political Thought from David Hume to the Present. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691037110. Remmer, Karen L. (1989). Military Rule in Latin America. Westview. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-8133-8450-4. Schneider, Gregory (2009). The Conservative Century: From Reaction to Revolution. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 9780742542846. Siaroff, Alan (2000). Comparative European Party Systems. Garland. ISBN 0-8153-2930-X. Ware, Alan (1996). Political Parties and Party Systems. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-878076-2. General Green, E.H.H. (2002). Ideologies of Conservatism: Conservative Political Ideas in the Twentieth Century. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191069031. Hazony, Yoram (2022). Conservatism: A Rediscovery. Forum. ISBN 9781800752344. Kirk, Russell (2001). The Conservative Mind: From Burke to Eliot (7 ed.). Regnery Publishing. ISBN 9780895261717. Kirk, Russell (2019). Russell Kirk's Concise Guide to Conservatism. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781621578789. Nisbet, Robert (2002). Conservatism: Dream and Reality. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 9780765808622. Scruton, Roger (2002). The Meaning of Conservatism (3 ed.). St. Augustine's Press. ISBN 9781890318406. Viereck, Peter (1949). Conservatism Revisited: The Revolt Against Ideology. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 9781412820233. Witonski, Peter, ed. (1971). The Wisdom of Conservatism (4 ed.). Arlington House. ISBN 9780870001185. [2396 pages; worldwide sources] Conservatism and fascism Crowson, N. J. (1997). Facing Fascism: The Conservative Party and the European Dictators, 1935–1940. Psychology Press. ISBN 9780415153157. Evola, Julius (2013). Fascism Viewed from the Right. Arktos. ISBN 9781907166921. Conservatism and liberalism Carey, George (2008). "Conservatism". In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publishing; Cato Institute. pp. 93–95. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. Dyson, K. (2021). Conservative Liberalism, Ordo-Liberalism, and the State: Disciplining Democracy and the Market. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198854289. Schlueter, N.; Wenzel, N. (2016). Selfish Libertarians and Socialist Conservatives?: The Foundations of the Libertarian-Conservative Debate. Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804792912. Conservatism and women Bacchetta, Paola; Power, Margaret (2002). Right-Wing Women: From Conservatives to Extremists Around the World. Psychology Press. ISBN 9780415927772. Blee, Kathleen M.; McGee Deutsch, Sandra, eds. (2012). Women of the Right: Comparisons and Interplay Across Borders. Penn State University Press. ISBN 9780271052151. Critchlow, Donald T. (2008). Phyllis Schlafly and Grassroots Conservatism: A Woman's Crusade. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691136240. Nickerson, M.M. (2014). Mothers of Conservatism: Women and the Postwar Right. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691163918. Conservatism in Germany Epstein, K. (2015). The Genesis of German Conservatism. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9781400868230. von Klemperer, K. (2015). Germany's New Conservatism: Its History and Dilemma in the Twentieth Century. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9781400876372. Lebovics, H. (1969). Social Conservatism and the Middle Class in Germany, 1914–1933. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9781400879038. Mohler, Armin (2018) [1949]. The Conservative Revolution in Germany, 1918–1932. Washington Summit Publishers. ISBN 9781593680596. Conservatism in Latin America Luna, J.P.; Kaltwasser, C.R. (2014). The Resilience of the Latin American Right. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 9781421413914. Middlebrook, Kevin J. (2000). Conservative Parties, the Right, and Democracy in Latin America. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 9780801863851. Conservatism in Russia Laqueur, Walter (2015). Putinism: Russia and Its Future with the West. Macmillan. ISBN 9781466871069. Pipes, Richard (2007). Russian Conservatism and Its Critics: A Study in Political Culture. Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300122695. Robinson, Paul (2019). Russian Conservatism. Cornell University Press. ISBN 9781501747342. Conservatism in the United Kingdom Jones, Emily (2017). Edmund Burke and the Invention of Modern Conservatism, 1830–1914. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198799429. Gilmartin, Kevin (2010). Writing against Revolution: Literary Conservatism in Britain, 1790–1832. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521142199. Nugent, Neill (1977). The British Right: Conservative and Right Wing Politics in Britain. Saxon House. ISBN 9780566001567. Soffer, R. (2008). History, Historians, and Conservatism in Britain and America: From the Great War to Thatcher and Reagan. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191548956. Conservatism in the United States Allitt, Patrick N. (2009). The Conservatives: Ideas and Personalities Throughout American History. Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300155297. Continetti, Matthew (2022). The Right: The Hundred-Year War for American Conservatism. Basic Books. ISBN 9781541600508. Goldwater, Barry (2007) [1960]. The Conscience of a Conservative. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691131177. Nash, George H. (2006) [1976]. The Conservative Intellectual Movement in America Since 1945. Regnery Publishing. ISBN 9781933859125. Nelson, Jeffrey O.; et al. (2014). American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia. Open Road Media. ISBN 9781497651579. Schneider, Gregory L., ed. (2003). Conservatism in America Since 1930: A Reader. NYU Press. ISBN 9780814797990. Schulman, B.J. (2008). Rightward Bound: Making America Conservative in the 1970s. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674267138. Will, George (2019). The Conservative Sensibility. Hachette Books. ISBN 9780316480932. Psychology Haidt, Jonathan (2012). The Righteous Mind: Why Good People are Divided By Politics and Religion. New York: Pantheon Books. ISBN 9780307377906. Hibbing, John R.; Smith, Kevin B.; Alford, John R. (2013). Predisposed: Liberals, Conservatives, and the Biology of Political Differences. Routledge. ISBN 1136281215. Lakoff, George (2008). The Political Mind : A Cognitive Scientist's Guide to your Brain and its Politics. Penguin. ISBN 1440637830. Lakoff, George (2016). Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226411323. Wailoo, Keith (2014). Pain: A Political History. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 9781421413662. Other Corrêa de Oliveira, Plinio (2003) [1960]. Revolution and Counter-revolution. The American TFP. ISBN 9781877905179. Hibbard, S.W. (2010). Religious Politics and Secular States: Egypt, India, and the United States. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 9780801899201. Thayer, N.B. (2015). How the Conservatives Rule Japan. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9781400871414. de Tocqueville, Alexis (2011) [1856]. The Ancien Régime and the French Revolution. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781139498814. Woodwards, E. L. (1963). Three Studies In European Conservatism: Metternich, Guizot, The Catholic Church In The Nineteenth Century. Archon Books. ISBN 9780714615295. Wikiquote has quotations related to Conservatism. Conservatism an article by Encyclopædia Britannica. Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). "Conservatism". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Conservatism at Curlie Portals:  Conservatism  Current events  Politics