The X Factor is a television music competition franchise created by British producer Simon Cowell and his company Syco Entertainment. It originated in the United Kingdom, where it was devised as a replacement for Pop Idol (2001–2003), and has been adapted in various countries. The "X Factor" of the title refers to the undefinable "something" that makes for star quality. Similar to Got Talent, the franchise maintains a YouTube channel, called X Factor Global. The channel uploads clips of X Factor shows from around the world. The channel currently has over 3 million subscribers. Additionally, many individual X Factor shows have their own YouTube channels such as X Factor Latvia. The prize is usually a recording contract, in addition to the publicity that appearance in the later stages of the show itself generates, not only for the winner but also for other highly ranked contestants. Unlike Idols, where the judges only critique the contestants' performances, on The X Factor each judge "mentors" the finalists in a particular category, aiding them with song selection and styling, while also participating together in judging the contestants in the other categories. Not only Idols, but also new singing shows such as The Voice, The Four and All Together Now have become rivals and popular in recent years. There have been a total of 241 winners of The X Factor worldwide.   Franchise that is currently airing   Franchise that is not currently airing, but is slated to return in the future   Franchise that has ended   Franchise that was cancelled during production   Franchise whose status is unknown Notes ^ As a one-off judge replacing Prūsaitis ^ Also shown in Republic of Ireland and in series 3, 4, 7 and 13 auditions were held in Dublin, and viewers in Ireland were allowed to vote. The UK version of The X Factor is also shown in Malta on channel TVM. Popstars Idols (franchise) Star Academy Got Talent The Voice (franchise) List of reality television show franchises List of television show franchises X Factor Belarus was planned to start in 2020 with a final on 31 December 2020. After completed pre-auditions in Hrodna, Mahilyow and Homiel, the production team behind X Factor Belarus had to cancel the auditions in Vitebsk in early April because of local COVID-19 pandemic regulations. On 4 April, the production team cancelled all further auditions and later announced there would be no more auditions until late May. In July 2020, the Instagram account of X Factor Belarus asked auditionees for patience. Since then, any update on the future of the show lacks. X Factor Belarus was planned to start in 2020 with a final on 31 December 2020. After failing to produce the show in 2020, the official X Factor Belarus Instagram account announced the show would return for a new audition round in March 2021. The proposed date for the final was again set for New Year's Eve. Described as "something you can't quite put your finger on" by Cheryl Cole, a judge on the UK version of The X Factor, The Xtra Factor, 23 November 2009 "X Factor Belarus to go on air in autumn". Belta.by. Belta Press Agency. 27 January 2020. Retrieved 15 January 2021. "X-Factor". TVR.by. Retrieved 15 January 2021. Из-за коронавируса белорусский "Х-Фактор" временно приостановил прослушивания. TUT.by. Archived from the original on 8 April 2020. Retrieved 15 January 2021. "Наберитесь терпения🙈 Мы тоже очень скучаем и ждём встречи с вами! Готовьтесь, репетируйте и оттачивайте своё вокальное мастерство! Как только будет известен новый график предкастингов, мы сразу опубликуем и расскажем❤️" (in Russian). X Factor Belarus. 6 July 2020. Archived from the original on 26 December 2021 – via Instagram. "X-Factor". TVR.by. Retrieved 15 January 2021. "The X Factor Malta minn Ottubru" (in Maltese). TVM. 20 June 2018. "Factor X". Cuatro. Archived from the original on 6 December 2009. "Telecinco recupera por sorpresa 'Factor X' 6 años después de su última edición". FormulaTV (in Spanish). 23 January 2024. Retrieved 24 January 2024. Kanal D cancelled the series during one of the live episodes in July 2014 due to poor ratings.