Jakob Diemer Fuglsang (born 22 March 1985) is a Danish professional road racing cyclist, who rides for UCI ProTeam Israel–Premier Tech. Before turning professional for Team Saxo Bank, he was a mountain biker racing for Team Cannondale–Vredestein, winning the Under-23 World Cup and Under-23 World Championships. Fuglsang has finished 7th overall at the Tour de France and 6th at the Giro d'Italia, his best result at a Grand Tour. His best career results are his win in the 2019 Liège–Bastogne–Liège, the 2020 Il Lombardia and his overall wins in both the 2017 and 2019 editions of the Critérium du Dauphiné stage race, in the former of which he won two stages. He has also won several other stage races during his career including Danmark Rundt 3 times in a row from 2008 to 2010, Tour de Luxembourg and Tour of Austria in 2012, and Tour of Slovenia in 2009. For the 2006 season Fuglsang rode his first year as a professional mountain biker for Cannondale-Vredestein. In 2007 Fuglsang moved to Italy in order to focus on riding his bike. It was a hard year for Fuglsang as he had no friends in the area and had no visits from his family. Despite being alone it allowed him to focus on his mountain bike career. The biggest event of his 2007 season came in September where he would ride the Under-23 UCI Mountain Bike World Championships. His biggest rival at the event was Swiss rider Nino Schurter. They had competed in GP Tell just weeks before the event where Fuglsang finished 3rd and Schurter 8th. However, when they approached the final of the race Schurter was in the lead but Fuglsang was closing in on the Swiss and overtook him on the final lap on an uphill section. Fuglsang could cross the line as Under-23 World Champion. After the event Fuglsang got tattooed the rainbow stripes on his right arm. The following year Fuglsang decided to focus more on road racing, however he would still ride mountain bikes races. After having finished 2nd overall with teammate Roal Paulissen in Cape Epic in 2007, he came back with Paulissen again the following year and claimed the overall win. He was leading the 2008 edition of Danmark Rundt heading into the last stage. He had been in contact with Team Saxo Bank, and the deal was finally signed the day before he won Danmark Rundt. Despite having signed the contract, Fuglsang's manager wanted him to wait as his market value could inflate if he won Danmark Rundt which he did the following day. Fuglsang rode his first World Tour season in 2009, riding for Team Saxo Bank which was led by Bjarne Riis. He had a great first year with finishing 6th overall in the Volta a Catalunya and Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré. Fuglsang won his second Danmark Rundt in August and had also won Tour of Slovenia one and a half months previous. He rode his first Grand Tour in August and September when he started in the Vuelta a España. He crashed in the first couple stages when he rode into the back of a tanker due to limiting road control. Later in the season he finished 2nd in the Italian classic Giro dell'Emilia. The following year would be a controversial year for Team Saxo Bank. It was uncertain whether the team would continue in 2011 due to a lack of sponsorship interest. Fuglsang wanted to stay at the team but got a great offer from Leopard Trek which was enough to persuade him. In June Fuglsang finished 3rd overall in the Tour de Suisse and won the Danish National Time Trial Championships for the first time in his career. In July 2010, Fuglsang started his first ever Tour de France. Despite most of the team set to leave in the 2011 season, Riis managed the team well and Andy Schleck would end up winning the race due to Alberto Contador's Clenbuterol case. Following the Tour de France, Fuglsang won his third Danmark Rundt in a row. In his last race for Team Saxo Bank, Fuglsang finished 4th in Giro di Lombardia after beating Vincenzo Nibali in a sprint. In the 2011 season, Fuglsang was riding for the new Luxembourgish team Leopard Trek funded by Flavio Becca. Fuglsang had a mixed start to his season with finishing 11th at Tour of Oman before abandoning at Paris-Nice. He finished 3rd on the Time trial at Critérium International and 4th on the Time trial at Tour of the Basque Country. He had to wait until the middle of April to get his first top result of the season. Fuglsang rode Amstel Gold Race where an attack on Cauberg saw Philippe Gilbert take the victory. Fuglsang could not quite follow the pace but managed to finish 4th just 5 seconds behind Gilbert. It was decided from the start of the season that Fuglsang would ride the Tour de France as a domestique for the Schleck brothers, and he showcased great form in his final stage race before the Tour. Delivering yet another great Time trial, Fuglsang finished 4th overall in the Tour de Suisse. In June he also finished 2nd in the Danish National Time Trial Championships. Arriving at the 2011 Tour de France, Leopard Trek was one of the favorites to take the win. After the first 8 stages, Fränk Schleck was 3rd, Fuglsang 5th and Andy Schleck 6th. Later in the race Fuglsang dropped out of the top 10 but the Tour was still a success with Andy Schleck taking a stage win and 2nd overall, and Fränk Schleck taking 3rd overall. Fuglsang participated in the Vuelta a España where Leopard Trek won the Opening Team Time Trial with Fuglsang crossing the line in first position. This meant that Fuglsang would wear the Red Leaders jersey on the following stage. Fuglsang was just the second Danish rider to wear the jersey, which was previously worn by Lars Michaelsen. His teammate Daniele Bennati took over the lead on stage 2. Fuglsang put in another great Time trial on stage 10 and finished 6th which moved him up to 2nd overall. However, later in the race he would drop to 11th overall. In 2012, Fuglsang remained with the Schleck brothers, as the team became RadioShack–Nissan. He was slated to be his team's leader in the 2012 Giro d'Italia, but had to withdraw due to knee problems and was replaced with Fränk Schleck. Fuglsang later won the Tour de Luxembourg, taking the overall classification jersey in the queen stage to Differdange and then defending his lead with the help of his team for the fourth and final stage in Luxembourg City. The last stage had to be shortened by 47 km (29 mi) by the organizers due to heavy rain. He was then excluded from the Tour de France by the RadioShack–Nissan team management after he had criticized them. He stated that he wanted to race for another squad in the next season since he was not happy with the way things were going within the team. In his book released in collaboration with Rasmus Staghøj in 2018, Fuglsang wrote that there was no real structure around the team. RadioShack–Nissan was the result of a merger between the two teams: Leopard Trek and Team RadioShack. During races and training camps the team was often split and racing as two teams, not one. Having phoned the general manager Johan Bruyneel, it was confirmed that Fuglsang was not riding any more World Tour races in 2012. As Fuglsang had just won the Danish National Time Trial Championships for the second time in his career, he went to Austria to ride the Tour of Austria. Fuglsang won stage 4 and the overall race ahead of Steve Morabito of BMC Racing Team who finished one minute and 24 seconds behind the Dane. Fuglsang left RadioShack–Nissan at the end of the 2012 season, and joined Astana on an initial three-year contract from the 2013 season onwards. In the 2013 Tour de France, Fuglsang was the team leader of Astana. As Dan Martin attacked on stage 9, Fuglsang saw it as a perfect opportunity to gain time on the other contenders, and attacked with Martin. They got a gap straight away, and started to work together. Inside the final kilometers it was clear to see that the bunch could not catch them. Fuglsang led out the sprint from the front, and as Martin attacked, he could not follow and had to settle with 2nd place. It was not until stage 13 that Fuglsang again was on the offence, when Saxo–Tinkoff attacked during sections of crosswinds. Fuglsang was the only rider from Astana in the break and finished 4th on the stage, advancing to 6th overall. His efforts on that stage gained praise from his team-mates and staff. From then on, Fuglsang battled with Dutch rider Bauke Mollema for the 6th place. Eventually he ended up finishing 7th overall, after a good performance in the mountains and the time trials. Later that year he helped team-mate Vincenzo Nibali to the Italian's second place at the Vuelta a España. Throughout the spring of the 2014 season, Fuglsang showed he had consistent form at the major World Tour stage races. He was set to help Vincenzo Nibali win the 2014 Tour de France. However the Italian rider showed no results before the Critérium du Dauphiné. On the final stage of the one-week stage race, Nibali attacked but was later dropped due to his efforts. Fuglsang was then ordered to pace Nibali up the final climb, but when the pace kept getting slower, Fuglsang was then finally ordered to ride his own chance. This sparked a lot of controversy at Astana since the leader for the Tour de France, was weaker than his domestique. On stage 2 of Tour de France, Fuglsang attacked a few times until Nibali managed to get away and win the stage in the end. Just a few days later, Fuglsang and Nibali were riding together on the cobblestone stage and dropped all the other contenders. However, on the final sector of cobblestones, Nibali was once again having problems, and could not close the gap to Lars Boom who rode away in the distance and won the stage. Fuglsang had to slow down his pace in order to get Nibali to the finish line, and once again Fuglsang finished second on a Tour de France stage. After the stage, Nibali was first overall and Fuglsang second overall. However, on the first climbing stage, Fuglsang showed weakness and dropped to fourth overall. On the following stages he dropped out of the top 10, and lost even more time on stage 13 when he hit a bottle on the downhill to the final climb. The remainder of the race became a challenge for Fuglsang who finished 36th overall. Having finished 7th overall at both the Tour of Oman and Paris-Nice, Fuglsang also cracked the top ten in two of the three Ardennes Classics, finishing eighth at La Flèche Wallonne and ninth at Liège–Bastogne–Liège. His main goal of the season was to help Vincenzo Nibali defend his 2014 Tour de France title. However already on the first mountain stage, Nibali looked vulnerable and Fuglsang was awarded his own chance by the Astana team. Fuglsang did a great final climb but only finished 13th because of acting as domestique to Nibali. The Astana team then said they were going to focus on Fuglsang for the remainder of the race. However, on the following day Fuglsang lost a lot of time, with Nibali only losing a minute. The final day in the Pyrenees saw the race heading up Plateau de Beille, and Fuglsang was in a 22-man breakaway. As the group was heading up the final climb, more riders were dropped from the group and Joaquim Rodríguez attacked with no one able to match the Spaniard's pace. Rodríguez won the stage with 1:12 down to Jakob Fuglsang who arrived at the soaking wet finish line in 2nd place. In probably his last chance for a stage win, Fuglsang went all in on stage 18 of the race. He was once again a part of a huge group which became smaller as it approached the Col du Glandon. It was clear that Fuglsang had a shot at winning the stage, but he was taken down by a motorbike which was about to pass the group. This ended his chances of a stage win and the driver of the motorbike was later ejected from the race. As the final preparation race for the 2016 Giro d'Italia, Fuglsang rode the Giro del Trentino. Fuglsang finished the race in 3rd overall with team-mate Tanel Kangert finishing 2nd overall. The team leader for the Giro, Nibali only finished 21st overall. On the first decisive day in the Giro d'Italia, Nibali attacked but was again dropped after his attack. Fuglsang followed the other contenders and even attacked inside the final kilometer and finished 2nd, and also advancing to 2nd place overall. Two days later Fuglsang lost time to the other contenders as he punctured on a gravel sector. After making a comeback in the final week of the race, Nibali ended up winning the Giro d'Italia with help from Fuglsang and his Astana team. At the Tour de France, Fuglsang was missing form but attacked on the final mountain stage but had no luck in going for the win on that stage. The team leader of Astana, Fabio Aru also cracked on that stage which meant Astana left the Tour de France empty handed. At the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro Fuglsang was in the chaser group descending the final climb, when two of the main-favorites Vincenzo Nibali and Richie Porte crashed. Going into the final kilometers Rafał Majka was alone in the front but an attack from Fuglsang and Greg Van Avermaet meant that a trio had formed inside the last 1.5 kilometers. Going into the sprint Fuglsang was leading the trio inside the final kilometer, with Van Avermaet opening the sprint inside the final 200 meters beating Fuglsang at the line. This meant a gold medal for Van Avermaet, silver for Fuglsang and bronze for Majka. Following his silver medal in the Olympic Games, Fuglsang started showing more aggressive racing for the following seasons. In June 2017 Fuglsang rode the Critérium du Dauphiné alongside Italian team-mate Fabio Aru as the leader. On stage 6, Fuglsang attacked on Mont du Chat, and got a gap on the general classification contenders. However, Aru also attacked a few minutes after which sparked a lot of debate since his team-mate was at the front of the race. Aru reached the top of the climb first with Chris Froome, Richie Porte and Jakob Fuglsang 15 seconds behind. On the downhill Aru was caught and the quartet reached the finish line together with Fuglsang winning the stage. This was a huge relief for Fuglsang as this was his first win in almost five years, and his first world tour win and first win in Astana colors. On the following day, Fuglsang finished 7th and was the only rider who could keep up with Porte, which meant he maintained his 3rd place in the general classification. On the last day of the race, Fuglsang showed a strong performance. Froome and Team Sky did everything to win and attacked early on the stage which cracked race leader Porte. It was clear to see that Froome were doing everything he could to boost his gap down to Porte. However he had used too much energy on the stage, and cracked up the final climb. Dan Martin then attacked and Fuglsang attacked a little later, and managed to chase down Martin, and blast pass him as Fuglsang won his second stage in just three days. Not only did he win the stage but Fuglsang also won the overall race, which was the biggest win of his career. Going into the Tour de France, Fuglsang was now considered one of the top favorites. On the first mountain stage, Fuglsang lost over a minute and started doubting if he had lost the form he had one month earlier. He bounced back on the queen stage of the race on stage 9 that included Mont du Chat which Fuglsang had ridden one month previous at the Critérium du Dauphiné. Having a great knowledge of the climb, Fuglsang attacked just as in the Dauphiné but once again an attack was made by team-mate Fabio Aru. This sparked a lot of debate as the Italian attacked his own team-mate and attacked when Chris Froome had a mechanical. Eventually Fuglsang reached the downhill with the other general classification contenders as they hunted down Warren Barguil for the stage win. Fuglsang attacked inside the final 500 meters but was chased down by Rigoberto Urán and lost his chance for the stage win. Despite losing the stage win, Fuglsang had gained the 5th place overall. Days later he went down in a crash in the feeding zone and suffered fractures to his elbow and wrist. He abandoned the race on stage 13. At the Tour of Almaty, Fuglsang won stage 2 which finished on a climb to Almaty. At his first race of the season, Fuglsang finished 3rd in the Spanish stage race "Volta a la Comunitat Valenciana". He scored another top 10 finish one week later at the Vuelta a Murcia, placing 6th. In the middle of February, Fuglsang rode the Vuelta a Andalucía, where he was 4th overall. Fuglsang arrived at Paris-Nice with hopes of riding for the general classification, however he was involved in a crash on the first stage, and lost time as he did the previous year. As his team-mate Luis León Sánchez was in the leaders jersey, Fuglsang helped his team-mate throughout the race, but when Sanchez cracked on stage 7, Fuglsang got his own chance with a few kilometers to go, and finished 9th on the stage. His next attempt to improve form after the opening stage races of the year was the first altitude training camp for the Tour de France. His first races back after his training camp were the Ardennes Classics, where he managed to finish 8th at Amstel Gold Race and 10th at Liège–Bastogne–Liège, as his best results. Fuglsang was ready to race again only two days later, when he started Tour de Romandie. After a disappointing time trial on stage 3, he attacked on the downhill of the last climb on stage 4, and took his first win of the season. He finished inside the bunch on the final stage, which meant he finished 4th overall. Fuglsang then went to altitude training camp once again to focus for the Tour de France. On 1 June, Fuglsang published his first book which he made in collaboration with Rasmus Staghøj. His last race before "La Grand Boucle" was Tour de Suisse. Fuglsang and his Astana team-mates got off to a very bad start to the race, only finishing 20th in the team time trial on stage 1. Fuglsang recovered and finished 2nd on the queen stage, and delivered the best time trial of the general classification contenders on stage 9, advancing Fuglsang to 2nd place overall. When Fuglsang arrived at the Tour de France however, his first week was full of chaotic moments. He was ninth on the first stage but with one man down on stage 3, Astana almost lost a minute in the team time trial. As the race hit the region of Brittany, Fuglsang was dealing with crashes and mechanical problems. He managed to overcome the problems and advanced to 7th place in the general classification after the cobbled classics stage, a stage in which Fuglsang attacked but had no luck of getting away from the bunch. As the race hit the Alps, Fuglsang was near top 3 overall, but cracked on stage 11 and dropped to 12th overall. For the rest of the race, he was struggling to keep up with the other general classification contenders and finished 12th overall in Paris. Fuglsang returned to racing after 2.5 weeks at Arctic Race of Norway where he was in the breakaway on stage 2, and finished 9th on the stage. At the Canadian World Tour classic Grand Prix Cycliste de Montréal, Fuglsang was in a late breakaway with Tim Wellens (Lotto–Soudal) and James Knox (Quick-Step Floors), but was brought back by the bunch with 6.2 kilometers to go. In late September, Fuglsang rode the UCI Road World Championships, and finished 20th. One week later, Fuglsang was 11th at Giro dell'Emilia. Fuglsang started his 2019 season at Vuelta a Murcia where he finished 6th in the general classification. He also won the Mountains classification at the race. His next success would already come in the following week, where he won Vuelta a Andalucía in front of other Tour favourites. He rode his first big classic of the season in Strade Bianche where he finished 2nd behind Julian Alaphilippe. Fuglsang attacked several times in the final but could not drop the Frenchman, who ended up outsprinting Fuglsang on the last climb. At Tirreno-Adriatico the Astana Team made a poor effort in the Team time trial and only finished 13th. On stage 5 to Recanati, Fuglsang attacked and made a huge effort on the hard stage. He ended up winning and made a jump to 3rd in the general classification which would be his final position in the race. Fuglsang dedicated his win on Stage 5 to his former team-mate Michele Scarponi. In his next race at Tour of the Basque Country, Fuglsang rode in honour of his team-mate Ion Izagirre who would go on to win the overall race. Izagirre took the race lead on the final day from Emanuel Buchmann, who would also make an error in the final turn. The German cyclist took the wrong turn which caused him to lose several seconds and ultimately his podium place. However the race jury decided to reinstate Buchmann on the podium, which dropped Fuglsang down to 4th place overall. Fuglsang found the decision "ridiculous" and said he had never seen anything like it before. Fuglsang rode an amazing Ardennes Classics week where he finished on the podium in all three races. At Amstel Gold Race, Fuglsang rode away with Alaphilippe, and they looked to fight out the win, however they slowed down drastically in the final kilometre which allowed the chasing group to bridge the gap to the leaders. Ultimately Fuglsang finished 3rd, and Alaphilippe 4th. At La Flèche Wallonne Fuglsang attacked on Muur de Huy, and only Alaphilippe could follow. It was once again a battle between Fuglsang and Alaphilippe as the Frenchman outsprinted the Dane. At the final classics race Liège–Bastogne–Liège, Fuglsang was the favourite, and he delivered despite huge pressure. He attacked in the final stages and dropped everyone, however he nearly crashed with 3 kilometres to go, but a miraculous save from Fuglsang secured him his first win in a monument classics. At his final race before the Tour de France, Fuglsang finished 3rd on Stage 2 at Critérium du Dauphiné, and proved he was one of the strongest candidates for the overall Tour win. He would take the yellow jersey on the penultimate day after attacking and dropping Adam Yates. His nearest rival for the overall win, Yates abandoned the race due to a fever. Thibaut Pinot tried an attack inside the final two kilometres, however Fuglsang quickly closed it down, and won his second Critérium du Dauphiné. Fuglsang started his 2020 campaign with a repeat victory in the Spanish stage race Vuelta a Andalucía. Aside from winning the general classification, Fuglsang also won two stages and finished 2nd on two other occasions. After the racing resumed in August, Fuglsang started with a 5th-place finish in the Italian neo-classic Strade Bianche, and a week later, he managed to come 2nd in the Tour de Pologne. On 15 August he took his first victory after the lockdown as he soloed his way to victory in the Italian monument race Il Lombardia. The victory in Lombardy was Fuglsang's second monument win, and it also marked the first time a Danish cyclist won the race. In the UCI Road World Championships, Fuglsang finished 5th in the road race and thus improved on his previous best result, a 12th-place finish from the road race in 2019. Fuglsang came into the road race as a top favourite and rode a tactical race until the last ascent up Cima Gallisterna, where he came up just short against his classics rival and the eventual race winner Julian Alaphilippe. Alaphilippe escaped on the last climb and soloed to victory, while Fuglsang lost the sprint for silver and bronze medals in a chase group. He contested the Giro d'Italia, finishing sixth overall – his best Grand Tour finish to that point. In the first quarter of the season, Fuglsang finished in eighth place overall at the Tour des Alpes-Maritimes et du Var, and then in ninth place at Strade Bianche. At the Tour de Suisse, Fuglsang finished second on the fifth stage to Leukerbad, losing out on the uphill finish to Richard Carapaz; he ultimately finished the race in third place overall. His season ended following a crash at the Benelux Tour, resulting in fractures to his scapula and clavicle. In October 2021, Fuglsang was announced to be joining Israel Start-Up Nation, later renamed as Israel–Premier Tech, for the 2022 season. Fuglsang started his 2022 season racing in Spain, competing in the Volta a la Comunitat Valenciana and O Gran Camiño stage races, finishing in sixth and tenth respectively. He took his first victory with the team in May's Mercan'Tour Classic, attacking out of the lead group with approximately 7 kilometres (4.3 miles) remaining, and ultimately led home a team 1–2 with Michael Woods getting the better of David Gaudu. He finished third overall for the second year in succession at the Tour de Suisse, also spending a day in the leader's jersey. He withdrew from the Tour de France, following a crash which resulted in a fractured rib. Fuglsang rode only four races in the first half of 2023, finishing only two – the Tour de Hongrie, and the Mercan'Tour Classic, both held in May. His racing was reduced due to suffering from epididymitis, following his withdrawal from the UAE Tour. Jakob Fuglsang lives in Monaco with his wife Loulou, whom he married in 2015. The couple have a daughter, Jamie Lou who was born in June 2017. Before moving to Monaco, Jakob and Loulou lived in Luxembourg where Fuglsang trained together with Andy Schleck and Fränk Schleck. His wife Loulou gave up her own chances of a modelling career in order to support Fuglsang in his sporting career. 2002 1st Cross-country, National Junior Championships 2003 1st Cross-country, National Junior Championships 2nd Cross-country, UEC European Junior Championships 2007 1st Cross-country, UCI World Under-23 Championships 1st Marathon, National Championships 2nd Overall Cape Epic (with Roel Paulissen) 3rd Cross-country, UEC European Under-23 Championships 2008 1st Overall Cape Epic (with Roel Paulissen) 3rd Cross-country, UEC European Championships Source: 2007 3rd Overall GP Tell 5th Paris–Troyes 7th Overall Danmark Rundt 10th Overall Ringerike GP 2008 (1 pro win) 1st Overall Danmark Rundt 2nd Overall Les 3 Jours de Vaucluse 2nd Overall Ronde de l'Oise 3rd Paris–Troyes 8th Les Boucles du Sud-Ardèche 2009 (4) 1st Overall Tour of Slovenia 1st Stage 1 1st Overall Danmark Rundt 1st Stage 3 2nd Giro dell'Emilia 3rd Time trial, National Championships 6th Overall Volta a Catalunya 6th Overall Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré 10th Overall Tour of Ireland 2010 (2) 1st Time trial, National Championships 1st Overall Danmark Rundt 2nd Binche–Chimay–Binche 2nd Gran Premio Bruno Beghelli 3rd Overall Tour de Suisse 3rd Overall Circuit Franco-Belge 4th Giro di Lombardia 9th GP Herning 2011 (1) Vuelta a España 1st Stage 1 (TTT) Held Stage 2 1st Stage 3 Danmark Rundt 2nd Time trial, National Championships 4th Overall Tour de Suisse 4th Amstel Gold Race 10th Time trial, UCI World Championships 2012 (4) 1st Time trial, National Championships 1st Overall Tour of Austria 1st Stage 4 1st Overall Tour de Luxembourg 4th Trofeo Deià 6th Overall USA Pro Cycling Challenge 2013 1st Stage 1 (TTT) Vuelta a España 4th Overall Critérium du Dauphiné 6th Overall Vuelta a Andalucía 7th Overall Tour de France 8th Vuelta a Murcia 2014 5th Overall Paris–Nice 7th Overall Tour de Romandie 10th Overall Critérium du Dauphiné 2015 4th Time trial, National Championships 7th Overall Tour of Oman 7th Overall Paris–Nice 8th La Flèche Wallonne 9th Liège–Bastogne–Liège 2016 2nd Road race, Olympic Games 3rd Overall Tour of Oman 3rd Overall Giro del Trentino 1st Stage 1 (TTT) 2017 (4) 1st Overall Critérium du Dauphiné 1st Stages 6 & 8 3rd Overall Tour of Almaty 1st Stage 2 6th Overall Volta a la Comunitat Valenciana 2018 (1) 2nd Overall Tour de Suisse 3rd Overall Volta a la Comunitat Valenciana 4th Overall Tour de Romandie 1st Stage 4 4th Overall Vuelta a Andalucía 6th Vuelta a Murcia 8th Amstel Gold Race 8th Milano–Torino 10th Liège–Bastogne–Liège 2019 (5) 1st Overall Critérium du Dauphiné 1st Overall Vuelta a Andalucía 1st Liège–Bastogne–Liège Vuelta a España 1st Stages 1 (TTT) & 16 2nd Strade Bianche 2nd La Flèche Wallonne 3rd Overall Tirreno–Adriatico 1st Stage 5 3rd Amstel Gold Race 4th Overall Tour of the Basque Country 4th Giro di Lombardia 6th Overall Vuelta a Murcia 1st Mountains classification 8th Giro dell'Emilia 8th Milano–Torino 2020 (4) 1st Overall Vuelta a Andalucía 1st Points classification 1st Stages 1 & 3 1st Giro di Lombardia 2nd Overall Tour de Pologne 5th Road race, UCI World Championships 5th Strade Bianche 6th Overall Giro d'Italia 6th Giro dell'Emilia 2021 3rd Overall Tour de Suisse 8th Overall Tour des Alpes-Maritimes et du Var 9th Strade Bianche 2022 (1) 1st Mercan'Tour Classic 3rd Overall Tour de Suisse 6th Overall Volta a la Comunitat Valenciana 10th Overall O Gran Camiño 2023 5th Super 8 Classic 8th Overall Vuelta a Castilla y León "Astana – Pro Team". Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 9 July 2019. "Astana Pro Team presented renewed roster for 2019". Astana. Apgrade. 16 December 2018. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 1 January 2019. "Astana Pro Team". UCI.org. Union Cycliste Internationale. Archived from the original on 1 January 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2020. "Astana - Premier Tech". UCI.org. Union Cycliste Internationale. Archived from the original on 1 January 2021. Retrieved 1 January 2021. "Fuglsang, Houle confirmed with Israel Start-Up Nation". cyclingnews.com. 13 October 2021. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "ISRAEL START-UP NATION". UCI. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Fuglsang, Mosquera among walking wounded after Vuelta stage 4 | Cyclingnews.com". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 6 October 2018. "Fuglsang follows in Michaelsen's footsteps at Vuelta a España | Cyclingnews.com". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 6 October 2018. "Fuglsang out of Giro d'Italia with knee problems". Cycling News. Future Publishing Limited. 27 April 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2012. "Fuglsang Wins Tour of Luxembourg". pelotonmagazine.com. Archived from the original on 19 January 2013. Retrieved 17 August 2012. "Fuglsang looking to leave RadioShack-Nissan over Tour de France snub". Cycling News. Future Publishing Limited. 21 June 2012. Retrieved 8 July 2012. VeloNation. "Fuglsang's relationship with RadioShack worsens, rider says he will be blocked from top races". velonation.com. Retrieved 6 October 2018. Stokes, Shane (8 July 2012). "Fuglsang celebrating Tour of Austria win, Colli takes emotional victory". VeloNation. VeloNation LLC. Retrieved 8 July 2012. "Guardini joins Fuglsang in move to Astana". Cycling News. Future Publishing Limited. 16 August 2012. Retrieved 16 August 2012. "Lars Boom wins Tour de France cobbles stage – Cycling Weekly". Cycling Weekly. 9 July 2014. Retrieved 3 October 2018. "Fuglsang expected to continue Tour de France after crash | Cyclingnews.com". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 3 October 2018. "Valverde wins La Fleche Wallonne 2015". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. 22 April 2015. Retrieved 26 April 2015. Nigel Wynn (26 April 2015). "Alejandro Valverde wins Liege-Bastogne-Liege 2015". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 26 April 2015. "Motorbike driver ejected from Tour de France after Fuglsang crash | Cyclingnews.com". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 3 October 2018. "Greg Van Avermaet grabs gold amid the carnage in Rio 2016 road race". The Guardian. Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 6 August 2016. "Uran Wins Chaotic Stage 9: Porte and Thomas Crash Out – Peloton Magazine". Peloton Magazine. 9 July 2017. Retrieved 3 October 2018. "Fuglsang abandons Tour de France | Cyclingnews.com". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 2 April 2018. "Astana – Tour of Almaty. Stage 2. Jakob Fuglsang wins on Medeu, Alexey Lutsenko takes the GC". astanaproteam.kz. Archived from the original on 3 October 2018. Retrieved 3 October 2018. "På vulkaner med Jakob Fuglsang: Her skaber han Tour-succesen". DR (in Danish). Retrieved 3 October 2018. Feltet.dk. "Jakob Fuglsang udgiver ny bog" (in Danish). Retrieved 3 October 2018. "Fuglsang reacts after losing Basque Country podium spot". cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 16 June 2019. "Cycling news – Jakob Fuglsang defends title in Andalucia". Eurosport. Discovery, Inc. 23 February 2020. Retrieved 2 May 2021. Farrand, Stephen (1 August 2020). "Jakob Fuglsang: It's nice to be back racing, but wow!". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. Retrieved 2 May 2021. "Tour de Pologne: Evenepoel and the wolfpack shine "for Fabio"". UCI.org. Union Cycliste Internationale. 9 August 2020. Retrieved 2 May 2021. Bonville-Ginn, Tim (15 August 2020). "Jakob Fuglsang takes a dominant Monument victory at Il Lombardia 2020". Cycling Weekly. TI Media. Retrieved 2 May 2021. Farrand, Stephen (15 August 2020). "Il Lombardia: Fuglsang on fire with second Monument win". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. Retrieved 2 May 2021. "Tour des Alpes-Maritimes et du Var Standings 2021". Eurosport. Discovery, Inc. 21 February 2021. Retrieved 16 July 2023. Farrand, Stephen (8 March 2021). "Mathieu van der Poel wins Strade Bianche". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. Retrieved 16 July 2023. Ostanek, Daniel (10 June 2021). "Tour de Suisse: Carapaz wins stage 5 summit finish at Leukerbad". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. Retrieved 16 July 2023. Goddard, Ben (13 June 2021). "Richard Carapaz wins Tour de Suisse". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Fuglsang ends season after Benelux Tour crash". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. 31 August 2021. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Fuglsang, Houle confirmed with Israel Start-Up Nation". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. 13 October 2021. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Jakob Fuglsang: Feeling at home at IPT". Israel–Premier Tech. Cycling Academy Ltd. 31 January 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Jakob Fuglsang and Mike Woods team up at Gran Camiño". Israel–Premier Tech. Cycling Academy Ltd. 23 February 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Fuglsang fights to 6th at Volta Valenciana". Israel–Premier Tech. Cycling Academy Ltd. 6 February 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2023. Ostanek, Daniel (27 February 2022). "Valverde overhauls Woods to win Gran Camiño". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. Retrieved 16 July 2023. Fletcher, Patrick (31 May 2022). "Fuglsang scores solo victory at Classic Alpes-Maritimes". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. Retrieved 16 July 2023. Farrand, Stephen (17 June 2022). "Tour de Suisse: Nico Denz wins stage 6". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Jakob Fuglsang battles against the clock to round out Tour de Suisse podium". Israel–Premier Tech. Cycling Academy Ltd. 19 June 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2023. Giuliani, Simone (19 July 2022). "Jakob Fuglsang fractures rib in Tour de France stage 15 crash". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Fuglsang On Track At First Race Back After Injury". Israel–Premier Tech. Cycling Academy Ltd. 14 May 2023. Retrieved 16 July 2023. Ostanek, Daniel (30 May 2023). "Richard Carapaz wins the Classic Alpes-Maritimes". Cyclingnews.com. Future plc. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "IPT Injury Update". Israel–Premier Tech. Cycling Academy Ltd. 7 March 2023. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Jakob Fuglsang rykker til Monaco" (in Danish). Retrieved 6 October 2018. "Jakob Fuglsang er blevet far | SE og HØR". SE og HØR (in Danish). Retrieved 6 October 2018. "Jakob Fuglsang". FirstCycling.com. FirstCycling AS. Retrieved 16 July 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jakob Fuglsang. Official website Palmares on CyclingBase (French) at the Wayback Machine (archived 11 March 2012) Jakob Fuglsang at UCI Jakob Fuglsang at Cycling Archives Jakob Fuglsang at ProCyclingStats Jakob Fuglsang at Cycling Quotient Jakob Fuglsang at CycleBase Jakob Fuglsang at Olympedia