"Dust Clears" is a song by British electronic group Clean Bandit, featuring chorus vocals by Noonie Bao and mainly sung by band member Jack Patterson. The song was released on 19 July 2013 as the third single from their debut album, New Eyes. The song peaked at number 43 on the UK Singles Chart and number 14 on the UK Dance Chart. A music video to accompany the release of "Dust Clears" was first released onto YouTube on 19 June 2013 at a total length of four minutes and fifty seconds. Talking about the video Clean Bandit said "We created and filmed the video ourselves completely and had an amazing time shooting it on a frozen lake in Sweden (Lake Vattern). Two of Jack's friends from film school who helped us make the Mozart's House video came to Sweden to help with this one too: Anna Patarakina and Daria Novitskaya. Big thank you to them and Nick Martin, the skater featured in the video." The video was filmed, directed and produced by Clean Bandit. The video contains a reference to the painting by Henry Raeburn of The Skating Minister, portrayed by Nick Martin who dressed in the same clothes and copied the exact pose as in the painting at one point in the video. Nick Martin is an artist and teacher who lives on the Isle of Wight. He also appears in another Clean Bandit video ("Rather Be"). The band and Nick came up with the concept of the "skating Minister" together. Copsey, Robert (3 February 2014). "Clean Bandit announce debut album New Eyes". Digital Spy. "Clean Bandit's 'Skating Minister' reveals Island connection". Isle of Wight News from OnTheWight. 23 July 2014. Retrieved 26 November 2018. Clean Bandit (19 June 2013). "Clean Bandit - Dust Clears ft. Noonie Bao [Official Video]" – via YouTube. "Clean Bandit's 'Skating Minister' reveals Island connection". Isle of Wight News from OnTheWight. 23 July 2014. Retrieved 26 November 2018. "ČNS IFPI" (in Slovak). Hitparáda – Radio Top 100 Oficiálna. IFPI Czech Republic. Note: insert 201337 into search. "Official Dance Singles Chart Top 40". Official Charts Company. "Official Charts Company". www.officialcharts.com. "Dust Clears (Remixes) - EP by Clean Bandit on Apple Music". iTunes Store. 28 July 2013. v t e