A canyon (from Spanish: cañón; archaic British English spelling: cañon), gorge or chasm, is a deep cleft between escarpments or cliffs resulting from weathering and the erosive activity of a river over geologic time scales. Rivers have a natural tendency to cut through underlying surfaces, eventually wearing away rock layers as sediments are removed downstream. A river bed will gradually reach a baseline elevation, which is the same elevation as the body of water into which the river drains. The processes of weathering and erosion will form canyons when the river's headwaters and estuary are at significantly different elevations, particularly through regions where softer rock layers are intermingled with harder layers more resistant to weathering. A canyon may also refer to a rift between two mountain peaks, such as those in ranges including the Rocky Mountains, the Alps, the Himalayas or the Andes. Usually, a river or stream carves out such splits between mountains. Examples of mountain-type canyons are Provo Canyon in Utah or Yosemite Valley in California's Sierra Nevada. Canyons within mountains, or gorges that have an opening on only one side, are called box canyons. Slot canyons are very narrow canyons that often have smooth walls. Steep-sided valleys in the seabed of the continental slope are referred to as submarine canyons. Unlike canyons on land, submarine canyons are thought to be formed by turbidity currents and landslides. The word canyon is Spanish in origin (cañón, pronounced [kaˈɲon]), with the same meaning. The word canyon is generally used in North America, while the words gorge and ravine (French in origin) are used in Europe and Oceania, though gorge and ravine are also used in some parts of North America. In the United States, place names generally use canyon in the southwest (due to their proximity to Spanish-speaking Mexico) and gorge in the northeast (which is closer to French Canada), with the rest of the country graduating between these two according to geography. In Canada, a gorge is usually narrow while a ravine is more open and often wooded. The military-derived word defile is occasionally used in the United Kingdom. Most canyons were formed by a process of long-time erosion from a plateau or table-land level. The cliffs form because harder rock strata that are resistant to erosion and weathering remain exposed on the valley walls. Canyons are much more common in arid areas than in wet areas because physical weathering has a more localized effect in arid zones. The wind and water from the river combine to erode and cut away less resistant materials such as shales. The freezing and expansion of water also serves to help form canyons. Water seeps into cracks between the rocks and freezes, pushing the rocks apart and eventually causing large chunks to break off the canyon walls, in a process known as frost wedging. Canyon walls are often formed of resistant sandstones or granite. Sometimes large rivers run through canyons as the result of gradual geological uplift. These are called entrenched rivers, because they are unable to easily alter their course. In the United States, the Colorado River in the Southwest and the Snake River in the Northwest are two examples of tectonic uplift. Canyons often form in areas of limestone rock. As limestone is soluble to a certain extent, cave systems form in the rock. When a cave system collapses, a canyon is left, as in the Mendip Hills in Somerset and Yorkshire Dales in Yorkshire, England. A box canyon is a small canyon that is generally shorter and narrower than a river canyon, with steep walls on three sides, allowing access and egress only through the mouth of the canyon. Box canyons were frequently used in the western United States as convenient corrals, with their entrances fenced. The definition of "largest canyon" is imprecise, because a canyon can be large by its depth, its length, or the total area of the canyon system. Also, the inaccessibility of the major canyons in the Himalaya contributes to their not being regarded as candidates for the biggest canyon. The definition of "deepest canyon" is similarly imprecise, especially if one includes mountain canyons, as well as canyons cut through relatively flat plateaus (which have a somewhat well-defined rim elevation). The Yarlung Tsangpo Grand Canyon (or Tsangpo Canyon), along the Yarlung Tsangpo River in Tibet, is regarded by some as the deepest canyon in the world at 5,500 metres (18,000 ft). It is slightly longer than the Grand Canyon in the United States. Others consider the Kali Gandaki Gorge in midwest Nepal to be the deepest canyon, with a 6,400-metre (21,000 ft) difference between the level of the river and the peaks surrounding it. Vying for the deepest canyon in the Americas is the Cotahuasi Canyon and Colca Canyon, in southern Peru. Both have been measured at over 3,500 metres (11,500 ft) deep. The Grand Canyon of northern Arizona in the United States, with an average depth of 1,600 metres (5,200 ft) and a volume of 4.17 trillion cubic metres (147 trillion cubic feet), is one of the world's largest canyons. It was among the 28 finalists of the New 7 Wonders of Nature worldwide poll. (Some referred to it as one of the seven natural wonders of the world.) The largest canyon in Europe is Tara River Canyon. The largest canyon in Africa is the Fish River Canyon in Namibia. In August 2013, the discovery of Greenland's Grand Canyon was reported, based on the analysis of data from Operation IceBridge. It is located under an ice sheet. At 750 kilometres (470 mi) long, it is believed to be the longest canyon in the world. Despite not being quite as deep or long as the Grand Canyon, the Capertee Valley in Australia is actually 1 km wider than the Grand Canyon, making it the widest canyon in the world. Some canyons have notable cultural significance. Evidence of archaic humans has been discovered in Africa's Olduvai Gorge. In the southwestern United States, canyons are important archeologically because of the many cliff-dwellings built in such areas, largely by the ancient Pueblo people who were their first inhabitants. The following list contains only the most notable canyons of the world, grouped by region. Fish River Canyon Blyde River Canyon, Mpumalanga Oribi Gorge, KwaZulu-Natal Olduvai Gorge Atuel Canyon, Mendoza Province Itaimbezinho Canyon, Rio Grande do Sul Bolivia Torotoro River Canyon Grand Canyon of the Stikine, British Columbia Horseshoe Canyon, Alberta Niagara Gorge, Ontario Ouimet Canyon, Ontario Chicamocha Canyon, Santander Department Barranca de Oblatos, Jalisco Copper Canyon, Chihuahua Sumidero Canyon, Chiapas Cañón del Pato, Ancash Region Colca Canyon, Arequipa Region Cotahuasi Canyon, Arequipa Region American Fork Canyon, Utah Antelope Canyon, Arizona Apple River Canyon, Illinois Ausable Chasm, New York Big Cottonwood Canyon, Utah Black Canyon of the Gunnison, Colorado Black Hand Gorge, Ohio Blackwater Canyon, West Virginia Blue Creek Canyon, Colorado Bluejohn Canyon, Utah Box Canyon, Colorado Breaks Canyon, Kentucky and Virginia Butterfield Canyon, Utah Cane Creek, Alabama Canyon de Chelly, Arizona Canyonlands National Park, canyons of the Colorado River and its main tributary the Green River, Utah Cheat Canyon, West Virginia Clifton Gorge, Ohio Clifty Canyon, Indiana Cloudland Canyon, Georgia Columbia River Gorge, Oregon and Washington Conkle's Hollow, Ohio Cottonwood Canyon, Utah Crooked River Gorge, Oregon Death Hollow, Utah Desolation Canyon, Utah Dismals Canyon, Alabama Flaming Gorge, Wyoming and Utah Flume Gorge, New Hampshire Glen Canyon, Utah and Arizona Glenwood Canyon, Colorado Gore Canyon, Colorado Grand Canyon, Arizona Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone, Wyoming Grandstaff Canyon, Utah Guffey Gorge, Colorado Gulf Hagas, Maine Hells Canyon, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington Horse Canyon, Utah Kern River Canyon, California Kings Canyon, Utah Kings Canyon, California Leslie Gulch, Oregon Linville Gorge, North Carolina Little Cottonwood Canyon, Utah Little Grand Canyon, Illinois Little River Canyon, Alabama Logan Canyon, Utah Mather Gorge, Maryland Marysvale Canyon, Utah McCormick's Creek Canyon, Indiana Millcreek Canyon, Utah New River Gorge, West Virginia Ninemile Canyon, Utah Ogden Canyon, Utah Oneonta Gorge, Oregon Palo Duro Canyon, Texas Parleys Canyon, Utah Pine Creek Gorge, Pennsylvania Poudre Canyon, Colorado Providence Canyon, Georgia Quechee Gorge, Vermont Red River Gorge, Kentucky Rio Grande Gorge, New Mexico Royal Gorge, Colorado Ruby Canyon, Utah Snake River Canyon, Idaho Snow Canyon, Utah Stillwater Canyon, Utah Tallulah Gorge, Georgia Tenaya Canyon, California Tennessee River Gorge, Alabama and Tennessee The Trough, West Virginia Unaweep Canyon, Colorado Uncompahgre Gorge, Colorado Waimea Canyon, Hawaii Walls of Jericho, Alabama Weber Canyon, Utah Westwater Canyon, Utah Wolverine Canyon, Utah White Canyon, Utah Zion Canyon, Utah Three Gorges, Chongqing Tiger Leaping Gorge, Yunnan Yarlung Zangbo Grand Canyon, Tibet Autonomous Region Gandikota, Kadapa District, Andhra Pradesh Raneh Falls, Chatarpur district, Madhya Pradesh Idukki, Western Ghats, Kerala Brown Canyon, Semarang, Central Java Cukang Taneuh, Pangandaran, West Java Afghanistan – Tang-e Gharu Japan – Tenryū-kyō in Nagano Prefecture Kazakhstan – Charyn Canyon Nepal – Kali Gandaki Gorge Russia – Delyun-Uran (Vitim River) Pakistan - Indus River Gorge through the Himalaya Taiwan – Taroko Gorge in Hualien County Turkey – Ihlara Valley in Aksaray Province Avon Gorge, Bristol Burrington Combe, Somerset Cheddar Gorge, Somerset Corrieshalloch Gorge, Ullapool Ebbor Gorge, Somerset Gordale Scar, North Yorkshire Winnats Pass, Derbyshire Gorges de l'Ardèche, Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes Gorges de Daluis, Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur Gorges du Tarn, Occitanie Grands Goulets, Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes Verdon Gorge, Alpes-de-Haute-Provence Aktove canyon Buky Canyon Dniester Canyon Albania – Osum Canyon, Kanionet e Skraparit Albania/Montenegro – Cem Bosnia and Herzegovina – Rakitnica, Drina, Neretva, Vrbas, Unac, Čude, Ugar, Prača, Bulgaria – Trigrad Gorge, Kresna Gorge, Iskar Gorge Finland – Korouoma Canyon Germany – Partnach Gorge Greece – Vikos Gorge, Samaria Gorge Greenland – Greenland's Grand Canyon Iceland – Fjaðrárgljúfur Canyon Kosovo – Rugova Canyon, White Drin Canyon, Kacanik Gorge North Macedonia – Matka Canyon Montenegro – Morača, Piva Montenegro/Bosnia and Herzegovina – Tara River Canyon Montenegro/Serbia – Ibar Norway – Sautso Canyon Poland/Slovakia – Dunajec River Gorge Russia – Sulak Canyon, Dagestan Serbia - Lazar's Canyon Serbia/Bosnia and Herzegovina – Lim Serbia/Romania - Iron Gates Slovenia – Vintgar Gorge Switzerland – Aare Gorge Joffre Gorge, Karijini National Park, Western Australia Katherine Gorge, Northern Territory Kings Canyon, Northern Territory Murchison River Gorge, Western Australia Jamison Valley, New South Wales Capertee Valley, New South Wales – the world's second-widest canyon Shoalhaven Gorge, New South Wales Werribee Gorge, Victoria The Slot Canyons of the Blue Mountains, New South Wales Manawatū Gorge, North Island Skippers Canyon, South Island Ithaca Chasma on Saturn's moon Tethys Valles Marineris on Mars, the largest-known canyon in the Solar System Vid Flumina on Saturn's largest moon Titan is the only known liquid-floored canyon in the Solar System besides Earth Messina Chasmata on Uranus' moon Titania Venus has many craters and canyons on its surface. The troughs on the planet are part of a system of canyons that is more than 6,400 km long. Sinkhole  Environment portal Antecedent drainage stream – stream maintaining its original course and pattern despite the changes in underlying rock topPages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback Canyoning – Traveling in canyons using a variety of techniques Chine – Steep-sided river valley Draw (terrain) – Terrain feature formed by two parallel ridges or spurs with low ground in betweenPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Geomorphology – Scientific study of landforms Gully – Landform created by running water and/or mass movement eroding sharply into soil Steephead valley – LandformPages displaying short descriptions with no spaces Valley – Low area between hills, often with a river running through it "canon". Lexico UK English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on January 16, 2020. "canyon". National Geographic Society. 20 May 2011. Ward Cameron (2005). "Understanding Canyon Formation". Archived from the original on 2001-04-25. Retrieved 2010-10-07. Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Canyon" . Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. "The Geology of the Grand Canyon". Retrieved 2015-10-01. "box canyon". Encarta World English Dictionary. 2009. Archived from the original on 2009-12-17. Retrieved 2009-08-04. "China Virtual Museums: Canyon". Kepu.net. "Park Statistics". National Park Service. USA. Truong, Alice (1 July 2011). "Everything About the Grand Canyon". Discovery Communications. Retrieved 5 February 2012. Cohen, Callan; Spottiswoode, Claire & Rossouw, Jonathan (2006). Southern African Birdfinder. Penguin Random House South Africa. p. 210. ISBN 978-1-86872-725-4. "Grand Canyon of Greenland Discovered under Ice". news.discovery.com. 2017-05-10. Archived from the original on 2016-05-11. Retrieved 2013-08-30. Fitzsimons, David (14 December 2015). "Capertee Valley: Australia's own Grand Canyon". Daily Telegraph. Retrieved March 28, 2016. Kruszelnicki, Karl S. (22 May 2012). "Grand Canyon is not so grand › Dr Karl's Great Moments In Science". ABC Science. Retrieved March 28, 2016. Poggiali, Valerio; Mastrogiuseppe, Marco; Hayes, Alexander G.; Seu, Roberto; Birch, Samuel P. D.; Lorenz, Ralph; Grima, Cyril; Hofgartner, Jason D. (9 August 2016). "Liquid-filled Canyons on Titan". Geophysical Research Letters. 43 (15): 7887–7894. Bibcode:2016GeoRL..43.7887P. doi:10.1002/2016GL069679. hdl:11573/932488. S2CID 132445293. Look up canyon in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Canyons and gorges travel guide from Wikivoyage Media related to Canyons at Wikimedia Commons