Agrimonia (from the Greek ἀργεμώνη), commonly known as agrimony, is a genus of 12–15 species of perennial herbaceous flowering plants in the family Rosaceae, native to the temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere, with one species also in Africa. The species grow to between 0.5–2 m (1.6–6.6 ft) tall, with interrupted pinnate leaves, and tiny yellow flowers borne on a single (usually unbranched) spike. Agrimonia species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species including grizzled skipper (recorded on A. eupatoria) and large grizzled skipper. Agrimonia eupatoria – Common agrimony (Europe, Asia, Africa) Agrimonia gryposepala – Common agrimony, tall hairy agrimony (North America) Agrimonia incisa – Incised agrimony (North America) Agrimonia coreana – Korean agrimony (eastern Asia) Agrimonia microcarpa – Smallfruit agrimony (North America) Agrimonia nipponica – Japanese agrimony (eastern Asia) Agrimonia parviflora – Harvestlice agrimony (North America) Agrimonia pilosa – Hairy agrimony (eastern Europe, Asia) Agrimonia procera – Fragrant agrimony (Europe) Agrimonia pubescens – Soft or downy agrimony (North America) Agrimonia repens – Short agrimony (southwest Asia) Agrimonia rostellata – Beaked agrimony (North America) Agrimonia striata – Roadside agrimony (North America) In ancient times, it was used for foot baths and tired feet. Agrimony has a long history of medicinal use. The English poet Michael Drayton once hailed it as an "all-heal" and through the ages it was considered a panacea.[citation needed] The ancient Greeks used agrimony to treat eye ailments, and it was made into brews for diarrhea and disorders of the gallbladder, liver, and kidneys.[citation needed] The Anglo-Saxons boiled agrimony in milk and used it to improve erectile performance. They also made a solution from the leaves and seeds for healing wounds; this use continued through the Middle Ages and afterward, in a preparation called eau d'arquebusade, or "musket-shot water". It has been added to tea as a spring tonic. According to the German Federal Commission E (Phytotherapy)-Monograph "Agrimony", published 1990, the internal application area is "mild, nonspecific, acute diarrhea" and "inflammation of oral and pharyngeal mucosa" and the external application "mild, superficial inflammation of the skin". Traditional British folklore states that if a sprig of Agrimonia eupatoria was placed under a person's head, they would sleep until it was removed. Aremonia agrimonoides (Bastard-agrimony, of the related genus Aremonia) Eupatorium cannabinum (Hemp-agrimony) Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Agrimony" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 1 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 424. C. F. Leyel (1946). Compassionate Herbs. Faber and Faber Limited. Lacey, R. and Danziger, D. (1999) In The Year 1000 London: Little, Brown & Co, p. 126 Grieve, Margaret (1931). A Modern Herbal (Hypertext version ed.). Hafner Pub. pp. Agrimony. Retrieved 14 December 2021. German Federal Commission E Monographs (Phytotherapy): Monograph Agrimony (Agrimoniae herba). Bundesanzeiger. March 13, 1990. – www.heilpflanzen-welt.de. Encyclopedia of Folk Medicine: Old World and New World Traditions by Gabrielle Hatfield, p.310 Eriksson, Torsten; Hibbs, Malin S.; Yoder, Anne D.; Delwiche, Charles F.; Donoghue, Michael J. (2003). "The Phylogeny of Rosoideae (Rosaceae) Based on Sequences of the Internal Transcribed Spacers (ITS) of Nuclear Ribosomal DNA and the TRNL/F Region of Chloroplast DNA". International Journal of Plant Sciences. 164 (2): 197–211. doi:10.1086/346163. S2CID 22378156. Media related to Agrimonia at Wikimedia Commons Agrimonia at Wikibooks "Agrimonia L." Atlas of Living Australia. Herb Forum Agrimony Thread