Newcastle upon Tyne, or simply Newcastle (/njuːˈkæsəl/ new-KASS-əl, RP: /ˈnjuːkɑːsəl/ NEW-kah-səl), is a city and metropolitan borough in Tyne and Wear, England. It is England's northernmost metropolitan borough, located on the River Tyne's northern bank opposite Gateshead to the south. It is the most populous settlement in the Tyneside conurbation and North East England. Newcastle developed around a Roman settlement called Pons Aelius. The settlement became known as Monkchester before taking on the name of a castle built in 1080 by William the Conqueror's eldest son, Robert Curthose. It was one of the world's largest ship building and repair centres during the industrial revolution. Newcastle was part of the county of Northumberland until 1400, when it separated and formed a county of itself. In 1974, Newcastle became part of Tyne and Wear. Since 2018, the city council has been part of the North of Tyne Combined Authority. The first recorded settlement in what is now Newcastle was Pons Aelius ("Hadrian's bridge"), a Roman fort and bridge across the River Tyne. It was given the family name of the Roman Emperor Hadrian, who founded it in the 2nd century AD. This rare honour suggests Hadrian may have visited the site and instituted the bridge on his tour of Britain. The population of Pons Aelius then is estimated at 2,000. Fragments of Hadrian's Wall are visible in parts of Newcastle, particularly along the West Road. The course of the "Roman Wall" can be traced eastwards to the Segedunum Roman fort in Wallsend – the "wall's end" – and to the separate supply fort of Arbeia in South Shields, across the river from Hadrian's Wall. The extent of Hadrian's Wall was 73 miles (117 km), spanning the width of Britain; the Wall incorporated the Vallum, a large rearward ditch with parallel mounds, and was built primarily for defence and to prevent the incursion of Pictish tribes from the north, and probably not as a fighting line for a major invasion. However, it seems that the Vallum stopped just west of Newcastle, where its role as a secondary line of defence was performed by the River Tyne. After the Roman departure from Britain, completed in 410, Newcastle became part of the powerful Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Northumbria, and was known throughout this period as Munucceaster (sometimes modernised as Monkchester). Conflicts with the Danes in 876 left the settlements along the River Tyne in ruins. After the conflicts with the Danes, and following the 1088 rebellion against the Normans, Monkchester was all but destroyed by Odo of Bayeux. Because of its strategic position, Robert Curthose, son of William the Conqueror, erected a wooden castle there in the year 1080. The town was henceforth known as Novum Castellum or New Castle. The wooden structure was replaced by a stone castle in 1087. The castle was rebuilt again in 1172 during the reign of Henry II. Much of the keep which can be seen in the city today dates from this period. Throughout the Middle Ages, Newcastle was England's northern fortress. In 1400 Newcastle was separated from Northumberland and made a county of itself by Henry IV. Newcastle was given the title of the county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne. The town had a new charter granted by Elizabeth I in 1589. A 25-foot-high (7.6 m) stone wall was built around the town in the 13th century, to defend it from invaders during the Border war against Scotland. The Scots king William the Lion was imprisoned in Newcastle in 1174, and Edward I brought the Stone of Scone and William Wallace south through the town. Newcastle was successfully defended against the Scots three times during the 14th century. From 1530, a royal act restricted all shipments of coal from Tyneside to Newcastle Quayside, giving a monopoly in the coal trade to a cartel of Newcastle burgesses known as the Hostmen. This monopoly, which lasted for a considerable time, helped Newcastle prosper and develop into a major town. The phrase taking coals to Newcastle was first recorded contextually in 1538. The phrase itself means a pointless pursuit. In the 18th century, the American entrepreneur Timothy Dexter, regarded as an eccentric, defied this idiom. He was persuaded to sail a shipment of coal to Newcastle by merchants plotting to ruin him; however, his shipment arrived on the Tyne during a strike that had crippled local production, allowing him to turn a considerable profit. In the Sandgate area, to the east of the city, and beside the river, resided the close-knit community of keelmen and their families. They were so called because they worked on the keels, boats that were used to transfer coal from the river banks to the waiting colliers, for export to London and elsewhere. In the 1630s, about 7,000 out of 20,000 inhabitants of Newcastle died of plague, more than one-third of the population. Specifically within the year 1636, it is roughly estimated with evidence held by the Society of Antiquaries that 47% of the then population of Newcastle died from the epidemic; this may also have been the most devastating loss in any British city in this period. During the English Civil War, the North declared for the King. In a bid to gain Newcastle and the Tyne, Cromwell's allies, the Scots, captured the town of Newburn. In 1644, the Scots then captured the reinforced fortification on the Lawe in South Shields following a siege and the city was besieged for many months. It was eventually stormed ("with roaring drummes") and sacked by Cromwell's allies. The grateful King bestowed the motto "Fortiter Defendit Triumphans" ("Triumphing by a brave defence") upon the town. Charles I was imprisoned in Newcastle by the Scots in 1646–7. Newcastle opened its first lunatic asylum in 1767. The asylum catered for people from the counties of Newcastle, Durham and Northumberland. The Newcastle Eccentrics of the 19th century were a group of unrelated people who lived in and around the centre of Newcastle and its Quayside between the end of the 18th and early/mid 19th century. These were characters who were described as "Worthies", "Props" or "Eccentrics" and would later be more gently described as "unfortunates". All had some form of physical or mental disability, but were looked upon as "unfortunates" and generally liked, respected and looked after by the population of hard working inhabitants.[citation needed] Newcastle was the country's fourth largest print centre after London, Oxford and Cambridge, and the Literary and Philosophical Society of 1793, with its erudite debates and large stock of books in several languages, predated the London Library by half a century. Some founder members of the Literary and Philosophical Society were abolitionists. Newcastle also became a glass producer with a reputation for brilliant flint glass. A permanent military presence was established in the city with the completion of Fenham Barracks in 1806. The great fire of Newcastle and Gateshead was a tragic and spectacular series of events starting on Friday 6 October 1854, in which a substantial amount of property in the two North East of England towns was destroyed in a series of fires and an explosion which killed 53 and injured hundreds. The status of city was granted to Newcastle on 3 June 1882. In the 19th century, shipbuilding and heavy engineering were central to the city's prosperity; and the city was a powerhouse of the Industrial Revolution. This revolution resulted in the urbanisation of the city. In 1817 the Maling company, at one time the largest pottery company in the world, moved to the city. The Victorian industrial revolution brought industrial structures that included the 2+1⁄2-mile (4 km) Victoria Tunnel, built in 1842, which provided underground wagon ways to the staithes. On 3 February 1879, Mosley Street in the city, was the first public road in the world to be lit up by the incandescent lightbulb. Newcastle was one of the first cities in the world to be lit up by electric lighting. Innovations in Newcastle and surrounding areas included the development of safety lamps, Stephenson's Rocket, Lord Armstrong's artillery, Be-Ro flour, Lucozade, Joseph Swan's electric light bulbs, and Charles Parsons' invention of the steam turbine, which led to the revolution of marine propulsion and the production of cheap electricity. In 1882, Newcastle became the seat of an Anglican diocese, with St. Nicholas' Church becoming its cathedral. Newcastle's public transport system was modernised in 1901 when Newcastle Corporation Tramways electric trams were introduced to the city's streets, though these were replaced gradually by trolley buses from 1935, with the tram service finally coming to an end in 1950. The city acquired its first art gallery, the Laing Art Gallery in 1904, so named after its founder Alexander Laing, a Scottish wine and spirit merchant who wanted to give something back to the city in which he had made his fortune. Another art gallery, the Hatton Gallery (now part of Newcastle University), opened in 1925. With the advent of the motor car, Newcastle's road network was improved in the early part of the 20th century, beginning with the opening of the Redheugh road bridge in 1901 and the Tyne Bridge in 1928. Efforts to preserve the city's historic past were evident as long ago as 1934, when the Museum of Science and Industry opened, as did the John G Joicey Museum in the same year. Council housing began to replace inner-city slums in the 1920s, and the process continued into the 1970s, along with substantial private house building and acquisitions. Unemployment hit record heights in Newcastle during the Great Depression of the 1930s. The city's last coal pit closed in 1956, though a temporary open cast mine was opened in 2013. The temporary open cast mine shifted 40,000 tonnes of coal, using modern techniques to reduce noise, on a part of the City undergoing redevelopment. The slow demise of the shipyards on the banks of the River Tyne happened in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. During the Second World War, the city and surrounding area were a target for air raids as heavy industry was involved in the production of ships and armaments. The raids caused 141 deaths and 587 injuries. A former French consul in Newcastle called Jacques Serre assisted the German war effort by describing important targets in the region to Admiral Raeder who was the head of the German Navy. The public sector in Newcastle began to expand in the 1960s. The federal structure of the University of Durham was dissolved. That university's college in Newcastle, which had been known as King's College, became the University of Newcastle upon Tyne (now known as Newcastle University), which was founded in 1963, followed by Newcastle Polytechnic in 1969; the latter received university status in 1992 and became the University of Northumbria at Newcastle (now known as Northumbria University). Further efforts to preserve the city's historic past continued in the later 20th century, with the opening of Newcastle Military Vehicle Museum in 1983 and Stephenson Railway Museum in 1986. The Military Vehicle museum closed in 2006. New developments at the turn of the 21st century included the Life Science Centre in 2000 and Millennium Bridge in 2001. Based at St James' Park since 1886, Newcastle United F.C. became Football League members in 1893. They have won four top division titles (the first in 1905 and the most recent in 1927), six FA Cups (the first in 1910 and the most recent in 1955) and the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup in 1969. They broke the world transfer record in 1996 by paying £15 million for Blackburn Rovers and England striker Alan Shearer, one of the most prolific goalscorers of that era. In 2017, Newcastle was the venue for the 2017 Freedom City festival. The 2017 Freedom City festival commemorated the 50 years since Dr Martin Luther King's visit to Newcastle, where King received his honorary degree from Newcastle University. In 2018 Newcastle hosted the Great Exhibition of the North, the largest event in England in 2018. The exhibition began on 22 June with an opening ceremony on the River Tyne, and ended on 9 September with the Great North Run weekend. The exhibition describes the story of the north of England through its innovators, artists, designers and businesses. In 2019, various travel sites named Newcastle to be the friendliest city in the UK. Since 1974, Newcastle has been a part of the metropolitan county of Tyne and Wear in North East England. The city is located on the north-western bank of the River Tyne, approximately 46 miles (74 km) south of the border with Scotland. The ground beneath the city is formed from Carboniferous strata of the Middle Pennine Coal Measures Group — a suite of sandstones, mudstones and coal seams which generally dip moderately eastwards. To the west of the city are the Upper Pennine Coal Measures and further west again the sandstones and mudstones of the Stainmore Formation, the local equivalent of the Millstone Grit. In large parts, Newcastle still retains a medieval street layout. Narrow alleys or 'chares', most of which can only be traversed by foot, still exist in abundance, particularly around the riverside. Stairs from the riverside to higher parts of the city centre and the extant Castle Keep, originally recorded in the 14th century, remain intact in places. Close, Sandhill and Quayside contain modern buildings as well as structures dating from the 15th–18th centuries, including Bessie Surtees House, the Cooperage and Lloyds Quayside Bars, Derwentwater House and House of Tides, a restaurant situated at a Grade I-listed 16th century merchant's house at 28–30 Close. The city has an extensive neoclassical centre referred to as Tyneside Classical, largely developed in the 1830s by Richard Grainger and John Dobson. More recently, Newcastle architecture considered to be Tyneside classical has been extensively restored. Broadcaster and writer Stuart Maconie described Newcastle as England's best-looking city and the German-born British scholar of architecture, Nikolaus Pevsner, describes Grey Street as one of the finest streets in England. In 1948 the poet John Betjeman said of Grey Street, "As for the curve of Grey Street, I shall never forget seeing it to perfection, traffic-less on a misty Sunday morning." The street curves down from Grey's Monument towards the valley of the River Tyne and was voted England's finest street in 2005 in a survey of BBC Radio 4 listeners. In the Google Street View awards of 2010, Grey Street came 3rd in the British picturesque category. A portion of Grainger Town was demolished in the 1960s to make way for the Eldon Square Shopping Centre, including all but one side of the original Eldon Square itself. Immediately to the north-west of the city centre is Leazes Park, first opened to the public in 1873 after a petition by 3,000 working men of the city for "ready access to some open ground for the purpose of health and recreation". Just outside one corner of this is St James' Park, the stadium home of Newcastle United FC which dominates the view of the city from all directions. Another major green space in the city is the Town Moor, lying immediately north of the city centre. It is larger than London's Hyde Park and Hampstead Heath put together and the freemen of the city have the right to graze cattle on it. The right extends to the pitch of St. James' Park, Newcastle United Football Club's ground; this is not exercised, although the Freemen do collect rent for the loss of privilege. Honorary freemen include Bob Geldof, King Harald V of Norway, Bobby Robson, Alan Shearer, the late Nelson Mandela and the Royal Shakespeare Company. The Hoppings funfair, said to be the largest travelling funfair in Europe, is held here annually in June. In the south-eastern corner of the Town Moor is Exhibition Park, which contains the only remaining pavilion from the North East Coast Exhibition of 1929. From the 1970s until 2006 this housed the Newcastle Military Vehicle Museum; which closed in 2006. The pavilion is now being used as a microbrewery and concert venue for Wylam Brewery. The wooded gorge of the Ouseburn in the east of the city is known as Jesmond Dene and forms another recreation area, linked by Armstrong Park and Heaton Park to the Ouseburn Valley, where the river finally reaches the River Tyne. The springtime dawn chorus at 55 degrees latitude has been described as one of the best in the world. The dawn chorus of the Jesmond Dene green space has been professionally recorded and has been used in various workplace and hospital rehabilitation facilities. The area around the Tyne Gorge, between Newcastle on the north bank and Gateshead on the south bank, is the famous Newcastle-Gateshead Quayside. It is famed for its series of dramatic bridges, including the Tyne Bridge of 1928 which was built by Dorman Long of Middlesbrough, Robert Stephenson's High Level Bridge of 1849, the first road/rail bridge in the world, and the Swing Bridge of 1876. Large-scale regeneration efforts have led to the replacement of former shipping premises with modern new office developments; an innovative tilting bridge - the Gateshead Millennium Bridge - integrated the Quayside more closely with the Gateshead Quayside, home to the BALTIC Centre for Contemporary Art (the venue for the Turner Prize 2011) and the Norman Foster-designed The Sage Gateshead music centre. The Newcastle and Gateshead Quaysides are now a thriving, cosmopolitan area with bars, restaurants, hotels and public spaces. The historic heart of Newcastle is the Grainger Town area. Established on classical streets built by Richard Grainger, a builder and developer, between 1835 and 1842, some of Newcastle upon Tyne's finest buildings and streets lie within this area of the city centre including Grainger Market, Theatre Royal, Grey Street, Grainger Street and Clayton Street. These buildings are predominantly four stories high, with vertical dormers, domes, turrets and spikes. Richard Grainger was said to 'have found Newcastle of bricks and timber and left it in stone'. Of Grainger Town's 450 buildings, 244 are listed, of which 29 are grade I and 49 are grade II*. Grey's Monument, which commemorates Prime Minister Earl Grey and his Reform Act of 1832, stands above Monument Metro Station and was designed and built by Edward Hodges Baily and Benjamin Green. Hodges, who also built Nelson's Column, designed and built the statue, and the monument plinth was designed and built by Benjamin Green. The Grainger Market replaced an earlier market originally built in 1808 called the Butcher Market. The Grainger Market itself, was opened in 1835 and was Newcastle's first indoor market. At the time of its opening in 1835 it was said to be one of the largest and most beautiful markets in Europe. The opening was celebrated with a grand dinner attended by 2000 guests, and the Laing Art Gallery has a painting of this event. With the exception of the timber roof which was destroyed by a fire in 1901 and replaced by latticed-steel arches the Market is largely in its original condition. The Grainger Market architecture, like most in Grainger Town, which are either grade I or II listed, was listed grade I in 1954 by English Heritage. The development of the city in the 1960s saw the demolition of part of Grainger Town as a prelude to the modernist rebuilding initiatives of T. Dan Smith, the leader of Newcastle City Council. A corruption scandal was uncovered involving Smith and John Poulson, a property developer from Pontefract, West Yorkshire, and both were imprisoned. Echoes of the scandal were revisited in the late 1990s in the BBC TV mini-series, Our Friends in the North. Newcastle's thriving Chinatown lies in the north-west of Grainger Town, centred on Stowell Street. A new Chinese arch, or paifang, providing a landmark entrance, was handed over to the city with a ceremony in 2005. The Tyneside flat was the dominant housing form constructed at the time when the industrial centres on Tyneside were growing most rapidly. They can still be found in areas such as South Heaton in Newcastle but once dominated the streetscape on both sides of the Tyne. Tyneside flats were built as terraces, one of each pair of doors led to an upstairs flat while the other led into the ground-floor flat, each of two or three rooms. A new development in the Ouseburn valley has recreated them; Architects Cany Ash and Robert Sakula were attracted by the possibilities of high density without building high and getting rid of common areas. In terms of housing stock, the authority is one of few authorities to see the proportion of detached homes rise in the 2010 Census (to 7.8%), in this instance this was coupled with a similar rise in flats and waterside apartments to 25.6%, and the proportion of converted or shared houses in 2011 renders this dwelling type within the highest of the five colour-coded brackets at 5.9%, and on a par with Oxford and Reading, greater than Manchester and Liverpool and below a handful of historic densely occupied, arguably overinflated markets in the local authorities: Harrogate, Cheltenham, Bath, inner London, Hastings, Brighton and Royal Tunbridge Wells. Significant Newcastle housing developments include Ralph Erskine's the Byker Wall designed in the 1960s, and now Grade II* listed. It is on UNESCO's list of outstanding 20th-century buildings. Newcastle has an oceanic climate (Köppen: Cfb). Data in Newcastle was first collected in 1802 by the solicitor James Losh. Situated in the rain shadow of the North Pennines, Newcastle is amongst the driest cities in the UK. Temperature extremes recorded at Newcastle Weather Centre include 37.0 °C (98.6 °F) set in July 2022 down to −14.0 °C (6.8 °F) on 29 December 1995. Newcastle can have cool to cold winters, though usually warmer than the rural areas around it, and the winters are often compensated for by warm summers, with very long daylight hours in the summer months, longer than all other major English cities. Newcastle upon Tyne shares the same latitude as Copenhagen and southern Sweden. The nearest weather station to provide sunshine statistics is at Durham, about 14 miles (23 km) south of Newcastle City Centre. Durham's inland, less urbanised setting results in night-time temperature data about 1 degree cooler than Newcastle proper throughout the year. The city is located within the centre of the North East Green Belt, also known as the Tyne and Wear Green Belt. The green belts stated aims are to: Prevent the merging of settlements Safeguard the countryside from encroachment Check unrestricted urban sprawl Assist in urban regeneration in the city-region by encouraging the recycling of derelict and other urban land The green belt surrounds Brunswick Village, Dinnington, Callerton, Hazlerigg, Throckley, Walbottle, and Woolsington. Popular locations such as Ryton Island, Tyne Riverside Country Park, the city's golf courses, Newcastle Racecourse, and Newcastle International Airport fall inside the green belt. The city has been recognised for its commitment to environmental issues, with a programme planned for Newcastle to become "the first carbon neutral city" however, those plans have been revised and they now hope to be carbon neutral by 2050. The Rough Guide to Britain placed Newcastle upon Tyne's nightlife as Great Britain's number one tourist attraction. In the Tripadvisor Travellers' Choice Destination Awards for Nightlife destinations, Newcastle was awarded third place in Europe (behind London and Berlin) and seventh place in the world. In July 2023 Newcastle was voted the best city in the UK for food, fashion and nightlife. There are many bars on the Bigg Market and its adjoining streets. Other areas popular for nightlife include Collingwood Street (commonly referred to as the 'Diamond Strip' due to its concentration of high-end bars). Neville Street, the Central Station area, Osborne Road in Jesmond and the wider Ouseburn area are home to a variety of younger metropolitan bars. "The Gate", located on Newgate Street, has become a popular venue for late-night entertainment in the past decade and a half. Newcastle's 'pink triangle' is concentrated on Times Square, surrounded by the Centre for Life. Bakery chain Greggs was founded, and is headquartered, in Newcastle and has the greatest number of Greggs stores per capita in the world. Local delicacies include pease pudding and stottie cake. In 1967, London based Smith's Crisps created Salt & Vinegar flavour crisps which were first produced by their Newcastle based subsidiary Tudor Crisps and tested in Tudor's home market of north-east England before being launched nationally. In 2010, Osborne Road in Jesmond was awarded fourth place in the UK Google Street View awards for the "foodie" category. Newcastle has its own Chinatown. Additionally, the city has a wide variety of cuisines available including Greek, Mexican, Spanish, Indian, Italian, Persian, Japanese, Malaysian, French, American, Mongolian, Moroccan, Thai, Polish, Vietnamese and Lebanese. There has also been a noticeable growth in Newcastle's gourmet restaurant industry in recent years. The city has a proud history of theatre. Stephen Kemble of the well-known Kemble family managed the original Theatre Royal, Newcastle for fifteen years (1791–1806). He brought members of his famous acting family such as Sarah Siddons and John Kemble out of London to Newcastle. Stephen Kemble guided the theatre through many celebrated seasons. The original Theatre Royal in Newcastle was opened on 21 January 1788 and was located on Mosley Street. It was demolished to make way for Grey Street, where its replacement was built. The city still contains many theatres. The largest, the Theatre Royal on Grey Street, first opened in 1837, designed by John and Benjamin Green. It has hosted a season of performances from the Royal Shakespeare Company for over 25 years, as well as touring productions of West End musicals. The Mill Volvo Tyne Theatre hosts smaller touring productions, whilst other venues feature local talent. Northern Stage, formally known as the Newcastle Playhouse and Gulbenkian Studio, hosts various local, national and international productions in addition to those produced by the Northern Stage company. Other theatres in the city include the Live Theatre, the People's Theatre, Gosforth Civic Theatre, and the Jubilee Theatre. NewcastleGateshead was voted in 2006 as the arts capital of the UK in a survey conducted by the Artsworld TV channel. Newcastle has a strong reputation as a poetry centre. The Morden Tower, run by poet Tom Pickard, is a major venue for poetry readings in the North East, being the place where Basil Bunting gave the first reading of Briggflatts in 1965. The Literary and Philosophical Society of Newcastle upon Tyne (popularly known as the 'Lit & Phil') is the largest independent library outside London, housing more than 150,000 books. Its music library contains 8,000 CDs and 10,000 LPs. The current Lit and Phil premises were built in 1825 and the building was designed by John and Benjamin Green. Operating since 1793 and founded as a 'conversation club,' its lecture theatre was the first public building to be lit by electric light, during a lecture by Joseph Swan on 20 October 1880. The old City library designed by Basil Spence, was demolished in 2006 and replaced. The new building opened on 21 June 2009 and was named after the 18th-century local composer Charles Avison; the building was first opened by Dr Herbert Loebl. Later that year it was officially opened by Queen Elizabeth II. Seven Stories, the National Centre for Children's Books, opened in 2005 in the Ouseburn Valley. In either January or February, Newcastle's Chinatown becomes the focus point of celebrations for the Chinese New Year with carnivals and parades. The Newcastle Science Festival, now called Newcastle ScienceFest, returns annually in early March. The Newcastle Beer Festival, organised by CAMRA takes place in April each year. Evolution Festival, a music festival that attracted tens of thousands of attendees, took place in May from 2002 until 2013 and was described as "the biggest festival Tyneside has ever staged". The This Is Tomorrow festival now takes place over the spring bank holiday and is in the same location. The biennial AV Festival of international electronic art, featuring exhibitions, concerts, conferences and film screenings, is held in March. The North East Art Expo, a festival of art and design from the regions professional artists, is held in late May. The Hoppings, the largest annual collection of travelling fairs in Europe, comes together on Newcastle Town Moor every June. The event has its origins in the Temperance Movement during the early 1880s, and coincides with the annual race week at High Gosforth Park. Newcastle Community Green Festival, which claims to be the UK's biggest free community environmental festival, also takes place every June, in Leazes Park. The Cyclone Festival of Cycling takes place within, or starting from, Newcastle in June. The Northern Pride Festival and Parade is held in Leazes Park and in the city's Gay Community in mid July. The Ouseburn Festival, a family oriented weekend festival near the city centre, incorporating a "Family Fun Day" and "Carnival Day", is held in late July. Newcastle Mela, held on the late August Bank Holiday weekend, is an annual two-day multicultural event that blends drama, music and food from Punjabi, Pakistani, Bengali and Hindu cultures. NewcastleGateshead also holds an annual International Arts Fair. The 2009 event will be in the Norman Foster designed Sage Gateshead Music and Arts Centre in September. In October, there is the Design Event festival—an annual festival providing the public with an opportunity to see work by regional, national and international designers. The SAMA Festival, an East Asian cultural festival is also held in early October. Newcastle's vernacular music was a mixture of Northumbrian folk music and nineteenth-century songs with dialect lyrics, by writers such as George "Geordie" Ridley, whose songs include one which became an unofficial Tyneside national anthem, "Blaydon Races". The 1960s saw the internationally successful rock group The Animals emerge from Newcastle night spots such as Club A-Go-Go on Percy Street. Other well-known acts with connections to the city include Sting, Bryan Ferry, Dire Straits and more recently Maxïmo Park. There is also a thriving underground music scene that encompasses a variety of styles, including drum and bass, doom metal and post-rock. Lindisfarne are a folk-rock group with a strong Tyneside connection. Their most famous song, "Fog on the Tyne" (1971), was covered by Geordie ex-footballer Paul Gascoigne in 1990. Venom, reckoned by many to be the originators of black metal and extremely influential to the extreme metal scene as a whole, formed in Newcastle in 1979. Folk metal band Skyclad, often regarded as the first folk metal band, also formed in Newcastle after the break-up of Martin Walkyier thrash metal band, Sabbat. Andy Taylor, former lead guitarist of Duran Duran was born here in 1961. Brian Johnson was a member of local rock band Geordie before becoming the lead vocalist for Australian band AC/DC. Newcastle is the home of Kitchenware Records (c. 1982), previously home to acclaimed bands such as Prefab Sprout, Martin Stephenson and the Daintees and The Fatima Mansions. The members of Lighthouse Family met at Newcastle University; the music video for their hit single "High" features the city's Tyne Bridge. The 1990s boom in progressive house music saw the city's Global Underground record label publish mix CDs by the likes of Sasha, Paul Oakenfold, James Lavelle, and Danny Howells recording mix compilations. The label is still going strong today with offices in London and New York, and new releases from Deep Dish and Adam Freeland. Newcastle's leading classical music ensemble is the Royal Northern Sinfonia, which was founded in 1958 and performed regularly at Newcastle City Hall until 2004. Nowadays it is based at The Sage, Gateshead. ICMuS, Newcastle University's music department, has been a driving force for music in the region, producing innovative work, organising concerts and festivals, instigating the first degree programme in folk music in the British Isles, and engaging creatively with communities in the region. The largest venue used for music concerts is St James Park, home of Newcastle United, which has also previously been used for Rugby League games and the Olympic Games. The second largest music venue in Newcastle is the 11,000-seat Utilita Arena Newcastle, which opened in 1995 and hosts major pop and rock concerts. Newcastle City Hall is one of the oldest venues in the region and "attracts big names who are often legends of the past". Both of the city's universities have venues that mainly host indie and alternative bands. On 14 October 2005, the 2,000 capacity O2 Academy Newcastle opened. It had previously been a music venue in the 1960s, hosting concerts by The Beatles and The Who. The new venue was headlined by The Futureheads on the opening night and known as the Carling Academy for a number of years. Since opening the venue has hosted performances by major bands and solo musicians including Adele, Arctic Monkeys, Katy Perry, The Libertines, Blondie and Amy Winehouse. The Riverside music venue on Melbourne Street, open from 1985 until 1999, notably hosted Nirvana's first European show in 1989. The venue also welcomed Oasis, David Bowie and The Stone Roses and was named Best Regional Venue by NME in 1993. Riverside has also been the subject of a book, Riverside: Newcastle's Legendary Alternative Music Venue. In 2016 open-air concerts took place at Times Square for the first time, including performances from Maxïmo Park, Ocean Colour Scene and Catfish and the Bottlemen. The small music venue Think Tank? was a nominee for Best Small Venue in NME in 2015. The Cluny in Ouseburn Valley is "one of the most important venues for breaking bands in the region". Trillians Rock Bar is well-noted for its rock and metal shows, and The Head of Steam is a 90-capacity basement venue described as "one of Newcastle's staple venues". Newcastle has multiple independent cinemas, including the famous Tyneside Cinema, located on Pilgrim Street. It originally opened as the 'Bijou News-Reel Cinema' in 1937, and was designed and built by Dixon Scott, great-uncle of film directors Ridley Scott and Tony Scott. The Pilgrim Street building was refurbished between November 2006 and May 2008; during the refurbishment works, the cinema relocated to the Old Town Hall, Gateshead. In May 2008 the Tyneside Cinema reopened in the restored and refurbished original building. The site currently houses three cinemas, including the restored Classic —the United Kingdom's last surviving news cinema still in full-time operation—alongside two new screens, and dedicated education and teaching suites. As well as this, the city is home to The Side Cinema and Star and Shadow Cinema which are both small venues which have built up cult audiences of film fans. Its landmarks include the Tyne Bridge; the Swing Bridge; Newcastle Castle; Newcastle Cathedral, St Mary's Cathedral, St Thomas' Church; Grainger Town including Grey's Monument and the Theatre Royal; the Millennium Bridge; St James' Park; Chinatown; and Fernwood House. The earliest known film featuring some exterior scenes filmed in the city is On the Night of the Fire (1939), though by and large the action is studio-bound. Later came The Clouded Yellow (1951) and Payroll (1961), both of which feature more extensive scenes filmed in the city. The gangster thriller Get Carter (1971) was shot on location in and around Newcastle and offers an opportunity to see what Newcastle looked like in the early 1970s. The city was also backdrop to another gangster film, the film noir Stormy Monday (1988), directed by Mike Figgis and starring Tommy Lee Jones, Melanie Griffith, Sting and Sean Bean. As well as this, Newcastle was used as the location for I, Daniel Blake (2016) which won the Palme d'Or award at Cannes Film Festival as well as the BAFTA for Outstanding British Film. The city has been the setting for films based around football; films such as Purely Belter (2000), The One and Only (2002) and Goal! have all been focused around Tyneside. The comedy School for Seduction (2004), starring Kelly Brook was also filmed in Newcastle. The Bollywood film Hum Tum Aur Ghost (2010) was shot on location in Newcastle's city centre and features key scenes in and around Grainger Town. The film Public Sex (2009) was shot in and around Newcastle, and features several scenes under and around the Tyne Bridge. Crime drama Harrigan (2013) was filmed in the city as well as Gateshead and Teesside. Local newspapers that are printed in Newcastle include Trinity Mirror's Evening Chronicle and The Journal, the Sunday Sun as well as the Metro freesheet. The Crack is a monthly style and listings magazine similar to London's Time Out. The adult comic Viz originated in Jesmond and includes many references to Newcastle, and The Mag is a fanzine for Newcastle United supporters. BBC North East and Cumbria is based to the north of the city on Barrack Road, Spital Tongues, in a building known as the Pink Palace. It is from here that the Corporation broadcasts the Look North television regional news programme and local radio station BBC Radio Newcastle. ITV Tyne Tees was based at City Road for over 40 years after its launch in January 1959. In 2005 it moved to a new facility on The Watermark business park next to the MetroCentre in Gateshead. The entrance to studio 5 at the City Road complex gave its name to the 1980s music television programme, The Tube. Independent Local Radio stations include Metro Radio and sister station Greatest Hits Radio North East, which are both based on the north side of the Tyne Bridge. Capital North East broadcasts across Newcastle and the North East England region from its studios in Wallsend. Heart North East and Smooth North East also broadcast from studios in the city. NE1fm launched on 8 June 2007, the first full-time community radio station in the area. Newcastle Student Radio is run by students from both of the city's universities, broadcasting from Newcastle University's students' union building during term time. Radio Tyneside has been the voluntary hospital radio service for most hospitals across Newcastle and Gateshead since 1951, broadcasting on Hospedia online, and also on 93.6 FM since July 2018 also under a community radio licence. The city also has a Radio Lollipop station based at the Great North Children's Hospital in the Newcastle Royal Victoria Infirmary. Newcastle was one of the first cities in the UK to have its city centre covered by free wireless internet access. It was developed and installed at the end of 2006 and went active in March 2007. The city's economy is diverse with major economic output in science, finance, retail, education, tourism, and nightlife. Newcastle is one of the UK Core Cities, as well as part of the Eurocities network. Newcastle played a major role during the 19th-century Industrial Revolution, and was a leading centre for coal mining, shipbuilding, engineering, munitions and manufacturing. Heavy industries in Newcastle declined in the second half of the 20th century; with office, service and retail employment now becoming the city's staples. Today, Newcastle's economy contributes around £13 billion to the UK GVA. This figure is mostly produced by corporate activity in the city centre. The city's thriving nightlife is estimated to be worth £340 million per year, and consequently is seen as a major contributor to Newcastle's economy. The UK's first biotechnology village, the Centre for Life, is located by Central Station. The village is the first step in the City Council's plans to transform Newcastle into a science city. In 2010, Newcastle was positioned ninth in the retail centre expenditure league of the UK. There are several major shopping areas in Newcastle City Centre. The largest of these is the Eldon Square Shopping Centre, one of the largest city centre shopping complexes in the UK. It has one of the largest John Lewis & Partners stores in the UK. This John Lewis branch was formerly known as Bainbridge, established in 1838, often cited as the world's first department store. Emerson Bainbridge (1817–1892), a pioneer and the founder of Bainbridge, sold goods via department, a new arrangement of trade for that time. The Bainbridge official ledgers reported revenue by department, giving birth to the name department store. Eldon Square is currently undergoing a full redevelopment. A new bus station, replacing the old underground bus station, was officially opened in March 2007. The wing of the centre, including the undercover Green Market, near Grainger Street was demolished in 2007 so that the area could be redeveloped. This was completed in February 2010 with the opening of a Debenhams department store as well as other major stores including Apple, Hollister and Guess. The main shopping street in the city is Northumberland Street. In a 2004 report, it was ranked as the most expensive shopping street in the UK for rent, outside London. It is home to two major department stores including the first and largest Fenwick department store, which houses some of the most luxurious designer labels, and one of the largest Marks and Spencer stores outside London. Both stores have entrances into Eldon Square Shopping Centre. Other shopping destinations in Newcastle include Grainger Street and the area around Grey's Monument, the relatively modern Eldon Garden and Monument Mall complexes, Central Arcade and the traditional Grainger Market. On Blackett Street can be found the silversmith Reid & Sons which was established in the city in 1788. Outside the city centre, the largest suburban shopping areas are Gosforth and Byker. From 2007, inside Kingston Park, on the edge of Newcastle, the Tesco store was the largest Tesco hypermarket in the UK — for a period of time. Close to Newcastle, the largest indoor shopping centre in Europe, the MetroCentre, is located in Gateshead. According to the ONS, Newcastle had a population of 293,000 in 2015. Tyneside (made up of Newcastle and the surrounding metropolitan boroughs of Gateshead, North Tyneside and South Tyneside) has a population of approximately 880,000, making it the eighth most populous urban area in the UK. The wider metropolitan area of Tyneside-Wearside has a population of approximately 1,122,000. Additionally, Newcastle is home to a large temporary population of students from Newcastle and Northumbria universities. Areas of suburban Newcastle with significant student populations include Jesmond, Shieldfield, Gosforth, Sandyford, Spital Tongues and Heaton. According to the same statistics, the average age of people living in Newcastle is 37.8 years, compared to the national average being of 38.6 years. From the 2011 Census, two significant religions could be identified in the city: Christian and Muslim. 56.6% of Newcastle identified as Christian and 6.3% as Muslim. Over 28% stated they have no religious affiliation. According to the 2011 census, the metropolitan borough of Newcastle upon Tyne was predominately white, representing 85.3% of the population (including non-British white). Asians made up 9.8% of the population (2.3% Pakistani, 1.7% 'Bangladeshi', 1.8% 'Indian', 2.2% 'Chinese', 1.8% 'Asian other'). Black people make up a small proportion of the population (1.7% 'Black African', 0.1% 'Black Caribbean' and 0.1% 'Black other'), as do mixed race groups at 1.6% (0.6% 'Asian and White', 0.3% 'White and Caribbean', 0.3% 'White and African', 0.4% 'White and Other'). The last significantly sized ethnic community in Newcastle is 'Arab' at 0.9%. The remainder of the population, 0.5%, represent other ethnicities. Large populations of ethnic minorities can be found in areas such as Elswick, Wingrove and Arthurs Hill. According to the 2011 UK Census, those born outside the UK were mainly from India (3,315), China (3,272), Pakistan (2,644), Bangladesh (2,276), Poland (1,473), Germany (1,357), Nigeria (1,226), Iran (1,164), Hong Kong (1,038) and Ireland (942). In the North East, Newcastle was the most ethnically diverse district followed by Middlesbrough. There are also small but significant Chinese, Jewish and Eastern European populations. The International Organization for Migration states there are estimated to be between 500 and 2,000 Bolivians in Newcastle, one of the largest populations in any city in the UK. The regional nickname for people from Newcastle and the surrounding area is Geordie. The Latin term Novocastrian can equally be applied to residents of any place called Newcastle, although it is most commonly used for ex-pupils of the city's Royal Grammar School. The dialect of Newcastle is also referred to as Geordie. It contains a large amount of vocabulary and distinctive words and pronunciations not used in other parts of the United Kingdom. The Geordie dialect has much of its origins in the language spoken by the Anglo-Saxon populations who migrated to and conquered much of England after the end of Roman Imperial rule. This language was the forerunner of Modern English; but while the dialects of other English regions have been heavily altered by the influences of other foreign languages—particularly Latin and Norman French—the Geordie dialect retains many elements of the old language. An example of this is the pronunciation of certain words: "dead", "cow", "house" and "strong" are pronounced "deed", "coo", "hoos" and "strang"—which is how they were pronounced in the Anglo-Saxon language. Other Geordie words with Anglo-Saxon origins include: "larn" (from the Anglo-Saxon "laeran", meaning "teach"), "burn" ("stream") and "gan" ("go"). According to the British Library, "Locals insist there are significant differences between Geordie and several other local dialects, such as Pitmatic and Mackem. Pitmatic is the dialect of the former mining areas in County Durham and around Ashington to the north of Newcastle upon Tyne, while Mackem is used locally to refer to the dialect of the city of Sunderland and the surrounding urban area of Wearside". "Bairn" and "hyem", meaning "child" and "home", respectively, are examples of Geordie words with origins in Scandinavia; barn and hjem are the corresponding modern Norwegian and Danish words. Some words used in the Geordie dialect are used elsewhere in the Northern United Kingdom. The words "bonny" (meaning "pretty") and "stot" ("bounce") are used in Scots; "aye" ("yes") and "nowt" (IPA:/naʊt/, rhymes with out, "nothing") are used elsewhere in Northern England. Many words, however, appear to be used exclusively in Newcastle and the surrounding area, such as "canny" (a versatile word meaning "good", "nice" or "very"), "hacky" ("dirty"), "netty" ("toilet"), "hockle" ("spit"). According to research from 2011, public health and levels of deprivation in Newcastle upon Tyne was generally worse than average in England. As levels of deprivation is considerably higher than the nationwide average, sociologists argue that as a result, the life expectancy for both men and women is lower than the nationwide average. There is significant discrepancy between life expectancies in wealthy areas and deprived areas, with life expectancy up to 14.3 years lower for men and 11.1 years lower for women in deprived areas than in wealthy areas. From 2015 to 2019 Newcastle became relatively more deprived according to the Index of Multiple Deprivation. From 2001 to 2011, as with all UK cities all-cause mortality rates have fallen, life expectancy has increased. Early death rates from cancer and from heart disease and stroke have fallen but remain worse than the England average. Almost 21.9% of Year 6 children are clinically obese. In 2014/5, 35.9% of 10 to 11-year-olds were classified as overweight or obese, in comparison to a national average of 33.2%. 54.9% of pupils meet the recommendation of at least three hours each week on school sport. Levels of teenage pregnancy are higher than the nationwide average. In 2011, GCSE attainment amongst school children was worse than the England average. Estimated numbers of adults 'healthy eating' are lower than the England average. Rates of smoking-related deaths and hospital stays for alcohol-related harm are higher than average. Newcastle remains one of the few major cities in England to supply fluoridated water; this scheme is directed by Northumbria Water plc. Newcastle has two large teaching hospitals: the Royal Victoria Infirmary and the Freeman Hospital, which is also a pioneering centre for transplant surgery. In a report, published in early February 2007 by the Ear Institute at the University College London and Widex, Newcastle was named as the noisiest city in the whole of the UK with an average noise level of 80.4 decibels. The report claimed that these noise levels would have a negative long-term impact on the health of the city's residents. The report was criticised, however, for attaching too much weight to readings at arbitrarily selected locations, which in Newcastle's case included a motorway underpass without pedestrian access. As well as numerous parks, open spaces, and extensive riverside areas, puzzlingly the report also overlooked the 1000-acre Town Moor at the heart of the city. Larger than London's Hyde Park and Hampstead Heath combined, and even larger than New York's Central Park, the town moor dates back to the 12th century, with the land tenure and its use being regulated by an Act of Parliament. The city has a strong sporting tradition. Football club Newcastle United has been based at St James' Park since the club was established in 1892, although any traces of the original structure are now long gone as the stadium now holds more than 52,000 seated spectators, being England's seventh largest football stadium. The city also has non-League football clubs, Newcastle Benfield, West Allotment Celtic, Team Northumbria and Heaton Stannington. There is a women's football team, Newcastle United Women's Football Club, founded in 1989. Newcastle United W.F.C. currently has 40 ladies aged between 16 and 29 years signed or associated with the club, and plays in the FA Women's Premier League (North). The Newcastle Falcons are the only rugby union team in north-east England to have played in the Aviva Premiership. They play at Kingston Park Stadium in the northern suburb of Kingston Park. 1996 Pilkington Shield winners Medicals RFC are also based in Newcastle. Newcastle Thunder (formerly Gateshead Thunder) are a professional rugby league club based in the city who now also play at Kingston Park Stadium. They currently play in the Kingstone Press League 1. Since 2015, the Super League Magic Weekend has been played annually in the city at St James' Park. Newcastle has a horse racing course at Gosforth Park. The city is also home to the Newcastle Eagles basketball team who play their home games at the new Sport Central complex at Northumbria University. The Eagles are the most successful team in the history of the British Basketball League (BBL). The city's speedway team Newcastle Diamonds are based at Brough Park in Byker, a venue that is also home to greyhound racing. Newcastle also hosts the start of the annual Great North Run, the world's largest half-marathon in which participants race over the Tyne Bridge into Gateshead and then towards the finish line 13.1 miles (21.1 km) away on the coast at South Shields. Another athletic event is the 5.9-mile (9.5 km) Blaydon Race (a road race from Newcastle to Blaydon), which has taken place on 9 June annually since 1981, to commemorate the celebrated Blaydon Races horse racing. The 2012 London Olympic committee selected Newcastle as one of the UK host venue cities, with the stadium St James' Park hosting 9 matches in both the men's and women's football. The Newcastle Warriors were a professional ice hockey team that played the 1995–96 season in the British Hockey League. The Newcastle Vipers were also a professional ice hockey team in the British National League from 2002 and then the Elite Ice Hockey League between 2005 and 2011 (when the team folded). Newcastle upon Tyne was one of the 11 host cities for the 2015 Rugby World Cup. St James' Park hosted three matches; South Africa v. Scotland (3 October 2015) New Zealand v. Tonga (9 October 2015) Samoa v. Scotland (10 October 2015) Newcastle International Airport is situated on the northern outskirts of the city at Woolsington, near to Ponteland. It is the largest and busiest airport in North East England and the second largest and busiest in Northern England (behind Manchester), handling over five million passengers per year. It is also the tenth-largest, and the fastest growing regional airport in the UK, expecting to reach 10 million passengers by 2016, and 15 million by 2030. As of 2007[update], Newcastle Airport operates flights to 90 destinations worldwide. The airport is serviced by numerous airlines including British Airways, Jet2, easyJet, Emirates, Ryanair, Air France, TUI Airways, Loganair, KLM and Eurowings. The airport is connected to Central Newcastle by the Tyne and Wear Metro, with an average journey between Central Station Metro station and Newcastle Airport Metro station taking approximately 20 minutes. Newcastle Central Station is a principal stop on the East Coast Main Line and Cross Country Route. It is one of the busiest stations in Britain. Train operator London North Eastern Railway provides a half-hourly frequency of trains to London King's Cross, with a variable journey time of between two and three hours, and north to Scotland with all trains calling at Edinburgh Waverley and a small number of trains extended to Glasgow Central, Aberdeen and Inverness. CrossCountry links Newcastle with destinations in Yorkshire, the Midlands and the South West. TransPennine Express operates services to the North West. Northern Trains provide local and regional services. Additionally, ScotRail offer an infrequent service to Glasgow Central. In 2014, work was completed on the station's historic entrance. Glazing was placed over the historic arches and the Victorian architecture was enhanced; transforming the 19th century public portico. The station is one of only six Grade One listed railway stations in the UK. Opened in 1850 by Queen Victoria, it was the first covered railway station in the world and was much copied across the UK. It has a neoclassical façade, originally designed by the architect John Dobson, and was constructed in collaboration with Robert Stephenson. The station sightlines towards the Castle Keep, whilst showcasing the curvature of the station's arched roof. The first services were operated by the North Eastern Railway company. The other mainline station in Newcastle is Manors, exclusively served by Northern Trains. The city is served by the Tyne and Wear Metro, a system of suburban and underground railways covering much of Newcastle and the surrounding metropolitan boroughs. It was opened in five phases between 1980 and 1984, and was Britain's first urban light rail transit system. The network was developed from a combination of existing and newly built tracks and stations, with deep-level tunnels constructed through Central Newcastle. A bridge was built across the Tyne, between Newcastle and Gateshead, and opened by Queen Elizabeth II in 1981. Extensions to the network were opened in 1991 and 2002. It is operated directly by Nexus, carrying over 37 million passengers a year. In 2004, the company Marconi designed and constructed the mobile radio system to the underground Metro system. The Metro system was the first in the UK to have mobile phone antennae installed in the tunnels. The Metro consists of two lines. The Green line begins at Newcastle Airport, goes through Central Newcastle and into the City of Sunderland, terminating at South Hylton. The yellow line starts at St James, runs north of the river alongside Byker towards Whitley Bay, before returning to Central Newcastle, then connecting to Gateshead Interchange before finally terminating at South Shields. The system is currently undergoing a period of refurbishment and modernisation, entitled 'Metro: All Change.' The programme has replaced all ticket machines and introduced ticket gates at the busiest stations – part of the transition to smart ticketing. All Metro trains are being completely refurbished and most stations are undergoing improvement works (or in some cases complete reconstruction, for example North Shields). In addition; tracks, signalling and overhead wires are also being overhauled. Longer-term plans include the procurement of an entirely new fleet of trains and further extensions to the system. Proposed routes include to Newcastle's west end, to the Cobalt Business Park in North Tyneside, to the Metrocentre in Gateshead and to additional locations in Gateshead, South Tyneside and Sunderland. Several of the proposed routes would require trams as opposed to the current light rail trains. Major roads in the area include the A1 (Newcastle Gateshead Western Bypass), stretching north to Edinburgh and south to London; the A19 heading south past Sunderland and Middlesbrough to York and Doncaster; the A69 heading west to Carlisle; the A696, which becomes the A68 heads past Newcastle Airport and up through central Northumberland and central Scottish Borders, the A167, the old "Great North Road", heading south to Gateshead, Chester-le-Street, Durham and Darlington; and the A1058 "Coast Road", which runs from Jesmond to the east coast between Tynemouth and Cullercoats. Many of these designations are recent—upon completion of the Western Bypass, and its designation as the new line of the A1, the roads between this and the A1's former alignment through the Tyne Tunnel were renumbered, with many city centre roads changing from a 6-prefix to their present 1-prefix numbers. In November 2011 the capacity of the Tyne Tunnel was increased when a project to build a second road tunnel and refurbish the first tunnel was completed. Bus Bus services in Newcastle upon Tyne and the surrounding boroughs part are coordinated by the Tyne and Wear Passenger Transport Executive. Stagecoach North East is the primary bus operator in the city, running city services between both the West and East ends, with some services extending out to the MetroCentre, Killingworth, Wallsend and Ponteland. Go North East provides the majority of services to and from the south of the Tyne, linking Newcastle with Gateshead, South Tyneside, Sunderland, and County Durham. Arriva North East runs numerous services to the north of city, North Tyneside and Northumberland. Additionally, QuayLink connects Newcastle and Gateshead to the Quayside. Newcastle Central coach station is the city's main hub for long-distance services, such as those operated by National Express. Other major bus departure points are Pilgrim Street (for buses running south of the Tyne via Gateshead), and Blackett Street/Monument for services to the East and West of the city. Many bus services also pass Newcastle Central Station, a major interchange for rail and metro services. Newcastle is accessible by several mostly traffic-free cycle routes that lead to the edges of the city centre, where cyclists can continue into the city by road, using no car lanes. The traffic-free C2C cycle route runs along the north bank of the River Tyne, enabling cyclists to travel off-road to North Shields and Tynemouth in the east, and westwards towards Hexham. Suburban cycle routes exist, which use converted trackbeds of former industrial wagonways and industrial railways. A network on Tyneside's suburban Victorian waggonways is being developed. A network of signed on-road cycle routes is being established, including some designated on-road cycle lanes that will lead from the city centre to the suburbs of Gosforth, Heaton and Wallsend. Newcastle has a growing culture of bicycle usage. Newcastle is also home to a cycling campaign, called the 'Newcastle Cycling Campaign.' The ideal of the organisation is to model other European cities like Amsterdam and Copenhagen. The aims of the organisation, within the constitution are: To raise the profile of cycling, especially utility cycling around the city; to educate decision makers over the benefits of cycling; to promote equality. Following guidelines set in the National Cycling strategy, Newcastle first developed its cycling strategy in 1998. As of 2012[update], the city council's social aims and objectives for cycling include: highlighting the usage of cycling to cut city congestion and educating that cycling promotes healthy living The authority also has infrastructure aims and objectives which include: developing on road cycle networks on quieter streets; making safer routes on busier streets; innovating and implementing contraflows on one way streets; developing the existing off-road cycle route networks and improve signage; joining up routes that are partially or completely isolated; Increase the number of cycle parking facilities; working with employers to integrate cycling into workplace travel plans; link the local networks to national networks. DFDS Seaways runs a ferry service to IJmuiden, near Amsterdam in The Netherlands, from Newcastle International Ferry Terminal (located in North Shields). The DFDS ferry service to Gothenburg, Sweden, ceased at the end of October 2006 and their service to Bergen and Stavanger, Norway was terminated in late 2008. The company cited high fuel prices and new competition from low-cost air services as the cause. However, since summer 2007, Thomson cruise lines have included Newcastle as a departure port on its Norwegian and Fjords cruise. Newcastle is a metropolitan borough with city status, governed by Newcastle City Council. Since 2018 the council has been a member of the North of Tyne Combined Authority, which is due to be replaced by the larger North East Mayoral Combined Authority in May 2024. There are six civil parishes within the city boundaries, at Blakelaw and North Fenham, Brunswick, Dinnington, Hazlerigg, North Gosforth, and Woolsington, which form an additional tier of local government for their areas. The rest of the city is an unparished area. Newcastle was an ancient borough. It is said to have been made a borough by William II (reigned 1087–1100), although the earliest known charter was granted by Henry II (reigned 1154–1189). In 1400, a new charter from Henry IV gave the borough the right to hold its own courts and appoint its own sheriffs, making it a county corporate, independent from the Sheriff of Northumberland. Whilst administratively independent, Newcastle was still deemed part of the geographical county of Northumberland for the purposes of lieutenancy until 1974. The Northumberland assizes were held at the Castle in Newcastle, and subsequently at the Moot Hall, built within the castle site in 1811. The Moot Hall also served as the meeting place of Northumberland County Council from its creation in 1889 until 1981 when the county council moved to Morpeth. Newcastle was therefore sometimes described as the county town of Northumberland, although that title was also claimed by Alnwick, where knights of the shire were elected until the Reform Act 1832. Until the 1830s the borough just covered the four parishes of All Saints, St Andrew, St John, and St Nicholas. The parliamentary borough (constituency) was enlarged in 1832 to also take in Byker, Elswick, Heaton, Jesmond and Westgate. The municipal boundaries were enlarged to match the constituency in 1836, when Newcastle was reformed to become a municipal borough under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, which standardised how most boroughs operated across the country. Newcastle was awarded city status in 1882. When elected county councils were established in 1889, Newcastle was considered large enough to provide its own county-level services, and so it was made a county borough. The city boundaries were enlarged on several occasions, notably in 1904 when it absorbed Benwell, Fenham and Walker, and in 1935 when it absorbed Kenton and parts of neighbouring parishes. In 1906 the city was given the right to appoint a Lord Mayor. In 1974 the county borough was replaced by a larger metropolitan borough within the new county of Tyne and Wear. The borough gained the area of the former urban districts of Gosforth and Newburn, and the parishes of Brunswick, Dinnington, Hazlerigg, North Gosforth and Woolsington. It also gained the Moot Hall, which until 1974 had been an exclave of the administrative county of Northumberland surrounded by the city. Newcastle's city status was transferred to the enlarged borough at the same time. From 1974 until 1986 the city council was a lower-tier district authority, with Tyne and Wear County Council providing county-level services. The county council was abolished in 1986, since when the city council has again provided both district-level and county-level services, as it had done when it was a county borough prior to 1974. Some functions are provided across Tyne and Wear by joint committees with the other districts. The county of Tyne and Wear continues to exist as a ceremonial county for the purposes of lieutenancy, but has had no administrative functions since 1986. Newcastle is represented by three elected Members of Parliament (MPs) in the House of Commons, the lower house of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Two of the current MPs are from the Labour Party and one sits as an independent. In the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum, Newcastle voted for the United Kingdom to remain in the European Union, with a ratio of 51:49 in favour of remain, compared to a national ratio of 48:52 in favour of leave. Newcastle has 74 primary schools and 20 secondary schools, of which 13 are LEA-funded and 7 are fee-paying independent schools. There are a number of critically acclaimed state secondary schools, including Walker Riverside Academy, Gosforth Academy, Jesmond Park Academy, St Cuthbert's High School, St Mary's Catholic School, Kenton School, Sacred Heart, Excelsior Academy, Walbottle Academy and Benfield School. The largest co-educational independent school is the Royal Grammar School. The largest girls' independent school is Newcastle High School for Girls. Both schools are located on the same street in Jesmond. Newcastle School for Boys is the only independent boys' only school in the city and is situated in Gosforth. Other independent schools include Dame Allan's School. Newcastle College is the largest general further education (FE) college in North East England and is a Beacon Status college. There are also two smaller FE colleges in Newcastle. The city has two major universities – Newcastle University and Northumbria University. Newcastle University has its origins in the Durham University School of Medicine and Surgery, established in 1834. It became fully independent on 1 August 1963, forming the University of Newcastle upon Tyne (now simply Newcastle University). It is a red brick university and is a member of the Russell Group, an association of research-intensive UK universities, often considered to represent the best UK universities. It won the Sunday Times University of the Year award in 2000. It was awarded the Gold Award in the Teaching Excellence Framework (TEF), one of only ten Russell Group universities to achieve the Gold TEF rating. Northumbria University has its origins in Newcastle Polytechnic, established in 1969 and becoming the University of Northumbria at Newcastle in 1992 as part of the UK-wide process in which polytechnics became new universities. Northumbria University was voted 'Best New University' by The Times Good University Guide 2005. It holds the Silver TEF Award. There are several museums and galleries in Newcastle, including the Centre for Life with its Science Village; the Discovery Museum a museum highlighting life on Tyneside, including Tyneside's shipbuilding heritage, and inventions which changed the world; the Great North Museum; in 2009 the Newcastle on Tyne Museum of Antiquities merged with the Great North Museum (Hancock Museum); Seven Stories, the National Centre for Children's Books; the Side Gallery with historical and contemporary photography from around the world and Northern England; and the Newburn Motor Museum. The Laing Art Gallery, similarly to other art galleries and museums around the world, has collections digitised on the Google Cultural Institute, an initiative that makes important cultural material accessible online. Newcastle has three cathedrals, the Anglican St Nicholas', with its elegant lantern tower of 1474, the Roman Catholic St Mary's designed by Augustus Welby Pugin and the Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Fenham. All three cathedrals began their lives as parish churches. St Mary's became a cathedral in 1850 and St Nicholas' in 1882. Another prominent church in the city centre is the Church of St Thomas the Martyr which is unique as the only Church of England church without a parish and which is not a peculiar. One of the largest evangelical Anglican churches in the UK is Jesmond Parish Church, situated a little to the north of the city centre. Newcastle is home to the only Baháʼí Centre in North East England; the centre has served the local Baháʼí community for over 25 years and is located close to the Civic Centre in Jesmond. Newcastle was a prominent centre of the Plymouth Brethren movement up to the 1950s, and some small congregations still function. Among these are at the Hall, Denmark Street and Gospel Hall, St Lawrence. The Parish Church of St Andrew is traditionally recognised as 'the oldest church in this town'. The present building was begun in the 12th Century and the last addition to it, apart from the vestries, was the main porch in 1726. It is quite possible that there was an earlier church here dating from Saxon times. This older church would have been one of several churches along the River Tyne dedicated to St Andrew, including the Priory church at Hexham. The building contains more old stonework than any other church in Newcastle. It is surrounded by the last of the ancient churchyards to retain its original character. Many key names associated with Newcastle's history worshipped and were buried here. The church tower received a battering during the Siege of Newcastle by the Scots who finally breached the Town Wall and forced surrender. Three of the cannonballs remain on site as testament to the siege. Charles Avison, the leading British composer of concertos in the 18th century, was born in Newcastle upon Tyne in 1709 and died there in 1770. Basil Hume, Archbishop of Westminster, was born in the city in 1923. Vice Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood, 1st Baron Collingwood, was born in the city. Ironmaster, metallurgist, and member of parliament Isaac Lowthian Bell was born in the city in 1816. Other notable people born in or associated with Newcastle include: engineer and industrialist Lord Armstrong, engineer and father of the modern steam railways George Stephenson, his son, also an engineer, Robert Stephenson, engineer and inventor of the steam turbine Sir Charles Parsons, inventor of the incandescent light bulb Sir Joseph Swan, actor and comedian Rowan Atkinson, industrial designer Sir Jonathan Ive, who studied at Newcastle Polytechnic (now Northumbria University), modernist poet Basil Bunting, and Lord Chief Justice Peter Taylor. Portuguese writer Eça de Queiroz was a diplomat in Newcastle from late 1874 until April 1879—his most productive literary period. Former Prime Minister of Thailand Abhisit Vejjajiva, was born in the city. Composer Agustín Fernández has been based in the city since 1995, teaching at Newcastle University and occasionally collaborating with Royal Northern Sinfonia. Musicians Cheryl, Eric Burdon, Sting, Mark Knopfler, the Lighthouse Family, Jeffrey Dunn, Brian Johnson, Alan Hull, Sakima, and Neil Tennant lived in Newcastle. Hank Marvin and Bruce Welch were both former pupils of Rutherford Grammar School. Actors Charlie Hunnam and James Scott, entertainers Ant & Dec and footballers Michael Carrick and Alan Shearer were also born in Newcastle. Multiple circumnavigator David Scott Cowper, Nobel Prize winning physicist Peter Higgs, who researched the mass of subatomic particles, and wrestler Benjamin Satterley were born in the city. John Dunn, inventor of the keyed Northumbrian smallpipes, lived and worked in the city. Kathryn Tickell, the celebrated Northumbrian piper and composer, has longstanding associations with Newcastle as a resident, frequent performer at Sage Gateshead and teacher at Newcastle University. Marc Smith (born 1963), French palaeographer, was born in Newcastle. Freddy Shepherd, former chairman of Newcastle United F.C. for ten years, lived in Newcastle upon Tyne until his death in 2017. Newcastle upon Tyne is twinned with: Newcastle, Australia Atlanta, Georgia, U.S. (1977) Groningen, Netherlands Bergen, Norway (1968) Gelsenkirchen, Germany (1948) Haifa, Israel Nancy, France (1954) Taiyuan, China (1985, unilaterally terminated by Newcastle upon Tyne in 2022) Newcastle has a "friendship agreement" with the American city of Little Rock, Arkansas. Since 2003, it has had a "special cooperation agreement" with the Swedish city of Malmö. Furthermore, Newcastle participated in the 1998 summit of worldwide cities named Newcastle, which led to friendship agreements with the following places: Neuburg an der Donau, Germany Neuchâtel, Switzerland Neufchâteau, Vosges, France New Castle, Delaware, United States New Castle, Indiana, United States New Castle, Pennsylvania, United States Newcastle-under-Lyme, England Newcastle, KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa Shinshiro, Japan The following countries have consular representation in Newcastle: Denmark, Finland, Romania, Belgium, France, Germany, Iceland, Italy, Norway, and Sweden. North East England portal List of tallest buildings and structures in Newcastle upon Tyne List of public art in Newcastle upon Tyne List of Freemen of the City of Newcastle upon Tyne Duke of Newcastle "Newcastle upon Tyne, North East". Ordnance Survey. Retrieved 16 January 2024. "How we run the city". Newcastle City Council. Retrieved 16 January 2024. "Mid-Year Population Estimates, UK, June 2021". Office for National Statistics. 21 December 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Towns and cities, characteristics of built-up areas, England and Wales: Census 2021". Census 2021. Office for National Statistics. Retrieved 29 March 2024. "Mid-Year Population Estimates, UK, June 2021". Office for National Statistics. 21 December 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2023. UK Census (2021). "2021 Census Area Profile – Newcastle upon Tyne Local Authority (E08000021)". Nomis. Office for National Statistics. Retrieved 9 January 2024. Fenton, Trevor (25 April 2023). "Regional gross domestic product: city regions". Office for National Statistics. Retrieved 2 September 2023. Wells, John C. (2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman. p. 539. ISBN 9781405881180. "Figure 1: Explore population characteristics of individual BUAs". Retrieved 7 August 2021. GoogleBooks George Patrick Welch, Britannia, the Roman Conquest and Occupation of Britain, Wesleyan University Press, 1963, pp 165, 167, 277 "Shipbuilding in North East England". englandsnortheast.co.uk. Retrieved 26 June 2020. Lewis, Samuel (1848). Newcastle-upon-Tyne', in A Topographical Dictionary of England. british-history.ac.uk. Retrieved 13 July 2016. separated from Northumberland... made a county of itself, by Henry IV... Mackenzie, Eneas (1827). "'The Corporation: Grants and charters', in Historical Account of Newcastle-Upon-Tyne". british-history.ac.uk. Mackenzie and Dent, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1827. Retrieved 1 May 2017. in 1400, by a charter, granted that Newcastle upon Tyne,... then belonging to the county of Northumberland, should be separated from thence, and be a county of itself "Newcastle City Council". tyneandweararchives.org.uk. Tyne & Wear Archives & Museum. Archived from the original on 5 August 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2019. "History of Newcastle upon Tyne" (PDF). Local Studies Factsheet No. 6. Newcastle City Council. 2009. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 July 2018. Retrieved 7 June 2014. "Arbeia Roman Fort". Retrieved 25 March 2018. The Megalithic Portal and Megalith Map. "C.Michael Hogan (2007) Hadrian's Wall, ed. A. Burnham, The Megalithic Portal". Megalithic.co.uk. Retrieved 4 August 2010. Stephen Johnson (2004) Hadrian's Wall, Sterling Publishing Company, Inc, 128 pages, ISBN 0-7134-8840-9 Mackenzie, Eneas (1827). "Historical Account of Newcastle-upon-Tyne". british-history.ac.uk. Retrieved 24 November 2008. Dodds, Graham. "Origins of (the) New Castle upon Tyne". Newcastle University. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 18 April 2015. "The war and bloodshed of our historic Baronial families". Morpeth Herald. 19 May 2013. Archived from the original on 25 March 2018. Retrieved 25 March 2018. Mackenzie, Eneas (1827). "'The Corporation: Grants and charters', in Historical Account of Newcastle-Upon-Tyne". british-history.ac.uk. Mackenzie and Dent, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1827. Retrieved 1 May 2017. title of the county of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne Newbottle – Newcastle-upon-Tyne British History Online – Retrieved 18 August 2009. Mackenzie, Eneas (1827). "Historical Account of Newcastle-Upon-Tyne". british-history.ac.uk. Mackenzie and Dent, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Retrieved 20 April 2015. Morely, Paul (6 June 2013). The North: (And Almost Everything In It). Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 542. ISBN 9780747578161. Ayto, John (8 July 2010). Oxford Dictionary of English Idioms (3 ed.). OUP. p. 68. ISBN 978-0199543786. Knapp, Samuel L. (1858). Life of Lord Timothy Dexter: Embracing sketches of the eccentric characters that composed his associates, including "Dexter's Pickle for the knowing ones". Boston: J.E. Tilton and Company. Archived from the original on 2 December 2007. Nash, Jay Robert (1982). Zanies, The World's Greatest Eccentrics. New Century Publishers. ISBN 0-8329-0123-7. Hudson, Jules (22 March 2013). "Victoria Tunnel". BBC. Retrieved 21 January 2014. By 1935, every city in the UK had been given a document by the government, declaring that in the event of war, every city should have air raid protection... Davison, Yvonne. "Sandgate and the Keelmen". Newcastle University. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 17 April 2014. Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Plague" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 21 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 695. Bower, Ian (22 October 2014). "Ebola and Plague in Newcastle in 1636". twmuseums.org.uk. Retrieved 24 November 2014. History.com Staff (2009). "English civil wars". History.com. A+E Networks. Retrieved 20 June 2015. "Civil War". The Northern Echo. 10 March 2009. Retrieved 17 April 2015. Southwick, Michael (2021). Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Fragments of the Past: Volume 1. Newcastle: Great North Children's Hospital. the Lunatic Asylum for the counties of Newcastle, Northumberland and Durham. It was erected by public subscription in 1767 "We take a closer look at the vibrant city of Newcastle" (PDF). Retrieved 26 July 2010. By the 18th century Newcastle was the country's fourth largest print centre after London, Oxford and Cambridge. Newcastle's Literary and Philosophical Society, founded in 1793 and now known as simply the Lit and Phil, predated the London Library by half a century.[permanent dead link] Lilley, Tasmin (June 2008). "Remembering Slavery" (PDF). collectionsprojects.org.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 October 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2021. "Glass (N) – Encyclopedia of Antiques". Oldandsold.com. 2 December 1994. Retrieved 4 August 2010. "The Building of Newcastle Barracks (later known as Fenham Barracks)". Retrieved 29 March 2014. "Last surviving building from Great Fire". Quayside Lives. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 25 March 2018. "Recalling the fascinating history of the city of Newcastle - from A to Z". Chronicle Live. 6 July 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2020. "The History of Newcastle upon Tyne". information-britain.co.uk. Retrieved 23 January 2014. Shipbuilding and heavy engineering developed fast and Newcastle became the powerhouse of the Industrial Revolution in Britain. "A history of urbanisation in Britain". BBC. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Retrieved 23 January 2014. "Mailing pottery". twmuseums.org.uk. Archived from the original on 11 April 2015. Retrieved 17 April 2015. "Tunnel History". ouseburntrust.org.uk. Archived from the original on 28 August 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2014. "Sir Joseph Wilson Swan". home.frognet.net. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 16 October 2010. "Sir Joseph Swan, The Literary & Philosophical Society of Newcastle". rsc.org. 3 February 2009. Retrieved 16 October 2010. "Electric lighting". Newcastle University. Archived from the original on 6 June 2014. Retrieved 3 June 2014. "The Birth of Be-Ro". be-ro.co.uk. 1 August 2011. Archived from the original on 12 May 2015. Retrieved 17 April 2015. "We did it first". The Northern Echo. 27 March 2013. "The Cathedral Church of St Nicholas". newcastle.anglican.org. Archived from the original on 21 June 2015. Retrieved 17 April 2015. "Newcastle City Council: Transport". Tyne & Wear Archives & Museums. 2006. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2015. Milne, Julie. "More about Laing Art Gallery". Art UK. Retrieved 20 September 2015. "About us". hattongallery.org.uk. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 20 September 2015. "Redheugh Bridge (1901–1984)". Newcastle University. 26 March 2004. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 20 September 2015. "The Tyne Bridge". BBC 2. 24 September 2014. Retrieved 20 September 2015. "Happy birthday Discovery Museum: Pictures from Newcastle's home of history past | Culture24". Culture24.org.uk. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "John G Joicey Museum, Newcastle upon Tyne". National Archives. Retrieved 25 March 2018. "Stories that shocked Tyneside: The high rise and fall of a leader who got greedy". The Chronicle. 9 June 2014. Retrieved 25 March 2018. Wilkinson, Tom (4 October 2011), "Newcastle may see return to coal mining", Independent, retrieved 4 July 2017 Evening Chronicle staff (19 January 2013), "Newcastle opencast mine quietly shifting 40,000 tonnes of coal", chroniclelive.co.uk, retrieved 4 July 2017 "The rise and fall of Tyne's shipyards". The Journal. 3 January 2008. Archived from the original on 25 March 2018. Retrieved 25 March 2018. "A Shipbuilding Target - Newcastle And Tyneside in World War Two | Culture24". Culture24.org.uk. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Marshall, Ray (16 November 2011). "WWII betrayal of French Consul in Newcastle". nechronicle. "History of the University". Archived from the original on 2 October 2007. Retrieved 22 September 2007. "Northumbria University World University Rankings | THE". Timeshighereducation.com. Retrieved 20 September 2018. "Newcastle's Military Vehicle Museum for sale". nechronicle. 3 November 2011. "A History of Newcastle". Localhistories.org. Archived from the original on 26 June 2014. Retrieved 4 March 2012. "The Early Years of Newcastle United: 1881 – 1939". Newcastle United F.C. Archived from the original on 8 July 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2012. "Newcastle United: Club Records". Newcastle United F.C. Retrieved 4 March 2012. "Archive – Shearer joins Newcastle in 1996". BBC News. 1 April 2009. Whetstone, David (4 October 2017). "Newcastle's iconic Tyne Bridge is to host the spectacular Freedom on the Tyne finale". Chronicle. Newcastle: chroniclelive.co.uk. Retrieved 11 July 2018. Whetstone, David (13 November 2017). "Statue of Dr Martin Luther King has been unveiled in Newcastle by his great friend". Chronicle. Newcastle: chroniclelive.co.uk. Retrieved 11 July 2018. freedomCity2017 Staff. "Freedom City 2017". freedomcity2017.com. Newcastle University. Archived from the original on 30 July 2018. Retrieved 11 July 2018.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Holland, Daniel (31 May 2018). "Spectacular Tyne water fountain for Great Exhibition of the North will become a reality". Chronicle. Newcastle: chroniclelive.co.uk. Retrieved 11 July 2018. Staff. "Great Exhibition of the North". Chronicle. Newcastle: chroniclelive.co.uk. Retrieved 11 July 2018. Simon Meechan (4 October 2019). "Travel site names Newcastle the friendliest city in the United Kingdom". Chronicle Live. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Bedrock Geology UK North, 1:625,000 scale geological map published by British Geological Survey "GRAINGER TOWN, Tyneside Classical". Archived from the original on 23 August 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2010. hundreds of fine Georgian and stylish Victorian buildings which have led to its architecture being referred to as "Tyneside Classical". Maconie, Stuart (8 February 2008). "Stuart Maconie reveals..why it's great up North." Daily Mirror. UK. Archived from the original on 6 October 2008. Retrieved 4 July 2008. Manchester, Leeds and Newcastle remain, bolder brighter and more beautiful than ever. You can't move in Manchester for boutique hotels, Leeds has got a Harvey Nichols and Newcastle is now the best-looking city in England. Maconie, Stuart (February 2007). Pies and Prejudice. Ebury Press. ISBN 978-0-09-191022-8. "GRAINGER TOWN... Grey Street, Sir Nikolaus Bernhard Leon Pevsner". Archived from the original on 23 August 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2010. Grey Street was described as 'one of the finest streets in England' by Sir Nikolaus Bernhard Leon Pevsner (1902–1983) the German-born British scholar of history of art and, especially, of history of architecture. Reid, Carlton (15 May 2020). "Parking Cull And Pocket Parks For England's Finest Street As Newcastle Plans Post-Pandemic Future". Forbes. Retrieved 15 May 2020. "Around Tyne. Grey Street". BBC. 13 December 2007. Retrieved 9 July 2008. Grey Street in Newcastle was voted the best street in Britain by Radio 4 listeners. "GOOD CASE STUDY – GREY STREET, NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE". BBC radio 4. Archived from the original on 7 August 2008. Retrieved 9 July 2008. Said by many to be amongst the greatest streets in 'England if not Europe', this gently curving and rising street has been 'sensitively restored and improved in the last decade'. "Google Street View awards 2010". The Guardian. London. 8 March 2010. Retrieved 8 March 2010. "Current and past exhibitions – University Library – Newcastle University". Archived from the original on 7 August 2016. "Insight: Taking a closer look at the Town Moor". Northumbria University. Retrieved 17 September 2008. land which covers an area larger than London's Hyde Park and Hampstead Heath[dead link] "Newcastle Breaks". latebreaks.com. Archived from the original on 15 January 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2008. Town Moor, which is larger and wider than Hampstead Heath and Hyde Park "Honorary Freedom – Citations – Bob Geldof". newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 15 December 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2010. "Honorary Freedom – Citations – King Harald V of Norway". newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 15 December 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2010. to mark the 40th anniversary of the official opening of the Civic Centre by his father HM King Olaf V and to recognise and celebrate the close links between Newcastle and Norway over many years "Honorary Freedom – Citations – Sir Bobby Robson". newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 15 December 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2010. in recognition of his long and outstanding career across Europe, his role as an ambassador for the North East and Newcastle, and his contribution to the culture and life of the City "Honorary Freedom – Citations – Alan Shearer". newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 15 December 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2010. "Honorary Freedom – Citations – Nelson Mandela". newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 15 December 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2010. "Honorary Freedom – Citations – Royal Shakespeare Company". newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 15 December 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2010. Lanagan, Paul (15 May 2010). The Hoppings Fair on Newcastle Town Moor. Books of the North. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-9555059-0-4. . Thought to be the largest travelling fairground in Europe, it takes place in the last full week of June... Coreena Ford (20 April 2016). "Check out workers finishing off Wylam Brewery's transformation of the Palace of Arts". Chronicle Live. Retrieved 26 February 2017. Watson, Chris (7 April 2008). "Dawn chorus". BBC News. Retrieved 10 April 2015. "Newcastle upon Tyne". Encyclopædia Britannica. 3 December 2023. "Turner Prize to leave London for BALTIC". M&H online. 17 September 2010. Archived from the original on 19 September 2010. Retrieved 17 September 2010. The Turner Prize will not be held at a Tate venue for the first time in 25 years in 2011 when it heads to the Baltic Centre for Contemporary Art Hunt, Amy (11 December 2007). "Art mixing with nature in the wild". Evening Chronicle. Archived from the original on 7 July 2008. Retrieved 1 September 2008. The Tyne is England's best salmon-fishing river, and this is something the North East should be really proud of, but it is so much more than a fishery. "History of the Grainger Market". Newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 25 August 2010. Retrieved 3 March 2011. Richard Grainger, builder and developer, planned and constructed some of Newcastle's finest buildings and streets during 1830s including Grainger Market, Theatre Royal, Grey Street, Grainger and Clayton Street. "History of the Grainger Market". newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 25 August 2010. Retrieved 3 March 2011. Richard Grainger was said to 'have found Newcastle of bricks and timber and left it in stone.' "GRAINGER TOWN, Greys Monument, Edward Hodges Baily". Archived from the original on 23 August 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2010. His statue by sculptor Edward Hodges Baily (also responsible for Nelson's Column) tops a column, Grey's Monument, of 41 metres (135 feet). It has remained a favourite meeting place since it was unveiled in 1838. "Newcastle Upon Tyne: The Architecture...; Greys Monument Centrepiece". Retrieved 26 July 2010. The centrepiece is Grey's Monument, designed in 1838 by Benjamin Green "Grainger Market". britishlistedbuildings.co.uk. Retrieved 28 August 2013. "History of the Grainger Market". Newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 25 August 2010. Retrieved 3 March 2011. Flannery, Peter. Retrospective – An interview with the creators of the series. Included as a bonus feature on the Our Friends in the North DVD release. (BMG DVD 74321 941149). Jeffery, Sarah (26 January 2015). "Chinese New Year 2015 Newcastle: Guide to shops and restaurants in Chinatown". nechronicle. "Heaton (HMOs & Tyneside flats)". Newcastle residential areas. 28 December 2012. Retrieved 10 January 2016. Williams, Francesca. "The rise, fall and rise of the Tyneside flat". BBC News. Retrieved 10 January 2016. "2011 Census Interactive". ons.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 29 January 2016. "Byker Wall". Architectuul.com. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Henderson, Tony (24 November 2019). "The remarkable record of what Newcastle's weather was like some 200 years ago". Chronicle. Newcastle, England: chroniclelive.co.uk. Retrieved 8 March 2020. "Newcastle climate: Weather by month, temperature, rain - Climates to Travel". "1995 temperature". TuTiempo. "Durham 1981–2010 averages". Station, District and regional averages 1981–2010. Met Office. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 4 November 2012. "World Weather Information Service". WMO. Retrieved 2 July 2023. "Planning for the Future Core Strategy and Urban Core Plan for Gateshead and Newcastle upon Tyne 2010–2030 – Adopted March 2015" (PDF). Newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 January 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2018. "Core Strategy and Urban Core Plan – Section 3 Strategic Policies – Chapter 12 People and Place" (PDF). Newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 January 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2018. "Case Study: Newcastle, the first carbon-neutral town – UK on the ManagEnergy Website". Managenergy.net. 13 July 2010. Archived from the original on 20 June 2010. Retrieved 4 August 2010. "Big considerations". Newcastle City Council. Retrieved 24 November 2016.[permanent dead link] Andrews, Robert (31 July 2006). The Rough Guide to Britain (6 ed.). United Kingdom: Rough Guide Travel Guides. ISBN 9781843536864. "Tripadvisor Unveils Travellers' Best Destinations- Party Hard in London and Newcastle". London, U.K.: Tripadvisor.co.uk. 4 May 2010. tourists a good time too with Newcastle coming third, followed by Dublin in fourth position and Edinburgh in seventh. "Tripadvisor Unveils Travellers' Best Destinations – The World Nightspots". Tripadvisor. 4 May 2010. Retrieved 12 August 2010. New Orleans has been identified as having the best nightlife in the world... London comes in at number five in the world and Newcastle number seven. Coleman, Liam (30 July 2023). "Newcastle voted best UK city for vibes". metro.co.uk. A survey asked 2,000 residents in the UK's largest cities to rate the different 'vibes' in their area. Newcastle scored highest for seven out of the nine in total – including being the most welcoming city and having the best pub scene. "The Gate". Retrieved 19 December 2006. "About". newcastlegay.co.uk right. Retrieved 3 January 2007. "Gay Village/Pink Triangle". pubsnewcastle.co.uk. Retrieved 19 December 2006. Sharma, Sonia; Scott, Patrick E (14 September 2016). "A pasty or three: Newcastle revealed as the Greggs capital of Britain". Chronicle Live. Retrieved 21 March 2022. "From salt and vinegar crisps to the offside rule: 12 gifts the North East gave the world". Evening Chronicle. Retrieved 5 September 2022. "Restaurants in Newcastle & North East restaurants, eating out, places to eat in Newcastle & North East restaurant guide UK". Sugarvine.com. Retrieved 4 August 2010. Akbars Restaurant Birmingham. "Restaurants in Birmingham, Newcastle, Nottingham, Derby – The Gourmet Society UK". Thegourmetsociety.co.uk. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 4 August 2010. "The people's Newcastle Restaurant Guide". Leaveatip.co.uk. Archived from the original on 25 November 2010. Retrieved 4 August 2010. "Theatres Royal Exhibition at Theatre Royal". newcastlegateshead.com. Archived from the original on 6 March 2017. Retrieved 6 March 2017. "Newcastle Upon Tyne: The Architecture... Theatre Royal, John and Benjamin Green". Archived from the original on 6 August 2010. Retrieved 26 July 2010. The principal event is the Theatre Royal (1837) by John and Benjamin Green who had designed the Literary and Philosophical Society's building. "History". Theatre Royal. Archived from the original on 6 July 2007. Retrieved 21 September 2007. "Curtain rises at new city theatre". BBC News. 25 August 2006. Retrieved 12 August 2007. "North East voted 'arts capital'". BBC News. 29 December 2006. Retrieved 18 August 2007. "Morden Tower Home Page". Mordentower.org. Archived from the original on 16 March 2010. Retrieved 4 August 2010. Glover, Andrew (8 February 2011). "Alexander Armstrong in appeal to save Lit and Phil". The Journal. ncjMedia, Trinity Mirror. Archived from the original on 15 February 2011. Retrieved 8 February 2011. The Lit and Phil is the largest independent library outside London, housing more than 150,000 books. Its music library contains 8,000 CDs and 10,000 LPs. The society was founded early in 1793 as a 'conversation club', with an annual subscription of one guinea. The current building was built in 1825. "Lit and Phil – Welcome". litandphil.org.uk. 2011. Archived from the original on 2 May 2010. Retrieved 8 February 2011. The Literary & Philosophical Society (Lit & Phil) is the largest independent library outside London, housing over 150,000 books. "Sir Basil Spence – Building Notes". canmore.rcahms.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 29 April 2014. Retrieved 15 November 2013. "City Library". Newcastle.gov.uk. 11 June 2013. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2013. On Sunday 21 June 2009 the building was formally dedicated by Dr Herbert Loebl Brown, Jonathon (23 February 2011). "Delight as 'lost' Enid Blyton book is discovered". The Independent. UK. Archived from the original on 24 February 2011. Retrieved 23 February 2011. Lawson, Ruth (20 August 2010). "Jacqueline Wilson Helps Birthday Celebrations". The Evening Chronicle. "Newcastle Science Festival – Home". Newcastlesciencefest.com. Retrieved 4 August 2010. "Beer Festival". cannybevvy.co.uk. Archived from the original on 13 February 2008. Retrieved 20 January 2008. "Evolution Festival postponed for one year". BBC News. 12 February 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2016. Barr, Gordon (7 April 2005). "Festival hits Dizzee heights". Evening Chronicle. Archived from the original on 14 September 2016. Retrieved 10 July 2016. Whetstone, David (3 April 2008). "Expo gives artists and makers a showcase". The Journal. Newcastle: thejournal.co.uk. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 24 May 2017. "North East Expo – Autumn 2017". northeastexpo.co.uk. northeastexpo. Retrieved 24 May 2017. "Town Moor Hoppings" (PDF). newcastle.gov.uk. September 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 February 2008. Retrieved 20 January 2008. "History of the Festival". newcastlegreenfestival.org.uk. Archived from the original on 13 January 2008. Retrieved 20 January 2008. "Cyclone Festival of Cycling". Retrieved 14 August 2020. "What is it?". northernrockcyclone.co.uk. Archived from the original on 17 December 2007. Retrieved 20 January 2008. "Ouseburn Festival home page". ouseburnfestival.org. Archived from the original on 23 May 2007. Retrieved 25 January 2008. "What is the Mela ?". newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 26 October 2007. Retrieved 25 January 2008. "NewcastleGateshead Arts Fair home page". ngartfair.com. Archived from the original on 16 April 2003. Retrieved 25 January 2008. "Introducing Design Event". design-event.co.uk. Archived from the original on 12 February 2008. Retrieved 22 February 2008. "NewcastleGateshead 6–12 October 2008". SAMA Festival. 24 July 2008. Archived from the original on 11 August 2009. Retrieved 4 August 2010. Smith, Roger. "Club A'GoGo". readysteadygone.co.uk. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010. Retrieved 15 August 2010. The Animals also recorded a live album at the Gogo and even wrote a song about the place. Christy, Duncan (10 November 2008). "Stephen Hannock painting commissioned by Sting to be displayed in Newcastle's Laing Art Gallery this autumn..." Sting.com (Official Site). Archived from the original on 28 November 2010. Retrieved 15 August 2010. "Superstar Bryan Ferry talks about his early days in Newcastle and how the North East shaped his life". ne4me.co.uk. 9 November 2009. Archived from the original on 11 February 2010. Retrieved 15 August 2010. "Dire Straits given plaque honour". BBC. 4 December 2009. Retrieved 15 August 2010. "Maximo Park Limited Edition Bottles of Brown Ale". ilikemusic.com. 2007. Retrieved 15 August 2010. "Back in Black Becomes 2nd Best-Selling Album in the World". 92 KQRS. 10 December 2019. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Anthony Bateman (2008). "Sporting Sounds: Relationships Between Sport and Music". p. 186. Routledge "Welcome To Kitchenware Records". Music. Kitchenware Records. Archived from the original on 2 May 2003. Retrieved 15 August 2010. Kitchenware Records was established in 1982 in Newcastle... "Lighthouse Family - High (Official Video)". YouTube. Retrieved 25 June 2022. "Global underground is 10". Archived from the original on 15 May 2008. Retrieved 20 August 2008. Global Underground has become more than an internationally renowned dance music label. It's become a way of life. This is an impressive legacy – especially for an independent label based in Newcastle-Upon-Tyne in the North of England. "Newcastle's music scene: where bands thrive". The Independent. 14 April 2006. Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. Retrieved 11 July 2016. Barr, Gordon (15 November 2005). "It's ten years of rockin' the Toon". Evening Chronicle. Retrieved 11 July 2016. Wonfor, Sam (16 August 2015). "The O2 Academy in Newcastle prepares to celebrate its 10th birthday in style in October". Evening Chronicle. Retrieved 10 July 2016. Duke, Simon (14 October 2015). "O2 Academy Newcastle is 10: A look at the big names who've entertained". Evening Chronicle. Retrieved 11 July 2016. Morton, David (5 April 2016). "Kurt Cobain died on this day in 1994: We recall Nirvana's first ever UK gig at Newcastle Riverside". Evening Chronicle. Retrieved 10 July 2016. Wonfor, Sam (27 January 2004). "Bright future ahead for live music". Evening Chronicle. Retrieved 10 July 2016. Plater, Hazel; Taylor, Carl (27 October 2011). Riverside: Newcastle's Legendary Alternative Music Venue. Tonto Books. ISBN 978-1907183195. Maine, Sammy (12 April 2016). "Maximo Park set to play huge homecoming show". Evening Chronicle. Retrieved 10 July 2016. Jeffrey, Sarah (17 June 2016). "Ocean Colour Scene to celebrate 20th anniversary of Moseley Shoals at Times Square gig". Evening Chronicle. Retrieved 10 July 2016. Jeffrey, Sarah. "Catfish and the Bottlemen to play open air gig in Times Square Newcastle this summer". No. 4 July 2016. Retrieved 10 July 2016. "Finalists revealed in NME's search for Britain's Best Small Venue with Jack Daniel's 2015". NME. 2 November 2015. Archived from the original on 7 October 2016. Retrieved 10 July 2016. Jeffery, Sarah (16 May 2016). "Evolution Emerging 2016: A guide to the music festival's ten Newcastle venues". Evening Chronicle. Retrieved 11 July 2016. Lawson, Ruth (18 October 2013). "Newcastle city centre The Head of Steam music venue relaunches". Evening Chronicle. Retrieved 11 July 2016. "Profiles – Sir Ridley Scott". BBC Tyne. 30 May 2008. Retrieved 18 July 2010. "Tyneside Cinema". Retrieved 18 July 2010. "Cinema Bids Au Revoir". 11 April 2008. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011. Retrieved 23 February 2011. "The Classic". tynesidecinema.co.uk. Archived from the original on 5 March 2011. Retrieved 23 February 2011. the Classic is a magnificently restored auditorium which features balcony seating in its Classic Circle "Forget Get Carter, On the Night of the Fire was first so-called film noir based in Newcastle". nechronicle. 16 April 2013. "Tinseltoon: Get Carter". Newcastle: BBC. Retrieved 4 July 2010. "Stormy Monday". Sting. Archived from the original on 16 December 2010. Retrieved 4 July 2010. "Tinseltoon: Purely Belter". BBC. Retrieved 4 July 2010. "The one and only". The Journal. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 4 July 2010. "Hollywood on Tyne". BBC. 2004. Retrieved 4 July 2010. "School For Seduction". BBC. 2004. Retrieved 4 July 2010. Mahmood, Shabnam (25 March 2010). "Newcastle makes Bollywood impact". BBC. Retrieved 4 July 2010. Hodgson, Barbara (18 September 2013). "Harrigan film turns focus on North East crime in the seventies". journallive. Archived from the original on 19 March 2015. Retrieved 25 March 2015. "Take a look around". BBC Tyne. Retrieved 21 September 2006. Bowden, Andrew (1 May 2007). "City Road". Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 17 September 2007. "A Fond Farewell". City Road. Archived from the original on 18 May 2008. Retrieved 19 September 2007. "Capital FM North East". Retrieved 11 March 2012.[dead link] "Radio station launch". Evening Chronicle. 7 July 2007. Retrieved 21 September 2007. "Student media". Newcastle University. Archived from the original on 30 March 2008. Retrieved 22 September 2007. "Radio Tyneside". radiotyneside.co.uk. Archived from the original on 19 August 2012. "Hospedia". Newcastle NHS Hospedia page. Archived from the original on 6 September 2012. "Newsdesk". Radio Tyneside. Archived from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Susan Williams (29 March 2018). "Community radio – Eight community radio licence awards: March 2018" (PDF). Ofcom. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "Newcastle joins UK 'wireless city' revolution". 24dash.com. Archived from the original on 9 January 2009. Retrieved 29 October 2007. "Core Cities". corecities.com. Core Cities. Retrieved 8 April 2007. "Eurocities". eurocities.org. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 19 August 2007. "Newcastle-Gateshead". eurocities.eu. eurocities. Archived from the original on 12 April 2013. Retrieved 17 September 2015. "Regional GVA December 2007 (Page 7)" (PDF). Office for National Statistics. 2007. Retrieved 13 April 2009. Whitfield, Graeme (26 August 2020). "Newcastle's nightlife in danger of "imminent collapse", club bosses warn". ChronicleLive. Retrieved 9 March 2021. "Newcastle Science City". Newcastle Science City.com. Archived from the original on 16 April 2007. Retrieved 8 April 2007. "Retail Footprint 2010 reveals Britain's shopping successes and strugglers". CACI. 21 May 2010. Archived from the original on 18 June 2010. Retrieved 18 August 2010. "GRAINGER TOWN... Eldon Square". Archived from the original on 23 August 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2010. Marshall, Ray (5 April 2008). "Remember When: SUPERSTORE; Remembering Bainbridge's – a world first". Evening Chronicle. thefreelibrary.com. Retrieved 15 October 2013. Anne Pimlott Baker, 'Bainbridge, Emerson Muschamp (1817–1892)', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004; online edn, January 2010 accessed 29 April 2011 Moreno, Shonquis (November 2010). "An Introduction to Retail Design". dwell.com. Retrieved 15 October 2013. "MP opens £11m bus station upgrade". BBC News. 15 March 2007. Retrieved 24 November 2007. "Last day for city centre market". BBC News. 26 January 2007. Retrieved 24 November 2007. "Newcastle's Eldon Square opens £170m extension". Retail Week. "Fifth Avenue tops shops rich list". BBC News. 26 October 2004. Retrieved 19 December 2006. "Reid & Sons, silversmiths in Newcastle and London". silvercollection.it. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Dangerfield, Andy (16 January 2007). "The continued rise of Tesco non-food". BBC News. Retrieved 19 January 2008. "MYE3 population change for local authorities UK 2015.xls". ons.gov.uk. gov.uk. 6 October 2016. Retrieved 24 May 2017. Pointer, Graham. "The UK's major urban areas" (PDF). statistics.gov.uk. Retrieved 8 April 2007. Roseworth. "What's it like to be student in Newcastle?". Roseworth Student Lettings. Archived from the original on 20 March 2020. Retrieved 9 February 2020. "Estimates of the population for the UK, England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland - Office for National Statistics". "Ethnicity in the North East (report)" (PDF). Government Office North East. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 November 2007. Retrieved 11 November 2007. UK Census (2011). "Local Area Report – Newcastle upon Tyne Built-up area (1119884888)". Nomis. Office for National Statistics. Retrieved 8 February 2018. "Newcastle upon Tyne - UK Census Data 2011". UK Census Data. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "Mapping Exercise: Bolivia" (PDF). London: International Organization for Migration. July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 July 2008. Retrieved 29 November 2008. "Bolivians in the UK: 1.2 GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION AND SPREAD OF THE BOLIVIAN COMMUNITY" (PDF). unitedkingdom.iom.int. International Organisation for Migration. July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 March 2017. Retrieved 21 July 2017. Bolivians who have recently arrived in the UK are concentrated in London, with a small number going to Newcastle. Long-term residents are more widely dispersed across the country. Some live in London and neighbouring areas... number live in Newcastle and Edinburgh (see figure 1). Data is taken from United Kingdom Casweb Data services of the United Kingdom 1991 Census on Ethnic Data for England, Scotland and Wales (Table 6) "Office of National Statistics; 2001 Census Key Statistics". webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk. Retrieved 7 September 2021. "2011 Census: Ethnic Group, local authorities in England and Wales". webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk. Retrieved 15 December 2021. "Ethnic group - Office for National Statistics". www.ons.gov.uk. Retrieved 29 November 2022. RGS Alumni – the Old Novocastrians' Association Archived 13 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 14 January 2007. "North East dialect origins and the meaning of 'Geordie'". northeastengland.talktalk.net. Archived from the original on 24 February 2008. Retrieved 5 February 2008. "Geordie: A regional dialect of English". The British Library. Archived from the original on 5 May 2021. Retrieved 5 May 2021. University Staff (23 October 2017). "Geordie dictionary". libguides.ncl.ac.uk. Newcastle University Library. Retrieved 31 March 2018. Hyem: Home (of Scandinavian origin) "Newcastle English ("Geordie") – Vocabulary". une.edu.au. Archived from the original on 25 October 2007. Retrieved 5 February 2008. "Newcastle upon Tyne Health Profile 2011". North East Public Health Observatory. Archived from the original on 3 October 2011. Retrieved 9 July 2011. Slope Index of Inequality published on 5 January 2011 "Statistics and intelligence". Newcastle City Council. Retrieved 28 September 2021. Tom Sheldrick (21 March 2016). "The scale of the North East's childhood obesity problem | Tyne Tees – ITV News". Itv.com. Retrieved 26 February 2017. "Children and Young People". newcastle.gov.uk. gov.uk. 2011. Archived from the original on 4 April 2016. Retrieved 26 April 2017. "Newcastle upon Tyne Health Profile 2012". North East Public Health Observatory. Archived from the original on 29 May 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2015. Helen Rae (25 June 2012). "11 North East people die every day due to smoking". thejournal.co.uk. Archived from the original on 5 April 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2017. Katie Dickinson (8 December 2016). "How bad is where you live for alcohol and drugs abuse? Tap in your postcode to find out". Chronicle Live. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Reporter, Telegraph (24 February 2015). "The extent of water fluoridation in the UK". Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 11 February 2018. "Noisy Newcastle tops league table". BBC News. 2 February 2007. Retrieved 3 February 2007. "Noise study gets an ear-bashing". Evening Chronicle. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 21 February 2007. "Town Moor Newcastle - News, views, gossip, pictures, video". Chronicle Live. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "St James' Park". BBC. Retrieved 17 September 2007. "Newcastle United's Women's Football Club: History". nuwfc. Retrieved 22 October 2012. "History of Gosforth Park". newcastle-racecourse.co.uk. Retrieved 22 October 2012. "Northumbria University | Newcastle upon Tyne | Study in the Best Student City". northumbria.ac.uk. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "Newcastle Eagles". chroniclelive.co.uk. Retrieved 27 November 2014. Staff (7 September 2014). "Who The Great North Run". guinnessworldrecords.com. Retrieved 24 March 2022. "Great North Run". BBC News. Retrieved 17 September 2007. "Runners set for traditional race". BBC News. 9 June 2007. Retrieved 17 September 2007. "Olympics 2012 – Newcastle". newcastlecitywatch.co.uk. Archived from the original on 29 July 2012. Retrieved 5 August 2012. "Olympics – Host Council for London 2012". Newcastle.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 1 December 2011. Retrieved 5 August 2012. "St James' Park celebrates one year to go". london2012.com. Archived from the original on 3 August 2012. Retrieved 5 August 2012. "Rugby World Cup". rugbyworldcup.com. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 6 January 2015. "Easter record at Newcastle Airport". uk-airport-news.info. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 26 March 2007. "Airport – Metro link marks 15th birthday as passenger numbers take off!". newcastleairport.com. Archived from the original on 12 February 2007. Retrieved 26 March 2007. "Destinations & Offers". newcastleairport.com. Archived from the original on 7 November 2007. Retrieved 8 December 2007. Lognonne, Ruth (7 April 2014). "Newcastle Central Station's new look is unveiled". The Journal. thejournal.co.uk. Archived from the original on 12 July 2014. Retrieved 24 June 2014. "Passengers see East Coast switch". BBC News. 8 December 2007. Retrieved 8 December 2007. "Bookmarking East Coast > East Coast" (PDF). Nationalexpresseastcoast.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2008. Retrieved 4 March 2012. "Trainshed, Central Station, Newcastle". victorianweb.org. 20 July 2006. Archived from the original on 12 December 2007. Retrieved 8 December 2007. "The Life of Robert Stephenson – a Timeline". robertstephensontrust.com. Archived from the original on 4 December 2007. Retrieved 8 December 2007. "History of public transport". nexus.org.uk. Archived from the original on 26 September 2007. Retrieved 14 January 2008. "Newcastle-upon-Tyne". urbanrail.net. Archived from the original on 18 January 2008. Retrieved 14 January 2008. "Tyne and Wear Metro". thetrams.co.uk. Retrieved 14 January 2008. "SINE Project, Structure Details for Queen Elizabeth II Bridge". Newcastle University. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 14 January 2008. "Tyne and Wear Metro". nexus.org.uk. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 14 January 2008. "Getting Around". newcastlegateshead.com. Archived from the original on 23 November 2006. Retrieved 14 January 2008. "Mobile Coverage to Newcastle Metro System". paul-walton.co.uk. Archived from the original on 24 August 2011. Retrieved 28 February 2011. Marconi undertook the negotiation, feasibility, design and construct of the mobile radio system to the underground parts of the Newcastle Metro. "Mobile sounds of the underground". BBC. 17 February 2004. Retrieved 28 February 2011. it would be the first time complete coverage had been provided to a UK underground system. "Metro: all change". nexus.org.uk. 2014. Retrieved 27 November 2014. Lognonne, Ruth (9 May 2014). "Government agrees to talks on Tyne and Wear Metro expansion". thejournal.co.uk. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 27 November 2014. "Newcastle Map Scans". rural-roads.co.uk. Retrieved 9 December 2007. "New Tyne Crossing Web-site". Archived from the original on 7 January 2012. Retrieved 16 January 2012. "Nexus – Bus". nexus.org.uk. Archived from the original on 28 December 2007. Retrieved 13 January 2008. "Full timetable list". nexus.org.uk. Archived from the original on 26 August 2007. Retrieved 13 January 2008. Henderson, Tony (20 December 2013). "Memories appeal for Tyneside waggonways project". thejournal.co.uk. Archived from the original on 27 February 2014. Retrieved 21 February 2014. "Delivering Cycling Improvements in Newcastle A ten-year strategy 2011–22 – Vision, aims and objectives" (PDF). newcycling.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 February 2014. Retrieved 21 February 2014. "Welcome to Newcastle Cycling Campaign". newcycling.org. Retrieved 4 September 2013. "Annual Report 2012/13" (PDF). newcycling.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 February 2014. Retrieved 4 September 2013. "Delivering Cycling Improvements in Newcastle A ten-year strategy 2011–22 – Background" (PDF). newcycling.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 February 2014. Retrieved 21 February 2014. "Ferry to Holland". DFDS Seaways. Retrieved 14 August 2017. "DFDS scraps Newcastle-Gothenburg line". The Local. 7 September 2006. Archived from the original on 28 August 2007. Retrieved 21 September 2007. "North East devolution deal". gov.uk. Retrieved 29 March 2024. "Election Maps". Ordnance Survey. Retrieved 29 March 2024. Report of the Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the Municipal Corporations in England and Wales: Appendix 3. 1835. pp. 1633–1635. Retrieved 29 March 2024. Militia Act. 1882. p. 21. Retrieved 18 February 2024. "Northumberland: Diagram showing administrative boundaries, 1972". National Library of Scotland. Ordnance Survey. Retrieved 29 March 2024. Historic England. "Moot Hall, Castle Garth (Grade I) (1116297)". National Heritage List for England. Retrieved 29 March 2024. "No. 48579". The London Gazette. 10 April 1981. p. 5337. Bell, James (1835). A new and comprehensive gazetteer of England and Wales. p. 254. Retrieved 29 March 2024. Penny Cyclopaedia, Volumes 15–16. Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. 1839. p. 316. Retrieved 29 March 2024. Parliamentary Boundaries Act. 1832. p. 353. Retrieved 29 March 2024. Municipal Corporations Act. 1835. p. 457. Retrieved 29 March 2024. "Local Government Act 1888", legislation.gov.uk, The National Archives, 1888 c. 41 "Local Government Board's Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 13) Act 1904". legislation.gov.uk. The National Archives. Retrieved 29 March 2024. "Newcastle upon Tyne Municipal Borough / County Borough". A Vision of Britain through Time. GB Historical GIS / University of Portsmouth. Retrieved 29 March 2024. "No. 27936". The London Gazette. 31 July 1906. p. 5232. "Local Government Act 1972: Schedule 1", legislation.gov.uk, The National Archives, 1972 c. 70 (sch. 1), retrieved 25 March 2024 "The Metropolitan Districts (Names) Order 1973", legislation.gov.uk, The National Archives, SI 1973/137 "No. 46255". The London Gazette. 4 April 1974. p. 4400. "Local Government Act 1985", legislation.gov.uk, The National Archives, 1985 c. 51, retrieved 29 March 2024 "EU referendum results: Newcastle upon Tyne declares narrow victory for Remain | The Independent". The Independent. 24 June 2016. Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "The Russell Group". The Russell Group. Retrieved 29 March 2008. "History". Newcastle University. Archived from the original on 12 September 2007. Retrieved 22 September 2007. McCall, Alastair (17 September 2000). "King of the Castle". Sunday Times. Archived from the original (Reprint on Newcastle University's website) on 18 September 2007. Retrieved 22 September 2007. Eleanor Busby (6 June 2018). "Elite universities improve teaching scores after requesting to be judged again in government rankings". The Independent. Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. "Life – A Center For World Class Science". Center For Life. Archived from the original on 8 February 2011. Retrieved 23 February 2011. "Welcome to the Centre for Life science village". Center For Life. Archived from the original on 20 July 2011. Retrieved 23 February 2011. "Discovery museum". britainsfinest.co.uk. Archived from the original on 27 November 2010. Retrieved 23 February 2011. "Great North Museum". aboutbritain.com. Retrieved 23 February 2011. "Newcastle on Tyne Museum of Antiquities". romanobritain.org. 2009. Archived from the original on 20 October 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Side Gallery". AmberOnline. Archived from the original on 12 October 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2013. Since opening in 1977, the gallery's been committed to documentary in the tradition of the concerned photographer – our own production/commissions in the North of England and the historical and contemporary work from around the world... "Newburn Motor Museum". Newburn Motor Museum. Retrieved 7 January 2020. Whetstone, David (16 December 2013). "Newcastle's Laing Art Gallery opens online to viewers around the world". The Journal. North East England. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 17 December 2013. The gallery has joined the White House, the Palace of Versaille and other museums and galleries around the world "Laing Art Gallery". Art Collections. Retrieved 17 December 2013. "Coptic Orthodox Faith Contacts – North East Religious Learning Resources Centre". Resourcescentreonline.co.uk. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 4 August 2010. "St. andrews church". british-history.ac.uk (From: 'St Andrew's church', Historical Account of Newcastle-upon-Tyne...(1827), pp. 323–341.). 1827. Retrieved 15 August 2012. Bourne, indeed, is of opinion that it was built before king David was born; because, according to tradition, it is the oldest church in town, and St. Nicholas', it is admitted, was erected before the time of king Henry I. But as the church of St. Nicholas was burnt down in 1216, this church may be the oldest ecclesiastical building in Newcastle... "The Parish Church of St Andrew". standrewsnewcastle.org.uk. Retrieved 15 August 2012. "Newcastle Collections – Charles Avison". Archived from the original on 7 April 2015. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Vallely, Paul (18 June 1999). "Obituary: Cardinal Basil Hume". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. "Cuthbert Collingwood, 1st Baron Collingwood". Britannica. 22 February 2024. "Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell". Science Museum Group Collection. "Sir William George Armstrong". The Mining Institute. "Rowan Atkinson biography". biography.com. Retrieved 7 February 2014. Bunting, Basil. "Title Page – Basil Bunting: Complete Poems". Bloodaxe Books. Archived from the original on 9 March 2010. Retrieved 4 August 2010. "Consul yourself". The Guardian. London. 22 December 2000. Retrieved 7 April 2010. "Thai PM admits British nationality". The Guardian. 24 February 2011. Lamb, Liz (5 June 2007). "I wanted to play clarinet". chroniclelive.co.uk. Retrieved 16 June 2015. "Profile of James Scott" Archived 14 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine. About.com. Retrieved 12 July 2013. "Profile: Peter Higgs". BBC. 8 October 2013. Retrieved 8 October 2013. "Newcastle, Australia". Newcastle City Council. Archived from the original on 9 January 2011. Retrieved 18 July 2010. "2003 Annual Report" (PDF). Atlanta Sister Cities Commission. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 July 2010. Retrieved 18 July 2010. "City Twinning – Newcastle upon Tyne". Gemeente Groningen. Retrieved 18 July 2010. "Bergen, Norway". Newcastle City Council. Archived from the original on 27 December 2008. Retrieved 18 July 2010. NRK (13 November 2013), "Prime Minister cuts Christmas tree for Newcastle", The Norway Post, archived from the original on 11 October 2016, retrieved 8 October 2016 "Gelsenkirchen and Newcastle celebrate 60 years as sister cities". German Consulate General Edinburgh. Archived from the original on 2 October 2009. Retrieved 18 July 2010. "Haifa, Israel". Newcastle City Council. Archived from the original on 9 January 2011. Retrieved 18 July 2010. "Nancy, France". Newcastle City Council. Archived from the original on 24 January 2010. Retrieved 18 July 2010. "British towns twinned with French towns [via WaybackMachine.com]". Archant Community Media Ltd. Archived from the original on 5 July 2013. Retrieved 20 July 2013. "Newcastle's International Relationships | Newcastle City Council". newcastle.gov.uk. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "太原：英国纽卡斯尔因新疆问题终止中国姊妹城市关系 (Taiyuan: UK's Newcastle upon Tyne terminated sister city partnership over Xinjiang issue)". BBC News Chinese (in Chinese (China)). 4 November 2022. Retrieved 5 November 2022. "NINE YOUTH FROM LITTLE ROCK DEPART FOR VISIT TO NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, UNITED KINGDOM" (Press release). City of Little Rock. 9 July 2007. Retrieved 4 February 2008. "Vänorter" (in Swedish). Malmö stad. Archived from the original on 23 December 2016. Retrieved 6 November 2013. "About". newcastlesoftheworld.com. Archived from the original on 3 February 2019. Retrieved 2 February 2019. "Danish Consulates and Vice-Consulates in the UK – Newcastle Upon Tyne". storbritannien.um.dk. storbritannien. Archived from the original on 19 February 2018. Retrieved 19 February 2018. "Consulate of Belgium in Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom". belgium.visahq.co.uk. Retrieved 21 May 2012. "Honorary Consul in Newcastle -Upon-Tyne". ambafrance-uk.org. Archived from the original on 17 May 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "Regional PAC chairman, Jo Chexal, honoured". soroptimist-ukpac.org. 12 May 2009. Archived from the original on 13 April 2013. Retrieved 21 May 2012. "Iceland Consulate, United Kingdom". iceland.visahq.co.uk. Retrieved 21 May 2012. "Honorary Consulate of Italy in Newcastle". embassy-finder. Retrieved 21 May 2012. "Bestowing the Order of Merit on the Honorary Norwegian Vice-Consul in Newcastle Upon Tyne". Norway.org.uk. 18 May 2012. Archived from the original on 24 December 2012. Retrieved 21 May 2012. "Sweden Consulate, United Kingdom". sweden.visahq.co.uk. Retrieved 21 May 2012. Tyneside: A History of Newcastle and Gateshead from Earliest Times, Alistair Moffat and George Rosie, Mainstream Publishing (10 November 2005), ISBN 1-84596-013-0 Tyneside Neighbourhoods: Deprivation, Social Life and Social Behaviour in One British City, Daniel Nettle, Open Book Publishers, (2016), ISBN 9781783741885 History of Northumberland and Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Leslie W. Hepple, Phillimore & Co Ltd (1976), ISBN 0-85033-245-1 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Newcastle upon Tyne. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Newcastle_upon_Tyne. Official NewcastleGateshead Tourism Site BBC Tyne BBC Local website