Reddit (/ˈrɛdɪt/) is an American social news aggregation, content rating, and forum social network. Registered users (commonly referred to as "Redditors") submit content to the site such as links, text posts, images, and videos, which are then voted up or down by other members. Posts are organized by subject into user-created boards called "communities" or "subreddits". Submissions with more upvotes appear towards the top of their subreddit and, if they receive enough upvotes, ultimately on the site's front page. Reddit administrators moderate the communities. Moderation is also conducted by community-specific moderators, who are not Reddit employees. It is operated by Reddit, Inc., based in San Francisco. As of October 2023, Reddit is the 18th most-visited website in the world. According to data provided by Similarweb, 48.98% of the website traffic comes from the United States, followed by the United Kingdom at 7.06% and Canada at 6.9%. Reddit was founded by University of Virginia roommates Steve Huffman and Alexis Ohanian, as well as Aaron Swartz, in 2005. Condé Nast Publications acquired the site in October 2006. In 2011, Reddit became an independent subsidiary of Condé Nast's parent company, Advance Publications. In October 2014, Reddit raised $50 million in a funding round led by Sam Altman and including investors Marc Andreessen, Peter Thiel, Ron Conway, Snoop Dogg, and Jared Leto. Their investment valued the company at $500 million at the time. In July 2017, Reddit raised $200 million for a $1.8 billion valuation, with Advance Publications remaining the majority stakeholder. In February 2019, a $300 million funding round led by Tencent brought the company's valuation to $3 billion. In August 2021, a $700 million funding round led by Fidelity Investments raised that valuation to over $10 billion. The company then reportedly filed for an IPO in December 2021 with a valuation of $15 billion. Reddit debuted on the stock market on the morning of March 21, 2024 with the ticker symbol RDDT. Reddit has received praise for many of its features, such as the ability to create several subreddits for niche communities, being a platform for raising publicity for numerous causes, and has grown to be one of the most visited websites on the Internet. It has also received criticism for spreading misinformation. The idea and initial development of Reddit originated with college roommates Steve Huffman and Alexis Ohanian in 2005, who attended a lecture by programmer-entrepreneur Paul Graham in Boston, Massachusetts, during their spring break from University of Virginia. After speaking with Huffman and Ohanian following the lecture, Graham invited the two to apply to his startup incubator Y Combinator. Their initial idea, My Mobile Menu, was unsuccessful, and was intended to allow users to order food by SMS text messaging. During a brainstorming session to pitch another startup, the idea was created for what Graham called the "front page of the Internet". For this idea, Huffman and Ohanian were accepted in Y Combinator's first class. Supported by the funding from Y Combinator, Huffman coded the site in Common Lisp and together with Ohanian launched Reddit in June 2005. Embarrassed by an empty-looking site, the founders created hundreds of fake users for their posts to make it look more populated, an example of a fake it till you make it strategy. The team expanded to include Christopher Slowe in November 2005. Between November 2005 and January 2006, Reddit merged with Aaron Swartz's company Infogami, and Swartz became an equal owner of the resulting parent company, Not A Bug. Swartz went on to help rewrite the software running Reddit using web.py, a web framework he developed. The passage from Aaron Swartz's blog post "Rewriting Reddit" reveals that the switch from Lisp to Python, specifically using the web.py framework developed by Swartz, was driven by a desire for simplicity, maintainability, and performance. Despite facing skepticism and critique from the Lisp community, the change was justified by the efficiency and clarity Python provided for the project. This initiative not only influenced the technical evolution of Reddit but also contributed to the broader web development community by inspiring other frameworks and remaining a significant part of Reddit's history. (In 2020, Ohanian claimed that rather than Swartz being a co-founder, the correct description would be that Swartz's company was acquired by Reddit 6 months after he and Huffman had started.) Huffman and Ohanian sold Reddit to Condé Nast Publications, owner of Wired, on October 31, 2006, for a reported $10 million to $20 million and the team moved to San Francisco. In November 2006, Swartz blogged complaining about the new corporate environment, criticizing its level of productivity. In January 2007, Swartz was fired for undisclosed reasons. Huffman and Ohanian left Reddit in 2009. Huffman went on to co-found Hipmunk with Adam Goldstein, and later recruited Ohanian and Slowe to the new company. After Huffman and Ohanian left Reddit, Erik Martin, who joined the company as a community manager in 2008 and later became general manager in 2011, played a role in Reddit's growth. VentureBeat noted that Martin was "responsible for keeping the site going" under Condé Nast's ownership. Martin facilitated the purchase of Reddit Gifts and led charity initiatives. Reddit launched two different ways of advertising on the site in 2009. The company launched sponsored content and a self-serve ads platform that year. Reddit launched its Reddit Gold benefits program in July 2010, which offered new features to editors and created a new revenue stream for the business that did not rely on banner ads. On September 6, 2011, Reddit became operationally independent of Condé Nast, operating as a separate subsidiary of its parent company, Advance Publications. Reddit and other websites participated in a 12-hour sitewide blackout on January 18, 2012, in protest of the Stop Online Piracy Act. In May 2012, Reddit joined the Internet Defense League, a group formed to organize future protests. Yishan Wong joined Reddit as CEO in 2012. Wong resigned from Reddit in 2014, citing disagreements about his proposal to move the company's offices from San Francisco to nearby Daly City, but also the "stressful and draining" nature of the position. Ohanian credited Wong with the company's newfound success as its user base grew from 35 million to 174 million. Wong oversaw the company as it raised $50 million in funding and spun off as an independent company. Also during this time, Reddit began accepting the digital currency Bitcoin for its Reddit Gold subscription service through a partnership with bitcoin payment processor Coinbase in February 2013. Ellen Pao replaced Wong as interim CEO in 2014 and resigned in 2015 amid a user revolt over the firing of a popular Reddit employee. During her tenure, Reddit initiated an anti-harassment policy, banned involuntary sexualization, and banned several forums that focused on bigoted content or harassment of individuals. After five years away from the company, Ohanian and Huffman returned to leadership roles at Reddit: Ohanian became the full-time executive chairman in November 2014 following Wong's resignation, while Pao's departure on July 10, 2015, led to Huffman's return as the company's chief executive. After Huffman rejoined Reddit as CEO, he launched Reddit's iOS and Android apps, improved Reddit's mobile website, and created A/B testing infrastructure. The company launched a major redesign of its website in April 2018. Huffman said new users were turned off from Reddit because it had looked like a "dystopian Craigslist". Reddit also instituted several technological improvements, such as a new tool that allows users to hide posts, comments, and private messages from selected redditors in an attempt to curb online harassment, and new content guidelines. These new content guidelines were aimed at banning content inciting violence and quarantining offensive material. Slowe, the company's first employee, rejoined Reddit in 2017 as chief technology officer. Reddit's largest round of funding came in 2017, when the company raised $200 million and was valued at $1.8 billion. The funding supported Reddit's site redesign and video efforts. On June 5, 2020, Ohanian resigned as a member of the board in response to the George Floyd protests and requested to be replaced "by a Black candidate". Michael Seibel, then-CEO of Y Combinator, was subsequently named to the board. On December 13, 2020, Reddit announced it had acquired short-form video social platform Dubsmash, hiring its entire team, with the intention of integrating its video creation tools into Reddit. On March 5, 2021, Reddit announced that it had appointed Drew Vollero, who has worked at Snapchat's parent company Snap (SNAP), as its first Chief Financial Officer weeks after the site was thrust into the spotlight due to its role in the GameStop trading frenzy. Vollero's appointment spurred speculation of an initial public offering, a move that senior leaders have considered publicly. In December 2021, Reddit revealed that it had confidentially filed for an initial public offering with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. In June 2022, Reddit acquired MeaningCloud, a natural language processing company. In September 2022, Reddit acquired Spiketrap for an undisclosed sum. In April 2023, Fidelity, the lead investor in Reddit's funding round in 2021, devalued its investment in Reddit by 41% cumulatively. It was revealed in a monthly disclosure that Fidelity valued its stake at $16.6 million, down from its initial investment of $28.2 million which had valued the company at $10 billion. This was followed by an announcement in June 2023 of plans to layoff 5% of Reddit's workforce and to reduce the number of planned hires for the year. In June 2023, BlackCat hacker gang claimed responsibility for a February 2023 breach of Reddit's systems. On their data leak site, they claimed that they stole 80 GB of compressed data and demanded a $4.5 million ransom from Reddit. This attack did not involve data encryption like typical ransomware campaigns. In February 2024, Reddit announced a partnership with Google in a deal worth about $60 million per year, to license its real-time user content to train Google's AI model. The partnership also lets Reddit get access to Google's "Vertex AI" service which would help improve search results on Reddit. In March 2024 it was announced that Reddit would target a valuation of up to $6.4 billion in its U.S. IPO. The platform intends to sell 22 million class A common shares at a price between $31 and $34 alongside some of its investors, looking to raise up to $748 million. Reddit's initial public offering opened on March 20, 2024, at $34 per share and a $6.4 billion valuation. They went public the next day on the New York Stock Exchange at $47 per share and rose to $50.44 at market close on its first day of trading, reaching a market cap of $9.5 billion. Reddit is a website comprising user-generated content—including photos, videos, links, and text-based posts—and discussions of this content in what is essentially a bulletin board system. The name "Reddit" is a play-on-words with the phrase "read it", i.e., "I read it on Reddit." According to Reddit, in 2019, there were approximately 430 million monthly users, who are known as "redditors". The site's content is divided into categories or communities known on-site as "subreddits", of which there are more than 138,000 active communities. Noteworthy subreddits include r/centuryclub, where only Reddit users with 100k+ post or comment karma are allowed to participate in, and r/freekarma4u, where Reddit users give each other free upvotes. As a network of communities, Reddit's core content consists of posts from its users. Users can comment on others' posts to continue the conversation. A key feature to Reddit is that users can cast positive or negative votes, called upvotes and downvotes respectively, for each post and comment on the site. The number of upvotes or downvotes determines the posts' visibility on the site, so the most popular content is displayed to the most people. Users can also earn "karma" for their posts and comments, a status that reflects their standing within the community and their contributions to Reddit. Posts are sometimes automatically archived after six months, meaning they can no longer be commented or voted on. The most popular posts from the site's numerous subreddits are visible on the front page to those who browse the site without an account. By default for those users, the front page will display the subreddit r/popular, featuring top-ranked posts across all of Reddit, excluding not-safe-for-work communities and others that are most commonly filtered out by users (even if they are safe for work). The subreddit r/all originally did not filter topics, but as of 2021 it does not include not-safe-for-work content. Registered users who subscribe to subreddits see the top content from the subreddits to which they subscribe on their personal front pages. Additionally, some subreddits have a karma and account age requirement to discourage bots and spammers from posting. Front-page rank—for both the general front page and for individual subreddits—is determined by a combination of factors, including the age of the submission, positive ("upvoted") to negative ("downvoted") feedback ratio, and the total vote-count. Registering an account with Reddit is free and requires an email address. In addition to commenting and voting, registered users can also create their own subreddit on a topic of their choosing. In Reddit style, usernames begin with "u/". For example, noteworthy redditors include u/Poem_for_your_sprog, who responds to messages across Reddit in verse, u/Shitty_Watercolour who posts paintings in response to posts, u/gallowboob, with the second-highest karma on Reddit, u/spez, the CEO of Reddit (Steve Huffman), and u/DeepFuckingValue, the redditor with the most awardee karma. Subreddits are overseen by moderators, Reddit users who earn the title by creating a subreddit or being promoted by a current moderator. Reddit users may also request to moderate a sub that has no moderators or very inactive ones in r/redditrequest. These requests are reviewed by the Reddit admins. Moderators are volunteers who manage their communities, set and enforce community-specific rules, remove posts and comments that violate these rules, and generally work to keep discussions in their subreddit on topic. Admins, by contrast, are paid to work for Reddit. Reddit also releases transparency reports annually which have information like how many posts have been taken down by moderators and for what reason. It also details information about requests law enforcement agencies have made for information about users or to take down content. In 2020, Reddit removed 6% of posts made on their platform (approx. 233 million). More than 99% of removals were marked as spam; the remainder made up of a mix of other offensive content. Around 131 million posts were removed by the automated moderator and the rest were taken down manually. It is estimated that Reddit's moderators do a total of 466 hours of work every day, which totals up to $3.4 million in unpaid work each year. This roughly equates to 2.8% of the company's annual revenue. Subreddits (officially called communities) are user-created areas of interest where discussions on Reddit are organized. There are about 138,000 active subreddits (among a total of 1.2 million) as of July 2018[update]. Subreddit names begin with "r/"; for instance, "r/science" is a community devoted to discussing scientific publications, while "r/gaming" is a community devoted to discussing video games and "r/worldnews" is for posting news articles from around the world. In a 2014 interview with Memeburn, Erik Martin, then the general manager of Reddit, remarked that their "approach is to give the community moderators or curators as much control as possible so that they can shape and cultivate the type of communities they want". Subreddits often use themed variants of Reddit's alien mascot, Snoo, in the visual styling of their communities. Reddit Premium (formerly Reddit Gold) is a premium membership that allows users to view the site ad-free. Until 2023, subscribers could also use coins to award posts or comments they valued, generally due to humorous or high-quality content. Reddit Premium unlocks several features not accessible to regular users, such as comment highlighting, exclusive subreddits such as r/lounge, a personalized Snoo (known as a "snoovatar"), and a Reddit premium trophy that can be displayed on the user's profile. Reddit Gold was renamed to Reddit Premium in 2018. In addition to gold coins, users were able to gift silver and platinum coins to other users as rewards for quality content. On the site redditors commemorate their "cake day" once a year, on the anniversary of the day their account was created. Cake day adds an icon of a small slice of cake next to the user's name for 24 hours. In August 2021, the company introduced a TikTok-like short-form video feature for iOS that lets users rapidly swipe through a feed of short video content. In December 2021, the company introduced a Spotify Wrapped-like feature called Reddit Recap that recaps various statistics from January 1 to November 30 about each individual user, such as how much time they spent on Reddit, which communities they joined, and the topics that they engaged with, and allows the user to view it. On July 7, 2022, Reddit announced 'blockchain-backed Collectible Avatars', customizable avatars which are available on the subreddit r/CollectibleAvatars for purchase separate from Reddit Premium. The avatars were created by independent artists who post work on other subreddits, and who receive a portion of the profits. They use Reddit's Polygon blockchain-powered digital wallet the Vault. Richard Lawler of The Verge described them as "non-fungible tokens (NFTs) that are available for purchase in the Reddit Avatar Builder". In 2017, Reddit developed its own real-time chat software for the site. While some established subreddits have used third-party software to chat about their communities, the company built chat functions that it hopes will become an integral part of Reddit. Individual chat rooms were rolled out in 2017 and community chat rooms for members of a given subreddit were rolled out in 2018. Reddit Talk was announced in April 2021 as a competitor to Clubhouse. Reddit Talk lets subreddit moderators start audio meeting rooms that mimick Clubhouse in design. In 2022, Reddit Talk was updated to support recording audio rooms and work on the web version of Reddit. A desktop app is reportedly slated for a late February release. Reddit Public Access Network, commonly known as RPAN, was a live streaming service run by Reddit. Viewers interacted with streams by upvoting or downvoting, chatting and by giving paid awards. During the off-air hours, 24/7 streaming was possible to the dedicated subreddits, but with limited slots and capabilities. On August 19, 2019, Reddit announced RPAN. It was said to be in testing, but they were experimenting with making it a permanent program, as well as a way to increase revenue for the platform. Later, a five-day testing period began. During the testing period, streaming was for a select group of users, allowing 30 minutes of streaming per person and 100 slots. On July 1, 2020, RPAN Studio was released, an application that allows users to broadcast live from desktop computers. RPAN Studio has been built on top of OBS, an open-source streaming and recording program. On January 28, 2021, Reddit permanently increased streaming times to three hours. RPAN was officially discontinued on November 15, 2022. In 2019, Reddit tested a new feature which allowed users to tip others. It was only made available for a user named Chris who goes by the alias u/shittymorph, who was known for posting well-written comments, only for them to end with the same copypasta referencing the 1998 Hell in a Cell match between wrestlers The Undertaker and Mankind. Reddit was originally written in Common Lisp but was rewritten in Python in December 2005 for wider access to code libraries and greater development flexibility. The Python web framework that Swartz developed to run the site, web.py, is available as an open source project. As of November 10, 2009[update], Reddit used Pylons as its web framework. Reddit was an open source project from June 18, 2008, until 2017. During that time, all of the code and libraries written for Reddit were freely available on GitHub, with the exception of the anti-spam/cheating portions. In a September 2017 announcement, the company stated that "we've been doing a bad job of keeping our open-source product repos up to date", partially because "open-source makes it hard for us to develop some features 'in the clear'... without leaking our plans too far in advance", prompting the decision to archive its public GitHub repos. As of November 10, 2009[update], Reddit decommissioned its servers which it owned and migrated to Amazon Web Services, using EC2 for application services and S3 for storage. Reddit uses PostgreSQL as its primary datastore. As part of an effort to be more data-driven, Reddit built a data analytics pipeline on top of Apache Kafka and Hive as its data warehouse. It uses Amazon's Elastic MapReduce to run Hadoop workloads across Hive and stores results in S3, eventually putting data in Amazon RDS for visualization purposes. It also uses HAProxy for load balancing and Jenkins and Apache Pig in the data pipeline. Reddit uses Redis and its implementation of HyperLogLog to cache approximate page views with an underlying Apache Cassandra cluster for persistence. For general caching of queries and memoization, Reddit uses memcached behind Facebook's memcached router, mcrouter. In 2017, it had almost 3.3 terabytes of memory on 54 EC2 instances dedicated to caching split across different pools. Services at Reddit are structured around a common foundation named Baseplate. It was originally implemented in Python, but since 2019, parts of it have been reimplemented in Go for better performance. Reddit also runs its services through Kubernetes and uses Spinnaker for continuous delivery. In early 2009, Reddit started using jQuery. In 2017, Reddit announced it adopted TypeScript for its UI redesign. Reddit's search function has had many iterations and currently uses Lucidworks Fusion to implementation. In 2010, Reddit released its first mobile web interface for easier reading and navigating the website on touch screen devices. For several years, redditors relied on third-party apps to access Reddit on mobile devices. In October 2014, Reddit acquired one of them, Alien Blue, which became the official iOS Reddit app. Reddit removed Alien Blue and released its official application, Reddit: The Official App, on Google Play and the iOS App Store in April 2016. The company released an app for Reddit's question-and-answer Ask Me Anything subreddit in 2014. The app allowed users to see active Ask Me Anythings, receive notifications, ask questions and vote. The site has undergone several products and design changes since it originally launched in 2005. When it initially launched, there were no comments or subreddits. Comments were added in 2005 and interest-based groups (called 'subreddits') were introduced in 2008. Allowing users to create subreddits has led to much of the activity that redditors would recognize that helped define Reddit. These include subreddits "WTF", "funny", and "AskReddit". Reddit rolled out its multireddit feature, the site's biggest change to its front page in years, in 2013. With the multireddits, users see top stories from a collection of subreddits. In 2015, Reddit enabled embedding and as a result users could share Reddit content on other sites. In 2016, Reddit began hosting images using a new image uploading tool, a move that shifted away from the uploading service Imgur that had been the de facto service. Users still can upload images to Reddit using Imgur. Reddit's in-house video uploading service for desktop and mobile launched in 2017. Previously, users had to use third-party video uploading services, which Reddit acknowledged was time-consuming for users. Reddit released its "spoiler tags" feature in January 2017. The feature warns users of potential spoilers in posts and pixelates preview images. Reddit unveiled changes to its public front page, called r/popular, in 2017; the change creates a front page free of potentially adult-oriented content for unregistered users. In late 2017, Reddit declared it wanted to be a mobile-first site, launching several changes to its apps for iOS and Android. The new features included user-to-user chat, a theater mode for viewing visual content, and mobile tools for the site's moderators. "Mod mode" lets moderators manage content and their subreddits on mobile devices. Reddit launched its redesigned website in 2018, with its first major visual update in a decade. Development for the new site took more than a year. It was the result of an initiative by Huffman upon returning to Reddit, who said the site's outdated look deterred new users. The new site features a hamburger menu to help users navigate the site, different views, and new fonts to better inform redditors if they are clicking on a Reddit post or an external link. The goal was not only for Reddit to improve its appearance, but also to make it easier to accommodate a new generation of Reddit users. Additionally Reddit's growth had strained the site's back end; Huffman and Reddit Vice President of Engineering Nick Caldwell told The Wall Street Journal's COI Journal that Reddit needed to leverage artificial intelligence and other modern digital tools. Registered users can opt-out from the redesign and use "Old Reddit" which continues to use the previous design. Unregistered users can access it via old.reddit.com. In November 2023, Fast Company reported that Reddit began rolling out a comprehensive rebrand, including a new logo, typeface, brand colors, and an updated version of its mascot Snoo, as part of its preparation for a potential 2024 IPO and in response to its expanding user base and global reach. Reddit's logo consists of a time-traveling alien named Snoo and the company name stylized as "reddit". The alien has an oval head, pom-pom ears, and an antenna. Its colors are black, white, and orange-red. The mascot was created in 2005 while company co-founder Alexis Ohanian was an undergraduate at the University of Virginia. Ohanian drew a doodle of the creature while he was bored during a marketing class. Originally, Ohanian sought to name the mascot S'new, a play on "What's new?", to tie the mascot into Reddit's premise as the "front page of the Internet". Eventually, the name Snoo was chosen. In 2011, Ohanian outlined the logo's evolution with a graphic that showcased several early versions, including various spellings of the website name, such as "Reditt". Snoo is genderless, so the logo is moldable. Over the years, the Reddit logo has frequently changed for holidays and other special events. Many subreddits have a customized Snoo logo to represent the subreddit. Redditors can also submit their own logos, which sometimes appear on the site's front page, or create their own customized versions of Snoo for their communities (or "subreddits"). When Reddit revamped its website in April 2018, the company imposed several restrictions on how Snoo can be designed: Snoo's head "should always appear blank or neutral", Snoo's eyes are orange-red, and Snoo cannot have fingers. Snoo's purpose is to discover and explore humanity. Reddit is a public company based in San Francisco. It has an office in the Mid-Market neighborhood. Reddit doubled its headcount in 2017; as of 2018[update], it employed approximately 350 people. In 2017, the company was valued at $1.8 billion during a $200 million round of new venture funding. The company was previously owned by Condé Nast, but was spun off as an independent company. As of April 2018[update], Advance Publications, Condé Nast's parent company, retained a majority stake in Reddit. Reddit's key management personnel includes co-founder and CEO Steve Huffman, Chief Technology Officer Chris Slowe, who was the company's original lead engineer, and Chief Operating Officer Jen Wong, a former president of digital and chief operating officer at Time Inc. Reddit does not disclose its revenue figures. The company generates revenue in part through advertising and premium memberships that remove ads from the site. As part of its company culture, Reddit operates on a no-negotiation policy for employee salaries. The company offers new mothers, fathers, and adoptive parents up to 16 weeks of parental leave. As of August 2021[update], Reddit is valued at more than $10 billion following a $410 million funding round. The company was looking to hire investment bankers and lawyers to assist in making an initial public offering. However, CEO Steve Huffman said the company has not decided on the timing for when to go public. In December 2021, Reddit announced they had filed a draft registration statement with the SEC regarding their prospective IPO. Reddit finally made its debut on the stock market on March 21, 2024. In February 2013, Betabeat published a post that recognized the influx of multinational corporations like Costco, Taco Bell, Subaru, and McDonald's posting branded content on Reddit that was made to appear as if it was original content from legitimate Reddit users. PAN Communications wrote that marketers want to "infiltrate the reddit community on behalf of their brand," but emphasized that "self-promotion is frowned upon" and Reddit's former director of communications noted that the site is "100 percent organic." She recommended that advertisers design promotions that "spark conversations and feedback." She recommended that businesses use AMAs to get attention for public figures but cautioned "It is important to approach AMAs carefully and be aware that this may not be a fit for every project or client." Nissan ran a successful branded content promotion offering users free gifts to publicize a new car, though the company was later ridiculed for suspected astroturfing when the CEO only answered puff piece questions on the site. Taylor described these situations as "high risk" noting: "We try hard to educate people that they have to treat questions that may seem irreverent or out of left field the same as they would questions about the specific project they are promoting." Reddit's users tend to be more privacy-conscious than on other websites, often using tools like ad-blocking software and proxies, and they dislike "feeling manipulated by brands" but respond well to "content that begs for intelligent viewers and participants." Lauren Orsini writes in ReadWrite that "Reddit's huge community is the perfect hype machine for promoting a new movie, a product release, or a lagging political campaign" but there is a "very specific set of etiquette. Redditors don't want to advertise for you, they want to talk to you." Journalists have used the site as a basis for stories, though they are advised by the site's policies to respect that "reddit's communities belong to their members" and to seek proper attribution for people's contributions. Reddit announced that they would begin using VigLink to redirect affiliate links in June 2016. Since 2017, Reddit has partnered with companies to host sponsored AMAs and other interactive events, increased advertising offerings, and introduced efforts to work with content publishers. In 2018, Reddit hired Jen Wong as COO, responsible for the company's business strategy and growth, and introduced native mobile ads. Reddit opened a Chicago office to be closer to major companies and advertising agencies located in and around Chicago. In 2019, Reddit hired former Twitter ad director Shariq Rizvi as its vice president of ad products and engineering. The website is known for its open nature and diverse user community that generate its content. Its demographics allows for wide-ranging subject areas, as well as the ability for smaller subreddits to serve more niche purposes. The possibilities that subreddits provide create new opportunities for raising attention and fostering discussion across various areas. In gaining popularity in terms of unique users per day, Reddit has been a platform to raise publicity for a number of causes. Additionally, the user base of Reddit has given birth to other websites, including image sharing community and image host Imgur, which started in 2009 as a gift to Reddit's community. In its first five months, it jumped from a thousand hits per day to a million total page views. Statistics from Google Ad Planner suggest that 74% of Reddit users are male. In 2016, the Pew Research Center published research showing that 4% of U.S. adults use Reddit, of which 67% are men. 78% of users get news from Reddit. Users tend to be significantly younger than average with less than 1% of users being 65 or over. Politically, Reddit's community is predominantly left-leaning, with less than 19% of its users leaning to the right. Reddit is known in part for its passionate user base, which has been described as "offbeat, quirky, and anti-establishment". Similar to the "Slashdot effect", the Reddit effect occurs when a smaller website crashes due to a high influx of traffic after being linked to on Reddit; this is also called the Reddit "hug of death". Users have used Reddit as a platform for their charitable and philanthropic efforts. Redditors raised more than $100,000 for charity in support of comedians Jon Stewart's and Stephen Colbert's Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear; more than $180,000 for Haiti earthquake relief efforts; and delivered food pantries' Amazon wish lists. In 2010, Christians, Muslims, and atheists held a friendly fundraising competition, where the groups raised more than $50,000. A similar donation drive in 2011 saw the atheism subreddit raise over $200,000 for charity. In February 2014, Reddit announced it would donate 10% of its annual ad revenue to non-profits voted upon by its users. As a result of the campaign, Reddit donated $82,765 each to Electronic Frontier Foundation, Planned Parenthood Federation of America, Doctors Without Borders, Erowid Center, Wikimedia Foundation, Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, NPR, Free Software Foundation, Freedom From Religion Foundation, and Tor Project. Reddit has been used for a wide variety of political engagement including the presidential campaigns of Barack Obama, Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton, and Bernie Sanders. It has also been used for self-organizing sociopolitical activism such as protests, communication with politicians and active communities. Reddit has become a popular place for worldwide political discussions. The March for Science originated from a discussion on Reddit over the deletion of all references to climate change from the White House website, about which a user commented that "There needs to be a Scientists' March on Washington". On April 22, 2017, more than 1 million scientists and supporters participated in more than 600 events in 66 countries across the globe. Reddit users have been engaged in the defense of Internet privacy, net neutrality and Internet anonymity. Reddit created an Internet blackout day and was joined by Wikipedia and other sites in 2012 in protest of the Stop Online Piracy and Protect IP acts. On January 18, Reddit participated in a 12-hour sitewide blackout to coincide with a congressional committee hearing on the measures. During that time, Reddit displayed a message on the legislation's effects on Reddit, in addition to resources on the proposed laws. In May 2012, Reddit joined the Internet Defense League, a group formed to organize future protests. The site and its users protested the Federal Communications Commission as it prepared to scrap net neutrality rules. In 2017, users upvoted "Battle for the Net" posts enough times that they filled up the entire front page. On another day, the front page was overtaken by posts showcasing campaign donations received by members of Congress from the telecommunications industry. Reddit CEO Steve Huffman has also advocated for net neutrality rules. In 2017, Huffman told The New York Times that without net neutrality protections, "you give internet service providers the ability to choose winners and losers". On Reddit, Huffman urged redditors to express support for net neutrality and contact their elected representatives in Washington, D.C. Huffman said that the repeal of net neutrality rules stifles competition. He said he and Reddit would continue to advocate for net neutrality. As a response to Glenn Beck's August 28, 2010, Restoring Honor rally, in September 2010 Reddit users started a movement to persuade satirist Stephen Colbert to have a counter-rally in Washington, D.C. The movement, which came to be called "Restoring Truthiness", was started by user mrsammercer, in a post where he described waking up from a dream in which Stephen Colbert was holding a satirical rally in D.C. Over $100,000 was raised for charity to gain the attention of Colbert. The campaign was mentioned on-air several times, and when the Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear was held in Washington, D.C., on October 30, 2010, thousands of redditors made the journey. During a post-rally press conference, Reddit co-founder Ohanian asked, "What role did the Internet campaign play in convincing you to hold this rally?" Jon Stewart responded by saying that, though it was a very nice gesture, he and Colbert had already thought of the idea and the deposit for using the National Mall was already paid during the summer, so it acted mostly as a "validation of what we were thinking about attempting". In a message to the Reddit community, Colbert later added, "I have no doubt that your efforts to organize and the joy you clearly brought to your part of the story contributed greatly to the turnout and success." Reddit has been blocked in multiple countries due to Internet censorship performed by the governments of some countries. As of October 2023, Reddit is blocked in Indonesia, China, North Korea, Turkey, and partially blocked in Bangladesh. Reddit was blocked in Russia in 2015 and later unblocked. Since May 2014, Reddit has been blocked in Indonesia by the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology for hosting content containing nudity. In August 2015, the Federal Drug Control Service of Russia determined that Reddit was promoting conversations about psychedelic drugs. The Roskomnadzor banned the website, citing advice on how to grow magic mushrooms as the reason. The Russian government had asked Reddit before to remove drug-related posts to no response. The site was later unblocked. In June 2015, Reddit was blocked in China for a few weeks. The site was unblocked later.[when?][citation needed] It was then re-blocked in August 2018 and as of September 2021[update] remained blocked. ISPs in India were found to be blocking traffic over Reddit for intermittent periods in some regions in 2019. On April Fools' Day 2010, Reddit's first massive April Fool's social experiment was to make everyone on site an admin. For 24 hours, users could ban one another, modify upvotes, delete comments, and votes. However, any modifications to Reddit only occurred through the user's perspective. While many caught on, others began threatening fellow users with their admin privileges.[citation needed] On April Fools' Day 2011, Reddit replaced its Reddit Gold subscription with Reddit Mold, a joke version of the premium service that could be given to users to make the website experience worse. For example, users who were given Mold would only be able to see fewer posts per page as well as not being able to post anything containing the letter E. These effects were amplified upon receiving more Mold, such as losing the ability to post another letter for each Mold received. On April Fools' Day 2013, Reddit claimed that it had acquired the video game Team Fortress 2, and initiated a site-wide event where users were randomly assigned into two teams, Orangered and Periwinkle, based on both the colors of the Team Fortress 2 teams as well as the colors of the upvote and downvote buttons. As in Team Fortress 2, users were randomly given items and cosmetics to use, most importantly weapons to use against users on the opposing team. Valve also participated in the event, updating Team Fortress 2 with Reddit related cosmetics. When the event ended, team Orangered was declared the victor. For April Fools' Day 2014, Reddit did "headdit", a joke way to navigate and use the website using the webcam. For April Fools' Day 2015, Josh Wardle of Wordle fame launched a social experiment subreddit called r/thebutton, attracting more than a million clicks. It displayed a button and a 60-second countdown timer. User accounts created before that day were eligible to participate. A user could only click the button once, or opt not to click it. If a user clicked the button the timer was globally reset to 60 seconds, and the user's "flair" (an icon next to the user's name) changed color. Colors were assigned based on a gradient from purple to red with purple signifying up to 60 seconds and red as low as 0 seconds. The countdown reached zero several times due to technical problems but eventually expired without further problems on June 5, 2015, after which the subreddit was archived. For April Fools' Day 2016, another experiment was launched involving the "Robin" chat widget. After clicking a titular button, an IRC-like chat window was opened with one other user, and allowed a certain time to pick among three options: "Grow", "Stay" and "Leave". "Grow" would join the chat with another group, "Stay" would close the group chat and create a subreddit with that group as moderators and "Leave" would close the group chat. For April Fools' Day 2017, Wardle again launched a social experiment, this time on r/place. The subreddit contained a collaborative pixel art canvas, where a user could place a pixel every five minutes (the timer was temporarily ten and twenty minutes for a few hours on April 1). Many people worked together to create large graphics, such as flags or symbols. Often subreddits would come together as a group to add a graphic from that community to place. Place was closed on April 3, 2017, at 1:00 PM GMT having been active for a full three days. For April Fools' Day 2019, a social experiment subreddit called r/sequence was released. The experiment consisted of a community-driven sequencer that users interacted with by submitting GIFs or text slides to be compiled into a movie. The order of the GIFs and text slides were chosen by users through upvoting one GIF or text slide per scene. The most upvoted GIF or text slide was locked into the next available scene for every three minutes. At the end, once the entire sequence was filled, it was posted as a full story in an external page. The experiment ended at April 3, 2019, 11:08 PM GMT. For April Fools' Day 2021, Reddit released r/second, in which users have to guess the second most popular option out of a group of three options. The event ended after 2000 one-minute rounds, with the final round lasting one hour. For April Fools' Day 2022, Reddit once again featured r/place, similar to the event featured in 2017. The subreddit featured a 1000 x 1000 pixel collaborative canvas which users could edit the color of a single pixel every five minutes. The event began on April 1, 2022, at 1:00 PM GMT, and would be live for 87 hours. On the second day of r/place, the canvas was expanded from 1000 x 1000 to 2000 x 1000, allowing for more artwork. On the third day of r/place, the canvas was once again expanded from 2000 x 1000 to 2000 x 2000. Before the event ended, users were only allowed to place white pixels, reverting the canvas back to its original state. AMAs, or "Ask Me Anything" interviews, are among Reddit's most popular features. As of August 1, 2018[update], r/IAmA, which is the most popular community for AMAs, was the eighth most popular subreddit on the site with 17.7 million subscribers. During an AMA on r/IAmA and other subreddits, users can ask questions to interviewees. Notable participants include former-United States President Barack Obama (while campaigning for the 2012 election), Bill Gates (multiple times), and Donald Trump (also while campaigning). AMAs have featured CEO Steve Huffman, as well as figures from entertainment industries around the world (including Priyanka Chopra and George Clooney), literature (Margaret Atwood), space (Buzz Aldrin), privacy (Edward Snowden), fictional characters (including Borat and Cookie Monster) and others, such as experts who answered questions about the transgender community. The Atlantic wrote that an AMA "imports the aspirational norms of honesty and authenticity from pseudonymous Internet forums into a public venue". RedditGifts was a program that offers gift exchanges throughout the year. The fan-made RedditGifts site was created in 2009 for a Secret Santa exchange among Reddit users, which has since become the world's largest and set a Guinness World record. In 2009, 4,500 redditors participated. For the 2010 holiday season, 92 countries were involved in the secret Santa program. There were 17,543 participants, and $662,907.60 was collectively spent on gift purchases and shipping costs. In 2014, about 200,000 users from 188 countries participated. Several celebrities have participated in the program, including Bill Gates, Alyssa Milano, and Snoop Dogg. Eventually, the secret Santa program expanded to various other occasions through RedditGifts, which Reddit acquired in 2011. On June 9, 2021, Reddit announced the shutdown of Reddit Gifts, effective at the conclusion of the 2021 Secret Santa exchange; new account registration was disabled when the announcement was issued. The online Reddit community conducts real-world meetups across the globe each summer. These in-person meetups are called Global Reddit Meetup Day. As with most public online forums, Reddit is vulnerable to the use of disruptive or manipulative practices by its members, from sources such as troll farms, click farms and astroturfing. Another example is brigading, notable in the case of Reddit as it is often cited as the origin of the practice and use of the word in this context. Though all of these examples are in some form, against the rules of Reddit's content policy, at least in the case of brigading, they are not always malicious in intent. A notable example is the case of "Mr. Splashy Pants", when organized brigading of another website, by redditors, appears to have been tacitly encouraged by the Reddit administration. In the aftermath, the target of this vote brigading appeared to take it in good humor. Reddit communities occasionally coordinate Reddit-external projects such as skewing polls on other websites, like the 2007 incident when Greenpeace allowed web users to decide the name of a humpback whale it was tracking. Reddit users voted en masse to name the whale "Mister Splashy Pants", and Reddit administrators encouraged the prank by changing the site logo to a whale during the voting. In December of that year, Mister Splashy Pants was announced as the winner of the competition. In general, the website grants subreddit moderators discretion in deciding what content is and is not allowed on their subreddits, so long as site-wide rules are not being violated. This relative freedom has allowed for a wide diversity of subreddits to exist, and some of them have attracted controversy. Many of the default subreddits are highly moderated, with the "science" subreddit banning climate change denialism, and the "news" subreddit banning opinion pieces and columns. Reddit has changed its site-wide editorial policies several times, sometimes in reaction to controversies. Reddit has historically been a platform for objectionable but legal content, and in 2011, news media covered the way that jailbait was being shared on the site before the site changed their policies to explicitly ban "suggestive or sexual content featuring minors". Following some controversial incidents of Internet vigilantism, Reddit introduced a strict rule against the online publication of non-public personally-identifying information (a common internet harassment tool colloquially known as doxxing) via the site. Those who break the rule are subject to a site-wide ban, which can result in the deletion of their user-generated content. Due to Reddit's decentralized moderation, user anonymity, and lack of fact-checking systems, the platform is highly prone to spreading misinformation and disinformation. It has been suggested that those who use Reddit should exercise caution in taking user-created unsourced content as fact. Reddit communities exhibit the echo chamber effect, in which repeated unsourced statements come to be accepted among the community as fact, leading to distorted worldviews among users. Concerns have been raised about dangerous medical misinformation on the platform. It has been suggested that since 2019, Russian state-sponsored troll accounts and bots either formed or took over prominent left-wing subreddits, such as the antiwar, greenandpleasant, and aboringdystopia subreddits. Following the Boston Marathon bombing in April 2013, Reddit faced criticism after users wrongly identified a number of people as suspects. Notable among misidentified bombing suspects was Sunil Tripathi, a student reported missing before the bombings took place. A body reported to be Sunil's was found in Providence River in Rhode Island on April 25, according to Rhode Island Health Department. The cause of death was not immediately known, but authorities said they did not suspect foul play. The family later confirmed Tripathi's death was a result of suicide. Reddit general manager Erik Martin later issued an apology for this behavior, criticizing the "online witch hunts and dangerous speculation" that took place on the website. The incident was later referenced in the season 5 episode of the CBS TV series The Good Wife titled "Whack-a-Mole", as well as The Newsroom. After Ellen Pao became CEO in 2014, she was initially a target of criticism by users who objected to the deletion of content critical of herself and her husband. Later on June 10, 2015, Reddit shut down the 150,000-subscriber "fatpeoplehate" subreddit and four others citing issues related to harassment. This move was seen as very controversial; some commenters said that the bans went too far, while others said that the bans did not go far enough. One of the latter complaints concerned a subreddit that was "expressing support" for the perpetrator of the Charleston church shooting. Responding to the accusations of "skewed enforcement", Reddit reaffirmed their commitment to free expression and stated, "There are some subreddits with very little viewership that get highlighted repeatedly for their content, but those are a tiny fraction of the content on the site." On July 2, Reddit began experiencing a series of blackouts as moderators set popular subreddit communities to private, in an event dubbed "AMAgeddon", a portmanteau of AMA ("ask me anything") and Armageddon. This was done in protest of the recent firing of Victoria Taylor, an administrator who helped organize citizen-led interviews with famous people on the popular AMA subreddit. Organizers of the blackout also expressed resentment about the recent severance of the communication between Reddit and the moderators of subreddits. The blackout intensified on July 3 when former community manager David Croach gave an AMA about being fired. Before deleting his posts, he stated that Ellen Pao dismissed him with one year of health coverage when he had cancer and did not recover quickly enough. Following this, a Change.org petition to remove Pao as CEO of Reddit Inc. reached over 200,000 signatures. Pao posted a response on July 3 as well as an extended version of it on July 6 in which she apologized for bad communication and not delivering on promises. She also apologized on behalf of the other administrators and noted that problems already existed over the past several years. On July 10, Pao resigned as CEO and was replaced by former CEO and co-founder Steve Huffman. In August, Steve Huffman introduced a policy which led to the banning of several offensive and sexual communities. Included in the ban was lolicon, to which Huffman referred as "animated CP [child porn]". Some subreddits had also been "quarantined" due to having "highly-offensive or upsetting content" such as r/European, r/swedenyes, r/drawpeople, r/kiketown, r/blackfathers, r/greatapes, and r/whitesarecriminals. In April 2023, Reddit announced its intentions to charge large fees for its application programming interface (API), a feature of the site that has existed for free since 2008, causing an ongoing dispute. The move forced multiple third-party applications to shut down and threatened accessibility applications and moderation tools. On May 31, Apollo developer Christian Selig stated that Reddit's pricing would force him to cease development on the app. The resulting outcry from the Reddit community ultimately led to a planned protest from June 12 to 14 in which moderators for the site would make their communities private or restricted posting. Following the release of an internal memo from Reddit CEO Steve Huffman and defiance from Reddit, some moderators have continued their protest. Alternate forms of protest have emerged in the days following the initial blackout. Upon reopening, users of r/pics, r/gifs, and r/aww voted to exclusively post about comedian John Oliver. Multiple subreddits labeled themselves as not safe for work (NSFW), affecting advertisements and resulting in administrators removing the entire moderation team of some subreddits. The protest has been compared to a strike. In August, private sexual photos from the celebrity photo hack were widely disseminated across the site. A dedicated subreddit, "TheFappening", was created for this purpose, and contained links to most if not all of the criminally obtained explicit images. Some images of McKayla Maroney and Liz Lee were identified by redditors and outside commentators as child pornography because the photos were taken when the women were underage. The subreddit was banned on September 6. The scandal led to wider criticisms concerning the website's administration from The Verge and The Daily Dot. On December 18, Reddit took a criticized action of banning a subreddit, "SonyGOP", that was being used to distribute hacked Sony files. In May, Steve Huffman said in an interview at the TNW Conference that, unlike Facebook, which "only knows what [its users are] willing to declare publicly", Reddit knows its users' "dark secrets" at the same time that the website's "values" page was updated regarding its "privacy" section. The video reached the top of the website's main feed. Shortly thereafter, announcements concerning new advertisement content drew criticism on the website. In September, a user named "mormondocuments" released thousands of administrative documents belonging to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, an action driven by the ex-Mormon and atheist communities on Reddit. Previously, on April 22, the same user had announced his plans to do so. Church officials commented that the documents did not contain anything confidential. On November 23, Huffman admitted to having replaced his username with the names of r/The_Donald moderators in many insulting comments. He did so by changing insulting comments made towards him and made it appear as if the insult were directed at the moderators of r/The_Donald. On November 24, The Washington Post reported Reddit had banned the "Pizzagate" conspiracy board from their site, stating it violated their policy of posting personal information of others, triggering a wave of criticism from users on r/The_Donald, who felt the ban amounted to censorship. After the forum was banned from Reddit, the words "we don't want witchhunts on our site" now appears on the former page of the Pizzagate subreddit. On November 30, Huffman announced changes to the algorithm of Reddit's r/all page to block "stickied" posts from a number of subreddits, such as r/The_Donald. In the announcement, he also apologized for personally editing posts by users from r/The_Donald, and declared intentions to take actions against "hundreds of the most toxic users" of Reddit and "communities whose users continually cross the line". In February, Reddit banned the alt-right subreddit r/altright for violating its terms of service, more specifically for attempting to share private information about the man who attacked alt-right figure Richard B. Spencer. The forum's users and moderators accused Reddit administrators of having political motivations for the ban. In March, it was revealed that Huffman had hidden Russian troll activity from users. On July 12, the creator and head moderator of the GamerGate subreddit, r/KotakuInAction, removed all of the moderators and set the forum to private, alleging it to have become "infested with racism and sexism". A Reddit employee restored the forum and its moderators an hour later. In January, the Filipino-themed subreddit r/jakolandia was accused of "distributing" posts of photos of women, including celebrities, apparently without their consent, similar to "a number" of secret Facebook groups that had been engaging in illegal activity of sharing "obscene" photos of women and possibly child pornography. In February, Chinese company Tencent invested $150 million into Reddit. This resulted in a large backlash from Reddit users, who were worried about potential censorship. Many posts featuring subjects censored in China, such as Tiananmen Square, Tank Man, and Winnie the Pooh, received popularity on Reddit. During the George Floyd protests in early June, over 800 moderators signed an open letter demanding a policy banning hate speech, a shutdown of racist and sexist subreddits, and more employee support for moderation. Bloomberg News pointed out the company's slow reaction to r/watchpeopledie, a subreddit dedicated to videos of people dying in accidents and other situations, and the harassment that accompanied new unmoderated features like icons for purchase and public chats. On June 29, Reddit updated its content policy and introduced rules aimed at curbing the presence of communities they believed to be "promoting hate", and banned approximately 2,000 subreddits that were found to be in violation of the new guidelines on the same day. Larger subreddits affected by the bans included r/The_Donald, r/GenderCritical (the platform's largest and most active anti-transgender radical feminist subreddit), and r/ChapoTrapHouse (a far-left subreddit originally created by fans of the podcast Chapo Trap House). Some media outlets and political commentators also condemned the banning of the r/The_Donald and r/ChapoTrapHouse subreddits as a violation of the right to free political expression. After the 2021 storming of the United States Capitol, Reddit banned the subreddit r/DonaldTrump in response to repeated policy violations and alluding to the potential influence the community had on those who participated in or supported the storming. The move followed similar actions from social media platforms, Twitter, YouTube, TikTok and more. The ban was criticized by those who believed it furthered an agenda and censorship of conservative ideologies. The subreddit had over 52,000 members just before it was banned. The GameStop short squeeze was primarily organized on the subreddit r/wallstreetbets in January. In March, Reddit users discovered that Aimee Challenor, an English politician who had been suspended from two UK political parties, was hired as an administrator for the site. Her first suspension from the Green Party came for retaining her father as her campaign manager after his arrest on child sexual abuse charges. She was later suspended from the Liberal Democrats after tweets describing pedophilic fantasies were discovered on her partner's Twitter account. Reddit banned a moderator for posting a news article which mentioned Challenor, and some Reddit users alleged that Reddit were removing all mention of Challenor. Many subreddits, including r/Music which had 27 million subscribers, and 46 other subreddits with over 1 million subscribers, went private in protest. On March 24, Reddit's CEO Steve Huffman said that Challenor had been inadequately vetted before being hired and that Reddit would review its relevant internal processes. Huffman attributed user suspensions to over-indexing on anti-harassment measures. Challenor was also removed from her role as a Reddit admin. In late August, more than 70 subreddits went private to protest against COVID-19 misinformation on Reddit, as well as Reddit's refusal to delete subreddits undermining the severity of the pandemic. A 2021 letter from the United States Senate to Reddit CEO Steve Huffman expressed concern about the spread of COVID-19 misinformation on the platform. A 2022 study of 300 comments and posts discussing urinary tract infections found that fewer than 1% cited a source for their content, and several contained harmful medical misinformation that may dissuade readers from seeking medical care or lead to dangerous self-medication, such as proposing fasting as a cure for UTIs. /r/place had its third launch on July 20, 2023; however, the launch was heavily protested by users and developers due to the event following the 2023 Reddit API controversy; Reddit CEO Steve Huffman's decision to make it prohibitively expensive for third-party app developers drew widespread condemnation. In October, Reddit Moons (a site-specific cryptocurrency launched in May 2020) had seen a surge of value in 2023, at one point in mid-2023 rising past 50 cents per moon, but it crashed by more than 90% after it was announced on October 17 that the token would be "wound down" on November 8, allegedly due to scaling and regulatory issues; Reddit-centric coins DONUT and BRICK also crashed upon the news. Aggregate Reddit user data has been used for scientific research. For example, a 2014 study showed how subreddits can support role-based group recommendations or provide evaluation towards group stability and growth. Another study evoked a connection between cognitive and attention dynamics and the usage of online social peer production platforms, including the effects of deterioration of user performance. There is also work that has studied the influence of Reddit posts on the popularity of Wikipedia content. A participant-observation study of April Fools' Day 2017 social experiment on r/place identified top-down and bottom-up coordination mechanisms, rules and emergence, and analyzed their relative impact on the collaboratively created artwork, revealing cooperation and conflict, using qualitative and quantitative methods. Data from Reddit can also be used to assess academic publications. Internet portal Crowdsourcing Internet culture Social bookmarking Unidan Usenet Web 2.0 Baidu Tieba Delicious (del.icio.us) Digg Diigo Fark Hacker News Imzy Kuro5hin Lemmy LIHKG MetaFilter Pikabu PTT Bulletin Board System Slashdot Stack Exchange Steemit StumbleUpon Tal Canal Voat The site's display interface is available in several common languages, but most of its user-submitted content is written in English with no built-in translation feature. Individual subreddits may opt to cater to a specific language, only allowing posts and comments to be in that language. Reddit can be viewed without an account but registration is required to submit, comment or vote. Registration is also occasionally required to view posts marked as Not safe for work. Previously written in Lisp, then rewritten in Python in 2005. "What languages is Reddit available in?". Reddit Help. "Reddit on June 23-05". December 5, 2006. Retrieved August 28, 2014. "Reddit Inc. Form S-1". U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. February 22, 2024. "Seeing the forest in the trees: two years of technology changes in one post". Reddit. January 17, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Ohlheiser, Abby (November 30, 2016). "Reddit will limit the reach of a pro-Trump board and crack down on its 'most toxic users'". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. OCLC 2269358. Archived from the original on January 14, 2017. Retrieved December 1, 2016. "Top Websites Ranking". Similarweb. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved December 1, 2021. "Careers - Reddit". Reddit. Retrieved June 16, 2023. Carr, David (September 2, 2012). "Reddit Thrives Under Hands-Off Policy of Advance Publications". The New York Times. United States. ISSN 1553-8095. OCLC 1645522. Retrieved March 22, 2019. And when it became clear that Reddit was hamstrung in competition for leadership and engineers as part of Condé Nast, the company was spun out as an operationally independent subsidiary in 2011. Alden, William (October 1, 2014). "With Reddit Deal, Snoop Dogg Moonlights as a Tech Investor". The New York Times. ISSN 1553-8095. OCLC 1645522. Retrieved October 25, 2014. Cheredar, Tom (September 8, 2014). "Reddit reportedly raising $50M at a $500M valuation". VentureBeat. Retrieved May 15, 2015. Kafka, Peter; Swisher, Kara (September 7, 2014). "Reddit Raising a Big Round, and Some Y Combinator Players Are in the Mix". Recode. Retrieved May 15, 2015. Wagner, Kurt (July 31, 2017). "Reddit raised $200 million in funding and is now valued at $1.8 billion". Recode. Retrieved August 5, 2017. Saxena, Aparajita (February 11, 2019). "Reddit valued at $3 billion after raising $300 million in latest funding round". Reuters. Retrieved May 7, 2019. "Reddit Secures Funding to Continue Growth Plans". Upvoted. August 12, 2021. Retrieved August 12, 2021. "Reddit taps Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs for IPO". The Economic Times. January 8, 2022. Retrieved August 10, 2022. Roof, Katie; Tse, Crystal (January 7, 2022). "Reddit Taps Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs for IPO". Bloomberg. Retrieved August 10, 2022. "Reddit goes public today. Users are wary of what comes next". Washington Post. March 21, 2024. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Madrigal, Alexis C. (January 7, 2014). "AMA: How a Weird Internet Thing Became a Mainstream Delight". The Atlantic. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Kim Renfro (January 13, 2016). "From whom the troll trolls: A day in the life of a Reddit moderator". Tech Insider. Retrieved August 1, 2018. Tynski, Chris (February 2, 2012). "Could Reddit Be the World's Most Influential Website?". BlueGlass. Archived from the original on May 4, 2012. Retrieved April 26, 2012. "Reddit Website Traffic, Ranking, Analytics [February 2023]". Semrush. Retrieved May 9, 2022. "Luján, Klobuchar, Heinrich Urge Reddit to Combat Health Misinformation". Senator Ben Ray Luján. United States Senate. October 6, 2021. Archived from the original on September 12, 2023. Hempel, Jessi (October 6, 2015). "Inside Reddit's plan to recover from its epic meltdown". Wired. Retrieved March 13, 2018. Fink, Steve (August 2015). "Mr. Meme". Baltimore. Retrieved March 13, 2018. Williams, Michelle (August 2015). "'This internet thing is not a fad': Reddit co-founder Alexis Ohanian to discuss online entrepreneurship at UMass Amherst". Mass Live. Retrieved March 27, 2018. Guy Raz (August 31, 2017). "Make Me Smart 6: Reddit CEO Steve Huffman is not horsing around" (Podcast). NPR. Retrieved March 28, 2018. "Live Episode! Reddit: Alexis Ohanian & Steve Huffman". How I Built This With Guy Raz. August 31, 2017. NPR. Wallace, Benjamin (October 6, 2015). "Reddit Redux". New York. Retrieved March 28, 2018. Christine Lagorio-Chafkin (2018). We Are the Nerds: The Birth and Tumultuous Life of Reddit, the Internet's Culture Laboratory. Hachette Books. p. 70. ISBN 978-0316435369. Richards, Zak. "Unleashing High-Profile, High-Profit Websites". Archived from the original on September 16, 2012. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Macale, Sherilynn "Cheri" (October 13, 2011). "A rundown of Reddit's history and community [Infographic]". The Next Web Social Media. Retrieved November 12, 2011. Casey Johnston (June 21, 2012). "reddit founders made hundreds of fake profiles so site looked popular". Ars Technica. Singel, Ryan (July 19, 2011). "Feds Charge Activist as Hacker for Downloading Millions of Academic Articles". Wired. Retrieved January 12, 2013. Swartz, Aaron (February 27, 2006). "Introducing Infogami". Infogami. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008. Retrieved January 6, 2007. (archive.org link) http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rewritingreddit @alexisohanian (July 19, 2011). "Alexis Ohanian Sr. 🚀 on Twitter: "ATTN @nytimes Steve Huffman & I founded @reddit. We acquired Aaron Swartz's company infogami 6mos after we launched." / Twitter" (Tweet). Retrieved July 17, 2020 – via Twitter. Arrington, Michael (October 31, 2006). "Breaking news: Condé Nast/Wired Acquires Reddit". TechCrunch. Retrieved January 6, 2007. Aaron Swartz (November 15, 2006). "Office Space". Aaron Swartz's Raw Thought. Retrieved July 17, 2020. "A Chat with Aaron Swartz". Blogoscoped.com. May 7, 2007. Retrieved December 4, 2011. Peterson, Andrea (July 15, 2015). "The two co-founder quotes that explain Reddit's struggle to grow up". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 16, 2018. Lagorio-Chafkin, Christine (June 27, 2011). "30 Under 30: Adam Goldstein and Steve Huffman, Founders of Hipmunk". Inc. Retrieved May 16, 2018. Kincaid, Jason (November 1, 2010). "Reddit Chief Takes Flight To Hipmunk, Explains Why He's Leaving Now". Techcrunch.com. Retrieved December 4, 2011. Parks, Miles (January 1, 2015). "Erik Martin helped make Reddit huge, then he left. What's next for an Internet master?". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 16, 2018. Cheredar, Tom (March 30, 2012). "Reddit General Manager Erik Martin leads Time's "100 Most Influential" poll". VentureBeat. Retrieved May 16, 2018. Kafka, Peter (March 27, 2009). "Reddit's Ad Experiment Is Good News for Condé Nast. Maybe for Digg, Too". All Things Digital. Retrieved May 25, 2018. Loizos, Connie (July 31, 2017). "Reddit just raised a new round that values the company at $1.8 billion". TechCrunch. Retrieved May 16, 2018. Siegler, MG (November 12, 2009). "Reddit opens its homepage to anyone willing to pay (invites)". TechCrunch. Retrieved May 25, 2018. Shu, Catherine (June 12, 2013). "Reddit Adds Benefits For Gold Members To Further Monetize The Site Without More Ads". TechCrunch. Retrieved May 16, 2018. "blog.reddit – what's new online: Independence". Archived from the original on July 22, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2011. "Reddit Plans SOPA 'Blackout' Protest Jan. 18". Entertainment Consumers Association. Archived from the original on October 10, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Cartwright, Madison (July 4, 2018). "Who cares about Reddit? Historical institutionalism and the fight against the Stop Online Piracy Act and the PROTECT Intellectual Property Act". Policy Studies. 39 (4): 383–401. doi:10.1080/01442872.2018.1472757. ISSN 0144-2872. S2CID 158502071. "The Internet Defense League – Protecting the Free Internet since 2012". Internet Defense League. 2012. Archived from the original on June 19, 2015. Retrieved August 1, 2012. Kerr, Dara (March 8, 2012). "Reddit names new CEO, Yishan Wong". CNET. Retrieved May 16, 2018. "Reddit CEO Explains Why He and Company Battled Over Office Space". ABC News. November 14, 2014. Retrieved March 17, 2019. Rushe, Dominic (November 13, 2014). "Reddit CEO Yishan Wong resigns after row about new office space". The Guardian. Retrieved May 16, 2018. Olanoff, Drew (February 14, 2013). "Reddit Starts Accepting Bitcoin for Reddit Gold Purchases Thanks To Partnership With Coinbase". Techcrunch. Retrieved February 14, 2013. Alba, Davey (July 10, 2015). "Ellen Pao steps down as CEO after Reddit revolt". Wired. Retrieved May 16, 2018. "Reddit, under Ellen Pao, launches harassment crackdown". BBC. May 15, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2018. Dewey, Caitlin (June 10, 2015). "These are the 5 subreddits Reddit banned under its game-changing anti-harassment policy — and why it banned them". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 16, 2018. Breit, Johannes (July 20, 2018). "We Banned Holocaust Deniers From Our History Subreddit. Here's Why Facebook Should Do the Same". Slate.com. Retrieved August 19, 2018. Issac, Mike (July 10, 2015). "Ellen Pao Is Stepping Down as Reddit's Chief". New York Times. Retrieved July 10, 2015. Pardes, Arielle (April 2, 2018). "The inside story of Reddit's redesign". Wired. Retrieved May 16, 2018. Lagorio-Chafkin, Christine (March 9, 2018). "Steve Huffman Talks About Bringing Reddit Back From the Brink". Inc. Retrieved March 13, 2018. "Reddit Launches New Block Tools To Help Temper Harassment". April 6, 2016. Matney, Lucas (August 27, 2017). "Reddit's new CTO was the company's first hire". TechCrunch. Retrieved May 17, 2018. "r/announcements – Upcoming changes to our content policy, our board, and where we're going from here". reddit. June 5, 2020. Retrieved June 5, 2020. Yurieff, Kaya; Ashley O'Brien, Sara (June 10, 2020). "Alexis Ohanian asked to be replaced by a black candidate on Reddit's board. Reddit listened". CNN. Retrieved June 13, 2023. Staff (December 13, 2020). "Reddit Welcomes Video Platform Dubsmash to Team". Upvoted. Retrieved December 13, 2020. Duffy, Clare. "Reddit names its first-ever CFO as it mulls IPO". CNN. Retrieved March 8, 2021. Picchi, Aimee (December 16, 2021). "Reddit says it has filed for an IPO". CBS News. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Reddit I.P.O. Is a Step Closer After Confidential Filing to Go Public". The New York Times. December 15, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Thomas, Owen (December 15, 2021). "Reddit has filed for an IPO." Protocol. Retrieved May 18, 2022. "Reddit acquires natural language processing company MeaningCloud". TechCrunch. July 2022. Retrieved July 18, 2022. "Reddit Buys Natural Language Processing Startup MeaningCloud to Boost Product & Advertising". Voicebot.ai. July 11, 2022. Retrieved July 18, 2022. "Reddit acquires Spiketrap to boost its ads business". TechCrunch. September 2022. Retrieved September 2, 2022. Singh, Manish (June 1, 2023). "Fidelity has cut Reddit valuation by 41% since 2021 investment". TechCrunch. Retrieved June 13, 2023. Satija, Bhanvi; Arunasalam, Samrhitha (June 6, 2023). Samuel, Maju (ed.). "Reddit to lay off about 5% of its workforce". Reuters. Retrieved June 13, 2023. "The Week in Ransomware - June 23rd 2023 - The Reddit Files". BleepingComputer. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Roth, Emma (February 22, 2024). "Google cut a deal with Reddit for AI training data". The Verge. Hamilton, David (February 22, 2024). "Reddit strikes $60M deal allowing Google to train AI models on its posts, unveils IPO plans". AP News. Clark, Adam (March 11, 2024). "Reddit Aims for Valuation of Up to $6.4 Billion. How It Compares With Pinterest, Snap". Barron's. Retrieved March 11, 2024. Isaac, Mike (March 20, 2024). "Reddit Prices I.P.O. at $34 a Share, in a Positive Sign for Tech". Isaac, Mike (March 21, 2024). "Reddit Rises 48% in First Day of Trading". Will Nicol (July 19, 2018). "What is Reddit? A beginner's guide to the front page of the internet". Digital Trends. Retrieved July 26, 2018. Michael Franco (September 5, 2018). "The Beginner's Guide to Reddit". Lifehacker. Retrieved August 1, 2018. Nudd, Tim (December 1, 2014). "The Meaning of 35 Brand Names, From Etsy to Reddit". Adweek. New York City, New York, U.S. ISSN 0199-2864. OCLC 1001870403. Retrieved August 1, 2018. "Reddit Frequently Asked Questions". Reddit. Retrieved April 10, 2014. Kastrenakes, Jacob (December 1, 2020). "Reddit reveals daily active user count for the first time: 52 million". The Verge. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Molina, Brett (August 31, 2017). "Reddit is extremely popular. Here's how to watch what your kids are doing". USA Today. ISSN 0734-7456. OCLC 931943141. Retrieved July 26, 2018. "Reddit Lets Community Moderators Enable Comments, Votes on Older Posts". October 4, 2021. Rich McCormick (February 15, 2017). "Reddit overhauls its front page for new users and lurkers". The Verge. Retrieved July 26, 2018. Menegus, Bryan (June 2, 2017). "Reddit Is Finally Fixing its Trump Spam Problem". Gizmodo. Retrieved February 2, 2018. Cory Scarola (February 16, 2017). "Reddit Gave Its Homepage a Makeover". Inverse. Retrieved September 13, 2018. Shah, Saqib (February 15, 2017). "Reddit is eliminating explicit content from its public homepage". Digital Trends. Retrieved May 25, 2018. KeyserSosa (February 11, 2021). "Removing sexually explicit content from r/all". r/changelog. Retrieved September 4, 2021. "Reddit algorithm". seomoz. July 2, 2008. Andrew Couts (November 8, 2012). "How to create your own Reddit community". Digital Trends. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved August 1, 2018. Fiona Zublin (October 13, 2016). "The poet laureate of Reddit". Ozy. Archived from the original on December 3, 2018. Retrieved August 1, 2018. Packham, Alfie (July 31, 2016). "Meet Shitty: the internet's favourite self-deprecating watercolourist". The Guardian. United Kingdom. ISSN 1756-3224. OCLC 60623878. Retrieved August 1, 2018. "Leaderboard for Reddit". www.karmalb.com. Retrieved March 26, 2020. "Leaderboard for Reddit". www.karmalb.com. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Morris, Kevin (October 5, 2012). "Meet the mods—the true stars of Reddit". The Daily Dot. Retrieved October 9, 2018. "Transparency". Reddit. "Transparency Report 2020". www.redditinc.com. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "Reddit removed 6% of all posts made last year". BBC News. February 17, 2021. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Stokel-Walker, Chris. "Reddit moderators do $3.4 million worth of unpaid work each year". New Scientist. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Marotti, Ally (April 23, 2018). "Reddit to open Chicago office as part of advertising push". Chicago Tribune. Chicago: R. Bruce Dold. ISSN 2165-171X. OCLC 60639020. Retrieved June 25, 2018. "New subreddits by date (How Reddit grew over time)". Redditmetrics.com. Archived from the original on August 9, 2020. Retrieved August 1, 2018. Atagana, Michelle (August 22, 2014). "Creating a more curious generation through memes: Q&A with Reddit GM". Memeburn.com. Retrieved September 11, 2014. Klara, Robert (September 14, 2015). "How an Alien Doodle Became Reddit's Simple, Versatile Logo". Adweek. United States. ISSN 0199-2864. OCLC 1001870403. Retrieved August 1, 2018. Trachtenberg, Jeffrey (April 19, 2018). "Reddit taps Time Inc. veteran Jen Wong as its COO". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved June 25, 2018. "Reddit is getting rid of its Gold awards system". The Verge. December 5, 2023. "What is Reddit Gold—and why do people keep giving it away?". The Daily Dot. July 24, 2017. Retrieved September 15, 2017. "Create your own reddit alien avatar with reddit gold". redditblog.com. January 7, 2015. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 4, 2017. Asarch, Steven (October 16, 2018). "Reddit Gold Update: How To Give And Get New Silver and Platinum Icons". Newsweek. Retrieved November 12, 2018. Mick Statt (December 18, 2017). "Reddit overhauls mobile app with chat function and new moderation tools". The Verge. Retrieved May 17, 2018. "Enjoy your complimentary karma". Reddit. Retrieved August 8, 2014. Roston, Brittany (August 14, 2021). "Reddit is the latest social platform to launch a TikTok clone". SlashGear. Retrieved August 27, 2021. Malik, Aisha (December 8, 2021). "Reddit to roll out personalized end-of-year recaps with stats about users' habits". TechCrunch. Retrieved October 16, 2022. Reddit staff (July 7, 2022). "Blockchain-Backed Collectible Avatars Coming to Reddit via New Storefront". redditinc.com. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Richard, Lawler (July 7, 2022). "Reddit will sell 'Collectible Avatars,' and yes — they're NFTs". The Verge. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Pardes, Arielle (July 18, 2018). "Reddit reinvents the chat room with community chat". Wired. United States. ISSN 1059-1028. OCLC 24479723. Retrieved August 1, 2018. Sean Keane (July 19, 2018). "Reddit's chat rooms are bringing back fast-paced conversation". CNET. Retrieved August 1, 2018. Roettgers, Janko (May 25, 2018). "Reddit Is Testing Community Chat Rooms to Take on Discord". Variety. United States. ISSN 0042-2738. OCLC 810134503. Retrieved September 13, 2018. Perez, Sarah (April 19, 2021). "Reddit unveils its Clubhouse clone Reddit Talk". TechCrunch. Verizon Media. Retrieved August 27, 2021. Roth, Emma (February 9, 2022). "Reddit's Clubhouse clone gets recordings and web support". The Verge. Vox Media. Retrieved February 10, 2022. "When is RPAN ON-AIR? r/pan". reddit. December 8, 2020. "Reddit Now Lets You Livestream. What Could Go Wrong?". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved March 11, 2020. Hautala, Laura. "Reddit tests out livestreaming feature called Public Access Network". CNET. Retrieved March 11, 2020. "r/RPANStudio – You want a desktop streaming solution, you got it. Introducing RPAN Studio". reddit. July 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. "Stream times are now 3 hours!". January 28, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2021. "Reddit". November 3, 2022. Kooser, Amanda. "Hell in a Cell: The surprising story behind the Reddit meme". CNET. Retrieved June 12, 2020. Liao, Shannon (February 28, 2019). "Reddit is letting users tip real money — to one guy in one subreddit". The Verge. Retrieved June 12, 2020. steve [spez] (December 5, 2005). ""On lisp" blog post by Reddit founder "spez", detailing the reasons for switching to python from lisp". Blog.reddit.com. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved December 4, 2011. "Official web.py site". Webpy.org. Retrieved December 4, 2011. Sites Using Pylons Archived September 13, 2008, at the Wayback Machine – Pylons Community – PythonWeb steve [spez] (June 17, 2008). "Reddit goes open source". Blog.reddit.com. Archived from the original on May 1, 2012. Retrieved December 4, 2011. "r/changelog – An update on the state of the reddit/reddit and reddit/reddit-mobile repositories". reddit. September 1, 2017. Retrieved March 17, 2019. "Reddit GitHub". GitHub. Retrieved June 5, 2011. Edberg, Jeremy (November 10, 2009). "Moving to the cloud". Blog.reddit.com. Archived from the original on April 10, 2016. Retrieved December 4, 2011. "Which Major Companies Use PostgreSQL? What Do They Use It for?". LearnSQL.com. May 19, 2020. Retrieved August 25, 2022. Doherty, Mike (February 28, 2018). "The Evolution of Data at Reddit - Upvoted". www.redditinc.com. Retrieved June 14, 2023. Chandra, Krishnan (May 24, 2017). "View Counting at Reddit". www.redditinc.com. Retrieved June 14, 2023. Ellis, Daniel (January 17, 2017). "Caching at Reddit". redditblog.com. Archived from the original on January 19, 2017. Retrieved June 15, 2023. Uversky, Sergei; Espinola, Adam (January 13, 2021). "Improving Reddit Engineering through GAINS - Upvoted". www.redditinc.com. Retrieved June 15, 2023. Slowe, Chris (January 30, 2009). "What's new on Reddit: Reddit now powered by jQuery". blog.reddit. Archived from the original on May 28, 2014. Ramadas, Niranjan (June 30, 2017). "Why We Chose Typescript - Upvoted". www.redditinc.com. Retrieved June 14, 2023. Slowe, Chris; Caldwell, Nick; Bitencourt-Emilio, Luis (September 7, 2017). "The Search for Better Search at Reddit - Upvoted". www.redditinc.com. Retrieved June 14, 2023. Miller, Ron (September 7, 2017). "Reddit teams with Lucidworks to build new search framework". TechCrunch. Retrieved June 15, 2023. Siegler, MG (June 9, 2010). "Reddit Finally Becomes Usable On The Mobile Web — Cause They Hate The App Store". TechCrunch. Retrieved May 25, 2018. Kumparak, Greg (October 15, 2014). "Reddit Acquires Alien Blue, The Most Popular Unofficial Reddit App". TechCrunch. AOL. Retrieved October 25, 2014. Reddit scraps Alien Blue in favor of in-house built iOS and Android apps April 2016 Spradlin, Liam (September 3, 2014). "Reddit's Official Ask Me Anything App Hits The Play Store As Promised". Android Police. Retrieved May 25, 2018. Steve Huffman (December 12, 2005). "blog.reddit – what's new on reddit: comments!". Redditblog.com. Retrieved May 24, 2015. Vanhemert, Kyle (January 9, 2014). "Fascinating graphs show how Reddit got huge by going mainstream". Wired. Retrieved May 17, 2018. Cheredar, Tom (July 23, 2013). "Reddit rolls out its front page-changing multireddit feature to the public". VentureBeat. Retrieved May 25, 2018. Fingas, Jon (March 24, 2015). "Reddit now lets you embed comments on other websites". Engadget. Retrieved May 17, 2018. Toor, Amar (May 26, 2016). "Reddit moves away from Imgur with new photo-uploading tool". The Verge. Retrieved May 17, 2018. Perez, Sarah (August 17, 2017). "Reddit rolls out its own video platform". TechCrunch. Retrieved May 17, 2018. Mejia, Zameena (March 28, 2017). "The hidden benefit of Twitter's hate-speech controls: avoiding TV spoilers". Quartz. Retrieved May 25, 2018. Loten, Angus (April 10, 2018). "Reddit CEO revamped outdated website from the IT foundations". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 17, 2018. "The lifecycle of a redesign: Making Reddit more welcoming | Inside Design Blog". www.invisionapp.com. Petit, Zachary (November 29, 2023). "Reddit just got a fancy, new rebrand from Pentagram. Will it get an upvote? (exclusive)". Fast Company. Pardes, Rielle (July 6, 2018). "The Transformative Power of Reddit's Alien Mascot". Wired. Retrieved October 24, 2018. Morris, Kevin (August 11, 2011). "How Reddit's alien landed". The Daily Dot. Retrieved October 24, 2018. Bond, John-Michael; Powell, Austin (January 27, 2021). "TIL 30 interesting facts about Reddit". The Daily Dot. Spector, Nicole (December 4, 2017). "Hipster internet favorite Reddit may have to lose its edge to go public". NBC News. Retrieved June 25, 2018. Li, Roland (October 2, 2019). "Reddit moving headquarters to SF's Mid-Market, joining Uber and Square". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved November 26, 2022. Hess, Abigail (January 29, 2018). "How to land a job at Reddit". CNBC. Retrieved June 25, 2018. Jenny Darmody (December 11, 2017). "From Pixar to people: How katelin Holloway's career brought her to Reddit". Silicon Republic. Retrieved June 25, 2018. Tsukayama, Hayley (September 5, 2017). "Reddit co-founder is latest tech executive to take parental leave". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 25, 2018. Isaac, Mike (August 12, 2021). "Reddit is valued at more than $10 billion in latest funding round". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. Sen, Anirban (September 2, 2021). "EXCLUSIVE-Reddit seeks to hire advisers for U.S. IPO -sources". Reuters. Retrieved September 3, 2021. Rodriguez, Salvador (December 15, 2021). "Reddit files to go public". CNBC. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Needleman, Sarah E. (December 16, 2021). "Reddit Files Confidentially for IPO". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved December 16, 2021. Holiday, Ryan (February 21, 2013). "Hail Corporate: The Increasingly Insufferable Fakery of Brands on Reddit". Betabeat. Archived from the original on December 30, 2014. "Victoria Taylor Tells PAN how Reddit Stays Genuine and What That Means for Marketers". PAN communications. May 21, 2014. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. "On Reddit, Unlike Other Social Sites, It's About the Topic, Not the Brand". PR News. October 28, 2013. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Brands that are mentioned on the site are in a casual context, similar to being in a local bar or coffee shop, rather than a mall, which is much more of a commercial space "To Learn About reddit, Listen First". September 3, 2014. Victoria Taylor, director of communications at reddit, said the point of posting to reddit is not to have content go viral; it is to build credibility "Social Media and Journalism: An Intrinsically Linked Organism". Brandwatch. May 20, 2014. The communities on Reddit don't want to feel used or exploited. That's where listening comes in. "The Real Low-Down From Reddit". Tech Affect. October 22, 2014. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. Carrie Fung (September 13, 2013). "When the Narwhal Bacons and Why it Matters to PR Pros". EngagePR blog. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. "Nissan Buys Gifts for Redditors – and Some Love for Itself". Digday. November 21, 2013. Victoria Taylor, reddit's director of communications, told Digiday that Nissan's reddit adventure was one of the best campaigns the site has seen in a long time. "The community really responded well to the two community managers" "Cheatsheet: How brands can win reddit". Digday. February 3, 2014. "Going into it, we are honest with advertisers that redditors are opinionated," said Victoria Taylor, reddit's director of communications. "Anywhere you have opinions, people are going to have a dialog and disagree." Advertisers have to be willing to engage honestly — and cleverly — with the reddit community to win their trust. "Nissan, Reddit defend authenticity of questions in Ghosn AMA". PR Week. January 14, 2015. While Taylor said it's a positive that users demand authenticity, transparency, and accountability on Reddit, she noted that "it's unfortunate that people tend to try to look for negative examples." She admitted that the AMA with Nissan was not the most successful edition the platform has had... Reddit, she said, will always be "open and transparent if something doesn't seem genuine." "Walking a fine line as a communicator on Reddit". Muck Rack. March 3, 2015. "Reddit AMAs: A minefield worth crossing". PR Week. April 4, 2014. Nicole Spector (June 18, 2014). "Reddit's Safe Play in the Game of Geo-Targeting". Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved July 6, 2015. Megan Haynes (June 5, 2014). "Reddit knows: new study reveals what Canadians want". StrategyOnline.ca. "Let your audience ask you anything". ReadWrite. September 24, 2014. "Reddit – the front page of the internet: New user behaviour and social media trends". BBC Academy: Journalism. BBC via YouTube. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. "r/announcements – Affiliate links on Reddit". reddit. June 6, 2016. Woollaston, Victoria (June 7, 2016). "Reddit begins trialling affiliate links across the site". Wired. Retrieved May 31, 2019. Schultz, E.J. (September 25, 2017). "Audi's Reddit 'Ask Me Anything' with Elizabeth Goes 130 MPH". Ad Age. Retrieved October 9, 2018. Alexander, Julia (November 14, 2017). "Reddit holding its own 'Twitch Plays' game, featuring a tiny robot and several subreddits". Polygon. Retrieved October 9, 2018. Castillo, Michelle (July 5, 2018). "Reddit — one of the world's most popular websites — is trying to cash in through advertising". CNBC. Retrieved June 4, 2019. Sloane, Garett (May 25, 2017). "The Washington Post Gets Its Own Reddit Page". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 4, 2019. Gesenhues, Amy (January 9, 2019). "Reddit hires former Twitter ad team director as VP of ad products, engineering". Marketing Land. Retrieved May 31, 2019. Schaaf, Alan (February 23, 2009). "My Gift to Reddit: I created an image hosting service that doesn't suck. What do you think?". Reddit. Retrieved April 9, 2013. "Interview: Imgur's Path to a Billion Image Views Per Day – Liz Gannes – Social – AllThingsD". AllThingsD. "Social Media By Gender: Women Dominate Pinterest, Twitter, Men Dominate Reddit, YouTube (INFOGRAPHIC)". June 21, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2017 – via Huff Post. Barthel, Michael; Stoking, Galen; Holcomb, Jesse; Mitchell, Amy (February 25, 2016). "Seven-in-Ten Reddit Users Get News on the Site". Pew Research Center. Retrieved May 28, 2017. While just 4% of U.S. adults report using Reddit, about seven-in-ten of these users (78%) get news on the site. Marjanovic, Sara; Stańczak, Karolina; Augenstein, Isabelle (2022). "Quantifying gender biases towards politicians on Reddit". PLOS ONE. 17 (10): 4. arXiv:2112.12014. Bibcode:2022PLoSO..1774317M. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0274317. PMC 9603992. PMID 36288326. Reddit is predominantly left-leaning, with less than 19% of overall users leaning right. abc blog (August 31, 2012). "The Reddit effect". ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation). Archived from the original on November 1, 2014. Retrieved October 1, 2013. Lee, Dave (March 14, 2018). "Reddit holds the secret to fixing Facebook". BBC News. Retrieved September 11, 2018. Kevin Morris (December 11, 2015). "How Reddit saved the world". The Daily Dot. Retrieved September 12, 2018. meganfriedman (September 14, 2010). "Reddit Campaign for Colbert Rally Breaks Donation Record". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved April 18, 2021. Ben Sullivan (May 8, 2018). "Reddit's global food bank is delivering Amazon wish lists to the hungry". The Big Issue. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Miles, Tom (December 12, 2011). "Irreverent atheists crowdsource charitable giving". Reuters. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Winston, Kimberly (December 21, 2011). "Atheists aim to change image of penny-pinching Scrooges". USA Today. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Josh Lowensohn (February 28, 2014). "Reddit's giving away 10 percent of money made off its ads to charity this year". The Verge. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Harrison Weber (February 26, 2015). "These 10 charities will get 10% of Reddit's 2014 ad revenue". VentureBeat. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Kanalley, Craig (August 29, 2012). "Barack Obama Reddit AMA: President Participates In 'Ask Me Anything' Thread". Huffington Post. Retrieved April 23, 2017. "How Obama Won The Internet". BuzzFeed. January 9, 2013. Retrieved April 23, 2017. Lagorio-chafkin, Christine (November 19, 2016). "Reddit and the God Emperor of the Internet". The New York Times. Retrieved April 23, 2017. Kulwin, Noah (March 6, 2016). "Hillary Clinton Drops In on Reddit's r/HillaryClinton: 'Senpai Notices Us!'". Recode. Retrieved October 9, 2018. Krieg, Gregory (September 2, 2015). "How Bernie Sanders' Online Army Is Using Reddit to Fuel His 2016 Campaign Surge". Mic. Retrieved October 9, 2018. "The Surprising Ways You Ruined Your Interview Before You Even Opened Your Mouth". Fast Company. April 21, 2017. Retrieved April 23, 2017. "The March for Science began with this person's 'throwaway line' on Reddit". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 23, 2017. "Are scientists going to march on Washington?". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 31, 2017. Foley, Katherine Ellen (April 22, 2017). "The global March for Science started with a single Reddit thread". Quartz. Retrieved April 23, 2017. Feinblatt, Scott (April 5, 2018). "March for Science rally April 14 will call for evidence-based policy". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 9, 2018. Ngak, Chenda (January 17, 2012). "Wikipedia, MoveOn, Reddit, Mozilla shuts down to protest SOPA/PIPA, how to prepare". CBS News. Retrieved September 13, 2018. Vlad Savov (January 18, 2012). "The SOPA blackout: Wikipedia, Reddit, Mozilla, Google, and many others protest proposed law". The Verge. Retrieved September 13, 2018. Tom Cheredar (January 10, 2012). "Reddit goes black Jan. 18 to protest SOPA & PIPA — Who else will join?". VentureBeat. Retrieved September 13, 2018. Kaleigh Rogers (December 12, 2017). "How Net Neutrality Protesters Took Over Reddit". Motherboard. Retrieved September 13, 2018. Kang, Cecilia (December 14, 2017). "F.C.C. repeals net neutrality rules". The New York Times. Retrieved March 13, 2018. Ingram, Mathew (December 6, 2017). "Reddit flexes its muscle over net neutrality". Columbia Journalism Review. Retrieved March 13, 2018. Huffman, Steve; Chang, Emily (December 14, 2017). "Reddit CEO says net neutrality vote stifles competition". Bloomberg LP. Retrieved April 30, 2018. Friedman, Megan (September 14, 2010). "Reddit Campaign for Colbert Rally Breaks Donation Record". Time NewsFeed. Retrieved December 4, 2011. mrsammercer (August 31, 2010). "I've had a vision and I can't shake it: Colbert needs to hold a satirical rally in DC". Reddit. Retrieved December 4, 2011. Schiraldi, Mike (November 12, 2010). "Buy Shirts, Remember the Rally, Question Colbert, and Smile". blog.reddit. Retrieved December 4, 2011. Rally to Restore Sanity – Press Conference – Video Mediaite. October 30, 2010. "Stephen Colbert has answered your questions: IAmA". Reddit. November 30, 2010. Retrieved December 4, 2011. Stainkamph, Max (January 27, 2020). "Netflix is latest victim: 5 things censored in Indonesia". Rappler. Croft-Cutsworth, Catriona (May 16, 2014). "Indonesia bans Vimeo". Lowy Institute. Chong, Celena (August 13, 2015). "Russia bans Reddit". Business Insider. Retrieved April 2, 2020. Chong, Celena. "Russia bans Reddit over shrooms". Business Insider. Retrieved June 14, 2023. Williams, Owen (June 26, 2015). "Reddit has been caught in China's Great Firewall". The Next Web. "https://reddit.com is 100% blocked in China". greatfire.org. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Ravikumar, Sau Sachin (April 3, 2019). "Reddit, Telegram among websites blocked in India: internet groups". Reuters India. Retrieved April 2, 2020. Paul, Ian (April 1, 2010). "Top 10 April Fools' Day Fake News Items for 2010". PCWorld. Retrieved November 4, 2023. "reddit mold is now live!". Upvoted. Reddit. Archived from the original on February 7, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2021. "reddit buys Team Fortress 2". Upvoted. Reddit. Archived from the original on December 2, 2020. Retrieved February 3, 2021. "Business Time". Team Fortress. Valve Corporation. Retrieved February 3, 2021. "2014 April Fools' Day". Know Your Meme. April 1, 2014. Retrieved January 27, 2024. Lee, Timothy (April 14, 2015). "The button: the fascinating social experiment driving Reddit crazy". Vox. Vox Media. Retrieved April 24, 2015. powerlanguage (June 8, 2015). "The button has ended". Reddit. Archived from the original on June 8, 2015. Retrieved June 11, 2015. "Reddit's 'Robin' is a brilliant social experiment that pits millions of internet users against each other" Business Insider April 1, 2016 "Reddit's new 'Place' is forcing millions of users to work together to make something great". Business Insider. Retrieved April 1, 2017. "Place has ended". Reddit. April 3, 2017. Retrieved April 3, 2017. Asarch, Steven (April 2, 2019). "Reddit Sequence is the latest April Fool's Day experiment from the social media forum". Newsweek. Retrieved April 4, 2019. "Sequence is over". Reddit. April 3, 2019. "Second: announcements". April 1, 2021. "The Best (or Worst) of April Fools 2021". Cheddar. Retrieved April 2, 2021. Adorno, José (March 28, 2022). "Reddit is bringing back r/Place for April Fools' Day – here's how to participate". 9to5Mac. Retrieved April 3, 2022. "Welcome to Day 2 of Place". April 2, 2022. Retrieved April 2, 2022. "Top Subreddits". Redditmetrics.com. Archived from the original on July 31, 2018. Retrieved August 1, 2018. "President Obama makes online appearance on Reddit". The Telegraph. London. August 29, 2012. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved August 30, 2012. Michelle Castillo (February 27, 2017). "Bill Gates is 'concerned' about U.S. influence overseas and political divide online". CNBC. Gates participated in an "ask me anything" feature on Reddit that allows notable people to answer questions from users. This is the fifth time Gates has participated. Scott Bixby (July 28, 2016). "From the media to moon landings: Trump takes questions in Reddit AMA". The Guardian. Lagorio-Chafkin, Christine (October 4, 2018). "Reddit Confirms New Russian Meddling Efforts". Inc. Retrieved October 10, 2018. FP Staff (July 4, 2014). "Priyanka Chopra's Reddit encounter: Did AMA make her run away?". Firstpost. Retrieved April 4, 2021. Bacardi, Francesca (January 28, 2014). "George Clooney Talks 'Monuments Men,' Playing Batman in Reddit AMA". Variety. Retrieved October 9, 2018. Schaub, Michael (December 31, 2014). "Margaret Atwood's charming Reddit AMA". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 9, 2018. "Buzz Aldrin's AMA: colonising Mars and the moon's 'magnificent desolation'". The Guardian. July 8, 2014. Retrieved October 9, 2018. Whittaker, Zack (February 23, 2015). "Any regrets, Edward Snowden? "I'd have come forward sooner"". ZDNet. Retrieved October 9, 2018. McNamara, Brittney (July 28, 2017). "Experts Answer Reddit Questions About Transgender People". Teen Vogue. Retrieved October 9, 2018. Boran, Marie (September 15, 2016). "Give and receive gifts online with Redditgifts". Irish Times. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Greg Kumparak (August 23, 2011). "Reddit Acquires Fan-Made Secret Santa Site, RedditGifts". TechCrunch. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Boitnott, John (December 23, 2010). "Secret Santa success caps banner year for Reddit". VentureBeat Interpreting Innovation. VentureBeat. Retrieved January 3, 2011. "The Biggest Secret Santa Gift Exchange in the World". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on December 23, 2010. Retrieved February 12, 2011. "Statistics for Secret Santa 2010". Retrieved February 12, 2011. "Nearly 1,000 Reddit Ottawa users signed up for gift exchange". CBC News. December 19, 2014. Retrieved December 20, 2014. McCluskey, Megan (December 17, 2015). "Bill Gates Gave One Reddit User an Amazingly Thoughtful Secret Santa Gift". Retrieved April 27, 2016. Criss, Doug (September 21, 2017). "Bill Gates was her secret Santa, and it was as awesome as you'd think". CNN. Retrieved October 9, 2018. Ballingall, Alex (December 22, 2014). "Web community's holiday gift exchange has more than 212,000 participants this year, including celebrities and people from 188 countries". Retrieved April 27, 2016. "Sunsetting Secret Santa and Reddit Gifts". June 9, 2021. Shaer, Matthew (July 8, 2012). "Reddit in the Flesh". New York Magazine. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Leasca, Stacey (June 15, 2013). "Reddit Meetup: Can users turn online connections into real ones?". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "New Use of 'Brigade'". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved May 28, 2023. Blair, Tony (March 10, 2021). "Social Media Futures: What Is Brigading?". www.institute.global. "Reddit Content Policy". www.redditinc.com. Retrieved May 28, 2023. Greenpeace.org: Humpbacks to be spared the harpoon -- for now Archived February 12, 2010, at the Wayback Machine Feature story (December 10, 2007). "Mister Splashy Pants the whale – you named him, now save him". Greenpeace.org. Retrieved August 8, 2014. Nicks, Denver (October 1, 2013). "The Six Most Important Moments in Reddit History". Time. Retrieved April 25, 2019. "Rules of Reddit". Archived from the original on October 13, 2012. Retrieved October 14, 2012. "Critics blast Reddit over climate-change skeptic ban". Fox News. December 19, 2013. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Reddit's director of communications told FoxNews.com that while it was Allen's prerogative to ban climate-change skeptics from "/r/science", his statements "do not reflect the views of Reddit as a whole, or other science or climate-oriented subreddits. Each subreddit community is entitled to its own views, and anyone who wants to start their own subreddit is welcome to do so devoted to their views, opinions or interests" Sam Kirkland (November 25, 2014). "How to get your news site banned from Reddit". Poynter. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. If you don't like how a moderator is managing a subreddit, the best solution is to start your own subreddit and moderate it with different rules, said Victoria Taylor, director of communications for Reddit. "blog.reddit – what's new on reddit: reddit, we need to talk..." redditblog.com. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved February 18, 2019. "A necessary change in policy: blog". reddit. February 12, 2012. Archived from the original on February 12, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2019. "Image from Yishan Wong". imgur.com. Archived from the original on October 18, 2017. Retrieved April 17, 2017. Rob Price (July 15, 2015). "Reddit's old CEO rewrites the history of Reddit and says 'the purge' of users will begin". Business Insider Australia. Archived from the original on December 16, 2018. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Morris, Kevin (February 12, 2012). "Reddit bans "suggestive or sexual content" of minors". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 12, 2014. "How Internet Platforms Are Combating Disinformation and Misinformation in the Age of COVID-19". New America. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Garcia-Navarro, Lulu (December 8, 2019). "Managing Misinformation On Reddit". NPR. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Cinnelli, Matteo; De Francisci Morales, Gianmarco; Galeazzi, Alessandro; Starnini, Michele (February 23, 2021). "The echo chamber effect on social media". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 118 (9): e2023301118. Bibcode:2021PNAS..11823301C. doi:10.1073/pnas.2023301118. PMC 7936330. PMID 33622786. Hart, Janelle (February 8, 2022). "Reddit study shows abundance of misinformation on recurrent UTIs". Urology Times. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Naylor, Aliide (December 12, 2023). "Pro-Putin Disinformation Warriors Take War of Aggression to Reddit". CEPA. "Innocents accused in online manhunt". 3 News NZ. April 22, 2013. Archived from the original on December 15, 2013. Retrieved June 4, 2013. Buncombe, Andrew (April 26, 2013). "Family of Sunil Tripathi – missing student wrongly linked to Boston marathon bombing – thank well-wishers for messages of support". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved January 17, 2015. The cause of the student's death has still be determined but the medical examiner said no foul play was suspected. Nark, Jason. "The Boston bombing's forgotten victim". Philadelphia Daily News. Archived from the original on November 15, 2014. Retrieved October 31, 2014. Akhil spent the most time with Sunny before his suicide, weekends at Brown where he tried to help his youngest child foresee a future. Martin, Erik. "Reflections on the Recent Boston Crisis". Reddit. Archived from the original on March 10, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2013. Harnick, Chris (November 24, 2013). "'The Good Wife' Recap: Alicia Takes on Anonymous Posters in 'Whack-A-Mole'". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on November 26, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2013. Hathaway, Jay (November 11, 2014). "Here's How The Newsroom Covered Reddit's Failed Boston Bombing Manhunt". Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015. Fallon, Kevin. "'Newsroom' Premiere: Aaron Sorkin Puts CNN on Blast Over the Boston Bombing". Archived from the original on June 29, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015. Staff writers (July 15, 2015). "Why does the internet hate Ellen Pao?". News.com.au. Retrieved May 1, 2021. Griffin, Andrew (June 11, 2015). "Reddit bans communities including 'Fat People Hate' as users say anti-harassment policies could be 'beginning of the end'". The Independent. Archived from the original on February 11, 2017. Retrieved February 8, 2017. Woollacott, Emma. "Users Flock To Voat As Reddit Shuts Harassing Groups". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 13, 2015. Retrieved June 11, 2015. Wendling, Mike (June 29, 2015). "What should social networks do about hate speech?". Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved July 2, 2015. "Reddit in uproar after staff sacking". BBC News. BBC. July 3, 2015. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. About 100 chat sections, or sub-reddits, that together have millions of readers are believed to have been shut. Reddit's only comment about the issue has been to say that it did not talk about 'individual employee matters'. The protests were led by the volunteer moderators of the AMA section, which said in an explanatory posting that they needed Ms Taylor to keep the sub-reddit functioning. Ms Taylor helped organise guests for AMAs and worked to verify that people due to answer questions were who they said they were. There had been no explanation of why she was suddenly sacked, said the administrators. "Reddit: Laute Rufe nach Absetzung von CEO Ellen Pao". Der Standard. July 4, 2015. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2015. Zwar sind einige Foren wieder entsperrt, trotzdem ist Pao weiterhin Ziel vielerlei Angriffe. Zusätzliches Öl ins Feuer goss ein ehemaliger Community Manager der Online-Community, der angab von der Reddit-Chefin aufgrund seiner Krebserkrankung gefeuert worden zu sein. Zuvor wurde dem an Leukämie erkrankten Mitarbeiter eingeräumt, beim Unternehmen zu verbleiben – allerdings meldete sich Pao nur wenig später und gab ihm zu wissen, dass er aufgrund seiner Erkrankung nicht mehr bei Reddit verbleiben könnte. So zumindest die Behauptung, die wenig später offline ging. "Reddit's CEO Allegedly Fired an Employee For Having Cancer and Not Recovering Fast Enough". Next Shark. July 3, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2015. McGregor, Jena (July 6, 2015). "More than 200k people have signed a petition calling for Reddit's Ellen Pao to step down". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved July 7, 2015. Musil, Steven (July 5, 2015). "Petition for Pao resignation from Reddit grows to 130K". Cnet. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2015. Malik, Naureen; Jones, Tim (July 5, 2015). "Reddit CEO Pao Under Fire as Users Protest Removal of Executive". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2015. Reddit CEO Ellen Pao apologizes: 'We screwed up' Archived December 12, 2018, at the Wayback Machine By Laurie Segall and Chris Isidore CNN July 6, 2015 Reddit CEO Ellen Pao Issues an Apology for the Direction of the Site Archived September 24, 2015, at the Wayback Machine by Laura Entis FoxNews.com July 6, 2015 Jack Linshi (July 6, 2015). "Ellen Pao: Reddit CEO Apologizes After Petition for Her to Resign". TIME.com. Archived from the original on June 26, 2018. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Titcomb, James (July 7, 2015). "Petition calling for Reddit boss Ellen Pao to resign hits 200,000 as she admits 'we screwed up'". London: The Telegraph. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved July 7, 2015. Mike, Isaac (July 10, 2015). "Ellen Pao Is Stepping Down as Reddit's Chief". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved July 10, 2015. Weinberger, Matt (August 5, 2015). "Reddit finally bans its most infamous racist communities because they 'made recruiting here more difficult'". Business Insider. Archived from the original on August 20, 2016. Retrieved August 9, 2016. "Quarantined Subreddits". Reddit Help. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved June 21, 2016. Shakir, Umar (April 18, 2023). "Reddit's upcoming API changes will make AI companies pony up". The Verge. Retrieved July 16, 2023. Peters, Jay (June 8, 2023). "It's not just Apollo: other Reddit apps are shutting down, too". The Verge. Retrieved July 16, 2023. Porter, Jon (June 5, 2023). "Major Reddit communities will go dark to protest threat to third-party apps". The Verge. Retrieved July 16, 2023. IV, Antonio Pequeño. "Reddit Blackout Rolls On For More Than 5,000 Subreddits Past Planned End Date—Some Of Which Plan To Stay Dark Indefinitely". Forbes. Retrieved July 16, 2023. Peters, Jay (June 17, 2023). "Three of the biggest Reddit communities reopened in the funniest way possible". The Verge. Retrieved July 16, 2023. Peters, Jay (June 21, 2023). "Reddit removed moderators behind the latest protests before restoring a few of them". The Verge. Retrieved July 16, 2023. McArdle, Megan (June 15, 2023). "Reddit followed Goodwill's playbook. Now Redditors are on strike". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 17, 2023. "Say hello to men who hate NSA spying but blame women for being spied on". The Verge. September 1, 2014. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Vincent, James (September 1, 2014). "Is Apple's iCloud safe after leak of Jennifer Lawrence and other celebrities' nude photos?". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. "Celebrity Naked Photos Leaked – #theFappening – So You Have A Girlfriend". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. "The Fappening Is Being Broadcast Live On Reddit With 100,000+ Viewers". Business 2 Community. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Anthony Johnston, Metro World News (October 10, 2014). "Security expert weighs in on 'The Fappening' and the iCloud". Metro. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved December 26, 2014. "Hunt begins for hacker behind Jennifer Lawrence nude photo theft". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on September 30, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. "Jennifer Lawrence nude photos leaked: Hacker posts explicit pics". NewsComAu. September 3, 2014. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Price, Rob (September 2, 2014). "There's child porn in the massive celebrity nudes hack". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on September 4, 2014. Retrieved September 2, 2014. Geller, Eric (September 7, 2014). "Reddit just banned the subreddit at the center of Celebgate". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2014. Sottek, T.C. (September 8, 2014). "Reddit is a failed state". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Retrieved November 2, 2014. Sankin, Aaron (November 2, 2014). "Is Reddit broken beyond repair?". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on November 3, 2014. Retrieved November 2, 2014. Goldman, David (December 29, 2014). "Reddit takes down Sony hack forum". CNN. Archived from the original on January 4, 2015. Retrieved January 4, 2015. Boris van Zanten (May 30, 2016). "Reddit CEO Steve Huffman: 'We know your dark secrets. We know everything.'". The Next Web (TNW). Archived from the original on February 1, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Haworth, Jessica (May 30, 2016). "Reddit CEO tells users 'we know your dark secrets' as he strikes fear into web surfers". Mirror. OCLC 223228477. Archived from the original on December 11, 2018. Retrieved February 18, 2019. "Reddit CEO Steve Huffman says, "We know your dark secrets"". Daily News and Analysis. May 31, 2016. Archived from the original on October 18, 2017. Retrieved February 18, 2019. "CEO of Reddit, Steve Huffman, about advertising on Reddit: "We know all of your interests. Not only just your interests you are willing to declare publicly on Facebook – we know your dark secrets, we know everything" (TNW Conference, 26 May) (27,500 votes)". Reddit. May 29, 2016. Archived from the original on October 3, 2018. Retrieved February 18, 2019. "New Ad Type: Promoted User Posts". Reddit (official announcement). July 26, 2016. Archived from the original on February 22, 2018. Retrieved February 18, 2019. "Sponsored headline tests: placement and design". Reddit (official announcement). June 23, 2016. Archived from the original on February 1, 2018. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Roth, Max (September 22, 2016). "Allegedly secret LDS Church documents leaked". Fox 13 Now. Fox 13 Salt Lake. Archived from the original on September 28, 2016. Retrieved September 30, 2016. Wenzke, Marissa (September 26, 2016). "Inside the online world of ex-Mormons". Mashable. Archived from the original on September 30, 2016. Retrieved September 30, 2016. Yeung, Ken. "Reddit CEO apologizes for editing comments critical of him following Pizzagate ban". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved November 24, 2016. Russell, Jon. "Reddit CEO admits he secretly edited comments from Donald Trump supporters". Techcrunch. Archived from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved November 24, 2016. Weingerger, Matt. "The CEO of Reddit confessed to modifying posts from Trump supporters after they wouldn't stop sending him expletives". Business Insider. Archived from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved November 24, 2016. Ohlheiser, Abby (November 24, 2016). "Fearing yet another witch hunt, Reddit bans 'Pizzagate'". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. OCLC 2269358. Archived from the original on December 30, 2016. Retrieved November 24, 2016. Blake, Andrew (November 25, 2016). "Reddit CEO admits editing posts, directing obscene comments to pro-Trump administrators". Washington Times. ISSN 0732-8494. OCLC 8472624. Archived from the original on November 26, 2016. Retrieved November 25, 2016. "Pizzagate subreddit webpage". Reddit. November 23, 2016. Archived from the original on November 22, 2016. Retrieved November 25, 2016. Huffman, Steve (November 30, 2016). "TIFU by editing some comments and creating an unnecessary controversy". Reddit. Archived from the original on November 30, 2016. Retrieved November 30, 2016. Lee, Dave (November 30, 2016). "Reddit moves against 'toxic' Trump fans". BBC News. Archived from the original on December 1, 2016. Retrieved December 1, 2016. "Reddit shuts down 'alt-right' subreddit". CNET. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved February 15, 2017. Resnick, Gideon (February 2, 2017). "Reddit Bans Alt-Right Group". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on February 16, 2017. Retrieved February 15, 2017. Weinberger, Matt (February 2, 2017). "Reddit bans a major alt-right community — and there may be a very good reason". Business Insider. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Hern, Alex (February 2, 2017). "Reddit bans far-right groups altright and alternativeright". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved February 15, 2017. Collins, Ben (March 6, 2018). "Reddit Rises Up Against CEO for Hiding Russian Trolls". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on March 6, 2018. Retrieved March 6, 2018. "Opinions Are Split On The Attempt To Shut Down Popular Subreddit r/KotakuInAction [Opinion]". The Inquisitr. July 14, 2018. Archived from the original on July 17, 2018. Retrieved July 17, 2018. "Reddit employee saves GamerGate subreddit, KotakuInAction, after founder closes it". Polygon. Archived from the original on July 16, 2018. Retrieved July 17, 2018. "Netizens slam 'disturbing' photos of PH subsite on Reddit". The Manila Times. January 14, 2019. Archived from the original on January 16, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Constine, Josh (February 11, 2019). "Reddit confirms $300M Series D led by China's Tencent at $3B value". TechCrunch. Retrieved September 30, 2019. Osborne, Charlie (February 11, 2019). "Winnie The Pooh takes over Reddit due to Chinese investment, censorship fears". ZDNet. Retrieved September 30, 2019. "Reddit: Censorship fears spark criticism of Tencent funding reports". BBC News. February 11, 2019. Retrieved September 30, 2019. Law, Tara (February 11, 2019). "Chinese Company's Reddit Investment Angers Users Who Fear Censorship". Time. Retrieved September 30, 2019. Verhage, Julie (February 11, 2019). "China's Tencent Invests in Reddit, Sparking Free Speech Protests". Bloomberg. Retrieved September 30, 2019. Liao, Shannon (February 11, 2019). "Reddit gets a $150 million investment from Tencent and users are posting memes to mock the deal". The Verge. Retrieved September 30, 2019. "Racism is rampant on Reddit, and its editors are in open revolt". SFGate. June 18, 2020. "Promoting Hate Based on Identity or Vulnerability". Reddit Help. July 13, 2020. "Update to Our Content Policy". reddit. June 29, 2020. Lima, Cristiano (June 29, 2020). "Reddit bans pro-Trump forum in crackdown on hate speech". Politico. Retrieved June 29, 2020. "Reddit bans r/The_Donald and r/ChapoTrapHouse as part of a major expansion of its rules". The Verge. June 29, 2020. "Reddit Bans Feminist Sub r/GenderCritical". 4W – A Feminist Publication. June 29, 2020. "Saagar and Ryan Grim: Reddit's OUTRAGEOUS BAN of pro-Trump, Chapo trap house subreddits". The Hill. June 30, 2020. Archived from the original on December 19, 2021. Retrieved October 15, 2020 – via YouTube. Isaac, Mike; Conger, Kate (January 8, 2021). "Reddit bans forum dedicated to supporting Trump, and Twitter permanently suspends his allies who spread conspiracy theories". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2021. Fischer, Sara (January 8, 2021). "Reddit bans subreddit group "r/DonaldTrump"". Axios. Retrieved January 23, 2021. Guynn, Jessica. "'They want to take your speech away,' censorship cry unites Trump supporters and extremists after Capitol attack". USA TODAY. Retrieved January 23, 2021. Reimann, Nicholas. "Reddit Bans 'r/donaldtrump' Subreddit". Forbes. Retrieved January 23, 2021. Phillips, Matt; Lorenz, Taylor (January 27, 2021). "'Dumb Money' Is on GameStop, and It's Beating Wall Street at Its Own Game". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved January 29, 2021. Goforth, Claire (March 24, 2021). "Massive subs all go private to protest Reddit's hiring of a pedophile 'enabler'". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on March 24, 2021. Tamburro, Paul (March 24, 2021). "Reddit's most popular subreddits go private in protest against 'censorship'". GameRevolution. Archived from the original on March 24, 2021. Retrieved March 24, 2021. Robertson, Adi (March 24, 2021). "Major subreddits are going dark to protest Reddit allegedly hiring a controversial UK politician". The Verge. Retrieved March 24, 2021. Knowles, Tom (March 25, 2021). "Social platform in Reddit censorship row over Spectator article". The Times. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Eccleston, Ben (March 25, 2021). "Coventry activist Aimee Challenor removed from Reddit role following backlash". CoventryLive. Retrieved April 29, 2021. Porterfield, Carlie. "Dozens Of Subreddits Go Private To Protest Reddit's Covid Disinformation Policy". Forbes. Retrieved August 31, 2021. "Reddit communities 'go dark' in protest over Covid misinformation". The Guardian. September 1, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2021. Peters, Jay (July 27, 2023). "Here's how to watch the evolution of Reddit's r/Place canvas — including its protest art". The Verge. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Binder, Matt (July 20, 2023). "Reddit relaunched r/Place public art canvas. Redditors immediately protest on it". Mashable. Retrieved October 18, 2023. "Reddit ends its blockchain Community program, leads to MOON, BRICK & DONUT crashing". FXStreet. October 18, 2023. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Jones, Naiyan (March 27, 2020). "Key points when using Reddit as a source of data". Medium. Retrieved January 31, 2021. Buntain, C., & Golbeck, J. (2014). Identifying social roles in reddit using network structure Archived April 11, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web (pp. 615–620). ACM. Singer, P., Ferrara, E., Kooti, F., Strohmaier, M., & Lerman, K. (2016). Evidence of online performance deterioration in user sessions on Reddit. PloS one, 11(8), e0161636. Moyer, D., Carson, S. L., Dye, T. K., Carson, R. T., & Goldbaum, D. (2015). Determining the influence of Reddit posts on Wikipedia pageviews. In Proceedings of the Ninth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media. Litherland, Kristina T. (March 30, 2022). "Instruction vs. emergence on r/place: Understanding the growth and control of evolving artifacts in mass collaboration". Computers in Human Behavior. 122: 106845. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2021.106845. hdl:10852/86918. Haustein, Stefanie (2016). "Grand challenges in altmetrics: Heterogeneity, data quality and dependencies". Scientometrics. 108: 413–423. arXiv:1603.04939. Bibcode:2016arXiv160304939H. doi:10.1007/s11192-016-1910-9. S2CID 2169363. Forestal, Jennifer (January 2021) [December 3, 2020 (published online)]. "Beyond Gatekeeping: Propaganda, Democracy, and the Organization of Digital Publics". The Journal of Politics. 83 (1): 306–320. doi:10.1086/709300. S2CID 216325883. Reddit at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Official website Business data for Reddit, Inc.: Bloomberg Google Reuters SEC filings Yahoo! reddittorjg6rue252oqsxryoxengawnmo46qy4kyii5wtqnwfj4ooad.onion (Accessing link help) "Live Episode! Reddit: Alexis Ohanian & Steve Huffman"—How I Built This (audio interview with founders)