The Republic of Marshall Islands consists of 30 atolls (each made up of many islets) and 5 islands, which can be divided into two island chains, Ralik Chain and Ratak Chain. Administratively, the country is divided into 24 inhabited municipalities, corresponding to the 24 inhabited atolls or islands, where each of them is an electoral district. "Nuclear Claims Tribunal". 177. "New K-B-E mayor Nishma Jamore and local government council members take oath of office". wordpress.com. Bikini Atoll. 23 January 2012. Since 1985, most of the Rongelapese community lives on the Mejatto Island of Kwajalein Atoll, due to radioactive contamination of their atoll. The remaining 11 atolls/islands are currently uninhabited. According to the Constitution of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the uninhabited atolls/islands Narikrik, Erikub, Jemo, Taka, Bikar, Bokak, Rongrik and Ailinginae shall each be included in the electoral district with which it is most closely associated, pursuant to the customary law or any traditional practice. Ujelang is listed with the Enewetak & Ujelang District, and Bikini with the Bikini & Kili District. Ailinginae Atoll and Rongerik Atoll traditionally belong to Rongelap Atoll Erikub Atoll belongs to the people of Wotja Atoll Jemo Island belongs to the owners of Likiep Atoll (see there) Toke Atoll belongs to the people of Utirik Atoll Wake Atoll is disputed with the US ISO 3166-2:MH "Republic of the Marshall Islands 2021 Census Report, Volume 1: Basic Tables and Administrative Report" (PDF). Pacific Community (SPC): Statistics for Development Division. Pacific Community. May 30, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023. "Constitution of the Republic of the Marshall Islands" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 November 2010. "Marshall Healthsafety (IHS) G51" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04. Retrieved 2012-09-12. Geography, Embassy of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Washington, D.C. Marshall Islands, GeoHive Municipalities of the Marshall Islands, Statoids.com