Mario (Japanese: マリオ) /mɑːrioʊ/ is a character created by the Japanese video game designer Shigeru Miyamoto. He is the star of the Mario franchise and the mascot of the Japanese video game company Nintendo. Mario is an Italian plumber who resides in the Mushroom Kingdom with his younger twin brother, Luigi. Their adventures generally center on rescuing Princess Peach from the villain Bowser while using power-ups that give them different abilities. Mario first appeared as the player character of Donkey Kong (1981), a platform game. Miyamoto wanted to use Popeye as the protagonist, but when he could not gain the licensing rights, he created Mario instead. The graphical limitations of arcade hardware influenced Mario's design, such as his large nose, mustache, and overalls. Miyamoto expected the character to be unpopular and planned to use him for cameo appearances. Originally called "Mr. Video" and "Jumpman," he was renamed Mario after Nintendo of America's landlord, Mario Segale. After Donkey Kong, Mario starred in Mario Bros. (1983). Its 1985 Nintendo Entertainment System sequel, Super Mario Bros., began the successful Super Mario series. Charles Martinet voiced Mario from 1991 to 2023, when he was succeeded by Kevin Afghani. After Super Mario Bros., Mario began to branch off into different genres and has appeared in over 200 video games since his creation. These include puzzle games such as Dr. Mario, role-playing games such as Paper Mario and Mario & Luigi, and sports games such as Mario Kart and Mario Tennis. He has appeared in other Nintendo properties, such as in the Super Smash Bros. series of crossover fighting games. Mario has also appeared in various animations, including three series produced by DIC Entertainment (voiced by Lou Albano and later Walker Boone). He was portrayed by Bob Hoskins in the live-action Super Mario Bros. film in 1993, and voiced by Chris Pratt in The Super Mario Bros. Movie in 2023. An established pop culture icon, Mario is widely considered the most famous video game character in history. He has appeared in a variety of merchandise, such as clothing and collectible items, and people and places have been nicknamed after him. He has also inspired a considerable amount of unofficial media. Shigeru Miyamoto created Mario while developing Donkey Kong in an attempt to produce a bestselling video game for Nintendo; previous games, such as Sheriff, had not achieved the success of games such as Namco's Pac-Man. Originally, Miyamoto wanted to create a game that used the 1930s characters Popeye, Bluto, and Olive Oyl. At the time, however, as Miyamoto was unable to acquire a license to use the characters (and would not until 1982 with Popeye), he would end up creating an unnamed player character, along with Donkey Kong, and Lady (later known as Pauline). In the early stages of Donkey Kong, Mario was drawn using pixel dots in a 16x16 grid. The focus of the game was to escape a maze, while Mario did not have the ability to jump. However, Miyamoto soon introduced jumping capabilities for the player character, reasoning that "If you had a barrel rolling towards you, what would you do?" Continuing to draw from 1930s media, King Kong served as an inspiration and Mario was set in New York City. Though the protagonist was unnamed in the Japanese release of Donkey Kong, he was named "Jumpman" in the game's English instructions and "little Mario" in the sales brochure. Miyamoto envisioned a character to be used in every game developed by Miyamoto; a "go-to" character who could be placed into any game if needed, albeit in cameo appearances as Miyamoto did not, at the time, expect the character to become singularly popular. To this end, he originally named the character "Mr. Video," comparing what he intended for the character's appearances in later games to the cameos that Alfred Hitchcock had done within his films. In retrospect, Miyamoto commented that if he had named Mario "Mr. Video," Mario likely would have "disappeared off the face of the Earth." According to a widely circulated story, during the localization of Donkey Kong for American audiences, Nintendo of America's warehouse landlord, Mario Segale, confronted then-president Minoru Arakawa, demanding back rent. Following a heated argument in which the Nintendo employees eventually convinced Segale he would be paid, they opted to name the character in the game Mario after him. A friend of Mario Segale commented: "My direct understanding and perception is that Mario Segale doesn't mind at all the fact that his name inspired such an iconic character, and that he shows humble pride in that fact in front of his grandchildren and close-knit adult circles." While it is implied by the title of the Mario Bros. series, in a 1989 interview, his full name was stated not to be "Mario Mario". The first notable use of "Mario Mario" was in the 1993 live-action film adaptation of the Super Mario series, and was further used in Prima's official video game strategy guides, in 2000 for Mario Party 2 and in 2003 for Mario & Luigi: Superstar Saga. In 2012, after Mario voice actor Charles Martinet stated that the character's name was, in fact, "Mario Mario" at the San Diego Comic-Con, Nintendo CEO Satoru Iwata said Mario had no last name, with which Miyamoto agreed the month after. Two months after Iwata's death in July 2015, Miyamoto changed his stance, asserting at the Super Mario Bros. 30th Anniversary festival that Mario's full name was indeed "Mario Mario." By Miyamoto's own account, Mario's profession was chosen to fit with the game design: since Donkey Kong takes place on a construction site, Mario was made into a carpenter; and when he appeared again in Mario Bros., it was decided that he should be a plumber, because a lot of the game is situated in underground settings. Mario's character design, particularly his large nose, draws on western influences; once he became a plumber, Miyamoto decided to "put him in New York" and make him Italian, light-heartedly attributing Mario's nationality to his mustache. Other sources have Mario's profession chosen to be carpentry in an effort to depict the character as an ordinary hard worker, making it easier for players to identify with him. After a colleague suggested that Mario more closely resembled a plumber, Miyamoto changed Mario's profession accordingly and developed Mario Bros., featuring the character in the sewers of New York City. Due to the graphical limitations of arcade hardware at the time, Miyamoto clothed the character in red overalls and a blue shirt to contrast against each other and the background, making the movements of his arms easily perceptible. A red cap was added to let Miyamoto avoid drawing the character's hairstyle, forehead, and eyebrows, as well as to circumvent the issue of animating his hair as he jumped. To give distinctly human facial features with the limited graphical abilities, Miyamoto drew a large nose and a mustache, which avoided the need to draw a mouth and facial expressions. Omitting a mouth circumvented the problem of clearly separating the nose from the mouth with a limited number of pixels available. Over time, Mario's appearance has become more defined; blue eyes, white gloves, brown shoes, a red "M" in a white circle on the front of his hat and gold buttons on his overalls have been added. According to an interview, Japanese character designer Yōichi Kotabe, who worked on redesigning characters in Super Mario Bros. (1985), revealed that Mario's M on his hat was originally the resemblance of McDonald's logo; Kotabe later changed the design of M and straightened its lines to clearly distinguish the difference. The colors of his shirt and overalls were also reversed from a blue shirt with red overalls to a red shirt with blue overalls. Miyamoto attributed this process to the different development teams and artists for each game as well as advances in technology. Mario was voiced by Charles Martinet from 1991 to 2023. When he crashed the audition, the directors were preparing to close for the night, already packing up when he arrived. He was prompted with "an Italian plumber from Brooklyn"; when he heard the phrase, he immediately thought of a stereotypical Italian accent with a voice similar to that of a mobster. He then assumed the voice would be too harsh for children, so he planned on using a voice of an older figure. However, according to Martinet, the audition for Mario was the only time where his thoughts crashed and he spoke complete nonsense. After he was prompted the character, he babbled the following in a soft and friendly voice instead: "Hello, ima Mario. Okey dokey, letsa make a pizza pie together, you go get somea spaghetti, you go geta some sausage, I getta some sauce, you gonna put some spaghetti on the sausage and the sausage on the pizza, then I'm gonna chasea you with the pizza, then you gonna chasea me with the pizza, and gonaa makea lasagne." The voice he chose was derived from another voice role he used to play the character Gremio from William Shakespeare's The Taming of the Shrew. Martinet kept speaking with the voice until the audition tape ran out; the clip was the only tape sent back to Nintendo, and when the director called the company he said he "found our Mario." For the following years he would use the voice for an attraction at trade shows: small tracking sensors were glued onto his face, and he would voice a 3D model of Mario's head on a television while he remained hidden behind a curtain. When attendees would approach the screen, they could talk and interact with Mario. The attraction was successful and would be used for five years until he was called by Miyamoto, requesting that he use the voice for a video game. His first official video game voice role would be the CD rerelease of Mario Teaches Typing in 1994, but his first major voice acting role was Super Mario 64. He received instructions on the types of sound clips needed from Miyamoto, and Martinet appreciated the fun tone of the game and later called Miyamoto a genius. He has since also continued to voice other various Mario characters, such as Luigi, Wario, and Waluigi. His time in the studio recording voice clips consisted of "45 takes of every sound [he] can think of," according to Martinet at a Q&A in Canada. What time he gives vocals for the game varies, and according to him has ranged from three years before a game's release to one week. The amount of clips varies as well, ranging from one hour of audio to 20. Martinet was recognized by the Guinness World Records for the most roles performed with the same character, at the time one hundred, and is the most of any video game voice actor. As of January 2022, he has voiced Mario in over 150 games and has recorded 5 million audio files with the voice. In an interview, Martinet said he wants to continue voicing the character until he "drops dead," or until he can no longer perform the voice accurately. In August 2023, Nintendo announced Martinet would be retiring from the voice role of Mario, though he would continue to promote the franchise as a "Mario Ambassador." Voice actor Kevin Afghani succeeded Martinet in Super Mario Bros. Wonder the following October. Mario is depicted as a portly plumber who lives in the fictional land of the Mushroom Kingdom with Luigi, his younger, taller brother. The original Mario Bros. depicted Mario and Luigi as Italians in New York, with the television series and films specifying them as originating from the borough Brooklyn. Mario's infancy, in which he was transported by a stork to the Mushroom Kingdom, was first depicted in Super Mario World 2: Yoshi's Island. In a 2005 interview, Miyamoto stated that Mario's physical age was about 24–25 years old, and Nintendo Power stated that his birthday is October 11. He wears a long-sleeved red shirt, a pair of blue overalls with yellow buttons, brown shoes, white gloves, and a red cap with a red "M" printed on a white circle. In Donkey Kong, he wore a pair of red overalls, and a blue shirt. In Super Mario Bros., he wore a brown shirt with red overalls. He has blue eyes, and, like Luigi, has brown hair, and a dark brown or black mustache. This consistent difference in color is attributed to being a relic from designing the characters for their original platforms, wherein certain features were actively distinguished while others had to be curtailed due to technical limitations. Mario's occupation is plumbing, though in the original Donkey Kong games he is a carpenter. Mario has also assumed several other occupations: in the Dr. Mario series of puzzle games, which debuted in 1990, Mario is portrayed as a medical physician named "Dr. Mario"; in the Game Boy game Mario's Picross, Mario is an archaeologist; in Mario vs. Donkey Kong 2: March of the Minis, Mario is the president of a profitable toy-making company. Mario is an athlete in Mario sports games in games such as tennis and golf, as well as a kart racer in the Mario Kart series. In September 2017, Nintendo confirmed on their official Japanese profile for the character that Mario was no longer considered a plumber, but the statement was changed in March 2018. Although according to Nintendo, Mario has seven careers, which include plumber, doctor, racer, martial artist, basketball player, baseball player, and soccer player. Mario usually saves Princess Peach and the Mushroom Kingdom and purges antagonists, such as Bowser, from various areas; since his first game, Mario has usually had the role of saving the damsel in distress. Originally, he had to rescue his girlfriend Pauline in Donkey Kong (1981) from Donkey Kong. Pauline was soon replaced by Princess Peach in Super Mario Bros., although Pauline has reappeared in the Mario vs. Donkey Kong series and is considered "Mario's friend" instead. Mario reprises his role of saving Peach in the Super Mario series, but Mario himself was rescued by Peach in role-reversal in Super Princess Peach. Mario rescued Princess Daisy of Sarasaland in Super Mario Land, but Luigi has since been more linked to her; in Super Smash Bros. Melee, the text explaining Daisy states that "after her appearance in Mario Golf, gossips portrayed her as Luigi's answer to Mario's Peach." Luigi is Mario's younger fraternal twin brother, who is taller, slimmer, and can jump higher than him. He is a companion in the Mario games, and the character whom the second player controls in two-player sessions of many of the video games. Luigi has also occasionally rescued Mario as seen in Mario Is Missing! and the Luigi's Mansion series. Super Mario Land 2: 6 Golden Coins for the Game Boy saw the arrival of Wario, Mario's greedy counterpart and self-declared arch rival, who usually assumes the role of a main antagonist or an antihero. The dinosaur character Yoshi serves as Mario's steed and sidekick in games such as Super Mario World. Toad is Mario's trusted close friend, who gives him advice and supports him throughout his journey to rescue Princess Peach. During the development of Donkey Kong, Mario was known as Jumpman (ジャンプマン, Janpuman). Jumping—both to access places and as an offensive move—is a common gameplay element in Mario games, especially the Super Mario series. By the time Super Mario RPG was released, jumping became such a signature act of Mario that the player was often tasked with jumping to prove to non-player characters that he was Mario. Mario's most commonly portrayed form of attack is jumping to stomp on the heads of enemies, first used in Super Mario Bros. This jump-stomp move may entirely crush smaller enemies on the stage, and usually deal damage to larger ones, sometimes causing secondary effects. This attack often enables Mario to knock the turtle-like Koopa Troopas into or out of their shells, which can be used as weapons. Subsequent games have elaborated on Mario's jumping-related abilities. Super Mario World added the ability to spin-jump, which allows Mario to break blocks beneath him. The Game Boy version of Donkey Kong allows Mario to jump higher with consecutive jumps, and perform a backflip. In Super Mario 64, Mario gains new jumping abilities such as a sideways somersault; a ground pound, which is a high-impact downward thrusting motion; and the "Wall Kick," which propels him upwards by kicking off walls. Mario uses items, which give him various powers, and differ between the games he is in. The first power-up Mario used was the Hammer in Donkey Kong. Super Mario Bros. introduced the basic three power-ups that have become staples for the series, especially the 2D games – the Super Mushroom, a large red mushroom (similar to the real world fungus Amanita muscaria), which causes Mario to grow larger and be able to survive getting hit once; the Fire Flower, which allows Mario to throw fireballs; and the Starman (later named Super Star), which gives Mario temporary invincibility. These powers have appeared regularly throughout the series. Throughout the series' history, there have been several kinds of Mushroom power-ups, including the 1-up Mushroom (green), which gives Mario an extra life; the Poison Mushroom (purple), which causes Mario to take damage; the Mega Mushroom (yellow and red), which causes Mario to grow very large and become invincible for a short period of time; and the Mini Mushroom (blue), which causes Mario to shrink, and in some games, climb up walls. A reoccurring power-up throughout the series is an item that gives Mario the ability of flight. The first of this type was introduced in Super Mario Bros. 3: the first of which, the Super Leaf, gives Mario a raccoon (a transliteration of tanuki) tail and ears, and lets Mario swing his tail as an attack, float gently to the ground, and temporarily fly. There is an alternate version of this power-up in the same game, the Raccoon Suit (or Tanooki Suit) which grants Mario the same abilities as the Super Leaf, but with the addition of being able to temporarily turn into a statue, granting him invincibility. There is also a P-Wing that he can use, which makes him look like he has a Super Leaf, but gives him unlimited flight until he gets hit or finishes the level, and Frog Suit, which allows Mario to swim more effortlessly. In Super Mario World, an item called the Cape Feather was introduced that gave Mario a cape, and in addition to being able to fly, let Mario spin and swing his cape as an attack. In Super Mario Land 2: 6 Golden Coins, a carrot was available that gave Mario rabbit ears that allowed him to glide, and in Super Mario 64, Mario could acquire an item called the Wing Cap, which only let him fly temporarily, before disappearing. Super Mario Sunshine introduces a pump-water spraying device named "F.L.U.D.D.," whose abilities include spraying water and hovering. Mario 64 also featured two additional caps, one turning Mario into metal, making him immune to damage and allowing him to walk underwater, and another that turns him invisible and allows him to phase through certain walls. Both cap's effects can be combined. Super Mario Galaxy introduced new power-ups, including the Bee Mushroom (striped in yellow and brown), which turned Mario into a bee and allowed him to fly temporarily; the Boo Mushroom (ghostly white), which turned Mario into a Boo, allowing him to float and pass through some walls; the Spring Mushroom (metallic), which encased Mario in a spring, allowing him to jump higher; and the Ice Flower, which allowed the player to temporarily walk or skate on water and lava without sinking or taking damage. Super Mario Galaxy 2 introduced more power-ups, including the Cloud Flower, which allows Mario to create platforms in midair, and Rock Mario, which transforms Mario into a boulder that could be used to break through barriers. New Super Mario Bros. Wii updated the Ice Flower, which allows Mario to shoot ice balls that temporally freeze enemies; enemies frozen underwater will float to the surface, creating makeshift platforms for Mario. Frozen enemies can also be picked up and thrown. Super Mario 3D Land introduced the Boomerang Flower, which allows Mario to throw boomerangs at nearby enemies. In New Super Mario Bros. U, the Super Acorn makes its debut. This transforms Mario into his new flying squirrel form, where he can glide and stick on walls. Super Mario 3D World introduced the Super Bell, which transforms Mario into his cat form, as well as a Double Cherry to make multiple copies of himself. Super Mario Bros. Wonder introduced the Elephant Fruit, a power-up that transforms Mario into an elephant. The power-up allows Mario to wield various unique abilities, from being able to hit enemies with its trunk to absorbing and spraying water. Mario is the protagonist of the Super Mario series. Each game varies in its plot, but most of them have the ultimate goal of Mario rescuing Princess Peach after being kidnapped by Bowser. Mario explores a variety of locations, titled "worlds," and along the way, he can collect items and defeat enemies. Most levels have an end goal, such as stars or flagpoles, that he needs to reach to move on to the next. The series is divided by fans into two general sets of games: the 2D side-scrolling Super Mario games and the 3D Super Mario games. The Super Mario series had Mario starring in platform games, beginning with Super Mario Bros. on the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) in 1985. In these games, Mario traverses worlds that contain a set number of levels for Mario to complete. In them, he traverses them from moving left to right, the screen scrolling in the direction he moves. Mario has the goal of reaching the end of the level to move onto the next, typically marked with a flagpole. These games are less focused on plot and more on platforming; most commonly, Bowser kidnaps Peach, and Mario, with the help of Luigi and other characters, sets out to rescue her. Most worlds have mini boss battles, which typically involve fighting Bowser Jr. or one of several Koopalings. The final level is a fight against Bowser. His first appearance in the 2D variant of the series was Super Mario Bros. in 1985, which began with a 16x32 pixel rectangle prototype as the character; Takashi Tezuka suggested the character to be Mario after the success of one of his previous roles, Mario Bros. Certain other gameplay concepts were cut as well, such as how Mario could fly in a rocket ship and fire bullets. Originally designed with a small Mario in mind with the intention of increasing his size further in development, the developers implemented the feature of his size changes via power-ups as they considered it a fun addition. The concept was influenced by Japanese folktales. Super Mario Bros. 2 was originally not going to be a sequel to Super Mario Bros., and was originally going to be a game called Doki Doki Panic; directed by Kensuke Tanabe. After unsuccessful gameplay, development was shelved until he was requested to implement mascots from the Yume Kōjō festival. The game was redesigned with the help of Miyamoto and released exclusively in Japan in 1987. Minoru Arakawa, however, requested the game to be changed to a Mario game for its international release. Much of the original gameplay concepts were retained, with mainly graphical changes being made. One of the changes included the retexturing of the four main playable characters of Doki Doki Panic, and since they varied in height, this was the first instance where Mario was noticeably shorter than Luigi. Super Mario Bros. 3 experimented with Mario's looks with different power-ups that represented different creatures. An example included the raccoon tail, which was chosen over a power-up that represented a centaur. The levels were created after power-ups were chosen, and were designed to take advantage of his varying abilities. The raccoon tail power-up became a staple in the Mario franchise, being used as an ability in a variety of Mario games that even stretched outside of the Super Mario series, such as Mario Kart 7. The game's success led to an animated television series, The Adventures of Super Mario Bros. 3, with Mario being portrayed by Walker Boone. Hiroshi Yamauchi wanted a launch game for the Game Boy that featured Mario, as he believed in the statement "fun games sold consoles". Super Mario Land was designed without the help of Miyamoto, a first for the series. The game uses completely different elements to pair with the small screen due to the Game Boy's portability. For example, instead of rescuing Princess Peach from Bowser in the Mushroom Kingdom, Mario is instead rescuing Princess Daisy from Tatanga in Sarasaland. Mario was designed with line art. Super Mario World was the first video game to feature Yoshi as a companion to Mario. Miyamoto had always wanted a dinosaur-like companion, ever since the original Super Mario Bros., but the concept was never achievable due to limited hardware. Since Super Mario World took place in a land of dinosaurs, Takashi Tezuka requested Shigefumi Hino to draw a character based on Miyamoto's concepts and sketches, which he drew during the development of Super Mario Bros. 3. Yoshi's rideability was inspired by Miyamoto's love for horseback riding. Super Mario World was released during a console war between Nintendo and Sega; Sega's mascot, Sonic the Hedgehog, was considered a "cooler" alternative to Mario, to which Miyamoto apologized for. The plot for Super Mario Land 2: 6 Golden Coins has Mario pursue something for his own benefit rather than for someone else, his goal trying to reclaim ownership of his island, Mario Land, from Wario. The game was developed by Nintendo Research & Development 1 (R&D1). The company was unmotivated by the Super Mario series, and when they were tasked with creating a Super Mario game without Miyamoto, they created Wario to emphasize the frustration of working with a character they did not make. The name "Wario" is word play of "Mario" and "Warui," the latter meaning "bad" in Japanese to mean "bad Mario." The character's models and backgrounds in New Super Mario Bros. were 3D, but still only allowed for left and right movement and are considered 2.5D. With the 2D series of Super Mario games being absent for 14 years, the previous installment being released in 1992, game mechanics improved drastically. Since the characters were no longer sprites and the backdrops were not tile-based, the developers were nearly restrictionless; new game mechanics, such as Mario teetering off of trees and swinging on ropes, were implemented. New Super Mario Bros. was the first 2D Super Mario game to use voice acting, with Charles Martinet voicing Mario and Luigi. It was followed by three games similar to New Super Mario Bros., namely New Super Mario Bros. Wii, New Super Mario Bros. 2, and New Super Mario Bros. U, the latter of which being the first game to feature Mario in high-definition graphics (HD). Most Super Mario games in 3D feature open world gameplay; instead of being confined to only moving left and right, Mario can move in any direction, and the player can complete the level however they please. The player chooses from one of the multiple objectives before entering a level, and Mario is tasked with completing that goal, which ultimately ends with an obtainable item such as a star. These games feature a more complex narrative, but most still have Mario rescuing a kidnapped Princess Peach from Bowser. Early in most of the games, Mario befriends an ally, which helps Mario on his journey and gives him a unique ability to obtain his goal. Mario's debut 3D role was in Super Mario 64; since the concept of 3D video games was still new at the time, the developers knew they were helping to pave the way for future games, and they were not restricted on what the standard game was like. However, when Yoshiaki Koizumi had to create a 3D model and animation of Mario, he had no frame of reference and struggled with the task. Koizumi stated how the whole concept was "arguably tough," but was overtaken by the enjoyment of innovating in a new field. Mario's movement was among the top priorities in the game's development, with his animation being tested long before the basic layout of the game's locations was in place. Super Mario 64 was one of the first games voiced by Charles Martinet, and Mario's character model was made with the N-World toolkit. Mario's movements and animations were inspired by Arale Norimaki from Dr. Slump, a Japanese manga series. Super Mario Sunshine was the first Nintendo game after Satoru Iwata became the CEO of Nintendo, succeeding Hiroshi Yamauchi. The game's original concept did not feature Mario, as the developers believed the role was too out of the ordinary for such a character. Later on, when they used a generic man for the role instead, they believed having a realistic person alongside a character like Mario would cause "incongruity," and it was ultimately changed to Mario instead. Mario's ally, F.L.U.D.D., was one of ten design options but was chosen because it fit the game's theme, although it was not their favorite option in terms of looks. Super Mario Galaxy had Mario exploring a number of spherical planets, which the developers at the time knew simply jumping on enemies would be difficult to perform. They instead took advantage of the Wii Remote and Nunchuk having motion controls, and gave Mario a "spin" attack where he knocked over the enemies via spinning. To also balance the game's difficulty, Mario was given fewer hit points. With the amount of creative freedom the space-themed setting gave, many power-ups and transformations were implemented based on the worker's suggestions. To create a sense of familiarity for Super Mario Odyssey, various references to the Super Mario series were put in the game's environment. For example, Pauline was chosen to be a major aspect of the "Metro Kingdom" due to the kingdom representing the core of the game. Mario was also given a variety of costumes to represent other smaller games, such as the Mario's Picross series. The development team found the most fun way to use the Joy-Con controllers' motion controls was to throw a hat, and the gameplay was centered around Mario throwing his cap. 64, Sunshine, and Galaxy were re-released on the Nintendo Switch in 2020 as part of the 35th anniversary of Super Mario Bros. in the collection pack Super Mario 3D All-Stars. The games featured high-definition graphics but were kept generally the same as their original counterparts. The version of Super Mario 64 used for the game is the Shindō version, originally released only in Japan in July 1997, which added bug fixes and made minor gameplay alterations. There have also been a variety of Super Mario games starring Mario that do not have typical 2D or 3D platforming. The Super Mario 3D series does have 3D gameplay, but the stages are linear and do not allow for open-world movement. The Super Mario Maker games are a series of game creation systems where the player can create their own 2D Super Mario levels and play ones created by others. Super Mario Run is a 2D platforming mobile game with other unnatural gameplay aspects. The main aspect of Super Mario 3D Land was bridging the aspects of 2D and 3D Super Mario games. One of the issues brought up was how Mario looked too small in comparison to the large terrain and the small, portable screen of the Nintendo 3DS, so the game's camera system needed to be fixed to one position in certain occasions. The game brought with it the "Tanooki Tail" power-up, which was originally introduced in Super Mario Bros. 3, and its existence was teased by the developers to the fans prior to its official announcement. Concepts for Mario, which included a skater outfit and a power-up that would make Mario grow to a large size, were cut. Super Mario 3D World on the Wii U included the "Cat Mario" power-up, which was implemented to help newcomers play the game and add new gameplay features such as climbing up walls. Another power-up was the "Double Cherry," which was added accidentally; one of the developers added a second Mario into the game in error, and found it humorous when both Marios were somehow controllable at the same time. In 2020, also as part of the Super Mario Bros. 35th anniversary, Nintendo re-released Super Mario 3D World on the Nintendo Switch with an additional mode, Bowser's Fury. The developers of Super Mario Run were mainly inspired by speedrunners during development, as they took note of how when they would try to beat a 2D Super Mario game as fast as possible, they would never let go of the run button. With this, they made the core gameplay concept revolve around how Mario does not stop moving forward. While the most prominent use of Mario has been directed toward the Super Mario series, various spinoff series that split into numerous games covering various genres have also been released. This includes genres such as role-playing games (RPGs), puzzle games, sports games, and even educational games in the 1990s. Mario has been the protagonist of various role-playing video games (RPGs), beginning with Super Mario RPG on the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES). The developer of Super Mario RPG, Yoshio Hongo for Square, liked the character Mario and believed he would fit well in an RPG format. He discussed the idea with Miyamoto, and according to him, the meeting went well. The game was a critical and commercial success, and led to two other spinoff RPG series starring the characters, Paper Mario and Mario & Luigi. Of the two series, Paper Mario is the only one still currently running with Paper Mario: The Origami King in 2020, as the company behind the Mario & Luigi series, AlphaDream, went bankrupt in 2019. A sequel to Super Mario RPG was planned for the Nintendo 64. The original developer, Square, had signed a deal with Sony to release Final Fantasy VII for the PlayStation, so Nintendo had Intelligent Systems develop the game instead. The new art designer, Naohiko Aoyama, changed every character to two-dimensional to bring out "cuter" graphics compared to low-polygon three-dimensional graphics on the console. In the Paper Mario games, Mario is often aided by numerous allies who progress the story while Mario remains silent. Unlike Paper Mario, both Mario and Luigi have voices in the Mario & Luigi series and are voiced by Charles Martinet. According to the developers, the early games used character sprites; the developers were generally inexperienced and did not know much about hardware at the time. Once the Nintendo 3DS was released, the developers had the chance to switch to 3-dimensional graphics. They decided to change the background and world design but chose to keep the characters as 2D renderings of 3D characters as they believed it made it easier to convey comedic expressions. In 2013, they believed Mario took too much of the spotlight in the Mario franchise, and they made Luigi the more story-focused character in Mario & Luigi: Dream Team. Nintendo has explored a variety of sports games featuring Super Mario properties, which include tennis, golf, baseball, soccer, kart racing, and other miscellaneous. In the 1984 video game Golf, although one of the two playable characters looks similar to that of him, wearing red clothes and black pants, he is never directly referred to be Mario; In 1997, his look was changed in the re-release of the Famicom Disk System to that more like the character, and Nintendo later confirmed the character was Mario in a guide book of the game in 1991, marking his first sports video game appearance. He then directly appeared in NES Open Tournament Golf in 1991 as one of two playable characters, the other being Luigi, along with a variety of other Mario characters with supporting roles. The character sprites were designed by Eiji Aonuma, his first project in graphical art design. After the unsuccessful attempt on the Virtual Boy with Mario's Tennis, the first tennis game featuring Mario, Nintendo gave licensing rights to Camelot Software Planning to develop a second Mario-themed tennis game for the Nintendo 64. Each character had a unique ability, with Mario having an all-around average set of skills to pair with his type of character. This ideology was later continued in Mario Power Tennis. The Mario Kart franchise began with Super Mario Kart for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System in 1992; early in development, the game did not have any Mario-themed elements. A few months into the process, the designers were testing how one character would look at another they had just passed. They implemented Mario, simply to see how he would look inside a kart, and the original concept was scrapped entirely after they decided he looked better than the previous non-defined characters. Similar to the Mario & Luigi series, he appears as a sprite that turns in 16 different angles. Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games is a crossover series of party and sports games featuring characters from the Mario franchise and the Sonic the Hedgehog series. It includes different varieties of sports such as skateboarding, fencing, volleyball, gymnastics, and many others. Mario Party is a party video game series in which up to four players compete in board games with a collection of multiple mini-games. The main purpose of the game series is to collect coins and stars. The player with the most points wins the game. Players can also receive bonus points according to how well they perform. There are several other properties in the series that are advantageous and disadvantageous to players, such as mushroom fields, which could make players gain or lose a turn; blue and red fields, in which players gain coins or lose coins, respectively; and Bowser fields, which cause terrible things to happen in the game. Mario has also starred in a variety of multiple puzzle games, but sometimes only makes an appearance and is not playable. The first of which to release was Wrecking Crew, designed by Yoshio Sakamoto. Surprisingly, in this game, Mario can't jump because of hammer's weight. After which, three main series and a variety of spin-offs were released starring him, including Dr. Mario, Mario vs. Donkey Kong, and Mario Picross, the latter of which was inactive. The original game in the Dr. Mario series, also titled Dr. Mario, was designed by Takahiro Harada and had Mario assume the role of a doctor instead of a plumber. His appearance and role have generally remained the same; to celebrate his 30th anniversary in the series, an 8-bit rendering of his original appearance was made unlockable in the most recent game, Dr. Mario World. Mario vs. Donkey Kong is centered around "Mini Marios," wind-up toys that resemble Mario. The Mario's Picross series was an attempt by Nintendo to capitalize on the popularity of Mario and the success of puzzle games in Japan at the time. Released in 1995, the game was popular and was followed by two sequels, Super Mario Picross and Picross 2, but the first game was only made available to American audiences in 2020. Due to the abandonment of the SNES-CD hardware in the 1990s, a project developed by Nintendo and Phillips, as part of Nintendo's dissolving agreement with Philips they gave the licensing rights to Mario and The Legend of Zelda property to release games on the CD-i. Multiple games were developed by the inexperienced Fantasy Factory, which included the puzzle game Hotel Mario in 1994. Via Animation Magic, Hotel Mario had various cutscenes of Mario and Luigi, which borrowed animation elements from Disney and J. R. R. Tolkien. Mario was voiced by Marc Graue as the game was released prior to Charles Martinet receiving the role of voicing the character. Due to the popularity of the Super Mario series, various educational games starring the character were released and appealed to younger audiences. These games had little involvement from Nintendo, with the games releasing for the NES, Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES), and personal computers. The last of the genres to release was Mario Teaches Typing 2 in 1997, before the production of such games was discontinued. Mario is Missing! is one of the only occasions where Mario himself was kidnapped and rescued by another character. In the game, Mario and Luigi approach Bowser to stop his plans, but Mario is then captured; Luigi traverses real-world locations to follow after him, solving trivia along the way. A similar game was released without the help of Miyamoto, Mario's Time Machine, which starred Mario against Bowser instead. Mario's Game Gallery has the player competing in various card and board games against Mario. The game was Charles Martinet's first official voice acting role for Mario, one year prior to Super Mario 64. "So I thought, 'Well, a teacher... What's more interesting than a teacher but Mario?' So I went to Nintendo and pitched them and they loved it and it was a huge success." Former head of Interplay Productions, Brian Fargo, 2017 IGN interview For Mario Teaches Typing, the head of Interplay Productions, Brian Fargo, saw the success of the typing game Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing, and knew a character like Mario as the teacher would be appealing. Pre-dating Mario's Game Gallery, Martinet did not voice Mario. After release, the concept was so successful, it began a negative relationship between Fargo Les Crane, the creator of Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing. Mario Teaches Typing 2 was released in 1997, which Martinet voiced Mario for. When they were approved of creating Mario's Game Gallery, another Mario-themed education game was also released that was of poor quality, so Miyamoto met with Fargo and halted production of any further education games using the character. Apart from his platformer and spin-off game appearances, Mario has made guest appearances in non-Mario games, such as Mike Tyson's Punch-Out!! and Tennis (1984), where Mario is an umpire, in Pac-Man Vs., he is the in-game announcer. Mario appears as a playable character in NBA Street V3 and SSX on Tour. He also appears as a playable character in the Super Smash Bros. series. He makes countless cameo appearances in many forms in many games, such as portraits and statues in The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past, The Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask, The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time, Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes, Pilotwings 64, and Stunt Race FX. On an ending screen that appears in the NES version of the video game Tetris, Mario appears with Luigi dancing to the music, which is a version from prelude to the opera Carmen. On that screen also appear Peach, Bowser, and other Nintendo characters such as Link, Samus, Donkey Kong, and Pit. Mario also appeared in Minecraft as a skin. In February 2024, Lisa Simpson portrayed Mario in The Simpsons's episode, "Lisa Gets an F1." The first appearance of Mario in media other than games was Saturday Supercade, an animated television series produced by Ruby-Spears Productions in 1983. The 1986 original video animation Super Mario Bros.: The Great Mission to Rescue Princess Peach! features Mario (voiced by Toru Furuya) as the protagonist. The animated series The Super Mario Bros. Super Show! features a live-action series of skits that stars former WWF manager "Captain" Lou Albano as Mario and Danny Wells as Luigi. Mario appeared in a book series, the Nintendo Adventure Books. The other two animated series, The Adventures of Super Mario Bros. 3 and Super Mario World, star Walker Boone as Mario and Tony Rosato as Luigi. Mario is portrayed by Bob Hoskins in the 1993 film loosely based on the Super Mario series, Super Mario Bros. In the film, he is the cynical older brother who takes great pride in being a plumber and is a parental figure to Luigi, portrayed by John Leguizamo. At first, he held no belief in unusual things happening, but meeting Daisy and taking a trip to Dinohattan soon changed his mind. Hoskins was ultimately cast to play the character after other choices fell out, such as Dustin Hoffman and Danny DeVito. Hoskins had previously done multiple roles in children's films and kept suggesting changes to the script before he agreed to portray the character. According to one of the films' directors, Annabel Jankel, Hoskins was mainly considered due to his physical appearances. In subsequent interviews, Hoskins considered the role his worst choice in his acting career, admitted to constantly drinking before and during filming, and noted that he was injured and almost died multiple times during production. Mario and Luigi have appeared in several Robot Chicken sketches, notably in "Lust for Puppets," in which Mario and Luigi were riding their go-kart when they came to a fork in the road. They decided to choose the path that led directly to Vice City, where they had to contend with unbreakable bricks, turtles, prostitutes, psychedelic mushrooms, and deadly bullets. At the end of the sketch, Mario and Luigi were shot down by cops in typical Grand Theft Auto fashion after reaching a high crime level. Mario is voiced by Chris Pratt in the 2023 film adaptation The Super Mario Bros. Movie. Although American actor Sebastian Maniscalco originally auditioned to voice Mario in the 2023 film, he got the role of voicing Spike instead. The film depicts him and Luigi as Italian-American plumbers who started their own business in Brooklyn after working for the antagonistic Foreman Spike, who supervises the Wrecking Crew. They attempt to fix a significant manhole leak reported in the news to make a name for themselves, only for the pipe to transport Mario to the Mushroom Kingdom and Luigi to the Dark Lands. Mario works with Peach, Toad, and later Donkey Kong to rescue Luigi and the Mushroom Kingdom from the tyrannical Bowser. Martinet makes cameo appearances in the film as Mario and Luigi's unnamed father and as Giuseppe, who appears in Brooklyn and resembles Mario's original design from Donkey Kong, speaking in his in-game voice. In response to criticism of Pratt's casting, co-director Aaron Horvath explained that he was cast mainly because of his history of playing good-natured, blue collar-type protagonists. As Nintendo's mascot, Mario is widely considered to be the most famous video game character in history, and has been called an icon of the gaming industry. He has been featured in over two hundred video games. Mario was one of the first video game character inductees at the Walk of Game in 2005, alongside Link and Sonic the Hedgehog. Mario was the first video game character to be honored with a wax figure in the Hollywood Wax Museum in 2003. Kotaku writer Luke Plunkett had called Mario the most recognizable figure in the gaming industry. In 1990, a national survey found that Mario was more recognizable to American children than Mickey Mouse.James Coates of The Baltimore Sun stated that as author David Sheff notes "In 1990, according to ‘Q’ ratings, Mario has become more popular than Mickey Mouse with American children” and he also notes that his 9-year-old son is a Nintendo fan who he curious about what Mario doing to the youth of America. In 2005, American musician Jonathan Mann created an opera based on Super Mario Bros. and performed Mario Opera as a tribute to Shigeru Miyamoto. Creator Shigeru Miyamoto has stated that Mario is his favorite out of all characters that he has created. Electronic Gaming Monthly gave Mario their "Coolest Mascot" award for 1996, calling him "an age-old friend." Nintendo Power listed Mario as their favorite hero, citing his defining characteristics as his mustache, red cap, plumbing prowess, and his mushrooms. In a poll conducted in 2008 by Oricon, Mario was voted as the most popular video game character in Japan by both men and women, overtaking popular video game icons such as Final Fantasy's Cloud Strife and Metal Gear's Solid Snake. Yahoo! Japan held a poll between November 1, 2009, and October 31, 2010, to determine which video game character is more popular among readers. Mario won the poll with 9862 votes. Several publications have often compared Mario to Sega's mascot and iconic character, Sonic the Hedgehog. Mario also serves as an inspiration for Sonic the Hedgehog's origin. Mario has been established as a pop culture icon, and has appeared on lunch boxes, T-shirts, magazines, and commercials (notably in a Got Milk? commercial). Other products include cartoon shows, movies, books, hats, plush dolls, cereals, ice cream, bedding, kitchenware, clocks, purses, cufflinks, wallets, mugs, art prints, boxers, Lego sets, coaster sets, Hot Wheels sets, stationery sets, and board games. Mario has inspired unlicensed paintings, performances on talent shows such as India's Got Talent, and short films. The character has been present in a number of works created by third parties other than Nintendo, such as in the iOS and Android video game Platform Panic, in which one of the purchasable skins is a reference to him. The character has also been a subject of cosplay; celebrities including Seth Rogen, John Legend, Kendall Jenner, Cara Delevingne, and Camila Mendes have cosplayed the character. Many people and places have been named or nicknamed after Mario. Bergsala, the distributor of Nintendo's products in the Nordic and the Baltic countries, is located at Marios Gata 21 (Mario's Street 21) in Kungsbacka, Sweden, named after Mario. Many sports stars, including Bundesliga football players Mario Götze and Mario Gómez, National Hockey League player Mario Lemieux, Italian footballer Mario Balotelli, and Italian cyclist Mario Cipollini have been given the nickname "Super Mario". In a suburb of the Spanish city of Zaragoza, streets were named after video games, including "Avenida de Super Mario Bros." Mario's legacy is recognized by Guinness World Records, who awarded the Nintendo mascot, and the series of platform games he has appeared in, seven world records in the Guinness World Records: Gamer's Edition 2008. These records include "Best Selling Video Game Series of All Time," "First Movie Based on an Existing Video Game," and "Most Prolific Video Game Character," with Mario appearing in 116 original games. In 2009, Guinness World Records listed him as the second most recognizable video game character in the United States, recognized by 93 percent of the population, second only to Pac-Man, who was recognized by 94 percent of the population. In 2011, readers of Guinness World Records Gamer's Edition voted Mario as the top video game character of all time. In 2018, Charles Martinet, voice actor of Mario, received the Guinness World Record for most video game voice-over performances as the same character. Mario appeared in the 2016 Summer Olympics closing ceremony to promote the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo. In a pre-recorded video, the prime minister Shinzo Abe became Mario to use a Warp pipe planted by Doraemon from Shibuya Crossing to Maracanã Stadium. Abe then appeared dressed as Mario in an oversized Warp Pipe in the middle of the stadium. This segment was favorably well received as playful and tasteful in Japan, resulting in giving Abe the nickname "Abe-Mario." Mario Day is celebrated on March 10, as when that date is presented as Mar 10 it resembles the word "Mario." Since 2016 the day has been officially observed by Nintendo, who celebrates the day annually by promoting Mario games and holding Mario-related events. In March 2018, Google Maps collaborated with Nintendo for the celebration of Mario Day. By tapping on a yellow ? Block, the navigation arrow changes into Mario, who drives his Pipe Frame kart from the Mario Kart series. In March 2024, American actor Gaten Matarazzo teamed up with Nintendo to celebrate that year's Mario Day. Video games portal List of video games featuring Mario List of Mario franchise characters List of unofficial Mario media List of non-video game media featuring Mario Super Mario Bros.: The Great Mission to Rescue Princess Peach!, Super Mario's Fire Brigade, Super Mario's Traffic Safety, Amada Anime Series: Super Mario Bros., Super Mario World: Mario & Yoshi's Adventure Land, Nagatanien Super Mario Bros. furikake commercial, BS Super Mario USA, Excitebike: Bun Bun Mario Battle Stadium, and BS Super Mario Collection Mario's Great Adventure Super Mario Bros. Special Drama CD. Mario Paint commercial and Super Mario All-Stars commercial Japanese dubs of Super Mario Bros. film. Japanese Mario Kart commercial. "Donkey Kong Cereal". Behind The Voice Actors. Archived from the original on May 30, 2018. Retrieved February 21, 2021. "This forgotten 1983 vinyl made Mario history, but it could never be created today". Digital Trends. July 24, 2023. Archived from the original on September 17, 2023. Retrieved September 13, 2023. "Mario Voices (Super Mario Bros.)". Behind The Voice Actors. Archived from the original on November 4, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2021. A green check mark indicates that a role has been confirmed using a screenshot (or collage of screenshots) of a title's list of voice actors and their respective characters found in its opening and/or closing credits and/or other reliable sources of information.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: postscript (link) "Mario's Great Adventure - マリオの大冒険 (Mario no Daibouken) - VHS Rip HQ". YouTube. Video Archaeology. Archived from the original on October 13, 2023. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "Super Mario: ABC no Utau Video". YouTube. Cabbusses. Retrieved May 1, 2021. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "Super Mario Bros Ice Capades". YouTube. Game Informer. Retrieved February 21, 2021. Mario's voiced by Henry Corden, who took over voicing Fred Flintstone after Alan Reed passed away. "Super Mario Bros. Special Booklet p. 09-10.jpg". vgmsite.com. Archived from the original on March 27, 2024. Retrieved March 27, 2024. "Real Time Mario at the 1992 SCES". YouTube. DigitalNeohuman. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved February 21, 2021. "Mario Is Missing!". Behind The Voice Actors. Archived from the original on February 6, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021. "Super Mario Bros. Movie - Audio Poster Pack". YouTube. Cyberpunk Studios. Archived from the original on September 17, 2023. Retrieved September 13, 2023. Sherman, Jennifer (October 1, 2020). "Voice Actor Kousei Tomita Passes Away at 84". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on October 2, 2020. Retrieved March 17, 2024. "Revisiting Nintendo's novelty pop hit". Eurogamer. November 12, 2017. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Random: Looking Back On That Time When Mario Gatecrashed The UK Music Charts". Nintendo Life. November 13, 2017. Archived from the original on November 23, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2021. "Hotel Mario". Behind The Voice Actors. Archived from the original on February 3, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021. "Evil SMAP Member Stars in Mario Kart Commercial". IGN. IGN Staff. October 24, 2003. Archived from the original on March 28, 2024. Retrieved March 28, 2024. "E3 2014: Nintendo Opens E3 Digital Event With Robot Chicken Greatness". Hardcore Gamer. June 10, 2014. Archived from the original on January 28, 2024. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "All the Robot Chicken of Nintendo's Digital Event - E3 2014 - Eurogamer". YouTube. Eurogamer. Archived from the original on January 7, 2024. Retrieved January 7, 2024. Murphy, J. Kim (September 23, 2021). "Nintendo Direct: Chris Pratt Will Voice Mario in the Super Mario Bros. Movie". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on September 23, 2021. Retrieved September 24, 2021. "News Release : Nov. 30, 2022 "Illumination and Nintendo Announce Second Trailer and the Japanese voice cast for The Super Mario Bros. Movie"". Nintendo Co., Ltd. Archived from the original on November 29, 2022. Retrieved November 29, 2022. "Live-Action Mario Reviews The Super Mario Bros. Movie". YouTube. Amusing Jews. Archived from the original on October 15, 2023. Retrieved September 13, 2023. Mike Snider (November 8, 2010). "Q&A: 'Mario' creator Shigeru Miyamoto". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 11, 2010. Retrieved November 9, 2010.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Mario Couldn't Jump At First". Nintendo. p. 1. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2013. McLaughlin, Rus (September 14, 2010). "IGN Presents The History of Super Mario Bros". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on November 9, 2019. Retrieved April 9, 2014. Fox Van Allen (December 22, 2015). "35 Facts About Mario Only Hardcore Fans Will Know". GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 12, 2024. Retrieved March 7, 2024. "Q&A: Shigeru Miyamoto On The Origins Of Nintendo's Famous Characters". NPR. NPR Staff. June 19, 2015. Archived from the original on June 19, 2015. Retrieved March 23, 2024. Orlando, Greg (May 15, 2007). "Console Portraits: A 40-Year Pictorial History of Gaming". Wired News. Archived from the original on October 20, 2008. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Kohler, Chris (2005). Power-up: How Japanese Video Games Gave the World an Extra Life. Indianapolis, Indiana: BradyGAMES. p. 36. "マリオ映画公開記念！宮本茂さんインタビュー 制作の始まりから驚きの設定まで" [Commemorating the release of the Mario movie! Interview with Shigeru Miyamoto From the beginning of production to the surprising setting]. Nintendo Dream (in Japanese). April 25, 2023. Archived from the original on April 25, 2023. もともと『マリオブラザーズ』は、土管がいっぱいあるニューヨークの地下で活躍する兄弟、ニューヨークのなかでもたぶんブルックリン、というところまで勝手に決めていて。『ドンキーコング』は舞台がニューヨークですし。[Miyamoto: Originally, Mario Bros. was arbitrarily decided as brothers who are active in the underground of New York, where there are many clay pipes, and probably Brooklyn in New York. Donkey Kong is set in New York.] Compton, Caleb (May 4, 2021). "How the Creator of Mario Designs Games – Shigeru Miyamoto – Game Designer Spotlight". Game Developer. Archived from the original on March 23, 2024. Retrieved March 23, 2024. "Mario: Alive, Well, and Living in the Bronx?" Next Generation 26:46. Brisbane, CA: Imagine Media. February 1997. "Donkey Kong". The Arcade Flyers Archive. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved January 25, 2017. "Playback 93". Yahoo. December 2, 2009. Archived from the original on December 11, 2009. Retrieved December 24, 2009. "The Reason Mario Wears Overalls". Nintendo. p. 2. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2013. Edwards, Benj (April 25, 2010). "The True Face of Mario". Technologizer. Archived from the original on June 25, 2011. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Eric Pryne (March 27, 2010). "Powerful Segale family has massive vision for Tukwila expanse". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 21, 2011. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Chappell, Bill (November 2, 2018). "Mario Segale, Inspiration For Nintendo's Hero Plumber, Has Died". NPR. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved March 24, 2024. Loy, Joel (1989). "Inside Super Mario Bros". Inside Edition. CBS Television Distribution. Tica, Don; Govia, Mario De; Pham, Tri (2000). Mario Party 2: Prima's Official Strategy Guide. Random House Information. ISBN 9780761527671. Archived from the original on May 16, 2020. Retrieved August 22, 2017. Stratton, Stephen; Buchanan, Levi (2003). Mario & Luigi: Superstar Saga : Prima's Official Strategy Guide. Prima Games. p. 21. ISBN 9780761544234. Archived from the original on May 16, 2020. Retrieved August 22, 2017. "Mario reveals his last name & other tales – San Diego Comic Con 2012". YouTube. Patrick Scott Patterson. July 16, 2012. Archived from the original on June 24, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2016. What's my last name? That's a very good question. That's right, it's Mario! My name's-a Mario Mario. Of course, my brother's name, a-Luigi Mario. And of course, my mama's-a Mama Mia Mario; my papa Papa Pio Mario. Of course, my grandmama Grandmama Mia Mario and my greatpapa et cetera, et cetera. Yeah, first name Mario, last name Mario. Yahoo! Totilo, Stephen (August 17, 2012). "Nintendo Chief: Mario Is Part Of Gamers' DNA". Kotaku. Archived from the original on June 14, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Could that mean that Mario's last name is "Video Game"? No, Iwata replied. "He does not have a last name." Ryckert, Dan (September 10, 2015). "Mario's Creators Answer Burning Questions About The Series". Game Informer. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015. Retrieved December 20, 2017. "【衝撃事実】ついに任天堂公式のマリオの本名が判明！任天堂の代表取締役・宮本茂氏が明かす" [[Impact] fact finally found real name of Nintendo official of Mario! Reveal the representative director, Shigeru Miyamoto of Nintendo]. ガジェット通信 GetNews (in Japanese). September 14, 2015. Archived from the original on June 16, 2016. Retrieved May 25, 2016. Greenbaum, Aaron (March 30, 2023). "Super Mario Bros: What Is Mario and Luigi's Last Name?". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on March 22, 2024. Retrieved March 22, 2024. Kohler, Chris (June 27, 2008). "Q&A: 90 Minutes With Miyamoto, Nintendo's Master of Amusement". Wired. Archived from the original on July 27, 2010. Retrieved July 30, 2010. Arakawa, Minoru, ed. 1991. "The Man Behind Mario." Pp. 30 Archived August 3, 2020, at the Wayback Machine–32 in Mario Mania Archived April 1, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Redmond, WA: Nintendo. ASIN B000BPL42C. Grajqevci, Jeton (October 9, 2000). Profile: Shigeru Miyamoto Archived May 14, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. N-Sider. Retrieved May 6, 2009 West, Neil (February 1998). "The Way Games Ought to Be...". Next Generation. No. 38. p. 106. Rao, Anjali (February 15, 2007). Sigeru Miyamao Talk Asia interview Archived April 1, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. CNN. Retrieved February 28, 2009 Par William Audureau (December 6, 2018). "Les confidences du dessinateur historique des personnages Nintendo" [The secrets of the historic designer of Nintendo characters]. Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on October 11, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Savage, Mark (October 1, 2012). "The actors hiding inside your video games". BBC News. Archived from the original on April 22, 2015. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Hold, Christian (August 21, 2023). "Charles Martinet retires as the voice of Mario: 'You are all Numba One in my heart!'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 14, 2024. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Lau, Evelyn (March 10, 2022). "Charles Martinet on 30 years of voicing Nintendo's beloved Mario: 'It's such an honour'". The National News. Archived from the original on August 29, 2023. Retrieved October 3, 2022. "It's a me Charles Martinet, the voice of Mario". Siliconera. July 26, 2006. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. "The Voice of Mario – Charles Martinet Interview". YouTube. GamerSpawn. Archived from the original on February 26, 2020. Retrieved March 22, 2024. Totilio, Stephen (September 17, 2009). "Mario's Voice Actor Recalls His Rambling Audition". Kotaku. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Fisher, Andrew (January 3, 2022). "Legendary Mario voice actor Charles Martinet on his favorite characters and why he now 'dreams in 2D'". GamesRadar. Archived from the original on March 25, 2023. Retrieved October 3, 2022. "The Voice of Mario". GameSpy. August 10, 2002. Archived from the original on December 22, 2004. Retrieved March 23, 2024. Ryan, Jeff (2012). Super Mario: How Nintendo Conquered America. London, England: Portfolio / Penguin. p. 137. ISBN 978-1-59184-563-8. Archived from the original on August 29, 2023. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Phillips, Tom (October 26, 2021). "Charles Martinet: "I want to voice Mario until I drop dead"". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on August 29, 2023. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Moore, Jared (January 6, 2022). "Charles Martinet Says He 'Dreams As Mario'". IGN. Archived from the original on August 29, 2023. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Barsanti, Sam (December 15, 2018). "Charles Martinet now holds a Guinness record for voicing Super Mario 100 times". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on December 16, 2018. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Parrish, Ash (October 13, 2023). "Here's Mario's new voice actor". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Shanfeld, Ethan (October 13, 2023). "Mario's New Voice Actor Announced by Nintendo After Charles Martinet's Departure". Variety. Archived from the original on October 18, 2023. Retrieved October 13, 2023. "Mario Biography". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on December 20, 2009. Retrieved January 23, 2010. "Luigi Biography". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on August 17, 2009. Retrieved January 26, 2010. Welsh, Oli (August 1, 2022). "Yoshi's Island is the Super Mario series' loveliest detour". Polygon. Archived from the original on August 1, 2022. Retrieved April 1, 2024. Nero, Dom (October 30, 2023). "Yoshi Is a Good Dad". Vulture. Archived from the original on January 14, 2024. Retrieved April 1, 2024. Mendelsohn, Tom (September 30, 2016). "Mario is only 24 years old, according to creator Shigeru Miyamoto". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018. Retrieved August 6, 2018. "2.宮本 茂ロングインタビュー マリオの生みの親からのメッセージ" [2. Long Interview with Shigeru Miyamoto, Message from the Creator of Mario]. Nintendo Co., Ltd. (in Japanese). 2005. Archived from the original on November 4, 2005. Retrieved March 9, 2024. "Nintento Power – Issue #2 (September–October 1998)" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on October 3, 2022. Retrieved August 23, 2022. daniel.harris.porter. "Nintendo Power : Free Download, Borrow, and Streaming : Internet Archive". Retrieved August 23, 2022. "Miyamoto explains Mario's mismatched hair and mustache color". BeefJack. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved November 2, 2017. "History of Nintendo Worldwide 1980–1990". Nintendo of Europe. 2013. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2013. Colayco, Bob (November 2, 2004). "Classic NES Series: Dr. Mario Review". GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 17, 2024. Retrieved March 7, 2024. Lucas M. Thomas (August 5, 2011). "Mario's Picross Review". IGN. Archived from the original on April 9, 2023. Retrieved March 26, 2024. "Story and Characters". Mario vs. Donkey Kong 2: March of the Minis Instruction Booklet. Nintendo of America. September 25, 2006. "Is Mario Actually Any Good at Sports?". Esquire. April 5, 2023. Archived from the original on March 11, 2024. Retrieved March 11, 2024. Ashcraft, Brian (September 4, 2017). "Mario Is Officially No Longer A Plumber". Kotaku. Archived from the original on September 4, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2017. Schreier, Jason (March 6, 2018). "Mario Is Officially A Plumber Again". Kotaku. Archived from the original on March 19, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Doolan, Liam (January 3, 2019). "Random: Mario Holds Seven Jobs And Still Saves The Mushroom Kingdom Regularly". Nintendo Life. Archived from the original on March 26, 2024. Retrieved March 26, 2024. Trueman, Doug. "GameSpot Presents: The History of Donkey Kong". GameSpot. Archived from the original on July 10, 2001. Retrieved January 1, 2010. "Mario vs. DK 2: March of the Minis". Yahoo! Games. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Bozon, Mark (February 1, 2006). "Hands-On: Super Princess Peach". IGN. Archived from the original on October 7, 2008. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Princess Daisy Biography". IGN. Archived from the original on November 29, 2007. Retrieved January 27, 2009. HAL Laboratory (December 3, 2001). Super Smash Bros. Melee (Nintendo GameCube). Nintendo. Gilbert, Henry (March 19, 2013). "A life in shadows: A Luigi biography". GamesRadar. Archived from the original on November 26, 2023. Retrieved March 20, 2024. "Luigi Profile". IGN. Archived from the original on February 25, 2009. Retrieved January 26, 2010. Buchanan, Levi (August 7, 2008). "The Other Mario Games, Vol. 2". IGN. Archived from the original on February 20, 2009. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Wario Biography". IGN. Archived from the original on July 12, 2009. Retrieved January 23, 2010. "Yoshi Biography". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on June 2, 2010. Retrieved January 23, 2009. "Toad (Nintendo) Biography". IGN. Archived from the original on March 27, 2009. Retrieved March 22, 2024. Oxford, Nadia (January 23, 2019). "Super NES Retro Review: Super Mario World". VG247. Archived from the original on March 13, 2024. Retrieved March 13, 2024. Marcel van Duyn (June 17, 2011). "Donkey Kong Review (3DS eShop / GB)". Nintendo Life. Archived from the original on November 16, 2023. Retrieved March 13, 2024. "Super Mario 64 Review". GameSpot. December 1, 1996. Archived from the original on February 15, 2018. Retrieved March 6, 2024. Byrd, Matthew (April 20, 2022). "How Super Mario's Most Iconic Power-Up Was Inspired by Magic Mushrooms". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on March 8, 2024. Retrieved March 8, 2024. Suellentrop, Chris (November 5, 2007). "Super Mario Bros.: The Lost Levels". Slate. Archived from the original on April 10, 2009. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Harris, Craig (May 18, 2012). "New Super Mario Bros. Review". IGN. Archived from the original on March 11, 2009. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Provo, Frank (November 9, 2007). "Super Mario Bros. 3 Review for Wii". GameSpot. Red Ventures. Archived from the original on March 10, 2009. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Top 10 Mario Suits". IGN. November 16, 2009. Archived from the original on March 9, 2010. Retrieved January 23, 2010. Shea, Brian (March 10, 2022). "Making Mario: A Look Back At The First 30 Years". Game Informer. Archived from the original on March 6, 2024. Retrieved March 24, 2024. Navarro, Alex (February 9, 2007). "Super Mario World for Wii Review". GameSpot. Archived from the original on July 14, 2007. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Super Mario 64 at Nintendo Wii Virtual Console". Nintendo. Archived from the original on June 24, 2013. Retrieved June 24, 2013. Gerstmann, Jeff (February 26, 2002). "Super Mario Sunshine Review". GameSpot. Archived from the original on May 4, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Super Mario 64 NUS-NSME-USA Manual. Redmond: Nintendo of America. 1996. p. 19. NUS-NSME-USA. Retrieved March 7, 2022 – via Internet Archive. "Mario's Special Moves". Super Mario Galaxy Instruction Booklet. Nintendo of America. 2007. "Mario's Special Moves". Super Mario Galaxy 2 Instruction Booklet. Nintendo of America. 2010. Welsh, Oli (December 8, 2009). "New Super Mario Bros. Wii". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Benedetti, Winda (November 15, 2011). "Five reasons to leap into 'Super Mario 3D Land'". NBC News. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Kamen, Matt (January 10, 2019). "New Super Mario Bros U: Deluxe Edition Review". Empire. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Stephany Nunneley-Jackson (January 13, 2021). "Super Mario 3D World + Bowser's Fury extended gameplay shows Snapshot Mode, amiibo bonuses". VG247. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. McWhertor, Michael (August 31, 2023). "Super Mario Bros. Wonder brings awe back to 2D Mario". Polygon. Archived from the original on March 3, 2024. Retrieved March 3, 2024. Quinton O'Reilly (September 12, 2015). "30 years ago, the game that changed everything was released". The Journal. Archived from the original on March 22, 2024. Retrieved March 22, 2024. Iwata, Satoru (2009). "Iwata Asks: New Super Mario Bros (Volume 2- It Started With a Square Object Moving)". Archived from the original on December 15, 2009. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Gantayat, Anoop (October 25, 2010). "Super Mario Bros. Originally Had Beam Guns and Rocket Packs". Andriasang. Archived from the original on January 26, 2014. Retrieved January 24, 2014. "Letting Everyone Know It Was A Good Mushroom". Iwata Asks: New Super Mario Bros Wii. Nintendo. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved December 5, 2012. "Super Mario Bros. and Super Mario Bros. 3 developer interviews- NES Classic Edition". Nintendo of America. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 18, 2017. Tanabe, Kensuke (May 18, 2004). "Interview – Kensuke Tanabe Talks Metroid Prime 2: Echoes" (Interview). Interviewed by Jonathan Metts; Daniel Bloodworth; Matt Cassamassina. Nintendo World Report. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "クリエイターズファイル 第101回" [Creators File No. 101] (in Japanese). Gpara.com. February 10, 2003. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved January 11, 2011. Mike (January 24, 2003). "Doki Doki Panic: The strange truth behind Super Mario Bros. 2". Progressive Boink. Archived from the original on June 22, 2007. Retrieved February 8, 2015. "IGN Top 100 Games 2007: 39 Super Mario Bros. 3". IGN. 2007. Archived from the original on April 9, 2017. Retrieved January 25, 2009. Nintendo Power Staff (January–February 1990). "The Making of Super Mario Bros. 3". Nintendo Power. No. 10. Nintendo. pp. 20–23. Nintendo Power Staff (September–October 1990). "On the Air: SMB3". Nintendo Power. No. 16. Nintendo. p. 89. Thomas, Lucas M. (June 1, 2012). "Building to New Super Mario Bros.". IGN. Archived from the original on April 11, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015. Thomas, Lucas M. (June 15, 2011). "Super Mario Land Review". IGN. Archived from the original on April 24, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2015. Nintendo Power staff (August 1991). Mario Mania. Bath. p. 32.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Corrigan, Hope (September 28, 2017). "Super Mario World: Mario Was Originally Punching Yoshi in The Head". IGN. Archived from the original on September 30, 2017. Retrieved May 4, 2022. East, Thomas (March 2012). "A brief history of ... Yoshi". Official Nintendo Magazine (49). Bath: 42. Sao, Akinori. "Developer Interview: Super Mario World & Yoshi's Island – Super Nintendo Entertainment System: Super NES Classic Edition". Nintendo. Archived from the original on October 3, 2017. Retrieved October 23, 2017. Kent, Steven (2001). The Ultimate History of Video Games: The Story Behind the Craze that Touched our Lives and Changed the World. Roseville: Prima Publishing. ISBN 0-7615-3643-4. Lucas M. Thomas (September 30, 2011). "Super Mario Land 2: 6 Golden Coins Review". IGN. Archived from the original on March 22, 2024. Retrieved March 22, 2024. Schilling, Chris (September 3, 2015). "There's far more to Wario than being Mario's fatter arch nemesis". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Hollingshead, Anise (February 21, 2006). "Two New Titles Announced For Nintendo DS". GameZone. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Retrieved December 28, 2008. Martino, Chris (May 19, 2005). "New Super Mario Bros. preview". Nintendo World Report. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved January 3, 2009. "E3 2005: New Super Mario Bros. Impressions". IGN. May 18, 2005. Archived from the original on November 7, 2012. Retrieved December 28, 2008. Thomason, Steve. "Sizing Up Mario". Nintendo Power. No. 202. pp. 41–42. "Review: New Super Mario Bros. U". Destructoid. November 18, 2012. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Park, Gene (September 14, 2020). "Mario makers reflect on 35 years and the evolution of gaming's most iconic jump". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved March 30, 2021. "Playing a 3D Game Like It's 2D". Nintendo. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved March 11, 2024. "Super Mario 64". Nintendo Power. No. 89. Nintendo. October 1996. p. 67. Andretti (August 5, 1997). "ACCL Message Board – Msg: 1910481". Silicon Investor. Knight Sac Media. Archived from the original on September 9, 2017. Retrieved February 14, 2018. "Super Mario 64 – 1996 Developer Interviews". shmuplations.com. January 11, 2022. Archived from the original on September 29, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2024. Anthony JC (August 2007). "The Making of The Game – Super Mario Sunshine". Nintendo Online Magazine. N-Sider. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 7, 2007. "A Mario Even Beginners Can Play". Nintendo. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved March 19, 2009. Casamassina, Matt (November 29, 2007). "Interview: Super Mario Galaxy". IGN. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "From 5 to 95". Iwata Asks. Nintendo. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2016. "Inspired by a Note from a Female Staff Member". Iwata Asks. Nintendo. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2016. Plunkett, Luke (June 13, 2017). "Super Mario Odyssey's Outfits Are A Nice Throwback". Kotaku. Archived from the original on June 14, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2017. McCarthy, Caty (June 14, 2017). "Super Mario Odyssey Celebrates All the Spin-Offs of Mario's Past Through Costumes". USgamer. Archived from the original on June 18, 2017. Retrieved June 15, 2017. Schreier, Jason (June 13, 2017). "I Played 30 Minutes Of Super Mario Odyssey And It Sure Is Impressive". Kotaku. Archived from the original on June 15, 2017. Retrieved June 15, 2017. Naudus, Kris (March 30, 2021). "'Super Mario 3D All-Stars' goes away forever on March 31st". Engadget. Archived from the original on May 4, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Robinson, Martin (September 17, 2020). "Super Mario 3D All-Stars review – three great games in one lacklustre compilation". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Ryan, Zachary (September 16, 2020). "Super Mario 3D All-Stars Port Analysis". IGN. Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2020. McElroy, Griffin (September 2, 2015). "Super Mario Maker Review: The Blueprint". Polygon. Archived from the original on March 11, 2024. Retrieved March 11, 2024. McWhertor, Michael (May 28, 2019). "Super Mario Maker 2's surprise best new feature: chaotic multiplayer". Polygon. Archived from the original on March 11, 2024. Retrieved March 11, 2024. Webster, Andrew (December 15, 2016). "Super Mario Run review: a fun but compromised Mario on iPhone". The Verge. Archived from the original on June 26, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2024. Drake, Audrey (November 30, 2011). "Bridging the Gap Between 2D and 3D Mario". IGN. Archived from the original on June 24, 2020. Retrieved June 21, 2020. Gilbert, Henry (March 7, 2012). "An inspiring development to find joy in the face of national tragedy". GamesRadar. Future Publishing. Archived from the original on September 3, 2014. Retrieved June 16, 2012. Drake, Audrey (November 30, 2011). "The Creation of Super Mario 3D Land". IGN. Archived from the original on December 6, 2011. Retrieved August 12, 2012. Gilbert, Henry (March 2, 2011). "Nintendo reveals new Super Mario for 3DS". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on May 4, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Moriarty, Colin (June 7, 2011). "E3 2011: You'll Play Super Mario 3DS This Year". IGN. Archived from the original on May 24, 2012. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Why double Mario forced Nintendo to change Super Mario 3D World". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2017. Watts, Steve (February 10, 2021). "Super Mario 3D World + Bowser's Fury Review – Switch Release Reinvigorates A Classic". GameSpot. Archived from the original on May 3, 2021. Retrieved March 15, 2021. Bernstein, Joseph (December 7, 2016). "Shigeru Miyamoto Explains Why Nintendo Finally Brought Mario To The iPhone". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on December 8, 2016. Retrieved December 9, 2016. Kohler, Chris (December 15, 2016). "7 Surprising Insights Into Super Mario Run, Straight From Shigeru Miyamoto". Wired. Archived from the original on November 26, 2020. Retrieved December 15, 2016. "Nintendo Ultra 64: The Launch of the Decade?". Maximum: The Video Game Magazine (2): 107–8. November 1995. Ashcraft, Brian (October 2, 2019). "Mario & Luigi RPG Developer AlphaDream Has Gone Bankrupt". Kotaku. Archived from the original on April 9, 2020. Retrieved March 25, 2021. "Nintendo and AlphaDream Talk Mario, RPGs, And More". Game Informer. February 7, 2016. Archived from the original on February 14, 2021. Retrieved March 19, 2021. Harris, Craig (September 17, 2003). "Mario & Luigi". IGN. Archived from the original on February 24, 2009. Retrieved January 26, 2008. Khaw, Cassandra (August 6, 2013). "USGamer Interviews the Developers of Mario & Luigi : Dream Team". USGamer. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Nix, Marc (October 11, 2012). "Mario's Love of Golf". IGN. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Bertoli, Ben (June 22, 2018). "The Ups And Downs Of Mario Sports Games". Kotaku. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Mario Mania: Nintendo Player's Guide. Redmond, WA: Nintendo of America. 1991. p. 9. OCLC 299240250. Whitehead, Thomas (August 28, 2015). "Mario History: Mario Tennis – 2000". Nintendo Life. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved March 25, 2021. "Camelot Talks Mario Power Tennis". IGN. December 2, 2004. Archived from the original on February 26, 2015. Retrieved January 20, 2015. "It Started With A Guy In Overalls". Nintendo Wii. Archived from the original on April 9, 2008. Retrieved December 28, 2008. Heckel, Nathan. "Reviews – Super Mario Kart". Nintendojo. Archived from the original on November 14, 2006. Retrieved December 28, 2008. Koopman, Daan (November 5, 2019). "Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games: Tokyo 2020 (Switch) Review". Nintendo World Report. Archived from the original on November 5, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2024. Schneider, Peer (February 12, 1999). "Mario Party Review". IGN. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved March 28, 2024. Donlan, Christian (August 22, 2022). "I've discovered Wrecking Crew, the game where Mario can't jump, and it's brilliant". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on March 22, 2024. Retrieved March 22, 2024. "Hirokazu Tanaka's Works" (in Japanese). Sporadic Vacuum. Archived from the original on January 19, 2011. Retrieved November 21, 2011. Denzer, TJ (March 10, 2021). "Mario Day special: The complete evolution of Mario Bros". Shacknews. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Craddock, Ryan (July 27, 2020). "Dr. Mario World Celebrates The Character's 30th Anniversary With 8-Bit Dr. Mario". Nintendo Life. Archived from the original on April 23, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Lane, Gavin (March 23, 2021). "Feature: Best Donkey Kong Games Of All Time". Nintendo Life. Archived from the original on March 20, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Delgado, Tony (December 4, 2006). "Column: Beyond Tetris – Mario's Picross". GameSetWatch. Archived from the original on April 11, 2018. Retrieved February 23, 2018. Craddock, Ryan (September 16, 2020). "Nintendo Shares Mario's Super Picross Tutorial As The Game Arrives On Switch". Nintendo Life. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2021. GameSpy Staff (January 1, 2008). "Nintendo: From Hero to Zero". GameSpy. Archived from the original on April 4, 2008. Retrieved April 7, 2008. Buchanan, Levi (August 14, 2008). "The Other Mario Games, Vol. 3". IGN. Archived from the original on April 17, 2012. Retrieved September 16, 2008. Cowan, Danny (April 25, 2006). "CDi Retrospective from 1Up.com". 1Up.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2015. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Fletcher, J. C. (August 7, 2008). "Virtually Overlooked: Hotel Mario". Engadget. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Devin (September 16, 2007). "Interview with Trici Venola". The Black Moon Project. Archived from the original on December 18, 2007. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Bailey, Dustin (June 11, 2020). "Let's remember Nintendo's official – and terrible – Mario PC games". PCGamesN. Archived from the original on November 5, 2020. Retrieved March 26, 2021. Roberts, Samuel (May 5, 2016). "The PC Mario game that time forgot". PC Gamer. Archived from the original on March 26, 2024. Retrieved March 26, 2024. Carter, Justin (April 21, 2023). "Mario is Missing! was shaped by a Carmen Sandiego rivalry and miscommunication". Game Developer. Archived from the original on March 26, 2024. Retrieved March 26, 2024. Osborn, Alex (June 17, 2017). "Interplay Founder on Working With Nintendo on Mario Teaches Typing — IGN Unfiltered". IGN. Archived from the original on July 14, 2019. Retrieved March 26, 2021. Pigna, Kris (August 9, 2009). "Mario Included in NES Punch-Out!! Without Miyamoto's Permission". 1UP.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2013. Retrieved January 28, 2009. Shadow, Gray (September 14, 2015). "10 Mario Cameos You Should Know About". NoobFeed: Video Game Reviews & News. Archived from the original on December 4, 2021. Retrieved December 4, 2021. Harris, Craig (December 9, 2003). "Pac-Man Vs". pp. 1–2. Archived from the original on January 23, 2012. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Surette, Tim (January 5, 2005). "Mario to hoop it up in NBA Street V3". GameSpot. Archived from the original on January 12, 2005. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Torres, Ricardo (August 26, 2005). "SSX On Tour Character Spotlight: Mario, Luigi, and Peach". GameSpot. Archived from the original on January 14, 2006. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Mejia, Ozzie (July 9, 2018). "Super Smash Bros. Ultimate Character Profiles: Mario". Shacknews. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Obias, Rudie (August 21, 2014). "9 Hidden Mario Cameos and References in Videogames". Mental Floss. Archived from the original on August 24, 2014. Retrieved August 8, 2018. Ryckert, Dan (December 21, 2010). "Mario's Appearances In Non-Mario Games". Game Informer. Archived from the original on March 20, 2024. Retrieved March 20, 2024. "Ten Interesting Link Links: Zelda Crossovers – Rice Digital". Rice Digital – The No. 1 Stop For Asian Games & Culture!. Adam. November 12, 2014. Archived from the original on December 4, 2021. Retrieved December 4, 2021. Birken, Mike (January 28, 2014). "Applying Artificial Intelligence to Nintendo Tetris". Meat Fighter. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved December 4, 2021. Webster, Andrew (May 16, 2016). "Nintendo's new Minecraft mash-up is a love letter to Super Mario". The Verge. Archived from the original on March 17, 2024. Retrieved March 17, 2024. Zwiezen, Zack (February 27, 2024). "Mario Kart Spoof In New Simpsons Episode Features Yoshi Milhouse, Wario Homer". Kotaku. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. "The Evolution of Mario On Screen". IGN. April 9, 2023. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Plunkett, Luke (April 19, 2012). "There was a Good Super Mario Bros. Movie. Let's Watch it!". Kotaku. Archived from the original on October 7, 2020. Retrieved October 4, 2020. Guinness World Records 2016: Gamer's Edition. Guinness World Records. 2015. p. 155. ISBN 978-1910561096. Retrieved October 4, 2020. Bozon, Mark (January 25, 2006). "Super Mario Bros. Super Show! Volume 1". IGN. Archived from the original on September 5, 2014. Retrieved March 7, 2024. Mateo, Alex (August 13, 2021). "Animated Mario Shows' Actor Walker Boone Passes Away". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on January 9, 2024. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Shanfeld, Ethan (April 6, 2023). "Original 'Super Mario Bros.' Directors Were 'Abandoned by Hollywood' After 'Reviled' 1993 Film. Then Quentin Tarantino Helped Vindicate Them". Variety. Archived from the original on February 14, 2024. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Lussier, Germain (September 2, 2014). "The Making of the 'Super Mario Bros.' Movie, From the Book 'Console Wars'". Slash Film. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Stayton, Richard (August 16, 1992). "The Bros. Mario Get Super Large". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 8, 2019. Retrieved June 22, 2018. "Mario: The Movie". The Times-News. January 11, 1991. Archived from the original on August 29, 2021. Retrieved June 22, 2018. Goodson Jr., William Wilson (June 1993). Nintendo Meets Bladerunner, Cinefantastique Owen, Luke (2017). Lights, Camera GAME OVER!: How Video Game Movies Get Made. Schiffer Publishing, Ltd. ISBN 9780764353178. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Hattenstone, Simon (August 3, 2007). "The Method? Living it out? Cobblers!". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 16, 2016. Retrieved December 13, 2016. Greenstreet, Rosanna (June 17, 2011). "Q&A: Bob Hoskins". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved December 13, 2016. O'Neill, Shane (March 15, 2020). "Super Mario Bros. The Movie: The Actor Who Almost Died On Set TWICE". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 16, 2020. Retrieved April 5, 2020. Iverson, Dan (November 7, 2006). "Robot Chicken: "Lust for Puppets" Review". IGN. Archived from the original on March 31, 2024. Retrieved March 31, 2024. Nolfi, Joey (May 26, 2023). "Italian dad Sebastian Maniscalco auditioned for Mario voice role using stereotypical accent". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 21, 2024. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Byrd, Matthew (August 11, 2021). "Super Mario Bros. Movie: Who is Foreman Spike?". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on March 20, 2024. Retrieved March 20, 2024. Bardini, Julio (February 18, 2024). "'The Super Mario Bros. Movie' Ending Explained: So Many Galaxies to Explore". Collider. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Franzese, Tomas (August 21, 2023). "Longtime Mario voice actor Charles Martinet is stepping away from the role". Digital Trends. Archived from the original on March 11, 2024. Retrieved March 11, 2024. McWhertor, Michael (April 5, 2023). "Charles Martinet's cameo role in The Super Mario Bros. Movie is perfect". Polygon. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved March 12, 2024. Sharf, Zack (March 2, 2023). "Casting Chris Pratt as Mario Made 'Total Sense,' Directors Tell Baffled Fans: 'He's Really Good at Playing a Blue-Collar Hero'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023. "Nintendo's Shining Star: The History of Mario". Gamecubicle. Archived from the original on January 20, 2016. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Buchanan, Levi (February 13, 2009). "Is There a Bad Mario Game?". IGN. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Past Inductees 2005 Games / Characters". Walk of Game. Archived from the original on January 21, 2008. Retrieved February 21, 2008. Calvert, Justin (December 9, 2003). "Hollywood Wax Museum adds Mario". GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 12, 2024. Retrieved March 12, 2024. Plunkett, Luke (September 13, 2010). "Happy 25th Birthday, Super Mario Bros". Kotaku. Archived from the original on September 21, 2010. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Iwabuchi, Koichi (November 8, 2002). "1. Taking Japanization seriously: Cultural globalization reconsidered". Recentering globalization: Popular culture and Japanese transnationalism. Duke University Press. p. 30. ISBN 978-0-8223-2891-9. Archived from the original on July 9, 2010. Retrieved February 20, 2017. Coates, James (May 18, 1993). "How Super Mario conquered America". Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved January 3, 2019. Owen S. Good (August 23, 2014). "Watch the entire first act of the Mario Opera". Polygon. Archived from the original on March 28, 2024. Retrieved March 28, 2024. I think it's a great show that anyone who grew up playing Mario will appreciate and enjoy, and there are moments that will give you genuine feels. Ledford, Jon (August 25, 2014). "Mario Opera's History Revealed by its Creator, Jonathan Mann". Arcade Sushi. Archived from the original on March 28, 2024. Retrieved March 28, 2024. "Exclusive Interview With Nintendo Gaming Mastermind Shigeru Miyamoto". Popular Mechanics. October 19, 2009. Archived from the original on April 13, 2010. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "The Best of '96". Electronic Gaming Monthly. No. 92. Ziff Davis. March 1997. p. 90. Nintendo Power 250th issue!. South San Francisco, California. 2010. pp. 40, 41.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Brian Ashcraft (August 23, 2008). "And Japan's Favorite Video Game Characters Are...?". Kotaku. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "With 9,862 Votes, Japan's Most Popular Video Game Character Is…". Siliconera. Siliconera Staff. December 21, 2010. Archived from the original on March 27, 2024. Retrieved March 27, 2024. Gerken, Tom (October 22, 2023). "Mario v Sonic: Rivals launch similar games in same week". BBC. Archived from the original on March 21, 2024. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Laib, Shawn (April 9, 2022). "What the Super Mario Movie Can Learn from Sonic the Hedgehog". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on March 21, 2024. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Sawyer, Logan (October 10, 2021). "Mario Vs. Sonic The Hedgehog: Who Wins In A Fight?". Game Rant. Archived from the original on February 22, 2024. Retrieved March 21, 2024. McAloon, Alissa (May 15, 2018). "Sonic the Hedgehog devs explain how competing with Mario influenced development". Game Developer. Archived from the original on March 21, 2024. Retrieved March 21, 2024. "Why Japanese PM Shinzo Abe was dressed as Super Mario in Rio". The Guardian. August 22, 2016. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Haider, Arwa (March 24, 2023). "Super Mario Bros: The ultimate video game icon". BBC. Archived from the original on March 3, 2024. Retrieved March 3, 2024. Weiss, Jodi & Kahn, Russell (2004). In 145 Things to Be When You Grow Up Archived June 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Princeton Review Publishing. p. 25. ISBN 0-375-76369-4. Google Book Search. Retrieved November 6, 2009. Lobley, William (February 11, 2021). "The Best Super Mario Merchandise". Empire. Archived from the original on March 25, 2024. Retrieved March 25, 2024. Murdock, Jason (March 8, 2024). "Best Super Mario gifts and merchandise to buy for all ages in 2024". Radio Times. Immediate Media Company Ltd. Archived from the original on March 25, 2024. Retrieved March 25, 2024. "10 Works of Art Inspired By Super Mario Bros.". Pixelated Geek. Archived from the original on May 2, 2009. Retrieved May 5, 2009. Ashcraft, Brian (July 13, 2009). "India's Got Mario Talent". Kotaku. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Totilo, Stephen (December 23, 2011). "32 Nintendo Fans made these 8 Short Movies in 24 Hours". Kotaku. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Spencer, Spanner (December 30, 2014). "Platform Panic Review: Infinite Platforms, Infinite Pleasure". Gamezebo. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved July 4, 2016. Chilton, Charlotte (October 26, 2022). "The 78 Best Celebrity Couple Halloween Costumes of All Time". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on March 24, 2024. Retrieved March 24, 2024. "The best celebrity Halloween costumes of 2023". Entertainment Weekly. EW Staff. November 1, 2023. Archived from the original on March 24, 2024. Retrieved March 24, 2024. "Kendall Jenner and Cara Delevingne Channel Their Inner Video-Game Geeks". Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved April 1, 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Bergsala AB, Contact page" (in Swedish). Archived from the original on August 17, 2010. Retrieved June 24, 2013. "Gotze is back to being Super Mario with PSV Eindhoven". Marca. August 4, 2021. Archived from the original on March 27, 2024. Retrieved March 27, 2024. "Mario Gomez: 10 things on VfB Stuttgart's legendary striker". Bundesliga. June 29, 2020. Archived from the original on March 27, 2024. Retrieved March 27, 2024. Schwartz, Larry. "Mario was super despite the obstacles". ESPN. Archived from the original on February 5, 2009. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Leicester, John (June 29, 2012). "Super Mario: Euro 2012: Super Mario Balotelli on target to finish as top scorer". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Burns, John F. (December 5, 2014). "England's F.A. Charges Mario Balotelli Over Racist Posting". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 23, 2022. Retrieved September 23, 2022. "Super Mario Comes Up Short". The New York Times. Samuel Abt, International Herald Tribune. July 1, 1996. Archived from the original on March 11, 2024. Retrieved March 11, 2024. Shoichet, Catherine E. (November 8, 2010). "Spanish neighborhood unveils 'Super Mario' street". CNN. Archived from the original on August 31, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2018. Craig Glenday, ed. (March 11, 2008). Guinness World Records Gamer's Edition 2008. Guinness World Records. Guinness. ISBN 978-1-904994-21-3. Turi, Tim (December 21, 2009). "Gain Knowledge From Guinness 2010 Gamer's Edition". Game Informer. Archived from the original on December 13, 2021. Retrieved December 13, 2021. Marchiafava, Jeff (February 16, 2011). "Guinness Names Top 50 Video Game Characters Of All Time". Game Informer. Archived from the original on February 1, 2012. Retrieved February 2, 2018. Khan, Imran (December 14, 2018). "Charles Martinet Attains World Record For Most Video Game Voiceovers As One Character". Game Informer. Archived from the original on March 14, 2024. Retrieved March 14, 2024. Samuelson, Kate (August 22, 2016). "Shinzo Abe Dresses as Super Mario for Rio Closing Ceremony". Time. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved August 22, 2016. Palazzo, Chiara (August 22, 2016). "Shinzo Abe emerges from a green pipe disguised as Super Mario during Rio Closing Ceremony". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved August 22, 2016. Kageyama, Yuri (September 1, 2016). "Super Mario marketing op in Rio cost Nintendo how much? Zero". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on March 29, 2024. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Kim, Dan (March 10, 2020). "It's-A Mario Day! 4 Deals to Save Your Ninten-dough". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 10, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2021. Burkhardt, Kai (March 10, 2020). "Wa-hoo! Celebrate Mario Day with deals on games, toys and more". CNN Underscored. Archived from the original on April 13, 2020. Retrieved March 4, 2021. "Fun Holiday – Mario Day". Time And Date. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2017. Werner, Dani (March 7, 2016), "Jump-start your week with some items of interest", Star Tribune, archived from the original on March 12, 2017, retrieved March 9, 2017 Webb, Jack (March 10, 2020). "Happy Mario Day 2020 – Everything you need to know". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on April 20, 2020. Retrieved March 4, 2021. Burch, Jennifer (March 9, 2018). "Nintendo celebrates Mario Day with panache". Nintendo Wire. Archived from the original on March 14, 2018. Retrieved March 13, 2018. Sawers, Paul (March 9, 2018). "Google Maps marks Mario Day by adding a Super Mario Kart to your navigation". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on March 29, 2024. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Warren, Tom (March 9, 2018). "Mario invades Google Maps to help you avoid bananas while driving". The Verge. Archived from the original on April 8, 2023. Retrieved March 29, 2024. McCreesh, Louise (March 9, 2018). "Google Maps now lets Super Mario drive you along your route". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on March 29, 2024. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Obias, Rudie (March 8, 2024). "'Stranger Things' Actor Gaten Matarazzo Teams Up With Nintendo for Mario Day". Variety. Archived from the original on March 9, 2024. Retrieved March 9, 2024. Andronico, Mike (March 8, 2024). "The Essentials List: 'Stranger Things' star Gaten Matarazzo on Mario Day, Nintendo and his must-have travel products". CNN Underscored. Archived from the original on March 9, 2024. Retrieved March 9, 2024. Media related to Mario (character) at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Mario at Wikiquote Official website for the Mario series Mario profile on mario.nintendo.com Mario profile on smashbros.com