Somalia is officially divided into 12 administrative regions (gobollo, singular gobol). These are in turn subdivided into seventy-two districts (plural degmooyin; singular degmo) On a de facto basis, northern Somalia is now divided up among the autonomous region of Puntland In central Somalia, Galmudug is another regional entity that emerged south of Puntland. For these divisions, see States and regions of Somalia. In 1931, Italian Somaliland consisted of seven commissariats. Alto Giuba Alto Uebi-Scebeli Basso Giuba Basso Uebi-Scebeli Migiurtinia Mogadiscio Mudugh Following the 1935–36 Second Italo-Abyssinian War, Italian Somaliland became part of Italian East Africa with Abyssinia (Ethiopia) and Eritrea. Italian Somaliland was one of six governorates of the new colony, the Somalia Governorate, and incorporated Somali-inhabited parts of the former Abyssinia. The governorate was subdivided into 10 commissariats, which were themselves divided into residencies. Alto Giuba (English: Upper Juba) (capital: Baidoa) Alto Scebeli (Upper Shabele) (Bulo Burti) Basso Scebeli (Lower Shabele) (Merca) Migiurtinia (Migiurtinia) (Dante) Mogadiscio (Mogadishu) (Mogadiscio) Mudugh (Mudug) (Rocca Littorio) Ogaden (Ogaden) (Uarder) Uebi Gestro (Gestro River) (Callafo) Basso Giuba (Lower Juba) (Chisimaio) Nogal (Nugaal) (Eil) Following World War II, the Italian-administered Trust Territory of Somalia consisted of six Regions. Alto Giuba Basso Giuba Benadir Hiiraan Migiurtinia Mudugh The British Somaliland protectorate also consisted of two Regions. Burao Hargeisa Upon independence in 1960, the Somali Republic maintained the 12 districts of the former Italian Somaliland and British Somaliland that merged to form the new country. In 1964, a new Northeastern (Burao) Province was established by merging Burao, Erigavo, and Las Anod and a Northwestern (Hargeisa) Province was formed from Berbera, Borama, and Hargeisa districts. In 1968, the capital of Basso Giuba was moved from Kismayo to Jamame. The 8 provinces at this time were: In 1982, Somalia reorganized from eight provinces into 16 regions. In June 1984, Awdal was split from Woqooyi Galbeed and Sool was split from Nugaal to form the current 18 regions. Somalia portal States and regions of Somalia List of regions of Somalia by Human Development Index ISO 3166-2:SO "Somalia". World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 2009-05-14. Retrieved 2009-05-31. UNFPA Population Estimation Survey 2014 "Regions of Somalia". Statoids. Retrieved 20 February 2011.