Vormsi, also Ormsö (Swedish: Ormsö, German: Worms) is the fourth-largest island of Estonia. It is located between Hiiumaa and the mainland and has a total area of 92 square kilometres (36 square miles). It is part of Vormsi Parish, a rural municipality. Ormsö in Swedish means "Orm's Island", and can be translated also as "Snake Island". The island's Estonian name Vormsi is derived from its German name Worms or its Swedish name Ormsö. Vormsi's history dates back as far as the 13th century. During most of this time, the island was inhabited by Estonian Swedes ("rannarootslased" in Estonian or "coastal Swedes" in English), whose population reached 3,000 before World War II. During the war, nearly all of Vormsi's population, along with other Swedes living in Estonia, forming the larger region of Aiboland, were evacuated, or fled, to Sweden. The island's current registered population is about 400. The villages on the island include: Hullo (the administrative center), Sviby (the main port), Söderby, Norrby, Diby, Rälby, Förby, Borrby, Kärrslätt, Saxby, Suuremõisa (Magnushof, formerly Busby), Rumpo (the main beach area) and Hosby. Vormsi is the per capita wealthiest island and region in Estonia outside of the Tallinn metro area, with incomes on the same level as inner Tallinn. This is attributed to the fact that many comparatively wealthy people own summer homes on the island and are registered as residents, so their yearly income tax is forwarded to the island's budget. Vormsi has no industrial activity. The island earns the majority of its revenues from the taxation of the mainland and overseas income of residents. The island of Vormsi has homeowners from several countries and regions: Estonia, Sweden, Finland, Switzerland, Åland. Kanarbik, Madis, Ormsö. De estlandssvenska böndernas kamp mot godsägarna under 1700- och 1800-talet [Nordistica Tartuensia; 9] (Tartu, 2003) Beyer, Jürgen, 'Whom should one thank for a narrow escape? Lessons drawn from a perilous journey from Vormsi and Noarootsi to Finland in 1796', Pro Ethnologia 17 (2004), 175-95 Vormsi harbor Saxby lighthouse Paddock, Rälby Old windmill, Rälby Woodsman's cottage, Hullo Beach area in Rumpo Viewing platform in Rumpo peninsula, looking towards Sviby harbor Thatched roof house Vormsi cemetery The Huitberg Coral Reef Sunset in Saxby Aurora Borealis in Saxby Windmills in Hullo, 1930s The President of Estonia, Toomas Hendrik Ilves in Vormsi in 2010 Estonian Swedes in the 19th century Fleeing the Soviet occupation to Sweden, 1944 Road signs in Hullo The Swedish Lutheran Church on the island Traditional island architecture Round crosses in the cemetery are unique to Vormsi and Gotland Scottish Highland Cattle on the island in Rumpo Aerial photo from 1934 "Vormsi". ttykk.edu. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved September 5, 2023. "Ajalugu". talumuuseum.vormsi.ee. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved December 18, 2016. "Vormsi vald pealinnaga ühel pulgal". Äripäev. January 9, 2012. Archived from the original on October 23, 2020. Retrieved September 5, 2023. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Vormsi. Vormsi vald (Vormsi municipality)