Bernard Sanders (born September 8, 1941) is an American politician and activist who is the senior United States senator from Vermont. Sanders is the longest-serving independent in U.S. congressional history but has a close relationship with the Democratic Party, having caucused with House and Senate Democrats for most of his congressional career and sought the party's presidential nomination in 2016 and 2020, coming second in both campaigns. He is often seen as a leader of the U.S. progressive movement. Born into a working-class Jewish family and raised in the Brooklyn borough of New York City, Sanders attended Brooklyn College before graduating from the University of Chicago in 1964. While a student, he was a protest organizer for the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) during the civil rights movement. After settling in Vermont in 1968, he ran unsuccessful third-party political campaigns in the early to mid-1970s. He was elected mayor of Burlington in 1981 as an independent and was reelected three times. He won election to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1990, representing Vermont's at-large congressional district, later co-founding the Congressional Progressive Caucus. He was a U.S. representative for 16 years before being elected to the U.S. Senate in 2006, notably becoming the first non-Republican elected to Vermont's Class 1 seat since Whig Solomon Foot was elected in 1850. Sanders was reelected to the Senate in 2012 and 2018. He chaired the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee from 2013 to 2015 and the Senate Budget Committee from 2021 to 2023. In January 2023, he became chair of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, and the senior senator and dean of the Vermont congressional delegation upon Leahy's retirement from the Senate. Sanders was a major candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2016 and 2020, receiving the second most votes in each. Despite initially low expectations, his 2016 campaign generated significant grassroots enthusiasm and funding from small-dollar donors, carrying him to victory against eventual nominee Hillary Clinton in 23 primaries and caucuses before he conceded in July. In 2020, his strong showing in early primaries and caucuses made him the front-runner in a historically large field of Democratic candidates. In April 2020, Sanders conceded the nomination to Joe Biden, who had won a series of decisive victories as the field narrowed. He supported both Clinton and Biden in their respective general election campaigns against Donald Trump. He has since emerged as a close ally of Biden. Sanders is credited with influencing a leftward shift in the Democratic Party after his 2016 presidential campaign. An advocate of progressive policies, he is known for his opposition to economic inequality and neoliberalism, and support for workers' self-management. On domestic policy, he supports labor rights, universal and single-payer healthcare, paid parental leave, tuition-free tertiary education, an ambitious Green New Deal to create jobs addressing climate change, and worker control of production through cooperatives, unions, and democratic public enterprises. On foreign policy, he supports reducing military spending, pursuing more diplomacy and international cooperation, and putting greater emphasis on labor rights and environmental concerns when negotiating international trade agreements. Sanders supports workplace democracy, and has praised elements of the Nordic model. Some have compared and contrasted his politics to left-wing populism and the New Deal policies of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Bernard Sanders was born on September 8, 1941, in the Brooklyn borough of New York City. His father, Elias Ben Yehuda Sanders (1904–1962), was born in Słopnice, a town in Austrian Galicia that was then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and is now in Poland. Elias Sanders was a Polish-Jewish immigrant who immigrated to the United States in 1921 and became a paint salesman, although his family was killed in the Holocaust. Bernie's mother, Dorothy Sanders (née Glassberg) (1912–1960), was born in New York City. He is the younger brother of Larry Sanders. Sanders says he became interested in politics at an early age due to his family background. In the 1940s, many of his relatives in German-occupied Poland were murdered in the Holocaust. Sanders lived in Midwood, Brooklyn. He attended elementary school at P.S. 197, where he won a borough championship on the basketball team. He attended Hebrew school in the afternoons, and celebrated his bar mitzvah in 1954. His older brother Larry said that during their childhood, the family never lacked for food or clothing, but major purchases, "like curtains or a rug", were not affordable. Sanders attended James Madison High School, where he was captain of the track team and took third place in the New York City indoor one-mile race. In high school, he lost his first election, finishing last of three candidates for the student body presidency with a campaign that focused on aiding Korean War orphans. Despite the loss, he became active in his school's fundraising activities for Korean orphans, including organizing a charity basketball game. Sanders attended high school with economist Walter Block. When he was 19, his mother died at age 47. His father died two years later in 1962 at age 57. Sanders studied at Brooklyn College for a year in 1959–1960 before transferring to the University of Chicago and graduating with a Bachelor of Arts degree in political science in 1964. In later interviews, Sanders described himself as a mediocre college student because the classroom was "boring and irrelevant", and said he viewed community activism as more important to his education. Sanders later described his time in Chicago as "the major period of intellectual ferment in my life." While there, he joined the Young People's Socialist League (the youth affiliate of the Socialist Party of America) and was active in the civil rights movement as a student for the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC). Under his chairmanship, the university chapter of CORE merged with the university chapter of the SNCC. In January 1962, he went to a rally at the University of Chicago administration building to protest university president George Wells Beadle's segregated campus housing policy. At the protest, Sanders said, "We feel it is an intolerable situation when Negro and white students of the university cannot live together in university-owned apartments". He and 32 other students then entered the building and camped outside the president's office. After weeks of sit-ins, Beadle and the university formed a commission to investigate discrimination. After further protests, the University of Chicago ended racial segregation in private university housing in the summer of 1963. Joan Mahoney, a member of the University of Chicago CORE chapter at the time and a fellow participant in the sit-ins, described Sanders in a 2016 interview as "a swell guy, a nice Jewish boy from Brooklyn, but he wasn't terribly charismatic. One of his strengths, though, was his ability to work with a wide group of people, even those he didn't agree with." Sanders once spent a day putting up fliers protesting police brutality, only to notice later that Chicago police had shadowed him and taken them all down. He attended the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, where Martin Luther King Jr. gave the "I Have a Dream" speech. That summer, Sanders was fined $25 (equivalent to $249 in 2023) for resisting arrest during a demonstration in Englewood against segregation in Chicago's public schools. In addition to his civil rights activism during the 1960s and 1970s, Sanders was active in several peace and antiwar movements while attending the University of Chicago, becoming a member of the Student Peace Union. He applied for conscientious objector status during the Vietnam War; his application was eventually turned down, by which point he was too old to be drafted. Although he opposed the war, Sanders never criticized those who fought in it, and has strongly supported veterans' benefits throughout his political career. He also was briefly an organizer with the United Packinghouse Workers of America while in Chicago. He also worked on the reelection campaign of Leon Despres, a prominent Chicago alderman who opposed then-mayor Richard J. Daley's Democratic Party machine. Sanders said that he spent much of his student years reading history, sociology, psychology, and the works of political authors, from Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, John Dewey, Karl Marx, and Erich Fromm—"reading everything except what I was supposed to read for class the next day." After graduating from college, Sanders returned to New York City, where he worked various jobs, including Head Start teacher, psychiatric aide, and carpenter. In 1968, he moved to Stannard, Vermont, a town small in both area and population (88 residents at the 1970 census) within Vermont's rural Northeast Kingdom region, because he had been "captivated by rural life". While there, he worked as a carpenter, filmmaker, and writer who created and sold "radical film strips" and other educational materials to schools. He also wrote several articles for the alternative publication The Vermont Freeman. He lived in the area for several years before moving to the more populous Chittenden County in the mid-1970s. During his 2018 reelection campaign, he returned to the town to hold an event with voters and other candidates. From 1969 to 1971, Sanders resided in Montpelier. After moving to Burlington, he began his electoral political career as a member of the Liberty Union Party, a national umbrella party for various socialist-oriented state parties, originating in the anti-war movement and the People's Party. He ran as the Liberty Union candidate for governor of Vermont in 1972 and 1976 and as a candidate in the special election for U.S. senator in 1972 and in the general election in 1974. In the 1974 senatorial race, he finished third (5,901 votes; 4%), behind 34-year-old Chittenden County state's attorney Patrick Leahy (D; 70,629 votes; 49%) and two-term incumbent U.S. Representative Dick Mallary (R; 66,223 votes; 46%). The 1976 campaign was the zenith of the Liberty Union's influence, with Sanders collecting 11,317 votes for governor and the party. His strong performance forced the down-ballot races for lieutenant governor and secretary of state to be decided by the state legislature when its vote total prevented either the Republican or Democratic candidate for those offices from garnering a majority of votes. But the campaign drained the Liberty Union's finances and energy, and in October 1977, Sanders and the Liberty Union candidate for attorney general, Nancy Kaufman, announced their retirement from the party. During the 1980 presidential election, Sanders was one of three electors for the Socialist Workers Party in Vermont. After resigning from the Liberty Union Party in 1977, Sanders worked as a writer and as the director of the nonprofit American People's Historical Society (APHS). While with the APHS, he produced a 30-minute documentary about American labor leader Eugene V. Debs, who ran for president five times as the Socialist Party candidate. On November 8, 1980, Sanders announced his candidacy for mayor. He formally announced his campaign on December 16 at a City Hall press conference. Sanders selected Linda Niedweske as his campaign manager. The Citizens Party attempted to nominate Greg Guma for mayor, but Guma declined, saying it would be "difficult to run against another progressive candidate". Sanders had been convinced to run for the mayoralty by his close friend Richard Sugarman, an Orthodox Jewish professor of religious studies at the University of Vermont, who had shown him a ward-by-ward breakdown of the 1976 Vermont gubernatorial election, in which Sanders had run, that showed him receiving 12% of the vote in Burlington despite only getting 6% statewide. Sanders initially won the mayoral election by 22 votes against incumbent mayor Gordon Paquette, Richard Bove, and Joseph McGrath, but the margin was later reduced to 10 votes. Paquette did not contest the results of the recount. Paquette's loss was attributed to his own shortcomings, as he did not campaign or promote his candidacy since neither Sanders nor Bove was seen as a serious challenger. Sanders had not previously won an election. Paquette was also considered to have lost because he proposed an unpopular $0.65 per $100 raise in taxes that Sanders opposed. Sanders spent around $4,000 on his campaign. Sanders castigated the pro-development incumbent as an ally of prominent shopping center developer Antonio Pomerleau, while Paquette warned of ruin for Burlington if Sanders were elected. The Sanders campaign was bolstered by a wave of optimistic volunteers as well as a series of endorsements from university professors, social welfare agencies, and the police union. The result shocked the local political establishment. Sanders formed a coalition between independents and the Citizens Party. On December 3, 1982, he announced that he would seek reelection. On January 22, 1983, the Citizens Party voted unanimously to endorse Sanders, although Sanders ran as an independent. He was reelected, defeating Judy Stephany and James Gilson. Sanders initially considered not seeking a third term, but announced on December 5, 1984, that he would run. He formally launched his campaign on December 7, and was reelected. On December 1, 1986, Sanders, who had finished third in the 1986 Vermont gubernatorial election, announced that he would seek reelection to a fourth term as mayor of Burlington, despite close associates saying that he was tired of being mayor. Sanders defeated Democratic nominee Paul Lafayette in the election. He said he would not seek another mayoral term after the 1987 election: "eight years is enough and I think it is time for new leadership, which does exist within the coalition, to come up". Sanders did not run for a fifth term as mayor. He went on to lecture in political science at Harvard Kennedy School that year and at Hamilton College in 1991. During his mayoralty, Sanders called himself a socialist and was described as such in the press. During his first term, his supporters, including the first Citizens Party city councilor Terry Bouricius, formed the Progressive Coalition, the forerunner of the Vermont Progressive Party. The Progressives never held more than six seats on the 13-member city council, but they had enough to keep the council from overriding Sanders's vetoes. Under his leadership, Burlington balanced its city budget; attracted a minor league baseball team, the Vermont Reds, then the Double-A affiliate of the Cincinnati Reds; became the first U.S. city to fund community-trust housing; and successfully sued the local cable television franchise, thereby winning reduced rates for customers. As mayor, Sanders also led extensive downtown revitalization projects. One of his primary achievements was improving Burlington's Lake Champlain waterfront. In 1981, he campaigned against the unpopular plans by Burlington developer Tony Pomerleau to convert the then-industrial waterfront property owned by the Central Vermont Railway into expensive condominiums, hotels, and offices. He ran under the slogan "Burlington is not for sale" and successfully supported a plan that redeveloped the waterfront area into a mixed-use district featuring housing, parks, and public spaces. Sanders was a consistent critic of U.S. foreign policy in Latin America throughout the 1980s. In 1985, Burlington City Hall hosted a foreign policy speech by Noam Chomsky. In his introduction, he praised Chomsky as "a very vocal and important voice in the wilderness of intellectual life in America" and said that he was "delighted to welcome a person who I think we're all very proud of." Sanders hosted and produced a public-access television program, Bernie Speaks with the Community, from 1986 to 1988. He collaborated with 30 Vermont musicians to record a folk album, We Shall Overcome, in 1987. That same year, U.S. News & World Report ranked Sanders one of America's best mayors. As of 2013[update], Burlington was regarded as one of the most livable cities in the United States. During a trip to the Soviet Union in 1988, Sanders interviewed the mayor of Burlington's sister city Yaroslavl about housing and health care issues in the two cities. When Sanders left office in 1989, Bouricius, a member of the Burlington city council, said that Sanders had "changed the entire nature of politics in Burlington and also in the state of Vermont". In 1988, incumbent Republican congressman Jim Jeffords decided to run for the U.S. Senate, vacating the House seat representing Vermont's at-large congressional district. Former Lieutenant Governor Peter P. Smith won the House election with a plurality, securing 41% of the vote. Sanders, who ran as an independent, placed second with 38% of the vote, while Democratic state representative Paul N. Poirier placed third with 19%. Two years later, he ran for the seat again and defeated Smith by a margin of 56% to 39%. Sanders was the first independent elected to the U.S. House of Representatives since Frazier Reams of Ohio won his second term in 1952, as well as the first socialist elected to the House since Vito Marcantonio, from the American Labor Party, who won his last term in 1948. Sanders was a representative from 1991 until he became a senator in 2007, winning reelection by large margins except during the 1994 Republican Revolution, when he won by 3%, with 50% of the vote. During his first year in the House, Sanders often alienated allies and colleagues with his criticism of both political parties as working primarily on behalf of the wealthy. In 1991, he co-founded the Congressional Progressive Caucus, a group of mostly liberal Democrats that he chaired for its first eight years, while still refusing to join the Democratic Party or caucus. In 2005, Rolling Stone called Sanders the "amendment king" for his ability to get more roll call amendments passed than any other congressman during the period since 1995, when Congress was entirely under Republican control. Being an independent allowed him to form coalitions across party lines. In 1999, Sanders voted and advocated against rolling back the Glass–Steagall legislation provisions that kept investment banks and commercial banks separate entities. He was a vocal critic of Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan; in June 2003, during a question-and-answer discussion, Sanders told him he was concerned that he was "way out of touch" and "that you see your major function in your position as the need to represent the wealthy and large corporations." Concerned by high breast cancer rates in Vermont, on February 7, 1992, Sanders sponsored the Cancer Registries Amendment Act to establish cancer registries to collect data on cancer. Senator Patrick Leahy introduced a companion bill in the Senate on October 2, 1992. The Senate bill was passed by the House on October 6 and signed into law by President George H. W. Bush on October 24, 1992. In 1993, Sanders voted against the Brady Bill, which mandated federal background checks when buying guns and imposed a waiting period on firearm purchasers in the United States; the bill passed by a vote of 238–187. He voted against the bill four more times in the 1990s, explaining his Vermont constituents saw waiting-period mandates as more appropriately a state than federal matter. Sanders did vote for other gun-control measures. For example, in 1994, he voted for the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act "because it included the Violence Against Women Act and the ban on certain assault weapons." He was nevertheless critical of the other parts of the bill. Although he acknowledged that "clearly, there are some people in our society who are horribly violent, who are deeply sick and sociopathic, and clearly these people must be put behind bars in order to protect society from them", he maintained that governmental policies played a large part in "dooming tens of millions of young people to a future of bitterness, misery, hopelessness, drugs, crime, and violence" and argued that the repressive policies introduced by the bill were not addressing the causes of violence, saying, "we can create meaningful jobs, rebuilding our society, or we can build more jails." Sanders has at times favored stronger law enforcement and sentencing. In 1996, he voted against a bill that would have prohibited police from purchasing tanks and armored carriers. In 1998, he voted for a bill that would have increased minimum sentencing for possessing a gun while committing a federal crime to ten years in prison, including nonviolent crimes such as marijuana possession. In 2005, Sanders voted for the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act. The purpose of the act was to prevent firearms manufacturers and dealers from being held liable for negligence when crimes have been committed with their products. As of 2016[update], he said that he has since changed his position and would vote for legislation to defeat this bill. Sanders was a consistent critic of the Patriot Act. As a member of Congress, he voted against the original Patriot Act legislation. After its 357–66 passage in the House, he sponsored and voted for several subsequent amendments and acts attempting to curtail its effects and voted against each reauthorization. In June 2005, he proposed an amendment to limit Patriot Act provisions that allow the government to obtain individuals' library and book-buying records. The amendment passed the House by a bipartisan majority but was removed on November 4 of that year in House–Senate negotiations and never became law. Sanders voted against the resolutions authorizing the use of force against Iraq in 1991 and 2002, and he opposed the 2003 invasion of Iraq. He voted for the 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists that has been cited as the legal justification for controversial military actions since the September 11 attacks. He especially opposed the Bush administration's decision to start a war unilaterally. In February 2005, Sanders introduced a bill that would have withdrawn the permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) status that had been extended to China in October 2000. He said to the House, "Anyone who takes an objective look at our trade policy with China must conclude that it is an absolute failure and needs to be fundamentally overhauled", citing the American jobs being lost to overseas competitors. His bill received 71 co-sponsors but was not sent to the floor for a vote. Sanders entered the race for the U.S. Senate on April 21, 2005, after Senator Jim Jeffords announced that he would not seek a fourth term. Chuck Schumer, chair of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and fellow James Madison High School alumnus, endorsed Sanders. This was a critical move because it meant no Democrat running against him could expect financial help from the party. He was also endorsed by Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid and Democratic National Committee chair and former Vermont governor Howard Dean. Dean said in May 2005 that he considered Sanders an ally who "votes with the Democrats 98% of the time." Then-Senator Barack Obama also campaigned for him in Vermont in March 2006. Sanders entered into an agreement with the Democratic Party, much as he had as a congressman, to be listed in their primary but to decline the nomination should he win, which he did. In the most expensive political campaign in Vermont's history, Sanders defeated businessman Rich Tarrant by an almost 2-to-1 margin. Many national media outlets projected him as the winner just after the polls closed, before any returns came in. Sanders was reelected in 2012 with 71% of the vote. Sanders was reelected in 2018 with 67% of the vote. While a member of Congress, Sanders sponsored 15 concurrent resolutions and 15 Senate resolutions. Of those he co-sponsored, 218 became law. While he has consistently advocated for progressive causes, Politico wrote that he has "rarely forged actual legislation or left a significant imprint on it." According to The New York Times, "Big legislation largely eludes Mr. Sanders because his ideas are usually far to the left of the majority of the Senate ... Mr. Sanders has largely found ways to press his agenda through appending small provisions to the larger bills of others." During his time in the Senate, he had lower legislative effectiveness than the average senator, as measured by the number of sponsored bills that passed and successful amendments made. Nevertheless, he has sponsored over 500 amendments to bills, many of which became law. The results of these amendments include a ban on imported goods made by child labor; $100 million in funding for community health centers; $10 million for an outreach program for servicemembers who have post-traumatic stress disorder, traumatic brain injury, depression, panic attacks, and other mental disorders; a public database of senior Department of Defense officials seeking employment with defense contractors; and including autism treatment under the military healthcare program Tricare. In August 2022, Sanders voted for the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022. He was not satisfied with the bill, calling it only a small step forward. In 2008 and 2009, Sanders voted against the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), a program to purchase toxic banking assets and provide loans to banks that were in free-fall. On February 4, 2009, he sponsored an amendment to ensure that TARP funds would not displace U.S. workers. The amendment passed and was added to the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. Among his proposed financial reforms is auditing the Federal Reserve, which would reduce its independence in monetary policy deliberations; Federal Reserve officials say that "Audit the Fed" legislation would expose the Federal Reserve to undue political pressure from lawmakers who do not like its decisions. On December 10, 2010, Sanders delivered an 8 hour and 34-minute speech against the Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010, which proposed extending the Bush-era tax rates. He argued that the legislation would favor the wealthiest Americans. "Enough is enough! ... How many homes can you own?" he asked. Nevertheless, the bill passed the Senate with a strong majority and was signed into law a week later. In February 2011, Nation Books published the speech as The Speech: A Historic Filibuster on Corporate Greed and the Decline of Our Middle Class, with authorial proceeds going to Vermont nonprofit charitable organizations. In 2016, Sanders voted for the Federal Reserve Transparency Act, which included proposals for a reformed audit of the Federal Reserve System. On June 12, 2017, U.S. senators agreed to legislation imposing new sanctions on Russia and Iran. The bill was opposed only by Sanders and Republican Rand Paul. He supported the sanctions on Russia, but voted against the bill because he believed the sanctions could endanger the Iran nuclear deal. In 2018, Sanders sponsored a bill and was joined by Senators Chris Murphy (D–CT) and Mike Lee (R–UT) to invoke the 1973 War Powers Resolution to end U.S. support for the Saudi-led military intervention in Yemen, which has resulted in hundreds of thousands of civilian casualties and "millions more suffering from starvation and disease". After the assassination of Jamal Khashoggi in October 2018 (which was ordered by Saudi Arabian Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman, according to multiple intelligence agencies), his bill attracted bipartisan co-sponsors and support, and the Senate passed it by a vote of 56–41. The bill passed the House in February 2019 by a 247–175 vote and President Trump vetoed it in March, saying: "This resolution is an unnecessary, dangerous attempt to weaken my constitutional authorities, endangering the lives of American citizens and brave service members, both today and in the future." In mid-December 2009, Sanders successfully added a provision to the Affordable Care Act to fund $11 billion to community health centers, especially those in rural areas. The provision brought together Democrats on the left with Democrats from conservative, rural areas, helping to secure the 60 votes needed for passage. On May 4, 2017, in response to the House vote to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act, he predicted "thousands of Americans would die" from no longer having access to health care. PolitiFact rated his statement "mostly true". In September 2017, Sanders along with 15 Senate co-sponsors submitted the Medicare for All bill, a single-payer healthcare plan. The bill covers vision and dental care, unlike Medicare. Some Republicans have called the bill "Berniecare" and "the latest Democratic push for socialized medicine and higher taxes." He responded that the Republican Party has no credibility on the issue of health care after voting for legislation that would take health insurance away from 32 million Americans under the Affordable Care Act. As chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Primary Health and Aging, Sanders introduced legislation in 2013 to reauthorize and strengthen the Older Americans Act, which supports Meals on Wheels and other programs for seniors. In 2007, Sanders helped kill a bill introducing comprehensive immigration reform, arguing that its guest-worker program would depress wages for American workers. In 2010, he supported the DREAM Act, which would have provided a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants who had been brought to the United States as minors. In 2013, he supported the Gang of Eight's comprehensive immigration reform bill after securing a $1.5 billion youth jobs program provision, which he argued would offset the harm of labor market competition with immigrants. In April 2017, Sanders introduced a bill that would raise the minimum wage for federal contract workers to $15 an hour, an increase over an earlier Democratic $12 an hour proposal. On May 9, 2018, he introduced the Workplace Democracy Act, a bill that would expand labor rights by making it easier for workers to join a union, ban right-to-work laws and some anti-union provisions of the Taft–Hartley Act, and outlaw some union-busting tactics. Announcing the legislation, he said, "If we are serious about reducing income and wealth inequality and rebuilding the middle class, we have got to substantially increase the number of union jobs in this country." Sanders opposed the 2018 United States federal budget proposed by the Trump administration, calling it "a budget for the billionaire class, for Wall Street, for corporate CEOs, and for the wealthiest people in this country ... nothing less than a massive transfer of wealth from working families, the elderly, children, the sick and the poor to the top 1%." After the November 2017 revelations from the Paradise Papers and a recent report from the Institute for Policy Studies which says just three people (Jeff Bezos, Bill Gates, and Warren Buffett) own more wealth than the bottom half of the U.S. population, Sanders stated that "we must end global oligarchy" and that "we need, in the United States and throughout the world, a tax system which is fair, progressive and transparent." On September 5, 2018, Sanders partnered with Ro Khanna to introduce the Stop Bad Employers by Zeroing Out Subsidies (Stop BEZOS) Act, which would require large corporations to pay for the food stamps and Medicaid benefits that their employees receive, relieving the burden on taxpayers. On June 9, 2014, Sanders sponsored the Veterans' Access to Care through Choice, Accountability, and Transparency Act of 2014 to reform the Department of Veterans Affairs in the wake of the Veterans Health Administration scandal of 2014. He worked with Senator John McCain, who co-sponsored the bill. His bill was incorporated into the House version of the bill, which passed both chambers on July 31, 2014, and was signed into law by President Obama on August 7, 2014. On March 17, 2016, Sanders said he would support Merrick Garland's nomination to the Supreme Court, though he added, "there are some more progressive judges out there." He opposed Neil Gorsuch's nomination to the court, saying that Gorsuch had "refused to answer legitimate questions". He also objected to Senate Republicans' use of the nuclear option to "choke off debate and ram [Gorsuch's] nomination through the Senate". He voted against Gorsuch's confirmation as an associate justice, and against Trump's nominees Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett. In 2022, Sanders voted to confirm Joe Biden's nominee Ketanji Brown Jackson to the Supreme Court. As an independent, Sanders maintains an agreement with the Senate Democratic leadership where he votes with the Democrats on all procedural matters unless the Democratic whip, Dick Durbin, agrees that he need not (a request rarely made or granted). In return he was allowed to keep his seniority and received the committee seats that would have been available to him as a Democrat; in 2013–14 he was chairman of the United States Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs (during the Veterans Health Administration scandal). Sanders became the ranking minority member on the Senate Budget Committee in 2015 and the chair in 2021; he previously chaired the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee for two years. Since 2017, he has been chair of the Senate Democratic Outreach Committee. He appointed economics professor Stephanie Kelton, a modern monetary theory scholar, as the chief economic adviser for the committee's Democratic minority and presented a report about helping "rebuild the disappearing middle class" that included proposals to raise the minimum wage, boost infrastructure spending, and increase Social Security payments. As of 2023[update], Sanders's committee assignments are as follows: Committee on the Budget (former chair) Committee on Energy and Natural Resources Subcommittee on Energy Subcommittee on National Parks Subcommittee on Water and Power Committee on Environment and Public Works Subcommittee on Clean Air and Nuclear Safety Subcommittee on Green Jobs and the New Economy Subcommittee on Transportation and Infrastructure Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions (chair) Subcommittee on Children and Families Subcommittee on Primary Health and Retirement Security Committee on Veterans' Affairs (former chair) Sanders was only the third senator from Vermont to caucus with the Democrats, after Jeffords and Leahy. His caucusing with the Democrats gave them a 51–49 majority in the Senate during the 110th Congress in 2007–08. The Democrats needed 51 seats to control the Senate because Vice President Dick Cheney would likely have broken potential ties in favor of the Republicans. He is a member of the following caucuses: Congressional Progressive Caucus Democratic Caucus of the United States Senate United States Senate Afterschool Caucus Polling conducted in August 2011 by Public Policy Polling found that Sanders's approval rating was 67% and his disapproval rating 28%, making him then the third-most popular U.S. senator. Both the NAACP (National Association for the Advancement of Colored People) and the NHLA (National Hispanic Leadership Agenda) have given him 100% voting scores during his tenure in the Senate. In 2015, he was named one of the Top 5 of The Forward 50. In a November 2015 Morning Consult poll, he reached an 83% approval rating among his constituents, making him the most popular U.S. senator. Fox News found him to have the highest net favorability at +28 points of any prominent politician included in its March 2017 poll. He ranked third in 2014 and first in both 2015 and 2016. In April 2017, a nationwide Harvard-Harris Poll found that Sanders had the highest favorability rating among all the political figures included in the poll, a standing confirmed by subsequent polling. Sanders was not a candidate in the 2008 or 2012 presidential elections. He endorsed then-Senator Barack Obama in 2008, before then-Senator Hillary Clinton had formally withdrawn from the race. During the 2012 Democratic presidential primaries, Sanders—dissatisfied with President Obama's "attempts to trade Social Security cuts for tax hikes"—reportedly considered running against him in the primaries. Sanders had previously suggested in 2011 that it was "a good idea" for someone to challenge Obama, and "got so close to running a primary challenge ... that Senator Harry Reid had to intervene to stop him." In November 2013, Sanders suggested that Senator Elizabeth Warren could be president and that she might earn his backing if she ran. He added that if no progressive candidate ran, he might feel compelled to do so himself. In December 2014, Warren said she was not running. Sanders announced his intention to seek the Democratic Party's nomination for president on April 30, 2015. His campaign was officially launched on May 26 in Burlington. In his announcement Sanders said, "I don't believe that the men and women who defended American democracy fought to create a situation where billionaires own the political process", and made this a central idea throughout his campaign. Warren welcomed Sanders's entry into the race, saying, "I'm glad to see him get out there and give his version of what leadership in this country should be", but never endorsed him. Initially considered a long shot, Sanders won 23 primaries and caucuses and around 46% of pledged delegates to Hillary Clinton's 54%. His campaign was noted for its supporters' enthusiasm, as well as for rejecting large donations from corporations, the financial industry, and any associated Super PAC. Some of the Democratic National Committee (DNC) emails leaked to the public in June and July 2016 showed that the committee leadership had favored Clinton over him and had worked to help Clinton win the nomination. On July 12, 2016, Sanders formally endorsed Clinton in her unsuccessful general election campaign against Republican Donald Trump, while urging his supporters to continue the "political revolution" his campaign had begun. Following his endorsement, Sanders spent weeks campaigning for Clinton, holding 39 rallies in 13 states during the final three months before the 2016 election. Unlike the other major candidates, Sanders did not pursue funding through a Super PAC or from wealthy donors, instead focusing on small-dollar donations. His presidential campaign raised $1.5 million within 24 hours of his official announcement. At the end of the year, the campaign had raised a total of $73 million from more than one million people, making 2.5 million donations, with an average donation of $27.16. The campaign reached 3.25 million donations by the end of January 2016, raising $20 million in that month alone. Sanders used social media to help his campaign gain momentum, posting content to online platforms such as Twitter and Facebook and answering questions on Reddit. He gained a large grassroots organizational following online. A July 29, 2015, meetup organized online brought 100,000 supporters to more than 3,500 simultaneous events nationwide. To his surprise, Sanders's June 2015 campaign events drew overflow crowds across the country. When Clinton and Sanders made public appearances within days of each other in Des Moines, Iowa, he drew larger crowds, even though he had already made many stops around the state and Clinton's visit was her first in 2015. On July 1, 2015, his campaign stop in Madison, Wisconsin, drew the largest crowd of any 2016 presidential candidate to that date, with an estimated turnout of 10,000. Over the following weeks, he drew even larger crowds: 11,000 in Phoenix; 15,000 in Seattle; and 28,000 in Portland, Oregon. The Democratic National Committee (DNC) announced in May 2015 that there would be six debates. Critics alleged that the small number of debates and the schedule, with half of the debates on Saturday or Sunday nights, were part of the DNC's deliberate attempt to protect Clinton, who was perceived as the front-runner. In February 2016, both the Clinton and Sanders campaigns agreed in principle to holding four more debates for a total of ten. Clinton dropped out of the tenth debate, scheduled to take place just before the California primary, citing a need to devote her time to making direct contact with California voters and preparing for the general election. Sanders expressed disappointment that Clinton canceled the debate before what he believed would be "the largest and most important primary in the presidential nominating process." Some Sanders supporters raised concerns that publications such as The New York Times minimized coverage of the Sanders campaign in favor of other candidates, especially Trump and Clinton. The Times' ombudsman reviewed her paper's coverage of the Sanders campaign and found that as of September 2015[update] the Times "hasn't always taken it very seriously. The tone of some stories is regrettably dismissive, even mocking at times. Some of that is focused on the candidate's age, appearance and style, rather than what he has to say." She also found that the Times's coverage of Sanders's campaign was much scanter than its coverage of Trump's, though Trump's was also initially considered a long shot at that time, with 63 articles covering the Trump campaign and 14 covering Sanders's. A December 2015 report found that the three major networks—CBS, NBC, and ABC—had spent 234 minutes reporting on Trump and 10 minutes on Sanders, despite their similar polling results. The report noted that ABC World News Tonight had spent 81 minutes on Trump and less than one minute on Sanders during 2015. A study of media coverage in the 2016 election concluded that while Sanders received less coverage than his rival Hillary Clinton, the amount of coverage of Sanders during the election was largely consistent with his polling performance, except during 2015 when Sanders received coverage that far exceeded his standing in the polls. Studies concluded that the tone of media coverage of Sanders was more favorable than that of any other candidate, whereas his main opponent in the democratic primary, Hillary Clinton, received the most negative coverage of any candidate. All 2016 candidates received vastly less media coverage than Donald Trump, and the Democratic primary received substantially less coverage than the Republican primary. Amy Goodman of Democracy Now! noted that on March 15, Super Tuesday III, the speeches of Trump, Clinton, Marco Rubio, and Ted Cruz were broadcast in full. Sanders was in Phoenix, Arizona, on that date, speaking to a rally larger than any of the others, yet his speech was not mentioned, let alone broadcast. However, political scientist Rachel Bitecofer wrote in her 2018 book about the 2016 election that the Democratic primary was effectively over in terms of delegate count by mid-March 2016, but that the media promoted the narrative that the contest between Sanders and Clinton was "heating up" at that time. An NBC/Wall Street Journal poll conducted in May 2016 found Clinton and Trump (by then the presumptive Republican nominee) in a "dead heat", but the same poll found that if Sanders were the Democratic nominee, 53% of voters would support him to 39% for Trump. Clinton and Trump were the least popular likely candidates ever polled, while Sanders received a 43% positive, 36% negative rating. Polls showed that Democratic voters older than 50 preferred Clinton by a large margin but that those under 50 overwhelmingly favored Sanders. A 2017 analysis in Newsweek found that 12% of those who voted for Sanders in the Democratic primary voted for Trump in the general election, a lower proportion than that of Clinton supporters in 2008 who voted for John McCain. In July 2016, a leak of the Democratic National Committee's emails appeared to show DNC officials favoring Clinton over Sanders. Staff repeatedly discussed making his irreligious tendencies a potential campaign issue in southern states and questioned his party loyalty. DNC chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz called his campaign manager "an ass" and "a damn liar". Speaking with Jake Tapper on CNN, Sanders responded to the leak, saying, "it is an outrage and sad that you would have people in important positions in the DNC trying to undermine my campaign. It goes without saying: the function of the DNC is to represent all of the candidates—to be fair and even-minded. But again, we discussed this many, many months ago, on this show, so what is revealed now is not a shock to me." After the final primary election, Clinton became the presumptive Democratic nominee. On July 12, Sanders formally endorsed Clinton. He said he would continue to work with the Democratic National Convention organizers to implement progressive positions. Sanders refused to formally concede before the convention. He spoke at the 2016 Democratic National Convention on July 25, during which he gave Clinton his full support. Some of his supporters attempted to protest Clinton's nomination and booed when Sanders called for party unity. He responded, "Our job is to do two things: to defeat Donald Trump and to elect Hillary Clinton ... It is easy to boo, but it is harder to look your kids in the face if we are living under a Trump presidency." On November 8, in the general election, Sanders received almost 6% of the vote in Vermont, even though he was no longer a candidate. This was the highest share of a statewide presidential vote for a write-in draft campaign in American history. He also received more votes in Vermont than Gary Johnson, the Libertarian candidate, and Jill Stein, the Green candidate, combined. It was possible to vote for Sanders as a write-in candidate in 12 states, and exact totals of write-in votes for him were published in three of them: California, New Hampshire, and Vermont. In those three states, he received 111,850 write-in votes, about 15% of the write-in votes nationwide, and less than 1% of total nationwide vote. In November 2016, Sanders's book Our Revolution: A Future to Believe In was released; upon its release, it was number three on The New York Times Best Seller list. The audiobook later received a Grammy nomination for Best Spoken Word Album. In February 2017, he began webcasting The Bernie Sanders Show on Facebook live streaming. As of April 2, 2017[update], guests had included William Barber, Josh Fox, Jane Mayer, and Bill Nye. Polls taken in 2017 found him to be the most popular politician in the United States. In February 2018, Special Counsel Robert Mueller's investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. elections concluded that Russians had communicated false information during the primary campaigns to help Sanders and Stein and harm Clinton. Sanders rejected the investigation's conclusion, saying that he had seen no evidence that Russians had helped his campaign. Furthermore, he blamed the Clinton campaign for not doing more to prevent Russian interference. He later said that his campaign had taken action to prevent Russian meddling in the election and that a campaign staffer had alerted the Clinton campaign. Politico noted that a Sanders campaign volunteer contacted a political action committee (PAC) that supported the Clinton campaign to report suspicious activities but that the Sanders campaign did not contact the Clinton campaign as such. In November 2018, the Sanders Institute and Yanis Varoufakis, co-founder of DiEM25, launched Progressive International, an international organization uniting progressive activists and organizations "to mobilize people around the world to transform the global order and the institutions that shape it." Analysts have suggested that Sanders's campaign shifted both the Clinton campaign and the Democratic Party politically leftward. A new political organization, Brand New Congress, was formed in April 2016 by former campaign staffers. It works to elect congressional representatives with platforms in line with Sanders. In August 2016, he formed Our Revolution, a political organization dedicated to educating voters about issues, getting people involved in the political process, and electing progressive candidates for local, state, and national office. Speaking on the PBS Newshour about the upcoming 2018 elections and discussing the main principles of the two major parties, Susan Page described the Republican Party as "Trump's party" and the Democratic Party as "Bernie Sanders's party", saying that "Sanders and his more progressive stance has really taken hold." Noting the increasing acceptance of his national single-payer health-care program, his $15-an-hour minimum wage stance, free college tuition and many of the other campaign platform issues he introduced, an April 2018 opinion article in The Week suggested, "Quietly but steadily, the Democratic Party is admitting that Sanders was right." In July 2016, a Slate article called the Democratic platform draft "a monument to his campaign", noting not only his call for a $15 minimum wage, but other campaign issues, such as Social Security expansion, a carbon tax, Wall Street reform, opposition to the death penalty, and a "reasoned pathway for future legalization" of marijuana. Sanders's presidential campaigns led to a resurgence of interest in social democracy and democratic socialism among millennials. On February 19, 2019, Sanders announced that he would seek the Democratic Party's 2020 nomination for president. He had declined the Vermont Democratic Party nomination for U.S. Senate in 2006, 2012, and 2018, which caused an unsuccessful legal challenge to his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2016. Along with his 2019 campaign announcement, he said he would abide by a new Democratic Party rule for presidential candidates and that he would affirm his membership in that party. On March 5, 2019, he signed a formal statement, known as a "loyalty pledge", that he is a member of the Democratic Party and will serve as a Democrat if elected. News reports noted that the day before, he had signed paperwork to run as an independent for reelection to his Senate seat in 2024. Sanders's campaign manager was Faiz Shakir. The campaign's national co-chairs were Ben & Jerry's co-founder Ben Cohen, Representative Ro Khanna, Our Revolution President Nina Turner, and San Juan mayor Carmen Yulín Cruz. Given the high national profile that Sanders maintained since his 2016 campaign, NPR described him as "no longer an underdog" when he announced his 2020 campaign. Using the large email list it built during the 2016 campaign, the 2020 campaign recruited more than one million volunteers within weeks of its launch. It enlisted several former NowThis News employees to produce professional videos for wide social media distribution, live-streamed various forums to its millions of social media followers, and launched a podcast and smartphone app for grassroots organizing. Sanders's 2020 campaign employed many of the same methods as its 2016 counterpart, eschewing a Super PAC and relying predominantly on small-dollar contributions. According to Federal Election Commission filings, the Sanders campaign had raised the most money in the 2020 Democratic field as of June 2019, including money left over from his 2018 Senate and 2016 presidential races. In September 2019, the Sanders campaign became the fastest in U.S. history to reach one million donors. On October 1, 2019, the campaign announced it had raised $25.3 million in the year's third quarter, with an average donation of $18. It was the largest quarterly sum raised by any Democratic candidate. The campaign raised $34.5 million during the fourth quarter of 2019. Sanders steadily polled between 15 and 20% on most national surveys between May and September 2019, according to the RealClearPolitics average. This placed him in a decisive second-place behind Joe Biden until Elizabeth Warren and Kamala Harris caught up in July. From mid-February 2020 to the start of March, Sanders polled in first place in the Democratic primary ahead of Joe Biden and was described by the press as the party's presidential front-runner. According to a RealClearPolitics analysis, Sanders received the third-most mentions on CNN, Fox News, and MSNBC between January and August 2019, trailing only Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. Biden, however, received twice as many mentions as Sanders and Harris. Mentions of Sanders on ABC World News Tonight found him in second place, though also trailing Biden by a large margin. Online mentions "reflect a slightly more balanced picture", with both Sanders and Elizabeth Warren running "neck-and-neck" with Biden. On April 6, 2019, Sanders participated in a Fox News town hall that attracted more than 2.55 million viewers. His decision to appear on Fox was controversial given the Democratic National Committee's decision not to allow Fox to host any of its debates. His appearance saw an increase of Fox News viewers by 24% overall and 40% in the 25-to-54-year-old demographic, surpassing the ratings of all other Democratic presidential candidate town halls that year. As of September 2019, the town hall had received more than 1.5 million views on YouTube. On August 6, 2019, Sanders appeared on The Joe Rogan Experience podcast. Some praised Rogan for "hosting a pragmatic discussion" while others "seemed rather stunned by Sanders's decision to appear on the show at all." After the podcast, Rogan became a top-trending Twitter topic. After interviewing him, Rogan said, "I am not right-wing ... I've interviewed right-wing people. I am 100% left-wing ... Bernie Sanders made a ton of sense to me and I would 100% vote for him." As of October 2019, the podcast had received more than ten million views on YouTube. In December 2018, the Democratic National Committee (DNC) announced the preliminary schedule for 12 official DNC-sanctioned debates, set to begin in June 2019, with six in 2019 and the remaining six during the first four months of 2020. During the July and September debates, commentators described Sanders and Elizabeth Warren as having a "non-aggression pact", staking out similar progressive positions in contrast to the more conservative candidates. In the October 15 debate, his first appearance since his heart attack, debate coach Todd Graham gave Sanders's performance an A, his highest rating of all the candidates. CNN hosted the first 2020 debate in January with six candidates remaining. Co-moderator Abby Phillip questioned Sanders and Warren about an allegation Warren had made that he had privately told her that a woman could not defeat Donald Trump. Phillip asked Sanders, "Senator Sanders, CNN reported yesterday, and Senator Warren confirmed in a statement, that in 2018 you told her that you did not believe that a woman could win the election. Why did you say that?" Ignoring Sanders's strong denial, Phillip asked Warren, "What did you think when Bernie Sanders told you that a woman couldn't become president?" In an interview after the debate, Sanders called it ludicrous to believe that he would doubt a woman's ability to win the presidency and noted that a woman already had won the national popular vote, saying, "After all, Hillary Clinton beat Donald Trump by 3 million votes in 2016." Sanders announced that he was suspending his campaign on April 8, 2020. He stated that he would remain on the ballot in the remaining states and continue to accumulate delegates with the goal of influencing the Democratic Party's platform. On April 14 Sanders endorsed Biden. Biden responded, "I think that your endorsement means a great deal. It means a great deal to me. I think people are going to be surprised that we are apart on some issues but we're awfully close on a whole bunch of others. I'm going to need you—not just to win the campaign, but to govern." A self-described democratic socialist, Sanders is a progressive and left-wing populist who admires social democratic programs in Europe and supports workplace democracy via union democracy, worker cooperatives, and workers' management of public enterprises. He is a strong critic of contemporary neoliberal capitalism, which he calls "uber-capitalism", blaming it for such societal ills as declining life expectancy and rising diseases of despair. He advocates universal, single-payer healthcare, paid parental leave, and tuition-free tertiary education. He supports lowering the cost of drugs by reforming patent laws to allow cheaper generic versions to be sold in the U.S. He supported the Affordable Care Act, though he said it did not go far enough. In November 2015, he gave a speech at Georgetown University about his view of democratic socialism, including its place in the policies of presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Lyndon B. Johnson. Defining what "democratic socialism" means to him, Sanders said: "I don't believe government should take over the grocery store down the street or own the means of production, but I do believe that the middle class and the working families who produce the wealth of America deserve a decent standard of living and that their incomes should go up, not down." Based on his positions and votes throughout his career, many commentators consider his political platform primarily focused on tax-funded social benefits inspired by the Nordic model and not on social ownership of the means of production. Some socialists and major socialist organizations have described Sanders as a democratic socialist, market socialist, or reformist socialist, while others have called him a reformist social democrat. Bhaskar Sunkara has characterized Sanders' politics as "class struggle social democracy", arguing that while postwar social democracy operated as a compromise that instituted tripartite arrangements between business, labor, and government to dampen class conflict, Sanders sees social democratic demands as a means to sharpening class confrontation and raising class consciousness. His views have been echoed by George Eaton, arguing that Sunkara's phrase "captures the nuances of Sanders' politics in a way that a socialist / social democrat binary does not" and asserting that if he was elected president it would represent "the triumph of a politics that is neither wholly socialist, nor social democratic, but a new fusion of both". Sanders views global warming as a serious problem, and advocates bold action to reverse its effects. He calls for substantial investment in infrastructure, with energy efficiency, sustainability, and job creation as prominent goals. He considers climate change the greatest threat to national security. He said that family planning can help fight climate change. He opposed the construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline on the grounds that, like the Keystone XL Pipeline, it "will have a significant impact on our climate." In 2019, he announced his support for Green New Deal legislation, and joined Representatives Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Earl Blumenauer in proposing legislation that would declare climate change a national and international emergency. Sanders focuses on economic issues such as income and wealth inequality, poverty, raising the minimum wage, universal healthcare, cancelling all student debt, making public colleges and universities tuition-free by taxing financial transactions, establishing a 32-hour work week, and expanding Social Security benefits by eliminating the cap on the payroll tax on all incomes above $250,000. He has become a prominent supporter of laws requiring companies to give their workers parental leave, sick leave, and vacation time, noting that such laws have been adopted by nearly all other developed countries. He also supports legislation that would make it easier for workers to join or form a trade union. He was against the Troubled Asset Relief Program, and has called for comprehensive financial reforms, such as breaking up "too big to fail" financial institutions, restoring Glass–Steagall legislation, reforming the Federal Reserve Bank, and allowing the Post Office to offer basic financial services in economically marginalized communities. Believing greater emphasis is needed on labor rights and environmental concerns when negotiating international trade agreements, Sanders voted against and has long spoken against NAFTA, CAFTA, and PNTR with China. He has called them a "disaster for the American worker", saying that they have resulted in American corporations moving abroad. He also opposes the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which he says was "written by corporate America and the pharmaceutical industry and Wall Street." On May 1, 2019, he tweeted: "Since the China trade deal I voted against, America has lost over three million manufacturing jobs. It's wrong to pretend that China isn't one of our major economic competitors." Sanders also strongly opposes outsourcing American jobs. During discussions of the United States Innovation and Competition Act, which was to be used to fund the manufacture of semiconductors amid a shortage, he proposed a measure to ensure the companies the bill funded could not outsource their jobs. The proposed measure would also block the companies from forbidding their employees to unionize. Sanders's proposal was voted down by most Democrats and all Republicans in the Senate. Ahead of the 2022 midterms, Sanders said he wants the Democratic Party to focus more on supporting unionization: "I think we should move to a system where, if 50% of the workers in a bargaining unit plus one vote to form a union, they have a union. End of discussion." Sanders supports establishing worker-owned cooperatives and introduced legislation numerous times from the 1990s to the 2020s that would aid workers who want to "form their own businesses or to set up worker-owned cooperatives." As early as 1976, Sanders proposed workplace democracy, saying, "I believe that, in the long run, major industries in this state and nation should be publicly owned and controlled by the workers themselves." Likewise, he supports empowering and expanding labor unions to advance union democracy. In 1987, Sanders defined democracy as public ownership and workers' self-management in the workplace, saying: "Democracy means public ownership of the major means of production, it means decentralization, it means involving people in their work. Rather than having bosses and workers it means having democratic control over the factories and shops to as great a degree as you can." In his 2020 run for president, he proposed that 20% of stocks in corporations with over $100 million in annual revenue be owned by the corporation's workers and that 45% of the board of directors of corporations with over $100 million in annual revenue be elected by the workers of that corporation. Sanders supports reducing military spending while pursuing more diplomacy and international cooperation. He opposed funding Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras, in the CIA's covert war against Nicaragua's leftist government. He opposed the U.S. invasion of Iraq and has criticized a number of policies instituted during the War on Terror, particularly that of mass surveillance and the USA Patriot Act. He criticized Israel's actions during the 2014 Gaza war and U.S. involvement in the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen. On November 15, 2015, in response to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)'s attacks in Paris, he cautioned against Islamophobia and said, "We gotta be tough, not stupid" in the war against ISIL, adding that the U.S. should continue to welcome Syrian refugees. He criticized the January 2020 drone assassination of Iranian general Qasem Soleimani, calling it a dangerous escalation of tensions that could lead to an expensive war. Sanders supports Palestinian rights and has criticized Israel on several occasions. In 2020, he called the American Israel Public Affairs Committee a platform for bigotry and said he would not attend its conference. He condemned Trump's decision to recognize Jerusalem as Israel's capital, saying, "It would dramatically undermine the prospects for an Israeli–Palestinian peace agreement, and severely, perhaps irreparably, damage the United States' ability to broker that peace." During the 2023 Israel–Hamas war, he criticized Hamas for its attacks on civilians and criticized Israel for its bombing of Gaza. He first called for a pause in fighting, saying that he "doesn't know if a ceasefire is possible with an organization like Hamas", then later called for a humanitarian ceasefire. Addressing Westminster College in a September 2017 speech, Sanders laid out a foreign policy plan for greater international collaboration, adherence to U.S.-led international agreements such as the Paris Agreement and the Iran nuclear deal framework and promoting human rights and democratic ideals. He emphasized the consequences associated with global economic inequality and climate change and urged reining in the use of U.S. military power, saying it "must always be a last resort". He also criticized U.S. support for "murderous regimes" during the Cold War, such as those in Iran, Chile and El Salvador and said that those actions continue to make the U.S. less safe. He also spoke critically of Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. elections and the way President Trump has handled the crisis. He does not consider Turkey a U.S. ally and condemned the Turkish military offensive against U.S.-aligned Kurdish forces in northeastern Syria. Sanders supports closing the "gun show loophole", banning assault weapons, and passing and enforcing universal federal background checks for gun purchases. In 1990, his bid to become a U.S. Representative benefitted from the National Rifle Association of America opposing the competing campaign of Peter Smith, who had reversed his stance on firearm restrictions, and waiting periods for handgun purchases. In 1993, while a U.S. Representative, he voted against the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act (which established background checks and wait periods), and in 2005 voted for legislation that gave gun manufacturers legal immunity against claims of negligence, but as of 2016[update] he has since said that he would support repealing that law. In 1996, he voted against additional funding to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for research on issues related to firearms, but in 2016, he called for an increase in CDC funding for the study of gun violence. On social issues, Sanders has long taken liberal stances. He considers himself a feminist, is pro-choice on abortion, and opposes defunding Planned Parenthood. He has long advocated for LGBT rights; in 2009, he supported legalizing same-sex marriage in Vermont. Sanders has denounced institutional racism and called for criminal justice reform to reduce the number of people in prison, advocates a crackdown on police brutality, and supports abolishing private, for-profit prisons and the death penalty. He supports Black Lives Matter. He also supports legalizing marijuana at the federal level. He has advocated for greater democratic participation by citizens, campaign finance reform, and a constitutional amendment or judicial decision that would overturn Citizens United v. FEC. Sanders criticized President Trump for appointing multiple billionaires to his cabinet. He criticized Trump's rolling back President Obama's Clean Power Plan, noting the scientifically reported effect on climate change of human activity and citing Trump's calling those reports a hoax. He called for caution on the Syrian Civil War, saying, "It's easier to get into a war than out of one."[better source needed] In 2017, he promised to defeat "Trump and Trumpism and the Republican right-wing ideology". Sanders gave an online reply to Trump's January 2018 State of the Union address in which he called Trump "compulsively dishonest" and criticized him for initiating "a looming immigration crisis" by ending the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program. He voiced concern about Trump's failure to mention the finding that Russia had interfered in the 2016 election and "will likely interfere in the 2018 midterms we will be holding ... Unless you have a very special relationship with Mr. Putin." On January 6, 2021, Trump supporters attacked the United States Capitol. Sanders commented: "[Trump] has made it clear that he will do anything to remain in power – including insurrection and inciting violence [and he] will go down in history as the worst and most dangerous president in history." Sanders voted to convict Trump on both articles of his first impeachment trial in 2020 (for pressuring a foreign leader to investigate Joe Biden), and again on the sole article of his second impeachment trial in 2021 (for inciting the Capitol attack). Sanders influenced the environmental policy goals of the Biden administration as described before Biden's nomination. Biden's policy team took some but not all of the Biden-Sanders Unity Task Forces' climate recommendations.[needs update] After Biden was elected president, Sanders became the subject of speculation over a potential appointment as Labor Secretary, which was supported by several progressive groups, such as the Sunrise Movement. For his part, Sanders said that he would accept Biden's nomination if it was offered, but Boston mayor Marty Walsh was chosen for the position instead. When announcing Walsh's nomination, Biden confirmed that he had discussed the position with Sanders, but the two agreed that Sanders's resignation from the Senate and the ensuing special election would have put the Democrats' slim Senate majority at risk. On February 23, 2021, Sanders became the first senator in the Democratic caucus to oppose one of Biden's cabinet picks when he voted against Tom Vilsack's confirmation as Agriculture Secretary, citing concerns about Vilsack's past work as a lobbyist and ties to large corporations. Sanders strongly supported Senate Democrats' decision to use budget reconciliation, a procedure used to avoid filibusters, to pass the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, despite having criticized Republicans' use of reconciliation to pass the 2017 tax cuts. The bill passed the Senate by a 50–49 vote and was signed into law by Biden on March 11, 2021. Sanders has continued to have a strong influence on the Biden administration. When it was noted that he had become a key voice in Biden's administration, he replied, "As somebody who wrote a book called Outsider in the House, yes, it is a strange experience to be having that kind of influence that we have now." Their relationship has lasted over 30 years and Sanders has said it is based on respect and trust: "We have had a good relationship. He wants to be a champion of working families, and I admire that and respect that." Before the 2022 midterm election, Sanders said he regarded it as deciding the fate of democracy, abortion, and climate change, calling it "the most consequential midterm election" of modern U.S. history. He expressed a fear that the Democratic Party had "not done a good enough job" of getting its message out "to young people and working-class people." After the election, Sanders said it "went a hell of a lot better than we had anticipated" and that "discussion about the economy" had "a very strong impact" that helped Democrats. He also pointed to John Fetterman's successful campaign as a model for future Democratic efforts, saying that Fetterman had "strongly identified with the working class" during the Pennsylvania election. In April 2023, Sanders endorsed Biden in the 2024 United States presidential election. Born into a Democratic-voting family, Sanders was first introduced to political activism when his brother Larry joined the Young Democrats of America and campaigned for Adlai Stevenson II in 1956. Sanders joined Vermont's Liberty Union Party in 1971 and was a candidate for several offices, never coming close to winning election. He became party chairman, but quit in 1977 to become an independent. In 1980, he served as an elector for the Socialist Workers Party. In 1981, Sanders ran as an independent for mayor of Burlington, Vermont, and defeated the Democratic incumbent; he was reelected three times. Although an independent, he endorsed Democratic presidential candidates Walter Mondale in 1984 and Jesse Jackson in 1988. His endorsement of Mondale was lukewarm (telling reporters that "if you go around saying that Mondale would be a great president, you would be a liar and a hypocrite"), but he supported Jackson enthusiastically. The Washington Post reported that the Jackson campaign helped inspire Sanders to work more closely with the Democratic Party. Sanders attended the 1983 conference of the Socialist Party USA where he gave a speech. Sanders first ran for the U.S. House of Representatives in 1988 and for the U.S. Senate in 2006, each time adopting a strategy of winning the Democratic Party primary, thereby eliminating Democratic challengers, and then running as an independent in the general election. He continued this strategy through his reelection in the 2018 United States Senate election in Vermont. Throughout his tenure in Congress, he has been listed as an independent. He caucused with Democrats in the House while refusing to join the party, and continues to caucus with Democrats in the Senate. Some conservative southern House Democrats initially barred him from the caucus as they believed that allowing a self-described socialist to join would harm their electoral prospects. He soon came to work constructively with Democrats, voting with the party over 90% of the time during his tenure in Congress. Starting with his 2016 presidential campaign, Sanders's announcements suggested that not only was he running as a Democrat, but that he would run as a Democrat in future elections. When challenged by Clinton about his party commitment, he said, "Of course I am a Democrat and running for the Democratic nomination." Since he remained a senator elected as an independent, his U.S. Senate website and press materials continued to refer to him as an independent during the campaign and upon his return to the Senate. In October 2017, Sanders said he would run for reelection as an independent in 2018 despite pressure to run as a Democrat. His party status became ambiguous again in March 2019 when he signed a formal "loyalty pledge" to the Democratic Party stating that he was a member of the party and would serve as a Democrat if elected president. He signed the pledge the day after he signed paperwork to run as an independent for reelection to the Senate in 2024. After Trump's victory in the 2016 elections, Sanders suggested the Democratic Party undergo a series of reforms and that it "break loose from its corporate establishment ties and, once again, become a grass-roots party of working people, the elderly and the poor." He drew parallels between his campaign and that of the Labour Party in the 2017 UK general election. He wrote in The New York Times that "the British elections should be a lesson for the Democratic Party" and urged the Democrats to stop holding on to an "overly cautious, centrist ideology", arguing that "momentum shifted to Labour after it released a very progressive manifesto that generated much enthusiasm among young people and workers." He had earlier praised Jeremy Corbyn's stance on class issues. Sanders is one of three independents in the Senate, the others being Angus King, who also caucuses with the Democrats, and Kyrsten Sinema. In 1963, Sanders and Deborah Shiling Messing, whom he met in college, volunteered for several months on the Israeli kibbutz Sha'ar HaAmakim. They married in 1964 and bought a summer home in Vermont; they had no children and divorced in 1966. His son (and only biological child), Levi Sanders, was born in 1969 to then-girlfriend Susan Campbell Mott. On May 28, 1988, Sanders married Jane O'Meara Driscoll (née Mary Jane O'Meara), who later became president of Burlington College, in Burlington, Vermont. The day after their wedding, the couple visited the Soviet Union as part of an official delegation in his capacity as mayor. They own a row house in Capitol Hill, a house in Burlington's New North End neighborhood, and a lakefront summer home in North Hero. He considers Jane's three children—Dave Driscoll (born 1975), Carina Driscoll (born 1974), and Heather Titus (née Driscoll; 1971)—to be his own. Sanders's elder brother, Larry, lives in England; he was a Green Party county councillor, representing the East Oxford division on Oxfordshire County Council, until he retired from the council in 2013. Larry ran as a Green Party candidate for Oxford West and Abingdon in the 2015 British general election and came in fifth. Bernie Sanders told CNN, "I owe my brother an enormous amount. It was my brother who actually introduced me to a lot of my ideas." On October 1, 2019, Sanders was hospitalized after experiencing chest pains at a campaign event in Las Vegas. His campaign announced the next day that a blockage had been found in one coronary artery and two stents inserted. Scheduled campaign events and appearances were canceled until further notice. Two days later his campaign released a statement that he had been diagnosed with a heart attack. He was released from the hospital the same day. The statement included the following from Sanders's doctors: After presenting to an outside facility with chest pain, Sen. Sanders was diagnosed with a myocardial infarction. He was immediately transferred to Desert Springs Hospital Medical Center. The senator was stable upon arrival and taken immediately to the cardiac catheterization laboratory, at which time two stents were placed in a blocked coronary artery in a timely fashion. All other arteries were normal. His hospital course was uneventful with good expected progress. He was discharged with instructions to follow up with his personal physician. A few days after returning home, Sanders addressed media outside his home and said he had experienced fatigue and chest discomfort for a month or two before the incident; he expressed regret for not seeking medical assessment sooner: "I was dumb." Sanders made his first national appearance after his heart attack on October 15 at the Democratic debate, at which he said, "I'm healthy, I'm feeling great." When asked how he would reassure voters about his health and ability to take on the duties of the presidency, he said, "We are going to be mounting a vigorous campaign all over this country. That is how I think I can reassure the American people." It was noted that he was "lively and sharp at the debate." In December 2019, three months after the heart attack, Sanders released letters from three physicians, Attending Physician of Congress Brian P. Monahan and two cardiologists, who declared Sanders healthy and recovered from his heart condition. On December 4, 2015, Sanders won Time's 2015 Person of the Year readers' poll with 10.2% of the vote but did not receive the editorial board's award. On March 20, 2016, he was given an honorary Lushootseed name, dxʷshudičup, by Deborah Parker in Seattle to honor his focus on Native American issues during his presidential campaign. On May 30, 2017, Sanders received an honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters from Brooklyn College. As Sanders described his upbringing as an American Jew in a 2016 speech: his father generally attended synagogue only on Yom Kippur; he attended public schools while his mother "chafed" at his yeshiva Sunday schooling at a Hebrew school; and their religious observances were mostly limited to Passover seders with their neighbors. Larry Sanders said of their parents, "They were very pleased to be Jews, but didn't have a strong belief in God." Bernie had a bar mitzvah at the historic Kingsway Jewish Center in Midwood, Brooklyn, where he grew up. In 1963, in cooperation with the Labor Zionist youth movement Hashomer Hatzair, Sanders and his first wife volunteered at Sha'ar HaAmakim, a kibbutz in northern Israel. His motivation for the trip was as much socialistic as it was Zionistic. As mayor of Burlington, Sanders allowed a Chabad public menorah to be placed at city hall, an action the ACLU contested. He publicly inaugurated the Hanukkah menorah and performed the Jewish religious ritual of blessing Hanukkah candles. His early and strong support played a significant role in the now widespread public menorah celebrations around the globe. When asked about his Jewish heritage, Sanders has said that he is "proud to be Jewish." Sanders rarely speaks about religion. He describes himself as "not particularly religious" and "not actively involved" with organized religion. A press package issued by his office states his religion as Jewish. He has said he believes in God, but not necessarily in a traditional way: "I think everyone believes in God in their own ways", he said. "To me, it means that all of us are connected, all of life is connected, and that we are all tied together." In October 2015, on the late-night talk show Jimmy Kimmel Live!, Kimmel asked him, "You say you are culturally Jewish and you don't feel religious; do you believe in God and do you think that's important to the people of the United States?" Sanders replied: I am who I am, and what I believe in and what my spirituality is about is that we're all in this together. That I think it is not a good thing to believe as human beings we can turn our backs on the suffering of other people ... and this is not Judaism, this is what Pope Francis is talking about, that we can't just worship billionaires and the making of more and more money. Life is more than that. In 2016, he disclosed that he had "very strong religious and spiritual feelings", adding, "My spirituality is that we are all in this together and that when children go hungry, when veterans sleep out on the street, it impacts me." Sanders does not regularly attend synagogue, and he does not refrain from working on Rosh Hashanah, as observant Jews do. He has attended yahrzeit observances in memory of the deceased, for the father of a friend, and in 2015 attended a Tashlikh, an atonement ceremony, with the mayor of Lynchburg on the afternoon of Rosh Hashanah. According to Richard Sugarman, his Jewish identity is "certainly more ethnic and cultural than religious." His wife is Roman Catholic, and he has often expressed admiration for Pope Francis, saying that "the leader of the Catholic Church is raising profound issues. It is important that we listen to what he has said." He has said he feels very close to Francis's economic teachings, describing him as "incredibly smart and brave". In April 2016, he accepted an invitation from Marcelo Sánchez Sorondo, an aide close to Francis, to speak at a Vatican conference on economic and environmental issues. While at the Vatican, he met briefly with Francis. In December 1987, during his tenure as mayor of Burlington, Sanders recorded a folk album, We Shall Overcome, with 30 Vermont musicians. As he was not a skilled singer, he performed his vocals in a talking blues style. Owing to his two high-profile campaigns in the 2016 and 2020 Democratic primaries, Sanders and his campaigns have generated many Internet memes and other online content. The Facebook group Bernie Sanders' Dank Meme Stash, where users can submit memes focused around Sanders, received significant attention in the 2016 primary season due to the at-the-time unique idea of a meme community focused entirely on a politician. During the 2020 primary season, a still from a fundraising video in which Sanders tells the viewers "I am once again asking for your financial support" went viral online, with numerous edits made of the frame. The day before Super Tuesday 2020, a video of the Twitch streamer Neekolul wearing a Bernie 2020 shirt and lip-syncing the song "Oki Doki Boomer" also went viral. In 2021, a frame from the inauguration of Joe Biden showing Sanders seated in a folding chair wearing patterned mittens and a jacket reminiscent of the one in the "I am once again asking" meme went viral, with the image captioned or edited into other images, most commonly popular movie scenes. Sanders appeared in a cameo role in the 1988 comedy-drama film Sweet Hearts Dance, playing a man who distributes candy to young trick-or-treaters. In 1999, he acted in the film My X-Girlfriend's Wedding Reception, playing Rabbi Manny Shevitz. In this role he mourned the Brooklyn Dodgers' move to Los Angeles, reflecting Sanders's own upbringing in Brooklyn. On February 6, 2016, he was a guest star alongside Larry David (who is a sixth cousin once removed of Sanders) on Saturday Night Live, playing a Polish immigrant on a steamship that was sinking near the Statue of Liberty. In the DC Extended Universe film Birds of Prey (and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn), one of the reasons Roman Sionis wants Harley Quinn dead is that she "voted for Bernie". With Huck Gutman, Outsider in the White House. London: Verso Books. 2015 [1997]. ISBN 978-1-78478-418-8. OCLC 918986570. In Robert McChesney; Russell Newman; Ben Scott, eds. (2005). "Why Americans Should Take Back the Media". The Future of Media: Resistance and Reform in the 21st Century. Seven Stories Press. ISBN 978-1-58322-679-7. OCLC 57574152. The Speech: A Historic Filibuster on Corporate Greed and the Decline of Our Middle Class. New York: Bold Type Books. 2015 [2011]. ISBN 978-1-56858-554-3. LCCN 2011920256. OCLC 927456901. OL 25090387M. Our Revolution: A Future to Believe In. Thomas Dunne Books. 2016. ISBN 978-1-250-13292-5. OCLC 1026148801. Bernie Sanders Guide to Political Revolution. Henry Holt and Company. 2017. ISBN 978-1-250-13890-3. OCLC 999379791. Where We Go from Here: Two Years in the Resistance. Gale. 2018. ISBN 978-1-432-86916-8. OCLC 1126540640. It's OK to Be Angry About Capitalism. Crown Books. 2023. ISBN 978-0593238714. "A Revolution in American Foreign Policy", Foreign Affairs, March 18, 2024 "Washington's Dangerous New Consensus on China", Foreign Affairs, June 17, 2021 "Ending America's Endless War", Foreign Affairs, June 24, 2019 American Left Electoral history of Bernie Sanders History of the socialist movement in the United States List of elected socialist mayors in the United States List of Jewish members of the United States Congress List of people who received an electoral vote in the United States Electoral College Spintharus berniesandersi Third-party members of the United States House of Representatives From January 3, 2015 to January 3, 2017 Klobuchar was the Chair of the Steering & Outreach Committee. At the start of the 115th Congress - January 3, 2017 - Steering and Outreach were split into 2 separate Chairs; Klobuchar continued as the Chair of the Steering Committee. Caucus member 1995–present Affiliated non-member Excludes three stepchildren, whom he considers to be his own A long speech such as this is commonly known as a filibuster, but because it did not block action, it was not technically a filibuster under Senate rules. IPA: [ˌduːh.s.ˈhwuː.diː.ˌtʃuːp], lit. 'the one lighting the fires for change and unity' in Lushootseed Gambino, Lauren (March 10, 2019). "'Not the billionaires': why small-dollar donors are Democrats' new powerhouse". The Guardian. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 26, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2020. McCrummen, Stephanie (February 5, 2016). "His Most Radical Move". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 5, 2016. Retrieved January 21, 2017. Vargas, Ramon Antonio (August 28, 2023). "Bernie Sanders urges left to back Biden to stop 'very dangerous' Trump". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. Müller, Jan-Werner (January 23, 2020). "Opinion | Please Stop Calling Bernie Sanders a Populist". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 4, 2023. Retrieved September 4, 2023. * Horowitz, Jason (July 24, 2015). "Bernie Sanders's '100% Brooklyn' Roots Are as Unshakable as His Accent". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 24, 2015. Retrieved February 18, 2016. "Bernie Sanders". Jewish Virtual Library. American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved February 18, 2016. "Bernie Sanders Biography". Biography.com. A&E Television Networks, LLC. Archived from the original on January 3, 2023. Retrieved February 18, 2016. "Sanders, Bernard (1941 – )". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Office of the Clerk of the United States House of Representatives' Office of History and Preservation and the Office of the Historian of the United States Senate. Archived from the original on February 17, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2016. "Season 4, Episode 1: The Impression". Finding Your Roots. October 3, 2017. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2020. "Bernie Sanders' ancestral town in Poland kvells over his Iowa performance". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. February 2, 2016. Archived from the original on June 17, 2018. Retrieved February 3, 2016. "Eli Sanders". Geni.com. September 12, 1904. Archived from the original on February 22, 2020. Retrieved January 23, 2016. New York Passenger Lists, 1820–1957 immigration record: Eliasz Gitman, sailing from Antwerp, mother Jetti Gutman, citizenship in 1927 as Elias Sanders. Chana, Jas (August 20, 2015). "Straight Outta Brooklyn, by Way of Vermont: The Bernie Sanders Story". Tablet. Archived from the original on April 26, 2020. Retrieved January 20, 2016. Soltys told them that at the time the Nazis invaded Poland, Romek was the leader of Slopnice's Jewish community. "Which of course," Larry said, "meant he was one of the first to be killed." Kelly, Amita (April 29, 2015). "5 Things You Should Know About Bernie Sanders". NPR. Archived from the original on March 12, 2022. Retrieved July 19, 2015. Stone, Kurt F. (2010). The Jews of Capitol Hill: A Compendium of Jewish Congressional Members. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. p. 483. ISBN 978-0-8108-5731-5. OCLC 755001191. Gaudiano, Nicole (April 28, 2015). "OnPolitics: 6 things to know about Bernie Sanders". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 27, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015. * Leibovich, Mark (January 21, 2007). "The Socialist Senator". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on January 24, 2007. Retrieved July 18, 2015. Kelly, Amita (April 29, 2015). "5 Things You Should Know About Bernie Sanders". NPR. Archived from the original on March 12, 2022. Retrieved July 19, 2015. McCaskill, Nolan D (March 6, 2016). "Sanders: 'My father's family was wiped out by Hitler'". Politico. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved April 15, 2017. * Sathish, Madhuri (August 28, 2015). "Bernie Sanders' Quote About Hitler Winning An Election Is Powerful. It's Also Misleading". Bustle. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. Feldmann, Linda (June 11, 2015). "Bernie Sanders: 'I'm Proud to be Jewish'". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on April 23, 2020. Retrieved June 13, 2015. 'I'm proud to be Jewish,' the Independent from Vermont – and candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination – responded Thursday at a press breakfast hosted by the Monitor. Though, he added, 'I'm not particularly religious.' As a child, Sanders said, being Jewish taught him 'in a very deep way what politics is about. A guy named Adolf Hitler won an election in 1932,' the senator said. 'He won an election, and 50 million people died as a result of that election in World War II, including 6 million Jews. So what I learned as a little kid is that politics is, in fact, very important.' Keith, Tamara (November 2, 2015). "Sanders Could Be The First Jewish President, But He Doesn't Like To Talk About It". NPR. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Bump, Philip (January 29, 2016). "The untold story of Bernie Sanders, high school track star". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 23, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2016. Felsenthal, Carol (May 4, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Found Socialism at the University of Chicago". Chicago. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved July 18, 2015. He graduated from Brooklyn's P.S. 197 and James Madison High School where he was captain of his high school track team. Smith, Nicola (January 17, 2016). "Bernie ropes in British brother for showdown with Clinton". London: Sunday Times. ProQuest 1757568267. Hamm, Theodore (July 7, 2020). "In Bernie's Brooklyn, Political Revolution Was Mainstream". Jacobin. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020. Retrieved July 25, 2020. Chana, Jas (August 20, 2015). "Straight Outta Brooklyn, by Way of Vermont: The Bernie Sanders Story". Tablet Magazine. Nextbook Inc. Archived from the original on May 2, 2020. Retrieved March 15, 2021. "Bernie Sanders Fast Facts". CNN. August 20, 2015. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved October 13, 2015. Talbot, Margaret (October 12, 2015). "The Populist Prophet". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on February 4, 2020. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Kampf-Lassin, Miles (March 3, 2019). "What Chicago Taught Bernie". Jacobin. Archived from the original on April 16, 2020. Retrieved March 4, 2019. Kruse, Michael (July 9, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Has a Secret: Vermont, his son and the hungry early years that made him the surging socialist he is today". Politico. Archived from the original on May 2, 2020. Retrieved July 18, 2015. After he graduated from James Madison High School in 1959, he went to Brooklyn College for a year before transferring to the University of Chicago, where he joined the Congress of Racial Equality, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), the Student Peace Union, and the Young People's Socialist League. Nichols, John (July 6, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Speaks". The Nation. Archived from the original on July 17, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015. Murphy, Tim (February 11, 2016). "Here's What Bernie Sanders Actually Did in the Civil Rights Movement". Mother Jones. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved February 11, 2016. Frizell, Sam (May 26, 2015). "The Radical Education of Bernie Sanders". Time. Archived from the original on December 10, 2015. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Perlstein, Rick (January 2015). "A political education". The University of Chicago Magazine. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2015. Craven, Jasper (August 26, 2015). "Can Sanders' civil rights experience at U. of C. translate on campaign trail?". Chicago Tribune. ISSN 1085-6706. Archived from the original on January 8, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Booth, Hannah (September 16, 2016). "'He wasn't terribly charismatic': Bernie Sanders leads a civil rights protest in 1962". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 28, 2020. Retrieved September 16, 2016. Sanders, Bernie (August 25, 2013). "News August 25". Senate.gov. Archived from the original on February 6, 2020. Retrieved June 17, 2015. Skiba, Katherine (February 22, 2016). "Arrest photo of young activist Bernie Sanders emerges from Tribune archives". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved May 28, 2018. Murphy, Tim (August 26, 2015). "Read 21-Year-Old Bernie Sanders' Manifesto on Sexual Freedom". Mother Jones. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2015. Vogel, Steve (April 14, 2013). "Bernie Sanders on frontline for veterans". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 11, 2020. Retrieved September 30, 2015. Parks, Mary Alice (August 31, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Applied for 'Conscientious Objector' Status During Vietnam, Campaign Confirms". ABC News. Archived from the original on February 3, 2020. Retrieved September 30, 2015. Inskeep, Steve (November 6, 2015). "Bernie Sanders On Being Jewish And A Democratic Socialist". National Public Radio. Archived from the original on February 23, 2023. Schwarz, Hunter (April 30, 2015). "Bernie Sanders: From hippie migrant to would-be president". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Seitz-Wald, Alex (May 28, 2015). "The 25 best things we learned from Bernie Sanders' book". MSNBC. Archived from the original on February 17, 2020. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Sanders, Bernard (March 29, 1969). "Cuba: the Other Side of the Story" (PDF). Vermont Freeman. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2016. Sanders, Bernie [@BernieSanders] (November 4, 2018). "I moved to Stannard when I first came to Vermont. I've visited 13 states in the last 3 weeks but coming home to Stannard was very special to me. pic.twitter.com/muk1Ps4mzh" (Tweet). Retrieved December 17, 2019 – via Twitter. "Two Accidents In Montpelier". Barre Montpelier Times Argus. Barre, VT. January 21, 1969. p. 2. Archived from the original on August 23, 2023. Retrieved August 23, 2023 – via Newspapers.com. "Third Party Candidates". Rutland Herald. Rutland, VT. October 25, 1971. p. 20. Archived from the original on August 23, 2023. Retrieved August 23, 2023 – via Newspapers.com. "Sen. Bernard Sanders (I-Vt.)". Roll Call. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2015. "Election Results Search: 1974 Election Results". sec.state.vt.us. Retrieved May 2, 2015. Citation for votes (total for Leahy and percentages calculated from spreadsheet) Nelson, Garrison (September 14, 2014). "Jim Jeffords: Reluctant Rebel. Section: 1974: Changing the Congressional Guard". VTDigger. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2015. Guma, Greg (1989). The People's Republic: Vermont and the Sanders Revolution. South Burlington, Vermont: New England Press. pp. 19–42. ISBN 978-0-933050-78-5. Siegel, Lou (June 27, 1978). "Vermont's Third Party: No Longer Just a Fan Club". Vanguard Press. Archived from the original on March 19, 2016. Retrieved March 1, 2016 – via Seven Days. "Socialists Launch Campaign to Get Candidates on Ballot". Rutland Herald. July 11, 1980. p. 9. Archived from the original on December 9, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Arena Profile: Sen. Bernie Sanders". Politico. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2015. Bernard Sanders (1979). Eugene V. Debs: Trade Unionist, Socialist, Revolutionary, 1855–1926 – Introduction (Video). Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved July 13, 2015. "Liberty Unionite to Run For Mayor of Burlington". The Burlington Free Press. November 9, 1980. p. 19. Archived from the original on December 13, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "UVM Pair to Work for Independent Coalition". The Burlington Free Press. December 13, 1980. p. 3. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Sanders Opens Campaign Office". The Burlington Free Press. February 18, 1981. p. 14. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Citizens Party Fails To Nominate Candidate". The Burlington Free Press. January 16, 1981. p. 2. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Bernie's Red Vermont". The New Republic. June 13, 2019. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. "Board to Conduct Mayoral Recount Friday". The Burlington Free Press. March 10, 1981. p. 11. Archived from the original on December 3, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. Clendinen, Dudley (March 2, 1982). "It's New Politics vs. Old in Vermont As Mayor Strives to Oust Alderman". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 9, 2018. Margolis, Jon (March 15, 1983). "Bernie of Burlington". The New Republic. Archived from the original on September 2, 2019. "Gilson Rejects Campaign Fund Limit". The Burlington Free Press. February 2, 1983. p. 17. Archived from the original on August 26, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Sanders will make it official". Bennington Banner. December 3, 1982. p. 16. Archived from the original on August 26, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Sanders Announces He's Running Again". Barre Montpelier Times Argus. December 3, 1982. p. 1. Archived from the original on August 26, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Citizens Party Endorses Sanders". The Burlington Free Press. January 23, 1983. p. 14. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Massive Turnout Keeps Mayor Sanders in Office". The Burlington Free Press. March 2, 1983. p. 3. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Mayor Sanders to run again". Brattleboro Reformer. December 7, 1984. p. 2. Archived from the original on August 26, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Sanders Makes It Official". Rutland Herald. December 8, 1984. p. 6. Archived from the original on August 26, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "City Elections At-a-glance". The Burlington Free Press. March 6, 1985. p. 2. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Sanders Announces for Fourth Term, Says He Has 'Energy and Enthusiasm'". Rutland Herald. December 2, 1986. p. 1. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "1987 election results". The Burlington Free Press. March 4, 1985. p. 11. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Sanders Proclaims '87 Race Will Be His Last Mayoral Bid". The Burlington Free Press. December 7, 1987. p. 21. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Bernie Sanders (I)". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 7, 2014. Retrieved January 18, 2013. Banks, Russell (October 5, 2015). "Bernie Sanders, the Socialist Mayor". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on April 21, 2020. Retrieved January 21, 2016. "Self-Styled Socialist Takes Oath as Mayor of Burlington, Vermont". Boston Globe. Associated Press. April 7, 1981. Daybell, Morgan (July 1, 2009). "Senator Bernie Sanders". Vermont Progressive Party. Archived from the original on April 7, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2015. Dreier, Peter; Clavel, Pierre (June 4, 2015). "Bernie's Burlington: What Kind of Mayor Was Bernie Sanders?". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved August 6, 2015. Gram, Dave; Thomas, Ken (May 26, 2015). "Bernie Sanders kicks off 2016 bid from Clinton's left". The Bellingham Herald. Associated Press. Archived from the original on February 8, 2016. Retrieved December 9, 2015. Reynolds, David (1997). Democracy Unbound: Progressive Challenges to the Two Party System. South End Press. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-89608-563-3. "Third Political Parties in America". C-SPAN. February 3, 1989. 34:27 minutes in. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2018. Markus, Bethania Palma (August 11, 2015). "The Bernie effect: Noam Chomsky says Sanders will push the Democratic Party to the left". The Raw Story. Archived from the original on December 17, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2015. "Chomsky Speech at Burlington City Hall – 1985". Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2015 – via YouTube. "Bernie Speaks with the Community". Center for Media and Democracy. September 27, 2011. Archived from the original on January 2, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Murphy, Tim (November 10, 2015). "I Can't Stop Watching These Old Clips of Bernie Sanders' Cable-Access Show". Mother Jones. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Davis, Mark (September 17, 2014). "Bernie Sanders Recorded a Folk Album. No Punchline Required". Seven Days. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Kaczynski, Andrew (June 25, 2015). "Watch This 1980s Bernie Sanders Public Access Show On Recording His Folk Album". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on July 10, 2018. Retrieved February 10, 2016. McCarthy, Colman (April 1, 1989). "Bernie Sanders' Socialism". Archived from the original on February 19, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2020 – via www.washingtonpost.com. "Press Release - 'He's a Rock' | The American Presidency Project". www.presidency.ucsb.edu. Archived from the original on February 18, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2020. "10 Great Places to Live, 2013". kiplinger.com. July 25, 2013. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved December 17, 2019. Cillizza, Chris (August 20, 2015). "Bernie Sanders: The 'Uncola' of American politics". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved August 24, 2017. Sanders, Bernard. "Bernie Sanders compares the US and the USSR". Soundcloud. GDN US Audio. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Horowitz, Jason (April 8, 2016). "Bernie Sanders May Hear the Word 'Socialist' More, From Democrats". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. "Friends honor Sanders as he says goodbye". The Burlington Free Press. April 4, 1989. p. 1. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "1988 U.S. House General Election". Vermont Secretary of State. Archived from the original on June 14, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2022. "Vermont State archives – General Election Results" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on December 20, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016. Pertman, Adam (November 11, 1990). "'The Times Caught Up' To Vermont Socialist". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Daly, Christopher B. (November 11, 1990). "For Vermont's Sanders, Victory Followed Long Path; First Socialist Elected to House in Decades Gets Attention With Frank Talk of Class Conflict". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 7, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2017. Carle, Robin H., ed. (May 12, 1995). "Statistics of the Congressional Election of November 8, 1994". Archived from the original on November 14, 2015. Qiu, Linda (February 23, 2016). "Is Bernie Sanders a Democrat?". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on December 5, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2016. Taibbi, Matt (August 25, 2005). "Inside the Horror Show That Is Congress". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 16, 2020. Retrieved February 14, 2020. "Who should pay?". Brattleboro Reformer. September 23, 2008. Archived from the original on May 29, 2015. Retrieved August 30, 2023. "Statement of Congressman Sanders on 7/16/2003 regarding: Congressman Sanders' Questioning of Federal Reserve Chairman Greenspan". bernie.house.gov (Press release). July 16, 2003. Archived from the original on September 26, 2006. Retrieved August 29, 2010. Bernie Sanders, Alan Greenspan (July 15, 2003). Monetary Policy Report (Motion Picture). House Financial Services Committee: C-SPAN. Event occurs at 1:29:12. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Andrews, Edmund L. (October 23, 2008). "Greenspan Concedes Error on Regulation". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 24, 2008. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Naylor, Brian (October 24, 2008). "Greenspan Admits Free Market Ideology Flawed". NPR. Archived from the original on March 16, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2016. Reynolds, Tom (May 6, 1992). "Cancer Data Bases Expanding". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 84 (9): 839–841. doi:10.1093/jnci/84.11.839. PMID 1593651. Retrieved January 22, 2020. "H.R.4206 - Cancer Registries Amendment Act". United States Congress. February 28, 1992. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved January 22, 2020 – via Congress.gov. "S.3312 - Cancer Registries Amendment Act". United States Congress. October 24, 1992. Archived from the original on February 23, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020 – via Congress.gov. Qiu, Linda (July 10, 2015). "Did Bernie Sanders vote against background checks and waiting periods for gun purchases?". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on January 8, 2020. Retrieved August 31, 2015. "Final Vote Results for Roll Call 614". US House of Representatives. Office of the Clerk of the U.S. House of Representatives. Archived from the original on January 4, 2017. Retrieved November 17, 2014. Qiu, Linda (July 10, 2015). "Did Bernie Sanders vote against background checks and waiting periods for gun purchases?". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2020. Clinton, Hillary (2017). What Happened. Simon & Schuster. p. 186. ISBN 978-1-5011-7556-5. Capehart, Jonathan (February 25, 2016). "Hillary Clinton on 'superpredator' remarks: 'I shouldn't have used those words'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 29, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Cabaniss, Will (September 2, 2015). "Where do Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders stand on the death penalty?". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on December 20, 2019. Retrieved February 26, 2016. "Providing for Further Consideration of H.R. 4092, Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994". Congressional Record. Government Publishing Office. April 13, 1994. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Kristian, Bonnie (February 9, 2016). "Bernie Sanders is not nearly as progressive as you think he is". The Week. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2019. "H.R.728 - Local Government Law Enforcement Block Grants Act of 1995". United States Congress. February 22, 1995. Archived from the original on February 7, 2019. Retrieved February 11, 2019 – via Congress.gov. "HR 424 - Minimum Sentences for Gun Crimes - National Key Vote". votesmart.org. Vote Smart. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved February 11, 2019. "Final Vote Results for Roll Call 534". Office of the Clerk of the U.S. House of Representatives. Archived from the original on July 29, 2007. Retrieved July 18, 2007. Bradner, Eric (July 5, 2015). "Bernie Sanders wants to 'bring us to the middle' on guns". CNN. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2015. Lee, Michelle Ye Hee (January 26, 2016). "Analysis | Everything you wanted to know about Bernie Sanders's record on guns". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved June 4, 2018.(subscription required) Tau, Byron (May 7, 2015). "Rand Paul, Bernie Sanders Revel in NSA Ruling". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2015. "Final Vote Results for Roll Call 398". Office of the Clerk of the U.S. House of Representatives. Archived from the original on February 5, 2011. Retrieved May 19, 2015. Hudson, David L. Jr. (May 25, 2004). "Patriot Act". Libraries and First Amendment. First Amendment Center. Archived from the original on February 23, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2015. Sanders, Bernie (May 7, 2015). "Bernie Sanders: It's Time To End Orwellian Surveillance of Every American". Time. Archived from the original on February 4, 2020. Retrieved July 19, 2015. "Sanders' Freedom to Read Language Dropped from Spending Bill". American Library Association Washington Office Newsline. 14 (107). American Library Association. November 4, 2005. Archived from the original on June 4, 2006. "Final Vote Results for Roll Call 342". Office of the Clerk of the U.S. House of Representatives. Archived from the original on December 18, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2014. Johnsen, Gregory D. (January 16, 2014). "60 Words And A War Without End: The Untold Story Of The Most Dangerous Sentence In U.S. History". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved October 13, 2014. Przybyla, Heidi (February 17, 2020). "Sanders' opposition to the Iraq War was more complicated than he presents". NBC News. Archived from the original on December 20, 2022. Retrieved December 19, 2022. Haltiwanger, John (March 20, 2019). "Bernie Sanders revisits his vote against the Iraq War, which started 16 years ago today, and says much of what he feared came true". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2022. Kusumi, John (2008). Monster Versus Monster: the Democratic Race. Nolanchart. "H.R.728 - To withdraw normal trade relations treatment from the products of the People's Republic of China". United States Congress. February 25, 2005. Archived from the original on February 27, 2020. Retrieved February 26, 2020 – via Congress.gov. "Transcript for May 22: Guest: Howard Dean, Chairman of the Democratic Party". Meet the Press. NBC News. May 22, 2005. Archived from the original on March 30, 2020. Retrieved August 1, 2011. Krieg, Gregory (July 9, 2015). "Watch Young Senator Barack Obama Campaign for Bernie Sanders in 2006". mic.com. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved July 20, 2015. Back in March 2006, the future president traveled to Vermont to headline a rally and fundraiser for then-Rep. Bernie Sanders, an independent running for Senate, and Pete Welch, a Democrat seeking election to Sanders's House seat. Taylor, Jessica (June 24, 2015). "This Quirky New Hampshire Law Might Keep Bernie Sanders Off The Ballot". NPR. Archived from the original on November 23, 2020. Retrieved July 20, 2015. He did appear on the Democratic primary ballot in Vermont for the Senate in both 2006 and 2012, winning their primary, but he declined the nomination both times so he could run as an independent. Nichols, John (May 26, 2015). "'Don't Underestimate Me': Bernie Sanders Knows a Thing or Two About Winning". The Nation. Archived from the original on July 17, 2015. Retrieved July 20, 2015. When Vermont Senator Jim Jeffords, a Republican who turned independent in his last term, announced that he was stepping down in 2006, Sanders jumped into a race that a number of Democrats would have liked to run. He won the Democratic primary and then declined the nomination, mounting an audacious independent run that was not supposed to be easy. Ring, Wilson (November 7, 2006). "Sanders, Welch are winners in Vermont". Boston Globe. Associated Press. Retrieved January 25, 2007. "Vermont Election Results". Decision 2012. NBC News. December 2, 2011. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved April 21, 2013. Vermont Secretary of State (November 2018). "Vermont electoral results, 2018" (PDF). State of Vermont. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 8, 2019. Retrieved February 4, 2019. "Member Activity by Bernard Sanders". Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved January 21, 2020. "Legislative Search Results". Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved January 21, 2020. "Legislative Search Results". Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved January 21, 2020. Dovere, Edward-Isaac (March 12, 2016). "Sanders had big ideas but little impact on Capitol Hill". Politico. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved June 4, 2018. Steinhauer, Jennifer (March 14, 2016). "Via Legislative Side Doors, Bernie Sanders Won Modest Victories". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Retrieved June 4, 2018. Lazarus, Jeffrey (April 7, 2016). "Hillary Clinton was a more effective lawmaker than Bernie Sanders". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on September 29, 2018. Retrieved June 4, 2018. "Member Activity by Bernard Sanders". congress.gov. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. Levitz, Eric (January 21, 2020). "Hillary Clinton Won't Commit to Endorsing Sanders If He Wins Nomination". New York Intelligencer. Vox Media. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. Cochrane, Emily; Friedman, Lisa (August 7, 2022). "What's in the Climate, Tax and Health Care Package". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 11, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Kiely, Eugene (March 7, 2016). "Clinton-Sanders Bailout Brawl - FactCheck.org". FactCheck.org. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved June 4, 2018. Carroll, Lauren (March 7, 2016). "In Michigan, Hillary Clinton says Bernie Sanders 'was against the auto bailout'". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on December 18, 2019. Retrieved June 4, 2018. "S.Amdt.306 to S.Amdt.98: To require recipients of TARP funding to meet strict H-1B worker hiring standard to ensure non-displacement of U.S. workers". February 6, 2009. Archived from the original on December 5, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. Robb, Greg (January 12, 2016). "'Audit the Fed' bill fails despite support from Paul, Sanders". MarketWatch. Archived from the original on May 29, 2021. Retrieved December 16, 2017. Nelson, Steven (January 12, 2016). "Democrats Kill Rand Paul's Audit the Fed Bill, Though Sanders Votes Yes". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on January 12, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Schroeder, Peter (January 12, 2016). "Sanders to vote for Paul's 'Audit the Fed' bill". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved December 16, 2017. "Senator Sanders Filibuster". C-SPAN. December 10, 2010. Archived from the original on April 15, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2015. Memoli, Michael A. (December 10, 2010). "Sen. Bernie Sanders ends filibuster". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved August 1, 2011. Burleigh, Nina (October 25, 2011). "Bernie Sanders' war on the banks". Salon. Archived from the original on December 3, 2020. Retrieved July 19, 2015. Condon, Stephanie (December 10, 2010). "Bernie Sanders Holds Old-School Filibuster Against Obama-GOP Tax Cut Deal". Archived from the original on October 16, 2020. Retrieved May 14, 2018. Beutler, Brian (December 16, 2010). "House Passes Tax Cut Plan, Obama To Sign |". Talking Points Memo. Archived from the original on December 20, 2010. Retrieved December 17, 2010. Bedard, Paul (March 15, 2011). "Sanders's 8.5 Hour Tax Cut Filibuster Gets a Book". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on February 25, 2017. Retrieved May 15, 2016. Adibi, Ida (July 30, 2017). "Bernie's Vote On Sanctions Was About Protecting The Iran Deal From Trump". HuffPost. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2019. "US bill on Russia sanctions prompts German, Austrian outcry". Deutsche Welle. dpa, AP, Reuters, AFP. June 15, 2017. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Sanders, Bernie (June 15, 2017). "Sanders Statement on Iran and Russia Sanctions" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: United States Senate. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved August 27, 2019. Detrow, Scott (December 13, 2018). "Senate votes to end U.S. support for war in Yemen, rebuking Trump and Saudi Arabia". NPR. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved January 1, 2019. Caldwell, Leigh Ann (November 28, 2018). "Senate advances bill to end U.S. involvement in Yemen war after 'inadequate' briefing on Saudi Arabia". NBC News. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2019. Ward, Alex (November 28, 2018). "The Senate is moving closer to ending US support for the war in Yemen". Vox. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2019. "Senate Joint Resolution 54 of the 115th Congress: A joint resolution to direct the removal of United States Armed Forces from hostilities in the Republic of Yemen that have not been authorized by Congress". Congress.gov. December 19, 2018. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved January 1, 2019. Davis, Julie Hirschfeld; Schmitt, Eric (December 13, 2018). "Senate votes to end aid for Yemen fight over Khashoggi killing and Saudis' war aims". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 13, 2018. Retrieved January 1, 2019. "Roll Call Vote 115th Congress - 2nd Session". Senate.gov. December 13, 2018. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved December 20, 2019. Vote Number 266 Sonmez, Felicia; Dawsey, Josh; Demirjian, Karoun (April 16, 2019). "Trump vetoes resolution to end U.S. participation in Yemen's civil war". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 9, 2020. Retrieved January 21, 2020. Vales, Leinz (May 4, 2017). "Thousands will die if House bill becomes law, Bernie Sanders says". CNN. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved December 21, 2019. Jacobson, Louis (June 27, 2017). "Bernie Sanders' projection of 'thousands' of deaths from lost health coverage is well-supported". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on January 14, 2020. Retrieved June 29, 2017. Kurtzleben, Danielle (September 14, 2017). "Here's What's In Bernie Sanders' 'Medicare For All' Bill". NPR. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2017. "Older Americans Act". Sanders.Senate.gov (Press release). May 23, 2013. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2015. Kim, Seung Min (June 19, 2015). "Sanders and immigration? It's complicated". Politico. Archived from the original on December 12, 2020. Retrieved June 4, 2018. Lachman, Samantha (July 22, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Introduces $15 Minimum Wage Bill As Federal Contract Workers Strike". HuffPost. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved August 18, 2015. Kampf-Lassin, Miles (May 9, 2018). "Bernie Sanders Has a Sweeping Plan to Expand Union Rights and Workplace Democracy". In These Times. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved May 12, 2018. Sanders, Bernie (May 24, 2017). "Bernie Sanders: Trump's budget is immoral". CNN. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Sanders, Bernie (November 13, 2017). "Bernie Sanders: We must end global oligarchy". CNN. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved November 13, 2017. Stewart, Emily (September 5, 2018). "Bernie Sanders's BEZOS bill takes aim at how Amazon pays workers". Vox. Archived from the original on September 14, 2018. Retrieved September 14, 2018. Santus, Rex (October 2, 2018). "Jeff Bezos just caved to activists and Bernie Sanders and raised Amazon's minimum wage to $15". Vice. Archived from the original on June 27, 2019. Retrieved October 4, 2018. What Mr. Bezos today has done is not only enormously important for Amazon's hundreds of thousands of employees. It could well be, and I think it will be, a shot heard around the world. Herb, Jeramy (June 5, 2014). "Sanders, McCain strike VA deal". Politico. Archived from the original on December 3, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. "S.2450 - Veterans' Access to Care through Choice, Accountability, and Transparency Act of 2014". Congress of the United States. June 11, 2014. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved January 22, 2020. "H.R.3230 - Veterans Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014". congress.gov. August 7, 2014. Archived from the original on August 22, 2019. Retrieved January 22, 2020. Trudo, Hanna; Gass, Nick (March 17, 2016). "Sanders: I wouldn't have picked Garland for Supreme Court". Politico. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved December 20, 2019. Carney, Jordain (March 23, 2017). "Sanders to oppose Gorsuch's nomination". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved December 20, 2019. Carlsen, Audrey (April 7, 2017). "How Senators Voted on the Gorsuch Confirmation". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved May 14, 2018. Knapp, Emily; Griffiths, Brent; McClure, Jon (October 6, 2018). "Kavanaugh Senate confirmation vote count: Here's how senators voted". Politico. Archived from the original on February 26, 2023. Retrieved February 26, 2023. "U.S. Senate: U.S. Senate Roll Call Votes 116th Congress - 2nd Session". www.senate.gov. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 26, 2023. "U.S. Senate: U.S. Senate Roll Call Votes 117th Congress - 2nd Session". www.senate.gov. Retrieved February 26, 2023. Cooper, Anderson (October 15, 2015). "Bernie Sanders criticized for leadership in VA committee". Anderson Cooper 360°. CNN. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Needham, Vicki (December 12, 2014). "Senate Democrats lock in key committee memberships". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2015. Resnikoff, Ned (February 19, 2015). "Bernie Sanders, mulling presidential run, adopts novel stance on deficit". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on March 19, 2015. Retrieved March 25, 2015. Staff. "Committee Assignments". sanders.senate.gov. US Senate. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2021. "Majority Leader Schumer Announces Senate Democratic Committee Memberships For The 118th Congress". Democrats.senate.gov. January 26, 2023. Archived from the original on January 28, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. Rebuild the Dream. Nation Books. April 3, 2012. p. 27. ISBN 978-1-56858-715-8. "Caucus Members". Congressional Progressive Caucus. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2021. "Members". Afterschool Alliance. Archived from the original on December 23, 2008. Retrieved April 17, 2018. Easley, Jason (August 2, 2011). "Americans Love Socialism: Bernie Sanders Is The 3rd Most Popular US Senator". Politics USA. Archived from the original on December 29, 2014. Retrieved July 18, 2015. Ackerman, Seth (June 29, 2015). "Give the People What They Want: Bernie Sanders' signature issues aren't 'white' issues". Jacobin. ISSN 2158-2602. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. "Forward 50 2015". The Forward. November 11, 2015. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2015. Wofford, Taylor (November 24, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Is America's Most Popular Senator, New Survey Says". Newsweek. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Timm, Trevor (March 17, 2017). "Everyone loves Bernie Sanders. Except, it seems, the Democratic party". The Guardian. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Wofford, Taylor (April 28, 2016). "Bernie Sanders is America's Most Popular Senator, Mitch McConnell its Least". Newsweek. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved September 17, 2016. Easley, Jonathan (April 18, 2017). "Poll: Bernie Sanders country's most popular active politician". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved April 20, 2017. Easley, Jonathan (August 24, 2017). "Poll: McConnell the country's least popular politician". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved May 9, 2019. Mark Murray (June 6, 2016). "In '08, Sanders Endorsed Obama – Before Clinton Formally Exited Race". NBC News. Retrieved February 25, 2024. Levitz, Eric (February 19, 2020). "Sanders Considered Primarying Obama in 2012: Report". New York. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved February 23, 2020. Joseph, Cameron (November 18, 2013). "Bernie Sanders won't rule out presidential bid, touts Elizabeth Warren". The Hill. News Communications. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved January 25, 2020. Eidelson, Josh (November 27, 2013). "Bernie Sanders: Why I might run in 2016". Salon. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved January 25, 2020. Inskeep, Steve (December 15, 2014). "'Warning Shot': Sen. Warren On Fighting Banks, And Her Political Future". 90.9 WBUR News. NPR. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved January 25, 2020. Parks, MaryAlice (April 30, 2016). "A Look Back at Bernie Sanders' Campaign One Year Later". ABC News. Archived from the original on June 21, 2020. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Kane, Paul; Rucker, Philip (April 30, 2015). "An unlikely contender, Sanders takes on 'billionaire class' in 2016 bid". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Rappeport, Alan (April 29, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Announces He Is Running for President". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 3, 2015. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Cogan, Marin (April 30, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Is Officially Running for President – That Doesn't Mean You Can Ask Him About Hillary Clinton". Intelligencer, New York. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved July 18, 2015. Pointdujour, Prisca (May 2, 2015). "Elizabeth Warren praises Bernie Sanders prez bid". Boston Herald. Archived from the original on August 8, 2017. Retrieved May 3, 2015. Kamisar, Ben (June 19, 2015). "Ready for Warren Endorses Sanders". The Hill. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2016. Blake, Aaron (July 24, 2016). "Here are the latest, most damaging things in the DNC's leaked emails". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 22, 2016. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Lee, MJ; Merica, Dan; Zeleny, Jeff (July 12, 2016). "Bernie Sanders endorses Hillary Clinton". CNN. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2018. Sorkin, Amy Davidson (November 4, 2016). "Bernie Sanders's Hard Fight for Hillary Clinton". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on August 30, 2023. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Grayer, Annie (May 30, 2019). "Bernie Sanders takes 'umbrage' when audience member says he didn't support Hillary Clinton in 2016". CNN. Archived from the original on August 30, 2023. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Bradner, Eric (April 30, 2015). "Sanders doesn't want billionaires' backing". CNN. Archived from the original on October 16, 2020. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Thomas, Ken (May 1, 2015). "Sanders raises $1.5M after announcing presidential bid". Yahoo! News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 22, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015. "Sanders raises $33M in final quarter, $73M total for 2015". Politico. January 2, 2016. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved January 2, 2016. Blumenthal, Paul (January 31, 2015). "Bernie Sanders' Small Donor Fundraising Continues To Set Records". HuffPost. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Corasaniti, Nick (May 18, 2015). "Seeking the Presidency, Bernie Sanders Becomes Facebook Royalty Through Quirky Sharing". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 21, 2015. Lerer, Lisa (July 30, 2015). "More than 100,000 people participated in a mega-grassroots Bernie Sanders event". Business Insider. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2015. Tesfaye, Sofia (June 16, 2015). "America is feeling the Bern: Bernie Sanders draws overflow crowds – and surges in the polls". Salon.com. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved June 16, 2015. Wagner, John (June 15, 2015). "Meet the people coming to see Bernie Sanders in Iowa". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved June 16, 2015. Keith, Tamara (June 15, 2015). "Bernie Sanders 'Stunned' By Large Crowds Showing Up For Him". NPR. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved June 16, 2015. Jacobs, Ben (June 25, 2015). "Bernie Sanders closes on Hillary Clinton in New Hampshire Democrats poll". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved July 2, 2015. Seitz-Wald, Alex (July 1, 2015). "Bernie Sanders draws biggest crowd of any 2016 candidate yet". MSNBC. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved July 2, 2015. Reilly, Mollie (July 1, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Draws His Biggest Crowd Yet In Progressive Stronghold". HuffPost. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved July 2, 2015. Wagner, John (July 19, 2015). "Bernie Sanders draws his biggest crowd yet – in Arizona of all places". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 22, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2015. Connelly, Joel (August 8, 2015). "Bernie Sanders draws 15,000 people at UW, state's biggest political crowd since 2010 Obama visit". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on August 9, 2015. Retrieved August 9, 2015. Cillizza, Chris (August 10, 2015). "This Bernie Sanders crowd shot should make Hillary Clinton a little jittery". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 10, 2022. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Mataconis, Doug (December 22, 2015). "How Saturday debates protect Hillary Clinton". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on October 25, 2020. Retrieved December 23, 2015. Sargent, Greg (February 3, 2016). "It's on: Looks like we're getting four more Democratic debates". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved March 30, 2016. Yen, Hope (June 7, 2016). "Delegate math: Clinton wins, and how AP counts delegates". Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved June 4, 2018. Merica, Dan; Stelter, Brian (May 24, 2016). "Clinton declines to debate Sanders in California". CNN. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved November 16, 2016. Sullivan, Margaret (September 9, 2015). "Public Editor's Journal: Has The Times Dismissed Bernie Sanders?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Debenedetti, Gabriel; Gass, Nick (September 10, 2015). "Bernie Sanders overtakes Hillary Clinton in Iowa". Politico. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved September 11, 2015. "Report: Top News Shows Give Trump 234 Minutes, Sanders 10 Minutes". Democracy Now!. December 15, 2015. 6:06. Archived from the original on December 16, 2015. Retrieved December 15, 2015. Sides, John; Tesler, Michael; Vavreck, Lynn (2018). Identity Crisis. Princeton University Press. pp. 8, 99, 104–107. ISBN 978-0-691-17419-8. Archived from the original on November 14, 2019. Retrieved December 8, 2019. Sanders's media coverage and polling numbers were strongly correlated ... At this point in time [2015], Sanders's share of news coverage far exceeded his share in national polls. Patterson, Thomas E. (June 13, 2016). "Pre-Primary News Coverage of the 2016 Presidential Race: Trump's Rise, Sanders' Emergence, Clinton's Struggle". Archived from the original on November 27, 2019. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Bitecofer, Rachel (2018). The Unprecedented 2016 Presidential Election. Palgrave. pp. 36–38, 48. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-61976-7. ISBN 978-3-319-61975-0. Goodman, Amy (November 29, 2016). "Bernie Sanders: "I Was Stunned" by Corporate Media Blackout During Democratic Primary". Democracy Now. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Murray, Mark (May 23, 2016). "Meet the Press". NBC News. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Todd, Chuck; Murray, Mark; Dann, Carrie (May 23, 2016). "First Read: Clinton's Challenge Is Winning Over Sanders Voters". NBC News. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Decker, Cathleen (April 19, 2016). "Why young voters are flocking to Sanders and older ones to Clinton". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 21, 2020. Retrieved September 6, 2016. Le Miere, Jason (August 23, 2017). "Bernie Sanders Voters Helped Trump and Here's Proof". Newsweek. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2018. Newport, Frank (March 26, 2008). "If McCain vs. Obama, 28% of Clinton Backers Go for McCain". Gallup. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved July 2, 2021. Ververs, Vaughn (November 12, 2008). "Who Were Those Clinton-McCain Crossover Voters?". CBS News. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved July 2, 2021. Shear, Michael D.; Rosenberg, Matthew (July 22, 2016). "Released Emails Suggest the D.N.C. Derided the Sanders Campaign". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 24, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Zeleny, Jeff; Lee, MJ; Bradner, Eric (July 22, 2016). "Emails released by Wikileaks raise questions of DNC's impartiality". CNN. Archived from the original on October 22, 2017. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Alcindor, Yamiche (June 16, 2016). "Bernie Sanders, Still Running, Pledges to 'Make Certain' Donald Trump Is Defeated". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved June 18, 2016. Alcindor, Yamiche (June 12, 2016). "Bernie Sanders Refuses to Concede Nomination to Hillary Clinton". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 12, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2020. Collinson, Stephen (July 26, 2016). "Bernie Sanders: 'I am proud to stand with her'". CNN. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Warner, Claire (October 19, 2016). "Ralph Nader Got The Most Write-In Votes For President Ever, But Election Write-Ins Have A Long History". Archived from the original on December 3, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2017. "Vermont Election Night Results". vtelectionresults.sec.state.vt.us. Archived from the original on May 28, 2019. Retrieved September 6, 2017. Dwilson, Stephanie Dube (November 16, 2016). "How Many Write-In Votes Did Bernie Sanders Get in the Election?". Heavy.com. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved September 6, 2017. "Presidential election results in California, 2016" (PDF). sos.ca.gov. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved September 6, 2017. "President of the United States – 2016 General Election – NHSOS". sos.nh.gov. Archived from the original on September 15, 2017. Retrieved September 6, 2017. O'Connor, Kevin (November 15, 2016). "Sanders' Book 'Our Revolution' Arriving with New Significance". VTDigger. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved November 21, 2016. the candidate who had been anointed by the entire establishment, was winning, but at the same time was losing state after state by huge margins. Johnson, Ted (November 27, 2017). "Bernie Sanders Earns Grammy Nomination". Variety. Archived from the original on September 8, 2022. Retrieved November 27, 2017. Seitz-Wald, Alex (April 2, 2017). "The Sanders Show: Welcome to 'Bernie TV'". NBC News. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved April 4, 2017. May, Charlie (April 3, 2017). "Forget Trump TV. Bernie Sanders has struck gold with his new Facebook Live show". Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved April 4, 2017. Schwartz, Drew (August 24, 2017). "Bernie Sanders Is the Most Popular Politician in America, Poll Says". Vice. Archived from the original on September 29, 2020. Retrieved August 25, 2017. Collins, Michael (February 17, 2018). "Indictment: Russians also tried to help Bernie Sanders, Jill Stein presidential campaigns". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 28, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2018. Dovere, Edward-Isaac (February 21, 2018). "Bernie blames Hillary for allowing Russian interference". Politico. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved February 24, 2018. Dovere, Edward-Isaac (February 24, 2018). "Bernie Sanders promoted false story on reporting Russian trolls". Politico. Archived from the original on November 25, 2020. Retrieved February 24, 2018. Wegel, David (December 1, 2018). "Bernie Sanders turns focus to the White House and the world". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 28, 2019. Retrieved December 2, 2018. "An Open Call to All Progressive Forces". Progressive International. November 30, 2018. Archived from the original on December 2, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Sanders, Bernie (September 13, 2018). "A new authoritarian axis demands an international progressive front". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 24, 2023. Retrieved October 27, 2018. Lachman, Samantha (April 27, 2016). "Former Bernie Sanders Staffers Seek To Elect A 'Brand New Congress'". HuffPost. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved November 20, 2016. Guadiano, Nicole (July 15, 2016). "Bernie Sanders will launch organizations to spread progressive message". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. Retrieved July 27, 2016. Harper, Jennifer (August 18, 2016). "Bernie Sanders: Still percolating". The Washington Times. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2016. Election days come and go, but the struggle for economic, social, racial and environmental justice must continue. We have the guts and the energy to take on the special interests, win critical battles on the most important issues of our time, and redefine what's possible in this country. Now it's time for all of us to get to work. PBS NewsHour full episode May 28, 2018. PBS NewsHour. Event occurs at 14:25. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved June 3, 2018. Zurcher, Anthony (June 20, 2019). "Bernie Sanders: What's different this time around?". BBC News. London, England: BBC. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved August 23, 2019. Cassidy, John (February 2, 2016). "Bernie Sanders Just Changed the Democratic Party". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on May 9, 2022. Retrieved August 23, 2019. Spross, Jeff (April 24, 2018). "Bernie Sanders has Conquered the Democratic Party". The Week. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2019. Bouie, Jamelle (July 11, 2016). "What Bernie Sanders Has Won". Slate.com. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved June 3, 2018. McGreal, Chris (September 2, 2017). "'The S-word': how young Americans fell in love with socialism". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved June 19, 2021. Kinzel, Bob (February 19, 2019). "He's In For 2020: Bernie Sanders Is Running For President Again". www.vpr.org. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2019. DiStaso, John (February 22, 2019). "Independent Bernie Sanders to put in writing that he's a 'bona fide' Democrat". WMUR. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2019. Seitz-Wald, Alex (March 5, 2019). "Bernie Sanders signs DNC loyalty pledge: 'I am a member of the Democratic Party'". NBC News. Archived from the original on December 7, 2020. Retrieved March 7, 2019. Resnick, Gideon; Ackerman, Spencer; Stein, Sam (February 19, 2019). "Bernie Sanders Hires Top Progressive Advocate, Faiz Shakir, as Campaign Manager". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on February 19, 2019. Retrieved October 16, 2019. Gamboa, Suzanne (February 22, 2019). "San Juan Mayor Carmen Yulín Cruz to co-chair Bernie Sanders 2020 campaign". NBC News. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved October 16, 2019. Detrow, Scott; Taylor, Jessica (February 19, 2019). "Bernie Sanders Enters 2020 Presidential Campaign, No Longer An Underdog". NPR. Archived from the original on February 20, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2019. Stewart, Emily (July 5, 2019). "Bernie Sanders is winning the internet. Will it win him the White House?". Vox. Archived from the original on December 12, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2019. "2020 Presidential Race". Open Secrets. Archived from the original on May 14, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2019. "Summary data for Bernie Sanders". Open Secrets. Archived from the original on May 13, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Jin, Beatrice; Severns, Maggie (October 15, 2019). "The Money". Politico. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Korte, Cara (September 19, 2019). "Bernie Sanders has 1 million donors". CBS News. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Krieg, Gregory; Nobles, Ryan (October 1, 2019). "Bernie Sanders scores massive $25.3 million third quarter fundraising haul". CNN on MSN. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved October 2, 2019. Lee, Michelle Ye Hee; Sullivan, Sean; Wang, Amy B. (October 2, 2019). "Sanders raised $25.3 million in third quarter, campaign says". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 15, 2021. Retrieved October 2, 2019. Smith, Allan (January 2, 2020). "Trump brings in $46M in 4th quarter, as Sanders, Yang smash their previous records". NBC News. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved January 2, 2020. "2020 Democratic Presidential Nomination". RealClearPolitics. Archived from the original on September 27, 2019. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Bycoffe, Aaron; King, Ritchie; Mehta, Dhrumil; et al. (June 28, 2018). "President: Democratic primary: 2020 Polls". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on February 24, 2020. Retrieved March 15, 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Election 2020 - 2020 Democratic Presidential Nomination". RealClearPolitics. Archived from the original on September 27, 2019. Retrieved March 15, 2020. Burns, Alexander; Martin, Jonathan (February 19, 2020). "Warren Leads an Onslaught of Attacks, Zeroing In on Bloomberg". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Kapur, Sahil; Brewster, Shaquille (February 12, 2020). "Bernie Sanders is now the front-runner. And moderates may be too divided to stop him". NBC News. Archived from the original on February 19, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Krieg, Gregory; Nobles, Ryan; Grayer, Annie (February 18, 2020). "How Bernie Sanders became the Democratic primary's early front-runner". CNN. Archived from the original on February 19, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Ward, Myah (February 18, 2020). "Sanders surges to double-digit lead in new nationwide poll". Politico. Archived from the original on February 19, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Leetaru, Kalev (August 22, 2019). "Ranking the 2020 Democratic Candidates by Media Coverage". RealClearPolitics. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Concha, Joe (April 16, 2019). "Bernie Sanders Fox News town hall draws more than 2.55 million". The Hill. Archived from the original on April 16, 2019. Retrieved April 16, 2019. Sunkara, Bhaskar (April 16, 2019). "How wide is Bernie Sanders's appeal? This cheering Fox News audience is a clue". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved April 18, 2019. Re, Gregg (April 15, 2019). "Bernie Sanders, at combative Fox News town hall, makes no apologies for making millions". Fox News. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Fearnow, Benjamin (April 3, 2019). "Democrats Ridicule Bernie Sanders Over Fox News Town Hall Plans, Conservatives and Moderates Offer Rare Praise". Newsweek. Retrieved September 21, 2019. "Town hall with Bernie Sanders". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Prokos, Hayley (August 7, 2019). "Joe Rogan Praised by Twitter After Bernie Sanders Appears On Podcast to Debate Health Care, Gun Laws and Aliens". Newsweek. Retrieved August 10, 2019. "Joe Rogan Experience #1334 - Fahim Anwar". YouTube. Retrieved September 21, 2019. "Joe Rogan Experience #1330 - Bernie Sanders". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2019. Zurcher, Anthony (September 13, 2019). "Democratic debate: The winners and losers". BBC News. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Light, John; Taintor, David (September 12, 2019). "Here's How Each Candidate Stood Out During The Debate". Talking Points Memo. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Graham, Todd (October 16, 2019). "Debate coach: A star emerged from the Democratic debate". CNN. Retrieved October 16, 2019. Derysh, Igor (January 14, 2020). "Elizabeth Warren: Bernie Sanders "disagreed" with me that a "woman could win" the presidency". Salon. Retrieved February 19, 2020. Ember, Sydney (April 8, 2020). "Bernie Sanders Drops Out of 2020 Democratic Race for President". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 8, 2020. Retrieved April 8, 2020. Krieg, Gregory; Nobles, Ryan; Grayer, Annie (April 8, 2020). "Bernie Sanders drops out of the 2020 race, clearing Joe Biden's path to the Democratic nomination". CNN. Retrieved April 10, 2020. Pramuk, Jacob (April 8, 2020). "Bernie Sanders drops out of the presidential race". CNBC. Retrieved April 10, 2020. Epstein, Kayla (April 8, 2020). "Bernie Sanders vows to stay on upcoming ballots and continue to gather delegates so he can 'exert significant influence over the party platform'". Business Insider. Retrieved April 10, 2020. Mitchell, Andrea (April 8, 2020). "Sanders drops out, remains on ballot to press issues important to political agenda". MSNBC. Retrieved April 9, 2020. "Bernie Sanders endorses Joe Biden for president". CNN. April 13, 2020. Retrieved June 21, 2020. "Bernie Sanders confirms presidential run and damns America's inequities". The Guardian. Associated Press. April 30, 2015. Retrieved June 19, 2015. The self-described 'democratic socialist' enters the race as a robust liberal alternative ... Dreier, Peter (May 5, 2015). "Bernie Sanders' Socialism Is as American as Apple Pie". HuffPost. Retrieved May 5, 2015. because the 73‑year[‑]old U.S. senator from Vermont describes himself as a 'democratic socialist.' Lerer, Lisa (July 16, 2009). "Where's the outrage over AIG bonuses?". The Politico. Retrieved April 19, 2010. Only a handful of members, including self-described democratic socialist Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), criticized ... *Sanders, Bernie (May 26, 2013). "What Can We Learn From Denmark?". HuffPost. Retrieved August 19, 2013. Issenberg, Sasha (January 9, 2010). "Sanders a growing force on the far, far left". Boston Globe. Retrieved August 24, 2013. You go to Scandinavia, and you will find that people have a much higher standard of living, in terms of education, health care, and decent paying jobs. Topaz, Jonathan; Schreckinger, Ben (July 6, 2015). "The socialist surge". Politico. Retrieved August 18, 2015.  'I believe that, in the long run, major industries in this state and nation should be publicly owned and controlled by the workers themselves,' he wrote in 1976. Lynch, Conor (October 8, 2015). "Bernie Sanders is Ayn Rand's worst nightmare: He's changing how we view socialism – and exposing free market parasites". Salon.com. Retrieved February 14, 2020. McMurry, Evan (May 3, 2015). "Bernie Sanders: America Should Look More Like Scandinavia". Mediaite. Archived from the original on May 4, 2015. Retrieved June 4, 2015. Stein, Jeff (May 28, 2019). "Bernie Sanders backs 2 policies to dramatically shift corporate power to U.S. workers". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 9, 2023. Bruenig, Matt (May 29, 2019). "Bernie Wants Power in Workers' Hands". Jacobin. Retrieved March 9, 2023. Sanders, Bernie (November 15, 2016). Our Revolution: A Future to Believe In. New York: Thomas Dunne Books. ISBN 978-1-250-13292-5. Sanders, Bernie (2023). It's OK to Be Angry About Capitalism. Crown Publishing Group. p. 9. ISBN 978-0593238714. Al-Sheikh, Yaseen (February 23, 2023). "Eight Lessons From Bernie Sanders's New Book". Jacobin. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Woodhead, Cameron; Carroll, Steven (February 24, 2023). "Unnerving short stories, an Irish romcom and a journey into the past". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Jaffe, Sarah (July 14, 2009). "Sanders Schools McCain on Public Healthcare". The Nation. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2013. Senator Bernie Sanders is one of the Senate's fiercest advocates for real healthcare reform that puts Americans, not private insurance companies, first. Recently, Sanders told The Nation's Katrina vanden Heuvel, '[I]f you are serious about real healthcare reform, the only way to go is single-payer.' Carter, Zach (May 19, 2012). "Bernie Sanders Offers Plan To Cut Prescription Drug Prices". HuffPost. Retrieved August 16, 2014. "Senator Bernie Sanders Explains Why Obamacare Isn't Enough". YouTube. NBC News. October 31, 2017. Retrieved June 13, 2023. the affordable care act is not good enough - we have got to do more Foran, Clare (November 20, 2015). "How Bernie Sanders Explains Democratic Socialism". The Atlantic. "Senator Bernie Sanders on Democratic Socialism in the United States". BernieSanders.com. November 19, 2015. Archived from the original on July 20, 2017. Weissmann, Jordan (November 19, 2015). "Calling Himself a Socialist Was One of Bernie Sanders' Smartest Moves". Slate. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Bernie Sanders has had consistent message for 4 decades". The Seattle Times. Associated Press. May 11, 2015. ISSN 0745-9696. Archived from the original on November 11, 2015. Maddow, Rachel (August 13, 2015). "Bernie Sanders' track record distinguished by consistency". MSNBC. Retrieved October 13, 2015. Gruenberg, Mark (May 30, 2019). "Bernie Sanders: Workers should control the means of production". People's World. Retrieved March 9, 2023. "History". Democratic Socialists of America (DSA). Retrieved June 4, 2023. Koritz, Joshua (February 28, 2020). "Bernie Sanders: The Socialist Feminist Choice". Socialist Alternative. Retrieved June 4, 2023. "How Bernie Sanders, an Open Socialist, Won Burlington's Mayoral Election". jacobin.com. Retrieved June 4, 2023. Murphy, Patricia (October 10, 2015). "Real socialists think Bernie is a sellout". The Daily Beast. Retrieved February 3, 2016. Smolarek, Walter. "The Bernie Sanders campaign and building the movement for socialism in the US – Liberation News". Retrieved June 4, 2023. Hawkins, Howie (June 25, 2019). "Sanders' "Socialism" is old-fashioned liberalism". www.gp.org. Retrieved June 4, 2023. Sunkara, Bhaskar (February 25, 2019). "The Exercise of Power". Jacobin. Retrieved December 24, 2021. Eaton, George (August 30, 2021). "Is Bernie Sanders a socialist, or a social democrat?". New Statesman. Retrieved December 24, 2021. Totten, Shay (January 15, 2007). "Sanders to push global warming legislation in Senate". Vermont Guardian. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved August 4, 2009. Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-VT, said Monday he was making good on at least one of a handful of campaign promises — introducing a bill designed to cut U.S. contributions to global greenhouse gas emissions in the next decade. ... Sanders added that construction of new power plants is 'extraordinarily expensive' and he would prefer to see federal funding support used to expand the development of sustainable energy, as well as biofuels. Goodman, Amy (September 22, 2014). "Bernie Sanders at People's Climate March: To Stop Global Warming, Get Dirty Money Out of Politics". Democracy now!. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Halsey, Ashley III (January 27, 2015). "Bernie Sanders wants to spend $1 trillion on infrastruture". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 18, 2015. Easley, Jonathan (November 14, 2015). "Sanders: Climate change still greatest threat to national security". The Hill. Retrieved December 19, 2019. "Bernie Sanders in climate change 'population control' uproar". BBC News. September 5, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Sammon, Alexander (October 13, 2016). "Bernie Sanders Just Asked President Obama to Halt the Dakota Access Pipeline". Mother Jones. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Olivia, Rosane (February 19, 2019). "Bernie Sanders Enters 2020 Race, Promises Own Version of Green New Deal". EcoWatch. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Day, Meagan (July 10, 2019). "The US Government Should Declare Climate Emergency". Jacobin. Retrieved July 10, 2019. "On the Issues: Income and Wealth Inequality". BernieSanders.com. Archived from the original on June 20, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2015. Pilkington, Ed (December 15, 2017). "Trump turning US into 'world champion of extreme inequality', UN envoy warns". The Guardian. Retrieved December 16, 2017. We are moving into 2018 – we should not be living in a country with 41 million people living in poverty and so many more in extreme poverty, and nobody even talks about it. – Bernie Sanders Nobles, Ryan; Krieg, Gregory (June 23, 2019). "Bernie Sanders to unveil plan to cancel all $1.6 trillion of student loan debt". CNN. Retrieved June 24, 2019. Resnikoff, Ned (May 19, 2015). "Bernie Sanders unveils plan for tuition-free public colleges". Al Jazeera. Retrieved August 18, 2015. Sanders, Bernie; Fain, Shawn (March 19, 2024). "The case for a 32-hour workweek with no loss in pay". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 21, 2024. "Sanders Files Bill to Strengthen, Expand Social Security". Sanders.Senate.gov (Press release). March 12, 2015. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Woo, Nicole; Jones, Janelle; Schmitt, John (September 2011). "Who's Above the Social Security Payroll Tax Cap?". Center for Economic and Policy Research. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved September 7, 2015. "Family values agenda: paid family leave, paid sick leave, paid vacation" (PDF). Senate office of Bernard Sanders. Retrieved August 18, 2015. Sanders, Bernie (December 1, 2014). "An Economic Agenda for America: 12 Steps Forward". HuffPost. Retrieved June 27, 2015. Resnikoff, Ned (October 6, 2015). "Bernie Sanders proposes sweeping labor law reforms". Al Jazeera. Retrieved October 6, 2015. "(Video) Bailout Petition Statement". Senate.gov. September 24, 2008. Archived from the original on October 14, 2008. Retrieved August 29, 2010. Sanders, Bernie (January 5, 2016). "Text of Bernie Sanders' Wall Street and economy speech". MarketWatch. Retrieved January 6, 2016. Sanders, Bernie (May 7, 2015). "Break Up Big Banks". HuffPost. Retrieved August 18, 2015. Everett, Burgess (July 17, 2015). "Bernie Sanders backs big bank breakups, in contrast with Hillary Clinton". Politico. Retrieved August 18, 2015. Sanders, Bernie (December 23, 2015). "Bernie Sanders: To Rein In Wall Street, Fix the Fed". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 23, 2015. Retrieved December 23, 2015. Sanders, Bernie (May 21, 2015). "The TPP Must Be Defeated". HuffPost. Retrieved August 18, 2015. "Bernie Sanders on Free Trade". On the Issues. Retrieved January 20, 2016. Sanders, Bernie [@BernieSanders] (May 2, 2019). "Since the China trade deal I voted against, America has lost over 3 million manufacturing jobs. It's wrong to pretend that China isn't one of our major economic competitors. When we are in the White House we will win that competition by fixing our trade policies" (Tweet). Retrieved August 30, 2023 – via Twitter. Neidig, Harper (November 26, 2016). "Sanders pressures Trump with anti-outsourcing legislation". The Hill. Retrieved May 11, 2022. "Roll Call Vote 117th Congress - 2nd Session". senate.gov. United States Senate. Retrieved May 11, 2022. Skolnik, Jon (May 5, 2022). "Senate Democrats join with Republicans to vote down Bernie Sanders' effort to stop outsourcing". Salon. Retrieved May 11, 2022. Walker, Hunter (April 28, 2022). "Bernie Sanders Wants Democrats to Make Unions Their Biggest Message". Vanity Fair. Retrieved May 26, 2022. Sanders, Bernie (December 1, 2014). "An Economic Agenda for America: 12 Steps Forward". HuffPost. Retrieved June 27, 2015. Sanders, Bernie (June 2, 2014). "Worker-Owned Businesses". sanders.senate.gov (Press release). Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2015. Wolff, Richard D. (June 27, 2015). "Socialism Means Abolishing the Distinction Between Bosses and Employees". Truthout. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Stancil, Kenny (December 22, 2022). "Sanders' Bill to Expand Worker Ownership Passes Senate in Omnibus". Common Dreams. Retrieved March 10, 2023. Schreckinger, Ben; Topaz, Jonathan (July 6, 2015). "The Socialist Surge". Politico. Retrieved July 8, 2015. "Workplace Democracy". Bernie Sanders Official Website. Retrieved March 10, 2023. Schreckinger, Ben; Topaz, Jonathan (July 6, 2015). "Sanders: 'Democracy means public ownership of the major means of production'". The Daily Kos. Retrieved February 17, 2016. "Corporate Accountability and Democracy". Bernie Sanders Official Website. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Katz, Jonathan M. (May 30, 2019). "Who Was Naive About Bernie Sanders Meeting the Sandinistas?". Mother Jones. "Flashback: Rep. Bernie Sanders Opposes Iraq War". Sanders.Senate.gov. Krieg, Gregory (May 7, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Rips NSA Spying and Pushes for End to Mass Surveillance". Mic.com. Retrieved August 18, 2015. "Statement on NSA Surveillance". Sen. Bernie Sanders (Press release). Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved October 13, 2015. "House Session". C-SPAN. October 9, 2002. p. 13:00:50. Retrieved February 14, 2020. "Bernie Sanders accuses Netanyahu of overreacting in Gaza war". The Times of Israel. November 19, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Fang, Lee; Emmons, Alex (February 28, 2018). "Bernie Sanders Wants Congress to End U.S. Support for Yemen War. Saudi Lobbyists Fought Similar Measures Last Year". The Intercept. Retrieved February 14, 2020. LoBianco, Tom (November 17, 2015). "Bernie Sanders on ISIS: U.S. needs to be "tough" not "stupid"". CNN. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Choi, Matthew (January 3, 2020). "2020 Dems warn of escalation in Middle East after Soleimani killing". Politico. Archived from the original on January 3, 2020. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Siddiqui, Usaid (February 24, 2020). "Sanders accuses pro-Israel group of giving platform to 'bigotry'". Al Jazeera. Retrieved February 24, 2020. Cortellessa, Eric (December 6, 2017). "Liberal US Jews blast Trump's expected Jerusalem declaration". The Times of Israel. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Sanders, Bernie (December 5, 2017). "Sanders Statement on Trump's Plan to Recognize Jerusalem as the Capital of Israel" (Press release). Senate.gov. Archived from the original on February 28, 2020. Retrieved February 28, 2020. Gannon, Casey (November 5, 2023). "Sanders says he doesn't know that a ceasefire is possible 'with an organization like Hamas'". cnn.com. CNN. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Bolton, Alexander (December 13, 2023). "Sanders presses Biden to deny Israel $10.1 billion in military aid". thehill.com. The Hill. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Hancock, Jason (September 21, 2017). "Bernie Sanders, in Missouri speech, takes aim at 'outrageous' inequalities". The Kansas City Star. Retrieved September 24, 2017. Detrow, Scott (September 21, 2017). "Bernie Sanders Lays Out His Foreign Policy Vision". NPR. Retrieved September 24, 2017. Berman, Paul (November 18, 2018). "The Foreign Policy of the American Left". Tablet. Retrieved November 27, 2018. Mortazavi, Negar (October 16, 2019). "Democratic debate: Military veterans Tulsi Gabbard and Pete Buttigieg clash over Syria". The Independent. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Ben, Kamisar (February 28, 2018). "Gun control push complicates Sanders's 2020 ambitions". The Hill. Archived from the original on March 3, 2018. Retrieved March 25, 2018. Willis, Derek; McCartney, Allison; Merrill, Jeremy B. (April 17, 2013). "Represent: Senate Vote 97: Defeats Manchin–Toomey Background Checks Proposal". ProPublica. Archived from the original on September 2, 2016. Retrieved May 28, 2018. "Bernie Sanders on Gun Control". Ontheissues.org. Retrieved July 27, 2016. Fahrenthold, David A. (July 19, 2015). "How the National Rifle Association helped get Bernie Sanders elected". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 20, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2018.(subscription required) Seitz-Wald, Alex (November 19, 2015). "Bernie Sanders explains democratic socialism". MSNBC. Archived from the original on March 1, 2019. Retrieved March 3, 2019. Tumulty, Karen (September 24, 2015). "Hey Bernie Sanders, are you a feminist?". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Lavender, Paige (July 29, 2015). "Bernie Sanders: GOP Efforts To Defund Planned Parenthood 'An Attack On Women's Health'". HuffPost. Retrieved October 5, 2015. Frizell, Sam (October 28, 2015). "How Bernie Sanders Evolved on Gay Marriage". Time. Retrieved August 14, 2017. Thomas, Ken (August 16, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Vows To Better Address Racism". HuffPost. Associated Press. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Tesfaye, Sophia (September 17, 2015). "Bernie Sanders declares war on the prison-industrial complex with major new bill". Salon.com. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Sanders, Bernie (September 22, 2015). "We Must End For-Profit Prisons". HuffPost. Retrieved September 23, 2015. Schwartz, Drew (October 29, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Wants to Abolish the Death Penalty". Vice. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders called for an end to the death penalty on Thursday, laying out his case in a Senate floor speech just one day after Hillary Clinton – the party's 2016 frontrunner and Sanders' main rival for the nomination – said she was opposed to abolishing the practice. Workneh, Lilly (April 7, 2016). "Bernie Sanders Tells Spike Lee What Black Lives Matter Means To Him". HuffPost. Retrieved October 6, 2016. Zhang, Mona (October 24, 2019). "How Bernie Sanders would legalize marijuana". Politico. "Legislation: Campaign Finance". Bernie Sanders: U.S. Senator for Vermont. Senate.gov. Retrieved February 17, 2013. "Saving American Democracy Amendment". Sanders.Senate.Gov. December 8, 2011. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Sanders, Bernie (March 22, 2015). "If We Don't Overturn Citizens United, The Congress Will Become Paid Employees of the Billionaire Class". HuffPost. Retrieved July 18, 2015. Bradner, Eric (February 6, 2017). "Sanders on Trump: 'This guy is a fraud'". CNN. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Shelbourne, Mallory (February 5, 2017). "Sanders: Trump is a 'fraud'". The Hill. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Ernst, Douglas (March 30, 2017). "Sanders: Prioritizing jobs over climate change is 'stupid and dangerous'". The Washington Times. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Pignataro, Juliana Rose (April 7, 2017). "Bernie Sanders Slams Trump's Airstrike On Syria". International Business Times. Panzer, Javier (February 21, 2017). "Bernie Sanders in Los Angeles: 'The truth is that Trump is a pathological liar'". Los Angeles Times. Diaz, Daniella (January 31, 2018). "Bernie Sanders holds his own SOTU speech on-line". CNN. Retrieved February 4, 2018. Haltiwanger, John. "Bernie Sanders skewers the president over Capitol siege: 'The man directly responsible for the chaos of today is Donald Trump'". Business Insider. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Heintz, Paul (February 13, 2021). "Leahy, Sanders vote to convict Trump of inciting insurrection". VT Digger. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Berardelli, Jeff (October 5, 2020). "How Joe Biden's climate plan compares to the Green New Deal". CBS News. Retrieved February 2, 2021. "Climate Mandate - The Team We Need to Combat the Climate Crisis". Climate Mandate. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Klein, Asher (January 8, 2021). "Here's Why Biden Didn't Pick Sen. Bernie Sanders for Labor Secretary". NECN. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Homan, Timothy R. (February 23, 2021). "Sanders votes against Biden USDA nominee Vilsack". The Hill. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Hooper, Kelly (January 24, 2021). "Bernie Sanders: Dems will use reconciliation to pass Covid relief 'as soon as we possibly can'". Politico. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Sullivan, Kate (March 11, 2021). "Biden signs historic $1.9 trillion Covid-19 relief law". CNN. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Semier, Ashley (June 8, 2021). "'Bernie Sanders has real influence': Vermont's longtime outsider has become a trusted voice in the Biden White House". CNN. Retrieved November 25, 2021. Salam, Erum (November 4, 2022). "'They haven't tried': Bernie Sanders on Democrats' economic messaging". The Guardian. Retrieved November 15, 2022. Voght, Kara (November 14, 2022). "Bernie Sanders Sees A Democratic Party That Looks More Like Him Than Ever". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 22, 2022. Peoples, Steve (April 25, 2023). "Bernie Sanders endorses Biden, rules out 2024 bid of his own". AP News. Retrieved July 3, 2023. Sanders, Bernie (November 15, 2016). Our Revolution: A Future to Believe In. New York: St Martin's Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-1-250-13292-5. Burbank, April; Donoghue, Mike (May 26, 2015). "Sanders: 'We begin a political revolution'". Burlington Free Press. Retrieved March 12, 2019. "Liberty Union Party Chief in Vermon Quits Position". Nashua Telegraph. Associated Press. October 12, 1977. Retrieved March 1, 2016. Phillips, Amber (November 19, 2015). "Bernie Sanders: A Somewhat Reluctant Socialist". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 7, 2020. Alterman, Eric (April 15, 2019). "The Liberal Case Against Bernie". The Nation. ISSN 0027-8378. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Murphy, Tim (December 17, 2015). "This Is the Campaign That Explains Bernie Sanders". Mother Jones. Retrieved January 22, 2017. Bernstein, Andrea (April 13, 2016). "In Speech from 1983, Sanders Rails Against the Establishment". WNYC. Archived from the original on November 28, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Blake, Aaron (May 21, 2018). "Bernie Sanders is still borrowing the Democratic Party". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 12, 2019. Dovere, Edward-Isaac (May 21, 2018). "Sanders to run as a Democrat — but not accept nomination". Politico. Retrieved March 12, 2019. Ronayne, Kathleen (November 5, 2015). "Sanders declares as Democrat in NH primary". Burlington Free Press. Associated Press. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Sanders says he'll run as a Democrat in future elections. He says, 'I am running as a Democrat obviously, I am a Democrat now.' Blomquist, Dan; Way, Robert (November 5, 2015). "Bernie Sanders files for Democratic ballot in N.H. primary". Boston Globe. Retrieved December 20, 2019. When a reporter asked Sanders his party allegiance after he filed, Sanders responded, 'I'm a Democrat.' He then called on Buckley, the Democratic chairman, who confirmed the senator's party allegiance. Sanders added that he would run as a Democrat in any future elections. Seitz-Wald, Alex; Koenig, Kailani (November 5, 2015). "Sanders Files for New Hampshire State Ballot Without Incident". NBC News. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Sanders declared himself a Democrat Thursday, and said he will run as a Democrat in future elections, and that was good enough for Gardner. Lee, MJ (February 5, 2016). "Clinton, Sanders clash over what it means to be progressive". CNN. Retrieved December 20, 2019. See search results for "Sanders (I-VT)" at www.senate.gov. Nicholas, Peter (July 26, 2016). "Bernie Sanders to Return to Senate as an Independent". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 6, 2016. Thomsen, Jacqueline (October 22, 2017). "Sanders to run as an independent in 2018". The Hill. Retrieved November 12, 2017. Sanders, Bernie (November 11, 2016). "Bernie Sanders: Where the Democrats Go From Here". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 12, 2016. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Roberts, Dan; Asthana, Anushka (June 2, 2017). "'There's a real similarity': Corbyn gets rousing support from Bernie Sanders". The Guardian. Retrieved July 15, 2017. Kentish, Ben (June 2, 2017). "Bernie Sanders praises 'courageous' Jeremy Corbyn for 'revitalising democracy'". The Independent. Retrieved July 15, 2017. Sanders, Bernie (June 13, 2017). "Bernie Sanders: How Democrats Can Stop Losing Elections". The New York Times. Retrieved August 1, 2017. Hasan, Mehdhi (June 26, 2017). "Prime Minister Jeremy Corbyn sitting down with President Bernie Sanders no longer sounds so outlandish". New Statesman. Retrieved August 1, 2017. Wilkinson, Michael (August 23, 2016). "Bernie Sanders 'backs Jeremy Corbyn' in Labour leadership race". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2017. Montanaro, Domenico (December 10, 2022). "Sinema's break with the Democratic Party may not help her as much as she'd like". NPR. Retrieved December 12, 2022. Wisloski, Jess; Galloway, Anne (July 9, 2015). "Bernie Sanders' Early Days in Vermont: His Life, Loves and Circuitous Route to Politics". VTDigger. Montpelier, Vermont. Retrieved May 23, 2017. Aderet, Ofer (February 4, 2016). "Mystery Solved? Haaretz Archive Reveals Which Kibbutz Bernie Sanders Volunteered On". Haaretz. Retrieved February 5, 2016. Greenhouse, Emily (May 12, 2015). "Getting to Know Jane Sanders, Wife of Bernie". Bloomberg. Retrieved August 19, 2015. Cabaniss, Will (August 12, 2015). "George Will describes Bernie Sanders' Soviet Union honeymoon". PolitiFact. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Goldstein, Sasha (August 8, 2016). "Bernie Sanders Buys a Summer Home in North Hero". Seven Days. Nguyen, Tina (August 9, 2016). "Bernie Sanders Buys His Third House". Vanity Fair - The Hive. Retrieved February 7, 2019. Marcin, Tim (April 21, 2017). "Bernie Sanders tweeted about billionaires' greed, then some Twitter users brought up his three homes". Newsweek. Retrieved February 7, 2019. Andrews-Dyer, Helena (August 10, 2016). "Bernie Sanders buys a $575,000 vacation home and the Internet cries hypocrisy". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 5, 2019. Webber, Esther (August 4, 2015). "The Sanders brothers: A tale of two underdogs". BBC News. Retrieved August 30, 2023. "Election results for East Oxford". Oxfordshire County Council. June 4, 2009. Retrieved May 19, 2014. "Green County Councillor Retires". Oxfordshire Green Party. June 8, 2013. Retrieved July 18, 2015. Hansen, Lauren (May 8, 2015). "Bernie Sanders' brother lost his longshot bid for British Parliament". The Week. Retrieved May 8, 2015. Collinson, Stephen (May 7, 2015). "Bernie Sanders' brotherly love". CNN. Retrieved May 8, 2015. Choi, Matthew; Otterbein, Holly (October 4, 2019). "Bernie Sanders suffered heart attack, has been discharged from hospital". Politico. Retrieved October 4, 2019. Parks, Maryalice; Margolin, Josh; Karson, Kendall (October 2, 2019). "Bernie Sanders hospitalized with chest pain, campaign events canceled". ABC News. Retrieved October 2, 2019. Pearce, Matt (October 4, 2019). "Bernie Sanders suffered a heart attack, campaign reveals". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 8, 2019. Krieg, Gregory; Nobles, Ryan (October 8, 2019). "Bernie Sanders to scale back campaign schedule in the wake of heart attack". www.msn.com. Retrieved October 9, 2019. Villa, Lissandra (October 16, 2019). "Bernie Sanders Leverages the Debate for a Comeback Just Weeks After a Heart Attack". Time. Retrieved October 16, 2019. Ember, Sydney (December 30, 2019). "Bernie Sanders Is in 'Good Health,' His Doctors Say". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 30, 2019. Retrieved February 2, 2020. Gass, Nick (December 7, 2015). "Bernie Sanders wins Time's Person of the Year readers' poll". Politico. Retrieved December 7, 2015. Frizell, Sam (December 7, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Wins Readers' Poll for Time Person of the Year". Time. Retrieved December 7, 2015. "U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders honoured with Coast Salish name". News (Indigenous). CBC News. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. March 25, 2016 [Updated; originally published March 23, 2016]. Archived from the original on July 24, 2018. Retrieved July 24, 2018. Singman, Brooke (May 30, 2017). "Bernie Sanders slams GOP health care plans at New York college graduation". Fox News. New York City. Retrieved May 30, 2017. Berger, Joseph (February 24, 2016). "Bernie Sanders Is Jewish, but He Doesn't Like to Talk About It". The New York Times. p. A16. Archived from the original on February 24, 2016. Retrieved February 24, 2016. Sellers, Frances; Wagner, John (January 27, 2016). "Why Bernie Sanders doesn't participate in organized religion". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Zeveloff, Naomi (February 4, 2016). "Bernie Sanders Kibbutz Revealed at Last". Forward. Retrieved February 4, 2016. "Mystery solved: Sanders volunteered at Kibbutz Shaar HaEmekim". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. February 5, 2016. Retrieved February 5, 2016. Frances Stead Sellers (February 5, 2016). "The kibbutz Bernie Sanders stayed in may have been revealed". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 6, 2016. Kellner, Mark (February 10, 2016). "Bernie Sanders supported religious liberty in menorah dispute". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Ziri, Danielle (February 10, 2016). "Sanders may play down Judaism, but he played big role in Hannukah case". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Johnson, Sally (December 9, 1988). "The Law; Menorah Ruling: Little New Light". The New York Times. Retrieved August 30, 2023. "Some More Info on Bernie Sanders and Judaism (blog)". Chabad.org. Retrieved December 19, 2019. "Press Package". Sanders.Senate.gov. Retrieved February 5, 2015. Winston, Kimberly (February 4, 2016). "Bernie Sanders disappoints some atheists with 'very strong religious' feelings". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Friedman, Gabe (October 24, 2015). "Watch: Bernie Sanders talks spirituality, Larry David and marijuana on 'Jimmy Kimmel'". Haaretz. Retrieved August 30, 2023. "Sanders discusses faith, Clinton grapples with rabbinical question on humility". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. February 4, 2016. Retrieved February 4, 2016. Kampeas, Ron (October 8, 2015). "Bernie Sanders Opens Up About Jewish Upbringing – at Last". The Forward. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Sanders, Bernie (February 15, 2015). "Pope Francis". Senate.gov. Retrieved June 13, 2015. Heilman, Uriel (February 2, 2016). "New Hampshire Jews all over the map ahead of presidential primary". The Times of Israel. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Horowitz, Jason (April 15, 2016). "As Bernie Sanders Heads to Vatican, a Visit With Pope Francis Seems in Doubt". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2016. Thomas, Ken (April 16, 2016). "Pope: Sanders encounter sign of good manners, 'nothing more'". Associated Press. Retrieved April 17, 2016. NPR Staff (January 30, 2016). "Behind The Music: Bernie Sanders". NPR. Retrieved February 4, 2016. Stuart, Tessa (December 2, 2015). "The Untold Story of Bernie Sanders' 1987 Folk Album". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 11, 2018. Retrieved February 4, 2016. Buzz, Carles (February 22, 2016). "Can Bernie Sanders' Dank Meme Stash Swing the Election?". Vice Motherboard. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Ashkinaze, Josh (February 12, 2016). "Politicians Should Embrace Internet Memes". The Oberlin Review. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Hoffman, Ashley (February 7, 2020). "The Bernie Sanders Meme Pile on Has Commenced". Time. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Ewart, Asia (February 4, 2020). "Bernie Sanders' Campaign Ad Became A Viral Meme & We Are Here For It". Refinery29. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Jackson, Gita (April 10, 2020). "Let the 'OK Boomer' Girl Live". Vice. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Romano, Aja (January 20, 2021). "Bernie Sanders inauguration memes are liberal comfort food". Vox. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Ives, Mike; Victor, Daniel (January 21, 2021). "Bernie Sanders Is Once Again the Star of a Meme". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Blevis, Joe (February 5, 2016). "Bernie Sanders has appeared in not one, but two low-budget rom-coms". The A.V. Club. Retrieved February 5, 2016. Wagner, Meg (February 4, 2016). "Bernie Sanders plays rabbi Manny Shevitz in 1999 romantic comedy, goes on long-winded Brooklyn Dodgers rant". New York Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved February 4, 2016. Sanders, Sam (February 7, 2016). "With A Little Help From Larry David, Bernie Sanders Does SNL". NPR. Retrieved February 7, 2016. "Here's the Moment Bernie Sanders and Larry David Found Out They're Cousins". Time. October 5, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2023. Grebey, James (February 7, 2020). "Harley Quinn Voted for Bernie Sanders in Birds of Prey, Apparently". GQ. Retrieved February 17, 2022. Sanders, Bernie (March 18, 2024). "A Revolution in American Foreign Policy". Foreign Affairs. ISSN 0015-7120. Retrieved March 18, 2024. Sanders, Bernie (June 17, 2021). "Washington's Dangerous New Consensus on China". Foreign Affairs. ISSN 0015-7120. Retrieved March 18, 2024. Sanders, Bernie (June 24, 2019). "Ending America's Endless War". Foreign Affairs. ISSN 0015-7120. Retrieved March 18, 2024. Rall, Ted (2016). Bernie. New York: Hollowbrook Publishing. ISBN 978-1-60980-698-9. Rice, Tom W. (1985). "Who Votes for a Socialist Mayor?: The Case of Burlington, Vermont". Polity. 17 (4): 795–806. doi:10.2307/3234575. ISSN 0032-3497. JSTOR 3234575. OCLC 5546248357. S2CID 153889856. Rosenfeld, Steven (1992). Making History in Vermont: The Election of a Socialist to Congress. Wakefield, NH: Hollowbrook Publishing. ISBN 978-0-89341-698-0. LCCN 91034055. OCLC 24468446. OL 1553980M. Soifer, Steven (1991). The Socialist Mayor: Bernard Sanders in Burlington, Vermont. Westport, CN: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-89789-219-3. LCCN 90048954. OCLC 22491683. OL 1887682M. Bernie Sanders at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata U.S. Senate website Campaign website Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress Appearances on C-SPAN Bernie Sanders at Curlie Column archive at The Huffington Post Issue positions and quotes at On the Issues Fact-checking at PolitiFact.com Profile at Vote Smart Bernie Sanders at IMDb Portals:  Biography  Civil rights movement  Judaism  Liberalism  Literature  Politics  Socialism  United States  Vermont