Aydın Province (Turkish: Aydın ili) is a province and metropolitan municipality of southwestern Turkey, located in the Aegean Region. Its area is 8,116 km2, and its population is 1,148,241 (2022). The provincial capital is the city of Aydın. Other towns in the province include the summer seaside resorts of Didim and Kuşadası. Neighboring provinces are Manisa to the north east, İzmir to the north, Denizli to the east, Muğla to the south. The central and western parts of the province are fertile plains watered by the largest river in the Aegean region the Büyük Menderes River, with the Aydın Mountains to the north and the Menteşe Mountains to the south. The western end of the province is the Aegean coast with Lake Bafa a major feature of the Menderes delta area. The climate is typical of the Aegean region, very hot in summer. The Germencik region contains a number of hot springs. Aydın province is divided into 17 districts: Bozdoğan Buharkent Çine Didim Efeler (central) Germencik Incirliova Karacasu Karpuzlu Koçarlı Köşk Kuşadası Kuyucak Nazilli Söke Sultanhisar Yenipazar Much of the countryside is a mix of fig, olive and citrus trees, especially figs. The major sources of income are agriculture and tourism. The coastal towns of Didim and Kuşadası in particular are tourist resorts. Kuşadası is near to the Dilek Peninsula - Büyük Menderes Delta National Park, while Didim has a temple of Apollo, beaches, and the ancient ruins of Miletos nearby. The province contains archeological sites, including the ancient Carian cities of Alinda and Alabanda. Aydın is Turkey's leading producer of figs[citation needed] and exports dried figs worldwide. The very name by which the fruit was called in the world markets was "Smyrna figs" until recently, due to the preponderance of figs exported from İzmir over other species of the genus. But İzmir got the name by being the center for the wholesale trade and exports, while in fact the fruit was traditionally cultivated in Aydın. The term used within Turkey is "Aydın figs" (Turkish: Aydın inciri). Turkey's yearly production of roughly 50,000 tons of dried figs, is almost all from Aydın, Within Aydın province, the best figs are reputed to be grown in Germencik. Aydın produces olives from the varieties of Memecik, Manzanilla, and Gemlik, as well as chestnuts, cotton, citrus fruits, water melons and other fruits. Orange and tangerine cultivation has increased in Aydın in recent years. Aydın has some light industry Adnan Menderes University was built in the city of Aydın in 1990s and has branches throughout the province. The city of Aydın has a number of antique ruins and Ottoman period mosques. The province's countryside and scenery include a stretch of the Aegean coast and a number of historic sites including: Didim coastal resort with large temple of Apollo and nearby Miletus ruins of an Ancient Greek city Ilyas Bey Complex, a cultural heritage of Turkey built in 1403 Kuşadası coastal resort, near to the Dilek Peninsula - Büyük Menderes Delta National Park Kirazli - a traditional Turkish village with old stone houses Alinda - ancient ruins Harpasa - ancient city in Nazilli and Arpaz Castle, also known as Arpaz Beyler Mansion. Alabanda - ancient ruins Magnesia ad Maeandrum - ancient ruins, on the Ortaklar-Söke road in Germencik Nysa - another ruined Carian city, in Sultanhisar Aphrodisias - more ancient ruins, including tombs, friezes and sculpture, in Karacasu Priene - another ruin, near Söke Mycale Mountains Aydın is the home of the Zeybek folk art. This involves a special type of war dance which is performed in a ring to resemble birds. The Zeybek is performed to sounds of the Kiteli and other Turkish folk instruments. The folk songs of Aydın are famously short, indeed a popular saying in the Aegean region to get someone to stop talking, is Keep it short, make it an Aydın tune. The cuisine features the typical Turkish pastries, köfte and kebab. İzmir to Aydın motorway, Motorway O-31, was built in the 1990s and is the city's main thoroughfare. An extension of this motorway to Denizli is currently under construction, with longer-term plans to extend it to Antalya. There is a passenger train service passing through Aydın, connecting the city to İzmir and Denizli. This passenger train runs five trains per day. List of populated places in Aydın Province "Address-based population registration system (ADNKS) results dated 31 December 2022, Favorite Reports" (XLS). TÜİK. Retrieved 19 September 2023. "İl ve İlçe Yüz ölçümleri". General Directorate of Mapping. Retrieved 19 September 2023. US Department of Agriculture briefing report on world fig production For comparison, the world's second and the third largest producers of dried figs, namely Greece and California, each produce around 12,500 tons per year. Since Aydın dominates the Turkish market in figs, the province also soars over these two producers by almost fourfold. Wiley Online Library- Retrieved 2018-07-10 Gazete, Banka (26 November 2021). "Portakal üreticisi aracıdan dertli". Gazete Banka. p. https://gazetebanka.com/. Retrieved 26 November 2021. kısa kes de aydın havası olsun Rail-Turkey TR - İzmir Denizli treni Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aydın Province. (in Turkish) Aydın governor's official website (in Turkish) Aydın municipality's official website Aydın weather forecast information (in Turkish) Local information (in Turkish) Aydın figs information (in Turkish) Aydın otelleri 37°43′42″N 27°56′14″E﻿ / ﻿37.72833°N 27.93722°E﻿ / 37.72833; 27.93722