The European Road Cycling Championships (Officially:UEC Road European Championships) are the set of European championship events for the various disciplines and distances in road cycling and have been regulated by the European Cycling Union since 1995. The championships are for under-23, junior (since 2005) and Elite riders (since 2016). The championships include a road race and an individual time trial since 1997, with women's events shorter than men's and junior's events shorter than under-23's. Championships are open to riders selected by their national cycling governing body. They compete in the colours of their country. As with national road race championships and the UCI Road World Championships, the winners are entitled to wear a special champion's jersey when racing throughout the year; in the case of the European Championship, a white jersey with blue bands and yellow stars, modelled on the flag of Europe, a symbolism and design adopted by both the Council of Europe and the European Union and widely used to represent the continent in sport. Turgis, Dominique (18 April 2018). "Deux villes pour le Championnat d'Europe Espoirs" [Two cities for the U23 European Championship]. DirectVelo (in French). Association Le Peloton. Retrieved 1 July 2018. Brno accueillera les épreuves contre-la-montre. Zlin recevra les courses en ligne. [Brno will host the time trials. Zlin will receive the road races.] "Sports Programme: 2–12 August 2018" (PDF). Glasgow 2018. Culture and Sport Glasgow. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 March 2017. Retrieved 14 May 2017. "Elite Mixed Team Relay" (PDF). UEC. Retrieved 21 September 2023. Results at the European Cycling Union website Older results at: Results men's RR U-23 (cyclingarchives) Results men's ITT U-23 (cyclingarchives) Results women's RR U-23 (cyclingarchives) Results women's ITT U-23 (cyclingarchives) Results men's RR Juniors (cyclingarchives) Results men's ITT Juniors (cyclingarchives) Results women's RR Juniors (cyclingarchives) Results women's ITT Juniors (cyclingarchives) European Cycling Union