Nine Inch Nails, commonly abbreviated as NIN, stylized as NIN, is an American industrial rock band formed in Cleveland in 1988. Singer, songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, and producer Trent Reznor was the only permanent member of the band until his frequent collaborator, Atticus Ross, joined in 2016. The band's debut album, Pretty Hate Machine (1989), was released via TVT Records. After disagreeing with TVT about how to promote the album, the band signed with Interscope Records and released the EP Broken (1992). The following albums, The Downward Spiral (1994) and The Fragile (1999), were released to critical acclaim and commercial success. Following a hiatus, Nine Inch Nails resumed touring in 2005 and released the album With Teeth (2005). Following the release of the album Year Zero (2007), the band left Interscope after a feud. Nine Inch Nails continued touring and independently released Ghosts I–IV (2008) and The Slip (2008) before a second hiatus. Their eighth album, Hesitation Marks (2013), was followed by a trilogy which consisted of the EPs Not the Actual Events (2016) and Add Violence (2017) and their ninth album Bad Witch (2018). In 2020, Nine Inch Nails simultaneously released two further installments in the Ghosts series: Ghosts V: Together and Ghosts VI: Locusts. When touring, Reznor typically assembles a live band to perform with him under the Nine Inch Nails name. This live band has varied over the decades, with various members leaving and returning; the most recent lineup consists of Robin Finck (who initially joined in 1994), Alessandro Cortini (who initially joined in 2005), and Ilan Rubin (who initially joined in 2009) alongside Reznor and Ross. The band's concerts are noted for their extensive use of thematic visual elements, complex special effects, and elaborate lighting. Songs are often rearranged to fit any given performance, and melodies or lyrics of songs that are not scheduled to be performed are sometimes assimilated into other songs. Nine Inch Nails have sold over 20 million records and been nominated for 13 Grammy Awards, winning for the songs "Wish" in 1992 and "Happiness in Slavery" in 1996. Time magazine named Reznor one of its most influential people in 1997, while Spin magazine has described him as "the most vital artist in music". In 2004, Rolling Stone placed Nine Inch Nails at No. 94 on its list of the 100 greatest artists of all time. Nine Inch Nails were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2020, after being nominated in 2014 (their first year of eligibility) and again in 2015. While living in Cleveland in 1987, Trent Reznor played keyboards in the Exotic Birds, a synthpop band managed by John Malm Jr.: 38  Reznor became friends with Malm, who informally became his manager when he left to work on his own music. At the time, Reznor was employed as an assistant engineer and janitor at Right Track Studios. Studio owner Bart Koster granted Reznor free access to the studio between bookings to record demos, commenting that it cost him nothing more than "a little wear on [his] tape heads". Unable to find a band that could articulate the material as he desired, Reznor was inspired by Prince to play all instruments himself except drums, which he programmed electronically. He has continued to play most parts on Nine Inch Nails recordings ever since. The first Nine Inch Nails performance took place at the Phantasy Theater in Lakewood, Ohio, on October 21, 1988. Soon after, following their live support of Skinny Puppy, Reznor aimed to release one 12-inch single on a small European label. Several labels responded favorably to the demo material and Reznor signed with TVT Records. Nine demos, recorded live in November 1988 and collectively known as Purest Feeling, were released in revised form on the first studio album, Pretty Hate Machine (1989).: 41  The overall sound on Purest Feeling is lighter than that of Pretty Hate Machine; several songs contain more live drumming and guitar, as well as a heavier use of film samples. Reznor chose the name "Nine Inch Nails" because it "abbreviated easily" rather than for "any literal meaning". Other rumored explanations have circulated, alleging that Reznor chose to reference Jesus' crucifixion with nine-inch spikes,: 57  or Freddy Krueger's nine-inch fingernails. The Nine Inch Nails logo first appeared on the music video for their debut single, "Down in It". Reznor and Gary Talpas designed the logo, inspired by Tibor Kalman's typography on the Talking Heads album Remain in Light. The logo features the band's initials, with the second N mirrored. Talpas, a native of Cleveland, continued to design Nine Inch Nails packaging until 1997. Written, arranged, and performed by Reznor, Nine Inch Nails' first album Pretty Hate Machine debuted in 1989. It marked his first collaboration with Adrian Sherwood (who produced the lead single "Down in It" in London without meeting Reznor face-to-face) and Mark "Flood" Ellis.: 42  Reznor asked Sean Beavan to mix the demos of Pretty Hate Machine, which had received multiple offers for record deals. He mixed sound during Nine Inch Nails' live concerts for several years, eventually becoming an unofficial member of the live band and singing live backup vocals from his place at the mixing console. Flood's production would appear on each major Nine Inch Nails release until 1994, and Sherwood has made remixes for the band as recently as 2000. Reznor and his co-producers expanded upon the Right Track Studio demos by adding singles "Head Like a Hole" and "Sin". Rolling Stone's Michael Azerrad described the album as "industrial-strength noise over a pop framework" and "harrowing but catchy music"; Reznor proclaimed this combination "a sincere statement" of "what was in [his] head at the time". In fact, the song "Down in It" spent over two months on Billboard's club-play dance chart. After spending 113 weeks on the Billboard 200, Pretty Hate Machine became one of the first independently released records to attain platinum certification. Three music videos were created in promotion of the album. MTV aired the videos for "Down in It" and "Head Like a Hole", but an explicit video for "Sin" was only released in partial form for Closure. The original version of the "Down in It" video ended with the implication that Reznor's character had fallen off a building and died in the street. This footage attracted the attention of the FBI. In 1989, while doing promotion for the album, the band members were asked what shows they would like to appear on. They jokingly replied (possibly while intoxicated) that they would like to appear on Dance Party USA, since it was the most absurd option they could think of at the time. Much to their surprise, they were booked on the show, and made an appearance. In 1990, Nine Inch Nails began the Pretty Hate Machine Tour Series, in which it toured North America as an opening act for alternative rock artists such as Peter Murphy and the Jesus and Mary Chain.: 41  Reznor began smashing his equipment while on stage; Rockbeat interviewer Mike Gitter attributed the live band's early success in front of rock oriented audiences to this aggressive attitude. Nine Inch Nails then embarked on a world tour that continued through the first Lollapalooza festival in 1991.: 42  After a poor European reception opening for Guns N' Roses, the band returned to the US amid pressure from TVT to produce a follow-up to Pretty Hate Machine. After finding out they were hindering control of his project, Reznor criticized the labeling of Nine Inch Nails as a commercially oriented band and demanded his label terminate his contract, but they ignored his plea. In response, Reznor secretly began recording under various pseudonyms to avoid record company interference. Involved in a feud with TVT, he signed a record deal with Interscope Records and created Nothing Records: We made it very clear we were not doing another record for TVT. But they made it pretty clear they weren't ready to sell. So I felt like, well, I've finally got this thing going but it's dead. Flood and I had to record Broken under a different band name, because if TVT found out we were recording, they could confiscate all our shit and release it. Jimmy Iovine got involved with Interscope, and we kind of got slave-traded. It wasn't my doing. I didn't know anything about Interscope. And I was real pissed off at him at first because it was going from one bad situation to potentially another one. But Interscope went into it like they really wanted to know what I wanted. It was good, after I put my raving lunatic act on.: 42  In 1992, Nine Inch Nails relocated to 10050 Cielo Drive, Benedict Canyon, Los Angeles (renamed "Le Pig" by Reznor), the site of the Tate murders, when Charles Manson's "family" murdered Sharon Tate, wife of noted film director Roman Polanski, and four of her friends.: 42  The band used it to record Broken, an extended play (EP) that was the first Nine Inch Nails release distributed by Interscope Records and reached the top 10 on the Billboard 200. In the liner notes, Reznor credited the 1991 Nine Inch Nails touring band as an influence on the EP's sound. He characterized Broken as a guitar-based "blast of destruction", and as "a lot harder ... than Pretty Hate Machine". The inspiration for the harder sound came from the way the live band played during concerts such as Lollapalooza. Songs from Broken earned Nine Inch Nails two Grammy Awards: a performance of the EP's first single "Happiness in Slavery" from Woodstock '94, and the second single "Wish". In reference to receiving the Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance for "Wish", Reznor joked that "Wish" became "the only song to ever win a Grammy that says 'fist fuck' in the lyrics." Against touring of the brand new material, Reznor began living and recording full-time at Le Pig, working on a follow-up free of restrictions from his record label.: 42  Peter Christopherson of the bands Coil and Throbbing Gristle directed a performance video for "Wish", but the EP's most controversial video accompanied "Happiness in Slavery". The video was almost universally banned for its graphic depiction of performance artist Bob Flanagan disrobed and lying on a machine that pleasures, tortures, then (apparently) kills him. A third video for "Pinion", partially incorporated into MTV's Alternative Nation opening sequence, showed a toilet that apparently flushes into the mouth of a person in bondage. Reznor and Christopherson compiled the three clips along with footage for "Help Me I Am in Hell" and "Gave Up" into a longform music video titled Broken. It depicts the murder of a young man who is kidnapped and tortured while forced to watch the videos. This footage was never officially released, but instead appeared covertly among tape trading circles. A separate performance video for "Gave Up" featuring Richard Patrick and Marilyn Manson was filmed at Le Pig. A live recording of "Wish" was also filmed, and both videos appeared in Closure. Broken was followed by the companion remix EP Fixed in late 1992. The only track that was left off the final version of the release is the remix of "Last", produced by Butch Vig (the outro of the "Last" remix is heard in "Throw This Away", which also includes Reznor's remix of "Suck"). The unedited version appeared on the internet as an 8-bit mono 11 kHz file, "NIN_LAST.AIFF", available by FTP from cyberden.com in 1993; it has been removed from the website, but can still be found on p2p networks (Reznor subsequently made it available in higher quality (256kbit/s mp3) at remix.nin.com). Vig later spoke about his remix while answering questions on a music production forum, saying "I started recording a lot of new parts, and took it in a much different direction. When it was finished, Trent thought the front part of the mix didn't fit the EP, so he just used the ending. I'm glad it's on his website. Duke and Steve worked with me on the remix, in the very early days of Garbage." Early ideas for The Downward Spiral arose after the Lollapalooza 1991 festival's concerts ended in September. Reznor elaborated the album's themes into lyrics.: 42  Despite initially choosing to record the album in New Orleans, Reznor searched for and moved to 10050 Cielo Drive, in Los Angeles (known as the Manson Murder House) renting it for $11,000 per month from July 4, 1992, the start of the making of both Broken and The Downward Spiral. Nine Inch Nails' second studio album, The Downward Spiral, entered the Billboard 200 at number two, and is the band's highest seller in the US, over four million copies, among five million worldwide. Influenced by Pink Floyd and by David Bowie of the 1970s, The Downward Spiral's diverse textures and moods depict a protagonist's mental progress. Flood co-produced several tracks, while Alan Moulder mixed most, and later found more extensive production duties on future albums. Reznor invited Sean Beavan to work on The Downward Spiral. After contributing to remixes of Nine Inch Nails songs, such as "Closer", Beavan mixed and co-produced Marilyn Manson's Antichrist Superstar in 1996. The Downward Spiral, alike Broken, was recorded at Le Pig Studios. "March of the Pigs" and "Closer" were singles. Two other tracks, "Hurt" and "Piggy", though not singles, were issued to radio. Also in 1994, the band released the promotional single "Burn", which Reznor produced, on the soundtrack of Oliver Stone film Natural Born Killers. as well as a cover of the Joy Division song "Dead Souls" on the soundtrack to the film The Crow, which went to number 1 on the Billboard 200 album chart. The music video for "Closer", directed by Mark Romanek, was in MTV's frequent rotation, although the network, deeming it too graphic, heavily censored the original. The video shows events in a laboratory dealing with religion, sexuality, animal cruelty, politics, and terror; controversial imagery included a nude bald woman with a crucifix mask, a monkey tied to a cross, a pig's head spinning on some type of machine, a diagram of a vulva, Reznor wearing an S&M mask while swinging in shackles, and of him wearing a ball gag. A radio edit that partially mutes the song's explicit lyrics also received extensive airtime.: 96  Contemporary critics generally praised The Downward Spiral, now classed among the most important albums of the 1990s. In 2005, Spin ranked it 25th among the "100 Greatest Albums, 1985–2005". In 2003, Rolling Stone ranked it 200 among "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time". Blender named it the 80th Greatest American Album. It was ranked No. 488 in the book The Top 500 Heavy Metal Albums of All Time by Martin Popoff. In 2001 Q named The Downward Spiral as one of the 50 Heaviest Albums of All Time; in 2010 the album was ranked No. 102 on their 250 Best Albums of Q's Lifetime (1986–2011) list. After The Downward Spiral's release, Reznor produced an accompanying remix album entitled Further Down the Spiral, the only non-major Nine Inch Nails release to be certified gold in the United States and among the best-selling remix albums of all time. It contained contributions from Coil with Danny Hyde, electronic musician Aphex Twin, producer Rick Rubin, and Jane's Addiction guitarist Dave Navarro, among others. After The Downward Spiral's 1994 release, the live band supported it by embarking on the Self Destruct Tour. The stage set-up featured dirty curtains, rising and lowering for visuals shown during songs such as "Hurt". The tour debuted the band's grungy, messy image as the members appeared in ragged attire slathered in corn starch. Performances were violent and chaotic, band members often injuring themselves by attacking each other, diving into the crowd, and destroying their instruments to close. The widest mainstream audience was a mud-soaked performance at Woodstock '94, and seen by Pay-Per-View in up to 24 million homes. Enjoying mainstream success thereafter, Nine Inch Nails then performed amid greater production values, adding theatrical visual elements. Supporting acts on tour included the Jim Rose Circus and Marilyn Manson. Released in 1997, the Closure video documented highlights from the tour, including full live videos of "Eraser", "Hurt" and a one-take "March of the Pigs" clip directed by Peter Christoperson. In 1997 Reznor also produced the soundtrack to the David Lynch film Lost Highway, which featured one new Nine Inch Nails song, "The Perfect Drug". Around this time, Reznor's studio perfectionism, struggles with addiction, and bouts of writer's block prolonged the production of The Fragile. Five years elapsed between The Downward Spiral and Nine Inch Nails' next studio album, The Fragile, which arrived as a double album in September 1999. The Fragile was conceived by making "songwriting and arranging and production and sound design ... the same thing. A song would start with a drum loop or a visual and eventually a song would emerge out of it and that was the song." Canadian rock producer Bob Ezrin was consulted on the album's track listing; the liner notes state that he "provided final continuity and flow." On the heels of the band's previous successes, media anticipation surrounded The Fragile more than a year before its release, when it was already described as "oft-delayed". The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, selling 228,000 copies in its first week and receiving generally positive reviews. Spin hailed The Fragile as the "album of the year", whereas Pitchfork Media panned its "melodramatic" lyrics. Nine Inch Nails released three commercial singles from the album in different territories: "The Day the World Went Away" in North America; "We're in This Together" in the EU and Japan (on three separate discs); and "Into the Void" in Australia. Several songs from the album became regulars on alternative rock radio stations, however the album dropped to number 16 and slipped out of the Billboard Top 10 only a week after its release, resulting in the band setting a record for the biggest drop from number one, which has since been broken. Reznor funded the subsequent North American tour out of his own pocket. Before the album's release, the song "Starfuckers, Inc." provoked media speculation about whom Reznor had intended its acerbic lyrics to satirize. Cinesexuality critic Patricia MacCormack interprets the song as a "scathing attack on the alternative music scene," particularly Reznor's former friend and protégé Marilyn Manson. The two artists put aside their differences when Manson appeared in the song's music video, retitled "Starsuckers, Inc." and performed on stage with Nine Inch Nails at Madison Square Garden in 2000. Reznor followed The Fragile with another remix album, Things Falling Apart, released in November 2000 to poor reviews, a few months after the 2000 Fragility tour which itself was recorded and released on CD, DVD, and VHS in 2002 as And All That Could Have Been. A deluxe edition of the live CD came with the companion disc Still, containing stripped-down versions of songs from the Nine Inch Nails catalog along with several new pieces of music. During the Fragility 2.0 tour, Reznor suffered a heroin overdose in London in June 2000, forcing a gig which was to be played that night to be cancelled. The incident pushed Reznor into entering rehab, putting Nine Inch Nails on hold while he attempted to become sober. In 2002, Johnny Cash covered the Nine Inch Nails' "Hurt" for his album, American IV: The Man Comes Around, to critical acclaim. After seeing the music video, which later won a Grammy, Reznor himself became a fan of the rendition: I pop the video in, and wow ... Tears welling, silence, goose-bumps ... Wow. [I felt like] I just lost my girlfriend, because that song isn't mine anymore ... It really made me think about how powerful music is as a medium and art form. I wrote some words and music in my bedroom as a way of staying sane, about a bleak and desperate place I was in, totally isolated and alone. [Somehow] that winds up reinterpreted by a music legend from a radically different era/genre and still retains sincerity and meaning—different, but every bit as pure. A further six years elapsed before Nine Inch Nails' fourth full-length album. With Teeth was released in May 2005, though it was leaked prior to its official release date. The album was written and recorded throughout 2004 following Reznor's battle with alcoholism and substance abuse and legal issues with his former manager, John Malm Jr. With Teeth debuted on top of the Billboard 200, Nine Inch Nails' second reign at number one with an album. The album's package lacks typical liner notes; instead it simply lists the names of songs and co-producers, and the URL for an online PDF poster with lyrics and full credits. The entire album was made available in streaming audio on the band's official MySpace page in advance of its release date. Critical reception of the album was mostly positive: Rolling Stone's Rob Sheffield described the album as "vintage Nine Inch Nails". PopMatters condemned the album, claiming Reznor "ran out of ideas." I think, fundamentally, music is something inherently people love and need and relate to, and a lot of what's out right now feels like McDonalds. It's quick-fix. You kind of have a stomachache afterwards. Trent Reznor, Salt Lake Tribune interview (2005) A music video for the song "The Hand That Feeds" premiered on the Nine Inch Nails official website in March 2005. Reznor released the source files for it in GarageBand format a month later, allowing fans to remix the song. He similarly released files for the album's second single "Only" in a wider range of formats, including Pro Tools and ACID Pro. David Fincher directed a video for "Only" with primarily computer-generated imagery. The planned music video for its third single, "Every Day Is Exactly the Same", was directed by Francis Lawrence but reportedly scrapped in the post-production stage. All three singles topped the Billboard Alternative Songs chart. Nine Inch Nails launched a North American arena tour in Autumn 2005, supported by Queens of the Stone Age, Autolux and Death from Above 1979. Another opening act on the tour, hip-hop artist Saul Williams, performed on stage with Nine Inch Nails at the Voodoo Music Experience festival during a headlining appearance in hurricane-stricken New Orleans, Reznor's former home. The Nine Inch Nails live band completed a tour of North American amphitheaters in the summer of 2006, joined by Bauhaus, TV on the Radio, and Peaches. The Beside You in Time tour documentary was released in February 2007 via three formats: DVD, HD DVD and Blu-ray Disc. The home video release debuted at number one on both the Billboard Top Music Videos and Billboard Comprehensive Music Videos charts in the United States. Nine Inch Nails' fifth studio album, Year Zero, was released on April 17, 2007, only two years after With Teeth, a marked change in the slow pace from the release of previous albums. With lyrics written from the perspective of multiple fictitious characters, Year Zero is a concept album criticizing the United States government's policies and their impact on the world 15 years in the future. Critical response to the album was generally favorable, with an average rating of 76% on Metacritic. The story takes place in the United States in 2022, which has been termed "Year 0", by the government, being the year America was reborn. It had suffered several major terrorist attacks, apparently by Islamic fundamentalists, including attacks on Los Angeles and Seattle, and in response, the government seized absolute control of the country. The government is a Christian fundamentalist theocracy, maintaining control of the populace through institutions like the Bureau of Morality and the First Evangelical Church of Plano. The government corporation Cedocore distributes the drug Parepin through the water supply, making Americans who drink water apathetic and carefree. There are several underground rebel groups, mainly operating online, most notably Art is Resistance and Solutions Backwards Initiative. In response to the increasing oppression of the government, several corporate, government, and subversive websites were transported back in time to the present by a group of scientists working clandestinely against the authorities. The websites-from-the-future were sent to the year 2007 to warn American people of the impending dystopian future and to prevent it from ever forming in the first place. An alternate reality game emerged parallel to the Year Zero concept, expanding upon its storyline. Clues hidden on tour merchandise initially led fans to discover a network of fictitious, in-game websites that describe an "Orwellian picture of the United States circa the year 2022". Before Year Zero's release, unreleased songs from the album were found on USB drives hidden at Nine Inch Nails concert venues in Lisbon and Barcelona, as part of the alternate reality game. Fan participation in the alternate reality game caught the attention of media outlets such as USA Today and Billboard, who have cited fan-site The NIN Hotline, forum Echoing the Sound, fan club The Spiral, and NinWiki as sources for new discoveries. The album's first single, "Survivalism", and other tracks from Year Zero were released as multitrack audio files for fans to remix. A remix album titled Year Zero Remixed was later released, containing remixes from Year Zero by other artists. The remix album was Nine Inch Nails' final release on a major record label for over five years, as the act had completed its contractual obligation to Interscope Records and did not renew its contract. The remix album was accompanied by an interactive remix site with multitrack downloads and the ability to post remixes. Reznor planned a film adaption of the album and noted Year Zero as "part of a bigger picture of a number of things I'm working on. Essentially, I wrote the soundtrack to a movie that doesn't exist." The project moved into the television medium because of high costs for Year Zero as a film, then Reznor found American film producer Lawrence Bender and met with writers. On August 10, 2007, Reznor announced that they would be taking the concept to television networks in an attempt to secure a deal: "We're about to pitch it to the network, so we're a couple of weeks away from meeting all of the main people, and we'll see what happens." Since first announcing his plans for a television series, progress slowed, reportedly due to the 2007–2008 Writer's Guild strike, but it nevertheless continued. In 2010, the resultant miniseries, also named Year Zero, was reported to be in development with HBO and BBC Worldwide Productions, with the screenplay and script written by Reznor and Carnivàle writer Daniel Knauf, but at the end of 2012 Reznor said that the project was "in a holding state". In February 2008, Reznor posted a news update on the Nine Inch Nails website entitled "2 weeks". On March 2, Ghosts I–IV (the first release on The Null Corporation label), a 36-track instrumental album, became available via the band's official website. Ghosts I–IV was made available in a number of different formats and forms, ranging from a free download of the first volume, to a $300 Ultra-Deluxe limited edition package. All 2,500 copies of the $300 package sold out in three days. The album is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial Share Alike licence. The album was created improvisationally over a 10-week period and contributors included Atticus Ross, Alan Moulder, Alessandro Cortini, Adrian Belew, and Brian Viglione. Similar to the announcement that ultimately led to the release of Ghosts I–IV, a post on the band's website in April 2008 read "2 weeks!" On May 5, Nine Inch Nails released The Slip via its website without any advertisement or promotion. The album was made available for download free of charge with a message from Reznor, "this one's on me," protected under the same Creative Commons licence as Ghosts, and has seen individual downloads surpassing 1.4 million.The Slip has since been released on CD as a limited edition set of 250,000. Since the release of Ghosts I–IV and The Slip, a 25-date tour titled Lights in the Sky, was announced in several North American cities, and was later expanded to include several more North American dates as well as dates in South America. Cortini and Josh Freese returned as members from the previous tour, while Robin Finck rejoined the band and Justin Meldal-Johnsen was added on bass guitar. Freese and Cortini left the live band, but it became a quartet with the addition of Ilan Rubin on drums. On January 7, 2009, Reznor uploaded unedited HD-quality footage from three shows as a download of over 400 GB via BitTorrent. In an immediate response, a fan organization known as This One Is On Us quickly downloaded the data and had begun to assemble the footage alongside its own video recordings to create a professional 3-part digital film, followed by a physical release created "by fans for fans". This tour documentary became collectively known as Another Version of the Truth and was released throughout late December 2009 to February 2010 via three formats: DVD, Blu-ray Disc and BitTorrent. To date, the group and the project has received significant attention from media outlets such as USA Today, Rolling Stone, Techdirt and Pitchfork TV, and holds the support of both Reznor and the fan community with theatrical screenings being held all over the world. Nine Inch Nails art director and webmaster Rob Sheridan noted on the band's official website: This is yet another example of a devoted fanbase and a policy of openness combining to fill in blanks left by old media barriers. The entire NIN camp is absolutely thrilled that treating our fans with respect and nurturing their creativity has led to such an overwhelming outpour of incredible content, and that we now have such a high quality souvenir from our most ambitious tour ever. Nine Inch Nails Revenge, an iPhone/iPod Touch-exclusive rhythm game developed by Tapulous, was released on March 8, 2009 (five months after the company announced the development of the game). This installment in the Tap Tap video game franchise was themed after Nine Inch Nails, and included tracks from Ghosts I–IV and The Slip. Portions of the album Ghosts I-IV were also used in making of the soundtrack for the documentary Citizenfour. In February 2009, Reznor posted his thoughts about the future of Nine Inch Nails on his official website, stating that "I've been thinking for some time now it's time to make NIN disappear for a while." Reznor since clarified that he "isn't done creating music under the moniker, but that Nine Inch Nails is done touring for the foreseeable future." The "Wave Goodbye" tour concluded on September 10, 2009, at the Wiltern Theater in Los Angeles. Reznor subsequently released two tracks under the Nine Inch Nails moniker: the theme song for the film Tetsuo: The Bullet Man, and a cover of U2's "Zoo Station", included in the Achtung Baby tribute album AHK-toong BAY-bi Covered. In 2009 Reznor married Mariqueen Maandig, and formed a project with Maandig and Atticus Ross dubbed How to Destroy Angels. Its first release, a six-track self-titled EP, was made available for free download in June 2010. Reznor's next collaboration with Ross was co-writing and producing the official score for David Fincher's 2010 film, The Social Network. Reznor and Ross received two awards for the score, a 2010 Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score for a Motion Picture, and a 2010 Oscar for Best Original Score. Reznor and Ross again collaborated with Fincher for the official score the American adaptation of the novel The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo, released in December 2011, and then again on Fincher's 2014 film Gone Girl. In July 2012 Reznor teamed up with video game developer Treyarch to compose the theme music for Call of Duty: Black Ops II. Later that year Reznor again worked with Atticus Ross along with Alessandro Cortini on a remix of the song "Destroyer" by Telepathe. Reznor also appeared in a documentary called "Sound City" directed by Dave Grohl, in addition to co-writing and performing the song "Mantra" with Grohl and Josh Homme. This led to further collaboration with Reznor and Homme on the 2013 album from Queens of the Stone Age titled ...Like Clockwork. Reznor contributed vocals and drum programing to the song "Kalopsia" and vocals on "Fairweather Friends" along with Elton John on piano and vocals. In October a project with Dr. Dre and Beats Electronics was announced that Reznor wrote was "probably not what you're expecting [from me]". The project was named "Daisy"; a digital music service was announced in January 2013. It was until January 2014 that the service was fully launched, with Reznor serving as chief creative officer. In an interview with BBC Radio 1, Reznor indicated that he would be writing for the majority of 2012 with Nine Inch Nails "in mind". Reznor eventually confirmed that he was working on new Nine Inch Nails material and might be performing live again. In February 2013, Reznor announced the return of Nine Inch Nails and revealed the Twenty Thirteen Tour. He also revealed that the new lineup of the band would include Eric Avery of Jane's Addiction, Adrian Belew of King Crimson, and Josh Eustis of Telefon Tel Aviv, as well as returning members Alessandro Cortini and Ilan Rubin. However, both Avery and Belew would quit the touring band before performances commenced, with former member Robin Finck returning in their place. By May 28 a new Nine Inch Nails album was complete. Released September 3, Hesitation Marks incorporated rhythms reminiscent of earlier releases, but was more expansive and theatrical. In addition to the recently departed Adrian Belew, Reznor employed bassist Pino Palladino along with Todd Rundgren and Fleetwood Mac's Lindsey Buckingham to achieve various art-rock elements. The album produced three singles, all released prior to that of the album itself. "Came Back Haunted" was released on June 6, with an accompanying music video bearing an epileptic seizure warning. The second single, "Copy of A", was released on August 12 free of charge to US and UK Amazon.com account holders. "Everything" was the third and final single, recorded during sessions for the Nine Inch Nails greatest hits album. The sessions gave way to more songs that ended up yielding the entire album. In July the Twenty Thirteen Tour was underway, beginning with a slew of festival appearances that included the Fuji Rock Festival, and the Pukkelpop, Hockenheim, Germany's Rock'n'Heim and the Reading and Leeds festivals in August. The Tension 2013 North American leg of the tour ran from September to November and added Palladino, Lisa Fischer and Sharlotte Gibson to the lineup with Godspeed You! Black Emperor and Explosions in the Sky as opening acts. This leg of the tour was documented and released in the spring as Nine Inch Nails Tension 2013. In 2014 the band extended its tour worldwide as a four-piece. The new lineup included previous collaborators, Ilan Rubin, Alessandro Cortini, and Robin Finck. The band was joined by Queens of the Stone Age for the Australia and New Zealand tour, during which a nightly coin toss determined who opened. The tour closed in Europe with supporting synth-pop act Cold Cave. After a month-long break, Nine Inch Nails again hit the road on a joint tour with Soundgarden. The 23-day journey extended throughout the continental US, with experimental hip-hop group Death Grips scheduled to open most of the shows. Two weeks prior to the tour, Death Grips announced its breakup and cancelled all subsequent live shows. Oneohtrix Point Never, the Dillinger Escape Plan and Cold Cave each replaced Death Grips separately for the tour. In 2014, its first year of eligibility, Nine Inch Nails was nominated for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame with 14 other candidates. While they were not inducted that year, the band placed second in the 2015 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Nominees Fan Vote. In 2015, Nine Inch Nails was once again nominated for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. However, they once again did not get inducted. In June 2015, Nine Inch Nails released instrumental versions of The Fragile and With Teeth to stream exclusively on Apple Music, a service of which Reznor is chief creative director. In an interview promoting the service, Reznor mentioned he has started "messing around with some things" in regards to a new Nine Inch Nails album, stating "It's not a record I'm trying to finish in a month. It's more just feeling around in the dark and seeing what sounds interesting". In December 2015, Reznor reported that "Nine Inch Nails will return in 2016". In October 2016, in response to a fan's question about the lack of new Nine Inch Nails music, Reznor responded with "2016 is not over yet". In December 2016, Reznor commented on his statement regarding Nine Inch Nails' return by the end of the year: "Those words did come out of my mouth, didn't they? ... Just wait and see what happens." Three days later, Reznor announced an EP titled Not the Actual Events, along with reissues of Broken, The Downward Spiral, and The Fragile, with subsequent reissues of With Teeth, Year Zero, and The Slip to be released later in 2017, these plans however fell through. Also announced was The Fragile: Deviations 1, which comprised 37 instrumental, alternate and unreleased tracks, many of which have never been heard before anywhere. Not the Actual Events was released on December 23, 2016, with fans who pre-ordered it receiving their download links one day earlier. Atticus Ross was also revealed to be an official full-time member of the band, the first member other than Reznor to be added to the band. In early 2017, the band announced three headlining festival dates in North America. In January 2017, the band announced that it would be performing at the Panorama Music Festival in New York on July 30. On March 21, the band announced on their official Facebook page that it would be headlining Day 3 of FYF Fest in Los Angeles on July 23. In the same post, the band also announced their 2017 touring lineup, which included Reznor and Ross joined by the band's 2014 touring lineup, Robin Finck, Alessandro Cortini, and Ilan Rubin. The band appeared in Part 8 of the third season of Twin Peaks, performing their song, "She's Gone Away". In June 2017, in an email that was issued out to customers waiting on delayed vinyl orders, Reznor confirmed that Not the Actual Events would actually make up the first part of a trilogy of EPs, with the second installment Add Violence being released on July 21 and the third and final EP of the trilogy to follow in 2018. The single "Less Than" was released a week prior to the second EP's release. Also in 2017, the pair were tasked to score the upcoming Ken Burns series The Vietnam War, and provide both original music and a compilation soundtrack of popular songs. Their score, which was released on September 15, 2017, included original compositions, and it also includes reworked pieces from other Nine Inch Nails songs and their award-winning scores for The Social Network and The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo.  The band released their ninth studio album, Bad Witch, on June 22, 2018. The band also announced the "Cold and Black and Infinite 2018 North America Tour", where it toured with the Jesus and Mary Chain. To prevent ticket scalping, the band took the unusual step of only selling physical tickets that had to be purchased at the venue prior to the shows. Reznor stated of the decision "The promise of a world made better by computers and online connectivity has failed us in many ways, particularly when it comes to ticketing. Everything about the process sucks and everyone loses except the reseller. We've decided to try something different that will also likely suck, but in a different way." In October 2019, Nine Inch Nails was again nominated for induction into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame. On January 15, 2020, Nine Inch Nails were officially named as members of the Class of 2020 for induction into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame. However, due to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, the induction ceremony was postponed indefinitely. Originally, only Trent Reznor was to be inducted as the sole full-time member of the group for most of its history. After holding discussions with the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame, Reznor announced that former live band members Chris Vrenna and Danny Lohner, as well as current members Alessandro Cortini, Ilan Rubin (the youngest person ever inducted into the Hall of Fame), longtime guitarist Robin Finck, and the only other full time member of the band, Atticus Ross, would all be inducted as members of Nine Inch Nails. On March 26, 2020, Nine Inch Nails released Ghosts V: Together and Ghosts VI: Locusts, their tenth and eleventh studio albums and the sequels to their 2008 instrumental album Ghosts I–IV. The albums were released for free as a show of solidarity with the band's fans during the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to the pandemic, the live induction ceremony for the 2020 Hall of Fame Induction was cancelled on July 15, 2020, and simultaneously, an induction special was announced to be broadcast and available for streaming through HBO and HBO Max, respectively, on November 7, 2020. In the interim, a special display was created to represent Nine Inch Nails' presence in the Hall of Fame that celebrated their popular, muddy performance at Woodstock '94; opened on the 26th anniversary of the concert. On November 6, 2020, Trent Reznor and the other to-be-inducted members of Nine Inch Nails were interviewed by journalist David Farrier about the history of the band and their feelings on being inducted. Then on November 7, Nine Inch Nails was formally inducted into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame, Class of 2020, by punk icon Iggy Pop. Reznor thanked the fans, his family, and all of his many Nine Inch Nails collaborators in his acceptance speech, recorded from his home in Beverly Hills, CA. On May 6, 2021, Nine Inch Nails released a new track, "Isn't Everyone" in collaboration with noise rock group HEALTH, who had previously been an opening act on their Lights In The Sky and Wave Goodbye tours. On May 7, they announced they would be playing two shows in Cleveland (September 21 and 23, 2021) with the Pixies to commemorate their inauguration into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, which, according to the band, would be "the only NIN headline shows in 2021". Those shows were cancelled on August 19, 2021, due to rising COVID-19 cases in the United States. Also in 2021, Reznor and Ross produced Halsey's album If I Can't Have Love, I Want Power. It was later nominated for the Best Alternative Music Album award at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards. In February 2022, Nine Inch Nails announced a short tour of the United States for 2022, the group's first performances in nearly four years. A tour of the United Kingdom was announced shortly afterwards. On September 24, 2022, Nine Inch Nails performed in their native Cleveland for the first time since 2013 after a "Nine Inch Nails Fan Day" at the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame the previous day. Over the course of the performance, all the other six inductees, as well as former members Richard Patrick and Charlie Clouser, joined Reznor on stage and even covered Patrick's Filter hit, "Hey Man Nice Shot". Reznor posted on his Discord after the show, “When/If we tour again, it will be different. Not like [2018′s “Cold Black Infinite” tour] era – It's over.” Nine Inch Nails has been described as incorporating alternative rock, industrial rock, industrial dance, industrial, electro-industrial, industrial metal, electronic rock, and alternative metal. AllMusic's Steve Huey states that "Nine Inch Nails were the most popular industrial group ever and were largely responsible for bringing the music to a mass audience". Reznor has never referred to his own work as industrial music, but admits to borrowing techniques from such early industrial bands as Throbbing Gristle and Test Dept. Despite the disparity between those artists initially operating under the term "industrial" and Nine Inch Nails, it has become common in journalistic descriptions of Reznor's body of work to describe it as such. Reznor acknowledged in Spin magazine that "Down in It" was influenced by early Skinny Puppy, particularly the band's song "Dig It"; other songs from Pretty Hate Machine and With Teeth have been described as synth-pop.: 35  Reviewing The Fragile, critic Steve Cooper noted that the album juxtaposes widely varied genres, such as solo piano in "The Frail" and drum and bass elements in "Starfuckers, Inc." Ambient music has been featured in some of Nine Inch Nails' music, including on Ghosts I–IV (which is specifically dark ambient), Hesitation Marks, The Downward Spiral, The Slip, and The Fragile. "The Day the World Went Away" "Closer" "The Great Destroyer" Problems playing these files? See media help. Songs such as "Wish" and "The Day the World Went Away" exhibit terraced dynamics. Reznor's singing follows a similar pattern, frequently moving from whispers to screams. He also has used software to alter his voice in several songs, as evident in "Starfuckers, Inc." and "Burn". The band's music also occasionally contains complex time signatures, notably in "The Collector" from With Teeth and concert favorite "March of the Pigs". Reznor uses noise and distortion in his song arrangements and incorporates dissonance with chromatic melody and/or harmony. These techniques are all used in the song "Hurt", which contains a highly dissonant tritone played on guitar during the verses, a B5#11, emphasized when Reznor sings the eleventh note on the word "I" every time the B/E# dyad is played. "Closer" concludes with a chromatic piano motif: the melody is debuted during the second verse of "Piggy" on organ, then reappears in power chords at drop D tuning throughout the chorus of "Heresy", while an inverted (ascending) version is used throughout "A Warm Place", and then recurs in its original state for the final time on "The Downward Spiral". On The Fragile, Reznor revisits the technique of repeating a motif multiple times throughout different songs, either on a different musical instrument with a transposed harmony or in an altered tempo. Many of the songs on Year Zero contain an extended instrumental ending, which encompasses the entire second half of the three-minute long "The Great Destroyer". Allmusic's review described the album's laptop-mixed sound: "Guitars squall against glitches, beeps, pops, and blotches of blurry sonic attacks. Percussion looms large, distorted, organic, looped, screwed, spindled and broken." Lyrical themes found in Nine Inch Nails songs are largely concerned with dark explorations of the self ranging from religion, greed, fame, lust, addiction, self-deception, aging, regret, and nihilism. Occasionally, the lyrics depart from their introspective nature to deal with a topic like politics, which is the focus of Year Zero. Three Nine Inch Nails albums are concept albums: The Downward Spiral, The Fragile, and Year Zero. The album With Teeth was originally set to be a concept album about an endless dream occurring in reality, but Reznor eventually took this idea out of the record. Nine Inch Nails' earliest influence was the punk rock band the Clash; Reznor stated that he started out trying to directly imitate them, only to abandon that direction due to his lack of a political message. Other early influences include Ministry and Skinny Puppy, which helped shape 1989's Pretty Hate Machine. The album's liner notes also paid tribute to Public Enemy and Prince. Another large influence on the band's sound is Gary Numan, which is evident as Reznor once said that "after hearing 'Cars' I knew I wanted to make music with synthesizers". The 2005 single "Only" exemplifies the disco-style beats and synthesizers drawn from Numan's persuasion. Other artists of significance to Nine Inch Nails include acts such as Depeche Mode, Queen, King Crimson, Devo, the Cure, Joy Division, U2, Bauhaus, Adam Ant, Coil, and Soft Cell. Reznor has toured with some of his influences, including a brief tour opening for Skinny Puppy in 1988. In 1995, Nine Inch Nails went on tour with David Bowie, who, along with Pink Floyd, had been a significant influence on The Downward Spiral. In 2006, Nine Inch Nails went on tour with Bauhaus, on their Summer Amphitheatre Tour. Nine Inch Nails has influenced many newer artists, which according to Reznor range from "generic imitations" dating from his initial success to younger bands echoing his style in a "truer, less imitative way". Following the release of The Downward Spiral, mainstream artists began to take notice of Nine Inch Nails' influence: David Bowie compared Reznor's impact to that of The Velvet Underground. Guns N' Roses singer Axl Rose was influenced heavily by Nine Inch Nails in changing his band's sound to an industrial style in the mid-90's. Bob Ezrin, producer for Pink Floyd, Kiss, Alice Cooper, and Peter Gabriel, described Reznor in 2007 as a "true visionary" and advised aspiring artists to take note of his no-compromise attitude. Nine Inch Nails has been credited by music journalists for popularizing industrial music, despite ambivalence from Reznor. The act has received four awards from 25 nominations, including two Grammy Awards for the songs "Wish" and "Happiness in Slavery" in 1993 and 1996 respectively. Nine Inch Nails have received two Kerrang! Awards; one of them being the Kerrang! Icon in 2006, honoring the band's overall contributions since 1988 and long-standing influence on rock music. The band has also received nine nominations from the MTV Video Music Awards for several of its videos, including two nominations for the "Closer" music video and five nominations for "The Perfect Drug" music video, including Video of the Year. In 1997, Reznor appeared in Time magazine's list of the year's most influential people, and Spin described him as "the most vital artist in music". The Recording Industry Association of America certified sales for 10.5 million units of the band's albums in the United States, which accounted for roughly half of the band's reported sales worldwide at that time. In 2003, Rolling Stone magazine placed The Downward Spiral at No. 200 in a 2003 list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time, and by the following year ranked Nine Inch Nails at No. 94 in their The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time list. In 2019, Reznor and Ross received songwriting and production credits for the number-one single "Old Town Road" by Lil Nas X, which sampled their track "34 Ghosts IV" from Ghosts I–IV. "Old Town Road" broke the record for most consecutive weeks at number one on the Billboard Hot 100. As producers for the song, Reznor and Ross won a CMA Award for the 'Musical Event of the Year', along with Lil Nas X, featured artist Billy Ray Cyrus and producer YoungKio. In January 2020, after previous nominations in 2014 and 2015, Nine Inch Nails (Alessandro Cortini, Robin Finck, Danny Lohner, Trent Reznor, Atticus Ross, Ilan Rubin and Chris Vrenna) were named as inductees of the 2020 class of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In the early 1990s, Nine Inch Nails was involved in a much-publicized feud with TVT Records, the first record label to sign the band. Reznor objected to the label's attempted interference with his intellectual property. Ultimately, Nine Inch Nails entered into a joint venture with Interscope Records in which Reznor forfeited a portion of his publishing rights to TVT Music in exchange for the freedom of having his own Nothing Records imprint. In 2005, Reznor sued his former friend and manager John Malm, co-founder of Nothing, for fraud, breach of contract and fiduciary duty, and other claims. Their relationship was formally severed in a New York courtroom, with damages awarded to Reznor in excess of $3 million. At the behest of Prudential Securities bankruptcy proceedings, TVT put the rights to Reznor's recordings for the label on auction in 2005. This offer included the whole TVT catalog, including Pretty Hate Machine, and a percentage of royalties from Reznor's song publishing company, Leaving Hope Music/TVT Music. Rykodisc, which did not win the auction but was able to license the rights from Prudential, reissued the out-of-print Pretty Hate Machine CD on November 22, 2005. Ryko also reissued the "Head Like a Hole" CD and a vinyl edition of Pretty Hate Machine in 2006. The label considered releasing a deluxe edition, just as Interscope had done for The Downward Spiral. They were influenced by Reznor and liked the idea, but did not want to pay him for the album and the idea was scrapped. In May 2007, Reznor made a post on the official Nine Inch Nails website skeptical of Universal Music Group (parent company of Nine Inch Nails' record label, Interscope Records) for its pricing and distribution plans for Year Zero. He labeled the company's retail pricing of Year Zero in Australia as "ABSURD", concluding that "as a reward for being a 'true fan' you get ripped off". Reznor went on to say that he hated Interscope, and in later years the "climate" of record labels may have an increasingly ambivalent impact on consumers who buy music. Reznor's post, specifically his criticism of the recording industry at large, elicited considerable media attention. In September 2007, Reznor continued his attack on UMG at a concert in Australia, urging fans there to "steal" his music online instead of purchasing it legally. Reznor went on to encourage the crowd to "steal and steal and steal some more and give it to all your friends and keep on stealing". Reznor announced on October 8, 2007, that Nine Inch Nails had fulfilled its contractual commitments to Interscope Records and was now free to proceed as a "totally free agent, free of any recording contract with any label". Reznor also speculated that he would release the next Nine Inch Nails album online in a similar fashion to The Inevitable Rise and Liberation of NiggyTardust!, which he produced. Reznor later released the first nine tracks of Ghosts I–IV and the entirety of The Slip in 2008 for free download. In another post on his website, Reznor again openly criticized Universal Music Group for preventing him from launching an official interactive fan remix website. Universal declined to host the site just days before its scheduled launch, citing the potential "accusation", in Reznor's words, "that they are sponsoring the same technical violation of copyright they are suing [other media companies] for". Reznor wrote in response that he was "challenged at the last second to find a way of bringing this idea to life without getting splashed by the urine as these media companies piss all over each other's feet". Despite these obstacles, the remix website was launched in November 2007. Nine Inch Nails was scheduled to perform at the 2005 MTV Movie Awards, but withdrew from the show due to a disagreement with the network over the use of an unaltered image of George W. Bush as a backdrop to the band's performance of "The Hand That Feeds". Soon afterwards, Reznor wrote on his official website: "Apparently, the image of our president is as offensive to MTV as it is to me." MTV replied that it respected Reznor's point of view, but was "uncomfortable" with the performance being "built around partisan political statements". A performance by Foo Fighters replaced Nine Inch Nails' time slot on the show. During the Lights in the Sky tour in 2008, some performances of "The Hand that Feeds" had the image of Bush on a video screen behind the band. At some gigs leading up to the election, the face of Bush slowly morphed during the song into the face of John McCain. Another ceremony incident had occurred at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards in 2014. The band performed "Copy of A" and "My God Is the Sun" with Queens of the Stone Age, Lindsey Buckingham, and Dave Grohl towards the end of the broadcast; however, the performance was not shown in full to the audience at home as advertisements had cut-in midway through the second song. Despite an apology from producer Kenneth Ehrlich, Reznor later heavily criticized the situation. In 2006, after being alerted by a fan website, Reznor issued a cease and desist to Fox News Channel for using three songs from The Fragile on air without permission. The songs "La Mer", "The Great Below", and "The Mark Has Been Made" appeared in an episode of War Stories with Oliver North detailing the battle of Iwo Jima. A post appeared on Reznor's blog, which read: "Thanks for the Fox News heads-up. A cease and desist has been issued. FUCK Fox Fucking News." As part of the alternate reality game which accompanied the release of Year Zero, three tracks from the album were intentionally "leaked" prior to their official release at a number of Nine Inch Nails concerts on USB flash drives. The high-quality audio files quickly circulated the internet, and owners of websites hosting the files soon received cease and desist orders from the Recording Industry Association of America, despite the fact that the viral campaign, and the use of USB drives, was sanctioned by Nine Inch Nails' record label. The source that broke the story was quoted as saying, "These fucking idiots are going after a campaign that the label signed off on." The music of Nine Inch Nails has reportedly been used by the U.S. military as music torture to break down the resolve of detainees. Reznor objected to the use of his music in this way with the following message on the front page of the Nine Inch Nails website: "It's difficult for me to imagine anything more profoundly insulting, demeaning and enraging than discovering music you've put your heart and soul into creating has been used for purposes of torture. If there are any legal options that can be realistically taken they will be aggressively pursued, with any potential monetary gains donated to human rights charities. Thank GOD this country has appeared to side with reason and we can put the Bush administration's reign of power, greed, lawlessness and madness behind us." Aside from disagreements over the usage of Nine Inch Nails material, some corporations have dismissed content due to perceived obscenity. In 2009, Apple rejected an update to Nine Inch Nails' iPhone application, NIN: Access, because it found The Downward Spiral to contain "offensive or obscene content", referring to the lyrical content. Reznor criticized their decision, citing the audio was also available through the iTunes application. A similar incident involving digital content distribution occurred in 2013 when Nine Inch Nails re-released the original 1993 film Broken on Vimeo. Within hours of launch, the video was removed due to terms of service violation on material that "harass, incite hatred or depict excessive violence". Until Atticus Ross joined in 2016, Reznor was the sole official member of Nine Inch Nails. However, Reznor typically forms a backing group of musicians to perform the songs in a live setting. This live band, also known as Nine Inch Nails, rearranges the band's studio catalog and creates a different sound than that of Reznor's studio recordings. Band members have occasionally been invited to participate in the recording process, but creative control within the studio has always been exclusively with Reznor. The Tapeworm project was created in 1995 as a Nine Inch Nails side-project between Reznor and various live-band members as a more "democratic" creative environment. The band initially included live band members Danny Lohner and Charlie Clouser, but eventually expanded to include other frequent Nine Inch Nails contributors Josh Freese, Atticus Ross, and Alan Moulder. However, after 9 years of studio sessions, no material was ever officially released from the group, and it was confirmed to be no longer active in 2005. The lineup of the live band had a tendency to change drastically between major tours: aside from Reznor remaining on lead vocals, keyboards and guitar, no member of the live band have remained constant since its formation. Reznor cited the long gestation period between studio albums as part of the reason for these frequent personnel changes, as well as his desire for fresh interpretations of his music. Pretty Hate Machine Tour Series (1988–1991) Self Destruct Tour (1994–1996) Fragility Tour (1999–2000) Live: With Teeth Tour (2005–2006) Performance 2007 Tour (2007) Lights in the Sky Tour (2008) Wave Goodbye Tour (2009) Twenty Thirteen Tour (2013–2014) I Can't Seem To Wake Up (2017) Cold and Black and Infinite (2018) U.S. 2022 & U.K. 2022 (2022) Trent Reznor – lead and backing vocals, guitars, bass, keyboards, synthesizers, saxophone, piano, programming, drums, percussion (1988–present) Atticus Ross – keyboards, synthesizers, programming, bass, backing vocals (2016–present) Robin Finck – guitars, synthesizers, keyboards, lap steel, violin, backing vocals (1994–1996, 1999–2000, 2008–2009, 2013–present) Alessandro Cortini – bass, keyboards, synthesizers, guitars, backing vocals (2005–2008, 2013–present) Ilan Rubin – drums, percussion, bass, guitars, cello, keyboards, backing vocals (2008–2009, 2013–present) Chris Vrenna – drums, percussion, keyboards, samplers (1988–1990, 1992–1997) Richard Patrick – guitars, backing vocals (1989–1993) Jeff Ward – drums (1990–1991; died 1993) James Woolley – keyboards, synthesizers, programming, backing vocals (1991–1994; died 2016) Danny Lohner – bass, guitars, synthesizers, backing vocals (1993–2003) Charlie Clouser – keyboards, synthesizers, theremin, percussion, programming, backing vocals (1994–2001) Jerome Dillon – drums, guitars (1999–2005) Jeordie White – bass, guitars, backing vocals (2005–2007) Aaron North – guitars, backing vocals (2005–2007) Josh Freese – drums, marimba (2005, 2005–2008) Justin Meldal-Johnsen – bass, backing vocals (2008–2009) Pretty Hate Machine (1989) Broken (1992) The Downward Spiral (1994) The Fragile (1999) With Teeth (2005) Year Zero (2007) Ghosts I–IV (2008) The Slip (2008) Hesitation Marks (2013) Not the Actual Events (2016) Add Violence (2017) Bad Witch (2018) Ghosts V: Together (2020) Ghosts VI: Locusts (2020) Nine Inch Nails has been nominated for 13 Grammy Awards and has won awards on two occasions—for "Wish" in 1992 and "Happiness in Slavery" in 1995: This member was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Studio EP. Weisbard, Eric (February 1996). "Sympathy for the Devil". Spin. Vol. 11, no. 11. pp. 34–42, 96. ISSN 0886-3032. Retrieved August 27, 2018 – via Google Books. Huxley 1997, p. 33. Reznor v. J. Artist Management, Inc. et al., 365 F. Supp. 2d 565 (S.D.N.Y. 2005). Huey, Steve. "Nine Inch Nails". AllMusic. All Media Network. Archived from the original on August 6, 2012. Retrieved October 15, 2017. Huxley 1997, p. 30. Jovanovic, Rob. "Nine Inch Nails". In Garrett, Charles (ed.). The Grove Dictionary of American Music. Oxford University Press. Dougherty, Steve; Alexander, Bryan; Nugent, Tom; Hannah, John (February 6, 1995). "The music of rage". People. Vol. 43, no. 5. pp. 105–107. Fine, Jason (July–August 1994). "The Truth About Trent". Option. Archived from the original on October 22, 2017. Retrieved October 18, 2017. "The Only Time" lyrics Archived April 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, nintourhistory.com, no date. "Getting Down in It". Alternative Press. No. 27. March 1990. Archived from the original on June 17, 2010. Retrieved October 18, 2017.. See also Huxley 1997, p. 37. "Purest Feeling Music Videos". OVGuide. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2015. "Talking about Nothing with Trent Reznor". Axcess. Vol. 2. 1994. Archived from the original on August 13, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2015.. See also Huxley 1997, p. 37. Rule, Greg (1999). "Nine Inch Nails Mastermind Trent Reznor". Electro Shock!: Groundbreakers of Synth Music. Backbeat Books. pp. 38–63. ISBN 0-87930-582-7 – via Internet Archive. Huxley 1997, p. 37. Reznor, Trent (July 21, 2004). "Response from Trent". Nine Inch Nails. Archived from the original on October 28, 2005. Retrieved October 18, 2017. Critton, Benjamin (September 23, 2013). "Empire of Dirt: The NIN Design Aesthetic". The Fader. No. 88 (published October–November 2013). ISSN 1533-5194. Archived from the original on February 5, 2018. Retrieved February 4, 2018. "Trent Reznor: area co-conspirators". Cleveland.com. Archived from the original on August 28, 2007. Retrieved October 18, 2017. Huxley 1997, p. 41. Huxley 1997, p. 35. Huxley 1997, p. 38. Huxley 1997, p. 207. Buskin, Richard (September 2012). "CLASSIC TRACKS: Nine Inch Nails 'Closer'". Sound on Sound. Archived from the original on December 7, 2017. Retrieved January 23, 2018. Huxley 1997, p. 44. Azerrad, Michael (February 22, 1990). "New Faces: Nine Inch Nails". Rolling Stone. No. 572. Archived from the original on February 12, 2015. Retrieved February 1, 2015. Lindsay, Cam. "Trent Reznor Further Down the Spiral". Exclaim!. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved February 3, 2015. Popson, Tom (January 26, 1990). "Music: Dancing through disillusion with Nine Inch Nails the insider". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on November 9, 2017. Retrieved November 9, 2017. Billboard. Nielsen Business Media. July 11, 1992. p. 75. ISSN 0006-2510. Huxley 1997, pp. 47–48. Bains, Jon. "Nine Inch Nails". Convulsion Magazine. Archived from the original on November 15, 2008. Retrieved April 12, 2008. "Here's Video of Nine Inch Nails Performing on Dance Party USA 22 Years Ago". Gawker. March 29, 2012. Archived from the original on January 21, 2014. Retrieved November 9, 2017. Huxley 1997, pp. 54–55. Gitter, Mike (1992). "The Man Behind the Machine". Rockbeat. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2015. Huxley 1997, pp. 69–70. Huxley 1997, p. 52. Greene, Jo-Ann (August 4, 1995). "Nine Inch Nails : Happiness Is Slavery". Goldmine. Archived from the original on June 17, 2010. Retrieved January 23, 2018 – via The NIN Hotline archive. "Nine Inch Nails". Musician. March 1994. Archived from the original on June 17, 2010. Retrieved October 15, 2017 – via The NIN Hotline archive. Huxley 1997, p. 97. Huxley 1997, p. 82. "Nine Inch Nails – Chart history: Billboard 200". Billboard. Retrieved November 9, 2016. Broken (liner notes). Nine Inch Nails. Interscope Records/nothing/TVT. September 22, 1992.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Larkin, Colin, ed. (2006). "Nine Inch Nails". Encyclopedia of Popular Music. Oxford University Press. "Awards Database". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2007. Huxley 1997, p. 86. "Wish". Painful Convictions. 2007. Archived from the original on August 12, 2007. Retrieved August 7, 2007. Huxley 1997, p. 89. Gold, Jonathan (September 8, 1994). "Love it to death". Rolling Stone. No. 690. p. 50. "Pinion". Painful Convictions. 2007. Archived from the original on July 15, 2007. Retrieved August 7, 2007. Huxley 1997, p. 91. "Gave Up". Painful Convictions. 2007. Archived from the original on August 12, 2007. Retrieved August 7, 2007. Huxley 1997, p. 92. "nin – "last" remix". Gearspace.com. June 30, 2009. Archived from the original on October 1, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2011. Huxley 1997, p. 95. Ali, Lorraine (March 18, 1994). "Helter Shelter: Making records where Manson murdered". Entertainment Weekly. No. 214. p. 100. Archived from the original on October 15, 2017. Retrieved January 23, 2018. Eggertsen, Chris (June 6, 2018). "The Manson murder house". Curbed LA. Retrieved April 22, 2021. Huxley 1997, pp. 95–99. Morris, Gina (April 1994). "Who Really Is Trent Reznor?". Select Magazine. Archived from the original on November 18, 2008. Retrieved January 21, 2009. "Trent Reznor: Timeline". Cleveland.com. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved December 18, 2006. "Gold and Platinum database". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on June 26, 2007. Retrieved August 10, 2007. Heath, Chris (April 1995). "The art of darkness". Details. Condé Nast Publications. Huxley 1997, p. 106. Huxley 1997, p. 167. "Natural Born Killers [Original Soundtrack]". Allmusic. Retrieved October 19, 2019. "The Crow [Original Soundtrack]". Allmusic. Retrieved August 6, 2020. Huxley 1997, pp. 133–134. "Nine Inch Nails: Closure (VHS)". DeepFocus.com. Archived from the original on July 27, 2007. Retrieved August 26, 2007. "100 Greatest Albums, 1985–2005". Spin. No. June 2005. "The RS 500 Greatest Albums of All Time". Rolling Stone. November 18, 2003. Archived from the original on April 17, 2010. Retrieved December 8, 2011. "Q 50 Heaviest Albums Of All Time". Q. Archived from the original on February 4, 2012. Retrieved April 15, 2007. "250 Best Albums of Q's Lifetime". Q (published February 2011). December 2010. Huxley 1997, p. 206. Huxley 1997, pp. 147, 154, 161. Huxley 1997, pp. 151–153. Umstead, R. Thomas (August 22, 1994). "Feedback muddy from Woodstock PPV". Multichannel News. Vol. 15, no. 32. pp. 3–4. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved November 20, 2007. "The Pit: Nine Inch Nails". Guitar School. May 1995. Archived from the original on May 11, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. Prato, Greg. "Closure [Video] – Nine Inch Nails". AllMusic. All Media Network. Archived from the original on October 16, 2017. Retrieved January 23, 2018. "Lost Highway [Original Motion Picture Soundtrack]". Allmusic. Retrieved October 19, 2019. Kloze, Peter (January 26, 2008). "Year Zero: Trent Reznor looks outside himself". World Socialist Web Site. Archived from the original on February 8, 2015. Retrieved February 3, 2015. Schafer, Joseph (September 10, 2013). "Trent Reznor Albums From Worst To Best". Stereogum. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved February 3, 2015. Soeder, John (April 9, 2000). "Rock's outlook bleak, but this Nail won't bend". Cleveland.com. Archived from the original on January 15, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2015. Moss, Corey (May 2005). "The upward spiral". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on April 17, 2006. Retrieved December 18, 2006. The Fragile (liner notes). Nine Inch Nails. Nothing Records. 1999.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) "NIN Album on Horizon". Daily News Online. August 1998. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2015. Hargrove, Brandon (September 1998). "Nine Inch Nails – Ball of confusion". Hit Parader. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2015. Kaufman, Gil (December 2, 1999). "Rock radio pumps up volume". SonicNet News. Archived from the original on March 11, 2007. Retrieved October 28, 2006. DiCrescenzo, Brent. "Review: The Fragile". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on August 22, 2009. Retrieved August 29, 2009. "Billboard Chart". Billboard. October 16, 1999. Kaufman, Gil (July 14, 1999). "Provocative, pounding new NIN songs leaked to radio". SonicNet News. Archived from the original on March 11, 2007. Retrieved October 28, 2006. MacCormack, Patricia. "All the fun of the (not so) fair". PopMatters. Archived from the original on October 1, 2007. Retrieved August 26, 2007. Machian, Mike (February 5, 2002). "Fragility 2.0: Bruises heal, DVD is forever". The Gateway. Archived from the original on April 11, 2008. Retrieved February 19, 2008. Beaumont, Mark. "The nine lives of Trent Reznor". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 19, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2017. "Hurt – Johnny Cash". AllMusic. Archived from the original on March 25, 2015. Retrieved January 2, 2015. "Johnny Cash – Awards". AllMusic. Archived from the original on December 20, 2014. Retrieved January 2, 2015. Pinckard, Cliff (September 18, 2014). "Miley Cyrus gets mixed reviews with Led Zeppelin remake, but here are 5 covers better than the originals (video)". Cleveland. The Plain Dealer. Archived from the original on February 4, 2015. Retrieved February 4, 2015. Roberts, Jo (August 5, 2005). "Hammer time over". The Sydney Morning Herald. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved November 28, 2006. "Nine inch Nails > Charts & Awards". AllMusic. Retrieved August 15, 2009. "With Teeth: Online Content". Nine Inch Nails. Archived from the original on May 18, 2007. Retrieved December 24, 2006. "Smaller bands: web propels music sales". National Public Radio. May 1, 2005. Archived from the original on November 25, 2006. Retrieved October 22, 2006. "Nine Inch Nails – With Teeth". Metacritic. Archived from the original on October 21, 2012. Retrieved February 27, 2008. Sheffield, Rob (May 5, 2005). "Nine Inch Nails – With Teeth". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 24, 2009. Retrieved April 12, 2011. Schiller, Mike. "Review: With Teeth". PopMatters. Archived from the original on December 8, 2009. Retrieved September 1, 2009. Nailen, Daniel. "Interview with Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails". The Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on December 16, 2013. Retrieved January 2, 2015. "Current". Nine Inch Nails. April 15, 2005. Archived from the original on April 20, 2005. Retrieved August 26, 2007. "EDIETS Video to Air TODAY on MTV!". The NIN Hotline. April 13, 2006. Archived from the original on May 11, 2012. Retrieved November 28, 2006. "Nine Inch Nails – With Teeth". AllMusic. Retrieved January 14, 2015. Harris, Chris (September 30, 2005). "Nine Inch Nails Postpone Show Due To Drummer's Heart Trouble". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 26, 2013. Retrieved August 24, 2007. Spera, Keith (November 1, 2005). "Rockin' relief". nola.com. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved April 12, 2011. "Nine Inch Nails: Live: Beside You in Time DVD". Artistdirect. Archived from the original on April 20, 2013. Retrieved August 20, 2007. "Top Music Video – Beside You in Time". Billboard. March 31, 2007. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved September 28, 2007. Gregory, Jason (March 26, 2007). "Trent Reznor Blasts the American Government". Gigwise.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved April 20, 2007. "Nine Inch Nails – Year Zero". Metacritic. Archived from the original on December 5, 2008. Retrieved January 10, 2008. Pareles, Jon (June 8, 2008). "Frustration and Fury: Take It. It's Free". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 31, 2018. Retrieved June 9, 2008. "NINE INCH NAILS Mainman On New CD: 'I Wrote The Soundtrack To A Movie That Doesn't Exist'". Blabbermouth. January 3, 2007. Archived from the original on March 9, 2007. Retrieved February 9, 2007. Reznor, Trent. Year Zero Bonus DVD (DVD). Best Buy. Note: DVD included with pre-ordered copies of Year Zero from Best Buy. ""Year Zero" Project = Way Cooler Than "Lost"". Rolling Stone. February 22, 2007. Archived from the original on March 21, 2012. Retrieved June 23, 2008. Montgomery, James (February 15, 2007). "Weird web trail: conspiracy theory—or marketing for nine inch nails LP?". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 30, 2012. Retrieved February 15, 2007. "Year Zero Project = Way Cooler Than Lost". Rolling Stone. February 22, 2007. Archived from the original on April 8, 2007. Retrieved April 20, 2007. Matheson, Whitney (February 15, 2007). "NIN's web of intrigue". USA Today. Retrieved February 15, 2007. Goodman, Elizabeth (February 15, 2007). "NIN fans = marketing team's dream". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 27, 2009. Retrieved April 12, 2011. "Multitracks for 3 YZ songs posted on nin.com". The NIN Hotline. April 26, 2007. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved April 27, 2007. Dombai, Ryan (January 3, 2008). "Nine Inch Nails – Y34RZ3R0R3M1X3D – Album Review". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Retrieved December 8, 2011. "Nine Inch Nails Announce Remix Album Details". FMQB. Friday Morning Quarterback Album Report, Inc. October 12, 2007. Archived from the original on February 23, 2012. Retrieved October 14, 2007. "remix.nin.com". Nine Inch Nails. Archived from the original on February 7, 2012. Retrieved November 27, 2007. "Kerrang discusses movie possibility with Trent Reznor". Kerrang!. March 6, 2007. Archived from the original on March 9, 2007. Retrieved March 13, 2007. leviathant (August 10, 2007). "I hate Contact Music". The NIN Hotline. Archived from the original on August 9, 2007. Retrieved August 10, 2007. Adler, Heather (August 14, 2007). "Nine Inch Nails Ready Apocalyptic Year Zero TV Show". Dose. Archived from the original on June 7, 2007. Retrieved August 19, 2007. Johnson, Neala (April 4, 2008). "Nine Inch Nails' Trent Reznor approaches the future a free man". Herald Sun. Retrieved February 1, 2015. Boucher, Geoff (September 28, 2010). "Trent Reznor and HBO moving forward with 'Year Zero' sci-fi series". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 30, 2010. Retrieved September 28, 2010. Miska, Brad (November 13, 2012). "Trent Reznor Tells Fans "Year Zero" Is In A Holding State". Bloody Disgusting. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Reznor makes $750,000 even when the music is free". Ars Technica. Condé Nast Publications. March 5, 2008. Archived from the original on March 6, 2008. Retrieved March 6, 2008. Steuer, Eric (March 2, 2008). "Nine Inch Nails releases Ghosts I-IV under a Creative Commons license". Creative Commons. Archived from the original on November 22, 2011. Retrieved December 8, 2011. "Ghosts – FAQ". Nine Inch Nails. 2008. Archived from the original on March 7, 2008. Retrieved March 2, 2008. Harding, Cortney & Cohen, Jonathan (March 2, 2008). "New Nine Inch Nails Album Hits The Web". Billboard. Nielsen Company. Archived from the original on February 11, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2008. "New Nine Inch Nails Single Possibly From 'Year Zero 2'?". CFOX-FM. Corus Entertainment. April 25, 2008. Archived from the original on January 13, 2009. Retrieved April 26, 2008. Van Buskirk, Eliot (May 5, 2008). "Nine Inch Nails Gives Fans The Slip". Wired Blog Network. Condé Nast Publications. Archived from the original on May 6, 2008. Retrieved May 5, 2008. Bru, Antony; Visakowitz, Susan (May 6, 2008). "Reznor's edge: 'This one's on me'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 11, 2015. Retrieved December 8, 2011. "The Slip Download Map". Nine Inch Nails. Archived from the original on June 5, 2008. Retrieved July 7, 2008. "nin.com – tour dates". Nine Inch Nails. Archived from the original on May 6, 2008. Retrieved May 3, 2008. "Nine Inch Nails replaces bassist ahead of tour". Reuters/Billboard. June 6, 2008. Archived from the original on June 10, 2008. Retrieved June 9, 2008 – via Yahoo! News. Yahoo! Inc. "Blabbermouth.Net – Drummer Josh Freese To Leave Nine Inch Nails". Roadrunnerrecords.com. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved March 17, 2009. "Blabbermouth.net – Nine Inch Nails' Alessandro Cortini Quits; Band To Resume Touring As Four-Piece". Roadrunnerrecords.com. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved March 17, 2009. "NIN give away free download". Side-Line. Seba Dolimont. July 1, 2008. Archived from the original on January 10, 2009. Retrieved July 2, 2008. "Portolio – TOIOU – fan driver live recordings". toiou.org. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2015. Mansfield, Brian. "Music fans pitch in to design covers, back CDs, map tours". USA Today. Retrieved January 14, 2015. Unterberger, Richie (August 10, 2013). "Kronos Quartet Backs Paul McCartney on 'Yesterday' at Outside Lands". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 2, 2015. Retrieved January 14, 2015. Dombal, Ryan. "Nine Inch Nails". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 14, 2015. "Press". This One Is On Us. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 14, 2015. "NIN fans collaborate on massive free DVD/Blu-ray of "Lights In The Sky"". Nine Inch Nails. January 5, 2010. Archived from the original on September 25, 2011. Cohen, Peter (October 1, 2008). "Nine Inch Nails version of Tap Tap Revenge game coming". Macworld. Archived from the original on October 4, 2008. Retrieved October 5, 2008. "Tap Tap Revenge: Nine Inch Nails". Tapulous. Archived from the original on March 1, 2010. "What Selena Gomez Is Doing In The Edward Snowden Movie". The Huffington Post. October 24, 2014. Archived from the original on June 27, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. "Nine Inch Nails to tour with Jane's Addiction, go on hiatus". idiomag. Idio, Ltd. February 17, 2009. Archived from the original on March 5, 2009. Retrieved February 18, 2009. Boucher, Jeff (June 2009). "Unknown story title". Mojo. he wouldn't say he was giving up the road for good but he does expect to set touring aside for a good decade or more so he can work on a major studio album ... There will be a record, I suspect, in the next couple of years but no touring. Kaufman, Gil (June 15, 2009). "Trent Reznor Says Bonnaroo Was Nine Inch Nails' Last U.S. Show". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved August 6, 2009. "TRENT REZNOR Discusses End Of NINE INCH NAILS As A Touring Act". Blabbermouth.net. September 13, 2009. Archived from the original on September 22, 2009. Retrieved October 1, 2009. Breihan, Tom (May 26, 2010). "Hear New Trent Reznor Music". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on December 17, 2011. Retrieved December 8, 2011. Luerssen, John D. (October 19, 2009). "Trent Reznor Married Mariqueen Maandig". Spinner. Archived from the original on March 20, 2012. Retrieved May 5, 2010. Goodman, William (October 19, 2009). "Nine Inch Nails' Trent Reznor Marries". Spin. Archived from the original on October 31, 2015. Retrieved May 5, 2010. "68th Annual Golden Globe Awards Nominations". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. January 16, 2011. Archived from the original on April 8, 2011. Retrieved March 22, 2011. "Oscar – The Official Website for the 83rd Academy Awards – Winners and Nominees". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. February 27, 2011. Archived from the original on March 10, 2011. Retrieved March 22, 2011. "Trent Reznor to Score 'Girl with the Dragon Tattoo'". Rolling Stone. January 10, 2011. Archived from the original on February 25, 2011. Retrieved February 24, 2011. Snider, Mike. "Interview: Trent Reznor pens 'Black Ops II' theme song". USA Today. Retrieved December 30, 2014. Breihan, Tom (October 8, 2012). "Telepathe – "Destroyer (Trent Reznor Alessandro Cortini Atticus Ross Remix)"". Stereogum. Archived from the original on December 20, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2014. Halperin, Shirley (December 9, 2012). "Dave Grohl Writes Letter to Fans: 'Sound City' Doc 'Is My Life's Most Important Work'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 11, 2015. Retrieved December 30, 2014. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Sound City: Real to Reel". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2014. Filho, Fernando Scoczynski. "Trent Reznor to guest on new Queens of the Stone Age album". antiquiet.com. Archived from the original on December 31, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2014. Graff, Gary. "Queens of the Stone Age, ' ... Like Clockwork': Track-By-Track Review". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 23, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2014. "Trent Reznor Teams With Beats by Dre". Rolling Stone. October 17, 2012. Archived from the original on February 1, 2015. Retrieved December 30, 2014. "Beats Electronics announces new music service, Project Daisy; names Ian Rogers CEO". Beats by Dre. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved December 30, 2014. Hogan, Marc (December 4, 2013). "Trent Reznor's Beats Music Launches in January". Spin. Archived from the original on October 6, 2015. Retrieved December 30, 2014. "Trent Reznor: Nine Inch Nails Returns In 2012". The Space Lab. Archived from the original on August 1, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2011. Pelly, Jenn (November 7, 2012). "New Nine Inch Nails Material Definitely in the Works". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2012. Doyle, Patrick (November 7, 2012). "Trent Reznor: Nine Inch Nails Working on New Music, Possible Tour". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 20, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2012. "New Nine Inch Nails material 'in the works'". NME. November 7, 2012. Archived from the original on June 10, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2012. Phillips, Amy (February 25, 2013). "Trent Reznor Announces the Return of Nine Inch Nails: Extensive Touring for 2013 and 2014". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved February 25, 2013. Roffman, Michael (May 15, 2013). "Bassist Eric Avery quits Nine Inch Nails". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on April 18, 2021. Retrieved May 15, 2013. Battan, Carrie (June 7, 2013). "Adrian Belew Quits Nine Inch Nails: "It Didn't Work"". Pitchfork Media. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015. Cubarrubia, RJ (May 17, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails Introduce Robin Finck as New Bassist". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 17, 2013. Battan, Carrie (May 17, 2013). "Former Nine Inch Nails/Guns 'N Roses Guitarist Robin Finck Joins NIN Tour Lineup". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 17, 2013. Philips, Amy (May 28, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails New Album Finished, Out This Year". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2013. Young, Alex (May 28, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails to release new album later this year". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on May 30, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2013. "Nine Inch Nails to release new album this year". Factmag.com. May 28, 2013. Archived from the original on July 5, 2013. Retrieved July 25, 2013. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Hesitation Marks – Nine Inch Nails". AllMusic. Archived from the original on December 29, 2014. Retrieved January 8, 2015. Danton, Eric R. (June 6, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails Release 'Came Back Haunted' From New LP". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 5, 2013. Retrieved July 25, 2013. Blistein, Jon (June 27, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails Photos Preview 'Came Back Haunted' Clip". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 29, 2013. Retrieved June 28, 2013. Battan, Carrie (August 12, 2013). "Listen: Nine Inch Nails: "Copy of A"". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on August 14, 2013. Beaumont, Mark (August 19, 2013). "The nine lives of Trent Reznor". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 8, 2013. Retrieved August 20, 2013. Young, Alex (February 27, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails to play Fuji Rock Festival 2013". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on May 4, 2013. Retrieved February 27, 2013. Battan, Carrie (February 27, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails Announce First Shows of Big Return". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on April 30, 2013. Retrieved February 27, 2013. Scoczynski Filho, Fernando. "Nine Inch Nails announce "Tension 2013" US arena tour". Antiquiet.com. Archived from the original on August 9, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. Bream, Jon (September 29, 2013). "The dark & the light of Nine Inch Nails' tour opener in St. Paul". Star Tribune. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. Childers, Chad (December 5, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails unveil 'Tension' tour concert film, prepping 2014 release". Loudwire. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. Martins, Chris (December 5, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails Will Tour With a New Lineup in 2014". Spin. Archived from the original on August 2, 2015. Retrieved December 6, 2013. Trendell, Andrew (December 6, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails to tour with new band line-up in 2014". Gigwise. Archived from the original on December 10, 2013. Retrieved December 6, 2013. Minsker, Evan (October 9, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails and Queens of the Stone Age Announce Tour". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on December 14, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. Whitehall, Gaby. "Nine Inch Nails Tickets for 2014 UK arena tour on sale now". Gigwise. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. Coleman, Miriam (March 16, 2014). "Nine Inch Nails, Soundgarden Embarking on Joint Tour". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 30, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. Slater, Rob (July 3, 2014). "Trent Reznor Responds to Death Grips Breakup; Wins Twitter". Relix. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. Minsker, Evan (July 14, 2014). "Oneohtrix Point Never, Cold Cave, Dillinger Escape Plan Replace Death Grips on Nine Inch Nails/Soundgarden Tour". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on November 23, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. "Green Day, Nine Inch Nails, Smiths Nominated for Rock and Roll Hall of Fame". Rolling Stone. Wenner Media. October 9, 2014. Archived from the original on October 15, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. Hare, Breeanna (December 16, 2014). "Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: Meet the 2015 class". CNN. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. "Results for 'Voting Has Closed!: The 2015 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Nominees Fan Vote'". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. "Vote for the 2016 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Inductees". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 9, 2015. Retrieved October 30, 2015. "Nine Inch Nails Release Instrumental Versions of 'The Fragile,' 'With Teeth' on Apple Music". Spin. June 30, 2015. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved July 6, 2015. "Trent Reznor Speaks Out On Apple Music, New Nine Inch Nails - Blabbermouth.net". BLABBERMOUTH.NET. July 2, 2015. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved July 6, 2015. Gordon, Jeremy (December 18, 2015). "Trent Reznor Says Nine Inch Nails Will Return in 2016". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on December 18, 2015. Retrieved December 19, 2015. Young, Alex (October 6, 2016). "Trent Reznor on the return of Nine Inch Nails: "2016 is not over yet"". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved December 28, 2016. Grow, Kory (December 13, 2016). "Trent Reznor Talks New Nine Inch Nails, Boundary-Pushing Soundtracks". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 14, 2016. Retrieved December 17, 2016. Nine Inch Nails (December 16, 2016). "Not The Actual Events EP out 23 Dec. Preorder now. 180g Vinyl and Limited Digital + Physical Component version". Twitter. Archived from the original on April 4, 2018. Retrieved December 16, 2016. "All Nine Inch Nails Records Being Reissued On Vinyl". nine inch nails. December 16, 2016. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 17, 2016. "The Fragile: Deviations 1 Limited Edition 4X Vinyl Available for Preorder Now". nine inch nails. December 16, 2016. Archived from the original on December 18, 2016. Retrieved December 17, 2016. Kreps, Daniel (December 23, 2016). "Nine Inch Nails Plan 'Two New Major Works' for 2017". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 20, 2017. Retrieved June 19, 2017. "Not the Actual Events Brand New Nine Inch Nails Digital + Physical Component". Nine Inch Nails. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 16, 2016. "Trent Reznor on Twitter". Twitter. Archived from the original on December 18, 2016. Retrieved December 16, 2016. "Nine Inch Nails Are Releasing a New EP Next Week – Oh Yeah, and Atticus Ross Is an 'Official' Member Now". December 16, 2016. Archived from the original on February 5, 2017. "Nine Inch Nails To Make Live Comeback At NYC's Panorama Music Festival". Consequence of Sound. January 10, 2017. Archived from the original on March 5, 2017. Retrieved March 4, 2017. "Twin Peaks" Part 8 (TV Episode 2017) – IMDb, retrieved January 24, 2022 "ADD VIOLENCE – NEW EP COMING 21 JULY". July 15, 2017. "NEWS: Nine Inch Nails confirm 'Not The Actual Events' is part of a trilogy; two EPs imminent!". June 6, 2017. Archived from the original on July 26, 2017. Goodman, Lizzy (July 25, 2017). "Trent Reznor's Soundtrack To The Apocalypse". villagevoice.com. The Village Voice. Archived from the original on July 26, 2017. Retrieved July 25, 2017. Melendez, Monique (March 15, 2018). "A New Nine Inch Nails EP Is Coming Soon". Spin. Archived from the original on April 18, 2018. Retrieved April 17, 2018. "NINE INCH NAILS To Release 'Add Violence' EP Next Week; 'Less Than' Song Streaming". July 13, 2017. Archived from the original on July 18, 2017. "Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross detail their score to Ken Burns' new Vietnam War documentary". Consequence of Sound. August 20, 2017. Archived from the original on August 21, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. Pitchfork [@pitchfork] (May 10, 2018). "Update: A representative for NIN has confirmed that Bad Witch is an album, not an EP http://p4k.in/zDVHilU" (Tweet). Retrieved May 10, 2018 – via Twitter. "NINE INCH NAILS: BAD WITCH". nine inch nails. May 10, 2018. Archived from the original on May 11, 2018. Retrieved May 10, 2018. "NINE INCH NAILS: COLD AND BLACK AND INFINITE NORTH AMERICA 2018". nine inch nails. May 10, 2018. Archived from the original on May 11, 2018. Retrieved May 10, 2018. "Nine Inch Nails Announce Tour and New Album Bad Witch | Pitchfork". pitchfork.com. May 10, 2018. Archived from the original on May 10, 2018. Retrieved May 10, 2018. "Nine Inch Nails are only selling physical tickets for their upcoming US tour". www.theindustryobserver.com.au. May 13, 2018. Hussey, Allison; Minsker, Evan (October 15, 2019). "Notorious B.I.G., Whitney Houston, Nine Inch Nails Nominated for Rock Hall of Fame 2020". Pitchfork. Retrieved May 21, 2021. "Class of 2020 Inductees | Rock & Roll Hall of Fame". www.rockhall.com. Retrieved November 10, 2020. Childers, Chad (September 3, 2020). "Rock Hall Adds Six Nine Inch Nails Members to 2020 Induction". Loudwire. Retrieved November 10, 2020. Bloom, Madison; Monroe, Jazz (March 26, 2020). "Nine Inch Nails Drop New Album Ghosts V-VI". Pitchfork. Retrieved March 26, 2020. Tan, Emily (March 26, 2020). "Nine Inch Nails Surprise Fans with Two New Albums". Spin. Retrieved March 26, 2020. Chan, Anna (March 26, 2020). "Nine Inch Nails Drops Two Surprise New Albums For Free in These 'Weird Times'". Billboard. Retrieved March 26, 2020. Farokhmanesh, Megan (March 26, 2020). "Nine Inch Nails just released two new albums for free". The Verge. Retrieved March 26, 2020. "Rock Hall Induction Ceremony cancelled, replaced with special on HBO". fox8.com. July 8, 2020. Retrieved November 10, 2020. "Rock & Roll Hall of Fame Exhibit". nine inch nails. August 13, 2020. Retrieved November 10, 2020. "Nine Inch Nails in Conversation | Rock & Roll Hall of Fame". www.rockhall.com. Retrieved November 10, 2020. Kreps, Daniel (November 8, 2020). "Read Iggy Pop's Nine Inch Nails 2020 Rock Hall Induction Speech". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 10, 2020. Minsker, Evan (November 8, 2020). "Nine Inch Nails at Rock Hall 2020: Watch Trent Reznor's Induction Speech". Pitchfork. Retrieved November 10, 2020. "HEALTH x NIN". nine inch nails. May 6, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2021. "NINE INCH NAILS ANNOUNCE CLEVELAND SHOWS". nine inch nails. May 7, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2021. Shaffer, Claire (August 19, 2021). "Nine Inch Nails Cancel All Shows for 2021 Due to Covid-19". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 20, 2021. Pareles, Jon (August 26, 2021). "Backed by Nine Inch Nails, Halsey Connects Past and Future". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved September 14, 2021. "Nine Inch Nails Announce 2022 U.S. Tour". Pitchfork. February 7, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Smith, Troy (September 25, 2022). "Nine Inch Nails marks end of an era with historic performance". Cleveland.com. Renner Brown, Eric (December 18, 2015). "Trent Reznor promises new Nine Inch Nails in 2016". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Ives, Brian (April 7, 2016). "13 Alt-Rock Acts That Should Be In The Rock And Roll Hall Of Fame". Radio.com. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. "Britney Spears gets close to Nine Inch Nails". Today. February 13, 2009. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Holden, Stephen (July 3, 1994). "Pop View – How Pop Music Lost the Melody". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Cronshaw, Jon (July 8, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails: a beginner's guide". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Grierson, Tim. "Top 10 Most Influential Rock Bands". ThoughtCo. Archived from the original on October 14, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Serpick, Evan. "Nine Inch Nails—Bio". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 25, 2017. Retrieved October 20, 2017. Klosterman, Chuck (March 2006). "My Back Pages". Spin. Vol. 22, no. 3. p. 104. ISSN 0886-3032. Krajewski, Jill (June 7, 2016). "An Essential Guide to Nine Inch Nails". Exclaim!. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Carr 2011, p. 21. Pham, George (November 6, 2018). "Closer-A Nine Inch Nails Concert Experience". Retrieved July 4, 2019. "Explore: Industrial Metal". Allmusic. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved July 4, 2019. Michaels, Sean (November 30, 2009). "Nine Inch Nails to sell 'hundreds of instruments' in eBay auction". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Brown, August (November 8, 2013). "Watch Nine Inch Nails make their network TV debut with Jimmy Kimmel". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Trynka, Paul; Bacon, Tony (1996). Rock Hardware. Hal Leonard Corporation. p. 57. ISBN 9780879304287. DK (2013). Music. Penguin. p. 337. ISBN 9781465421265. "Alternative Metal Music Genre Overview". AllMusic. McPadden, Mike (September 8, 2015). "Alt-Metal A To Z: 26 Bands That Define The Genre". VH1. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. Cinquemani, Sal (May 3, 2005). "Nine Inch Nails: With Teeth". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved December 31, 2015. Breihan, Tom (May 3, 2005). "Review: Pretty Hate Machine". Pitchfork Media. Archived from the original on December 28, 2015. Retrieved December 31, 2015. Cooper, Steve (September 24, 1999). "NIN's New Effort Threads the Line Between Beauty and Destruction". The Cavalier Daily. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 26, 2007. Price, Marc A. (March 10, 2008). "Nine Inch Nails: Ghosts I-IV". Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Chillingworth, Alec (October 10, 2016). "Every Nine Inch Nails Album Ranked From Worst To Best". TeamRock. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2017. "The Downward Spiral (Deluxe Edition) by Nine Inch Nails on Apple Music". iTunes. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 16, 2017. Raggett, Ned (August 29, 2013). "Nine Inch Nails Hesitation Marks". The Quietus. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Nash, Rob (April 5, 2005). "Arts reviews: Nine Inch Nails". The Independent. Huxley 1997, pp. 171–172. Reynolds, Tom (June 13, 2005). I Hate Myself and I Want to Die. Sanctuary Publishing. p. 227. ISBN 978-1-86074-628-4. Marburger, Lex (May 2000). "The Fragile". Lollipop Online. Archived from the original on August 1, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2006. "Nine Inch Nails – Year Zero". AllMusic. Retrieved March 13, 2008. Huxley 1997, pp. 44–46. "'Year Zero' Not NINE INCH NAILS' First Attempt At Concept Album". BLABBERMOUTH.NET. Archived from the original on January 16, 2008. Retrieved January 2, 2010. Grow, Kory (November 5, 2019). "Trent Reznor on 'Watchmen' Soundtrack, Nine Inch Nails' 'Pretty Hate Machine' Turning 30". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 26, 2020. Klein, Joshua (May 4, 2005). "Nine Inch Nails' Body Of Work Gains 'Teeth'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. Mervis, Scott. "Synth-rock pioneer Gary Numan adds a shot of industrial power". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on January 18, 2015. Retrieved January 2, 2015. "Trent Reznor, Tony Hawk Talk Depeche Mode Fandom". Rolling Stone. May 11, 2017. Retrieved May 11, 2017. Scaggs, Austin, "Trent Reznor: 'We Finally Put New Metal Back Where It Belongs'" Archived September 5, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, Rolling Stone, November 17, 2005. "TR Updates from Trent – Entry 03-23-2006". Nin.com. March 23, 2006. Archived from the original on December 11, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2013. Bauhaus has been a major influence of mine over the years. Their sound, look and style made me want to start a band. One of the first tours we were on was with Peter Murphy – a hero of mine. To share the stage with these guys now is truly an honor. Cooper, Wilbert L. (January 15, 2015). "Trent Reznor Talks About Making It Out of the Midwest". Vice. Vice Media LLC. Retrieved March 30, 2020. The other important thing that happened when I went to college was I finally had access to college radio. I never realized how much shit was out there. I discovered Bauhaus after they'd broken up and Joy Division and Throbbing Gristle and tons of shit that I just didn't know existed. You know that feeling where you find a new band you haven't heard of, then you discover them and you realize they have like three albums out? To me that's a great feeling because you can't wait to digest and absorb them. Well, that was happening with, like, 30 bands to me in college. It felt very inspiring to be a music fan. "The Quietus | Features | Trent Reznor On Coil & Nine Inch Nails, Plus Recoiled Review". The Quietus. Retrieved January 14, 2021. Reznor, Trent (April 5, 2005). "Radio One Rock Show hosted by Trent Reznor". The NIN Hotline. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved May 23, 2015. DuShane, Tony (June 21, 2007). "Skinny Puppy / Among industrial music band's fans are Trent Reznor and Marilyn Manson, and once you're in, it's a lifelong commitment". San Francisco Gate. Archived from the original on September 9, 2017. Retrieved December 17, 2014. "Nine Inch Nails: Live: With Teeth 2006 (5_06 – 7_06)". Nine Inch Nails. Archived from the original on February 5, 2008. Retrieved February 10, 2008. Rickly, Geoff (June 26, 2004). "Geoff Rickly interviews Trent Reznor". Alternative Press. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Bowie, David (April 21, 2005). "Nine Inch Nails". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 6, 2009. Retrieved March 13, 2007. Wall, Mick (February 5, 2008). W.A.R.: The Unauthorized Biography of William Axl Rose. St. Martin's Publishing Group. p. 263. ISBN 978-1-4299-2884-7. Lostracco, Marc (April 19, 2007). "Thank God for Trent Reznor". The Torontoist. Ink Truck Media. Archived from the original on October 22, 2013. Retrieved April 20, 2007. Huxley 1997, pp. 46–47, 170–171. "Awards Database". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2007. "Kerrang Awards revealed". BBC Radio 6 Music. August 23, 2007. Archived from the original on December 26, 2007. Retrieved September 12, 2007. Jones, Sam (August 26, 2005). "Green Day triumph at Kerrang! awards". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved August 31, 2008. "Time's 25 most influential Americans". Time. Vol. 149, no. 16. April 21, 1997. p. 66. "Best Sellers: Gold & Platinum Top Artists". Recording Industry Association of America. July 31, 2006. Archived from the original on August 27, 2013. Retrieved February 5, 2007. Amter, Charlie (May 17, 2005). "Reznor Bares Teeth in Court". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on August 17, 2005. Retrieved October 8, 2007. Retrieved from Internet Archive December 29, 2013. "Rolling Stone : 1988 The Downward Spiral". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 7, 2007. Retrieved April 15, 2007. Cirisano, Tatiana (March 22, 2019). "'Old Town Road' Rapper Lil Nas X Signs to Columbia Records". Billboard. Retrieved March 29, 2019. Rutherford, Kevin (July 31, 2019). "Lil Nas X's 'Old Town Road' Breaks Record for Longest Stay Atop Streaming Songs Chart". Billboard.com. Rettig, James (August 28, 2019). "Congrats To Trent Reznor On His First CMA Award Nomination". stereogum.com. Freeman, Jon (November 13, 2019). "CMA Awards 2019: Trent Reznor Wins His First Country Award". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 10, 2020. Greene, Andy (January 15, 2020). "Nine Inch Nails, Notorious B.I.G., Whitney Houston Lead Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 2020 Class". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 15, 2020. Huxley 1997, pp. 81–82. "Court Holds Reznor/Malm Contract Not Unconscionable". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 13, 2015. Retrieved February 4, 2015. Amter, Charlie (May 27, 2005). "Reznor bails on MTV, nails manager". E! Online. Comcast Entertainment Group. Archived from the original on February 21, 2009. Retrieved November 28, 2006. "Rykodisk to reissue pretty hate machine *updated*". The NIN Hotline. October 27, 2005. Archived from the original on November 28, 2007. Retrieved November 28, 2006. Ladouceur, Liisa (November 8, 2005). "Reznor grits his teeth". The Toronto Sun. Sun Media. Archived from the original on January 15, 2013. Retrieved May 14, 2008.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Kreps, Daniel (May 14, 2007). "Nine Inch Nails' Trent Reznor Slams Records Labels for Sorry State of the Industry". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 6, 2008. Retrieved April 12, 2011. Reznor, Trent (May 13, 2007). "Updates from Trent". Nine Inch Nails. Archived from the original on May 17, 2007. Retrieved August 22, 2007. "Reznor Smashes UMG, Websites Write About It". The NIN Hotline. May 17, 2007. Archived from the original on November 28, 2007. Retrieved May 19, 2007. Moses, Asher (September 18, 2007). "Nails frontman urges fans to steal music". Sydney Morning Herald. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved September 18, 2007. "Trent follows up on Universal AU". The NIN Hotline. September 16, 2007. Archived from the original on November 28, 2007. Retrieved September 18, 2007. Cohen, Jonathan (October 8, 2007). "Nine Inch Nails Celebrates Free Agent Status". Billboard. Nielsen Company. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018. Retrieved October 20, 2017. Westhoff, Ben (October 30, 2007). "Trent Reznor and Saul Williams discuss their new collaboration ..." New York. New York Media. Archived from the original on October 31, 2007. Retrieved October 31, 2007. Kreps, Daniel (November 20, 2007). "Trent Reznor puts new NIN site on hold". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 22, 2007. Retrieved November 21, 2007. "Universal's Legal Tangles With YouTube Kill Official Nine Inch Nails Fan Remix Site". Gizmodo. Gawker Media. November 26, 2007. Archived from the original on February 11, 2008. Retrieved January 29, 2008. Montgomery, James (May 27, 2005). "Nine Inch Nails Drop Out Of MTV Movie Awards Over Bush Dispute". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved August 20, 2007. "Trent Reznor says Grammys were "an utter waste of time"". March 5, 2014. Archived from the original on March 5, 2014. Retrieved September 2, 2021. "Fox News, War Stories, and Nine Inch Nails". The NIN Hotline. October 23, 2006. Archived from the original on November 28, 2007. Retrieved November 29, 2006. Reznor, Trent (October 24, 2006). "Updates from Trent". Nine Inch Nails. Archived from the original on May 17, 2007. Retrieved August 22, 2007. Paoletta, Michael (March 30, 2007). "Online Odyssey Stoking Interest In New NIN Album". Billboard. Nielsen Company. Archived from the original on July 8, 2013. Retrieved May 20, 2007. "Musicians don't want tunes used for torture". Today.com. NBC Universal/Microsoft. December 9, 2008. Retrieved December 9, 2008. "Trent Reznor Upset His Music Used To Torture Prisoners, Dude From Drowning Pool Not So Much". Stereogum. December 12, 2008. Archived from the original on April 15, 2014. Retrieved August 18, 2014. "Nine Inch Nails' iPhone application gets the boot from Apple". Side-Line Music Magazine. Seba Dolimont. March 4, 2009. Archived from the original on May 6, 2009. Retrieved May 4, 2009. "Reznor takes a byte out of Apple". BBC News. May 8, 2009. Archived from the original on May 11, 2009. @nineinchnails (May 6, 2013). "And just like that, the Broken movie ..." (Tweet). Retrieved May 6, 2013 – via Twitter. "Nine Inch Nails' 20-year old 'Broken' film is too violent for Vimeo (update)". The Verge. Nathan Ingraham. May 6, 2013. Archived from the original on May 7, 2013. Retrieved May 6, 2013. Zahlaway, Jon. "Live Review: Nine Inch Nails in Boston". LiveDaily. Archived from the original on June 1, 2007. Retrieved February 4, 2015. "DVD Review: Nine Inch Nails Live". The Western Courier. Archived from the original on April 27, 2009. Huxley 1997, p. 202. Wiederhorn, Jon. "Nine Inch Nails, Tool Frontmen Recording Together". MTV. Archived from the original on February 4, 2015. Retrieved February 4, 2015. Semel, Paul (June 2000). "Pretty Quake Machine". Incite (7). "tapeworm". Tapeworm. Archived from the original on August 2, 2002. Retrieved February 16, 2008. D'Angelo, Joe (February 13, 2001). "NIN's Reznor Teams With Tool's Keenan For Tapeworm". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 14, 2007. Reznor, Trent (May 8, 2004). "Nine Inch Nails: Access". Nine Inch Nails. Archived from the original on July 18, 2007. Retrieved May 21, 2007. "Trent Reznor talks to Ian Camfield". Xfm London. July 22, 2005. Reimink, Troy (March 5, 2007). "Changes in songs, lineup keep Nails sharp". Grand Rapids Press. Booth Newspapers. p. D1. "The Complete List of Grammy Nominations". The New York Times. December 8, 2005. Archived from the original on October 25, 2013. Retrieved April 13, 2008. "49th Annual Grammy Awards Nominee List". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on December 20, 2006. Retrieved December 7, 2006. "The 51st Annual Grammy Awards Winners List". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on February 7, 2009. Retrieved February 9, 2009. Matthew, Jacobs (December 6, 2013). "Grammy Nominations 2014: Macklemore & Ryan Lewis, Lorde, Robin Thicke Make The Honoree List". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on December 10, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2013. Carr, Daphne (2011). Nine Inch Nails' Pretty Hate Machine. Bloomsbury Publishing USA. ISBN 9781441186379. Huxley, Martin (September 1997). Nine Inch Nails: Self Destruct. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-15612-X – via the Internet Archive. Nine Inch Nails at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Nine Inch Nails discography at Discogs Nine Inch Nails at Curlie