Torraye L. Braggs (born May 15, 1976) is an American professional basketball player. During his pro club career, Braggs played in the NBA, and also in seventeen other country's national domestic leagues, including: Spain, Venezuela, Greece, Puerto Rico, the Philippines, Israel, Russia, South Korea, China, Latvia, Mexico, Jordan, Iran, Uruguay, Argentina, the Dominican Republic, and Colombia. Braggs, who was born in Fresno, California, attended Edison High School, in Fresno, where he also played high school basketball. After high school, Braggs played college basketball at San Jose City College, from 1994 to 1996. He then played NCAA Division I college basketball at Xavier University, with the Xavier Musketeers, from 1996 to 1998. After college, Braggs was drafted by the Utah Jazz, in the second round of the 1998 NBA draft, with the 57th overall draft pick. After being drafted, Braggs began his professional career with the Spanish ACB League club Alerta Cantabria. After spending several years playing basketball in Europe, Braggs spent time with two teams in the NBA. He played with the Houston Rockets, in November 2003 and March 2005. He also played with the Washington Wizards, from January to February 2004. He averaged 2.1 points per game during his NBA career. In the United States, he also played in the Continental Basketball Association (CBA), the American Basketball Association (ABA), and the NBA Developmental League (NBDL). In the 2006–07 season, Braggs played with the Latvian Basketball League club ASK Rīga. With ASK Rīga, he won the Latvian League's championship in that season. During that same season, Braggs averaged 13.0 points per game in the Latvian national domestic league (LBL), 14.4 points per game in the regional Baltic Basketball League (BBL), and 13.4 points per game overall, in the two competitions combined. In the 2008–09 season, Braggs played in the Uruguayan Basketball League (LUB) club Malvín. "Torraye L Braggs was born on May 15, 1976 in Fresno County, California". californiabirthindex.org. California Birth Index. Retrieved May 7, 2020. Diary of a journeyman at hoopshype.com Basketball-Reference.com Profile NBA.com Profile ProBallers.com Profile Eurobasket.com Profile RealGM.com Profile Sports-Reference.com Profile