The administrative divisions of France are concerned with the institutional and territorial organization of French territory. These territories are located in many parts of the world. There are many administrative divisions, which may have political (local government), electoral (districts), or administrative (decentralized services of the state) objectives. All the inhabited territories are represented in the National Assembly, Senate and Economic and Social Council and their citizens have French citizenship and elect the President of France. Hauts-de- France Normandy Île-de- France Grand Est Bourgogne- Franche- Comté Centre- Val de Loire Pays de la Loire Brittany Nouvelle- Aquitaine Auvergne- Rhône-Alpes Occitania Provence- Alpes- Côte d'Azur Corsica French Guiana Guadeloupe Martinique Mayotte Réunion Belgium Luxembourg Germany Switzerland Liechtenstein Italy Monaco United Kingdom Andorra Brazil Suriname Spain Channel Bay of Biscay Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea The French Republic is divided into 18 regions: 12 in mainland France and 6 elsewhere (1 in Europe: Corsica; 2 in the Caribbean (the Lesser Antilles): Guadeloupe and Martinique; 1 in South America: French Guiana; and 2 in the Indian Ocean near East Africa: Mayotte and Réunion). They are traditionally divided between the metropolitan regions, located on the European continent, and the overseas regions, located outside the European continent. Both have the same status and form the most integrated part of the French Republic. As of 1 January 2022[update], metropolitan France is divided into the following: 13 regions, including Corsica; although Corsica is formally a single territorial collectivity, it is considered equivalent to a region (local authority). The regions are subdivided into 96 departments (local authority). The departments are subdivided into 320 arrondissements (not a public or legal entity). The departments are subdivided into 1,995 cantons (not a public or legal entity). The departments are subdivided into 34,826 communes (local authority). Three urban communes (Paris, Marseille, and Lyon) are further divided into municipal arrondissements. There are 20 arrondissements of Paris, 16 arrondissements of Marseille, and 9 arrondissements of Lyon. The city of Marseille is also divided into 8 municipal sectors. Each sector is composed of two arrondissements. There are also 710 associated communes (as of January 2009[update]), formerly independent communes which were merged with larger communes but have retained some limited degree of autonomy (e.g., the commune of Lomme which was absorbed by Lille in 2000 and transformed into an "associated commune" inside the commune of Lille). Furthermore, as of January 2009[update], there exist 2,585 intercommunal structures grouping 34,077 communes (93.2% of all the communes of metropolitan France), with 87.4% of the population of metropolitan France living in them. These intercommunal structures are: 16 urban communities (communautés urbaines, or CU) 167 agglomeration communities (communautés d'agglomération, or CA) 2,397 commune communities (communautés de communes, or CC) 5 Syndicates of New Agglomeration (syndicats d'agglomération nouvelle, or SAN), a category being phased out Five overseas regions (régions d'outre-mer, or ROM), which have the same status as metropolitan regions. The overseas regions are as follows: French Guiana Guadeloupe Martinique Mayotte Réunion Each overseas region is coextensive with an overseas department (département d'outre-mer, or DOM), again with the same status as departments in metropolitan France. The first four overseas departments were created in 1946 and preceded the four overseas regions, Mayotte became a DOM in 2011. The dual structure of overseas region and overseas department, with two separate assemblies administering the same territory, results from the extension of the regional scheme to the overseas departments in the 1970s. Each overseas region or department may transform into a single territorial collectivity, with the merger of the regional and departmental assemblies, which voters in Martinique and French Guiana approved in two referendums in 2010. In Réunion, the creation of a second department for the southern part of the island has been debated for some time. The overseas departments are subdivided into 12 arrondissements (Mayotte does not have arrondissements). The 12 arrondissements are further subdivided into 153 cantons with Mayotte having another 19 cantons. The 172 cantons are composed of 129 communes. (In the five DOM, there are more cantons than communes, unlike in metropolitan France, because many communes are divided into several cantons, whereas in metropolitan France in general cantons are made up of several communes, except in large communes like Toulouse or Lille which are divided into several cantons.) Furthermore, as of 1 January 2009, there exist 16 intercommunal structures in the overseas departments, grouping 89 communes (79.5% of all the communes of the overseas departments), with 83.2% of the population of the overseas departments living in them intercommunal structures. These intercommunal structures are: 7 agglomeration communities 9 commune communities The French Republic includes five overseas collectivities (collectivités d'outre-mer, or COM) with a semi-autonomous status: French Polynesia Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Wallis and Futuna French Polynesia (designated as an "overseas country", French: pays d'outre-mer) is divided into 5 administrative subdivisions (subdivisions administratives). For elections, it is divided into six electoral districts (circonscriptions électorales), which differ slightly from the 5 administrative subdivisions. The 5 administrative subdivisions are divided into 48 communes. There also exist some associated communes as in metropolitan France. Saint Barthélemy (designated as a "collectivity", French: collectivité) is a new overseas collectivity created on 22 February 2007. It was previously a commune inside the Guadeloupe department. The commune structure was abolished, and Saint Barthélemy is now one of only three permanently inhabited territories of the French Republic with no commune structure. There are no cantons and arrondissements either. Saint Martin (designated as a "collectivity", French: collectivité) is also a new overseas collectivity created on 22 February 2007. It was also previously a commune inside the Guadeloupe department. The commune structure was abolished and Saint Martin is now one of only three permanently inhabited territories of the French Republic with no commune structure. There are also no cantons or arrondissements. Saint Pierre and Miquelon (designated as a "territorial collectivity", French: collectivité territoriale, the same designation as Corsica, a region and not an overseas collectivity) is divided into 2 communes with no arrondissements or cantons. Wallis and Futuna (designated as a "territory", French: territoire) is divided into 3 districts (circonscriptions territoriales), which exactly match the three traditional chiefdoms (royaumes coutumiers) with their traditional kings still at their head, the only kings currently recognized in the French Republic. These 3 districts are Uvea, Sigave, and Alo. Uvea is the most populous and is further divided into 3 wards (districts in French): Hahake, Mua, and Hihifo. Wallis and Futuna is one of only three permanently inhabited territories of the French Republic with no communes (the others being Saint Barthélemy and Saint Martin). It also has no arrondissements or cantons. The French Republic includes one autonomous collectivity: New Caledonia New Caledonia's status is unique in the French Republic: it is the only French local government that is not a territorial collectivity (although its subdivisions are territorial collectivities). It is regarded as a sui generis collectivity, which means that local government and parliament have the power to pass and enforce specific laws without seeking the consent of the French Government; unless such laws are declared illegitimate by the Constitutional Council in a specific proceeding brought to the Constitutional Council. As agreed in the 1998 Nouméa Accord, a New Caledonian citizenship was established (in addition to the French citizenship which is kept in parallel, along with the consequent European citizenship) and a self-determination referendum was held in 2018. Two follow-up referendums were held in 2020 and 2021. It is divided into 3 provinces. The provinces are subdivided into 33 communes. These territories have no permanent civilian population. The residents consist of military personnel, scientific researchers, and support staff. 1 overseas territory (territoire d'outre-mer, or TOM): the French Southern and Antarctic Lands, which have no permanent population and no communes. The French Southern and Antarctic Lands are divided into five districts (districts in French): Adélie Land Crozet Islands Kerguelen Islands Saint Paul Island and Amsterdam Island The Scattered Islands (Îles Éparses), a collection of five non-permanently inhabited island groups in the Indian Ocean: Bassas da India, Europa Island, the Glorioso Islands (including Banc du Geyser), Juan de Nova Island, and Tromelin Island. These were previously administered separately but they have been combined into the French Southern and Antarctic Lands since February 2007. Clipperton Island: an uninhabited island in the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Mexico which is directly under the authority of the Minister of the Overseas in Paris (until February 2007 it was administered by the high-commissioner of the French Republic in French Polynesia). Since the Scattered Islands were also combined with the French Southern and Antarctic Lands in February 2007, Clipperton Island is now the only island left in this category. French subdivisions that have a (limited) freedom of administration are called territorial collectivities. Among them are regions, departments, communes, overseas collectivities, provinces (only present in New Caledonia), and the territorial collectivity of Corsica which belongs to no category (but is usually grouped with the regions). New Caledonia is unique as it is not a territorial collectivity.[citation needed] Citizens from all parts of France, including the overseas administrative divisions, vote in national elections (presidential, legislative), and all of the collectivities are represented in the Senate. Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes 01 Ain 03 Allier 07 Ardèche 15 Cantal 26 Drôme 38 Isère 42 Loire 43 Haute-Loire 63 Puy-de-Dôme 69D Rhône 69M Lyon Metropolis 73 Savoie 74 Haute-Savoie Bourgogne-Franche-Comté 21 Côte-d'Or 25 Doubs 39 Jura 58 Nièvre 70 Haute-Saône 71 Saône-et-Loire 89 Yonne 90 Territoire de Belfort Brittany (Bretagne) 22 Côtes-d'Armor 29 Finistère 35 Ille-et-Vilaine 56 Morbihan Centre-Val de Loire 18 Cher 28 Eure-et-Loir 36 Indre 37 Indre-et-Loire 41 Loir-et-Cher 45 Loiret Corsica (Corse/Corsica) 2A Corse-du-Sud 2B Haute-Corse Île-de-France 75 Paris 77 Seine-et-Marne 78 Yvelines 91 Essonne 92 Hauts-de-Seine 93 Seine-Saint-Denis 94 Val-de-Marne 95 Val-d'Oise Grand Est 08 Ardennes 10 Aube 51 Marne 52 Haute-Marne 54 Meurthe-et-Moselle 55 Meuse 57 Moselle 67 Bas-Rhin 68 Haut-Rhin 88 Vosges Hauts-de-France 02 Aisne 59 Nord 60 Oise 62 Pas-de-Calais 80 Somme Normandy (Normandie) 14 Calvados 27 Eure 50 Manche 61 Orne 76 Seine-Maritime Nouvelle-Aquitaine 16 Charente 17 Charente-Maritime 19 Corrèze 23 Creuse 24 Dordogne 33 Gironde 40 Landes 47 Lot-et-Garonne 64 Pyrénées-Atlantiques 79 Deux-Sèvres 86 Vienne 87 Haute-Vienne Occitanie 09 Ariège 11 Aude 12 Aveyron 30 Gard 31 Haute-Garonne 32 Gers 34 Hérault 46 Lot 48 Lozère 65 Hautes-Pyrénées 66 Pyrénées-Orientales 81 Tarn 82 Tarn-et-Garonne Pays de la Loire 44 Loire-Atlantique 49 Maine-et-Loire 53 Mayenne 72 Sarthe 85 Vendée Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur 04 Alpes-de-Haute-Provence 05 Hautes-Alpes 06 Alpes-Maritimes 13 Bouches-du-Rhône 83 Var 84 Vaucluse Overseas departments (the following are both departments and regions) 971 Guadeloupe 972 Martinique 973 French Guiana 974 Réunion 976 Mayotte Overseas collectivities 975 Saint Pierre and Miquelon 977 Saint Barthélemy 978 Saint Martin 986 Wallis and Futuna 987 French Polynesia (was also given the designation of overseas country) Sui generis collectivity 988 New Caledonia Overseas territory 984 French Southern and Antarctic Lands (including France's Antarctic claim and the Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean) Special status 989 Clipperton Island Historically, France was divided into a complex mosaic of more or less independent entities. Their gradual incorporation into France as provinces may be followed in the article Territorial formation of France. 2009 Mahoran status referendum Decentralisation in France List of 35 largest French metropolitan areas by population Outre-mer Overseas collectivity Overseas department and region Overseas France Overseas Territories of France (European Parliament constituency) Overseas territory Special member state territories and the European Union Zone d'études et d'aménagement du territoire (ZEAT), the eight statistical divisions of metropolitan (mainland) France "Les collectivités locales en chiffres 2021" (PDF) (in French). Ministère de la Cohésion des territoires et des Relations avec les collectivités territoriales. August 2021. p. 18. "La réforme territoriale" (in French). Government of France. 18 December 2015. Archived from the original on 30 December 2015. Retrieved 1 January 2016. Direction générale des collectivités locales (DGCL), Ministry of the Interior. "Intercommunalité - Bilan statistique 2009" (in French). Archived from the original on 6 March 2009. Retrieved 24 March 2009. Local websites by region