The Hui people (Chinese: 回族; pinyin: Huízú; Wade–Giles: Hui2-tsu2, Xiao'erjing: خُوِزُو, Dungan: Хуэйзў, Xuejzw) are an East Asian ethnoreligious group predominantly composed of Chinese-speaking adherents of Islam. They are distributed throughout China, mainly in the northwestern provinces and in the Zhongyuan region. According to the 2010 census, China is home to approximately 10.5 million Hui people. Outside China, the 170,000 Dungan people of Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, Panthays in Myanmar, Hui Chin Haws in Thailand are also considered part of the Hui ethnicity. The Hui have a distinct connection with Islamic culture. For example, they follow Islamic dietary laws and reject the consumption of pork, the most commonly consumed meat in China, and have therefore developed their own variation of Chinese cuisine. They also have a traditional dress code, with some men wearing white caps (taqiyah) and some women wearing headscarves, as is the case in many Islamic cultures. The Hui people are one of the 56 ethnic groups recognized by China. The government defines the Hui people to include all historically Muslim communities not included in China's other ethnic groups; they are therefore distinct from other Muslim groups such as the Uyghurs. The Hui predominantly speak Chinese, while maintaining some Arabic and Persian phrases. The Hui ethnic group is unique among Chinese ethnic minorities in that it is not associated with a non-Sinitic language. Hui Muslims descend from Indo-Iranian Persians, Mongols and other Central Asian immigrants. Their ancestors were of primarily Central Asian and East Asian origin, with some Middle Eastern ancestry from ethnic groups such as Arabs and Persians, who spread Islam in the area. About 6.7 percent of Hui peoples' genetics have a Middle Eastern origin; however, most Hui samples have very similar characteristics to other East Asian populations, revealing a common genetic makeup. They show significant genetic homogeneity with the Han Chinese population in Linxia and with other East Asian populations rather than European or Middle Eastern, supporting a simple cultural diffusion as the origin of the Hui in China. Several medieval Chinese dynasties, particularly the Tang, Song and Mongol, witnessed foreign immigration from predominantly Muslim Persia and Central Asia, with both[which?] dynasties welcoming foreign Muslim traders from these regions and appointing Central Asian officials. In subsequent centuries, the immigrants gradually spoke Chinese and settled down, eventually forming the Hui. After arriving in China, the Hui settled in most provinces and therefore varied greatly from region to region. During their stay in southern China, Jesuit missionaries did not see much difference between the Hui and the Han Chinese, except for their religion. Western missionaries who entered Gansu and Shaanxi after the 18th century, on the other hand, considered the Hui in the north-western provinces an ethnic group between the Turkic, Han and Arab peoples. The East Asian Y-chromosome haplogroup O-M122 is found in large quantities, about 24–30%, in other Muslims groups close to the Hui like the Dongxiangs, Bo'an, and Salar people. While the Y chromosome haplogroup R1a (found among Central Asians, South Asians and Europeans) are found among 17–28% of them. Western mtDNA makes up 6.6% to 8%. Other haplogroups include D-M174, N1a1-Tat, and Q, commonly found among East Asians and Siberians. The majority of Tibeto-Burmans, Han Chinese, and Ningxia and Liaoning Hui share paternal Y chromosomes of East Asian origin which are unrelated to Middle Easterners and Europeans. In contrast to distant Middle Easterners and Europeans with whom the Muslims of China are not significantly related, East Asians, Han Chinese, and most of the Hui and Dongxiang of Linxia share more genes with each other. This indicates that native East Asian populations converted to Islam and were culturally assimilated and that the Chinese Muslim populations are mostly not descendants of foreigners as claimed by some accounts, while only a small minority of them are. A study in 2020 found that the Hui people descended almost exclusively from indigenous East Asian people, with only minor contribution from West-Eurasian populations (specifically Iranian merchants). The formation and ethnogenesis of Hui people can be attributed to the cultural transformation of local Chinese residents. The results of the genetic data and admixture analysis showed significant genetic homogeneity between Hui and East Asian populations, and could not prove whether or not Hui received any genetic contribution from populations outside of East Asia. An overview study in 2021 estimated that West Eurasian-related admixture among the average Northwestern Chinese minority groups was at ~9.1%, with the remainder being dominant East-Eurasian ancestry at ~90.9%. The study also showed that there is a close genetic affinity among these ethnic minorities in Northwest China (including Uyghurs, Huis, Dongxiangs, Bonans, Yugurs and Salars) and that these cluster closely with other East Asian people, especially in Xinjiang, followed by Mongolic, and Tungusic speakers, indicating the probability of a shared recent common ancestor of "Altaic speakers". Another study in 2021 revealed that Hui people themselves have only a limited amount of West-Eurasian-related ancestry at a proportion of ~6%, but show massive genetic affinity (~94%) with both indigenous Han Chinese and Tibetans as well as Tungusic/Mongolic-speaking Chinese groups. Another study found that the average Hui people's ancestry is of nearly exclusive East Asian origin, and that geneflow from non-East Asian groups into the "Ancestral Hui population" was generally limited and rare. A genome analysis, using the ancestry-informative SNP (AISNP) analysis, found only 3,66% West-Eurasian-like admixture among Hui people, while the Uyghurs harbored the relative highest amount of West-Eurasian-like admixture at 36.30%. After the establishment of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the term "Hui" was applied by the Chinese government to one of China's ten historically Islamic minorities. Today, the Chinese government defines the Hui people as an ethnicity without regard to religion, and includes those with Hui ancestry who do not practice Islam.. Chinese census statistics count among the Hui (and not as officially recognized separate ethnic groups) the Muslim members of a few small non-Chinese-speaking communities. These include several thousand Utsuls in southern Hainan Province, who speak an Austronesian language (Tsat) related to the language of the Vietnamese Champa Muslim minority. According to anthropologist Dru Gladney, they descend from Champa people who migrated to Hainan. A small Muslim minority among Yunnan's Bai people are classified as Hui as well, although they speak Bai. Some groups of Tibetan Muslims are classified as Hui as well. Huihui (回回) was the usual generic term for China's Muslims (White Hui), Persian Christians (Black Hui) and Jews (Blue Hui) during the Ming and Qing dynasties. It is thought to have had its origin in the earlier Huihe (回紇) or Huihu (回鶻), which was the name for the Uyghur State of the 8th and 9th centuries. Although the ancient Uyghurs were not Muslims the name Huihui came to refer to foreigners, regardless of language or origin, by the time of the Yuan (1271–1368) and Ming dynasties (1368–1644). The use of Hui to denote all foreigners—Muslims, Nestorian Christians, or Jews—reflects bureaucratic terminology developed over the Yuan and Ming dynasties. Arab were white cap, Persians black cap and Jews blue cap Huihui. Islamic mosques and Jewish synagogues at the time were denoted by the same word, Qīngzhēnsì (清真寺: Temple of Purity and Truth). Kublai Khan called both foreign Jews and Muslims in China Huihui when he forced them to stop halal and kosher methods of preparing food: "Among all the [subject] alien peoples only the Hui-hui say "we do not eat Mongol food". [Cinggis Qa’an replied:] "By the aid of heaven we have pacified you; you are our slaves. Yet you do not eat our food or drink. How can this be right?" He thereupon made them eat. "If you slaughter sheep, you will be considered guilty of a crime." He issued a regulation to that effect ... [In 1279/1280 under Qubilai] all the Muslims say: "if someone else slaughters [the animal] we do not eat". Because the poor people are upset by this, from now on, Musuluman [Muslim] Huihui and Zhuhu [Jewish] Huihui, no matter who kills [the animal] will eat [it] and must cease slaughtering sheep themselves, and cease the rite of circumcision." The widespread and rather generic application of the name Huihui in Ming China was attested to by foreign visitors as well. Matteo Ricci, the first Jesuit to reach Beijing (1598), noted that "Saracens are everywhere in evidence . . . their thousands of families are scattered about in nearly every province" Ricci noted that the term Huihui or Hui was applied by Chinese not only to "Saracens" (Muslims) but also to Chinese Jews and supposedly even to Christians. In fact, when the reclusive Wanli Emperor first saw a picture of Ricci and Diego de Pantoja, he supposedly exclaimed, "Hoei, hoei. It is quite evident that they are Saracens", and had to be told by a eunuch that they actually weren't, "because they ate pork". The 1916 Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics, Volume 8 said that Chinese Muslims always called themselves Huihui or Huizi, and that neither themselves nor other people called themselves Han, and they disliked people calling them Dungan. French army Commandant Viscount D'Ollone wrote a report on what he saw among Hui in 1910. He reported that due to religion, Hui were classed as a different nationality from Han as if they were one of the other minority groups. Huizu is now the standard term for the "Hui nationality" (ethnic group), and Huimin, for "Hui people" or "a Hui person". The traditional expression Huihui, its use now largely restricted to rural areas, would sound quaint, if not outright demeaning, to modern urban Chinese Muslims. Islam was originally called Dashi Jiao during the Tang dynasty, when Muslims first appeared in China. "Dashi Fa" literally means "Arab law" in Old Chinese. Since almost all Muslims in China were exclusively foreign Arabs or Persians at the time, it was rarely mentioned by the Chinese, unlike other religions like Zoroastrism or Mazdaism, and Nestorian Christianity, which gained followings in China. As an influx of foreigners, such as Persians, Jews and Christians, the majority of whom were Muslims who came from western regions, were labelled as Semu people, but were also mistaken by Chinese for Uyghur, due to them coming from the west (Uyghur lands). The name "Hui Hui" was applied to them, and eventually became the name applied to Muslims. Another, probably unrelated, early use of the word Huihui comes from the History of Liao, which mentions Yelü Dashi, the 12th-century founder of the Kara-Khitan Khanate, defeating the Huihui Dashibu (回回大食部) people near Samarkand—apparently, referring to his defeat of the Khwarazm ruler Ahmed Sanjar in 1141. Khwarazm is referred to as Huihuiguo in the Secret History of the Mongols as well. While Huihui or Hui remained a generic name for all Muslims in Imperial China, specific terms were sometimes used to refer to particular groups, e.g. Chantou Hui ("turbaned Hui") for Uyghurs, Dongxiang Hui and Sala Hui for Dongxiang and Salar people, and sometimes even Han Hui (漢回) ("Chinese Hui") for the (presumably Chinese-speaking) Muslims more assimilated into the Chinese mainstream society. Some scholars also say that some Hui used to call themselves 回漢子 (Hui Hanzi) "Muslim Han" but the Communist regime separated them from other Chinese and placed them into a separate ethnicity, "Huizu". In the 1930s, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) defined the term Hui as indicating only Sinophone Muslims. In 1941, this was clarified by a CCP committee comprising ethnic policy researchers in a treatise entitled "On the question of Huihui Ethnicity" (回回民族问题, Huíhui mínzú wèntí). This treatise defined the characteristics of the Hui nationality as an ethnic group associated with, but not defined by, Islam and descended primarily from Muslims who migrated to China during the Mongol-founded Yuan dynasty (1271–1368), as distinct from the Uyghur and other Turkic-speaking ethnic groups in Xinjiang. The Nationalist government by contrast recognised all Muslims as one of "the five peoples"—alongside the Manchus, Mongols, Tibetans and Han Chinese—that constituted the Republic of China. A traditional Chinese term for Islam is "回教" (pinyin: Huíjiào, literally "the religion of the Hui"). However, since the early days of the PRC, thanks to the arguments of such Marxist Hui scholars as Bai Shouyi, the standard term for "Islam" within the PRC has become the transliteration "伊斯蘭教" (pinyin: Yīsīlán jiào, literally "Islam religion"). The more traditional term Huijiao remains in use in Singapore, Taiwan and other overseas Chinese communities. Qīngzhēn: (清真, literally "pure and true") has also been a popular term for Muslim culture since the Yuan or Ming dynasty. Gladney suggested that a good translation for it would be the Arabic tahára. i.e. "ritual or moral purity" The usual term for a mosque is qīngzhēn sì (清真寺), i.e. "true and pure temple", and qīngzhēn is commonly used to refer to halal eating establishments and bathhouses. In contrast, the Uyghurs were called "Chan Tou Hui" ("Turban Headed Muslim"), and the Turkic Salars called "Sala Hui" (Salar Muslim), while Turkic speakers often referred to Hui as "Dungan". Zhongyuan ren: During the Qing dynasty, the term Zhongyuan ren (中原人; 'people from the Central Plain') was the term for all Chinese, encompassing Han Chinese and Hui in Xinjiang or Central Asia. While Hui are not Han, they consider themselves to be Chinese and include themselves in the larger group of Zhongyuan ren. The Dungan people, descendants of Hui who fled to Central Asia, called themselves Zhongyuan ren in addition to the standard labels lao huihui and huizi. Zhongyuan ren was used by Turkic Muslims to refer to ethnic Chinese. When Central Asian invaders from Kokand invaded Kashgar, in a letter the Kokandi commander criticised the Kashgari Turkic Muslim Ishaq for allegedly not behaving like a Muslim and wanting to be a Zhongyuan ren (Chinese). Some Uyghurs barely see any difference between Hui and Han. A Uyghur social scientist, Dilshat, regarded Hui as the same people as Han, deliberately calling Hui people Han and dismissing the Hui as having only a few hundred years of history. Pusuman: Pusuman was a name used by Chinese during the Yuan dynasty. It could have been a corruption of Musalman or another name for Persians. It means either Muslim or Persian. Pusuman Kuo (Pusuman Guo) referred to the country where they came from. The name "Pusuman zi" (pusuman script), was used to refer to the script that the HuiHui (Muslims) were using. Muslim Chinese: The term Chinese Muslim is sometimes used to refer to Hui people, given that they speak Chinese, in contrast to, e.g., Turkic-speaking Salars. During the Qing dynasty, Chinese Muslim (Han Hui) was sometimes used to refer to Hui people, which differentiated them from non-Chinese-speaking Muslims. However, not all Hui are Muslims, nor are all Chinese Muslims, Hui. For example, Li Yong is a famous Han Chinese who practices Islam and Hui Liangyu is a notable atheist Hui. In addition, most Uyghurs, Kazakhs, Kirghiz and Dongxiang in China are Muslims, but are not Hui.[citation needed] John Stuart Thomson, who traveled in China, called them "Mohammedan Chinese". They have also been called "Chinese Mussulmans", when Europeans wanted to distinguish them from Han Chinese. Some non-Muslim Hui identify as Hui out of interest in their ancestry or because of government benefits. These Hui are concentrated on the southeast coast of China, especially Fujian province. Some Hui clans around Quanzhou in Fujian, such as the Ding and Guo families, identify themselves by ethnicity and no longer practice Islam. In recent years, more of these clans have identified as Hui, increasing the official population. They provided evidence of their ancestry and were recognized as Hui. Many clans across Fujian had genealogies that demonstrated Hui ancestry. These clans inhabited Fujian, Taiwan, Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines. None of these clans were Muslims but they do not offer pork during their ancestral worship. In Taiwan, the Hui clans who followed Koxinga to Formosa to defeat the Dutch settled no longer observe Islam and their descendants embrace the Chinese folk religion. The Taiwanese branch of the Guo (Kuo in Taiwan) clan with Hui ancestry does not practice Islam, yet does not offer pork at their ancestral shrines. The Chinese Muslim Association counts these people as Muslims. Also on Taiwan, one branch of the Ding (Ting) clan that descended from Sayyid Ajjal Shams al-Din Omar resides in Taisi Township in Yunlin County. They trace their descent through him via the Quanzhou Ding family of Fujian. While pretending to be Han Chinese in Fujian, they initially practiced Islam when they came to Taiwan 200 years ago, but their descendants have embraced Buddhism or Taoism. An attempt was made by the Chinese Islamic Society to convert the Fujian Hui of Fujian back to Islam in 1983, by sending four Ningxia imams to Fujian. This futile endeavour ended in 1986, when the final Ningxia imam left. A similar endeavour in Taiwan also failed. Until 1982, a Han could "become" Hui by converting to Islam. Thereafter, a converted Han counts instead as a "Muslim Han". Symmetrically, Hui people consider other Hui who do not observe Islamic practices as still Hui, and that their Hui nationality cannot be lost. For both of these reasons, simply calling them "Chinese Muslims" is no longer accurate, strictly speaking, just as with Bosniaks in former Yugoslavia. The Hui nationality is the most widely distributed ethnic minority in China, and it is also the main ethnic minority in many provinces. There are 10,586,087 Hui people in China (2010 census), accounting for 0.79% of the total population, making them the third largest ethnic group after Han Chinese and Zhuang. Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region and Gansu Province have a Hui population of more than one million. In Ningxia, 33.95% of the population are of Hui ethnicity. Hui are the major minority in Qinghai (15.62%), Gansu and Shaanxi and is the overall major minority in Henan and Anhui. Dungan (simplified Chinese: 东干族; traditional Chinese: 東干族; pinyin: Dōnggānzú; Russian: Дунгане) is a term used in Central Asia and in Xinjiang to refer to Chinese-speaking Muslim people. In the censuses of Russia and Central Asian nations, the Hui are distinguished from Chinese, termed Dungans. However, in both China and Central Asia members of this ethnic group call themselves Lao Huihui or Zhongyuanren, rather than Dungan. Zhongyuan 中原, literally means "The Central Plain," and is the historical name of Shaanxi and Henan provinces. Most Dungans living in Central Asia are descendants of Hui people from Gansu and Shaanxi.[citation needed] Hui people are referred to by Central Asian Turkic speakers and Tajiks by the ethnonym Dungan. Joseph Fletcher cited Turkic and Persian manuscripts related to the preaching of the 17th century Kashgarian Sufi master Muhammad Yūsuf (or, possibly, his son Afaq Khoja) inside the Ming Empire (in today's Gansu and/or Qinghai), where the preacher allegedly converted ulamā-yi Tunganiyyāh (i.e., "Dungan ulema") into Sufism. As early as the 1830s, Dungan, in various spellings appeared in both English and German, referring to the Hui people of Xinjiang. For example, James Prinsep in 1835 mentioned Muslim "Túngánis" in Chinese Tartary. The word (mostly in the form "Dungani" or "Tungani", sometimes "Dungens" or "Dungans") acquired currency in English and other western languages when books in the 1860–70s discussed the Dungan Revolt. Later authors continued to use variants of the term for Xinjiang Hui people. For example, Owen Lattimore, writing ca. 1940, maintained the terminological distinction between these two related groups: the Donggan or "Tungkan" (the older Wade-Giles spelling for "Dungan"), described by him as the descendants of the Gansu Hui people resettled in Xinjiang in the 17–18th centuries, vs. e.g. the "Gansu Moslems" or generic "Chinese Moslems". The name "Dungan" sometimes referred to all Muslims coming from China proper, such as Dongxiang and Salar in addition to Hui. Reportedly, the Hui disliked the term Dungan, calling themselves either HuiHui or Huizi. In the Soviet Union and its successor countries, the term "Dungans" (дунгане) became the standard name for the descendants of Chinese-speaking Muslims who emigrated in the 1870s and 1880s to the Russian Empire, mostly to today's Kyrgyzstan and south-eastern Kazakhstan. The Panthay are a group of Chinese Muslims in Myanmar (Burma) and Yunnan Province. In Thailand, Chinese Muslims are referred to as Chin Ho (จีนฮ่อ). The Utsuls of Hainan are a Chamic-speaking ethnic group which lives southernmost tip of the island near the city of Sanya. They are thought to be descendants of Cham refugees who fled their homeland of Champa in what is now modern Central Vietnam to escape the Vietnamese invasion. Although they are culturally, ethnically and linguistically distinct from the Hui, the Chinese government nevertheless classifies them as Hui due to their Islamic faith. Many Hui are direct descendants of Silk Road travelers. On the southeast coast (e.g., Guangdong, Fujian) and in major trade centers elsewhere in China, some are of mixed local and foreign descent. The foreign element, although greatly diluted, came primarily from Iranian (Bosi) traders, who brought Islam to China. These foreigners settled and gradually intermarried, while assimilating Chinese culture. Early European explorers speculated that T'ung-kan (Dungans, i.e. Hui, called "Chinese Mohammedan") in Xinjiang, originated from Khorezmians who were transported to China by the Mongols, and descended from a mixture of Chinese, Iranian and Turkic peoples. They also reported that the T'ung-kan were Shafi'ites, as were the Khorezmians. The Hui people of Yunnan and Northwestern China resulted from the convergence of Mongol, Turkic, and Iranian peoples or other Central Asian settlers recruited by the Yuan dynasty, either as artisans or as officials (the semu), formed the second-highest stratum in the Yuan ethnic hierarchy (after the Mongols but above Chinese). A proportion of the ancestral nomad or military ethnic groups were originally Nestorian Christians, many of whom later converted to Islam under the Ming and Qing dynasties.[citation needed] Most Hui are Sunni Muslim following different Sufi schools. Ma Tong recorded that the 6,781,500 Sunni Hui in China followed 58.2% Gedimu, 21% Yihewani, 10.9% Jahriyya, 7.2% Khuffiya, 1.4% Qadariyya and 0.7% Kubrawiyya Sufi schools. Among the northern Hui, Central Asian Sufi schools such as Kubrawiyya, Qadiriyya, and Naqshbandiyya (Khufiyya and Jahriyya) were strong influences, mostly of the Hanafi Madhhab. Hui Muslims have a long tradition of synthesizing Confucian teachings with Qur'anic teachings and reportedly have contributed to Confucianism from the Tang period on. Before the "Yihewani" movement, a Chinese Muslim sect inspired by the Middle Eastern reform movement, northern Hui Sufis blended Taoist teachings and martial arts practices with Sufi philosophy. Many Jews in China, for example the Kaifeng Jews, and in particular the Jewish Zhang family Zhang of Kaifeng at the start of the 20th century, converted to Islam and became Hui people. According to legend, a Muhuyindeni person converted an entire village of Han with the surname Zhang to Islam. Hui also adopted Han children and raised them as Hui. Hui in Gansu with the surnames Tang (唐) and Wang (汪) descended from Han Chinese who converted to Islam and married Muslim Hui or Dongxiangs, joining the Hui and Dongxiang ethnic groups, both Muslim. Tangwangchuan and Hanjiaji were notable as towns with a multi-ethnic community, with both non-Muslims and Muslims. Kuomintang official Ma Hetian visited Tangwangchuan and met an "elderly local literatus from the Tang clan" while he was on his inspection tour of Gansu and Qinghai. In Gansu province in the 1800s, a Muslim Hui woman married into the Han Chinese Kong lineage of Dachuan District, which was descended from Confucius. The Han Chinese groom and his family converted to Islam after the marriage. In 1715 in Yunnan province, a few Han Chinese descendants of Confucius also surnamed Kong married Hui women and converted to Islam. Around 1376 the 30-year-old Chinese merchant Lin Nu visited Ormuz in Persia, converted to Islam, and married a Semu girl ("娶色目女") (either Persian or Arab) and brought her back to Quanzhou in Fujian. The Confucian philosopher Li Zhi was their descendant. During China's land reform movement (which began after the defeat of the Japanese in the Second Sino-Japanese War and continued in the early years of the People's Republic of China), the Communist Party encouraged rural women in achieving a "double fanshen"—a revolutionary transformation as both a peasant and a feminist awakening as a woman. The progress of Hui women was promoted as by the party as an example of such a success. Through the rural movement, Hui women were said to have not just received land, but also "freedom over their own bodies." Hui women embraced political participation and the rural revolution. The land reform movement succeeded among Hui people because activists first won over elder generations. The Cultural Revolution wreaked much havoc on all cultures and ethnicities in China. The quelling of Hui militant rebels at the hands of the People's Liberation Army in Yunnan, known as the Shadian incident, reportedly claimed over 1,600 lives in 1975. Different Muslim ethnic groups in different regions are treated differently by the Chinese government in regards to religious freedom. A greater freedom is permitted for Hui Muslims, who can practice their religion, build mosques, and have their children attend mosques, while more controls are placed specifically on Uyghurs in Xinjiang. Since the 1980s, Islamic private schools have been supported and permitted by the Chinese government in Muslim areas, except for Xinjiang due to the separatist sentiment there. Although religious education for children is officially forbidden by law in China, the CCP allows Hui Muslims to have their children educated in the religion and attend mosques, while the law is enforced on Uyghurs. After secondary education is completed, China then allows Hui students who would like to, embark on religious studies under an imam. China does not enforce the law against children attending mosques on non-Uyghurs in areas outside of Xinjiang. Hui religious schools are also allowed to establish a large autonomous network of mosques and schools run by a Hui Sufi leader, which was formed with the approval of the Chinese government even though he admitted to attending an event where Osama Bin Laden spoke. Hui Muslims who are employed by the state are allowed to fast during Ramadan, unlike Uyghurs in the same positions. The number of Hui going on Hajj is expanding, while Uyghurs find it difficult to get passports to go on Hajj. Hui women are allowed to wear veils, while Uyghur women are discouraged from wearing them. Many Hui women wear veils and headscarves. There is a major halal industry and Islamic clothing industry to manufacture Muslim attire such as skull caps, veils, and headscarves in the Hui region of Ningxia. China banned a book entitled Xing Fengsu ("Sexual Customs") which insulted Islam and placed its authors under arrest in 1989 after protests in Lanzhou and Beijing by Chinese Hui Muslims. During the protests, the Chinese police provided protection to the Hui Muslim protestors, and the Chinese government organized public burnings of the book. The Chinese government assisted them and gave into their demands because Hui do not have a separatist movement, unlike the Uyghurs. In 2007, anticipating the coming "Year of the Pig" in the Chinese calendar, depictions of pigs were banned from CCTV "to show respect to Islam, and upon guidance from higher levels of the government". Hui Muslims have been alleged to have experienced greater repression of religious activities in recent years. In 2018, paramount leader Xi Jinping issued a directive aimed at the sinicization of Chinese Muslims. Since then, the government has been accused of repressing aspects of Hui culture deemed "Arab". Most of these repressions have been limited to the removal of aesthetically Islamic buildings and symbols, with the government renovating architecture to appear more Chinese and banning Arabic signs in Hui regions. More drastic repressions have been taken, such as closing mosques or removing licenses from imams who have traveled outside of China. In order to sinicize the Hui, schools and mosques in Ningxia have been changed to include traits from traditional Han architecture. At least two Hui Muslims have allegedly been included in the reeducation camps, termed "Vocational Education and Training Centers" which the Chinese government claims are aimed at reforming the political thought of detainees, including extremist religious beliefs and separatist or terrorist sympathies. One or more of the Hui within these camps may have faced torture, and are allegedly grouped in different cells from Kazakhs and Uighurs, and on rare occasion die from stress. Tensions between Hui Muslims and Uyghurs have arisen because Hui troops and officials often dominated the Uyghurs and crushed Uyghur revolts. Xinjiang's Hui population increased by more than 520 percent between 1940 and 1982, an average annual growth of 4.4 percent, while the Uyghur population only grew at 1.7 percent. This dramatic increase in Hui population led inevitably to significant tensions between the Hui and Uyghur populations. Many Hui Muslim civilians were killed by Uyghur rebel troops in the Kizil massacre of 1933. Some Uyghurs in Kashgar remember that the Hui army at the Battle of Kashgar (1934) massacred 2,000 to 8,000 Uyghurs, which causes tension as more Hui moved into Kashgar from other parts of China. Some Hui criticize Uyghur separatism and generally do not want to get involved in conflict in other countries. Hui and Uyghur live separately, attending different mosques. During the 2009 rioting in Xinjiang that killed around 200 people, "Kill the Han, kill the Hui." is a common cry spread across social media among Uyghur extremists. The Uyghur militant organization East Turkestan Islamic Movement's magazine Islamic Turkistan has accused the Chinese "Muslim Brotherhood" (the Yihewani) of being responsible for the moderation of Hui Muslims and the lack of Hui joining militant jihadist groups in addition to blaming other things for the lack of Hui Jihadists, such as the fact that for more than 300 years Hui and Uyghurs have been enemies of each other, no separatist Islamist organizations among the Hui, the fact that the Hui view China as their home, and the fact that the "infidel Chinese" language is the language of the Hui. Even among Hui Salafis (Sailaifengye) and Uyghur Salafis, there is little coordination or cooperation and the two have totally different political agendas, with the Hui Salafists content to carry out their own teachings and remain politically neutral. Hui Muslim drug dealers are accused by Uyghur Muslims of pushing heroin onto Uyghurs. There is a typecast image in the public eye of Hui being heroin dealers. In Tibet, the majority of Muslims are Hui people. Antagonism between Tibetans and Muslims stems from events during the Muslim warlord Ma Bufang's rule such as the Ngolok rebellions (1917–49) and the Sino-Tibetan War, but such hostility was suppressed after the annexation of Tibet by the People's Republic of China. However, renewed Tibetan-Muslim violence broke out in the wake of the gradual liberalization of China, that resulted in increased movement of people, such as Han and Hui Chinese, into Tibetan areas. Muslim restaurants were attacked, and apartments and shops of Muslims were set on fire in the riot in mid-March 2008, resulting in death and injury. Tibetans also boycotted Muslim owned businesses. In August 2008, the main mosque in Lhasa was burned down by Tibetans during the 2008 Tibetan unrest. Some Muslims avoided overt display of religious identity in the wake of the violence. Many Hui Muslims also supported the repression of Tibetan separatism by the Chinese government, complicating their relationship. Problems also exist between Chinese-speaking Hui and Tibetan Hui (the Tibetan-speaking Kache minority of Muslims). There have been many occurrences of violent sectarian fighting between different Hui sects, mostly dating from the Qing dynasty. Sectarian fighting between Hui sects led to the Jahriyya rebellion in the 1780s and the 1895 revolt. After a hiatus after the People's Republic of China came to power, sectarian infighting resumed in the 1990s in Ningxia between different sects. In recent years, the Salafi movement in China has increased rapidly among Hui population with more mosques occupied under Salafis in China. Several sects refuse to intermarry with each other. One Sufi sect circulated an anti-Salafi pamphlet in Arabic. A small but growing number of Huis who supported or even joined the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. Chinese officials were believed to have ignored growing Hui Sufis' resentment against growing Salafi movement until recently. ISIL had released a music video called "I am a mujahid" (我們是Mujahid) in Mandarin to reportedly attract Hui Muslims into joining the organization. Some Hui believed that Islam was the true religion through which Confucianism could be practiced, superior to "barbarian" religions, and accused Buddhists and Daoists of "heresy", like most other Confucian scholars. Among the many Muslims in pre-Chinese Lhasa, the Kokonor Hui community was permitted to maintain the abattoirs outside the confines of the girdling pilgrims' circuit of the city. Muslim general Ma Bufang allowed polytheists to openly worship and Christian missionaries to station themselves in Qinghai. Ma and other high-ranking Muslim generals attended the Kokonuur Lake ceremony where the God of the Lake was worshipped, and during the ritual, the Chinese national anthem was sung, participants bowed to a portrait of Kuomintang party founder Sun Yat-sen, and to the God of the Lake. Offerings were given to Sun by the participants, including Muslims. Ma Bufang invited Kazakh Muslims to attend the ceremony. Ma Bufang received audiences of Christian missionaries, who sometimes preached the Gospel. His son Ma Jiyuan received a silver cup from the missionaries. The Muslim Ma Zhu wrote "Chinese religions are different from Islam, but the ideas are the same." During the Panthay Rebellion, the Muslim leader Du Wenxiu said to a Catholic priest: "I have read your religious works and I have found nothing inappropriate. Muslims and Christians are brothers." The style of architecture of Hui mosques varies according to their sect. The traditionalist Gedimu Hanafi Sunnis, influenced by Chinese culture, build mosques which look like Chinese temples. The reformist modernist Yihewani, originally inspired by Salafism, build their mosques in a middle-eastern style. Hui women once practiced foot binding, at the time a common practice across China. It was particularly prevalent in Gansu. The Dungan people, descendants of Hui from northwestern China who fled to Central Asia, also practised foot binding until 1948. However, in southern China, in Canton, James Legge encountered a mosque that had a placard denouncing footbinding, saying Islam did not allow it, since it violated God's creation. French army Commandant Viscount D'Ollone reported in 1910 that Sichuanese Hui did not strictly enforce the Islamic practices of teetotaling, ritual washing and Friday prayers. Chinese practices like incense burning at ancestral tablets and honoring Confucius were adopted. One practice that was stringently observed was the ban on pork consumption. The Sunni Gedimu and the Yihewani burned incense during worship. This was viewed as Daoist or Buddhist influence. The Hui were also known as the "white capped". Hui used incense during worship, while the Salar, also known as "black capped" Hui considered this to be a heathen ritual and denounced it. In Yunnan province, during the Qing dynasty, tablets that wished the Emperor a long life were placed at mosque entrances. No minarets were available and no chanting accompanied the call to prayer. The mosques were similar to Buddhist temples, and incense was burned inside. Hui enlisted in the military and were praised for their martial skills. Circumcision in Islam is known as khitan. Islamic scholars agree that it is required (mandatory), or recommended. However, circumcision is not universally practiced among the Hui. In the regions where it is undertaken, Hui tradition is that the maternal uncle (Jiujiu) play an important role by the circumcision and wedding of his nephew. The long history of Hui residence and mixing in China has led the Hui to adopt names typical of their Han neighbors; however, some common Hui names are actually Chinese renderings of common Muslim (i.e. Arabic) and Persian names. For instance, surname "Ma" for "Muhammad". Hui people usually have a Chinese name and a Muslim name in Arabic, although the Chinese name is used primarily. Some Hui do not remember their Muslim names. Hui people who adopt foreign names may not use their Muslim names. An example of this is Pai Hsien-yung, a Hui author in America, who adopted the name Kenneth. His father was Muslim general Bai Chongxi, who had his children adopt western names. Hui people commonly believe that their surnames originated as "Sinified" forms of their foreign Muslim ancestors some time during the Yuan or Ming eras. Common Hui surnames: Ma for Muhammad Mu for Muhammad Han Ha for Hasan Hu for Hussein Sai for Sa‘id Sha for Shah Zheng for Shams Guo (Koay) for Kamaruddin Cai (Chuah) for Osman Hai for Haydar A Ningxia legend states that four common Hui surnames—Na, Su, La, and Ding—originate with the descendants of Nasruddin, a son of Sayyid Ajjal Shams al-Din Omar, who "divided" the ancestor's name (Nasulading, in Chinese) among themselves. The Han Kitab is a collection of Islamic and Confucian texts written by various Hui authors in the 18th century, including Liu Zhi. New works were written by Hui intellectuals following education reform by Ma Clique warlords and Bai Chongxi. Some texts were translated from Arabic. A new edition of a book by Ma Te-hsin, called Ho-yin Ma Fu-ch'u hsien-sheng i-shu Ta hua tsung kuei Ssu tien yaohui, first printed in 1865, was reprinted in 1927 by Ma Fuxiang. General Ma Fuxiang invested in new editions of Confucian and Islamic texts. He edited Shuofang Daozhi, a gazette and books such as Meng Cang ZhuangKuang: Hui Bu Xinjiang fu. The Hui of Yunnan, whom the Burmese called Panthays, were reportedly fluent in Arabic. During the Panthay Rebellion, Arabic replaced Chinese as the official language of the rebel kingdom. Published in 1844, The Chinese repository, Volume 13 includes an account of an Englishman who stayed in the Chinese city of Ningbo, where he visited the local mosque. The Hui running the mosque was from Shandong and descended from residents of the Arabian city of Medina. He was able to read and speak Arabic with ease, but was illiterate in Chinese, although he was born in China and spoke Chinese. Hui marriages resemble typical Chinese marriages except that traditional Chinese rituals are not used. Endogamy is practiced by Hui, who mainly marry amongst themselves rather than with Muslims from other sects. However, the Hui Na family in Ningxia is known to practice both parallel and cross cousin marriage. The Najiahu village in Ningxia is named after this family, descended from Sayyid Ajjal Shams al-Din Omar. Intermarriage generally involves a Han Chinese converting to Islam when marrying a Hui, and marriage without conversion only takes place rarely. In Hui discourse, marriage between a Hui Muslim of both sexes and a Han is not allowed unless the Han converts to Islam. Although under Islamic law, a non-Muslim man cannot marry a Muslim woman, marriage between unconverted non-Muslim Han men and Hui Muslim women occurred repeatedly in Eastern China. Generally Han of both sexes have to convert to Islam before marrying. This practice helped increase the population of Hui. And under Islamic law Muslim men are not permitted to marry non-Muslim women who are not Jewish or Christian.[citation needed] A case of switching nationality occurred in 1972 when a Han man married a Hui and was considered a Hui after converting. Zhao nuxu is a practice where the son-in-law moves in with the wife's family. Some marriages between Han and Hui are conducted this way. The husband does not need to convert, but the wife's family follows Islamic customs. No census data documents this type of marriage, reporting only cases in which the wife moves in with the groom's family. In Henan province, a marriage was recorded between a Han boy and Hui girl without the Han converting, during the Ming dynasty. Steles in Han and Hui villages record this story and Hui and Han members of the Lineage celebrate at the ancestral temple together. In Beijing Oxen street Gladney found 37 Han–Hui couples, two of which were had Hui wives and the other 35 had Hui husbands. Data was collected in different Beijing districts. In Ma Dian 20% of intermarriages were Hui women marrying into Han families, in Tang Fang 11% of intermarriage were Hui women marrying into Han families. 67.3% of intermarriage in Tang Fang were Han women marrying into a Hui family and in Ma Dian 80% of intermarriage were Han women marrying into Hui families. Li Nu, the son of Li Lu, from a Han Chinese Li family in Quanzhou visited Hormuz in Persia in 1376. He married a Persian or an Arab girl, and brought her back to Quanzhou. He then converted to Islam. Li Nu was the ancestor of Ming dynasty reformer Li Chih. In Gansu province in the 1800s, a Muslim Hui woman married into the Han Chinese Kong lineage of Dachuan, which was descended from Confucius. The Han Chinese groom and his family were only converted to Islam after the marriage by their Muslim relatives. In 1715 in Yunnan province, few Han Chinese married Hui women and converted to Islam. Jiang Xingzhou 姜興舟, a Han bannerman lieutenant from the Bordered Yellow Banner married a Muslim woman in Mukden during Qianlong's late reign. He fled his position due to fear of being punished for being a bannerman marrying a commoner woman. He was sentenced to death for leaving his official post but the sentence was commuted and he was not executed. In the Dungan Revolt (1895–96) 400 Muslims in Topa 多巴 did not join the revolt and proclaimed their loyalty to China. An argument between a Han Chinese and his Muslim wife led to these Muslims getting massacred, when she threatened that the Muslims from Topa would attack Tankar and give a signal to their co-religionists to rise up and open the gates by burning the temples atop the hills. The husband reported this to an official and the next day the Muslims were massacred with the exception of a few Muslim girls who were married off to Han Chinese. In the 21st century, Hui men marrying Han women and Han men who marry Hui women have above average education. Hui have supported modern education and reform. Hui such as Hu Songshan and the Ma Clique warlords promoted western, modern secular education. Elite Hui received both Muslim and Confucian education. They studied the Quran and Confucian texts like the Spring and Autumn Annals. Hui people refused to follow the May Fourth Movement. Instead, they taught both western subjects such as science along with traditional Confucian literature and classical Chinese, along with Islamic education and Arabic. Hui warlord Ma Bufang built a girls' school in Linxia that taught modern secular subjects. Hui have had female imams, called Nu Ahong for centuries. They are the world's only female Imams. They guide women in prayer but are not allowed to lead prayers. Muslims have served extensively in the Chinese military for a long time in Chinese history, as both officials and soldiers, often filling the more distinguished military positions. During the Tang dynasty, 3,000 Chinese soldiers and Arab 3,000 Muslim soldiers were traded to each other in an agreement. In 756, 3,000 Arab mercenaries joined the Chinese against the An Lushan rebellion. A mythical Hui legendary folklore account claims 3000 Chinese soldiers were swapped by Guo Ziyi with the Muslims for 300 "Hui" soldiers, and said that only 3 Hui survived the war against An Lushan and populated Ningxia. A massacre of thousands of foreign Arab and Persian Muslim merchants and other foreigners by former Yan rebel general Tian Shengong happened during the An Lushan rebellion in the Yangzhou massacre (760), The rebel Huang Chao's army in southern China committed the Guangzhou massacre against over 120,000 to 200,000 foreign Arab and Persian Muslim, Zoroastrian, Jewish and Christian merchants in 878–879 at the seaport and trading entrepot of Guangzhou. During the Ming dynasty, Hui generals and troops loyal to Ming fought against Mongols and Hui loyal to the Yuan dynasty in the Ming conquest of Yunnan. Hui also fought for the emperor against aboriginal tribes in southern China during the Miao Rebellions. Many Hui soldiers of the Ming dynasty then settled in Yunnan and Hunan provinces. During the Qing dynasty, Hui troops in the Imperial army helped crush Hui rebels during the Dungan revolt and Panthay Rebellion. The Qing administration in Xinjiang also preferred to use Hui as police. Yang Zengxin, the Han Chinese governor of Xinjiang, extensively relied on Hui generals like Ma Shaowu and Ma Fuxing. Qing Muslim general Zuo Baogui (1837–1894), from Shandong province, was killed in Pingyang in Korea by Japanese cannon fire in 1894 while defending the city, where a memorial to him stands. Hui troops also fought western armies for the first time in the Boxer Rebellion, winning battles including the Battle of Langfang and Battle of Beicang. These troops were the Kansu Braves led by General Dong Fuxiang. Military service continued into the Republic of China period. After the Kuomintang party took power, Hui participation in the military reached new levels. Qinghai and Ningxia were created out of Gansu province, and the Kuomintang appointed Hui generals as military governors of all three provinces. They became known as the Ma Clique. Many Muslim Salar joined the army in the Republic era; they and Dongxiang who have joined the army are described as being given "eating rations" meaning military service. The Chinese government appointed Ma Fuxiang as military governor of Suiyuan. Ma Fuxiang commented on the willingness for Hui people to become martyrs in battle (see Martyrdom in Islam), saying: They have not enjoyed the educational and political privileges of the Han Chinese, and they are in many respects primitive. But they know the meaning of fidelity, and if I say "do this, although it means death," they cheerfully obey. Hui generals and soldiers fought for the Republic against Tibet in the Sino-Tibetan War, against Uyghur rebels in the Kumul Rebellion, the Soviet Union in the Soviet Invasion of Xinjiang and against Japan in the Second Sino Japanese War. The Japanese planned to invade Ningxia from Suiyuan in 1939 and create a Hui puppet state. The next year in 1940, the Japanese were defeated militarily by Kuomintang Muslim general Ma Hongbin. Ma Hongbin's Hui Muslim troops launched further attacks against Japan in the Battle of West Suiyuan. The Chinese Islamic Association issued "A message to all Muslims in China from the Chinese Islamic Association for National Salvation" in Ramadan of 1940 during the Second Sino-Japanese War. We have to implement the teaching "the love of the fatherland is an article of faith" by the Prophet Muhammad and to inherit the Hui's glorious history in China. In addition, let us reinforce our unity and participate in the twice more difficult task of supporting a defensive war and promoting religion ... We hope that ahongs and the elite will initiate a movement of prayer during Ramadan and implement group prayer to support our intimate feeling toward Islam. A sincere unity of Muslims should be developed to contribute power towards the expulsion of Japan. "Ahong" is the Mandarin Chinese word for "imam". During the war against Japan, the imams supported Muslim resistance, calling for Muslims to participate in the fight against Japan, claiming that casualties would become shaheeds (martyrs). Ma Zhanshan was a Hui guerilla fighter against the Japanese. Hui forces were known for their anti-communist sentiment, and fought for the Kuomintang against the CCP in the Chinese Civil War, and against rebels during the Ili Rebellion. Bai Chongxi, a Hui general, was appointed to the post of Minister of National Defence, the highest military position in the Republic of China. After the Communist victory and evacuation of the Kuomintang to Taiwan, Hui people continued to serve in the military of the Republic as opposed to the Communist-led People's Republic. Ma Bufang became the ambassador of the Republic of China (Taiwan) to Saudi Arabia. His brother, Ma Buqing, remained a military general on Taiwan. Bai Chongxi and Ma Ching-chiang were other Hui who served in Taiwan as military generals. The PLA recruited Hui soldiers who formally[clarification needed] had served under Ma Bufang, as well as Salafi soldiers, to crush the Tibetan revolt in Amdo during the 1959 Tibetan uprising. The majority of the Hui Muslim Ma Clique Generals were Kuomintang party members and encouraged Chinese nationalism in their provinces. Kuomintang members Ma Qi, Ma Lin (warlord), and Ma Bufang served as military governors of Qinghai, Ma Hongbin served as military governor of Gansu, and Ma Hongkui served as military governor of Ningxia. General Ma Fuxiang was promoted to governor of Anhui and became chairman of Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs. Ma Bufang, Ma Fuxiang, and Bai Chongxi were all members of the Central Executive Committee of the Kuomintang, which ruled China in a one-party state. Member Bai Chongxi helped build the Taipei Grand Mosque on Taiwan. Many members of the Hui Ma Clique were Kuomintang. Hui put Kuomintang Blue Sky with a White Sun party symbols on their Halal restaurants and shops. A Christian missionary in 1935 took a picture of a Muslim meat restaurant in Hankou that had Arabic and Chinese lettering indicating that it was Halal (fit for Muslim consumption). It had two Kuomintang party symbols on it. According to Dru Gladney, professor at Pomona College in California and a leading scholar on the Hui people, Hui Muslims are enjoying a resurgence in religiosity in China, and that the number of practising Muslims among the Hui people, are rising as well as a "dramatic increase" in the number of Hui women wearing the Hijab, and the numbers of Hui going on the Haj. There are also estimated twice as many mosques in China today than there were in 1950, in which majority were built by Hui Muslims. One of the reasons for the trend in China, is that Hui Muslims play a vital role as being middlemen in trade between the Middle East and China, and the China-Middle East trade has become increasingly important to the country. Consequently, the government has started constructing a $3.7 billion Islamic theme park called "World Muslim City", in Yinchuan, one of Hui Muslims hubs. Additionally unlike Uyghurs, who faces far more restrictions in religious freedoms, Hui Muslims generally do not seek independence from China and have a cultural affinity to the Han, and are far more assimilated into mainstream Chinese life. "It's not an issue of freedom of religion," says Gladney, "Clearly, there are many avenues of religious expression that are unfettered in China, but when you cross these very often nebulous and shifting boundaries of what the state regards as political, then you're in dangerous territory. Obviously this is what we see in Xinjiang and in Tibet". A community of Hui migrated to Taiwan after the Communist victory in China. In Southeast Asia, presence of Hui Muslims may date back 700 years to the time of Zheng He, who was a Hui. Hui also joined the wave of Chinese migrants that peaked between 1875 and 1912. They inhabited Penang, Sabah, Singapore and Pangkor prior to World War II. Most were Hokkien-speaking coolies and merchants from Fujian. The colonial British welfare system was commissioned according to language groups, so the Hui were classed as Hokkien. A small number of Hui may have become assimilated into mainstream Chinese society and local Muslim populations. In 1975, five Hui leaders started a campaign to get every clansman to put up a notice listing their ancestors for 40 generations, as a way of reminding them of their origins. The exact Hui population is unclear today as many families left Islam before independence. In 2000 official census figures gave the number of Muslim Chinese in Malaysia as 57,000 but most were Han converts. According to the Malaysian Chinese Muslim Association, the surnames Koay, Ma, Ha, Ta, Sha, Woon, and An (or Ang) may indicate Hui ancestry. Saudi Arabia was settled by hundreds of Hui Muslim soldiers under Ma Chengxiang after 1949. The Hui General Ma Bufang settled permanently in Mecca in 1961. For a while Cairo was the dwelling place of Ma Bukang and Ma Bufang in between the time they were in Saudi Arabia. The death of Ma Jiyuan in Jeddah on 27 February 2012 was greeted with sorrow by the Chinese consulate. The Panthays in Myanmar and some of the Chin Haw in Thailand are Hui Muslims, while Hui in Central Asia and Russia are called Dungans. The Dungan and Panthay revolts were set off by racial antagonism and class warfare, rather than religion. During the Dungan revolt (1862–77) fighting broke out between Uyghur and Hui groups. In the military, imbalances in promotion and wealth were other motives for holding foreigners in poor regard. In 1936, after Sheng Shicai expelled 20,000 Kazakhs from Xinjiang to Qinghai, the Hui led by Ma Bufang massacred their fellow Muslims, the Kazakhs, until only 135 remained. The Hui people have had a long presence in Qinghai and Gansu, or what Tibetans call Amdo, although Tibetans have historically dominated local politics. The situation was reversed in 1931 when the Hui general Ma Bufang inherited the governorship of Qinghai, stacking his government with Hui and Salar and excluding Tibetans. In his power base in Qinghai's northeastern Haidong Prefecture, Ma compelled many Tibetans to convert to Islam and acculturate. Tensions also mounted when Hui started migrating into Lhasa in the 1990s. In February 2003, Tibetans rioted against Hui, destroying Hui-owned shops and restaurants. Local Tibetan Buddhist religious leaders led a regional boycott movement that encouraged Tibetans to boycott Hui-owned shops. Tensions with Uyghurs arose because Qing and Republican Chinese authorities used Hui troops and officials to dominate the Uyghurs and crush Uyghur revolts. Xinjiang's Hui population increased by over 520 percent between 1940 and 1982, an average annual growth of 4.4 percent, while the Uyghur population only grew at 1.7 percent. This dramatic increase in Hui population led inevitably to significant tensions between the Hui and Uyghur populations. Many Hui Muslim civilians were killed by Uyghur rebel troops in the Kizil massacre (1933). Some Uyghurs in Kashgar remember that the Hui army at the 1934 Battle of Kashgar massacred 2,000 to 8,000 Uyghurs, which caused tension as more Hui moved into Kashgar from other parts of China. Some Hui criticize Uyghur separatism and generally do not want to get involved in conflict in other countries. Hui and Uyghur live separately, attending different mosques. During the 2009 rioting in Xinjiang that killed around 200 people, "Kill the Han, kill the Hui" was the recurring cry spread across social media among extremist Uyghurs. Hui Muslims in WW2 Hui Minorities' War Hui pan-nationalism Hui people in Beijing "By choosing assimilation, China's Hui have become one of the world's most successful Muslim minorities". The Economist. 8 October 2016. Archived from the original on 7 October 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2016. "الماتريدية وآثارها في الفكر الإنساني بدول طريق الحرير.. الصين نموذجا". Alfaisal Magazine. "الحنفية الماتريدية في بلاد الصين". midad.com. Gladney 1996, p. 20. Gladney 1996, p. 13 Quote: "In China, pork has been the most basic source of animal protein for centuries and Chairman Mao considered it 'a national treasure'" Lipman 1997, p. xxiii or Gladney 1996, pp. 18–20 Besides the Hui people, nine other officially recognized ethnic groups of PRC are considered predominantly Muslim. Those nine groups are defined mainly on linguistic grounds: namely, six groups speaking Turkic languages (Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, Salars, Tatars, Uyghurs and Uzbeks), two Mongolic-speaking groups (Bonan and Dongxiang) and one Iranian-speaking group (Tajiks). Dillon 2013, pp. 154–. Lipman 1997, p. 50 Of course, many members of some other Chinese ethnic minorities don't speak their ethnic group's traditional language anymore and practically no Manchu people speak the Manchu language natively anymore; but even the Manchu language is well attested historically. Meanwhile, the ancestors of today's Hui people are thought to have been predominantly native Chinese speakers of Islamic religion since no later than the mid or early Ming dynasty. [i.e. the late 14th to late 16th centuries] Yao, Y. G.; Kong, Q. P.; Wang, C. Y.; Zhu, C. L.; Zhang, Y. P. (2004). "Different matrilineal contributions to genetic structure of ethnic groups in the silk road region in china". Molecular Biology and Evolution. 21 (12): 2265–80. doi:10.1093/molbev/msh238. PMID 15317881. Yao, Hong-Bing; Wang, Chuan-Chao; Tao, Xiaolan; Shang, Lei; Wen, Shao-Qing; Zhu, Bofeng; Kang, Longli; Jin, Li; Li, Hui (7 December 2016). "Genetic evidence for an East Asian origin of Chinese Muslim populations Dongxiang and Hui". Scientific Reports. 6 (1): 38656. Bibcode:2016NatSR...638656Y. doi:10.1038/srep38656. ISSN 2045-2322. PMC 5141421. PMID 27924949. Lipman 1997, p. 210. Yao, H.-B.; et al. (2016). "Genetic evidence for an East Asian origin of Chinese Muslim populations Dongxiang and Hui". Scientific Reports. 6. 38656. Bibcode:2016NatSR...638656Y. doi:10.1038/srep38656. PMC 5141421. PMID 27924949. Zhou, Boyan; Wen, Shaoqing; Sun, Huilin; Zhang, Hong; Shi, Ruiming (2020). "Genetic affinity between Ningxia Hui and eastern Asian populations revealed by a set of InDel loci". Royal Society Open Science. 7 (1): 190358. Bibcode:2020RSOS....790358Z. doi:10.1098/rsos.190358. PMC 7029925. PMID 32218926. Ma, Bin; Chen, Jinwen; Yang, Xiaomin; Bai, Jingya; Ouyang, Siwei; Mo, Xiaodan; Chen, Wangsheng; Wang, Chuan-Chao; Hai, Xiangjun (2021). "The Genetic Structure and East-West Population Admixture in Northwest China Inferred From Genome-Wide Array Genotyping". Frontiers in Genetics. 12: 795570. doi:10.3389/fgene.2021.795570. ISSN 1664-8021. PMC 8724515. PMID 34992635. Wang, Qiyan; Zhao, Jing; Ren, Zheng; Sun, Jin; He, Guanglin; Guo, Jianxin; Zhang, Hongling; Ji, Jingyan; Liu, Yubo; Yang, Meiqing; Yang, Xiaomin (2021). "Male-Dominated Migration and Massive Assimilation of Indigenous East Asians in the Formation of Muslim Hui People in Southwest China". Frontiers in Genetics. 11: 618614. doi:10.3389/fgene.2020.618614. ISSN 1664-8021. PMC 7834311. PMID 33505437. He, Guanglin; Wang, Zheng; Wang, Mengge; Luo, Tao; Liu, Jing; Zhou, You; Gao, Bo; Hou, Yiping (November 2018). "Forensic ancestry analysis in two Chinese minority populations using massively parallel sequencing of 165 ancestry-informative SNPs". Electrophoresis. 39 (21): 2732–2742. doi:10.1002/elps.201800019. ISSN 1522-2683. PMID 29869338. S2CID 46935911. Lipman 1997, pp. xxii–xxiii. Gillette 2000, p. 12-13. Gladney 1996, pp. 33–34. Gladney 1996, pp. 33–34 The Bai-speaking Hui typically claim descent from Hui refugees who fled to Bai areas after the 1873 defeat of the Panthay Rebellion, and have since assimilated to the Bai culture. Gladney 1996, p. 18; or Lipman 1997, pp. xxiii–xxiv Gladney 2004, p. 161; he refers to Leslie 1986, pp. 195–196 Ting Jiang; Xiansheng Tian (2015). "The Hui People:Identity, Politics, Developments, and Problems". In Xiaobing Li; Patrick Fuliang Shan (eds.). Ethnic China: Identity, Assimilation, and Resistance. Lexington Books. pp. 123–138 [124]. ISBN 978-1-498-50729-5. Archived from the original on 19 September 2020. Leslie, Donald Daniel (1998). "The Integration of Religious Minorities in China: The Case of Chinese Muslims" (PDF). The Fifty-ninth George Ernest Morrison Lecture in Ethnology. p. 12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2010. Retrieved 30 November 2010. Trigault 1953, pp. 106–107. Trigault 1953, p. 112. In Samuel Purchas's translation (1625) (Vol. XII, p. 466): "All these Sects the Chinois call, Hoei, the Jewes distinguished by their refusing to eate the sinew or leg; the Saracens, Swines flesh; the Christians, by refusing to feed on round-hoofed beasts, Asses, Horses, Mules, which all both Chinois, Saracens and Jewes doe there feed on." It's not entirely clear what Ricci means by saying that Hui also applied to Christians, as he does not report finding any actual local Christians. Trigault 1953, p. 375. Hastings, Selbie & Gray 1916, p. 892. Dillon 1999, p. 80. Mission d'Ollone, 1906–1909. Recherches sur les Musulmans chinois. Par le Commandant d'Ollone, le capitaine de Fleurelle, le capitaine Lepage, le lieutenant de Boyve. Étude de A. Vissière ... Notes de E. Blochet ... et de divers savants. Ouvrage orné de 91 photographies, estampages, cartes et d'une carte hors texte. Henri Marie Gustave d' OLLONE, Viscount.; Henri Eugène de BOYVE; E Blochet; Pierre Gabriel Edmond GRELLET DES PRADES DE FLEURELLE; Gaston Jules LEPAGE. Paris, 1911. OCLC 563949793. Gladney 1996, pp. 20–21. Israeli 2002. Leslie, Donald Daniel (1998). "The Integration of Religious Minorities in China: The Case of Chinese Muslims" (PDF). The Fifty-ninth George Ernest Morrison Lecture in Ethnology. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2010. Retrieved 30 November 2010. Lipman 1997, p. 33. Dillon 1999, p. 13. Dillon 1999, p. 15. Gladney 1996, p. 18; Lipman 1997, p. xxiii Garnaut, Anthony. "From Yunnan to Xinjiang:Governor Yang Zengxin and his Dungan Generals" (PDF). Pacific and Asian History, Australian National University. p. 95. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2012. Retrieved 14 July 2010. Dudoignon, Komatsu & Kosugi 2006, p. 242. "Editorial". China Heritage Quarterly. Archived from the original on 14 March 2016. Retrieved 17 September 2016. Gladney 1996, pp. 18–19. Gladney 2004, pp. 161–162. On the continuing use of Huijiao in Taiwan, see Gladney 1996, pp. 18–19 Gladney 1996, pp. 12–13. Lipman 1997, p. xxiii. Weekes, Richard V. (1984). Muslim peoples: a world ethnographic survey. Vol. 1. Greenwood Press. p. 334. ISBN 0-313-23392-6. Retrieved 28 November 2010. Olson, James Stuart; Pappas, Nicholas Charles (1994). An Ethnohistorical dictionary of the Russian and Soviet empires. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 202. ISBN 0-313-27497-5. Retrieved 28 November 2010. Millward 1998, p. 215. Newby, Laura (2005). The Empire and the Khanate: a political history of Qing relations with Khoqand c. 1760–1860. BRILL. p. 148. ISBN 90-04-14550-8. Retrieved 28 November 2010. Bellér-Hann 2007, p. 185. Kauz, Ralph (20 May 2010). Kauz, Ralph (ed.). Aspects of the Maritime Silk Road: From the Persian Gulf to the East China Sea. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 89. ISBN 978-3-447-06103-2. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Australian National University. Dept. of Far Eastern History 1986, p. 90. Ronay, Gabriel (1978). The Tartar Khan's Englishman. Cassell. p. 111. ISBN 0-304-30054-3. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Willem van Ruysbroeck (1900). William Woodville Rockhill (ed.). The journey of William of Rubruck to the eastern parts of the world, 1253-55: as narrated by himself, with two accounts of the earlier journey of John of Pian de Carpine. Printed for the Hakluyt Society. p. 13. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Australian National University. Dept. of Far Eastern History 1986. Thomson, John Stuart (1913). China revolutionized. The Bobbs-Merrill company. p. 411. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Skrine, Clarmont Percival (1926). Chinese Central Asia. Methuen. p. 203. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Gransow, Bettina; Nyíri, Pál; Fong, Shiaw-Chian (2005). China: new faces of ethnography. Lit Verlag. p. 125. ISBN 3-8258-8806-1. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Gladney 2004, p. 294. Hefner, Robert W. (1998). Market cultures: society and morality in the new Asian capitalisms. Westview Press. p. 113. ISBN 0-8133-3360-1. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Gladney 1996, p. 287. Mallat, Chibli; Connors, Jane Frances (1990). Islamic family law. BRILL. p. 364. ISBN 1-85333-301-8. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Oi & Walder 1999, p. 62. Gowing, Peter G. (July–August 1970). "Islam in Taiwan". SAUDI ARAMCO World. Archived from the original on 11 September 2014. Retrieved 5 October 2010. Loa, Iok-Sin (31 August 2008). "FEATURE: Taisi Township re-engages its Muslim roots". Taipei Times. p. 4. Archived from the original on 20 September 2011. Retrieved 29 May 2011. The Journal of Asian studies, Volume 46, Issues 3–4. Association for Asian Studies. 1987. p. 499. Retrieved 13 June 2011. Gladney 1996, p. 279. Gladney 1996, p. 245. Lipman 1997, p. 59, based on: Fletcher, Joseph (1995). "The Naqshbandiya in Northwest China". In Manz, Beatrcie (ed.). Studies on Chinese and Islamic Inner Asia. London: Variorum. Prinsep, James (December 1835). Memoir on Chinese Tartary and Khoten. The Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. p. 655. ISBN 1-4021-5631-6. Lattimore, Owen (1941). "Inner Asian Frontiers of China". The Geographical Journal. 97 (1): 183. Bibcode:1941GeogJ..97...59R. doi:10.2307/1787115. JSTOR 1787115. Gladney 1996, pp. 33, 399. Olson, James Stuart (1998). An Ethnohistorical Dictionary of China. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 41. ISBN 0-313-28853-4. Lipman 1997, pp. 24. Museum, Roerich; Roerich, George (August 2003). Journal of Urusvati Himalayan Research Institute, Volumes 1–3. Vedams eBooks. p. 526. ISBN 81-7936-011-3. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Lipman 1997, pp. 31. Dillon 1999, pp. 19–21. Esposito 2000, p. 443–444, 462. LESLIE, DONALD DANIEL (2017). "INTEGRATION, ASSIMILATION, AND SURVIVAL OF MINORITIES IN CHINA: THE CASE OF THE KAIFENG JEWS". In Malek, Roman (ed.). From Kaifeng to Shanghai: Jews in China. Routledge. p. 68. ISBN 978-1351566292. In any case, the Kaifeng Jews did not stand out as an exotic community, for there were a large number of Muslims there, ... and they did not intermarry.93 According to most authorities, many Jews finally assimilated to Islam. Ehrlich, M. Avrum; Liang, Pingan (2008). "Part V KAIFENG JEWISH DESCENDANTS 14 THE CONTEMPORARY CONDITION OF THE JEWISH DESCENDANTS OF KAIFENG". In Ehrlich, M. Avrum (ed.). The Jewish-Chinese Nexus: A Meeting of Civilizations. Routledge Jewish Studies Series (illustrated ed.). Routledge. p. 194. ISBN 978-1134105533. Out of the seven original clans of Kaifeng Jews, the Zhang clan was said to have converted to Islam in the beginning of the twentieth century with the decline of the community and the problems in that period of China's history. Dubov, Kalman. Journey to the People's Republic of China; Review & Analysis. Kalman Dubov. Most of the Zhang converted to Islam. Jews who managed the synagogues were called mullahs. A high number of Kaifeng Jews passed the difficult Chinese Civil Service examination during the Ming Dynasty. Four inscriptions from 1489, 1512, ... Shapiro, Sidney (2001). Jews in Old China: Studies by Chinese Scholars. Hippocrene Books. p. 233. ISBN 0781808332. Muslim religious strictures required anyone , whether man or woman, who married a Muslim to convert to Islam . ... An San, a Kaifeng Jew, was awarded a rank of Third Grade, because of services he had rendered to the court ... -followers were not assimilated into the Han population. Jews who married Muslims had to embrace Islam. This is one of the reasons the Jews were assimilated. Goldstein, Jonathan, ed. (1999). "Contributors Benjamin Isadore Schwartz, Frank Joseph Shulman". The Jews of China: Historical and comparative perspectives. East Gate book. Vol. 1 of The Jews of China. M.E. Sharpe. p. 119. ISBN 0765601036. A 1757 regulation in the Paradesi record book stated : " If an Israelite or a ger (apparently , a convert from outside Cochin) marries a woman from the daughters ... of the mshuchrarim , the sons who are born to them go after the ... Dillon 1999, p. 127. Kitagawa, Joseph Mitsuo (2002). The religious traditions of Asia: religion, history, and culture. Routledge. p. 283. ISBN 0-7007-1762-5. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Lipman 1997, p. [145 Hui people], p. 145 145], at Google Books. University of Cambridge. Mongolia Inner Asia Studies Unit (2002). Inner Asia, Volume 4, Issues 1–2. The White Horse Press for the Mongolia and Inner Asia Studies Unit at the University of Cambridge. p. 119. Retrieved 17 July 2011.(Original from the University of Michigan) "How Many Minzu in a Nation? Modern Travellers Meet China's Frontier Peoples Brill Online". Ingentaconnect.com. 1 January 2002. Archived from the original on 25 October 2012. Retrieved 17 September 2016. Jing, Jun (1 October 1998). The Temple of Memories: History, Power, and Morality in a Chinese Village. Stanford University Press. p. 26. ISBN 0-8047-2757-0. Retrieved 29 June 2010. Zhou, Jing. "New Confucius Genealogy out next year". china.org.cn. Archived from the original on 10 October 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Archives on this are stored in Xuanwei city Chen, Da-Sheng. "CHINESE-IRANIAN RELATIONS vii. Persian Settlements in Southeastern China during the T'ang, Sung, and Yuan Dynasties". Encyclopedia Iranica. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Needham, Joseph (1971). Science and civilisation in China, Volume 4. Cambridge University Press. p. 495. ISBN 0-521-07060-0. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 29 June 2010. Deutsche Morgenländische Gesellschaft (2001). Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft: ZDMG, Volume 151 (in German). Kommissionsverlag F. Steiner. pp. 420, 422. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 25 August 2014. DeMare, Brian James (2019). Land wars : the story of China's agrarian revolution. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. pp. 140–141. ISBN 978-1-5036-0849-8. OCLC 1048940018. DeMare, Brian James (2019). Land wars : the story of China's agrarian revolution. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. p. 141. ISBN 978-1-5036-0849-8. OCLC 1048940018. Yongming Zhou, Anti-drug crusades in twentieth-century China : nationalism, history, and state building, Lanham [u.a.] Rowman & Littlefield 1999, p. 162 State Dept (U.S.), ed. (2005). Annual Report on International Religious Freedom, 2004. Government Printing Office. pp. 159–160. ISBN 0160725526. Archived from the original on 8 January 2017. Retrieved 24 April 2014. Versteegh, Kees; Eid, Mushira (2005). Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics: A-Ed. Brill. pp. 383–. ISBN 978-90-04-14473-6. Archived from the original on 9 January 2017. Retrieved 15 November 2015. The People's Republic, founded in 1949, banned private confessional teaching from the early 1950s to the 1980s, until a more liberal stance allowed religious mosque education to resume and private Muslim schools to open. Moreover, except in Xinjiang for fear of secessionist feelings, the government allowed and sometimes encouraged the founding of private Muslim schools in order to provide education for people who could not attend increasingly expensive state schools or who left them early, for lack of money or lack of satisfactory achievements "Chinese Islam: Unity and Fragmentation" (PDF). Religion, State & Society. 31. 2003. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 May 2012. Retrieved 17 September 2016. Szadziewski, Henryk. "Religious Repression of Uyghurs in East Turkestan". Venn Institute. Archived from the original on 27 March 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2015. Bovingdon, Gardner (2013). The Uyghurs: Strangers in Their Own Land. Columbia University Press. p. 68. ISBN 978-0231519410. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2014. Savadove, Bill (17 August 2005). "Faith Flourishes in an Arid Wasteland". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. Beech, Hannah (12 August 2014). "If China Is Anti-Islam, Why Are These Chinese Muslims Enjoying a Faith Revival?". TIME. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 25 June 2015. Devonshire-Ellis, Chris (19 August 2010). "Ningxia: Small but Beautiful and Productive". CHINA BRIEFING. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Sarkar, Sudeshna; Zhao, Wei (30 July 2015). "Building on Faith". BEIJING REVIEW. No. 31. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Schein, Louisa (2000). Minority Rules: The Miao and the Feminine in China's Cultural Politics. Duke University Press. p. 154. ISBN 9780822324447. Archived from the original on 9 January 2017. Retrieved 26 June 2015. Bulag, Uradyn E. (2010). Collaborative Nationalism: The Politics of Friendship on China's Mongolian Frontier. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 104. ISBN 9781442204331. Archived from the original on 10 January 2017. Retrieved 26 June 2015. Gladney, Dru C. (2013). Muslim Diversity: Local Islam in Global Contexts. p. 144. ISBN 9781136818578. Archived from the original on 9 January 2017. Retrieved 26 June 2015. Sautman, Barry (2000). Nagel, Stuart (ed.). Handbook of Global Legal Policy. p. 79. ISBN 9780824778927. Archived from the original on 9 January 2017. Retrieved 26 June 2015. Harold Miles Tanner (2009). China: a history. Hackett Publishing. p. 581, fn 50. ISBN 978-0872209152. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Lim, Louisa (6 February 2007). "Ban Thwarts 'Year of the Pig' Ads in China". National Public Radio. Archived from the original on 4 May 2019. Retrieved 5 April 2018. Albert, Eleanor (11 October 2018). "The State of Religion In China". CFR. Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 14 October 2018. Retrieved 27 May 2020. Hui Muslims have experienced an uptick in repression. Myers, Steven Lee (21 September 2019). "A Crackdown on Islam Is Spreading Across China". The New York Times. The New York Times. Archived from the original on 24 September 2019. Retrieved 27 May 2020. "China's Repressive Reach is Growing". Washington Post. 27 September 2019. Archived from the original on 22 June 2020. Retrieved 27 May 2020. Feng, Emily (26 September 2019). "'Afraid We Will Become The Next Xinjiang': China's Hui Muslims Face Crackdown". NPR. Archived from the original on 8 October 2019. Retrieved 8 October 2019. Jennion, James. "China's Repression of the Hui: A Slow Boil". thediplomat.com. The Diplomat. Retrieved 14 June 2021. "Internment camps make Uighurs' life more colourful, says Xinjiang governor". The Guardian. 16 October 2018. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. "Chinese officials defensive over Muslim re-education camps". Christian Science Monitor. Associated Press. 15 November 2018. Archived from the original on 5 July 2019. Bunin, Gene (10 February 2020). "Xinjiang's Hui Muslims Were Swept Into Camps Alongside Uighurs". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 8 March 2020. Retrieved 7 March 2020. Starr 2004, p. 311. Lars-Erik Nyman (1977). Great Britain and Chinese, Russian and Japanese interests in Sinkiang, 1918–1934. Stockholm: Esselte studium. p. 111. ISBN 91-24-27287-6. Archived from the original on 24 July 2020. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Starr 2004, p. 113. Van Wie Davis, Elizabath (January 2008). "Uyghur Muslim Ethnic Separatism in Xinjiang, China". Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies. Archived from the original on 17 June 2009. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Safran, William (1998). Nationalism and ethnoregional identities in China. Psychology Press. p. 35. ISBN 0-7146-4921-X. Retrieved 11 January 2011. Zenn, Jacob (17 March 2011). "Jihad in China? Marketing the Turkistan Islamic Party". Terrorism Monitor. 9 (11). The Jamestown Foundation. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015. Retrieved 18 September 2015. Zenn, Jacob (February 2013). "Terrorism and Islamic Radicalization in Central Asia A Compendium of Recent Jamestown Analysis" (PDF). The Jamestown Foundation. p. 57. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 18 September 2015. al-Sudairi, Mohammed (28 October 2014). "Chinese Salafism and the Saudi Connection". Mouqawamah Music. Archived from the original on 22 October 2015. al-Sudairi, Mohammed (23 October 2014). "Chinese Salafism and the Saudi Connection". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 8 September 2016. William, Safran (13 May 2013). Nationalism and Ethnoregional Identities in China. Routledge. pp. 36–. ISBN 978-1-136-32423-9. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 16 September 2016. Gao, Huan (15 July 2011). Women and Heroin Addiction in China's Changing Society. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-136-66156-3. Archived from the original on 24 March 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2016. Zhou, Yongming (1999). Anti-drug Crusades in Twentieth-century China: Nationalism, History, and State Building. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 128–. ISBN 978-0-8476-9598-0. Archived from the original on 24 March 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2016. Demick, Barbara (23 June 2008). "Tibetan-Muslim tensions roil China". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 22 June 2010. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Fischer 2005, p. 17. "Police shut Muslim quarter in Lhasa". CNN. Lhasa, Tibet. 28 March 2008. Archived from the original on 4 April 2008. Mayaram, Shail (2009). The other global city. Taylor Francis. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-415-99194-0. Retrieved 30 July 2010. "In China, rise of Salafism fosters suspicion and division among Muslims". Los Angeles Times. February 2016. Archived from the original on 27 June 2020. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "ISIS uses soothing music as a recruiting tool — in China". Archived from the original on 20 October 2019. Retrieved 20 October 2019. "Audio". SITE Intelligence Group. Archived from the original on 20 October 2019. Retrieved 20 October 2019. Lipman, Jonathan N. (July 1984). "Ethnicity and Politics in Republican China: The Ma Family Warlords of Gansu". Modern China. 10 (3). Sage Publications, Inc.: 297. doi:10.1177/009770048401000302. JSTOR 189017. S2CID 143843569. Heinrich Harrer, Seven Years in Tibet, Rupert Hart-Davis Publisher London 1953 p.157. Bulag 2002, p. 51. Bulag 2002, p. 52. American Water Works Association (1947). Journal of the American Water Works Association, Volume 39, Issues 1–6. The Association. p. 24. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Alternate URL: American Water Works Association (1947). Journal of the American Water Works Association, Volume 39, Issues 1–6. The Association. p. 24. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Horlemann, B. (2008). "The Divine Word Missionaries in Gansu, Qinghai and Xinjiang, 1922–1953: A Bibliographic Note". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 19: 59–82. doi:10.1017/S135618630800905X. S2CID 162397522. Wang, Jianping (1995). Discrimination, corruption and moral decline: the historical background of the Muslim Hui uprising in Yunnan, China, 1856–1873. The Harry S. Truman Research Institute for the Advancement of Peace, The Hebrew University. p. 8. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Atwill, David G. (2005). The Chinese sultanate: Islam, ethnicity, and the Panthay Rebellion in southwest China, 1856–1873. Stanford University Press. p. 167. ISBN 0-8047-5159-5. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Hastings, Selbie & Gray 1916, p. 893. Atabaki, Touraj; Mehendale, Sanjyot (2005). Central Asia and the Caucasus: transnationalism and diaspora. Psychology Press. p. 31. ISBN 0-415-33260-5. Retrieved 1 January 2011. Legge, James (1880). The religions of China: Confucianism and Tâoism described and compared with Christianity. Hodder and Stoughton. p. 111. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Rubin 2000, p. 80. Knights of Columbus Catholic Truth Committee (1913). The Catholic encyclopedia: an international work of reference on the constitution, doctrine, discipline, and history of the Catholic Church, Volume 3. Encyclopedia Press. p. 680. Retrieved 23 January 2011. Dillon 1999, p. 77. "BBC – Religions – Islam: Circumcision of boys". Allès, Élisabeth (2003). "Notes on some joking relationships between Hui and Han villages in Henan". China Perspectives. 2003 (5). doi:10.4000/chinaperspectives.649. Dillon 1999, p. 78. Pakistan horizon, Volumes 1–3. Pakistan Institute of International Affairs. 1948. p. 178. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Gladney 1996, p. 250. Blum, Susan Debra; Jensen, Lionel M. (2002). China off center: mapping the margins of the middle kingdom. University of Hawaii Press. p. 121. ISBN 0-8248-2577-2. Retrieved 9 April 2011. Gladney 1996, p. 375. Rubin 2000, p. 79. Manger, Leif O. (1999). Muslim diversity: local Islam in global contexts. Routledge. p. 132. ISBN 0-7007-1104-X. Retrieved 9 April 2011. Dillon 1999, p. 33. Dillon 1999, p. 22. Masumi, Matsumoto. "The completion of the idea of dual loyalty towards China and Islam". Archived from the original on 4 May 2015. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Wright, Mary Clabaugh (1957). Last Stand of Chinese Conservatism the T'Ung-Chih. Stanford University Press. p. 406. ISBN 0-8047-0475-9. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Lipman 1997, p. 176. Shuo fang dao zhi. 1926.[dead link] Ma, Fuxiang (1987). 朔方道志: 31卷. Tianjin Ancient Books Publishing House (天津古籍出版社). Ma, Fuxiang (1931). 蒙藏狀况: 回部新疆坿 [Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Status: Mikurube Xinjiang Agricultural Experiment Station]. Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission. Fytche 1878, p. 301. Evans, Brian L. (March 1985). "The Panthay Mission of 1872 and its Legacies". Journal of Southeast Asian Studies. 16 (1): 117–128. doi:10.1017/s0022463400012790. JSTOR 20070843. S2CID 162316292. The Chinese repository, Volume 13. 1844. p. 31. Retrieved 8 May 2011. Graeser, Andreas (1975). Zenon von Kition. Walter de Gruyter. p. 368. ISBN 3-11-004673-3. Retrieved 28 November 2010. Jia, Zhongyi (2006). The marriage customs among China's ethnic minority groups. 中信出版社. p. 25. ISBN 7-5085-1003-8. Retrieved 12 May 2011. Stroup, David R. (2022). Pure and True: The Everyday Politics of Ethnicity for China's Hui Muslims. University of Washington Press. p. 59-69. ISBN 978-0295749846. Gladney 1996, p. 211. Allès, Elizabeth (2003). "Notes on some joking relationships between Hui and Han villages in Henan". China Perspectives. 2003 (5). doi:10.4000/chinaperspectives.649. Archived from the original on 30 June 2010. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Gladney 1996, p. 209. Gladney 1996, p. 210. Association for Asian studies (1976). Dictionary of Ming Biography, 1368–1644. A-L, Volumes 1–2. Columbia University Press. p. 817. ISBN 978-0231038010. Retrieved 29 June 2010. Needham, Joseph (1 April 1971). Science and civilisation in China. Vol. 4. Cambridge University Press. p. 495. ISBN 0-521-07060-0. Retrieved 29 June 2010.. GZSL,juan1272, QL 52.1.8 (25 February 1787). Susie Carson Rijnhart (1901). "CHAPTER VIII OUR REMOVAL TO TANKAR". With the Tibetans in Tent and Temple (3rd ed.). Chicago, New York & Toronto: Fleming H. Revell Company. Archived from the original on 4 March 2014. Retrieved 24 April 2014. Susie Carson Rijnhart (1999). With the Tibetans in Tent and Temple: Narrative of Four Years' Residence on the Tibetan Borders and of a Journey Into the Far Interior. Asian Educational Services. p. 135. ISBN 978-81-206-1302-7. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 6 May 2020. Susie Carson Rijnhart (1901). With the Tibetans in Tent and Temple: Narrative of Four Years' Residence on the Tibetan Border, and of a Journey Into the Far Interior. Oliphant, Anderson, & Ferrier. pp. 135. During the recent rebellion, as already stated, a large proportion of the Mohammedan population left their homes and joined the rebel forces, ... Heaton, Tim B.; Jacobson, Cardell K. (September 2004). "The Cross-Cultural Patterns of Interracial Marriage". Department of Sociology Brigham Young University. p. 10. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 31 October 2010. Lipman 1997, p. 168. Dudoignon, Komatsu & Kosugi 2006, p. 251. Jaschok & Shui 2000, p. 96. "Muslim women do it their way in Ningxia". Taipei Times. WUZHONG, CHINA. AP. 20 December 2006. p. 9. Archived from the original on 30 November 2011. Retrieved 29 May 2011. Keim 1951, p. 121. Needham, Joseph; Ho, Ping-Yu; Lu, Gwei-Djen; Sivin, Nathan (1980). Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 5, Chemistry and Chemical Technology, Part 4, Spagyrical Discovery and Invention: Apparatus, Theories and Gifts (illustrated ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 416. ISBN 052108573X. Israeli 2017, p. 26. Wan, Lei (2017). The earliest Muslim communities in China (PDF). Qiraat No. 8 (February – March 2017). King Faisal Center For Research and Islamic Studies. p. 11. ISBN 978-603-8206-39-3. Qi 2010, p. 221-227. Gernet 1996, p. 292. Dillon 1999, p. 34. Tan, Ta Sen; Chen, Dasheng (19 October 2009). Cheng Ho and Islam in Southeast Asia. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. p. 170. ISBN 978-981-230-837-5. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Denis Crispin Twitchett; John King Fairbank (1977). The Cambridge history of China, Volume 10. Cambridge University Press. p. 68. ISBN 0-521-21447-5. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Lynn, Aliya Ma (1 August 2007). Muslims in China. University Press. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-88093-861-7. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Christian Literature Society for India (1920). Samuel Marinus Zwemer (ed.). The Moslem World, Volume 10. Hartford Seminary Foundation. p. 379. Retrieved 6 June 2011. Minahan, James B. (10 February 2014). Ethnic Groups of North, East, and Central Asia: An Encyclopedia. Abc-Clio. p. 240. ISBN 9781610690188. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 16 September 2016. Close, Upton (30 March 2007). In the Land of the Laughing Buddha – The Adventures of an American Barbarian in China. READ BOOKS. p. 271. ISBN 978-1-4067-1675-7. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Liu, Xiaoyuan (2004). Frontier passages: ethnopolitics and the rise of Chinese communism, 1921–1945. Stanford University Press. p. 131. ISBN 0-8047-4960-4. Retrieved 28 June 2010.[permanent dead link] Dudoignon, Komatsu & Kosugi 2006, p. 136. Smith, Warren W. (24 October 1996). The Tibetan nation: a history of Tibetan nationalism and Sino-Tibetan relations. Westview Press. p. 443. ISBN 0-8133-3155-2. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Gladney 1996, p. 9. Welle (www.dw.com), Deutsche. "The Hui – China's preferred Muslims? | DW | 09.12.2016". DW.COM. Retrieved 6 December 2021. "If China Is Anti-Islam, Why Are These Chinese Muslims Enjoying a Faith Revival?". Time. Retrieved 6 December 2021. Rosey Wang Ma. "Chinese Muslims in Malaysia History and Development". Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Bhatt, Himanshu (6 March 2005). "Baiqi to Koay Jetty". New Straits Times. pp. 1–3. Ember, Melvin; Ember, Carol R.; Skoggard, Ian (30 November 2004). Encyclopedia of Diasporas: Immigrant and Refugee Cultures Around the World. Volume I: Overviews and Topics; Volume II: Diaspora Communities. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 978-0-306-48321-9. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 16 September 2016. Intelligence Digest. Intelligence International Limited. 1948. p. lxxvi. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2016. Lillian Craig Harris (15 December 1993). China Considers the Middle East. I. B. Tauris. p. 66. ISBN 978-1-85043-598-3. Archived from the original on 24 March 2020. Retrieved 16 September 2016. Mi Kungmubu Hanʾguk Kungnae Sanghwang Kwallyŏn Munsŏ. 國防部軍事編纂硏究所. 1999. p. 168. Archived from the original on 30 June 2014. Retrieved 3 October 2016. Bellér-Hann 2007, p. 74. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Volume 277. American Academy of Political and Social Science. 1951. p. 152. Retrieved 28 June 2010. "Tibetans, Muslim Huis clash in China". CNN. 23 February 2003. Archived from the original on 13 September 2017. Retrieved 15 January 2010. Fischer 2005, pp. 2, 5, 10, 17–20. Bellér-Hann, Ildikó (2007). Situating the Uyghurs between China and Central Asia. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7546-7041-4. Retrieved 30 July 2010. Bulag, Uradyn Erden (2002). Dilemmas The Mongols at China's edge: history and the politics of national unity. Rowman Littlefield. ISBN 0-7425-1144-8. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Dillon, Michael (1999). China's Muslim Hui community: migration, settlement and sects. Routledge. ISBN 0-7007-1026-4. Dillon, Michael (16 December 2013). China's Muslim Hui Community: Migration, Settlement and Sects. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-136-80940-8. Retrieved 27 June 2015. Dudoignon, Stéphane A.; Komatsu, Hisao; Kosugi, Yasushi (2006). Intellectuals in the modern Islamic world: transmission, transformation, communication. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-36835-3. Retrieved 16 September 2016. Esposito, John (6 April 2000). The Oxford History of Islam. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-510799-3. Fischer, Andrew Martin (September 2005). "Close Encounters of an Inner Asian Kind: Tibetan–Muslim Co-Existence and Conflict in Tibet Past and Present" (PDF). Crisis States Research Centre Working Papers. 1 (68): 1–27. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011. Fytche, Albert (1878). Burma past and present. C. K. Paul. Retrieved 28 June 2010. ——— (1996), A History of Chinese Civilization (2nd ed.), New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-49781-7 Gillette, Maris Boyd (2000). Between Mecca and Beijing: modernization and consumption among urban Chinese Muslims. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-3694-4. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Gladney, Dru C. (1996). Muslim Chinese: Ethnic Nationalism in the People's Republic (2nd ed.). Harvard University Asia Center. ISBN 0-674-59497-5. (1st edition appeared in 1991) Gladney, Dru C. (2004). Dislocating China: reflections on Muslims, minorities and other subaltern subjects. C. Hurst Co. Publishers. ISBN 1-85065-324-0. Hastings, James; Selbie, John Alexander; Gray, Louis Herbert (1916). Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics. Vol. 8. T. & T. Clark. Retrieved 28 November 2010. Hille, Marie-Paule; Horlemann, Bianca; Nietupski, Paul K., eds. (2015). Muslims in Amdo Tibetan Society: Multidisciplinary Approaches. Studies in Modern Tibetan Culture. Lexington Books. pp. 90, 91, 264, 267, 146. ISBN 978-0739175309. Israeli, Raphael (2002). Islam in China: religion, ethnicity, culture, and politics. Lexington Books. ISBN 0-7391-0375-X. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Israeli, Raphael (2017). The Muslim Midwest in Modern China: The Tale of the Hui Communities in Gansu (Lanzhou, Linxia, and Lintan) and in Yunnan (Kunming and Dali). Wipf and Stock Publishers. ISBN 978-1532637520. Jaschok, Maria; Shui, Jingjun (2000). The history of women's mosques in Chinese Islam: a mosque of their own (illustrated ed.). Psychology Press. ISBN 0-7007-1302-6. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Keim, Jean Alphonse (1951). Panorama de la Chine. Hachette. Retrieved 6 June 2011. Leslie, Donald (1986). Islam in traditional China: a short history to 1800. Canberra College of Advanced Education. Lipman, Jonathan Neaman (1997). Familiar Strangers: A History of Muslims in Northwest China. University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-029-597-644-0. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Lipman, Jonathan Neaman (1998). Familiar strangers: A History of Muslims in Northwest China. University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-962-209-468-0. Lipman, Jonathan Neaman (July 2011). Familiar strangers: A History of Muslims in Northwest China. University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-0295800554. Retrieved 24 April 2014. Unknown year, Google summary has 2011, preview pages have 1997, Worldcat has eBook for the ISBN. Liu 刘, Yingsheng 迎胜 (2008). "Muslim Merchants in Mongol Yuan China". In Schottenhammer, Angela (ed.). The East Asian Mediterranean: Maritime Crossroads of Culture, Commerce and Human Migration. Volume 6 of East Asian economic and socio-cultural studies: East Asian maritime history. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. ISBN 978-3447058094. ISSN 1860-1812. Oi, Jean C.; Walder, Andrew George (1999). Property rights and economic reform in China. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-3788-6. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Millward, James A. (1998). Beyond the pass: economy, ethnicity, and empire in Qing Central Asia, 1759-1864. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-2933-6. Retrieved 28 November 2010. Rubin, Barry (2000). Guide to Islamist Movements. M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 0-7656-1747-1. Retrieved 9 April 2011. Starr, S. Frederick (2004). Xinjiang: China's Muslim borderland. M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 0-7656-1318-2. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Ting, Dawood C. M. (1958). "Chapter 9: Islamic Culture in China". In Morgan, Kenneth W. (ed.). Islam—The Straight Path: Islam Interpreted by Muslims. New York, NY: The Ronald Press Company. pp. 344–374. OCLC 378570. Archived from the original on 11 October 2011. Trigault, Nicolas (1953). China in the Sixteenth Century: The Journals of Matthew Ricci, 1583–1610. Random House. OCLC 503883458. This is an English translation by Louis J. Gallagher of the Latin work, De Christiana expeditione apud Sinas based on Matteo Ricci's journals. There is also full Latin text. Wei, C. X. George; Liu, Xiaoyuan, eds. (2002). Exploring Nationalisms of China: Themes and Conflicts. Volume 102 of Contributions to the Study of World History Series. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0313315124. Retrieved 25 March 2013. Australian National University. Dept. of Far Eastern History (1986). Papers on Far Eastern history, Issues 33–36. Australian National University, Dept. of Far Eastern History. Retrieved 28 June 2010. Qi, Dongfang (2010), "Gold and Silver Wares on the Belitung Shipwreck", in Krahl, Regina; Guy, John; Wilson, J. Keith; Raby, Julian (eds.), Shipwrecked: Tang Treasures and Monsoon Winds, Washington, DC: Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, Smithsonian Institution, pp. 221–227, ISBN 978-1-58834-305-5, archived from the original (PDF) on 4 May 2021, retrieved 10 July 2022 Attributions  This article incorporates text from Chinese and Japanese repository of facts and events in science, history and art, relating to Eastern Asia, Volume 1, a publication from 1863, now in the public domain in the United States.  This article incorporates text from The Moslem World, Volume 10, by Christian Literature Society for India, Hartford Seminary Foundation, a publication from 1920, now in the public domain in the United States.  This article incorporates text from Encyclopædia of religion and ethics, Volume 8, by James Hastings, John Alexander Selbie, Louis Herbert Gray, a publication from 1916, now in the public domain in the United States.  This article incorporates text from The journey of William of Rubruck to the eastern parts of the world, 1253–55: as narrated by himself, with two accounts of the earlier journey of John of Pian de Carpine, by Willem van Ruysbroeck, Giovanni (da Pian del Carpine, Archbishop of Antivari), a publication from 1900, now in the public domain in the United States.  This article incorporates text from China revolutionized, by John Stuart Thomson, a publication from 1913, now in the public domain in the United States.  This article incorporates text from Accounts and papers of the House of Commons, by Great Britain. Parliament. House of Commons, a publication from 1871, now in the public domain in the United States.  This article incorporates text from The River of golden sand, condensed by E.C. Baber, ed. by H. Yule, by William John Gill, a publication from 1883, now in the public domain in the United States.  This article incorporates text from Burma past and present, a publication from 1878, now in the public domain in the United States.  This article incorporates text from The religions of China: Confucianism and Tâoism described and compared with Christianity, a publication from 1880, now in the public domain in the United States.  This article incorporates text from The history of China, Volume 2, by Demetrius Charles de Kavanagh Boulger, a publication from 1898, now in the public domain in the United States.  This article incorporates text from The River of golden sand, condensed by E.C. Baber, ed. by H. Yule, by William John Gill, a publication from 1883, now in the public domain in the United States.  This article incorporates text from The Chinese repository, Volume 13, a publication from 1844, now in the public domain in the United States. "CHINA'S ISLAMIC HERITAGE" Newsletter (Australian National University), No. 5, March 2006.[full citation needed] Chuah, Osman (April 2004). "Muslims in China: the social and economic situation of the Hui Chinese". Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs. 24 (1): 155–162. doi:10.1080/1360200042000212133. S2CID 144060218. Forbes, Andrew; Henley, David (2011). China's Ancient Tea Horse Road. Chiang Mai: Cognoscenti Books. ASIN B005DQV7Q2. Forbes, Andrew; Henley, David (2011). Traders of the Golden Triangle. Chiang Mai: Cognoscenti Books. ASIN B006GMID5K. Gladney, Dru C. (1997). Ethnic Identity in China: The Making of a Muslim Minority Nationality (Case Studies in Cultural Anthropology). Harcourt Brace College Publishers. ISBN 0-15-501970-8. Hillman, Ben (2004). "The Rise of the Community in Rural China: Village Politics, Cultural Identity and Religious Revival in a Hui Hamlet". The China Journal. 51 (51): 53–73. doi:10.2307/3182146. JSTOR 3182146. S2CID 143548506. Berlie, Jean (2004). Islam in China, Hui and Uyghurs: between modernization and sinicization, the study of the Hui and Uyghurs of China. Bangkok, Thailand: White Lotus Press. ISBN 974-480-062-3. Media related to Hui people at Wikimedia Commons Britannica Hui People