Look up Oliver or oliver in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Oliver may refer to: Oliver the Western Engine, volume 24 in The Railway Series by Rev. W. Awdry Oliver Twist, a novel by Charles Dickens Ariadne Oliver, in the novels of Agatha Christie Oliver (Disney character) Oliver Fish, a gay police officer on the American soap opera One Life to Live Oliver Hampton, in the American television series How to Get Away with Murder Oliver Jones (The Bold and the Beautiful), on the American soap opera The Bold and the Beautiful Oliver Lightload, in the movie Cars Oliver Oken, from Hannah Montana Oliver (paladin), a paladin featured in the Matter of France Oliver Queen, DC Comic book hero also known as the Green Arrow Oliver (Thomas and Friends character), a locomotive in the Thomas and Friends franchise Oliver Trask, a controversial minor character from the first season of The O.C. Oliver Twist (character), the protagonist of Dickens' novel Oliver Twist Oliver Wendell Douglas, on the American television situation comedy Green Acres Oliver, the main character of the role-playing game Ni no Kuni: Wrath of the White Witch Tommy Oliver, from Power Rangers Oliver! (film), a 1968 musical by Carol Reed based on the stage musical Oliver! (soundtrack), the soundtrack to the 1968 British musical film of the same name Oliver!, a 1960 musical by Lionel Bart based on Dickens' novel Oliver Twist "Oliver", an episode of The Good Doctor Oliver (DJs), electronic music production and DJ duo based in Los Angeles Oliver EP, released by Irish singer-songwriter Gemma Hayes in 2008 Oliver (singer) (1945–2000), American pop singer best known for the hit song "Good Morning Starshine" Oliver (software), an English speaking Vocaloid by PowerFX who was released for Vocaloid 3 "Oliver!" (song), a 1960 song from the stage musical Oliver! "Oliver" (song), a 1979 song by Anita Skorgan Oliver Farm Equipment Company, an American farm equipment manufacturer (1929–1960) Oliver Typewriter Company, an American typewriter manufacturer (1895–1926) Oliver (given name) Oliver (surname) Oliver (Scottish surname), associated with a Scottish sept Oliver (Middlesex cricketer) (fl. 1787), an English cricketer Oliver (Surrey cricketer) (fl. 1824–1828), an English cricketer Oliver, British Columbia, a small town in the Okanagan Valley; known as the Wine Capital of Canada Oliver, Edmonton, an urban neighborhood west of downtown Edmonton, Alberta Oliver, Essex County, Ontario, a town Oliver Glacier, Baffin Island, Nunavut Oliver, Nova Scotia, a town Oliver, Arkansas, an unincorporated community Oliver, Georgia, a city Oliver, Edgar County, Illinois, an unincorporated community Oliver, Whiteside County, Illinois, an unincorporated community Oliver, Indiana, an unincorporated community Oliver, Baltimore, Maryland, a neighborhood Oliver, Nebraska, an unincorporated community Oliver, Pennsylvania, a census-designated place Oliver, Wisconsin, a village Oliver County, North Dakota Oliver Street, Baltimore, Maryland Oliver Township (disambiguation) Lake Oliver, a reservoir in Georgia and Alabama Lake Oliver (South Dakota) Oliver Island (Antarctica) Oliver Island (Western Australia) Oliver (chimpanzee), a former performing ape Oliver (Top Gear), nickname for a car in Top Gear: Botswana Special Oliver Bridge, a railroad bridge that connects Oliver, Wisconsin with Duluth, Minnesota Oliver High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, a former public school now used as offices Oliver Winery, Bloomington, Indiana Olive, a species of small tree in the family Oleaceae Oliver Township (disambiguation) Olivier (disambiguation) This disambiguation page lists articles associated with the title Oliver. If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.