The Subdivisions of Saudi Arabia, officially the Organization of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as provided by the Regions' System, issued on 27 Sha'baan 1412 AH (civil calendar: 28 February 1992) by Royal Order A/92, amended by Royal Order No. A/21 on 30 Rabi' al-Awal 1414 AH, divided the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia into 13 emirates (provinces/regions); the 13 provinces further divided into 118 governorates, classified category (A) or category (B); the 118 governorates divided into a number of centers, category (A) and category (B), taking into consideration the housing, geographical, security, transport, environment and historic conditions of each region. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is divided into 13 emirates (Arabic: إمارات, romanized: Imārāt sg. Arabic: إمارة, romanized: Imārah) or regions/provinces (Arabic: مناطق, romanized: manāṭiq), each governed by a governor or emir (Arabic: أمير, romanized: amīr, lit. 'prince'), known as the Provincial Governor, to differentiate them from the governors of governorates. These are: the Emirate of the Riyadh Province the Emirate of the Makkah Province the Emirate of the Eastern Province the Emirate of the Madinah Province the Emirate of the Al Baha Province the Emirate of the Al Jawf Province the Emirate of the Northern Borders Province the Emirate of the Qassim Province the Emirate of the Ha'il Province the Emirate of the Tabuk Province the Emirate of the 'Aseer Province the Emirate of the Jizan Province the Emirate of the Najran Province The 13 emirates are further divided into 118 governorates (Arabic: محافظات, lit. 'muḥafazāt' sg. Arabic: محافظة, lit. 'muḥafazah'), each governed by a Governor (Arabic: محافظ, romanized: muḥāfiz). Of these, 13 are capital governorates (Arabic: أمانات, romanized: amānāt sg. Arabic: أمانة, romanized: amānah) governed by a Mayor (Arabic: أمين, romanized: amīn). Saudi Arabia portal Provinces of Saudi Arabia, the historical four provinces List of governorates of Saudi Arabia ISO 3166-2:SA, the ISO 3166-2 codes for the regions "Emirate of Makkah Province". Ministry of Interior. "Organizational Chart of the Subdivisions of Saudi Arabia" (PDF). Ministry of Interior. "Saudi Arabia Governorates". www.statoids.com. Retrieved 2020-08-01. v t e