Netflix is an American subscription video on-demand over-the-top streaming service. The service primarily distributes original and acquired films and television shows from various genres, and it is available internationally in multiple languages. Launched on January 16, 2007, nearly a decade after Netflix, Inc. began its pioneering DVD‑by‑mail movie rental service, Netflix is the most-subscribed video on demand streaming media service, with 260.28 million paid memberships in more than 190 countries as of January 2024. By 2022, "Netflix Original" productions accounted for half of its library in the United States and the namesake company had ventured into other categories, such as video game publishing of mobile games via its flagship service. As of October 2023, Netflix is the 24th most-visited website in the world with 23.66% of its traffic coming from the United States, followed by the United Kingdom at 5.84% and Brazil at 5.64%. Netflix logo history Netflix was founded by Marc Randolph and Reed Hastings on August 29, 1997, in Scotts Valley, California. Hastings, a computer scientist and mathematician, was a co-founder of Pure Software, which was acquired by Rational Software that year for $750 million, the then biggest acquisition in Silicon Valley history. Randolph had worked as a marketing director for Pure Software after Pure Atria acquired a company where Randolph worked. He was previously a co-founder of MicroWarehouse, a computer mail-order company, as well as vice president of marketing for Borland. Hastings and Randolph came up with the idea for Netflix while carpooling between their homes in Santa Cruz, California, and Pure Atria's headquarters in Sunnyvale. Patty McCord, later head of human resources at Netflix, was also in the carpool group. Randolph admired Amazon and wanted to find a large category of portable items to sell over the Internet using a similar model. Hastings and Randolph considered and rejected selling and renting VHS as too expensive to stock and too delicate to ship. When they heard about DVDs, first introduced in the United States in early 1997, they tested the concept of selling or renting DVDs by mail by mailing a compact disc to Hastings's house in Santa Cruz. When the disc arrived intact, they decided to enter the $16 billion Home-video sales and rental industry. Hastings is often quoted saying that he decided to start Netflix after being fined $40 at a Blockbuster store for being late to return a copy of Apollo 13. Hastings invested $2.5 million into Netflix from the sale of Pure Atria. Netflix launched as the first DVD rental and sales website with 30 employees and 925 titles available—nearly all DVDs published. Randolph and Hastings met with Jeff Bezos, where Amazon offered to acquire Netflix for between $14 and $16 million. Fearing competition from Amazon, Randolph at first thought the offer was fair, but Hastings, who owned 70% of the company, turned it down on the plane ride home. Initially, Netflix offered a per-rental model for each DVD but introduced a monthly subscription concept in September 1999. The per-rental model was dropped by early 2000, allowing the company to focus on the business model of flat-fee unlimited rentals without due dates, late fees, shipping and handling fees, or per-title rental fees. In September 2000, during the dot-com bubble, while Netflix was suffering losses, Hastings and Randolph offered to sell the company to Blockbuster for $50 million. John Antioco, CEO of Blockbuster, thought the offer was a joke and declined, saying, "The dot-com hysteria is completely overblown." While Netflix experienced fast growth in early 2001, the continued effects of the dot-com bubble collapse and the September 11 attacks caused the company to hold off plans for its initial public offering (IPO) and to lay off one-third of its 120 employees. DVD players were a popular gift for holiday sales in late 2001, and demand for DVD subscription services were "growing like crazy", according to chief talent officer Patty McCord. The company went public on May 29, 2002, selling 5.5 million shares of common stock at US$15.00 per share. In 2003, Netflix was issued a patent by the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office to cover its subscription rental service and several extensions. Netflix posted its first profit in 2003, earning $6.5 million on revenues of $272 million; by 2004, profit had increased to $49 million on over $500 million in revenues. In 2005, 35,000 different films were available, and Netflix shipped 1 million DVDs out every day. In 2004, Blockbuster introduced a DVD rental service, which not only allowed users to check out titles through online sites but allowed for them to return them at brick and-mortar stores. By 2006, Blockbuster's service reached two million users, and while trailing Netflix's subscriber count, was drawing business away from Netflix. Netflix lowered fees in 2007. While it was an urban legend that Netflix ultimately "killed" Blockbuster in the DVD rental market, Blockbuster's debt load and internal disagreements hurt the company. On April 4, 2006, Netflix filed a patent infringement lawsuit in which it demanded a jury trial in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, alleging that Blockbuster's online DVD rental subscription program violated two patents held by Netflix. The first cause of action alleged Blockbuster's infringement of copying the "dynamic queue" of DVDs available for each customer, Netflix's method of using the ranked preferences in the queue to send DVDs to subscribers, and Netflix's method permitting the queue to be updated and reordered. The second cause of action alleged infringement of the subscription rental service as well as Netflix's methods of communication and delivery. The companies settled their dispute on June 25, 2007; terms were not disclosed. On October 1, 2006, Netflix announced the Netflix Prize, $1,000,000 to the first developer of a video-recommendation algorithm that could beat its existing algorithm Cinematch, at predicting customer ratings by more than 10%. On September 21, 2009, it awarded the $1,000,000 prize to team "BellKor's Pragmatic Chaos". Cinematch, launched in 2000, is a recommendation system that recommended movies to its users, many of which they might not ever had heard of before. Through its division Red Envelope Entertainment, Netflix licensed and distributed independent films such as Born into Brothels and Sherrybaby. In late 2006, Red Envelope Entertainment also expanded into producing original content with filmmakers such as John Waters. Netflix closed Red Envelope Entertainment in 2008. In January 2007, the company launched a streaming media service, introducing video on demand via the Internet. However, at that time it only had 1,000 films available for streaming, compared to 70,000 available on DVD. The company had for some time considered offering movies online, but it was only in the mid-2000s that data speeds and bandwidth costs had improved sufficiently to allow customers to download movies from the net. The original idea was a "Netflix box" that could download movies overnight, and be ready to watch the next day. By 2005, Netflix had acquired movie rights and designed the box and service. But after witnessing how popular streaming services such as YouTube were despite the lack of high-definition content, the concept of using a hardware device was scrapped and replaced with a streaming concept. In February 2007, Netflix delivered its billionth DVD, a copy of Babel to a customer in Texas. In April 2007, Netflix recruited ReplayTV founder Anthony Wood, to build a "Netflix Player" that would allow streaming content to be played directly on a television rather than a desktop or laptop. Hastings eventually shut down the project to help encourage other hardware manufacturers to include built-in Netflix support, which would be spun off as the digital media player product Roku. In January 2008, all rental-disc subscribers became entitled to unlimited streaming at no additional cost. This change came in a response to the introduction of Hulu and to Apple's new video-rental services.[page needed] In August 2008, the Netflix database was corrupted and the company was not able to ship DVDs to customers for 3 days, leading the company to move all its data to the Amazon Web Services cloud. In November 2008, Netflix began offering subscribers rentals on Blu-ray and discontinued its sale of used DVDs. In 2009, Netflix streams overtook DVD shipments. On January 6, 2010, Netflix agreed with Warner Bros. to delay new release rentals to 28 days after the DVDs became available for sale, in an attempt to help studios sell physical copies, and similar deals involving Universal Pictures and 20th Century Fox were reached on April 9. In July 2010, Netflix signed a deal to stream movies of Relativity Media. In August 2010, Netflix reached a five-year deal worth nearly $1 billion to stream films from Paramount, Lionsgate and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. The deal increased Netflix's annual spending fees, adding roughly $200 million per year. It spent $117 million in the first six months of 2010 on streaming, up from $31 million in 2009. On September 22, 2010, Netflix launched in Canada, its first international market. In November 2010, Netflix began offering a standalone streaming service separate from DVD rentals. In 2010, Netflix acquired the rights to Breaking Bad, produced by Sony Pictures Television, after the show's third season, at a point where original broadcaster AMC had expressed the possibility of cancelling the show. Sony pushed Netflix to release Breaking Bad in time for the fourth season, which as a result, greatly expanded the show's audience on AMC due to new viewers binging on the Netflix past episodes, and doubling the viewership by the time of the fifth season. Breaking Bad is considered the first such show to have this "Netflix effect". In January 2011, Netflix announced agreements with several manufacturers to include branded Netflix buttons on the remote controls of devices compatible with the service, such as Blu-ray players. By May 2011, Netflix had become the largest source of Internet streaming traffic in North America, accounting for 30% of traffic during peak hours. On July 12, 2011, Netflix announced that it would separate its existing subscription plans into two separate plans: one covering the streaming and the other DVD rental services. The cost for streaming would be $7.99 per month, while DVD rental would start at the same price. On September 11, 2011, Netflix expanded to countries in Latin America. On September 18, 2011, Netflix announced its intentions to rebrand and restructure its DVD home media rental service as an independent subsidiary called Qwikster, separating DVD rental and streaming services. On September 26, 2011, Netflix announced a content deal with DreamWorks Animation. On October 10, 2011, Netflix announced that it would retain its DVD service under the name Netflix and that its streaming and DVD-rental plans would remain branded together, citing customer dissatisfaction with the split. In October 2011. Netflix and The CW signed a multi-year output deal for its' television shows. On January 4, 2012, Netflix started its expansion to Europe, launching in the United Kingdom and Ireland. In February 2012, Netflix reached a multi-year agreement with The Weinstein Company. In March 2012, Netflix acquired the domain name DVD.com. By 2016, Netflix rebranded its DVD-by-mail service under the name DVD.com, A Netflix Company. In April 2012, Netflix filed with the Federal Election Commission (FEC) to form a political action committee (PAC) called FLIXPAC. Netflix spokesperson Joris Evers tweeted that the intent was to "engage on issues like net neutrality, bandwidth caps, UBB and VPPA". In June 2012, Netflix signed a deal with Open Road Films. On August 23, 2012, Netflix and The Weinstein Company signed a multi-year output deal for RADiUS-TWC films. In September 2012, Epix signed a five-year streaming deal with Netflix. For the initial two years of this agreement, first-run and back-catalog content from Epix was exclusive to Netflix. Epix films came to Netflix 90 days after premiering on Epix. These included films from Paramount, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Lionsgate. On October 18, 2012, Netflix launched in Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. On December 4, 2012, Netflix and Disney announced an exclusive multi-year agreement for first-run United States subscription television rights to Walt Disney Studios' animated and live-action films, with classics such as Dumbo, Alice in Wonderland and Pocahontas available immediately and others available on Netflix beginning in 2016. Direct-to-video releases were made available in 2013. On January 14, 2013, Netflix signed an agreement with Time Warner's Turner Broadcasting System and Warner Bros. Television to distribute Cartoon Network, Warner Bros. Animation, and Adult Swim content, as well as TNT's Dallas, beginning in March 2013. The rights to these programs were given to Netflix shortly after deals with Viacom to stream Nickelodeon and Nick Jr. Channel programs expired. For cost reasons, Netflix stated that it would limit its expansion in 2013, adding only one new market—the Netherlands—in September of that year. This expanded its availability to 40 territories. In 2011, Netflix began its efforts into original content development. In March, it made a straight-to-series order from MRC for the political drama House of Cards, led by Kevin Spacey, outbidding other U.S. cable networks. This marked the first instance of a first-run television series being specifically commissioned by the service. In November the same year, Netflix added two more significant productions to its roster: the comedy-drama Orange Is the New Black, adapted from Piper Kerman's memoir, and a new season of the previously cancelled Fox sitcom Arrested Development. Netflix acquired the U.S. rights to the Norwegian drama Lilyhammer after its television premiere on Norway's NRK1 on January 25, 2012. Notably departing from the traditional broadcast television model of weekly episode premieres, Netflix chose to release the entire first season on February 8 of the same year. House of Cards was released by Netflix on February 1, 2013, marketed as the first "Netflix Original" production. Later that month, Netflix announced an agreement with DreamWorks Animation to commission children's television series based on its properties, beginning with Turbo: F.A.S.T., a spin-off of its film Turbo. Orange is the New Black would premiere in July 2013; Netflix stated that Orange is the New Black had been its most-watched original series so far, with all of them having "an audience comparable with successful shows on cable and broadcast TV." On March 13, 2013, Netflix added a Facebook sharing feature, letting United States subscribers access "Watched by your friends" and "Friends' Favorites" by agreeing. This was not legal until the Video Privacy Protection Act was modified in early 2013. On August 1, 2013, Netflix reintroduced the "Profiles" feature that permits accounts to accommodate up to five user profiles. In November 2013, Marvel Television and ABC Studios announced Netflix had ordered a slate of four television series based on the Marvel Comics characters Daredevil, Jessica Jones, Iron Fist and Luke Cage. Each of the four series received an initial order of 13 episodes, and Netflix also ordered a Defenders miniseries that would tie them together. Daredevil and Jessica Jones premiered in 2015. The Luke Cage series premiered on September 30, 2016, followed by Iron Fist on March 17, 2017, and The Defenders on August 18, 2017. Marvel owner Disney later entered into other content agreements with Netflix, including acquiring its animated Star Wars series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, and a new sixth season. In February 2014, Netflix began to enter into agreements with U.S. internet service providers, beginning with Comcast (whose customers had repeatedly complained of frequent buffering when streaming Netflix), in order to provide the service a direct connection to their networks. In April 2014, Netflix signed Arrested Development creator Mitchell Hurwitz and his production firm The Hurwitz Company to a multi-year deal to create original projects for the service. In May 2014, Netflix acquired streaming rights to films produced by Sony Pictures Animation. It also quietly began to introduce an updated logo, with a flatter appearance and updated typography. In September 2014, Netflix expanded into six new European markets, including Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg, and Switzerland. On September 10, 2014, Netflix participated in Internet Slowdown Day by deliberately slowing down its speed in support of net neutrality regulations in the United States. In October 2014, Netflix announced a four-film deal with Adam Sandler and his Happy Madison Productions. In April 2015, following the launch of Daredevil, Netflix director of content operations Tracy Wright announced that Netflix had added support for audio description (a narration track with aural descriptions of key visual elements for the blind or visually impaired), and had begun to work with its partners to add descriptions to its other original series over time. The following year, as part of a settlement with the American Council of the Blind, Netflix agreed to provide descriptions for its original series within 30 days of their premiere, and add screen reader support and the ability to browse content by availability of descriptions. In March 2015, Netflix expanded to Australia and New Zealand. In September 2015, Netflix launched in Japan, its first country in Asia. In October 2015, Netflix launched in Italy, Portugal, and Spain. In January 2016, at the Consumer Electronics Show, Netflix announced a major international expansion of its service into 130 additional countries. It then had become available worldwide except China, Syria, North Korea, Kosovo and Crimea. In May 2016, Netflix created a tool called Fast.com to determine the speed of an Internet connection. It received praise for being "simple" and "easy to use", and does not include online advertising, unlike competitors. On November 30, 2016, Netflix launched an offline playback feature, allowing users of the Netflix mobile apps on Android or iOS to cache content on their devices in standard or high quality for viewing offline, without an Internet connection. In 2016, Netflix released an estimated 126 original series or films, more than any other network or cable channel. In April 2016, Hastings stated that the company planned to expand its in-house, Los Angeles-based Netflix Studios to grow its output; Hastings ruled out any potential acquisitions of existing studios, stating that "It's been 15 years we've been public and 20 years existing, and we've done no [mergers and acquisitions]. So I think that probably speaks for itself." In February 2017, Netflix signed a music publishing deal with BMG Rights Management, whereby BMG will oversee rights outside of the United States for music associated with Netflix original content. Netflix continues to handle these tasks in-house in the United States. On April 25, 2017, Netflix signed a licensing deal with IQiyi, a Chinese video streaming platform owned by Baidu, to allow selected Netflix original content to be distributed in China on the platform. On August 7, 2017, Netflix acquired Millarworld, the creator-owned publishing company of comic book writer Mark Millar. The purchase marked the first corporate acquisition to have been made by Netflix. On August 14, 2017, Netflix entered into an exclusive development deal with Shonda Rhimes and her production company Shondaland. In September 2017, Netflix announced it would offer its low-broadband mobile technology to airlines to provide better in-flight Wi-Fi so that passengers can watch movies on Netflix while on planes. In September 2017, Minister of Heritage Mélanie Joly announced that Netflix had agreed to make a CA$500 million (US$400 million) investment over the next five years in producing content in Canada. The company denied that the deal was intended to result in a tax break. Netflix realized this goal by December 2018. In October 2017, Netflix iterated a goal of having half of its library consist of original content by 2019, announcing a plan to invest $8 billion on original content in 2018. There will be a particular focus on films and anime through this investment, with a plan to produce 80 original films and 30 anime series. In October 2017, Netflix introduced the "Skip Intro" feature which allows customers to skip the intros to shows on its platform through a variety of techniques including manual reviewing, audio tagging, and machine learning. In November 2017, Netflix signed an exclusive multi-year deal with Orange Is the New Black creator Jenji Kohan. In November 2017, Netflix withdrew from co-hosting a party at the 75th Golden Globe Awards with The Weinstein Company due to the Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse cases. Audio logo Netflix's audio logo, adopted in 2019 Problems playing this file? See media help. In November 2017, Netflix announced that it would be making its first original Colombian series, to be executive produced by Ciro Guerra. In December 2017, Netflix signed Stranger Things director-producer Shawn Levy and his production company 21 Laps Entertainment to what sources say is a four-year deal. In 2017, Netflix invested in distributing exclusive stand-up comedy specials from Dave Chappelle, Louis C.K., Chris Rock, Jim Gaffigan, Bill Burr and Jerry Seinfeld. In February 2018, Netflix acquired the rights to The Cloverfield Paradox from Paramount Pictures for $50 million and launched on its service on February 4, 2018, shortly after airing its first trailer during Super Bowl LII. Analysts believed that Netflix's purchase of the film helped to make the film instantly profitable for Paramount compared to a more traditional theatrical release, while Netflix benefited from the surprise reveal. Other films acquired by Netflix include international distribution for Paramount's Annihilation and Universal's News of the World and worldwide distribution of Universal's Extinction, Warner Bros.' Mowgli: Legend of the Jungle, Paramount's The Lovebirds and 20th Century Studios' The Woman in the Window. In March, the service ordered Formula 1: Drive to Survive, a racing docuseries following teams in the Formula One world championship. In March 2018, Sky UK announced an agreement with Netflix to integrate Netflix's subscription VOD offering into its pay-TV service. Customers with its high-end Sky Q set-top box and service will be able to see Netflix titles alongside their regular Sky channels. In October 2022, Netflix revealed that its annual revenue from the UK subscribers in 2021 was £1.4bn. In April 2018, Netflix pulled out of the Cannes Film Festival, in response to new rules requiring competition films to have been released in French theaters. The Cannes premiere of Okja in 2017 was controversial, and led to discussions over the appropriateness of films with simultaneous digital releases being screened at an event showcasing theatrical film; audience members also booed the Netflix production logo at the screening. Netflix's attempts to negotiate to allow a limited release in France were curtailed by organizers, as well as French cultural exception law—where theatrically screened films are legally forbidden from being made available via video-on-demand services until at least 36 months after their release. Besides traditional Hollywood markets as well as from partners like the BBC, Sarandos said the company also looking to expand investments in non-traditional foreign markets due to the growth of viewers outside of North America. At the time, this included programs such as Dark from Germany, Ingobernable from Mexico and 3% from Brazil. On May 22, 2018, former president, Barack Obama, and his wife, Michelle Obama, signed a deal to produce docu-series, documentaries and features for Netflix under the Obamas' newly formed production company, Higher Ground Productions. In June 2018, Netflix announced a partnership with Telltale Games to port its adventure games to the service in a streaming video format, allowing simple controls through a television remote. The first game, Minecraft: Story Mode, was released in November 2018. In July 2018, Netflix earned the most Emmy nominations of any network for the first time with 112 nods. On August 27, 2018, the company signed a five-year exclusive overall deal with international best–selling author Harlan Coben. On the same day, the company inked an overall deal with Gravity Falls creator Alex Hirsch. In October 2018, Netflix paid under $30 million to acquire Albuquerque Studios (ABQ Studios), a $91 million film and TV production facility with eight sound stages in Albuquerque, New Mexico, for its first U.S. production hub, pledging to spend over $1 billion over the next decade to create one of the largest film studios in North America. In November 2018, Paramount Pictures signed a multi-picture film deal with Netflix, making Paramount the first major film studio to sign a deal with Netflix. A sequel to AwesomenessTV's To All the Boys I've Loved Before was released on Netflix under the title To All the Boys: P.S. I Still Love You as part of the agreement. In December 2018, the company announced a partnership with ESPN Films on a television documentary chronicling Michael Jordan and the 1997–98 Chicago Bulls season titled The Last Dance. It was released internationally on Netflix and became available for streaming in the United States three months after a broadcast airing on ESPN. In January 2019, Sex Education made its debut as a Netflix original series, receiving much critical acclaim. On January 22, 2019, Netflix sought and was approved for membership into the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), making it the first streaming service to join the association. In February 2019, The Haunting creator Mike Flanagan joined frequent collaborator Trevor Macy as a partner in Intrepid Pictures and the duo signed an exclusive overall deal with Netflix to produce television content. On May 9, 2019, Netflix contracted with Dark Horse Entertainment to make television series and films based on comics from Dark Horse Comics. In July 2019, Netflix announced that it would be opening a hub at Shepperton Studios as part of a deal with Pinewood Group. In early-August 2019, Netflix negotiated an exclusive multi-year film and television deal with Game of Thrones creators and showrunners David Benioff and D.B. Weiss. The first Netflix production created by Benioff and Weiss was planned as an adaptation of Liu Cixin's science fiction novel The Three-Body Problem, part of the Remembrance of Earth's Past trilogy. On September 30, 2019, in addition to renewing Stranger Things for a fourth season, Netflix signed The Duffer Brothers to an overall deal covering future film and television projects for the service. On November 13, 2019, Netflix and Nickelodeon entered into a multi-year agreement to produce several original animated feature films and television series based on Nickelodeon's library of characters. This agreement expanded on their existing relationship, in which new specials based on the past Nickelodeon series Invader Zim and Rocko's Modern Life (Invader Zim: Enter the Florpus and Rocko's Modern Life: Static Cling respectively) were released by Netflix. Other new projects planned under the team-up include a music project featuring Squidward Tentacles from the animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants, and films based on The Loud House and Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles. The agreement with Disney ended in 2019 due to the launch of Disney+, with its Marvel productions moving exclusively to the service in 2022. In November 2019, Netflix announced that it had signed a long-term lease to save the Paris Theatre, the last single-screen movie theater in Manhattan. The company oversaw several renovations at the theater, including new seats and a concession stand. In January 2020, Netflix announced a new four-film deal with Adam Sandler worth up to $275 million. On February 25, 2020, Netflix formed partnerships with six Japanese creators to produce an original Japanese anime project. This partnership includes manga creator group CLAMP, mangaka Shin Kibayashi, mangaka Yasuo Ohtagaki, novelist and film director Otsuichi, novelist Tow Ubutaka, and manga creator Mari Yamazaki. On March 4, 2020, ViacomCBS announced that it will be producing two spin-off films based on SpongeBob SquarePants for Netflix. On April 7, 2020, Peter Chernin's Chernin Entertainment made a multi-year first-look deal with Netflix to make films. On May 29, 2020, Netflix announced the acquisition of Grauman's Egyptian Theatre from the American Cinematheque to use as a special events venue. In July 2020, Netflix appointed Sarandos as co-CEO. In July 2020, Netflix invested in Black Mirror creators Charlie Brooker and Annabel Jones' new production outfit Broke And Bones. In September 2020, Netflix signed a multi-million dollar deal with the Duke and Duchess of Sussex. Harry and Meghan agreed to a multi-year deal promising to create TV shows, films, and children's content as part of their commitment to stepping away from the duties of the royal family. In September 2020, Hastings released a book about Netflix culture titled No Rules Rules: Netflix and the Culture of Reinvention, which was coauthored by Erin Meyer. In December 2020, Netflix signed a first-look deal with Millie Bobby Brown to develop and star in several projects including a potential action franchise. In March 2021, Netflix earned the most Academy Award nominations of any studio, with 36. Netflix won seven Academy Awards, which was the most by any studio. Later that year, Netflix also won more Emmys than any other network or studio with 44 wins, tying the record for most Emmys won in a single year set by CBS in 1974.[citation needed] On April 8, 2021, Sony Pictures Entertainment announced an agreement for Netflix to hold the U.S. pay television window rights to its releases beginning in 2022, replacing Starz and expanding upon an existing agreement with Sony Pictures Animation. The agreement also includes a first-look deal for any future direct-to-streaming films being produced by Sony Pictures, with Netflix required to commit to a minimum number of them. On April 27, Netflix announced that it was opening its first Canadian headquarters in Toronto. The company also announced that it would open an office in Sweden as well as Rome and Istanbul to increase its original content in those regions. In early-June, Netflix hosted a first-ever week-long virtual event called "Geeked Week", where it shared exclusive news, new trailers, cast appearances and more about upcoming genre titles like The Witcher, The Cuphead Show!, and The Sandman. On June 7, 2021, Jennifer Lopez's Nuyorican Productions signed a multi-year first-look deal with Netflix spanning feature films, TV series, and unscripted content, with an emphasis on projects that support diverse female actors, writers, and filmmakers. On June 10, 2021, Netflix announced it was launching an online store for curated products tied to the Netflix brand and shows such as Stranger Things and The Witcher. On June 21, 2021, Steven Spielberg's Amblin Partners signed a deal with Netflix to release multiple new feature films for the streaming service. On June 30, 2021, Powerhouse Animation Studios (the studio behind Netflix's Castlevania) announced signing a first-look deal with the streamer to produce more animated series. In July 2021, Netflix hired Mike Verdu, a former executive from Electronic Arts and Facebook, as vice president of game development, along with plans to add video games by 2022. Netflix announced plans to release mobile games which would be included in subscribers' plans to the service. Trial offerings were first launched for Netflix users in Poland in August 2021, offering premium mobile games based on Stranger Things including Stranger Things 3: The Game, for free to subscribers through the Netflix mobile app. On July 14, 2021, Netflix signed a first-look deal with Joey King, star of The Kissing Booth franchise, in which King will produce and develop films for Netflix via her All The King's Horses production company. On July 21, 2021, Zack Snyder, director of Netflix's Army of the Dead, announced he had signed his production company The Stone Quarry to a first-look deal with Netflix; his upcoming projects include a sequel to Army of the Dead and a sci-fi adventure film titled Rebel Moon. In 2019, he agreed to produce an anime-style web series inspired by Norse mythology. As of August 2021, Netflix Originals made up 40% of Netflix's overall library in the United States. The company announced that "TUDUM: A Netflix Global Fan Event", a three-hour virtual behind the scenes featuring first-look reveals for 100 of the streamer's series, films and specials, would have its inaugural show in late September 2021. According to Netflix, the show garnered 25.7 million views across Netflix's 29 Netflix YouTube channels, Twitter, Twitch, Facebook, TikTok and Tudum.com. Also in September, the company announced The Queen's Ball: A Bridgerton Experience, launching in 2022 in Los Angeles, Chicago, Montreal, and Washington, D.C.. Squid Game, a South Korean survival drama created and produced by Hwang Dong-hyuk, rapidly became the service's most-watched show within a week of its launch in many markets on September 17, 2021, including Korea, the U.S. and the United Kingdom. Within its first 28 days on the service, Squid Game drew more than 111 million viewers, surpassing Bridgerton and becoming Netflix's most-watched show. On September 20, 2021, Netflix signed a long-term lease with Aviva Investors to operate and expand the Longcross Studios in Surrey, UK. On September 21, 2021, Netflix announced that it would acquire the Roald Dahl Story Company, which manages the rights to Roald Dahl's stories and characters, for an undisclosed price and would operate it as an independent company. The company acquired Night School Studio, an independent video game developer, on September 28, 2021. On October 13, 2021, Netflix announced the launch of the Netflix Book Club, where readers will hear about new books, films, and series adaptations and have exclusive access to each book's adaptation process. Netflix will partner with Starbucks for a social series called But Have You Read the Book?. Uzo Aduba will serve as the inaugural host of the series and announce monthly book selections set to be adapted by the streamer. Aduba will also speak with the cast, creators, and authors about the book adaptation process over a cup of coffee at Starbucks. Through October 2021, Netflix commonly reported viewership for its programming based on the number of viewers or households that watched a show in a given period (such as the first 28 days from its premiere) for at least two minutes. On the announcement of its quarterly earnings in October 2021, the company stated that it would switch its viewership metrics to measuring the number of hours that a show was watched, including rewatches, which the company said was closer to the measurements used in linear broadcast television, and thus "our members and the industry can better measure success in the streaming world." Netflix officially launched mobile games on November 2, 2021, for Android users around the world. Through the app, subscribers had free access to five games, including two previously made Stranger Things titles. Netflix intends to add more games to this service over time. On November 9, the collection launched for iOS. Some games in the collection require an active internet connection to play, while others will be available offline. Netflix Kids' accounts will not have games available. On November 16, Netflix announced the launch of "Top10 on Netflix.com", a new website with weekly global and country lists of the most popular titles on their service based on their new viewership metrics. On November 22, Netflix announced that it would acquire Scanline VFX, the visual effects and animation company behind Cowboy Bebop and Stranger Things. On the same day, Roberto Patino signed a deal with Netflix and established his own production banner, Analog Inc., in partnership with the company. Patino's first project under the deal is a series adaptation of Image Comics' Nocterra. On December 6, 2021, Netflix and Stage 32 announced that they have teamed up the workshops at the Creating Content for the Global Marketplace program. On December 7, 2021, Netflix partnered with IllumiNative, a woman-led non-profit organization, for the Indigenous Producers Training Program. On December 9, Netflix announced the launch of "Tudum", an official companion website that offers news, exclusive interviews and behind-the-scenes videos for its original television shows and films. On December 13, Netflix signed a multi-year overall deal with Kalinda Vazquez. On December 16, 2021, Netflix signed a multi-year creative partnership with Spike Lee and his production company 40 Acres and a Mule Filmworks to develop film and television projects. In compliance with the EU Audiovisual Media Services Directive and its implementation in France, Netflix reached commitments with French broadcasting authorities and film guilds, as required by law, to invest a specific amount of its annual revenue into original French films and series. These films must be theatrically released and would not be allowed to be carried on Netflix until 15 months after their release. In January 2022, Netflix ordered additional sports docuseries from Drive to Survive producers Box to Box Films, including a series that would follow PGA Tour golfers, and another that would follow professional tennis players on the ATP and WTA Tour circuits. The company announced plans to acquire Next Games in March 2022 for €65 million as part of Netflix's expansions into gaming. Next Games had developed the mobile title Stranger Things: Puzzle Tales as well as two The Walking Dead mobile games. Later in the month, Netflix also acquired the Texas-based mobile game developer, Boss Fight Entertainment, for an undisclosed sum. On March 15, 2022, Netflix announced a partnership with Dr. Seuss Enterprises to produce five new series and specials based on Seuss properties following the success of Green Eggs and Ham. On March 29, 2022, Netflix announced that it would open an office in Poland to serve as a hub for its original productions across Central and Eastern Europe. On March 30, 2022, Netflix extended its lease agreement with Martini Film Studios, just outside Vancouver, Canada, for another five years. On March 31, 2022, Netflix ordered a docuseries that would follow teams in the 2022 Tour de France, which would also be co-produced by Box to Box Films. Following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Netflix suspended its operations and future projects in Russia. It also announced that it would not comply with a proposed directive by Roskomnadzor requiring all internet streaming services with more than 100,000 subscribers to integrate the major free-to-air channels (which are primarily state-owned). A month later, ex-Russian subscribers filed a class action lawsuit against Netflix. Netflix stated that 100 million households globally were sharing passwords to their account with others, and that Canada and the United States accounted for 30 million of them. Following these announcements, Netflix's stock price fell by 35 percent. By June 2022, Netflix had laid off 450 full-time and contract employees as part of the company's plan to trim costs amid lower than expected subscriber growth. On April 13, 2022, Netflix released the series Our Great National Parks, which was hosted and narrated by former US President Barack Obama. It also partnered with Group Effort Initiative, a company founded by Ryan Reynolds and Blake Lively, to provide opportunities behind the camera for those in underrepresented communities. On the same day, Netflix partnered with Lebanon-based Arab Fund For Arts And Culture for supporting the Arab female filmmakers. It will provide a one-time grant of $250,000 to female producers and directors in the Arab world through the company's Fund for Creative Equity. Also on the same day, Netflix announced an Exploding Kittens mobile card game tied to a new animated TV series, which will launch in May. Netflix formed a creative partnership with J. Miles Dale. The company also formed a partnership with Japan's Studio Colorido, signing a multi-film deal to boost their anime content in Asia. The streaming giant is said to co-produce three feature films with the studio, the first of which will premiere in September 2022. On April 28, the company launched its inaugural Netflix Is a Joke comedy festival, featuring more than 250 shows over 12 nights at 30-plus locations across Los Angeles, including the first-ever stand-up show at Dodger Stadium. The first volume of Stranger Things 4 logged Netflix's biggest premiere weekend ever for an original series with 286.79 million hours viewed. This was preceded by a new Stranger Things interactive experience hosted in New York City that was developed by the show's creators. After the release of the second volume of Stranger Things 4 on July 1, 2022, it became Netflix's second title to receive more than one billion hours viewed. On July 19, 2022, Netflix announced plans to acquire Australian animation studio Animal Logic. That month, in collaboration with Sennheiser, Netflix began to add Ambeo 2-channel audio mixes (referred to as "spatial audio") to selected original productions, which allows simulated surround sound on stereo speakers and headphones. On September 5, 2022, Netflix opened an office in Warsaw, Poland responsible for the service's operations in 28 markets in Central and Eastern Europe. On October 4, 2022, Netflix have signed a creative partnership with Andrea Berloff and John Gatins. On October 11, Netflix signed up with the Broadcasters' Audience Research Board for external measurement of viewership in the UK. On October 12, Netflix signed to build a production complex at Fort Monmouth in Eatontown, New Jersey. On October 18, Netflix began exploring a cloud gaming offering and opened a new gaming studio in Southern California. On November 7, 2022, Netflix announced a strategic partnership with The Seven, a Japanese production company owned by TBS Holdings, to produce multiple original live-action titles for the subscribers over the next five years. On December 12, 2022, Netflix announced that sixty-percent of its subscribers had watched a Korean drama. CEO Ted Sarandos attributed the increase in viewership of Korean content among Americans to Korean films and dramas being "often unpredictable" and catching "the American audience by surprise". On January 10, 2023, Netflix announced plans to open an engineering hub in its Warsaw office. The hub is to provide Netflix's creative partners with software solutions for the production of films and series. In February 2023, Netflix launched a wider rollout of spatial audio, and began allowing Premium subscribers to download content for offline playback on up to six devices (expanded from four). On March 4, 2023, Netflix broadcast its first-ever global live-streaming event, the stand-up comedy special Chris Rock: Selective Outrage. Netflix reworked its viewership metrics again in June 2023. Viewership of shows was measured during the first 91 days of availability, instead of the first 28 days, and now are based on the total viewership hours divided by the total hours of the show itself. This provided more equal considerations for shorter shows and movies compared to longer ones. In August 2023, the company announced Netflix Stories, a collection of interactive narrative games from Netflix series and films such as Love is Blind, Money Heist and Virgin River. On April 18, 2023, Netflix announced that it would discontinue its DVD-by-mail service on September 29. Users of the service were able to keep the DVDs that they had received. Over its lifetime the service had sent out over 5 billion shipments. In October 2023, Eunice Kim was promoted to Chief Product Officer and Elizabeth Stone was promoted to Chief Technology Officer. That same month, amid a restructuring of its animation division, Netflix announced a multi-film agreement with Skydance Animation beginning with the upcoming Spellbound. The agreement partially replaces one it had with Apple TV+. In December 2023, Netflix released its first "What We Watched: A Netflix Engagement Report", a look at viewership for every original and licensed title watched more than 50,000 hours from January to June 2023. The company also announced plans to publish the report twice a year. In its first report for the first six months of 2023, it reported that The Night Agent was the most watched show on globally in the that period. On January 23, 2024, Netflix announced a major agreement with professional wrestling promotion WWE, under which it will acquire the international rights to its live weekly program Raw beginning in January 2025; the rights will initially cover the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, and Latin America, and expand to other territories over time. Outside of the United States, it will also hold international rights to all three of WWE's main weekly programs (Raw, SmackDown, and NXT), premium live events, and documentaries among other content. The agreement was reported to be valued at $500 million per-year over ten years. In February 2024, Netflix joined with Peter Morgan, creator of the Netflix series The Crown, to produce the play Patriots on Broadway. The venture is the first Broadway credit for the company but not its first stage project. It was actively involved as a producer of Stranger Things: The First Shadow in London. Both productions share a lead producer, Sonia Friedman. Netflix is available in every country and territory except for China, North Korea, Crimea, Syria and Russia. In January 2016, Netflix announced it would begin VPN blocking since it can be used to watch videos from a country where they are unavailable. The result of the VPN block is that people can only watch videos available worldwide and other videos are hidden from search results. Variety is present on Netflix. Hebrew and right-to-left interface orientation, which is a common localization strategy in many markets, are what define the Israeli user interface's localization, and in some regions, Netflix offers a more affordable mobile-only subscription. Customers can subscribe to one of three plans; the difference in plans relates to video resolution, the number of simultaneous streams, and the number of devices to which content can be downloaded. At the end of Q1 2022, Netflix estimated that 100 million households globally were sharing passwords to their account with others. In March 2022, Netflix began to charge a fee for additional users in Chile, Peru, and Costa Rica to attempt to control account sharing. On July 18, 2022, Netflix announced that it would test the account sharing feature in more countries, including Argentina, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras. On October 17, Netflix launched Profile Transfer to help end account sharing. On July 13, 2022, Netflix announced a partnership with Microsoft to launch an advertising-supported subscription plan. Netflix's planned advertising tier would not allow subscribers to download content like the existing ad-free platform. On July 20, 2022, it was announced that the advertising-supported tier would be coming to Netflix in 2023 but it would not feature the full library of content. Netflix US launched with 5.1% of the library unavailable including 60 Netflix Originals. In September, Netflix announced that the launch would be moved up to November 1, 2022, but in October, the launch date was changed to November 3, 2022. The ad-supported plan is called "Basic with Ads" and it costs $6.99 per month in the United States. On February 24, 2023, Netflix cut subscription prices in more than 30 countries around the world to attract more subscribers from those countries. Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines, Croatia, Venezuela, Kenya, and Iran are on the list of countries where the cost for a subscription will be reduced. In the same month stronger anti-password-sharing rules were expanded to Canada, New Zealand, Portugal, and Spain. In May 2023, these measures were further expanded to United States and Brazil subscribers. In July 2023, Netflix added 5.9 million subscribers for the second quarter of the year for a total of 238.39 million subscribers overall. The United States and Canada accounted for 1.2 million subscribers which was the largest regional quarterly gain since 2021. Netflix announced in February that it was going to enforce stricter regulations for password sharing. In May 2023, Netflix began cracking down on password-sharing in the US, UK, and Australia. Under these new rules, multiple people can use and share one account, but they have to be under the same household. Netflix defines a household as people who live in the same location as the owner of the account. Users are asked to set a primary location based on the device's IP address. Once this location is set, people who do not live at that location no longer have access to the account unless they pay an additional fee to become an extra member on the account. This decision has sparked controversy, with many saying the new rule is not fair to college students who do not live at home any longer. Netflix can be accessed via a web browser, while Netflix apps are available on various platforms, including Blu-ray players, tablet computers, mobile phones, smart TVs, digital media players, and video game consoles, with the app being available on Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Xbox One, PlayStation 4, Xbox Series X/S and PlayStation 5 consoles. Previously, it was also available on PlayStation 2, Nintendo Wii, Nintendo 3DS, Wii U, PlayStation Vita and PlayStation TV. In addition, a growing number of multichannel television providers, including cable television and IPTV services, have added Netflix apps accessible within their own set-top boxes, sometimes with the ability for its content (along with those of other online video services) to be presented within a unified search interface alongside linear television programming as an "all-in-one" solution. The maximum video resolution supported on computers is dependent on the DRM systems available on a particular operating system and web browser. "Netflix Originals" are content that is produced, co-produced, or distributed exclusively by Netflix. Netflix funds its original shows differently than other TV networks when they sign a project, providing the money upfront and immediately ordering two seasons of most series. It keeps licensing rights, which normally give production companies future revenue opportunities from syndication, merchandising, etc. Over the years, Netflix output ballooned to a level unmatched by any television network or streaming service. According to Variety Insight, Netflix produced a total of 240 new original shows and movies in 2018, then climbed to 371 in 2019, a figure "greater than the number of original series that the entire U.S. TV industry released in 2005." The Netflix budget allocated to production increased annually, reaching $13.6 billion in 2021 and projected to hit $18.9 billion by 2025, a figure that once again overshadowed any of its competitors. As of August 2022, original productions made up 50% of Netflix's overall library in the United States. Netflix has exclusive pay TV deals with several studios. The deals give Netflix exclusive streaming rights while adhering to the structures of traditional pay TV terms. Distributors that have licensed content to Netflix include Warner Bros., Universal Pictures, Sony Pictures Entertainment and previously The Walt Disney Studios. Netflix also holds current and back-catalog rights to television programs distributed by Walt Disney Television, DreamWorks Classics, Kino International, Warner Bros. Television and Paramount Global Content Distribution, along with titles from other companies such as Hasbro Entertainment and Funimation. Formerly, the streaming service also held rights to select television programs distributed by NBCUniversal Television Distribution, Sony Pictures Television and 20th Century Fox Television. Netflix negotiated to distribute animated films from Universal that HBO declined to acquire, such as The Lorax, ParaNorman, and Minions. Netflix holds exclusive streaming rights to the film library of Studio Ghibli (with the exception of Grave of the Fireflies) worldwide except in the U.S. and Japan as part of an agreement signed with Ghibli's international sales holder Wild Bunch in 2020. In July 2021, Netflix hired Mike Verdu, a former executive from Electronic Arts and Facebook, as vice president of game development, along with plans to add video games by 2022. Netflix announced plans to release mobile games which would be included in subscribers' plans to the service. Trial offerings were first launched for Netflix users in Poland in August 2021, offering premium mobile games based on Stranger Things including Stranger Things 3: The Game, for free to subscribers through the Netflix mobile app. Netflix officially launched mobile games on November 2, 2021, for Android users around the world. Through the app, subscribers had free access to five games, including two previously made Stranger Things titles. Netflix intends to add more games to this service over time. On November 9, the collection launched for iOS. Verdu said in October 2022 that besides continuing to expand their portfolio of games, they were also interested in cloud gaming options. To support the games effort, Netflix began acquiring and forming a number of studios. The company acquired Night School Studio, an independent video game developer, in September 2021. Netflix announced plans to acquire Next Games in March 2022 for €65 million as part of Netflix's expansions into gaming. Next Games had developed the mobile title Stranger Things: Puzzle Tales as well as two The Walking Dead mobile games. Later in the month, Netflix also acquired the Texas-based mobile game developer, Boss Fight Entertainment, for an undisclosed sum. Netflix opened a mobile game studio in Helsinki, Finland in September 2022, and a new studio, their fifth total, in southern California in October 2022, alongside the acquisition of Spry Fox in Seattle. Netflix freely peers with Internet service providers (ISPs) directly and at common Internet exchange points. In June 2012, a custom content delivery network, Open Connect, was announced. For larger ISPs with over 100,000 subscribers, Netflix offers free Netflix Open Connect Computer appliances that cache their content within the ISPs' data centers or networks to further reduce Internet transit costs. By August 2016, Netflix closed its last physical data center, but continued to develop its Open Connect technology. A 2016 study at the University of London detected 233 individual Open Connect locations on over six continents, with the largest amount of traffic in the US, followed by Mexico. As of July 2017, Netflix series and movies accounted for more than a third of all prime-time download Internet traffic in North America. On October 1, 2008, Netflix offered access to its service via a public application programming interface (API). It allowed access to data for all Netflix titles, and allows users to manage their movie queues. The API was free and allowed commercial use. In June 2012, Netflix began to restrict the availability of its public API. Netflix instead focused on a small number of known partners using private interfaces, since most traffic came from those private interfaces. In June 2014, Netflix announced it would be retiring the public API; it became effective November 14, 2014. Netflix then partnered with the developers of eight services deemed the most valuable, including Instant Watcher, Fanhattan, Yidio and Nextguide. Netflix presents viewers with recommendations based on previous viewing history and ratings of viewed content. These are often grouped into genres and formats, or feature the platform's highest-rated content. Each title is presented with a thumbnail. Before around 2015, these were the same key art for everyone, but since then has been customized. Netflix may select a specific actor for a thumbnail based on viewing history, or an actor or scene type based on genre preferences. Some thumbnails are generated from video stills. The Netflix recommendation system is a vital part of the streaming platform's success, enabling personalized content suggestions for over 220 million subscribers worldwide. Using advanced machine learning algorithms, Netflix analyzes user interactions, including viewing history, searches, and ratings, to deliver personalized recommendations for movies and TV shows. The recommendation system considers individual user preferences, similarities with other users with comparable tastes, specific title attributes (genre, release year), device usage patterns, and viewing time. As users interact with the platform and provide feedback with their viewing habits, the recommendation system is able to adapt and refine its suggestions over time. Netflix uses a two-tiered ranking system, using the presentation of titles on the homepage for easy navigation to maximize user engagement. This is done by organizing content into rows and ranking the titles within each row based on how much the user would be interested in it. Netflix also uses A/B testing to determine what causes the biggest interest and engagement related to options concerning movie suggestions and how titles are organized. Tags like "bittersweet", "sitcom", or "intimate" are assigned to each title by Netflix employees. Netflix also uses the tags to create recommendation micro-genres like "Goofy TV Shows" or "Girls Night In". On July 18, 2013, Netflix earned the first Primetime Emmy Awards nominations for original streaming programs at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards. Three of its series, Arrested Development, Hemlock Grove and House of Cards, earned a combined 14 nominations (nine for House of Cards, three for Arrested Development and two for Hemlock Grove). The House of Cards episode "Chapter 1" received four nominations for both the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards and 65th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards, becoming the first episode of a streaming television series to receive a major Primetime Emmy Award nomination. With its win for Outstanding Cinematography for a Single-Camera Series, "Chapter 1" became the first episode from a streaming service to be awarded an Emmy. David Fincher's win for Directing for a Drama Series for House of Cards made the episode the first from a streaming service to win a Primetime Emmy. On November 6, 2013, Netflix earned its first Grammy nomination when You've Got Time by Regina Spektor — the main title theme song for Orange Is the New Black — was nominated for Best Song Written for Visual Media. On December 12, 2013, the network earned six nominations for Golden Globe Awards, including four for House of Cards. Among those nominations was Wright for Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama for her portrayal of Claire Underwood, which she won. With the accolade, Wright became the first actress to win a Golden Globe for a streaming television series. It also marked Netflix's first major acting award. House of Cards and Orange is the New Black also won Peabody Awards in 2013. On January 16, 2014, Netflix became the first streaming service to earn an Academy Award nomination when The Square was nominated for Best Documentary Feature. On July 10, 2014, Netflix received 31 Emmy nominations. Among other nominations, House of Cards received nominations for Outstanding Drama Series, Outstanding Directing in a Drama Series and Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series. Kevin Spacey and Robin Wright were nominated for Outstanding Lead Actor and Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series. Orange is the New Black was nominated in the comedy categories, earning nominations for Outstanding Comedy Series, Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series and Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series. Taylor Schilling, Kate Mulgrew, and Uzo Aduba were respectively nominated for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series, Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series and Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series (the latter was for Aduba's recurring role in season one, as she was promoted to series regular for the show's second season). Netflix got the largest share of 2016 Emmy Award nominations, with 16 major nominations. However, streaming shows only got 24 nominations out of a total of 139, falling significantly behind cable. The 16 Netflix nominees were: House of Cards with Kevin Spacey, A Very Murray Christmas with Bill Murray, Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, Master of None, and Bloodline. Stranger Things received 19 nominations at the 2017 Primetime Emmy Awards, while The Crown received 13 nominations. In December 2017, Netflix was awarded PETA's Company of the Year for promoting animal rights movies and documentaries like Forks Over Knives and What the Health. At the 90th Academy Awards, held on March 4, 2018, the film Icarus, distributed by Netflix, won its first Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature Film. During his remarks backstage, director and writer Bryan Fogel remarked that Netflix had "single-handedly changed the documentary world." Icarus had its premiere at the 2017 Sundance Film Festival and was bought by Netflix for $5 million, one of the biggest deals ever for a non-fiction film. Netflix became the network whose programs received more nomination at the 2018 Primetime and Creative Arts Emmy Awards with 112 nominations, therefore breaking HBO's 17-years record as a network whose programs received more nomination at the Emmys, which received 108 nominations. On January 22, 2019, films distributed by Netflix scored 15 nominations for the 91st Academy Awards, including Academy Award for Best Picture for Alfonso Cuarón's Roma, which was nominated for 10 awards. The 15 nominations equal the total nominations films distributed by Netflix had received in previous years. In 2020, Netflix received 20 TV nominations and films distributed by Netflix also got 22 film nominations at the 78th Golden Globe Awards. It secured three out of the five nominations for best drama TV series for The Crown, Ozark and Ratched and four of the five nominations for best actress in a TV series: Olivia Colman, Emma Corrin, Laura Linney and Sarah Paulson. In 2020, Netflix earned 24 Academy Award nominations, marking the first time a streaming service led all studios. Films and programs distributed by Netflix received 30 nominations at the 2021 Screen Actors Guild Awards, more than any other distribution company, where their distributed films and programs won seven awards including best motion picture for The Trial of the Chicago 7 and best TV drama for The Crown. Netflix also received the most nominations of any studio at the 93rd Academy Awards – 35 total nominations with 7 award wins. In February 2022, The Power of the Dog, a gritty western distributed by Netflix and directed by Jane Campion, received 12 nominations, including Best Picture, for the 94th annual Academy Awards. Films distributed by the streamer received a total of 72 nominations. Campion became the third female to receive the Best Director award, winning her second Oscar for The Power of the Dog. At the 50th International Emmy Awards, Netflix original Sex Education won Best Comedy Series. Later that year, Netflix received 26 Emmy Awards including six for Squid Game. The Squid Game wins for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series were the first-ever for a non-English language series in those categories. In March 2023, Netflix won six Academy Awards including four for All Quiet on the Western Front which was the most awarded Netflix film in its history. Guillermo del Toro's Pinocchio was the first streaming film to named Best Animated Feature and The Elephant Whisperers was the first Indian-produced film to receive Best Documentary Short Film. Netflix received 103 Emmy nominations including 13 each for the limited series Beef and Dahmer – Monster: The Jeffrey Dahmer Story. Netflix has been subject to criticism from various groups and individuals as its popularity and market reach increased in the 2010s. Customers have complained about price increases in Netflix offerings dating back to the company's decision to separate its DVD rental and streaming services, which was quickly reversed. As Netflix increased its streaming output, it has faced calls to limit accessibility to graphic violence and include viewer advisories for issues such as sensationalism and promotion of pseudoscience. Netflix's content has also been criticized by disability rights movement advocates for lack of closed captioning quality. Some media organizations and competitors have criticized Netflix for selectively releasing ratings and viewer numbers of its original programming. The company has made claims boasting about viewership records without providing data to substantiate its successes or using problematic estimation methods. In March 2020, some government agencies called for Netflix and other streamers to limit services due to increased broadband and energy consumption as use of the platform increased. In response, the company announced it would reduce bit rate across all streams in Europe, thus decreasing Netflix traffic on European networks by around 25 percent. These same steps were later taken in India. In May 2022, Netflix's shareholder Imperium Irrevocable Trust filed a lawsuit against the company for violating the U.S. securities laws. Netflix's privacy policy outlines how the streaming platform collects, uses, and protects user data. It covers various aspects of privacy such as the type of information collected (like account details, viewing history, and device data), the purposes for which it's used (including personalization, account management, and content recommendations), and how it's shared (with service providers, for legal reasons, or with user consent). The policy also addresses user controls, providing options for managing data preferences and settings. Additionally, it highlights security measures to safeguard user information from unauthorized access or misuse. For California citizens, Netflix follows the California Consumer Privacy Act, which "is a state statute that aims to enhance privacy rights and consumer protection". Film portal Television portal Companies portal San Francisco Bay Area portal List of streaming media services "Netflix is now available in Hindi". Netflix (Press release). August 9, 2020. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved August 21, 2020. "APA KABAR INDONESIA? Avriel like Essence". Netflix (Press release). October 18, 2018. Archived from the original on April 11, 2023. Retrieved October 9, 2021. "Where is Netflix available?". Netflix. Archived from the original on July 7, 2017. Lang, Brent (March 6, 2022). "Netflix Suspends Service in Russia Amid Invasion of Ukraine". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on March 9, 2022. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Netflix Packs on More Than 13 Million Subscribers in Q4, Well Above Expectations". January 23, 2024. Archived from the original on January 23, 2024. Retrieved January 23, 2024. "Netflix - Overview - Profile". ir.netflix.net. Archived from the original on December 3, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Lauren Forristal (July 19, 2023). "Netflix gains nearly 6M subscribers as paid sharing soars". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023. "Top Websites Ranking". Similarweb. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved December 1, 2021. "netflix.com". similarweb.com. Archived from the original on October 2, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Hastings, Reed (December 1, 2005). "How I Did It: Reed Hastings, Netflix". Inc. Archived from the original on June 19, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Xavier, Jon (January 9, 2014). "Netflix's first CEO on Reed Hastings and how the company really got started Executive of the Year 2013". American City Business Journals. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Sperling, Nicole (September 15, 2019). "Long Before 'Netflix and Chill,' He Was the Netflix C.E.O.". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 15, 2019. Keating, Gina (October 11, 2012). Netflixed: The Epic Battle for America's Eyeballs. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-1-101-60143-3. Archived from the original on December 18, 2023. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Castillo, Michelle (May 23, 2017). "Reed Hastings' story about the founding of Netflix has changed several times". Archived from the original on November 2, 2017. Cohen, Alan (December 1, 2002). "The Great Race No startup has cashed in on the DVD's rapid growth more than Netflix. Now Blockbuster and Wal-Mart want in. Can it outrun its big rivals?". CNN. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Rodriguez, Ashley (April 14, 2018). "Early images of Netflix.com show how far the service has come in its 20 years". Quartz. Archived from the original on May 25, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Barrett, Brian; Parham, Jason; Raftery, Brian; Rubin, Peter; Watercutter, Angela (August 29, 2017). "Netflix Is Turning 20—But Its Birthday Doesn't Matter". Wired. Archived from the original on November 25, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Cuccinello, Hayley C. (September 17, 2019). "Netflix Cofounder Marc Randolph On Why He Left, Becoming A Mentor And His Love Of Chaos". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Scipioni, Jade (September 21, 2019). "Why Netflix co-founders turned down Jeff Bezos' offer to buy the company". CNBC. Archived from the original on April 25, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2021. O'Brien, Jeffrey M. (December 1, 2002). "The Netflix Effect". Wired. Archived from the original on September 5, 2013. Huddleston Jr., Tom (September 22, 2020). "Netflix didn't kill Blockbuster — how Netflix almost lost the movie rental wars". CNBC. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Chong, Celena (July 17, 2015). "Blockbuster's CEO once passed up a chance to buy Netflix for only $50 million". Business Insider. Archived from the original on June 27, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2021. ZETLIN, MINDA (September 20, 2019). "Blockbuster Could Have Bought Netflix for $50 Million, but the CEO Thought It Was a Joke". Inc. Archived from the original on November 16, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Giang, Vivian (February 17, 2016). "She Created Netflix's Culture And It Ultimately Got Her Fired". Fast Company. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2021. McCord, Patty (September 2014). "How Netflix Reinvented HR". Harvard Business Review. Archived from the original on May 4, 2020. Retrieved March 28, 2018. "Netflix Announces Initial Public Offering" (Press release). May 22, 2002. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2021. Hu, Jim (June 24, 2003). "Netflix sews up rental patent". CNET. Archived from the original on August 14, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. "Netflix lowers its online DVD rental fees". Associated Press. July 22, 2007. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved October 11, 2021 – via NBC News. "Movies to go". The Economist. July 7, 2005. Archived from the original on December 6, 2008. Huddleston Jr., Tom (September 22, 2020). "Netflix didn't kill Blockbuster — how Netflix almost lost the movie rental wars". CNBC. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2021. US patent 7024381, Hastings; W. Reed (Santa Cruz, CA), Randolph; Marc B. (Santa Cruz, CA), Hunt; Neil Duncan, "Approach for renting items to customers", issued 2006-04-04  US patent 6584450, Hastings; W. Reed (Santa Cruz, CA), Randolph; Marc B. (Santa Cruz, CA), Hunt; Neil Duncan (Mountain View, CA), "Method and apparatus for renting items", issued 2003-06-24  Bond, Paul (June 29, 2007). "Blockbuster to shutter 282 stores this year". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 21, 2010. "Blockbuster Settles Fight With Netflix". The New York Times. Reuters. June 28, 2007. Archived from the original on July 1, 2007. Patel, Nilay (June 27, 2007). "Netflix, Blockbuster settle patent dispute". Engadget. Archived from the original on November 1, 2021. Retrieved November 1, 2021. CHENG, JACQUI (June 27, 2007). "Blockbuster and Netflix settle patent battle". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on November 1, 2021. Retrieved November 1, 2021. "Netflix Prize Website". Archived from the original on December 10, 2006. Jackson, Dan (July 7, 2017). "The Netflix Prize: How a $1 Million Contest Changed Binge-Watching Forever". Thrillist. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Van Buskirk, Elliott (September 22, 2009). "How the Netflix Prize Was Won". Wired. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Dornhelm, Rachel (December 8, 2006). "Netflix expands indie film biz". Marketplace. American Public Media. Archived from the original on December 10, 2006. Jesdanun, Anick (July 23, 2008). "Netflix shuts movie financing arm to focus on core". The Sydney Morning Herald. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 26, 2008. Goldstein, Gregg (July 22, 2008). "Netflix closing Red Envelope". The Hollywood Reporter. Associated Press. Archived from the original on October 26, 2014. "Netflix offers streaming movies to subscribers". January 16, 2007. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Kyncl, Robert (September 13, 2017). "The inside story of how Netflix transitioned to digital video after seeing the power of YouTube". Vox Media. Archived from the original on December 23, 2017. "Netflix delivers 1 billionth DVD". NBC News. Associated Press. February 25, 2007. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2021. "Texas woman takes one-billionth Netflix delivery". Reuters. February 26, 2007. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2021. Ogg, Erica (April 16, 2007). "Netflix appoints VP of Internet TV". CNET. Archived from the original on September 11, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. MANGALINDAN, JP (November 1, 2012). "Roku's Anthony Wood looks beyond the box". Fortune. Archived from the original on September 11, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Au-Yeung, Angel (December 31, 2019). "How Billionaire Anthony Wood Quit His Netflix Job, Founded Roku—And Then Quadrupled His Fortune In The Past Year". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 11, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Carr, Austin (January 23, 2013). "Inside Netflix's Project Griffin: The Forgotten History Of Roku Under Reed Hastings". Fast Company. Archived from the original on January 23, 2013. Retrieved June 21, 2020. "Netflix Expands Internet Viewing Option". San Francisco Chronicle. Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 15, 2008. "Netflix to lift limits on streaming movies". Los Angeles Daily News. Associated Press. January 14, 2008. Archived from the original on September 5, 2017. Retrieved September 11, 2021. "Completing the Netflix Cloud Migration". Netflix. February 11, 2016. Archived from the original on September 30, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Paul, Ian (November 5, 2008). "Netflix Stops Selling DVDs". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 14, 2022. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Siegler, MG (February 24, 2009). "Netflix streams already rushing past DVDs in 2009?". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. "Warner Bros. Home Entertainment and Netflix Announce New Agreements Covering Availability of DVDs, Blu-ray and Streaming Content" (Press release). Warner Bros. January 6, 2010. Archived from the original on December 23, 2016. "Universal Studios Home Entertainment and Netflix Announce New Distribution Deals for DVDs, Blu-ray, Disney and Streaming Content" (Press release). PR Newswire. April 9, 2010. Archived from the original on July 14, 2011. "Twentieth Century Fox and Netflix Announce Comprehensive Strategic Agreement That Includes Physical and Digital Distribution" (Press release). PR Newswire. April 9, 2010. Archived from the original on December 23, 2016. Zeidler, Sue (July 6, 2010). "Netflix signs movie deal with Relativity Media". Reuters. Archived from the original on January 9, 2015. Stelter, Brian (August 10, 2010). "Netflix to Stream Films From Paramount, Lions Gate, MGM". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 11, 2010. "Netflix stumbles as it launches in Canada". Toronto Star. September 10, 2010. Archived from the original on December 9, 2014. Nowak, Peter. "Netflix launches Canadian movie service". CBC News. Archived from the original on February 13, 2016. Arango, Tim; Carr, David (November 25, 2010). "Netflix's Move Onto the Web Stirs Rivalries". The New York Times. pp. A1. Archived from the original on July 23, 2013. Keegan, Rebecca (September 18, 2019). "'Breaking Bad' Returns: Aaron Paul and Vince Gilligan Take a TV Classic for a Spin in 'El Camino'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 15, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2023. "Remote controls to get a Netflix button". CNET. January 4, 2011. Archived from the original on March 14, 2017. Schonfeld, Erick (May 17, 2011). "Netflix Now The Largest Single Source of Internet Traffic In North America". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Lawler, Richard (May 17, 2011). "Study finds Netflix is the largest source of internet traffic in North America". Engadget. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Kang, Cecilia (May 17, 2011). "Netflix biggest driver of U.S. Internet traffic, puts spotlight on broadband pricing". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 5, 2016. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Phillips, Matt (May 4, 2011). "Time Warner Chief: 'Things Like Netflix are Welcome Additions'". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on September 7, 2011. Newman, Jared (July 26, 2011). "Netflix: Price Hike Backlash Won't Last". International Data Group. Archived from the original on August 13, 2018. Retrieved August 13, 2018. Reisinger, Don (July 12, 2011). "Netflix hikes prices, adds DVD-only plan". CNET. Archived from the original on May 3, 2012. Mack, Eric (July 12, 2011). "'Dear Netflix': Price hike ignites social-media fire". CNET. Archived from the original on May 3, 2012. O'Brien, T. (September 5, 2011). "Netflix lands in Brazil, 43 other Latin American countries within the week". Engadget. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Rao, Leena (September 5, 2011). "Netflix Starts Rolling Out Streaming Service To Mexico, Latin America". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Musil, Steven (September 5, 2011). "Netflix launches streaming service in Latin America". CNET. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Lawler, Richard (September 19, 2011). "Netflix spins DVD-by-mail service off into Qwikster, says it's 'done' with price changes (video)". Engadget. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. Murph, Darren (September 19, 2011). "Editorial: Reed Hastings' Netflix spinoff isn't about DVD success, it's about hedging the stream". Engadget. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. "Netflix renames DVD-by-mail service, adds video games". CNN. September 19, 2011. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. CARR, AUSTIN (September 19, 2011). "Netflix Splits DVD-Streaming Business, Rebrands With Qwikster, Adds Video Games". Fast Company. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Biggs, John. "Remember When Netflix Wanted To Rent DVDs on a Different Website? Yeah, That Was A Fun Week". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Barnes, Brooks; Stelter, Brian (September 26, 2011). "Netflix, DreamWorks Announce Content Deal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 26, 2011. Stelter, Brian (October 10, 2011). "Netflix, in Reversal, Will Keep Its Services Together". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 13, 2016. Lawler, Richard (October 10, 2011). "Netflix backtracks on Qwikster, will keep DVDs and streaming under the same URL". Engadget. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. Flint, Joe (October 13, 2011). "Netflix deal makes CW pay off for CBS and Warner Bros". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 18, 2023. Retrieved September 26, 2023. "Netflix launches UK film and TV streaming service". BBC News. January 9, 2012. Archived from the original on January 9, 2012. "Weinstein Co. and Netflix sign a multi-year licensing agreement". Deadline Hollywood. February 21, 2012. Archived from the original on February 22, 2012. "Netflix, Weinstein Co To "Reinvent" Pay-TV Experience With New Multi-Year Pact". Deadline Hollywood. August 20, 2013. Archived from the original on August 21, 2013. "Netflix Sharpens Focus On DVDs With DVD.com, But Don't Cry Qwikster. (It's Staying)". TechCrunch. March 30, 2012. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Munarriz, Rick (June 25, 2016). "Is Netflix About to Copy Amazon?". The Motley Fool. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Wade, Cameron (September 15, 2016). "Here's How Netflix's DVD Envelope Designs Have Changed Since 2012". Paste. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Levinthal, Dave (April 7, 2012). "Netflix forms PAC". Politico. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015. Rashid, Fahmida Y. (April 10, 2012). "Netflix Isn't Pro-CISPA, Facebook Is". PC Magazine. Archived from the original on January 23, 2016. Thier, Dave (April 10, 2012). "Netflix Has NOT Formed a Pro-Sopa Super-PAC". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 2, 2017. Fritz, Ben (June 28, 2012). "Company Town". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 11, 2012. Lawler, Ryan (July 24, 2012). "Netflix Adds Warner Bros. Exec as its New Chief Marketing Officer". Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. "Netflix And RADiUS-TWC Announce Multi-Year Output Deal in the United States To Bring Diverse Slate To Widest Possible Audience" (Press release). PR Newswire. August 23, 2012. Archived from the original on August 26, 2012. Heater, Brian (August 23, 2012). "Netflix inks deal with Weinstein Co.-owned Radius-TWC, films coming to watch instantly next year". Engadget. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. "Amazon Adds Movies to Streaming Service in New Challenge to Netflix". Advertising Age. September 4, 2012. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. Blair, Nancy (August 10, 2010). "Epix, Netflix announce deal to stream movies". USA Today. ISSN 0734-7456. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. Adegoke, Yinka (May 3, 2012). McCormick, Gerald E.; Von Ahn, Lisa (eds.). "Viacom profit beats, but Nickelodeon worries loom". Reuters. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. "Netflix Launches in Sweden, Denmark, Norway And Finland" (Press release). PR Newswire. October 18, 2012. Archived from the original on November 27, 2014. Protalinski, Emil (October 17, 2012). "Netflix launches in Norway today and Finland tomorrow following Sweden and Denmark". The Next Web. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2021. "Netflix outbids premium TV for rights to Disney movies". CBS News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 24, 2013. Graser, Marc (December 4, 2012). "Disney inks exclusive licensing deal with Netflix". Archived from the original on February 9, 2013. "'Disney Movies Online' Store, Site Shutting Down". Archived from the original on January 22, 2016. Whitney, Lance (January 14, 2013). "Netflix scores deals with Turner, Warner Bros". CNET. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Wallenstein, Andrew. "Netflix 2014 European Expansion: A Look Ahead". Variety. Archived from the original on December 19, 2014. Roettgers, Janko (September 10, 2013). "Netflix makes it official, launches in the Netherlands". GigaOm. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved September 12, 2021. ROXBOROUGH, SCOTT (September 11, 2013). "Netflix Launches in the Netherlands". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (March 15, 2011). "Netflix To Enter Original Programming With Mega Deal For David Fincher-Kevin Spacey Series 'House Of Cards'". Deadline. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Andreeva, Nellie (November 11, 2011). "Netflix, Lionsgate TV Closing Deal For Jenji Kohan's 'Orange Is The New Black' Comedy". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. Retrieved May 2, 2016. Hibberd, James (November 18, 2011). "'Arrested Development' officially back! Revived series coming to Netflix". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 12, 2012. Retrieved February 29, 2012. "Netflix 'Lilyhammer' to tv lineup". Deadline Hollywood. March 9, 2011. Archived from the original on October 19, 2011. Retrieved October 25, 2011. Andy, Greene (December 5, 2013). "How 'Lilyhammer' Changed the TV World". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved July 24, 2020. O'Connell, Mikey (October 4, 2012). "Netflix Launching Entire Run of David Fincher's 'House of Cards' in One Day". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Lieberman, David (February 12, 2013). "DreamWorks Animation To Produce First Netflix Original Series For Kids". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. Lieberman, David (June 17, 2013). "DreamWorks Animation To Produce TV Shows Based On Its Characters For Netflix". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. Ha, Anthony (October 21, 2013). "Netflix: 'Orange Is The New Black' Is Our Most-Watched Original, But Our TV Exclusives Are Even Bigger". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Littleton, Cynthia (February 5, 2016). "'Orange Is the New Black' Renewed For 3 Seasons By Netflix". Variety. Archived from the original on February 5, 2016. Pepitone, Julianne (March 13, 2013). "New Netflix Facebook app lets users share viewing history". CNN. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. MULLIN, JOE (December 21, 2012). "Congress tweaks US video-privacy law so Netflix can get on Facebook". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Stenovec, Timothy (August 1, 2013). "Netflix Launches Profiles, Finally Realizing How People Really Watch Movies On It". HuffPost. Archived from the original on March 19, 2016. Pepitone, Julianne (August 1, 2013). "Netflix launches user profiles for individual recommendations". CNN. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Lawler, Ryan (August 1, 2013). "Netflix Makes Recommendations More Personalized By Adding Individual User Profiles". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Rogowsky, Mark (August 2, 2013). "Netflix Profiles: One Step Up, Two Steps Back". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. "Marvel TV shows to debut on Netflix". BBC News. November 8, 2013. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Lieberman, David (November 7, 2013). "Disney To Provide Netflix With Four Series Based On Marvel Characters". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 14, 2014. Spangler, Todd (November 7, 2013). "Netflix Orders Four Marvel Live-Action Series". Variety. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. "Marvel's Iron Fist Release Date, Trailer, Review, Cast, and More". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Collura, Scott (July 21, 2017). "Comic-Con 2017: The Defenders – We Just Saw the First Episode". IGN. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Itzkoff, Dave (February 13, 2014). "'Clone Wars' Moves to Netflix". ArtsBeat. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Morran, Chris (February 23, 2014). "Netflix Agrees To Pay Comcast To End Slowdown". Consumerist. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Goldman, David (August 29, 2014). "Slow Comcast speeds were costing Netflix customers". CNN. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Wallace, Gregory (February 23, 2014). "Netflix and Comcast strike deal to allow faster speeds". CNN. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (April 22, 2014). "Mitch Hurwitz Inks Multi-Year Deal With Netflix For New Series". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 23, 2014. Szalai, Georg (May 27, 2014). "Netflix Gets Rights to Sony Animation Films". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. "Meet Netflix's stealthy new logo". CNN Business. May 6, 2014. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "Netflix now in France, Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Belgium and Luxembourg" (Press release). PR Newswire. September 18, 2014. Archived from the original on September 19, 2014. Eveleth, Rose (September 10, 2014). "Why Netflix Is 'Slowing Down' Its Website Today". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Steel, Emily (October 2, 2014). "With Four New Adam Sandler Films, Netflix Takes Aim at Theaters". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 3, 2014. Rosenberg, Alyssa (April 14, 2015). "Netflix makes a blind superhero accessible to blind audiences". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Spangler, Todd (April 14, 2015). "Netflix Adding Audio Description Tracks for Visually Impaired, Starting with 'Marvel's Daredevil'". Variety. Archived from the original on November 22, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. Spangler, Todd (April 14, 2016). "Netflix to Expand Audio Descriptions for Blind Subscribers". Variety. Archived from the original on April 30, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. "Netflix to launch in Australia and New Zealand in March 2015" (Press release). PR Newswire. November 18, 2014. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Grubb, Ben (March 24, 2015). "How the Australian Netflix differs from the US service". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on March 24, 2015. "Netflix to launch in Japan this fall" (Press release). PR Newswire. February 4, 2015. Archived from the original on February 5, 2015. Cox, Jamieson (August 4, 2015). "Netflix is coming to Japan on September 2nd". The Verge. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Sawers, Paul (August 4, 2015). "Netflix is finally launching in Asia, and it's starting in Japan". Business Insider. VentureBeat. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Spangler, Todd (June 6, 2015). "Netflix to Stream Into Italy, Spain and Portugal in October". Variety. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Minaya, Ezequiel; Sharma, Amol. "Netflix Expands to 190 Countries". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on February 7, 2016. McAlone, Nathan (May 18, 2016). "Netflix releases tool to determine internet speed". Business Insider. Archived from the original on September 11, 2016. Perez, Sarah (May 18, 2016). "Netflix launches its own speed test website, Fast.com". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on September 19, 2018. Lopez, Napier (May 18, 2016). "Netflix launches Fast.com, the simplest internet speed test ever". The Next Web. Archived from the original on August 9, 2020. Carpenter, Shelby (May 18, 2016). "Netflix Launches Fast.com, New Tool To Check Your Internet Speed". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Fung, Brian. "Netflix is finally letting you download videos for offline viewing". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 1, 2016. Shaw, Lucas. "Netflix unveils download feature for offline binge-watching". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on December 1, 2016. "Netflix finally lets you download shows and movies to watch offline". The Verge. November 30, 2016. Archived from the original on January 28, 2017. Han, Angie (November 30, 2016). "Netflix Offline Playback Is Finally Here". /Film. Archived from the original on June 16, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Masters, Kim (September 14, 2016). "The Netflix Backlash: Why Hollywood Fears a Content Monopoly". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. "Netflix to boost in-house production arm". Broadcast. April 19, 2016. Archived from the original on October 31, 2016. Spangler, Todd (February 2, 2017). "Netflix Inks BMG Deal to Manage Music Rights Outside U.S." Variety. Archived from the original on August 7, 2017. BRZESKI, PATRICK (April 24, 2017). "Netflix Signs Licensing Deal With China's iQiyi". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Russell, Jon (April 25, 2017). "Netflix enters China via licensing deal with top video streaming service iQiyi". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. "Netflix buys Scots comic book firm Millarworld". BBC News. August 7, 2017. Archived from the original on August 8, 2017. Koblin, John (August 14, 2017). "Netflix Signs Shonda Rhimes in Counterpunch to ABC and Disney". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on August 14, 2017. O'Brien, Sara Ashley (September 25, 2017). "Netflix wants to make it easier to binge-watch on planes". CNN. Archived from the original on December 16, 2017. LEBLANC, DANIEL (October 9, 2017). "Netflix in campaign to 'set record straight' on $500-million pledge for Canadian productions". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on February 20, 2018. Hayes, Dade (October 10, 2017). "Netflix Defends $500 Million Canadian Investment: "No Tax Deals Were Part Of The Approval"". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 19, 2017. Hayes, Dade (March 21, 2019). "Netflix Reaches Tipping Point As Originals Now Outpace Acquired Titles – Study". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved April 3, 2019. Statt, Nick (October 16, 2017). "Netflix plans to spend $8 billion to make its library 50 percent original by 2018". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. "How does the Skip Intro feature work on TV shows". Netflix. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved September 10, 2020. Bogost, Ian (October 31, 2017). "Netflix's 'Skip Intro' Button Makes TV Ever More Like an App". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (November 17, 2017). "Jenji Kohan Inks Overall Deal With Netflix". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Holloway, Daniel (November 22, 2017). "Netflix Won't Host Golden Globes Party With Weinstein Company". Variety. Archived from the original on January 30, 2018. de la Fuente, Anna Marie (November 22, 2017). "Netflix to Make its First Original Colombian Series". Variety. Archived from the original on November 22, 2017. SANDBERG, BRYN (December 6, 2017). "'Stranger Things' Producer Inks Massive Overall Deal With Netflix". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Luckerson, Victor (March 20, 2017). "Laughing All the Way to the Bank". The Ringer. Archived from the original on September 15, 2017. Kit, Borys (January 23, 2018). "Netflix in Talks to Acquire 'Cloverfield' Sequel From Paramount". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 24, 2018. Kit, Borys; McClintonk, Pamela (February 6, 2018). "Sources: Netflix Paid Paramount More Than $50 Million for 'Cloverfield Paradox'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 7, 2018. McNary, Dave (February 8, 2018). "Netflix Buys Michael Pena-Lizzy Caplan Thriller 'Extinction' From Universal". Variety. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 27, 2018). "Netflix Acquires Andy Serkis-Directed 'Mowgli' From Warner Bros & Plans 2019 Global Streaming Release". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 27, 2018. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Galuppo, Mia; Kit, Borys (March 20, 2020). "Netflix Picks Up Kumail Nanjiani and Issa Rae's 'The Lovebirds'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved June 3, 2022. Fleming, Mike Jr. (August 3, 2020). "Netflix Negotiating For 'The Woman In The Window' With Amy Adams; Last Fox 2000 Elizabeth Gabler Project Will Be Let Go By Disney". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Horton, Phillip (February 20, 2019). "Formula 1: Release date confirmed for F1's Netflix series". Motorsport Week. Archived from the original on February 17, 2020. Retrieved February 17, 2020. Spangler, Todd (March 2, 2018). "Netflix Stock Pops to New All-Time High, Company Now Worth More Than $130 Billion". Variety. Archived from the original on March 22, 2018. Retrieved March 22, 2018. "Netflix reports £1.4bn revenue last year from UK subscribers". The Guardian. October 10, 2022. Archived from the original on October 10, 2022. Retrieved October 11, 2022. Statt, Nick (April 11, 2018). "Netflix pulls out of Cannes Film Festival following competition ban". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. Tiffany, Kaitlyn (May 19, 2017). "Netflix booed at Okja's Cannes premiere". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. Tiffany, Kaitlyn (May 10, 2017). "Netflix's first two films at Cannes could be its last". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. Spangler, Todd (May 14, 2018). "Netflix Content Chief Says 85% of New Spending Is on Originals". Variety. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved April 3, 2019. Adalian, Josef (June 11, 2018). "Inside the Binge Factory". Vulture. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Adalain, Josef (September 30, 2021). "Planet Squid Game". Vulture. Archived from the original on October 3, 2021. Neuman, Scott (May 22, 2018). "Obamas Sign Deal With Netflix, Form 'Higher Ground Productions'". NPR. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved September 24, 2020. Harris, Hunter (May 21, 2018). "The Obamas Will Produce Movies and Shows for Netflix". Vulture.com. Archived from the original on May 3, 2020. Retrieved September 24, 2020. Pino, Nick (June 13, 2018). "Exclusive: Netflix to add games to its service, including Minecraft: Story Mode". TechRadar. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved June 13, 2018. Solsman, Joan; Grunin, Lori (June 13, 2018). "No, Netflix isn't going to stream Minecraft video games". CNET. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved June 13, 2018. Stevens, Colin (November 27, 2018). "Telltale's Minecraft: Story Mode Launches on Netflix". IGN. Archived from the original on November 27, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (August 27, 2018). "Harlan Coben Inks Overall Deal With Netflix For TV Series & Movie Adaptations Of His Books". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved August 28, 2018. Andreeva, Nellie (August 27, 2018). "'Gravity Falls' Creator Alex Hirsch Inks Overall Deal With Netflix". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 29, 2018. Retrieved August 28, 2018. "Netflix to expand production hub in New Mexico". ABC News. Archived from the original on August 8, 2021. Retrieved August 8, 2021. Spangler, Todd (October 16, 2018). "Netflix Is Paying Less Than $30 Million for Albuquerque Studios, Which Cost $91 Million to Build". Variety. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Hayes, Dade (November 16, 2018). "Paramount and Netflix Set Multi-Picture Film Deal". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 23, 2018. Retrieved November 25, 2018. Hagey, Keach; Flint, Joe (October 20, 2018). "Viacom Plans 'To All the Boys' Sequel for Netflix in Push to Create More Content for Rivals". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on November 21, 2018. Retrieved November 25, 2018. ESPINOZA, JOSHUA (December 25, 2018). "Here's the Thrilling New Trailer for ESPN's Michael Jordan Documentary 'The Last Dance'". Complex Networks. Archived from the original on December 27, 2018. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Spangler, Todd (April 22, 2020). "Netflix to Premiere ESPN's 'The Last Dance' for U.S. Subscribers in July". Variety. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. "The Thoughtful Raunch of Sex Education". The Atlantic. January 9, 2019. Archived from the original on April 23, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2020. McClintock, Pamela (January 22, 2019). "Netflix Becomes First Streamer to Join the Motion Picture Association of America". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 22, 2019. Retrieved January 22, 2019. Andreeva, Nellie (February 21, 2019). "'The Haunting' Renewed For Season 2 as Mike Flanagan & Trevor Macy Partner in Intrepid Pictures & Ink Netflix Overall Deal". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 16, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Baysinger, Tim (May 9, 2019). "Netflix Signs 'Umbrella Academy' Producer Dark Horse Entertainment to First-Look Deal". The Wrap. Archived from the original on June 2, 2019. Retrieved May 25, 2019. Sweney, Mark (July 3, 2019). "Netflix strikes production deal with Shepperton Studios". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on June 23, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2020. Munzenrieder, Kyle (August 8, 2019). "What Will David Benioff and D.B. Weiss Bring to Netflix For $200 Million?". W. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Statt, Nick (August 7, 2019). "Game of Thrones creators sign $200 million Netflix deal to make exclusive shows and films". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Boucher, Geoff (October 29, 2019). "'Star Wars' Setback: 'Game Of Thrones' Duo David Benioff & D.B. Weiss Exit Trilogy". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2023. "Game of Thrones creators Benioff and Weiss drop Star Wars movies for Netflix". The Guardian. October 29, 2019. Archived from the original on January 23, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Byford, Sam (October 29, 2019). "Game of Thrones showrunners quit Star Wars trilogy to work on Netflix projects". The Verge. Archived from the original on April 25, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Statt, Nick (September 1, 2020). "Game of Thrones showrunners are adapting The Three-Body Problem as first major Netflix project". The Verge. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2021. Goldberg, Leslie (September 30, 2019). "Stranger Things Renewed for Season 4 as Creators Ink Nine-Figure Netflix Deal". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 30, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2023. "Netflix and Nickelodeon form multi-year output deal to produce original animated films and series for kids & families around the world" (Press release). Netflix. November 13, 2019. Archived from the original on June 20, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Barnes, Brookes (November 13, 2019). "'SpongeBob' Spinoff Highlights Netflix-Nickelodeon Deal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 13, 2019. Slater, Georgina (November 15, 2019). "Netflix and Nickelodeon Team Up as Disney+ Lands 10 Million Subscribers One Day After Launch". People. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Gebhart, Andrew. "Marvel and Star Wars films will ditch Netflix for Disney's own service". CNET. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Andreeva, Nellie (March 1, 2022). "Disney+ Expands Into TV-MA Fare As It Adds Marvel's 'Defenders' Franchise & 'Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.' From Netflix". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "We'll Always Have Paris: Netflix Seals Long Term Deal To Keep Gotham's Last Single-Screen Picture Palace Alive". November 25, 2019. Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved February 17, 2022. Wiseman, Andreas (January 17, 2020). "Netflix Opens Vast Paris Office, Reveals New Content & Partnerships In France". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2021. Rosemain, Mathieu; De Clercq, Geert (January 17, 2020). "Netflix opens Paris office, plans new French-language series". Reuters. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2021. Lindahl, Chris (January 31, 2020). "Adam Sandler Extends Deal With Netflix, Will Make Four More Movies for the Streamer". IndieWire. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. "Netflix Partners With CLAMP & Kindaichi, Gundam Thunderbolt, Goth, Mardock Scramble, Thermae Romae Creators for New Anime". Anime News Network. February 25, 2020. Archived from the original on February 25, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2020. Gruenwedel, Erik (March 4, 2020). "It's a SpongeBob SquarePants World at ViacomCBS". Home Media Magazine. Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2023. "Chernin Entertainment, Netflix Sign First-Look Deal for Film". TheWrap. April 8, 2020. Archived from the original on April 14, 2020. Retrieved June 21, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 29, 2020). "Netflix closes deal of egyptian theater; joining forces with American Cinematheque". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 29, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. McNary, Dave (May 29, 2020). "Netflix Closes Deal to Buy Hollywood's Egyptian Theatre". Variety. Archived from the original on May 30, 2020. Retrieved May 30, 2020. Lindahl, Chris (May 29, 2020). "Netflix Finally Sealed the Deal on Hollywood's Egyptian Theatre, but Not Everyone Is Happy". IndieWire. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Lee, Edmund (July 16, 2020). "Netflix Appoints Ted Sarandos as Co-Chief Executive". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Bursztynsky, Jessica (July 16, 2020). "Netflix promotes Ted Sarandos to co-CEO". CNBC. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Kanter, Jake (July 30, 2020). "Netflix Quietly Strikes Landmark Investment Deal With 'Black Mirror' Creators Charlie Brooker & Annabel Jones". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 6, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Sweney, Mark; Lee, Benjamin (September 2, 2020). "Harry and Meghan sign multi-year Netflix deal". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on November 3, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Barnes, Brooks (September 2, 2020). "Prince Harry and Meghan Sign Megawatt Netflix Deal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 2, 2020. Spangler, Todd (September 7, 2020). "Reed Hastings' Book on Netflix's 'No Rules Rules': Five Key Takeaways". Variety. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 11, 2020). "Millie Bobby Brown To Star In & Executive Produce Netflix Fantasy Movie 'Damsel'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Hayes, Dade (April 8, 2021). "Netflix And Sony Break Ground With Film Licensing Deal Replacing Starz Pact, Including First Look At New Direct-To-Streaming Titles". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 23, 2022. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Donnelly, Matt; Littleton, Cynthia (April 8, 2021). "Sony Pictures Moves Movie Output Deal From Starz to Netflix in Rich Pact". Variety. Archived from the original on April 8, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Lindahl, Chris (April 8, 2021). "Netflix Will Become the Post-Theatrical Streaming Home for Sony Pictures". IndieWire. Archived from the original on April 24, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Doradea, Karen (April 27, 2021). "Netflix Canada to officially open new headquarters in Toronto". Daily Hive. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Keslassy, Elsa (April 28, 2021). "Netflix Launches Nordic Office in Sweden". Variety. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Jay Peters (May 24, 2021). "Netflix is holding a week-long 'geek' event in June about The Witcher, The Sandman, and more". Verge. Archived from the original on December 9, 2022. Retrieved December 9, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 7, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez Inks Multi-Year First-Look Production Deal With Netflix". Archived from the original on June 13, 2021. Retrieved June 11, 2021. Hayes, Dade (June 10, 2021). "Netflix Launches Branded Merchandise Site, Exploring New Revenue Frontier". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 11, 2021. Retrieved June 11, 2021. Koblin, John; Maheshwari, Sapna (June 10, 2021). "Netflix: The Store!". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Lang, Brent (June 21, 2021). "Steven Spielberg's Amblin Partners, Netflix Forge Film Deal in Sign of Changing Hollywood". Variety. Archived from the original on June 21, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Coldewey, Devin (June 21, 2021). "Spielberg's Amblin inks multiyear feature film deal with Netflix". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on December 11, 2023. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (June 30, 2021). "'Castlevania' Animation Studio Powerhouse Inks First-Look Deal With Netflix". Archived from the original on September 5, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Shaw, Lucas; Gurman, Mark (July 14, 2021). "Netflix Plans to Offer Video Games in Push Beyond Films, TV". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on September 29, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Peters, Jay (July 20, 2021). "Netflix's gaming expansion starts with mobile". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Retrieved July 20, 2021. Holt, Kris (August 26, 2021). "Netflix starts testing Stranger Things games in its Android app". Engadget. Archived from the original on September 22, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Petski, Denise (July 14, 2021). "'Kissing Booth' Star Joey King Inks First-Look Deal With Netflix". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 15, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Kit, Borys (July 21, 2021). "Zack Snyder's Stone Quarry Productions Signs First-Look Film Deal With Netflix (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 21, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2021. ANDERSON, JENNA (July 21, 2021). "Zack Snyder Signs First-Look Deal With Netflix". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 22, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2021. Kit, Borys (July 6, 2021). "Zack Snyder Sets Next Movie, Sci-Fi Adventure 'Rebel Moon', at Netflix (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 12, 2022. Retrieved July 22, 2021. "Zack Snyder Signs First-Look Deal With Netflix". Gemmill, Allie (July 11, 2019). "Zack Snyder Set to Produce a Netflix Anime Series About Norse Mythology". Collider. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2021. GOLDBERG, LESLEY (July 11, 2019). "Zack Snyder Sets Norse Mythology Anime Series at Netflix". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 11, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. BOCCELLA, MAGGIE (August 16, 2021). "Netflix Originals Now Make Up 40% of Streamer's Library in the U.S." Collider. Archived from the original on September 11, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Jackson, Angelique. "Netflix Sets 'Tudum' Global Fan Event, With Stars From 70 Movies and Shows Including 'Stranger Things' and 'The Harder They Fall'". Variety. Archived from the original on September 19, 2021. Retrieved September 13, 2021. Puhak, Janine (August 25, 2021). "Bridgerton, Stranger Things, The Crown and More to Join Netflix's First-Ever Global Fan Event". People. Archived from the original on September 13, 2021. Retrieved September 13, 2021. Jennifer Yuma (September 29, 2021). "Netflix Says Its Tudum Fan Event Garnered More Than 25 Million Views". Variety. Archived from the original on December 9, 2022. Retrieved December 9, 2022. Angel Saunders (September 16, 2021). "'Bridgerton' Live: Here's How You Can Get Tickets to 'The Queen's Ball' Before They're Gone". IndieWire. Archived from the original on December 9, 2022. Retrieved December 9, 2022. Hayes, Dade (October 12, 2021). "'Squid Game' Draws 111M Views In First Month, Per Netflix, Besting 'Bridgerton' To Become Top All-Time Series Launch". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 12, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Wiseman, Andreas (September 20, 2021). "Netflix Increases UK Studio Footprint With Long-Term Longcross Deal; Streamer Re-Confirms $1BN UK Content Spend In 2021". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. "Netflix Acquires Iconic Roald Dahl Story Company" (Press release). Netflix. September 21, 2021. Archived from the original on April 30, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Grater, Tom (September 21, 2021). "Netflix Acquires Roald Dahl Story Company". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 7, 2022. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Shaw, Lucas (September 22, 2021). "Netflix Agrees to Buy 'Matilda' Author Roald Dahl Story Catalog". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Ramachandran, Naman (September 22, 2021). "Netflix Acquires Roald Dahl Story Company, Plans Extensive Universe". Variety. Archived from the original on June 16, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Takahashi, Dean (September 28, 2021). "Netflix acquires its first game studio in deal with Oxenfree creator Night School Studio". Venture Beat. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved December 11, 2023. "Announcing Netflix Book Club with Host Uzo Aduba and New Social Series with Starbucks". About Netflix. Archived from the original on October 17, 2021. Retrieved October 16, 2021. Perez, Lexy (October 13, 2021). "Uzo Aduba to Host Netflix Book Club Series". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. White, Peter (October 19, 2021). "Netflix Set To Shake Up Ratings Strategy & Plans To Release More Viewing Figures In Future". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Rivera, Joshua (November 2, 2021). "Netflix officially has games now". Polygon. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Perez, Sarah (November 9, 2021). "Netflix launches games to iPhone and iPad users worldwide". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Spangler, Todd (November 2, 2021). "Netflix Sets Launch of Games in Mobile App Worldwide, Including 'Stranger Things' Titles". Variety. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Keith, Chantel (November 16, 2021). "Netflix Launches New 'Top10 on Netflix' Website". Spring Tribune. Archived from the original on December 6, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 22, 2021). "Netflix Acquiring Scanline VFX, Which Worked On 'Cowboy Bebop' & 'Stranger Things'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved November 22, 2021. White, Peter (November 22, 2021). "Roberto Patino Strikes Overall Deal With Netflix, Developing Comic Series Adaptation Nocterra". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Ramachandran, Naman (December 6, 2021). "'Black-ish', 'Jack Ryan' Talents to Present at Netflix, Stage 32 Content Creation Program". Variety. Archived from the original on December 6, 2021. Retrieved December 6, 2021. Sun, Rebecca (December 7, 2021). "Netflix Teams With IllumiNative for Indigenous Producers Training Program". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Hailu, Selome (December 7, 2021). "Netflix Partners with Illuminative to Train Indigenous TV and Film Producers". Variety. Archived from the original on January 8, 2022. Retrieved January 8, 2022. Galuppo, Mia (December 9, 2021). "Netflix Wants to Own Online News About Its Content, Too". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Hailu, Selome (December 13, 2021). "Netflix Inks Overall Deal With 'Fear the Walking Dead' Writer and Producer Kalinda Vazquez". Variety. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Welk, Brian (December 16, 2021). "Spike Lee Signs Multiyear Film Deal With Netflix to Direct and Produce". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 22, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2021. Keslassy, Elsa (December 9, 2021). "Netflix, Amazon.com, Disney Plus, Apple TV Plus to Invest as Much as $330 Million in French Content Annually". Variety. Archived from the original on April 26, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Roxborough, Scott (February 22, 2022). "Netflix to Invest $45M in French, European Films in Deal That Could Pave Return to Cannes". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 22, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2022. "Behind the scenes of the new PGA Tour/Netflix docuseries". Golf Digest. Archived from the original on April 26, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Petski, Denise (January 14, 2022). "Netflix Orders Tennis Docuseries From 'Formula 1: Drive To Survive' Producer". Deadline. Archived from the original on January 14, 2023. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Porter, Jon (March 2, 2022). "Netflix acquires another developer to build 'world class games'". The Verge. Archived from the original on March 2, 2022. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Spangler, Todd (March 24, 2022). "Netflix Acquires Its Third Game Studio, Boss Fight Entertainment". Variety. Archived from the original on March 24, 2022. Retrieved March 25, 2022. "Netflix and Dr. Seuss Enterprises to Bring the Whimsical World of Dr. Seuss to Life With Five New Animated Preschool Series and Specials". About Netflix. Archived from the original on March 23, 2022. Retrieved March 23, 2022. "Netflix Orders Five Dr. Seuss-Inspired Animated Preschool Series & Specials". March 15, 2022. Archived from the original on March 15, 2022. Retrieved March 23, 2022. Middleton, Richard (March 29, 2022). "Netflix opens Poland office as CEE hub". Digital TV Europe. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Vlessing, Etan (March 30, 2022). "Netflix Signs Five-Year Lease Extension at Vancouver Production Hub". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 6, 2022. Retrieved April 6, 2022. Hood, Andrew (March 31, 2022). "ASO confirms new details of Netflix-Tour de France deal with eight major teams". VeloNews. Archived from the original on January 28, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. "Netflix pauses future projects in Russia". BBC News. March 2, 2022. Archived from the original on March 9, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Ramachandran, Naman (February 28, 2022). "Netflix Declines to Carry Russian Propaganda Channels". Variety. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Hughes, Clyde (April 13, 2022). "Russian subscribers sue Netflix for pulling service over Ukraine war". United Press International. "Russian Netflix users sue streaming giant for leaving market -RIA". Reuters. April 13, 2022. Kit, Borys (June 1, 2022). "Behind Netflix's Leaner Movie Mandate: Bigger, Fewer and Better". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 28, 2022. Flint, Joe; Jacob, Denny (April 19, 2022). "Netflix Explores a Version With Ads as Subscriber Base Shrinks". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 20, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Bursztynsky, Jessica; Alessandrini, Sarah (April 20, 2022). "Netflix closes down 35% wiping more than $50 billion off market cap". CNBC. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Sherman, Alex (April 20, 2022). "Netflix estimates 100 million households are sharing passwords and suggests a global crackdown is coming". CNBC. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Rubin, Rebecca (May 17, 2022). "Netflix Scraps Several Animated Projects, Including Ava DuVernay's 'Wings of Fire' and 'Antiracist Baby' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Oganesyan, Natalie (April 28, 2022). "Netflix Begins Layoffs at Tudum Site, Marketing Department". TheWrap. Andreeva, Nellie (May 17, 2022). "Netflix Hit By Layoffs; About 150 Mostly U.S.-Based Employees Affected". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Niasse, Amina; Shaw, Lucas; Bloomberg, Writer (June 24, 2022). "Netflix lays off another 300 employees in latest round of cuts". Fortune. Retrieved June 24, 2022. White, Peter (June 23, 2022). "Netflix Axes Another 300 Staff, Taking Total Layoffs To More Than 450". Deadline Hollywood. "Barack Obama Narrates A Gorgeous New Netflix Series: 'Our Great National Parks'". Forbes. Horseh, Aysha Ashley (April 18, 2022). "Ryan Reynolds and Blake Lively team with Netflix to bring representation behind the scenes". Netflix Life. Ritman, Alex (April 18, 2022). "Netflix Teaming With Arab Fund for Arts and Culture on $250,000 Grant for Arab Female Filmmakers". The Hollywood Reporter. "Netflix to launch an 'Exploding Kittens' mobile game tied to a new animated TV series". TechCrunch. April 18, 2022. Retrieved April 19, 2022.[permanent dead link] Fleming, Mike Jr. (April 19, 2022). "'Nightmare Alley' Producer J. Miles Dale Strikes Creative Partnership With Netflix". Deadline Hollywood. Chmielewski, Dawn; Nussey, Sam (April 27, 2022). "EXCLUSIVE Netflix inks Japan studio deal in anime push". Reuters. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "31 must-see acts to catch during Netflix's major L.A. comedy festival". Los Angeles Times. April 24, 2022. Retrieved December 9, 2022. Michael Schneider (April 28, 2022). "Netflix's Massive Comedy Festival Is No Joke: Here's Why the Streamer Is Doing It Now". Variety. Retrieved December 9, 2022. Porter, Rick (May 31, 2022). "'Stranger Things' Smashes Netflix's Opening Weekend Viewing Record". The Hollywood Reporter. Forristal, Lauren (April 11, 2022). "'Stranger Things' fans can explore the Upside Down in new NYC experience". TechCrunch. Hailu, Selome (July 5, 2022). "Netflix Top 10: 'Stranger Things 4' Becomes Second Title Ever to Cross 1 Billion Hours Viewed". Variety. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Weprin, Alex (July 19, 2022). "Netflix Acquires Animation Studio Animal Logic". The Hollywood Reporter. Todd Spangler (July 19, 2022). "Netflix to Acquire Animation Studio Animal Logic in All-Cash Deal". Variety. Weatherbed, Jess (February 1, 2023). "Netflix brings spatial audio to a lot more movies and shows". The Verge. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Welch, Chris (July 7, 2022). "Netflix introduces spatial audio for Stranger Things and other originals". The Verge. Retrieved January 23, 2024. "Netflix uruchomił biuro w Polsce i szuka pracowników". wirtualnemedia.pl (in Polish). September 6, 2022. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Lang, Brent (October 4, 2022). "Oscar-Nominated Screenwriters Andrea Berloff, John Gatins Form Creative Partnership With Netflix (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Green, Alex (October 11, 2022). "Netflix agrees to have viewer numbers measured externally by Barb". The Independent. Goldsmith, Jill (October 12, 2022). "Netflix Is A Big Step Closer To Building Major New Jersey Production Studio". Deadline Hollywood. Silberling, Amanda (October 18, 2022). "Netflix to expand into cloud gaming, opens new studio in Southern California". TechCrunch. Retrieved October 19, 2022. Shackleton, Liz (November 7, 2022). "Netflix Teams With TBS Production Outfit The Seven To Boost Japanese Live-Action Slate". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 18, 2023. Brzeski, Patrick (November 8, 2022). "Netflix Pacts With The Seven for More Japanese Live-Action Originals". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 18, 2023. Gruenwedel, Erik (December 12, 2022). "Netflix Says Subscribers Love Korean Content". Media Play News. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Yonhap (December 29, 2022). "60% of Netflix subscribers watched at least one K-drama in 2022". The Korea Herald. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Souw, Rebecca (June 22, 2023). "Ted Sarandos Calls Korean Content 'Surprising and Unpredictable' as Netflix Prepares to Double Investment in Shows, Industry Development". Variety. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Park, Soomee (June 22, 2023). "Netflix's Ted Sarandos Touts the "Power of Korean Storytelling," Says K-Content Views Are Up Sixfold". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "Netflix to Open New Engineering Hub in Poland". About Netflix. Retrieved January 15, 2023. Garvey, Marianne (March 5, 2023). "Chris Rock tackles 'selective outrage' and Oscars slap in live Netflix special". CNN. Campione, Katie (June 20, 2023). "Netflix Adjusts Viewership Metric, Prompting Shakeups Among All-Time Most Popular Lists; 'Wednesday' Overtakes 'Stranger Things 4' & 'Queen Charlotte' Remains In Play For TV". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 20, 2023. Vilas-Boas, Eric (August 22, 2023). "Welcome the Love Is Blind Video Game to the Pods". Vulture. "Netflix will end its DVD-by-mail service". NPR. Associated Press. April 18, 2023. Nickinson, Phil (April 18, 2023). "Netflix will ship its final DVDs in September 2023". Digital Trends. Retrieved April 19, 2023. Hayes, Dade (September 29, 2023). "Netflix Sends Fond Video Farewell To Its DVD-Shipping Past". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved September 29, 2023. Donnelly, Matt (October 3, 2023). "Netflix Names Eunice Kim as Chief Product Officer, Elizabeth Stone as Chief Technology Officer (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Mia Galuppo (October 18, 2023). "Skydance Animation Leaves Apple for Netflix Pact". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 18, 2023). "Netflix Sets Skydance Animation In Multi-Year Deal, First Up Is Alan Menken Musical 'Spellbound;' Rachel Zegler, Nicole Kidman, Javier Bardem Star". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Maas, Jennifer (December 12, 2023). "Netflix Releases First Biannual Viewing Report With Massive Trove of Data, Including for Licensed Titles". Variety. Retrieved December 12, 2023. "What We Watched: A Netflix Engagement Report". Netflix. December 12, 2023. Retrieved December 12, 2023. "Netflix reveals viewing data across entire catalogue for the first time". www.ft.com. Retrieved December 15, 2023. Hayes, Dade (January 23, 2024). "Netflix Gets In The Ring, Locking Up WWE's 'Monday Night Raw' In 10-Year, $5B-Plus Deal For Longtime TV Staple". Deadline. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Sherman, Alex; Pramuk, Jacob (January 23, 2024). "Netflix to stream WWE's Raw starting next year in its biggest jump into live entertainment". CNBC. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Otterson, Joe (January 23, 2024). "Netflix, WWE Strike Deal to Move 'Monday Night Raw' to Streamer Beginning in 2025 for $500 Million per Year". Variety. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Paulson, Michael (February 27, 2024). "Netflix Becomes a Broadway Producer With Peter Morgan's 'Patriots'". The New York Times. Retrieved March 3, 2024.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: url-status (link) The ban does not include Hong Kong and Macau. The ban also includes Crimea peninsula. Ma, Wenlei (September 8, 2022). "Gulf nations and Egypt demand Netflix remove 'offensive' titles". News.com.au. Retrieved September 27, 2022. Greenberg, Julia (March 7, 2016). "For Netflix, Discontent Over Blocked VPNs Is Boiling". Wired. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Bi, Frank (January 25, 2016). "Unofficial Netflix catalog helps you find a movie not available in your area". The Verge. Lotz, Amanda D; Eklund, Oliver; Soroka, Stuart (August 3, 2022). "Netflix, library analysis, and globalization: rethinking mass media flows". Journal of Communication. 72 (4): 511–521. doi:10.1093/joc/jqac020. ISSN 0021-9916. "Netflix sets November Australian launch for advertising, claims report". News.com.au. September 5, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "Netflix to test a new 'add a home' option to charge for password sharing". TechCrunch. July 18, 2022. Retrieved July 19, 2022. Spangler, Todd (October 17, 2022). "Netflix Launches Profile-Transfer Feature — Making It Easier for Password Freeloaders to Set Up Their Own Paid Accounts". Variety. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Bursztynsky, Jessica (July 13, 2022). "Netflix partners with Microsoft on ad-supported subscription plan". CNBC. Gurman, Mark (August 17, 2022). "Netflix's Ad-Supported Plan Will Block Downloads of Shows, Films". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved August 18, 2022. "Netflix's free tier will have one huge drawback, chief executive says". The Independent. July 20, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Moore, Kasey (November 8, 2022). "5.1% of Netflix Library Unavailable on Netflix Ad Tier". What's on Netflix. Retrieved November 8, 2022. "Netflix Ad Tier Launch Moved up to November to Get Ahead of Disney+, Streamer Tells Ad Buyers". September 2022. Vranica, Suzanne (August 31, 2022). "WSJ News Exclusive | Netflix Seeking Top Dollar for Brands to Advertise on Its Service". The Wall Street Journal. Pulliam-Moore, Charles (October 13, 2022). "Netflix's ad tier will cost $6.99 a month and launch in November". The Verge. Retrieved October 17, 2022. "Netflix cuts prices for subscribers in more than 30 countries". BBC News. February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 27, 2023. Roth, Emma (April 18, 2023). "Netflix delays its password-sharing crackdown to sometime before July". The Verge. Michael Liedtke (May 23, 2023). "Netflix to charge an additional $8 month for viewers living outside US subscribers' households". Associated Press News. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Todd Spangler (May 23, 2023). "Netflix Launches Paid Sharing in U.S., Will Start Blocking Users With Unauthorized Passwords". Variety. Retrieved May 23, 2023. "Netflix vai cobrar R$ 12,90 por compartilhamento de senhas no Brasil". o Globo (in Portuguese). May 23, 2023. Retrieved May 25, 2023. Alex Sherman (July 19, 2023). "Netflix earnings showcase strength as the rest of the media industry struggles". CNBC. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Rhian Davis (December 2, 2023). "Netflix's new "household" rules are unreasonable". The University Star. Retrieved March 28, 2024. Hamish Hector (February 20, 2024). "Netflix password-sharing: how the crackdown works and what it costs". Tech Radar. Retrieved March 28, 2024. "Using Netflix on your Xbox". Netflix. June 28, 2023. "How to use Netflix on your PlayStation". Netflix. June 26, 2023. "Netflix (PlayStation 2)". The Cutting Room Floor. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "Wii is no longer supported". Netflix. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "Netflix". Nintendo of America. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "Netflix Discontinues Support for More Older Devices on October 16th, 2023". How-To Geek. October 16, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. McMillan, Graeme (October 17, 2013). "Netflix Is Coming Soon to Your TV Through Your Cable Box". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved April 28, 2019. Lapowsky, Issie (April 25, 2014). "Netflix Is Getting Its Own Cable Channel". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved April 28, 2019. Statt, Nick (December 7, 2017). "Verizon Fios quietly adds Netflix integration to three set-top box models". The Verge. Retrieved April 28, 2019. "How Cable Companies Learned to Love Netflix (or Hulu) and Chill Out". Bloomberg.com. November 27, 2017. Retrieved April 28, 2019. "Netflix computer requirements for HTML5 player and Silverlight". "How to use Netflix on your Windows computer or tablet". "Android phone or tablet doesn't play in HD". Netflix Help Center. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. "How to use Netflix on your iPhone, iPad, or iPod touch". Masters, Kim (September 14, 2016). "The Netflix Backlash: Why Hollywood Fears a Content Monopoly". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Castillo, Michelle (August 15, 2018). "Netflix pays more for TV shows up front, but keeps more upside on big hits, insiders say". CNBC. Bridge, Gavin (December 17, 2019). "Netflix Released More Originals in 2019 Than the Entire TV Industry Did in 2005". Variety. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Spangler, Todd (September 23, 2021). "Netflix's Amortized Content Spending to Rise 26% to $13.6 Billion in 2021, Analysts Project". Variety. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Moore, Kasey (August 24, 2022). "Netflix Originals Now Make Up 50% of Overall US Library". What's on Netflix. Retrieved August 24, 2022. Szalai, Georg (December 5, 2012). "Netflix's Ted Sarandos Calls Disney Content Deal a 'Game Changer'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 25, 2013. "Netflix strikes deal for Studio Ghibli films outside US, Japan". Screen Daily. January 20, 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2023. "Netflix Plans to Offer Video Games in Push Beyond Films, TV". July 14, 2021. "Netflix's gaming expansion starts with mobile". July 20, 2021. "Netflix starts testing Stranger Things games in its Android app". Engadget. August 26, 2021. Rivera, Joshua (November 2, 2021). "Netflix officially has games now". Polygon. Perez, Sarah (November 9, 2021). "Netflix launches games to iPhone and iPad users worldwide". TechCrunch. Egan, Toussaint (October 19, 2022). "Netflix might get into cloud gaming, forms another new game studio". Polygon. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Takahashi, Dean (September 28, 2021). "Netflix acquires its first game studio in deal with Oxenfree creator Night School Studio". Venture Beat. Porter, Jon (March 2, 2022). "Netflix acquires another developer to build 'world class games'". The Verge. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Takahashi, Dean (September 26, 2022). "Netflix opens mobile game studio in Helsinki". VentureBeat. Retrieved September 26, 2022. "Netflix adds 6th gaming studio with acquisition of Spry Fox". October 31, 2022. Ryan Lawler (June 4, 2016). "Netflix Rolls Out Its Own CDN: Open Connect". Tech Crunch. Retrieved September 12, 2016. "Netflix Open Connect Content Delivery Network". netflix.com. Retrieved October 25, 2014. Eric Savitz (June 5, 2012). "Netflix Shifts Traffic To Its Own CDN; Akamai, Limelight Shrs Hit". Forbes. Retrieved October 25, 2014. Peter Judge (August 20, 2015). "Netflix's data centers are dead, long live the CDN!". Data Center Dynamics. Retrieved September 15, 2016. Richard Chirgwin (June 22, 2016). "Boffins map Netflix's Open Connect CDN: Six continents, 233 locations, thousands of servers". The Register. Retrieved September 15, 2016. Böttger, Timm; Cuadrado, Felix; Tyson, Gareth; Castro, Ignacio; Uhlig, Steve (January 2018) [Submitted June 17, 2017]. "Open Connect Everywhere: A Glimpse at the Internet Ecosystem through the Lens of the Netflix CDN". ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review. 48 (1). arXiv:1606.05519. Bibcode:2016arXiv160605519B. doi:10.1145/3211852.3211857. S2CID 215824680. Ng, David (July 29, 2017). "Netflix is on the hook for $20 billion. Can it keep spending its way to success?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. "Netflix API Launches Tomorrow". ReadWriteWeb. Archived from the original on October 2, 2008. Retrieved September 30, 2008. "Netflix API Management Solution". Archived from the original on February 16, 2013. "Upcoming Changes to the Netflix API Program". Netflix. June 15, 2012. Archived from the original on June 18, 2012. Retrieved June 21, 2012. Daniel Jacobson and Sangeeta Narayanan (July 24, 2014). "Netflix API: Top 10 Lessons Learned (so far)". Retrieved September 12, 2016. Janko Roettgers (November 14, 2014). "Netflix is shutting down its public API today". GigaOm. Archived from the original on November 15, 2016. Retrieved September 12, 2016. Jacobson, Daniel (June 13, 2014). "Retiring the Netflix Public API". Netflix. Archived from the original on June 14, 2014. Retrieved August 11, 2014. Dany Roth (November 8, 2020). "The Secret Behind Netflix's Personalized Thumbnails". Ashok Chandrashekar; Fernando Amat; Justin Basilico; Tony Jebara (December 7, 2017). "Artwork Personalization at Netflix". Netflix Technology Blog. How Netflix Uses Matching To Pick The Best Thumbnail For You "Netflix Recommendation System: How it Works". RecoAI. April 5, 2022. Retrieved March 28, 2024. John Koblin (January 14, 2024). "A Few Words About Netflix's Success: Vivid. Snappy. Tags". The New York Times. Stelter, Brian (July 18, 2013). "Netflix Does Well in 2013 Primetime Emmy Nominations". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 19, 2013. "House Of Cards". Emmy Awards. Archived from the original on July 25, 2013. "Netflix Makes History With Two Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards" (Press release). PR Newswire. September 15, 2013. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Sharma, Amol & Cheney, Alexandra (September 23, 2013). "Netflix Makes Some History With Showing at Emmys". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. "'Orange Is The New Black' Scored Grammy Nomination For Theme Song 'You've Got Time' By Regina Spektor". HuffPost. December 7, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2015. Farley, Christopher John (December 12, 2013). "Golden Globes Nominations 2014: '12 Years a Slave,' 'American Hustle' Lead Field". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Zurawik, David (December 12, 2013). "'House of Cards' star Robin Wright earns series' sole Golden Globes win". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on January 13, 2014. Hyman, Vicki (January 12, 2014). "2014 Golden Globes: Robin Wright wins best actress for online-only 'House of Cards'". The Star-Ledger. Archived from the original on January 15, 2014. Littleton, Cynthia (January 12, 2014). "Golden Globes: 'Brooklyn Nine Nine' Nabs Upset TV Comedy Wins". Variety. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014. Andreeva, Nellie (April 2, 2014). "House Of Cards, Scandal, Breaking Bad, The Bridge, Key & Peele, Orphan Black, Orange Is The New Black Win Peabodys". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 14, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2024. "Netflix earns first Oscar nomination". Verge. January 16, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2022. Reed, Brad (July 10, 2014). "Netflix just scored a remarkable 31 Emmy nominations". Boy Genius Report. Archived from the original on July 13, 2014. JARVEY, NATALIE (July 14, 2016). "Emmys: Netflix Leads Streaming Nominations as Crackle Breaks Through With Jerry Seinfeld Coup". The Hollywood Reporter. Sarkar, Samit (July 13, 2017). "Westworld, Stranger Things lead 2017 Emmy nominations". Polygon. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. "Netflix Nets PETA's 2017 'Company of the Year' Award" (Press release). PETA. December 13, 2017. de Moraes, Lisa (December 13, 2017). "Netflix Named PETA's 2017 Company Of Year". Deadline Hollywood. Lang, Brent; Setoodeh, Ramin (January 24, 2017). "Sundance: Netflix Lands Russian Doping Documentary 'Icarus' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Gilbert, Sophie (July 12, 2018). "Emmys Nominations 2018: Netflix Takes Over". The Atlantic. Hibberd, James (July 12, 2018). "How Netflix beat HBO in Emmy nominations for first time ever". Entertainment Weekly. McClintock, Pamela (January 22, 2019). "Oscars: Netflix Takes On Hollywood Studios With 15 Noms". The Hollywood Reporter. Napoli, Jessica (February 4, 2021). "Netflix dominates Golden Globe awards with over 40 nominations". Fox Business. COYLE, JAKE (February 3, 2021). "'Mank' leads Golden Globe nominees with 6; Netflix dominates". Associated Press News. "Netflix Leads Oscar Nominations with 24 Nods". CNBC. January 13, 2020. Retrieved December 30, 2022. "Netflix leads the pack at the SAG Awards with 30 nominations". Engadget. February 4, 2021. Wagmeister, Elizabeth (April 4, 2021). "SAG Awards: Netflix Wins Big During Pandemic Year With 'The Crown,' 'Chicago 7' and 'Ma Rainey'". Variety. "THE 93RD ACADEMY AWARDS". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Whitten, Sarah (April 26, 2021). "Netflix snags 7 awards, nearly doubling its all-time Oscars tally". CNBC. Gruenwedel, Erik (February 8, 2022). "Netflix's 'The Power of the Dog' Leads 2022 Academy Awards Race With 12 Nominations". Media Play News. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Pulver, Andrew (March 27, 2022). "Jane Campion wins best director Oscar for The Power of the Dog". The Guardian. "International Emmys 2022: The Complete Winners List". Variety. November 22, 2022. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Kase Wickman (September 13, 2022). "Emmys 2022 Winners: See the Full List Here". Variety Fair. Sarah Whitten; Mike Calia (March 13, 2023). "Oscar 2023: 'Everything Everywhere All at Once' wins best picture, six other awards". CNBC. Jordan Moreau; Michael Schneider (July 12, 2023). "Emmys 2023: The Complete Nominations List". Variety. Cooper, Kelly-Leigh (June 29, 2018). "Queer Eye host backs Netflix subtitle change". BBC News. Retrieved July 8, 2019. "Netflix execs say they'll finally start releasing viewership data soon". The Verge. April 17, 2019. Retrieved June 2, 2019. "Netflix finds way to maintain streaming quality in India despite heavy traffic". Livemint. March 24, 2020. Retrieved May 17, 2023. Cho, Winston (May 4, 2022). "Netflix Hit With Shareholder Lawsuit After Disclosing Subscriber Loss". The Hollywood Reporter. https://help.netflix.com/legal/privacy Hastings, Reed (2020). No Rules Rules: Netflix and the Culture of Reinvention. Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-984877-86-4. McDonald, Kevin; Smith-Rowsey, Daniel (2016). The Netflix Effect: Technology and Entertainment in the 21st Century (1st ed.). Bloomsbury Academic & Professional. ISBN 978-1-5013-0944-1. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Netflix. Netflix