Carol is a 2015 historical romance film directed by Todd Haynes. The screenplay by Phyllis Nagy is based on the 1952 romance novel The Price of Salt by Patricia Highsmith (republished as Carol in 1990). The film stars Cate Blanchett, Rooney Mara, Sarah Paulson, Jake Lacy, and Kyle Chandler. Set in New York City during the early 1950s, Carol tells the story of a forbidden affair between an aspiring female photographer and an older woman going through a difficult divorce. Carol had been in development since 1997, when Nagy wrote the first draft of the screenplay. British company Film4 Productions and its then-chief executive Tessa Ross financed development. The film had a troubled development period, facing problems with financing, rights, scheduling conflicts, and accessibility. Number 9 Films came on board as a producer in 2011, when Elizabeth Karlsen secured the rights to the novel. The film is co-produced by New York–based Killer Films, which joined the project in 2013 after Haynes's collaborator Christine Vachon approached him to direct. Principal photography on the British-American production began in March 2014, in Cincinnati, Ohio, and lasted 34 days. Cinematographer Edward Lachman shot Carol on Super 16 mm film. Carol premiered at the Cannes Film Festival on May 17, 2015, and was released in the United States on November 20 and in the United Kingdom on November 27. Grossing over $42 million on an $11 million budget, the film received widespread acclaim for Haynes's direction and the performances of Blanchett and Mara and was the best-reviewed film of 2015. Carol competed for the Palme d'Or at Cannes, where Mara tied with Emmanuelle Bercot for the Best Actress award. The film received many accolades, including five Golden Globe Award nominations, six Academy Award nominations, and nine BAFTA Award nominations; as well as five Dorian Awards and awards from the New York Film Critics Circle, Los Angeles Film Critics Association, and National Society of Film Critics. It was featured in several "best of" film lists, and was ranked by the British Film Institute as the best LGBT film of all time. It was named one of the greatest films of the 21st Century by the BBC. During the Christmas season of 1952, aspiring photographer Therese Belivet is working in Frankenberg's department store in Manhattan. She meets a glamorous woman, Carol Aird, who is searching for a doll for her daughter, Rindy. At Therese's recommendation, Carol purchases a model train set instead. When Carol departs, she leaves her gloves on the counter. Therese mails them to her using Frankenberg's sales slip with Carol's name and address. Therese's boyfriend, Richard, wants her to go to France with him, hoping they will marry, but she is ambivalent about their relationship. A common friend, Dannie, invites Therese to his workplace, The New York Times, and offers to introduce her to a photo editor friend. Meanwhile, Carol is going through a difficult divorce from her husband, Harge. Carol calls Frankenberg's to thank the clerk who returned the gloves and invites Therese to lunch. Therese visits Dannie and he kisses her, but she becomes uncomfortable and leaves. Carol invites Therese to her home in New Jersey. She stops to purchase a Christmas tree, and Therese takes candid photographs of her. Harge arrives unexpectedly to take Rindy to Florida for Christmas; he becomes suspicious of Therese, as Carol had an affair years before with her friend Abby. Therese witnesses their argument. After Rindy leaves, a distressed Carol takes Therese to the train station so she can return home. Carol calls to apologize to Therese and they meet at her apartment, where Carol surprises her with a suitcase containing a gift of a Canon camera and film. Carol has learned that Harge is petitioning the judge to consider a "morality clause" against her, threatening to expose her homosexuality and give him full custody of Rindy. She decides to take a road trip to escape the stress of the divorce proceedings and invites Therese to join her. Richard accuses Therese of being infatuated with Carol and predicts Carol will soon tire of her. The two argue and their relationship comes to an end. On the second night of the trip, Therese meets a traveling salesman, Tommy Tucker. On New Year's Eve, Carol and Therese kiss for the first time and have sex. The next morning, they discover that Tucker is actually a private investigator Harge hired to obtain evidence against Carol. Carol confronts Tucker, threatening him at gunpoint, but he claims to have already sent tape recordings to Harge. Carol and Therese turn back. The next day, in Chicago, Therese learns that Carol has flown home to fight for custody of her daughter, having asked Abby to drive Therese home. Abby gives her a letter from Carol. Back at home, Therese telephones Carol, but knowing that she risks losing custody of Rindy if she continues her relationship with Therese, Carol hangs up. Therese creates a portfolio of her photographs and gets a job at The New York Times. In the meantime, Carol has been seeing a psychotherapist as a condition of the divorce settlement. During a confrontational meeting in mid-April with divorce lawyers, Carol suddenly admits to the truth of what the tapes contain and refuses to deny her sexuality. To avoid going to court and the likelihood of a public scandal, she tells Harge that he can have custody of Rindy if he allows her regular visits. Carol writes to Therese, and they meet in the lounge of the Ritz Tower Hotel. Carol reveals she is going to work for a furniture house and has taken an apartment on Madison Avenue. Therese declines Carol's invitation to live with her. Carol tells Therese that she is meeting associates in the Oak Room, and that if she changes her mind, they can have dinner. Therese remains still and Carol says, "I love you." They are interrupted by Jack, a colleague who has not seen Therese in months, and Carol departs. Therese accepts Jack's ride to a party, but finds she cannot connect with anyone. She leaves for the Oak Room. She scans the diners and sees Carol at a table. Therese hesitates, then walks toward Carol. Their eyes meet. Carol gazes at Therese with a smile that slowly grows. Cate Blanchett as Carol Aird Rooney Mara as Therese Belivet Sarah Paulson as Abby Gerhard Jake Lacy as Richard Semco John Magaro as Dannie McElroy Cory Michael Smith as Tommy Tucker Carrie Brownstein as Genevieve Cantrell Kevin Crowley as Fred Haymes Nik Pajic as Phil McElroy Kyle Chandler as Harge Aird Carol is based on Patricia Highsmith's 1952 semi-autobiographical romantic novel The Price of Salt. The book was originally published under the pseudonym "Claire Morgan" by Coward-McCann after Highsmith's publisher Harper & Brothers rejected it. In 1990, Highsmith agreed to republish with Bloomsbury Publishing under her own name, and retitled it Carol. It had been inspired by an encounter in 1948 between Highsmith and a blonde woman wearing a mink coat, Kathleen Wiggins Senn, whilst she was working as a Christmas season salesgirl at the toy department of Bloomingdale's in New York. That evening she wrote an eight-page outline, which she developed some weeks later and had completed by 1951. The character of Therese Belivet was based on Highsmith herself. Senn inspired the character of Carol Aird, but its template was inspired by Highsmith's relationships with two former lovers, Philadelphia socialite Virginia Kent Catherwood and psychoanalyst Kathryn Hamill Cohen. Catherwood lost custody of her daughter in a high-profile divorce that involved secret tape recordings of her and her female lover. London-born, New York–based producer Dorothy Berwin was initially attached to the project in 1996, owning the rights to the novel. She enlisted then-playwright Phyllis Nagy to write the screenplay on the recommendation of her London agent. Nagy, who was a friend of Highsmith, wrote the first draft of the script in 1997. Highsmith had suggested to Nagy that she adapt one of her novels. According to Nagy, Highsmith was not confident that the novel could be made into a "satisfying" film because of its "intense, subjective point of view". Nagy decided to adapt the script to ensure its fidelity to the source material, remarking, "I felt a strange responsibility to take it, and to make sure that it wasn't screwed up in some fundamental way, because she so disliked many of the screen adaptations of her work." What still strikes me now [about the novel], is how radical it was in terms of its overall conception—two central figures not giving a rat's ass about sexual identity. No one frets about being gay; others fret on their behalf...I also found Highsmith's notions of what makes a good mother to be quite radical—the choices that people have to make in order to make the lives of their children better seemed really fresh, and radical. And still do, to this day, actually. −Phyllis Nagy While searching for investors, Nagy and Berwin learned that the characters' homosexuality was not as much of an obstacle as that they were women. "Having two women leads was the issue", Nagy noted. In 2015, Berwin said that, in those days, it was a risky idea to play the role of Carol. "As a project it came together with Cate Blanchett. You needed to always start with her role". Film4 Productions and Tessa Ross financed the development of the film and kept it alive through the years, as it "underwent a decade-plus of revision under various directors and investors"—including Hettie MacDonald, Kenneth Branagh, Kimberly Peirce, John Maybury, and Stephen Frears—until the project completely stalled. The long delay was a result of struggles with funding, rights, and trepidations about a film with a gay theme and two female leads. "During its development, there was a very different kind of lesbian or gay movie that got financed", Nagy said. "They were very agenda or issue driven, and this was not. In fact it insists on not being that in order to make the point. I would talk about that with financiers, and I could see them glaze over." Nagy said it was important that the screenplay be authentic to the early 1950s. "There was a different protocol then, a different etiquette, a different way people related to each other physically", she said. "It does you no service to spoonfeed a contemporary audience their own emotional codes and value systems." While various directors and investors had input to the script during its long gestation period, Nagy rejected suggestions that Carol or Therese "should feel guilty about being gay and suffer some kind of breakdown scene about it." "What I knew going in to the adaptation", Nagy said, "was that Pat's lack of psychologizing about Carol and Therese's sexual attraction, and ultimately their love, had to be maintained. It could not be corrupted by an impulse to indulge in any number of dramatic narrative clichés about guilt concerning one's sexuality or the like." Nagy set the adaptation several years later than the novel is set, so that "the dawn of the Eisenhower administration and the rise of HUAC could be front and center". One of the challenges was translating the subjective and limited third-person viewpoint, where the narrator "sits on the shoulder of Therese and makes regular advances into (and retreats from) her head"; Carol is thus largely seen through Therese's fanatical prism. Nagy was initially apprehensive about the narrative structure, considering "there's no character of Carol. She's a ghost appropriately, as she should be, in the novel", adding that she was "overwhelmed by the task of trying to come up with the visual equivalent for it structurally." She decided to split the point of view and shift perspectives from Therese to Carol, as "the point of view is always with the more vulnerable party". She made Therese a photographer instead of a set designer, allowing her "to be seen moving from objects to people", which she likened to Highsmith as Therese is a "clear stand-in" for the author. Nagy drew from her personal knowledge of Highsmith for Therese, describing one of Therese's lines, "I started taking pictures of people because my friend says I have to be more interested in humans", as the epitome of Highsmith: "that ability to step outside of life and comment on it before participating in it". For Carol, she took inspiration from Grace Kelly's character in Rear Window (1954). Nagy had freedom in "inventing a life for [Carol], for whom, basically, we knew the outline of what was going on." Once she was able to understand the inner life of Carol, and her motivations, the character became easy to write. Nagy aimed to "focus on the nature of what it's like to fall in love from two points of view", and show the characters "just behaving ... not inhabiting positions." [Haynes and I] are of a similar mind, of similar influences ... he understood exactly that we were going for something almost entirely subtextual, and that it required bravery and a resistance to over-explication." −Phyllis Nagy Nagy realized she would "pass time in a different way" than the novel, eliminating unnecessary elements. She had "great freedom" developing the screenplay in England, while no studio or director was attached. Over the years, five "proper" drafts materialized. Nagy said that after all the previous collaborations, "working for Todd was easy and quick. We both have an interest in restraint." Haynes and Nagy collaborated on honing the screenplay. When Haynes came on board they had discussions about "what became the framing device"; the story reminded Haynes of the 1945 classic film Brief Encounter, and he proposed using a similar technique, which Nagy "then ran with in a certain way". "He was interested in the same things, tonally, that the script was interested in", she noted. "We were able to keep that restraint going". Nagy made the story more enigmatic, pruning some of the backstory in light of a significant early line that Carol says to Therese: "What a strange girl you are, flung out of space." Nagy and Haynes were determined not to make "an agenda film" or a "look how far we've come" film. At the London Film Festival, Nagy said she had titled the film Carol and not The Price of Salt because Highsmith herself had changed the title to Carol when the novel was republished, and also because she "liked the sort of strange, obsessive nature of calling it by someone's name." Haynes said the film is called Carol because the novel "is locked into the subjectivity of the younger woman" and Carol is "really the object of desire in the story." "There's an element of, something aloof ... something unsettled about [her], that puts Therese and these new feelings ... on edge throughout much of the film". Of the story's universal theme, Haynes said, "the real determining question is not whether society will accept [Therese's] feelings or not; it's, will this person return her love or not? ... That is what transcends the class of love, or the period in which it's occurring, and makes it something that just humbles us all and levels us all." British producer Elizabeth Karlsen of Number 9 Films came across Nagy's script around 2004, when she was co-producing Mrs. Harris with Christine Vachon of New York–based Killer Films. Berwin's rights to The Price of Salt expired in 2010, and Karlsen thereafter acquired the script. Berwin remained an executive producer on the film. Karlsen managed to convince Highsmith's estate to sign over the rights, closing the deal with Tessa Ross in late 2011. She then persuaded a disillusioned and reluctant Nagy to come back on board. The producers hired a UK director, who then dropped out because of scheduling conflicts. They later recruited Irish director John Crowley, who was announced in May 2012 along with the lead cast, Cate Blanchett and Mia Wasikowska, and the involved producers, Karlsen and Stephen Woolley of Number 9 Films and Tessa Ross of Film4, who received executive producer credit. Carol was scheduled to commence filming in early 2013, until Crowley withdrew due to a scheduling conflict. Karlsen called Vachon to discuss losing another director, and Vachon told her that Haynes's new film was not going to happen because its star had also backed out. They then decided to approach Haynes. Vachon, Haynes's frequent collaborator, asked if he would be interested, and he received a copy of the screenplay. Two days later he committed to direct, and Vachon joined as a producer. Haynes was announced as director on May 22, 2013. Three days later, The Weinstein Company acquired U.S. distribution rights at the Cannes Film Festival from HanWay Films. Haynes had first heard about the film in 2012 from costume designer Sandy Powell, who informed him that Blanchett was attached and Karlsen was producing. Blanchett, who served as an executive producer through her company Dirty Films, had been involved with the project for "a long time". Haynes learned that they were looking for a director when Vachon approached him in 2013. He regarded the story, its historical and social context, and collaborating again with Blanchett, as motivations to get involved. "What was so interesting to me when I first read this script", he said, "is how it basically links that hothouse mentality of the desiring subject ... to that of the criminal subject, in that both are these over-productive minds that are conjuring narratives constantly ... this crazy state of this furtive hyperactivity in the mind." Haynes collaborated with Blanchett on a dramaturgical level. Another complication emerged when Wasikowska had to drop out because of a scheduling conflict. Haynes then approached Rooney Mara, who had been offered the role of Therese after completing the 2011 film The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo. She said that although she loved the script and wanted to work with Blanchett, she turned it down because she was exhausted and unconfident. By the time Haynes came on board she was "in a much different head space" and signing on was then "a no-brainer". In August 2013, it was reported that Mara had replaced Wasikowska. Sarah Paulson was cast as Abby and Kyle Chandler as Harge in January 2014. The next month, Cory Michael Smith was cast as Tommy and Jake Lacy as Richard. In April 2014, John Magaro was cast as Dannie. Carrie Brownstein then joined the cast as Genevieve Cantrell. Carter Burwell was hired to compose the music, and Edward Lachman, who had previously collaborated with Haynes, served as director of photography. In rehearsal, Haynes, Blanchett and Mara realized that certain lines should be cut, which Haynes deemed the "stylistic practice that we all took throughout the creative departments. I feel there was an understanding with them that words and dialogue were never carrying the weight of the story." Costume designer Sandy Powell said of working with Haynes, "Todd is super visual, super prepared and he provides his own visuals at the beginning of the film. He starts with a look book of images that he's compiled over the months and months. He's almost OCD about it. In a good way." The film's look was influenced by the postwar color photography of Ruth Orkin, Esther Bubley, Helen Levitt, and Vivian Maier, as well as the abstract photography of Saul Leiter. Haynes used their work as a visual reference for depicting a "dirty and sagging" New York. In preparing for filming, the producers found that the cost of production in the New York City area would be prohibitive, and it was also going to be difficult to find locations there that resembled the early 1950s. Part of the financing plan hinged upon a co-production deal with Canada, with filming taking place in Montreal, but Haynes joining the production led to a rethink. Karlsen recalled making a film 27 years earlier in Cincinnati, Ohio, that was set in 1950s New York. After researching the city, she found that it had not changed much in decades, with Ohio also having one of the best film tax incentives in the U.S. The city of Cincinnati was very accommodating to the production, which employed many locals as crew. The production offices in Cincinnati opened in early January 2014, with filming expected between mid-March and May. In February 2014, the Greater Cincinnati & Northern Kentucky Film Commission released the solicitation from producers for extras and vintage vehicles. Principal photography began on March 12, 2014, at Eden Park in Cincinnati. Various locations around Cincinnati were used during production, including Downtown Cincinnati, Hyde Park, Over-the-Rhine, Wyoming, Cheviot, and Hamilton, as well as Alexandria, Kentucky. Except for the Waterloo, Iowa, motel room, which was a private set built for the love scene, locations were used for interior and exterior settings. The second floor of a now-defunct department store served as the setting for the toy department of the fictional Frankenberg's. Filming was completed after 34 days on May 2, 2014. Lachman shot Carol on Super 16 mm film using 35 mm format lenses. Post-production in New York took seven months to complete. Haynes was involved in the editing process alongside editor Affonso Gonçalves. Visual effects (VFX) were used to remove modern components from backgrounds, with six "key shots" needing extensive VFX. Moving shots were particularly complicated when they were filtered through windows, rain, dust, and other elements, said Haynes, and the CGI details "had to fit exactly into the vernacular itself, with the grain element and level of distress." The digital intermediate process was used to achieve a "very specific, slightly spoiled palette". Haynes spent five and a half weeks making detailed notes on Gonçalves's assembly edit, and produced his director's cut within four weeks. The producers gave notes on the director's cut and held some test screenings with friends and acquaintances. They decided to show the cut to Harvey Weinstein, who was impressed and endorsed it. Haynes confirmed the completion of deliverables on December 15, 2014. Brownstein said the first cut was extensive and most of her scenes were left out. In November 2015, Paulson said that a key scene between Abby and Therese, and some conversation in a scene with Carol, had been cut. In January 2016, Mara said that an intimate scene between Therese and Richard had also been deleted. Gonçalves said that the initial cut was two and a half hours, and the final cut ended at 118 minutes. Haynes explained in an October 2015 interview: "We cut a lot of scenes; it was too long, and they were all well-performed and nicely shot—we never, in my opinion, cut things because they were poorly executed. It was just a paring-down process, which all movies do." The first official image from Carol, released by Film4, appeared in the London Evening Standard in May 2014. Despite being completed in late 2014, producers withheld the film until 2015, to benefit from a film festival launch. In October 2014, Haynes and Vachon announced that it would premiere in the spring of 2015 and be released in the fall. Carol had its world premiere at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival. It made its North American debut at the Telluride Film Festival on September 4, and screened at the New York Film Festival on October 9, 2015. The film premiered in the United Kingdom at the BFI London Film Festival's Gala event on October 14, 2015. Originally scheduled for a December 18 release in the United States, Carol opened in limited release on November 20, 2015. It received a platform release in the country, expanding from four to 16 locations on December 11, and then to 180 theaters on December 25, reaching over 520 locations by the weekend of January 8, 2016. The film went into wide release on January 15, 2016. Carol was released nationwide in the UK on November 27, 2015. In December 2015, The Hollywood Reporter said that Russian distributor Arthouse had acquired rights to release the film in Russia in March 2016. Its CEO stated that it was "a huge challenge because of the federal 'gay propaganda' law that victimizes the Russian LGBT community", which would "prevent Carol [being] sold to major TV channels or even being advertised on federal networks". He noted that "some cinemas will refuse to book the film", but "the controversy ... will help us market Carol to the right audience", adding that he believed it would "appeal to the public way beyond the LGBT community." It was released in Russia on March 10, 2016. In March 2016, a 35 mm film screening was held at the London LGBT Film Festival. The Metrograph, an independent cinema in New York, hosted a special 35 mm screening event, followed by a Q&A with Haynes, Vachon and Lachman. The event was sold out, and a second and third screening were added. Carol was made available for digital download on March 4, 2016. The film was released on DVD, Blu-ray and video on demand on March 15, 2016, in the United States by Anchor Bay Entertainment, and on March 21, 2016, in the United Kingdom by StudioCanal. Disc format bonus features include a behind-the-scenes gallery, a Q&A interview with the cast and filmmakers, and (for the UK version) limited-edition art cards. As of March 10, 2016[update], both the DVD and Blu-ray were no. 7 in pre-order sales in the United States;[citation needed] followed by ranking no. 18 in retail sales the week of commercial release. In the United Kingdom, the DVD debut charted at no. 7 and the Blu-ray at no. 12 of "Top 100" sales for both formats. As of December 2019[update], sales of the DVD and Blu-ray in the U.S. and Canada totaled $1,223,818 million and $780,891, respectively, for a combined total of $2,004,709 million. In the United States, Carol premiered on premium cable channel Showtime on October 8, 2016, and on Showtime on Demand service and Showtime Anytime streaming app on October 9, 2016. The film became available for streaming on Netflix on September 20, 2017. As of March 31, 2016[update], Carol had grossed $12.7 million in the U.S. and Canada, and as of January 8, 2019[update], $30.1 million in other countries, for a worldwide total of $42.8 million against a budget of $11.8 million. In the United Kingdom, the film earned £540,632 ($812,000) in its opening weekend from 206 screens, ranking Number seven of the top ten films for the weekend. Carol had grossed $4.0 million in the UK as of April 3, 2016[update]. In the United States, the film began its limited run on November 20 at four theaters—the Paris and Angelika Theater in New York and the ArcLight Hollywood and Landmark Theatre in Los Angeles—and was projected to earn around $50,000 per theater. It grossed $253,510 in its opening weekend at the four locations, the best opening of Haynes's films. Its per-theater average of $63,378 was the third-largest of 2015. In its second weekend, the film grossed $203,076, with a "robust" average of $50,769 per location, the best of the week, bringing its nine-day cumulative to $588,355. In its third weekend at the four locations, Carol earned $147,241, averaging $36,810, the highest for the third week in a row. The film expanded from four to 16 theaters in its fourth week, and was projected to average an estimated $10,000 over the weekend. In its fourth weekend, it grossed $338,000, averaging $21,105 per screen, and bringing its U.S. cumulative total to $1.2 million. The film was projected to earn an estimated $218,000 from 16 theaters in its fifth weekend. It grossed $231,137, averaging $14,446 per theater. Carol then expanded to 180 theaters. In it sixth weekend, the film made $1.1 million, with a $6,075 average across 180 locations; its U.S. gross was $2.9 million, with $7.8 million worldwide from seven other countries. Carol reached $5 million in the United States in its seventh weekend. Carol received a ten-minute standing ovation at its Cannes Film Festival international press screening and premiere. Critics praised Haynes's direction, Blanchett's and Mara's performances, the cinematography, costumes and musical score, and deemed it a strong contender for a Cannes award. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a 94% rating based on reviews from 320 critics, and an average rating of 8.60/10. The website's critical consensus states: "Shaped by Todd Haynes' deft direction and powered by a strong cast led by Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara, Carol lives up to its groundbreaking source material." Carol was named the best-reviewed romance film of 2015 in Rotten Tomatoes' annual Golden Tomato Awards. On Metacritic, the film holds a score of 94 out of 100, based on 45 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim", and has been designated a Metacritic "Must-See" movie. It is the best-reviewed film of 2015. Kate Stables wrote in Sight & Sound: "Elegant restraint is the film's watchword ... In this enjoyably deliberate film, each shot and scene is carefully composed to pay homage to 50s cinema, yet infused with an emotional ambiguity which feels decidedly contemporary." Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times wrote that it is "a serious melodrama about the geometry of desire, a dreamy example of heightened reality that fully engages emotions despite the exact calculations with which it's been made... "Carol's" lush but controlled visual look is completely intoxicating. This is filmmaking done by masters, an experience to savor." A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times: "At once ardent and analytical, cerebral and swooning, Carol is a study in human magnetism, in the physics and optics of eros. With sparse dialogue and restrained drama, the film is a symphony of angles and glances, of colors and shadows." Amy Taubin from Film Comment wrote: "The narrative, precisely chiseled by Phyllis Nagy from the ungainly novel, is deceptively simple ... What's remarkable about Carol is that it seems to exist entirely in the present moment—to be precise, in that electric, elastic, heart-stopping/heart-racing present of romantic desire. It is a film composed of gestures and glances, its delicacy a veiled promise of abandon. And it could not exist without the extraordinary performances of Blanchett and Mara." David Stratton of The Australian wrote: "The meeting of these two women is an electrifying scene; their eyes make contact, and nothing of significance is said, apart from the usual interaction between shopper and shop assistant, but Haynes and his wonderful actors make it very clear that something momentous has occurred—love at first sight." Geoffrey Macnab of The Independent said: "Todd Haynes's latest feature is a subtle, moving and deceptive story of two women (brilliantly played in very contrasting styles by Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara) who refuse to live against 'their own grain' ... Phyllis Nagy's screenplay emphasises their steeliness and self-reliance. In sly and subversive fashion, Haynes is laying bare the tensions in a society that refuses to acknowledge 'difference' of any sort." Andrew O'Hehir of Salon wrote: "From its opening shots of the autumnal, rain-swept streets of New York sometime in the middle of the last century, director Todd Haynes' magnificent new film Carol establishes a mood of mournful romance, half nostalgic and half ominous, that never lets go." Peter Howell of the Toronto Star wrote: "Everything clicks into place for this gorgeous achievement. Cinematographer Ed Lachman shot on Super 16 mm film to achieve era-specific muted colours and softer textures. Precise production design and a palette steeped in shades of green and red (appropriate to the Yuletide setting) make watching it seem like stepping inside an Edward Hopper painting." Mark Kermode wrote in The Guardian: "This superb adaptation of Patricia Highsmith's 1952 novel The Price of Salt doesn't put a foot wrong. From Phyllis Nagy's alluringly uncluttered script to Cate Blanchett's sturdily tremulous performance as a society woman with everything to lose, this brilliantly captures the thrills, tears and fears of forbidden love." In Variety, Justin Chang wrote: "despite their obvious differences in class and background, Therese and Carol seem to ease themselves (and the audience) so quickly and naturally into a bond that they have no interest in defining, or even really discussing—a choice that works not only for an era when their love dared not speak its name, but also for Haynes' faith in the power of the medium to achieve an eloquence beyond words." Francine Prose in The New York Review of Books commented on "the delicacy, the patience, and the sheer amount of screen time that it lavishes on the experience of falling in love: the hesitations and doubts, the seemingly casual exchanges freighted with meaning and suppressed emotion, the simple happiness of being together." Anita Katz from the San Francisco Examiner said: "Haynes triumphs in his quest to make a sweeping romantic melodrama with social substance at the core. As a period piece, the movie immerses us in 1950s styles and attitudes. As a sensory experience, it dazzles with everything from rain-streaked windows to Therese's plaid tam-o-shanter ... Haynes powerfully addresses the consequences of ignorance and intolerance. Impressively textured, the drama is filled with secret glances and other subtle aspects of forbidden love." Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post wrote: "Carol is a performance of a performance, whereby codes and signals convey the most essential stuff of life, while the kabuki of being 'normal' plays out with the carefully cultivated—and patently false—perfection of the toy train village Carol buys from Therese at their first meeting. Working from a carefully crafted script by Phyllis Nagy, Haynes portrays two people thirstily drinking each other in, while on the outside, they sip tea and cocktails with prim decorum." Naming it "one of the year's very best films", Peter Travers of Rolling Stone said: "Camera virtuoso Edward Lachman finds visual poetry in the hothouse eroticism that envelops Carol and Therese, an amateur photographer who keeps framing Carol in her lens. Blanchett, a dream walking in Sandy Powell's frocks, delivers a master class in acting. And Mara is flawless ... [it's] a romantic spellbinder that cuts deep." Stephen Whitty in the Daily News praised Carol as a "lesbian romance where nobody says the word 'lesbian'.... because this isn't just a lesbian story. It's a human one." In a series of articles about the best of the 2010s in film, IndieWire ranked Carol the seventh-best film of the decade; Blanchett's performance the second-best acting performance; the opening scene the sixth-best film scene; and Burwell's score the second-best film score. The screenplay was named the 19th-best American screenplay of the century. The admiration of Carol resulted in a fandom community that has been referred to as the "Cult of Carol". In June 2017, the tribute comedy short film Carol Support Group premiered at the San Francisco International LGBTQ Film Festival. Directed by Allison Tate, the film tells the story of mayhem in "a support group for people addicted to the movie Carol." The tagline of the film's poster, "Some people are addicts forever", is a parody of the "Some people change your life forever" tagline of StudioCanal's original Carol film poster. Filmmakers John Waters and Edgar Wright named Carol one of their favorite films of 2015 and of all time, respectively. Carol has received over 290 industry and critic nominations, and over 100 awards and honours. The film was selected to compete for the Palme d'Or at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival, where it won the Queer Palm and Mara tied for the Best Actress award. It won the Audience Award at the Whistler Film Festival, and the Chicago International Film Festival's Gold Q Hugo Award for exhibiting "new artistic perspectives on sexuality and identity". Carol was the "overall favorite" on IndieWire's critics' poll of the best films and performances from the New York Film Festival, topping the Best Narrative Feature, Best Director, Best Lead Performance (Blanchett and Mara), Best Screenplay, and Best Cinematography categories. Lachman was awarded the grand prize for Best Cinematography by the Camerimage International Film Festival. The jury stated: [Carol] seamlessly evokes the period by paying homage to the great photography of the time. It also creates its own unique cinematic language and pulls the viewer deeper and deeper into a world where something as simple as love comes at a staggering cost. Its delicate and precise exploration of emotion through color and light led us to discuss what it meant to achieve mastery of our craft. [Lachman] is, for us, a master and [Carol] is a masterpiece. In September 2015, The Weinstein Company confirmed that it would campaign for Blanchett as Lead Actress and Mara as Supporting Actress for the 88th Academy Awards. The film received six Academy Award nominations, including Best Actress, and garnered five Golden Globe Award nominations, including Best Motion Picture – Drama. It received nine BAFTA Award nominations, including Best Film. The film was nominated for six Independent Spirit Awards and won for Best Cinematography. It also received nine Critics' Choice Movie Award nominations, including Best Film. Blanchett and Mara received Screen Actors Guild Award nominations for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role and Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role, respectively. The New York Film Critics Circle awarded Carol Best Film, Best Director, Best Cinematography, and Best Screenplay. The film won Best Music from the Los Angeles Film Critics Association and was runner-up for Best Director, Best Cinematography, and Best Production Design. The National Society of Film Critics awarded Haynes Best Director and Lachman Best Cinematography. Haynes and Lachman also received the Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Director and Best Cinematography. Lachman won the London Film Critics' Circle Technical Achievement Award. Carol won five Dorian Awards, including Film of the Year, Director of the Year, Performance of the Year – Actress (Blanchett), LGBTQ Film of the Year and Screenplay of the Year. It was awarded the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Film – Wide Release. The Frankfurt Book Fair named Carol the Best International Literary Adaptation. The American Film Institute selected Carol as one of its ten Movies of the Year. The AFI Awards jury rationale read: CAROL sets the screen aglow with the light of longing as Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara transform a period piece into a timeless cry from defiant hearts. Todd Haynes serves their romance as a restorative cocktail, adding splashes of color to a repressive Eisenhower era, when love was often seen in black-and-white. From luminous performances to sumptuous production, this is cinema's promise fulfilled—a haunting portrait in moving images, painted in the universal hues of heartache and passion. In March 2016, the British Film Institute named Carol the best LGBT film of all time, according to over one hundred film experts in a poll encompassing over 80 years of cinema. In a 2016 BBC poll of 177 critics from 36 countries, Carol was voted the 69th-best film of the 21st century. In November 2019, The New York Times named it one of the favorite films of the 2010s, with critic A. O. Scott remarking, "It keeps taking me by surprise." The omission of Carol from Best Picture and Best Director categories prompted speculation from journalists about the perceived indifference of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to female- and LGBT-centred films. Nate Scott of USA Today called it "the standout snub" of the ceremony, "one made all the more ridiculous because of the bloated Best Picture field". Nico Lang of The A.V. Club said that though the film had been considered a "lock" for a Best Picture nomination, the omission "shouldn't have been a major shock" given the controversy over Brokeback Mountain's loss a decade earlier. Jason Bailey of Flavorwire said that most Best Picture nominees that include gay themes "put them firmly in the realm of subplots". "Carol's most transgressive quality", he declared, "is its refusal to engage in such shenanigans; this is a film about full-blooded gay lives, not tragic gay deaths." At HitFix, Louis Virtel suggested that Academy members' reception of Carol was hurt by its focus on self-determined women. Matthew Jacobs of The Huffington Post expressed similar sentiments and felt that the academy's artistic tastes were "too conventional to recognize its brilliance". Richard Lawson of Vanity Fair said that though its "themes of passion and heartache may be universal", the film may be "too gay", speaking "in a vernacular that, I'd guess, only queer people are fully fluent in." He added that the lack of "gushing melodrama" put the film at a disadvantage. Dorothy Snarker of IndieWire attributed the omissions to the academy's demographics, and agreed that Carol may be too gay and too female "for the largely old white male voting base" to connect with. She also considered that the successes of the LGBT rights movement in the U.S. may have partly been responsible for the lack of "political urgency" around the film. In The Advocate, Rebekah Allen argued that "there are those who simply do not want to see a lesbian love story on screen." Trish Bendix of AfterEllen said the Best Picture snub was a "reminder of the patriarchal society we continue to live in, where films that create a space for women to live happily without men and without punishment will not be rewarded." Marcie Bianco of Quartz described the film as "centered around women's desire" and structured in a way that "elevates the power of women's gaze". The omission from Best Picture, she concluded, illustrates "yet again how sexism operates in the world, and in the Academy specifically, as the refusal to see women as protagonists and agents of desire." In Paper magazine, Carey O'Donnell wrote that gay romances are only "Oscar surefires" when they use the tragedy-desolation-demise "equation", and that "a depiction of two strong women in love with each other ... seems to still be troubling to many". David Ehrlich of Rolling Stone wrote that the film's "patience and precision" did not conform to Academy tastes, but its legacy "will doubtlessly survive this year's most egregious snub". Haynes said that he thought having two female leads was "a factor" in the omission. Despite winning Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival (shared with Emmanuelle Bercot) and receiving a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama alongside Blanchett, Mara was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. The Weinstein Company decided on the category placement to avoid the co-leads competing in the same category. In an interview with The New York Times, Mara seemed displeased by the decision. In January 2016, ABC rejected a prime-time commercial featuring a snippet of the nude scene between Carol and Therese, which caused The Weinstein Company to reedit the television trailer. In August 2016, Delta Air Lines was criticized on social media for airing an in-flight entertainment version of Carol in which the love scenes had been deleted. Nagy replied on Twitter that, in contrast to Delta, American and United Airlines had provided the full theatrical release. Comedian Cameron Esposito discovered during her flight that even the kissing scenes were cut from Delta's version. The soundtrack was released in both digital download and CD album format by Varèse Sarabande on November 20, 2015, followed by a double album vinyl release on June 24, 2016. It includes the original score by Carter Burwell and additional music by The Clovers, Billie Holiday, Georgia Gibbs, Les Paul and Mary Ford, and Jo Stafford. Songs not featured on the CD include "Willow Weep for Me" performed by Vince Giordano & the Nighthawks Orchestra, "Perdido" by Woody Herman, and "That's the Chance You Take" by Eddie Fisher. "A Garden in the Rain" by The Four Aces, "Slow Poke" by Pee Wee King, and "Why Don't You Believe Me" by Patti Page are also not included, but appear in the vinyl version. Desert Hearts (a film with similar themes set in 1959) List of Christmas films List of LGBT-related films of 2015 List of LGBT-related films by storyline New Queer Cinema List of films considered the best Highsmith described the character of Therese as having come "from my own bones". Haynes said: "The first film that I thought of when I read [the script] was Brief Encounter. And it made a real direct impact on some changes in the structure of the story. So we repeat that same structure in Brief Encounter that begins and ends with the same scene. The difference is that in Brief Encounter you realize that this is Celia Johnson's story. She goes home and begins to recount this experience to her husband. And you come full circle and then you realize what that conversation that was interrupted in the beginning of the film meant. And in this case we do the same thing, but you also shift point of views by the end of Carol, so by the time we come back, it's no longer Therese that's in the vulnerable position, but Carol." Karlsen said that she had wanted to do the film, "but the rights were held up with another producer [Dorothy Berwin]. It wasn't possible. So I just waited and waited. It took a good 10 years before the rights were free." Karlsen said that after Crowley's departure, Blanchett's involvement as an actress would depend on the director. "In a weird way what we had was a script, no director, the possibility of Cate and also a fair number of pre-sales that HanWay had made." In a 2018 interview with Cate Blanchett in which she was asked about her experience with Harvey Weinstein and described him as an "unwanted producer", Elizabeth Karlsen explained (in the comments section) his producer credit on the film: "The Weinstein Company were the US distributors of CAROL. The film was pre-sold to them at Cannes five years ago, nearly two years before we finally went into production. One of the non negotiable terms of the distribution agreement, which was a standard term for TWC and Miramax distribution agreements, was an Executive Producer credit for Harvey Weinstein. Indeed, EP credits for financiers, sales agents and distributors in key territories is industry standard. He was NOT a producer on the film. Neither he nor TWC were involved in the development of the film nor had any script, editorial, casting or other type of creative involvement in the film whatsoever. They acted solely as distributors. Had we had an offer equal to or greater than the TWC offer for US distribution rights we would have taken it, but we didn't. This is a frequent and frustrating misrepresentation of Harvey Weinstein and his role—he was a distributor, who stole the producing credit (as well as the financial rewards) from the actual producers who sourced, developed, filmed and fully created the work as we did with CAROL. He simply released and distributed it into cinemas. At one time he headed a great distribution company. As we found out on CAROL that time had passed." In 2015, producer Elizabeth Karlsen said: "It's not easy getting an independent film out there anymore, especially when it's female-led, it's lesbian, it's period." "Carol (2015)". American Film Institute. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2017. "Carol (2015)". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2017. Abramovitch, Seth (September 25, 2015). "Killer Films' Co-Founders Christine Vachon and Pamela Koffler on Lesbian Romance 'Carol' and Indie Resilience". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 28, 2015. Retrieved September 27, 2015. "Carol". The Numbers. Nash Information Services. 2015. Archived from the original on December 22, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Fauer, Jon (January 29, 2016). "Ed Lachman ASC on Super 16mm "Carol"". Film and Digital Times. Retrieved March 18, 2022. Mulcahey, Matt (January 14, 2016). ""The Grain of Super 16 Gives the Film Another Layer": Edward Lachman on Carol". Filmmaker. Retrieved March 18, 2022. "The 30 Best LGBT Films of All Time". British Film Institute. March 15, 2016. Archived from the original on March 15, 2016. Retrieved March 16, 2016. "The 21st Century's 100 greatest films". BBC Culture. August 23, 2016. Archived from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved October 10, 2016. Rich, Frank (November 18, 2015). "Loving Carol". New York. Archived from the original on February 1, 2016. Retrieved February 1, 2016. Jordan, Louis (November 19, 2015). "Carol's Happy Ending". Slate. Archived from the original on October 18, 2018. Retrieved February 21, 2016. Talbot, Margaret (November 30, 2015). "Forbidden Love". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on January 31, 2016. Retrieved February 1, 2016. Highsmith, Patricia (November 11, 2015). "Happily ever after, at last: Patricia Highsmith on the inspiration for Carol". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on February 24, 2016. Retrieved February 21, 2016. Schenkar, Joan (2009). "Les Girls: Part 1". The Talented Miss Highsmith: The Secret Life and Serious Art of Patricia Highsmith (1st ed.). St. Martin's Press. pp. 267–273. ISBN 9780312303754. Wilson, Andrew (November 28, 2015). "'Instantly, I love her': the affairs that inspired Carol". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on April 19, 2017. Retrieved March 6, 2017. Schenkar, Joan (2009). The Talented Miss Highsmith: The Secret Life and Serious Art of Patricia Highsmith (1st ed.). St. Martin's Press. pp. 282–286, 287–289. ISBN 9780312303754. Dawson, Jill (May 13, 2015). "Carol: the women behind Patricia Highsmith's lesbian novel". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 7, 2019. Retrieved February 21, 2016. Gayne, Zach (November 20, 2015). "Interview: Screenwriter Phyllis Nagy On Adapting Carol". Twitch Film. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved December 14, 2015. Nagy, Phyllis (May 22, 2015). "DP/30 in Cannes: Carol, Phyllis Nagy". DP/30: The Oral History Of Hollywood (Interview). Interviewed by David Poland. YouTube. Archived from the original on December 1, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2015. Lopez, John (January 7, 2016). "Rooney Mara Reminds Carol Screenwriter Phyllis Nagy of Her Friend, Patricia Highsmith". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 21, 2016. Park, Jennie E. (December 2, 2015). "Carol: "Less is More" when adapting Highsmith". Creative Screenwriting. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved December 2, 2015. Thompson, Anne (June 1, 2015). "Cannes: Todd Haynes and Writer Phyllis Nagy Talk 'Carol,' Glamorous Stars, Highsmith and More". IndieWire. Archived from the original on October 25, 2015. Retrieved June 1, 2015. Emily (November 13, 2015). "Phyllis Nagy: On Screen Writing and Carol". TheLaughingLesbian.com. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved December 14, 2015. Siegel, Tatiana (September 12, 2015). "TIFF: How 'About Ray', 'Carol' Producer Dorothy Berwin Quietly Developed Timely LGBT Films (Q&A)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 2, 2016. Retrieved February 21, 2016. Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (May 14, 2015). "Passion project: meet the indie super-producer behind Cannes hot ticket Carol". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 28, 2018. Retrieved May 15, 2015. Jury, Louise (May 16, 2014). "Patricia Highsmith's lesbian tale brought to the screen after 11-year battle". London Evening Standard. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved March 18, 2015. Jacobs, Matthew (November 20, 2015). "My Week With 'Carol,' The Year's Most Enchanting Movie". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on February 28, 2016. Retrieved February 21, 2016. Ali, Lorraine (November 20, 2015). "Cate Blanchett, Rooney Mara faced 'secrets ... forbidden topics ... taboos' in the world of 'Carol'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 20, 2016. Retrieved February 21, 2016. Cocozza, Paula (November 12, 2015). "How Patricia Highsmith's Carol became a film: 'Lesbianism is not an issue. It's a state of normal'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved December 14, 2015. Jaffe, Sara (February 21, 2016). "Phyllis Nagy: On Writing the Script for 'Carol' and Creating a Different Kind of Love Story". Lambda Literary. Archived from the original on April 14, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2016. "Talking Point: Carol". We Are UK Film. May 17, 2015. Archived from the original on February 25, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2015. Thompson, Anne (May 26, 2015). "'Carol' Producer Christine Vachon Talks Being Queen of the Croisette". IndieWire. Archived from the original on October 30, 2015. Retrieved May 27, 2015. Bale, Miriam (November 23, 2015). "Todd Haynes Explains the Cinematic Influences That Impacted His 'Carol'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2016. Mitchell, Wendy (December 11, 2015). "'Carol': producer Elizabeth Karlsen on her 14-year passion project". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on March 26, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2016. "Carol Press Conference in Full – Cate Blanchett & Rooney Mara". HeyUGuys. October 14, 2015. London Film Festival. Archived from the original on December 7, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2015 – via YouTube. Haynes, Todd (September 24, 2015). "Todd Haynes". Arts & Ideas (Interview). Interviewed by Noah Cowan. Jewish Community Center of San Francisco. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 19, 2015 – via YouTube. Utichi, Joe (December 12, 2015). "Todd Haynes on 'Carol,' Cate and Their Refusal to Pander – AwardsLine". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 13, 2015. Retrieved December 14, 2015. Rosser, Michael (August 17, 2015). "Todd Haynes' 'Carol' set for BFI London Film Festival". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on December 9, 2017. Retrieved December 9, 2017. Dang, Simon (May 18, 2012). "Cate Blanchett & Mia Wasikowska To Star In John Crowley's Patricia Highsmith Adaptation 'Carol'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 17, 2015. Chang, Justin (May 16, 2015). "Cannes Film Review: 'Carol'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 29, 2015. Retrieved May 29, 2015. Wiseman, Andreas (May 22, 2013). "Todd Haynes to direct Carol". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 16, 2015. Fleming, Mike Jr. (May 25, 2013). "Harvey Weinstein Closes Prolific Cannes With Deals For 'Carol' And 'The Young And Prodigious Spivet'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved February 22, 2016. Fleming, Mike Jr. (May 28, 2013). "CANNES TOLDJA! The Weinstein Company Acquires U.S. Rights To Todd Haynes-Helmed 'Carol'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 21, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2017. Eller, Claudia (May 2, 2018). "Cate Blanchett: Why 'We're Not Going Back to Ground Zero' on Women's Rights". Variety. Archived from the original on May 25, 2019. Retrieved May 3, 2018. Gilchrist, Tracy E. (May 24, 2018). "Carol Producer Elizabeth Karlsen Confirms Weinstein 'Stole' Credit". The Advocate. Archived from the original on May 27, 2018. Retrieved May 28, 2018. Ryan, Patrick (October 10, 2015). "5 things we learned about 'Carol' at NYFF". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 14, 2015. Retrieved October 13, 2015. Moraski, Lauren (February 27, 2016). "Cate Blanchett On The Incredible Media Scrutiny Women Face In Hollywood". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on February 28, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2016. "The Look of Love". Screen International at Cannes Film Festival. London, England: Media Business Insight. May 16, 2015. p. 30. Archived from the original on November 24, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2015. (Published May 14, 2015 on issuu.) Ford, Rebecca (May 16, 2015). "Cannes: Todd Haynes on Why 'Carol' Is About "Love Itself as Something Criminal" (Q&A)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Dargis, Manohla (May 24, 2015). "Todd Haynes's Film 'Carol' Draws Attention at Cannes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 25, 2015. Retrieved May 25, 2015. "CAROL -conference- (en) Cannes 2015". Festival de Cannes (Officiel) via YouTube. May 17, 2015. Archived from the original on January 3, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2015. D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 21, 2015). "'Carol's Quest: Lesbian Drama's 15-Year Journey To Cannes". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 22, 2015. Retrieved May 22, 2015. Shattuck, Kathryn (October 30, 2015). "Rooney Mara Wears Her Provocative Part Well in 'Carol'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 1, 2015. Retrieved October 31, 2015. Wiseman, Andreas (August 29, 2013). "Rooney Mara replaces Mia Wasikowska on Carol". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on October 2, 2015. Retrieved April 16, 2015. Kroll, Justin (January 22, 2014). "Sarah Paulson Joins Todd Haynes Pic 'Carol'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 23, 2015. Retrieved April 17, 2014. Patten, Dominic (January 31, 2014). "Kyle Chandler Joins Todd Haynes' 'Carol'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 18, 2015. Retrieved April 17, 2015. Deadline Team (February 4, 2014). "Chad Lindberg Catches 'Midnight Rider'; Cory Michael Smith Joins 'Carol'; Penelope Mitchell Added To 'The Fear Of Darkness'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 7, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014. Ford, Rebecca (February 11, 2014). "'The Office' Actor Joins Cate Blanchett, Rooney Mara in 'Carol' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 19, 2015. Retrieved April 17, 2015. Sneider, Jeff (April 8, 2014). "'Not Fade Away' Star John Magaro Joins Rooney Mara in 'Carol'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 10, 2014. Retrieved April 9, 2014. Ford, Rebecca (April 9, 2014). "'Portlandia's' Carrie Brownstein Joins Cate Blanchett in 'Carol'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 11, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014. Rodriguez, Cain (January 21, 2014). "Carter Burwell Scoring Todd Haynes' 'Carol' & Danny Elfman Bound To 'Fifty Shades Of Grey'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on January 31, 2014. Retrieved August 30, 2015. Davis, Clayton (March 12, 2014). "Production Starts Today on Todd Haynes' 'Carol' Starring Cate Blanchett". AwardsCircuit.com. Archived from the original on May 31, 2014. Retrieved May 30, 2014. "Carol and Cinderella costume designer Sandy Powell – In Conversation". Film Doctor. February 1, 2016. Archived from the original on February 5, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2016. Goodfellow, Melanie (December 2, 2014). "Elizabeth Karlsen: relationships crucial to financing Todd Haynes' Carol". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. Leszkiewicz, Anna (November 27, 2015). "Behind Carol: the photographers who influenced Todd Haynes' award-winning film". New Statesman. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved July 26, 2017. Saporito, Jeff (November 22, 2015). "How did the "Carol" filmmakers select shooting locations and handle set design for the film?". ScreenPrism. Archived from the original on July 26, 2017. Retrieved July 26, 2017. Kiesewetter, John (December 15, 2013). "Cate Blanchett, Rooney Mara to shoot 'Carol' movie here". The Cincinnati Enquirer. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved March 13, 2014. "'CAROL' Extras Information". Greater Cincinnati & Northern Kentucky Film Commission. February 5, 2014. Archived from "CAROL"_Extras_Information the original on February 9, 2016. Retrieved March 21, 2016. "'CAROL' Backround [sic] Vehicle Information". Greater Cincinnati & Northern Kentucky Film Commission. February 5, 2014. Archived from "CAROL"_Backround_Vehicle_Information the original on March 21, 2016. Retrieved March 21, 2016. Kiesewetter, John (February 6, 2014). "Extras, 1950s cars needed for 'Carol' movie". The Cincinnati Enquirer. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved March 21, 2016. Kiesewetter, John (March 12, 2014). "'Carol' filming starts at Eden Park overlook". The Cincinnati Enquirer. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved March 13, 2014. "Todd Haynes' 'Carol' Starring Cate Blanchett And Rooney Mara Starts Production". Goldcrest Films. March 10, 2014. Archived from the original on June 3, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. Kiesewetter, John (April 28, 2014). "'Carol' filming ends early Friday morning". The Cincinnati Enquirer. Archived from the original on June 20, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2015. Tan, Lot (March 31, 2014). "Academy Award winner Cate Blanchett filming in Lebanon today". Journal-News. Archived from the original on April 3, 2014. Retrieved April 1, 2014. Robinette, Eric (April 14, 2014). "Hamilton goes into time warp for movie shoot". Journal-News. Archived from the original on April 16, 2014. Retrieved April 17, 2015. Wiechert, Brian (March 13, 2014). "Hollywood arrives at Eden Park, Carol filming in the Cincinnati area". WXIX-TV. Archived from the original on March 13, 2014. Retrieved March 13, 2014. McGovern, Joe (August 17, 2015). "Prepare to swoon for Todd Haynes' 1950s romance 'Carol'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 3, 2017. Retrieved September 3, 2017. Kiesewetter, John (December 30, 2015). "7 Secrets To 'Carol' Movie Magic". WVXU (Cincinnati Public Radio). Archived from the original on October 31, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Williams, Justin (December 2015). "Spotlight: Carol Film Locations in Cincinnati". Cincinnati Magazine. Archived from the original on June 14, 2017. Retrieved September 3, 2017. Allen, Jeremy (November 18, 2015). "Everyone Will Be Talking About the Cars and Clothes of Carol". Bloomberg Pursuits. Archived from the original on September 3, 2017. Retrieved September 3, 2017. Bugbee, Teo (November 23, 2015). "Cate Blanchett's 'Carol': A Perfect Film That Will Restore Your Faith in Cinema". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on November 24, 2015. Retrieved November 24, 2015. Reumont, François (May 21, 2015). "Cinematographer Ed Lachman, ASC, speaks about his work on Todd Haynes's "Carol"". Afcinema.com. French Society of Cinematographers. Archived from the original on June 7, 2015. Retrieved October 11, 2016. Stasukevich, Iain (December 2015). "Carol". American Cinematographer. American Society of Cinematographers. Archived from the original on October 11, 2016. Retrieved October 11, 2016. Bernstein, Paula (December 7, 2015). "Why Ed Lachman Chose to Shoot Carol in Super 16mm". Filmmaker. Retrieved March 17, 2022. Blair, Iain (November 19, 2015). "The A-List: 'Carol' director Todd Haynes". postPerspective. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved March 7, 2016. Giroux, Jack (December 15, 2014). "Todd Haynes Discusses 'Safe,' Letting Go of the Past, Working With Julianne Moore, and 'Carol'". The Film Stage. Archived from the original on March 15, 2015. Retrieved March 19, 2015. Stiernberg, Bonnie (January 6, 2015). "Carrie Brownstein: Fill in the Blank". Paste Magazine. Archived from the original on January 17, 2015. Retrieved January 21, 2015. Saraiya, Sonia (January 20, 2016). ""I like that spot where fear and laughter converge": Carrie Brownstein on how "Portlandia" takes on aging, "Transparent" and channeling Sleater-Kinney on set". Salon. Archived from the original on March 25, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2016. Nemiroff, Perri (November 19, 2015). "Sarah Paulson on Having a Key Scene for Her Character Cut from 'Carol'". Collider. Archived from the original on December 28, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2015. ColliderVideos (November 19, 2015). "Sarah Paulson on Having a Key Scene for Her Character Cut from 'Carol'". Collider. Archived from the original on February 28, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2016 – via YouTube. Whitney, Erin (November 20, 2015). "Sarah Paulson on 'Carol,' Her Cut Scene With Rooney Mara, and 'American Horror Story'". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2016. Abramovitch, Seth (January 5, 2016). "Making of 'Carol': Why It Took 60 Years to Film the Lesbian Love Story". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 17, 2016. Retrieved May 2, 2016. Peters, Oliver (December 31, 2015). "Melancholy, Baby: Perfecting the Pace, Tone and Palette of 'Carol'". Creative Planet Network (NewBay Media). Archived from the original on May 22, 2016. Retrieved May 22, 2016. Baker, Brandon (October 27, 2015). "Q&A: A chat with Oscar-buzzing 'Carol' director Todd Haynes". Philly Voice. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved May 2, 2016. Jagernauth, Kevin (January 5, 2015). "Todd Haynes' 'Carol' Likely Headed For Fall Release, Plus New Image From The Film". The Playlist (column). IndieWire. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved January 28, 2015. "The 2015 Official Selection". Festival de Cannes. April 15, 2015. Archived from the original on April 18, 2015. Retrieved April 17, 2015. "Screenings Guide". Festival de Cannes. May 6, 2015. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved May 8, 2015. "Festival Cannes 2015: Horaire des Projections – Screening Guide" (PDF). Festival de Cannes. May 6, 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 8, 2015. "42nd Telluride Film Festival Program Guide" (PDF). Telluride Film Festival. 2015. p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 5, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2016. Perez, Rodrigo (September 3, 2015). "Telluride 2015: 10 Must-See Films To Watch Out Of A Killer Line-Up". IndieWire. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2015. Hunter, Alex (August 12, 2015). "The New York Film Festival Sets 26 Films for the 2015 Main Slate". Film Society of Lincoln Center. Archived from the original on November 20, 2015. Retrieved August 16, 2015. "59th BFI London Film Festival American Express Gala announced as the U.K. premiere of Carol" (PDF). British Film Institute. August 17, 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved August 20, 2015. McGovern, Joe (July 30, 2015). "Todd Haynes' Carol changes its release date". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 2, 2015. Retrieved August 16, 2015. Brian Brooks (November 22, 2015). "'Carol' Very Seductive In Debut, 'Legend' Solid But Iffy; 'Brooklyn' & 'Spotlight' Remain Solid: Specialty B.O." Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 23, 2015. Retrieved November 23, 2015. Lang, Brent (November 29, 2015). "'Carol' Avoids Glut of Adult Dramas With Slow and Steady Release Plan". Variety. Archived from the original on November 30, 2015. Retrieved November 30, 2015. Garris, Daniel (November 29, 2015). "NORTH AMERICA: Platform Watch: 'Carol' Holds Well In NY/LA With $204K; 'The Danish Girl' Solid With $185K Start In NY/LA; 'Trumbo' Claims $1.53M In Moderate Release". BoxOffice. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2016. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 10, 2015). "Globe Noms Buoy Big Pics & Give Indies Muscle As 'Force Awakens' Looms". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 14, 2015. Retrieved December 15, 2015. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 21, 2015). "'Force Awakens' Will Own Christmas Weekend As Five Wide Releases Join The Fray – Box Office Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 8, 2017. Retrieved December 29, 2015. Garris, Daniel (January 10, 2016). "NORTH AMERICA: Platform Watch: 'Anomalisa' Takes $221K In Expansion; '45 Years' Claims $91K In NY/LA; 'Carol' Registers $1.47M In Limited". BoxOffice. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. Retrieved March 27, 2016. "Carol". Box Office Mojo. 2015. Archived from the original on May 16, 2016. Retrieved May 5, 2016. Anderson, Tre'vell (January 4, 2016). "Specialty films look to awards season buzz to boost box office". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 12, 2017. "StudioCanal and Somerset House Celebrate the Release of 'Carol' with Saul Leiter Photography Display: "Through a Lens: Saul Leiter and Carol"" (PDF). Somerset House. November 23, 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 10, 2016. Retrieved March 27, 2016. Kozlov, Vladimir (December 17, 2015). "Russian Distributor Picks Up 'Carol' Despite Law Against "Gay Propaganda"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 21, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2015. Rosser, Michael (March 8, 2016). "Russia's Arthouse goes to 'War On Everyone'". ScreenDaily. Archived from the original on March 11, 2016. Retrieved March 18, 2016. "Carol (2015) – International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 24, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2016. "Carol". BFI Flare: London LGBT Film Festival. British Film Institute. March 2016. Archived from the original on March 30, 2016. Retrieved March 30, 2016. "Carol in 35mm". Metrograph. March 2016. Archived from the original on March 18, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2016. Allen, Julien (March 25, 2016). "Every Little Detail: The Meticulous Romance of CAROL". Metrograph. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2016. "Carol In 35MM". Metrograph. March 26, 2016. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Retrieved March 27, 2016. King, Danny (March 26, 2016). "Carol in 35mm". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved March 28, 2016. Davis, Clayton (February 2, 2016). "'Carol' Available on Blu-ray, DVD and On Demand March 15, 2016 Available on Digital HD March 4, 2016". AwardsCircuit.com. Archived from the original on February 12, 2016. Retrieved February 12, 2016. "Carol coming to DVD and Blu-ray in March". TheDigitalFix.com. February 4, 2016. Archived from the original on February 12, 2016. Retrieved February 12, 2016. "Top 20 Sellers for the Week Ended 03/20/16". Home Media Magazine. March 23, 2016. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2016. "Official DVD Chart Top 100". The Official UK Charts Company. March 27, 2016. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2016. "Official Blu-Ray Chart Top 100". The Official UK Charts Company. March 27, 2016. Archived from the original on April 10, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2016. "Carol – Video Sales". The Numbers. Nash Information Services. 2015. Archived from the original on December 22, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2020. "Carol". Showtime. September 2016. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved September 27, 2016. Keating, Lauren (September 23, 2016). "Showtime October 2016: The Complete List Of Movies And TV Shows To Stream". Tech Times. Archived from the original on September 26, 2016. Retrieved September 27, 2016. Heller, Chris (October 5, 2016). "What's New on Showtime: October 2016". New York. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Retrieved October 10, 2016. Dry, Jude (August 23, 2017). "'Carol' Comes to Netflix: See the Full List of Films to Binge in September 2017". IndieWire. Archived from the original on September 23, 2017. Retrieved September 23, 2017. "Carol". NewOnNetflixUSA. September 2017. Archived from the original on September 23, 2017. Retrieved September 23, 2017. "Carol". Box Office Mojo. March 31, 2016. p. Weekly. Archived from the original on February 21, 2017. Retrieved February 21, 2017. "Carol (2015) – International". The Numbers. Nash Information Services. 2015. Archived from the original on December 22, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Sandwell, Ian (November 30, 2015). "'The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 2' retains UK box office lead with $6.8m". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2016. Gant, Charles (December 1, 2015). "Bridge of Spies beats Black Mass and Carol in prestige week at UK box office". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 24, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. "Carol". Box Office Mojo. May 1, 2016. p. Foreign. Archived from the original on February 21, 2017. Retrieved February 21, 2017. Tartaglione, Nancy; D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 16, 2015). "Katniss To Set The World On Fire As 'Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 2' Shoots For $285M-$305M Global Debut – B.O. Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved November 17, 2015. "Carol – Weekend Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 1, 2015. Retrieved November 30, 2015. Brooks, Brian (November 29, 2015). "'The Danish Girl' Bows With Style; 'Janis: Little Girl Blue' Solid In Debut; 'Carol' Dominates Thanksgiving: Specialty B.O." Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 30, 2015. Retrieved November 30, 2015. Brooks, Brian (December 6, 2015). "Holdovers 'Carol', 'The Danish Girl' Outshine Newcomers 'Youth', 'Macbeth' – Specialty B.O." Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 12, 2015. Retrieved December 15, 2015. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 14, 2015). "In The Wake Of 'Heart Of The Sea's Storm – Monday Box Office Post Mortem". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 14, 2015. Retrieved December 15, 2015. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Busch, Anita (December 21, 2015). "Sunday Is Strong For 'Force Awakens' With All-Time $60.55M; Final Opening-Weekend Record At $247.97M -Monday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 22, 2019. Retrieved December 29, 2015. "Weekend Box Office Results for December 18–20, 2015". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 29, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2015. "Theater Counts for Week 52 of 2015". Box Office Mojo. December 25, 2015. Archived from the original on January 28, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2015. "Weekend Box Office Results for December 25–27, 2015". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 29, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2015. Tartaglione, Nancy (December 28, 2015). "'Star Wars', China Triple Play, 'Peanuts' Top Foreign Box Office – Monday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 29, 2015. Retrieved December 29, 2015. "Weekend Box Office (January 1–3, 2016)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 15, 2018. Retrieved June 15, 2018. Cannes reception: "Cannes 2015: ovazione per Carol di Todd Haynes" [Cannes 2015: ovation for Carol by Todd Haynes]. Cinefilos.it (in Italian). May 16, 2015. Archived from the original on May 20, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2015. "Cate Blanchett's Lesbian Drama 'Carol' Sparks Early Oscar Buzz". Variety. May 16, 2015. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2015. Coyle, Jake (May 17, 2015). "Cannes swoons for 'Carol,' Todd Haynes' '50s lesbian romance". Salon. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Dargis, Manohla (May 24, 2015). "Todd Haynes's Film 'Carol' Draws Attention at Cannes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 7, 2015. Retrieved June 7, 2015. Ealy, Charles (May 16, 2015). "Cannes Day 4: Blanchett, Mara stun Cannes with performances in 'Carol'". austin360. Austin American-Statesman. Archived from the original on October 13, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2015. Hammond, Pete (May 18, 2015). "Cannes At Halfway Point: Cate Blanchett & Rooney Mara Make 'Carol' Talk Of The Croisette". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021. Hoffman, Jordan (May 17, 2015). "'Carol' starring on-screen lesbian lovers Cate Blanchett, Rooney Mara praised at Cannes". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved February 14, 2021. Perez, Rodrigo (May 16, 2015). "Todd Haynes Is Working On A Limited TV Series About The '70s 'Source Family' Cult, Plus First 'Carol' Reactions From Cannes". IndieWire. Archived from the original on November 12, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2015. Pond, Steve (May 18, 2015). "Cannes So Far: Stars Bomb But Movies Deliver at 2015 Festival". TheWrap. Archived from the original on May 29, 2015. Retrieved May 29, 2015. "Carol". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. 2015. Archived from the original on April 1, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2023. "Best-Reviewed Romance Movies 2015". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2016. "Carol". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. 2015. Archived from the original on September 22, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022. "Movie Releases By Score". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. 2015. Archived from the original on April 24, 2020. Retrieved April 24, 2020. Dietz, Jason (January 5, 2016). "The Best Movies of 2015". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on January 9, 2016. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Stables, Kate (December 14, 2015). "Film of the week: Carol". Sight & Sound. Archived from the original on July 14, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Turan, Kenneth (November 19, 2015). "The beautiful and thrilling 'Carol' belongs among the best movie love stories". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Scott, A. O. (November 19, 2015). "Review: 'Carol' Explores the Sweet Science of Magnetism". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Taubin, Amy (November 19, 2015). "Review: Carol". Film Comment. Archived from the original on April 6, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Stratton, David (January 9, 2016). "Todd Haynes' Carol is a convincing tale of love, tender and painful". The Australian. Archived from the original on December 7, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Macnab, Geoffrey (November 26, 2015). "Carol, film review: Cate Blanchett stars in a moving tale of forbidden love". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 2, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. O'Hehir, Andrew (November 25, 2015). ""Carol" isn't just a "lesbian movie": Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara's '50s love story is a classic American screen romance". Salon. Archived from the original on June 12, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Howell, Peter (December 10, 2015). "'Carol' is a stunning drama about forbidden romance in 1950s America: review". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Kermode, Mark (November 29, 2015). "Carol review – Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara are dynamite". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 10, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Prose, Francine (December 11, 2015). "Love Is the Plot". The New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Katz, Anita (December 11, 2015). "Scenic 'Carol' stuns with social value and sensitivity". The San Francisco Examiner. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Hornaday, Ann (December 24, 2015). "Movie review: Todd Haynes's 'Carol' casts a beguiling spell". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Travers, Peter (November 18, 2015). "Carol". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Whitty, Stephen (November 18, 2015). "Movie review: Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara play lovers in nearly perfect 'Carol'". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on December 10, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2017. Ehrlich, David; Kohn, Eric; Erbland, Kate; Thompson, Anne; Sharf, Zack; O'Falt, Chris; Dry, Jude; Obenson, Tambay; Blauvelt, Christian; Lu, Leah; Zilko, Christian (July 22, 2019). "The 100 Best Movies of the Decade". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 27, 2019. Retrieved July 26, 2019. Ehrlich, David; Erbland, Kate; Kohn, Eric; Thompson, Anne; O'Falt, Chris; Obenson, Tambay; Blauvelt, Christian; Zilko, Christian (July 23, 2019). "The 50 Best Movie Performances of the Decade". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 27, 2019. Retrieved July 26, 2019. Ehrlich, David; Kohn, Eric; Erbland, Kate; Thompson, Anne; Dry, Jude; O'Falt, Chris; Sharf, Zack; Obenson, Tambay; Blauvelt, Christian; Nordine, Michael; Marotta, Jenna (July 24, 2019). "The 25 Best Movie Scenes of the Decade". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 25, 2019. Retrieved July 26, 2019. Ehrlich, David; Erbland, Kate; O'Falt, Chris; Nordine, Michael (July 26, 2019). "The 20 Best Movie Scores of the Decade". IndieWire. Archived from the original on January 12, 2021. Retrieved July 27, 2019. Dry, Jude; O'Falt, Chris; Erbland, Kate; Kohn, Eric; Sharf, Zack; Marotta, Jenna; Thompson, Anne; Earl, William; Nordine, Michael; Ehrlich, David (April 20, 2018). "The 25 Best American Screenplays of the 21st Century, From 'Eternal Sunshine' to 'Lady Bird'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021. Watercutter, Angela (May 16, 2017). "Inside the Cult of Carol, the Internet's Most Unlikely Fandom". Wired. Archived from the original on June 2, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017. bobby finger [@bobbyfinger] (December 21, 2015). "I'm going Caroling tonight. Gonna put on a big fur coat and go door to door seductively blowing smoke in the faces of my neighbors" (Tweet). Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2017 – via Twitter. Frameline41 (2017). "CAROL Support Group". San Francisco International LGBTQ Film Festival. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved July 27, 2017.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Press Release (June 16, 2017). "Here TV's Carol Support Group Makes World Premiere at Frameline Film Festival 2017". PRWeb. Archived from the original on June 19, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017. Chase, Andrea (June 20, 2017). "CAROL SUPPORT GROUP — Allison Tate and the Inevitability Factor". Killer Movie Reviews. Archived from the original on July 9, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017. "Carol Support Group". Here Media. 2017. Archived from the original on July 9, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017. "Carol Support Group". Facebook. May 28, 2017. Archived from the original on July 27, 2017. Retrieved July 27, 2017. STUDIOCANALUK [@StudiocanalUK] (October 23, 2015). "Some people change your life forever. Presenting the stunning new poster for Todd Haynes's #CAROL, in cinemas Nov 27" (Tweet). Retrieved July 9, 2017 – via Twitter. "John Waters". Artforum. December 1, 2015. Retrieved May 30, 2023. "Edgar Wright named his 1000 favourite films of all time". Far Out. May 19, 2021. Retrieved May 30, 2023. Pond, Steve (May 23, 2015). "Cannes: Cate Blanchett, Rooney Mara Drama 'Carol' Wins Queer Palm Award". TheWrap. Archived from the original on May 26, 2015. Retrieved June 7, 2015. Frosch, Jon (May 24, 2015). "Critic's Notebook: With Cannes Prizes, Coen Brothers Keep It Weird". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 25, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2015. Heilbron, Alexandra (December 7, 2015). "Carol wins Audience Award at Whistler Film Festival". Tribute. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 11, 2016. "51st Chicago International Film Festival Reveals Its Competition Winners At Awards Night". Chicago International Film Festival. October 24, 2015. Archived from the original on October 25, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2015. "Best Films and Performances from NYFF 2015". IndieWire. October 13, 2015. Archived from the original on October 14, 2015. Retrieved February 9, 2016. Greene, Steve (October 13, 2015). "Best of NYFF: Critics Pick Their Favorite Films and Performances". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Barraclough, Leo (November 21, 2015). "'Carol' Cinematographer Ed Lachman Takes Top Prize at Camerimage". Variety. Archived from the original on January 31, 2016. Retrieved February 11, 2016. "'Carol' scoops Golden Frog at Poland's Camerimage film festival". Radio Poland. November 23, 2015. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 27, 2017. Hammond, Pete (September 15, 2015). "Oscars: Weinstein Confirms It Will Campaign 'Carol' Star Cate Blanchett For Lead Actress – And That's The 'Truth'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. "Oscar Nominations: The Complete List". The Hollywood Reporter. January 14, 2016. Archived from the original on September 12, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2016. "Golden Globe Nominations: The Complete List". The Hollywood Reporter. December 10, 2015. Archived from the original on December 12, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2015. Ritman, Alex (January 7, 2016). "BAFTA Awards: 'Carol' and 'Bridge of Spies' Lead Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 8, 2016. Retrieved January 8, 2016. "Spirit Awards 2016: Complete Winners List". Variety. February 27, 2016. Archived from the original on March 21, 2020. Retrieved February 27, 2016. Gray, Tim (December 14, 2015). "Critics' Choice Award Nominations Led by 'Mad Max,' 'Fargo'". Variety. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved December 14, 2015. "SAG Awards Nominations: Complete List". Variety. December 9, 2015. Archived from the original on December 11, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2015. Berman, Eliza (December 2, 2015). "Carol Wins Big at the New York Film Critics Circle Awards". Time. Archived from the original on December 4, 2015. Retrieved December 4, 2015. Calia, Michael (December 2, 2015). "'Carol' Takes Top Honors at New York Film Critics Awards". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on December 3, 2015. Retrieved December 4, 2015. Coggan, Devan (December 6, 2015). "Spotlight wins top prize from the Los Angeles Film Critics Association". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 7, 2015. Retrieved December 7, 2015. Cox, Gordon (January 3, 2016). "'Spotlight' Named Best Picture by National Society of Film Critics". Variety. Archived from the original on January 4, 2016. Retrieved January 7, 2016. Lowe, Kinsey (December 6, 2015). "Boston Society Of Film Critics: 'Spotlight' Best Picture, Todd Haynes Best Director". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved December 7, 2015. Lodge, Guy (January 17, 2016). "'Mad Max: Fury Road,' '45 Years' Triumph at London Film Critics' Circle Awards". Variety. Archived from the original on January 19, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2016. "The Dorian Awards: 2015/16 Dorians". GALECA. February 2017. Archived from the original on October 20, 2018. Retrieved July 26, 2017. Tapley, Kristopher (January 18, 2016). "'Carol' Sweeps Gay and Lesbian Entertainment Critics Awards". Variety. Archived from the original on February 25, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2016. McHenry, Jackson (April 3, 2016). "Carol, Transparent, and Sense8 Win at the 2016 GLAAD Media Awards". New York. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2016. Barraclough, Leo (October 21, 2015). "Todd Haynes' 'Carol' Wins Frankfurt Book Fair Prize for Adaptation". Variety. Archived from the original on October 22, 2015. Retrieved October 22, 2015. "Here Are the AFI AWARDS 2015 Official Selections". American Film Institute. December 15, 2015. Archived from the original on July 7, 2017. Retrieved December 16, 2015. "AFI Awards 2015 – Honorees". American Film Institute. January 2016. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved October 23, 2016. Raup, Jordan (March 15, 2016). "'Carol' Leads the Top 30 LGBT Films of All-Time, According to BFI Poll". The Film Stage. Archived from the original on September 19, 2016. Retrieved March 16, 2016. Murthi, Vikram (August 23, 2016). "The 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century: BBC Polls Critics From Around The Globe". IndieWire. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved October 10, 2016. Dargis, Manohla; Scott, A.O (November 24, 2019). "The 10 Most Influential Films of the Decade (and 20 Other Favorites)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 21, 2019. Retrieved December 2, 2019. Lang, Nico (January 14, 2016). "Oscar snubs that hurt: The Academy Awards still aren't designed for anyone who isn't white, straight, and male". Salon. Archived from the original on January 19, 2016. Retrieved February 8, 2016. Harris, Aisha (January 14, 2016). "No Carol for Best Picture, and This Year's Other Big Oscar Nomination Surprises". Slate. Archived from the original on February 7, 2016. Retrieved February 8, 2016. Farber, Stephen (February 4, 2016). "Not only is #OscarsSoWhite, it's also #OscarsSoStraight with 'Carol' snub". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved February 8, 2016. Helligar, Jeremy (January 14, 2016). "Carol's Best Picture Oscar snub: Is the lesbian romance too 'normal' for the Academy?". TheFix. Archived from the original on August 6, 2017. Retrieved February 9, 2016. Scott, Nate (January 14, 2016). "9 biggest snubs of the 2016 Oscar nominations". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 23, 2016. Retrieved January 24, 2016. Lang, Nico (January 19, 2016). "By mostly snubbing Carol, the Oscars continue to exclude queer cinema". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on January 22, 2016. Retrieved January 24, 2016. Bailey, Jason (January 14, 2016). "How 'Carol' Got Screwed". Flavorwire. Archived from the original on February 8, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2016. Virtel, Louis (January 15, 2016). "5 myths that prevented 'Carol' from getting a Best Picture nomination". HitFix. Archived from the original on January 22, 2016. Retrieved January 24, 2016. Jacobs, Matthew (January 14, 2016). "Oscar Nominations Snub 'Carol,' Idris Elba, 'Star Wars,' Quentin Tarantino And More". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on January 19, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2016. Lawson, Richard (January 14, 2016). "Why Did Carol Get Shut Out of Oscar's Biggest Categories?". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on February 3, 2016. Retrieved February 8, 2016. Snarker, Dorothy (January 15, 2016). "Why 'Carol' Failed to Become the Lesbian 'Brokeback'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 8, 2016. Allen, Rebekah (January 14, 2016). "The Carol Curse: Why Hollywood Still Can't Take a Lesbian Love Story Seriously". The Advocate. Archived from the original on February 9, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2016. Bendix, Trish (January 14, 2016). ""Carol" was snubbed by the Oscars for the very same reason it was written". AfterEllen. Archived from the original on August 6, 2017. Retrieved August 6, 2017. Bianco, Marcie (January 14, 2016). "2016's biggest Oscar snub proves Hollywood overlords cannot deal with female sexual desire". Quartz. Archived from the original on January 28, 2016. Retrieved February 8, 2016. O'Donnell, Carey (January 14, 2016). "'Carol's' Best Picture Snub: Pop Culture Is Not Ready For LGBT Contentment". Paper. Archived from the original on February 9, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2016. Ehrlich, David (January 14, 2016). "Oscars 2016: 12 Major Nomination Snubs". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 9, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2016. MacKenzie, Steven (April 6, 2016). "Todd Haynes Interview: Cinema still has a problem with women". The Big Issue. Archived from the original on February 16, 2017. Retrieved February 16, 2017. "Cannes Palme d'Or awarded to French film Dheepan". BBC News Online. May 24, 2015. Archived from the original on July 18, 2018. Retrieved July 6, 2018. Formo, Brian (May 24, 2015). "Cannes 2015 Winners: Rooney Mara Best Actress, DHEEPAN the Palme d'Or, More". Collider. Archived from the original on July 6, 2018. Retrieved July 6, 2018. Oscar category: Lodge, Guy (October 6, 2015). "Alicia Vikander and Rooney Mara Campaigns Fuel 'Category Fraud' Debate". Variety. Archived from the original on July 4, 2018. Retrieved July 4, 2018. Sims, David (October 15, 2015). "Why Oscar Nominations Make No Sense". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on July 4, 2018. Retrieved July 4, 2018. Feinberg, Scott (November 24, 2015). "Awards "Category Fraud": The Insane Manipulation of the Acting Categories". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved July 4, 2018. Whitney, E. Oliver (December 10, 2015). "What Is Category Fraud? A Closer Look at This Year's Big Oscar Controversy". Screen Crush. Archived from the original on July 4, 2018. Retrieved July 4, 2018. Polowy, Kevin (February 26, 2016). "Alicia Vikander, Rooney Mara, and the Most Egregiously Miscategorized Oscar Nominees". Yahoo Movies. Archived from the original on July 4, 2018. Retrieved July 4, 2018. Lindsay, Brian (2016). "Act Three Carol". Category Fraud (1st ed.). Sydney, Australia: Tranter Ward Books. pp. 220–225. ISBN 978-0-98049091-6. Hughes, William (January 29, 2016). "ABC won't air the new Carol trailer unless the nude scene is edited". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on January 31, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2016. Eggertsen, Chris (January 29, 2016). "Outrage Watch: ABC slammed over 'Carol' nude scene flap". HitFix. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2016. Bendix, Trish (August 4, 2016). "Some airlines are showing edited versions of "Carol" with zero same-sex kissing". AfterEllen. Archived from the original on August 5, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2016. Burns, Tobias (August 5, 2016). "'Carol' Same-Sex Kissing Edited Out In Delta Airlines Flights". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2016. Martin, Hugo (August 27, 2016). "Delta criticized for deleting same-sex love scene from in-flight movie 'Carol'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 27, 2017. Retrieved October 27, 2017. Phyllis Nagy [@PhyllisNagy] (August 4, 2016). "domestic airlines that took the theatrical rather than edited version: American and United" (Tweet). Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved August 6, 2016 – via Twitter. Cameron Esposito [@cameronesposito] (August 3, 2016). "Watched CAROL on a plane & they edited it so the main characters never even kiss. Booooooo" (Tweet). Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2021 – via Twitter. Scott, Ryan (August 5, 2016). "Carol Lesbian Kissing Scenes Censored on Delta Airlines". MovieWeb. Retrieved April 9, 2022. "Todd Haynes 'Carol' Soundtrack Details". FilmMusicReporter.com. October 21, 2015. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved November 14, 2015. Raup, Jordan (April 28, 2016). "Carter Burwell's 'Carol' Score Getting Expanded Double Vinyl Release This Summer". The Film Stage. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2016. Jagernauth, Kevin (May 13, 2015). "All The Songs In Todd Haynes' 'Carol' Including Billie Holiday, Gerry Mulligan, The Clovers, Jo Stafford, & More". IndieWire. Archived from the original on November 27, 2015. Retrieved November 23, 2015. Setoodeh, Ramin (May 12, 2015). "Cate Blanchett Opens the Closet Door with Lesbian Romance 'Carol'". Variety. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (November 16, 2015). "Academy Conversations: Carol". YouTube. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Berman, Judy (November 18, 2015). "Carol: A Rare Movie That Escapes the Male Gaze". New York. Powell, Mike (November 20, 2015). "The True Love Story Behind the Making of 'Carol'". Rolling Stone. Halperin, Moze (November 23, 2015). "The Brilliant Subversiveness of 'Carol's' Conventional Ending". Flavorwire. Reynolds, Mark (November 24, 2015). "Phyllis Nagy: Carol and me". Bookanista. Aurthur, Kate (November 25, 2015). ""Carol" Offers A Rare Ending For A Lesbian Romance". BuzzFeed. Brody, Richard (November 30, 2015). ""Carol" Up Close". The New Yorker. NBR (November 30, 2015). "Carol – Q&A with Cate Blanchett, Rooney Mara, Phyllis Nagy, and Todd Haynes". National Board of Review. Davis, Nick (November–December 2015). "The Object of Desire: Todd Haynes discusses Carol and the satisfactions of telling women's stories". Film Comment. Lachman, Edward (December 3, 2015). "Edward Lachman Shares His Secrets For Shooting Todd Haynes' 'Carol'". IndieWire. Cotkin, George (December 10, 2015). "Carol and What It Was Really Like to Be a Lesbian in the 1950s". Time. Berry, Jennifer (December 11, 2015). "5 Minutes With Carol Costume Designer Sandy Powell". Flare. Archived from the original on February 4, 2016. Retrieved February 4, 2016. White, Patricia (December 24, 2015). "A Lesbian "Carol" for Christmas". Public Books. Skweres, Mary Ann (December 29, 2015). "Contender – Production Designer Judy Becker, Carol". Below The Line. White, Patricia (Winter 2015). "Sketchy Lesbians: "Carol" as History and Fantasy". Film & Media Studies. Swarthmore College. Skweres, Mary Ann (January 6, 2016). "Contender – Editor Affonso Gonçalves, Carol". Below The Line. Natalie, Wilson (January 7, 2016). "The Lesbian Gaze Of 'Carol'". The Establishment. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. Di Mattia, Joanna (January 21, 2016). "The nearness of you – Carol and the cine-poetics of love". In A Lonely Place. Woolf, Sam (February 23, 2016). "Sandy Powell's costumes tell what words can't". Seventh Row. Archived from the original on February 25, 2016. Staff (April 6, 2018). "We're Not Ugly People: The Costumes of "Carol" and How They Define the Central Relationship". Tom + Lorenzo. Wikiquote has quotations related to Carol (film). Wikimedia Commons has media related to Carol. Official website (Number 9 Films) Official website (The Weinstein Company) Official website (StudioCanal) Carol – Press Kit (2015 Festival de Cannes). Number 9 Films (Carol) Ltd., (37 pp), May 17, 2015 Carol – Production Notes. The Weinstein Company, (51 pp), November 10, 2015 Carol – Screenplay. The Weinstein Company Carol at TWC Guilds (Weinstein Company, Films For Consideration) Carol at BBFC Carol at British Council | Film Carol at the British Film Institute Carol at IMDb Carol at Movie Maps (Filming Locations) Carol at SearchWorks Catalog, Stanford University Libraries Portals:  United Kingdom  Film  United States  LGBT