The Paris Institute of Political Studies (French: Institut d'études politiques de Paris), also known as Sciences Po (pronounced [sjɑ̃s po]) or Sciences Po Paris, is a public research university located in Paris, France, that holds the status of grande école and grand établissement. The institute has decentralized campuses in Dijon, Le Havre, Menton, Nancy, Poitiers and Reims, each with their own academic program focused on a geopolitical part of the world. Sciences Po historically specialized in political science and history, then it progressively started to expand to other social sciences such as economics, law and sociology. The institute was established in 1872 by Émile Boutmy as the École libre des sciences politiques in the aftermath of the Franco-Prussian War as a private institution to modernize education for French civil servants. It offered instruction in political science, a relatively new field of study at the time. Following World War II, the school was nationalized and re-established as a public institution after growing criticisms towards its faculty led to calls for the school's closure. After being reformed in 1985, Sciences Po began to offer courses beyond political science that would lead to careers beyond public service. As of 2021, 80% of Sciences Po graduates are employed in the private sector. Sciences Po Paris is the only Institute of Political Sciences in France allowed to refer to itself with the epithet "Sciences Po" without indicating the name of the city where their headquarters are located, under a legal agreement with the other institutes. They are allowed to use the term "Sciences Po" to refer to themselves only when followed by the names of the cities where they are located, such as "Sciences Po Lille" or "Sciences Po Grenoble". The institute is a member of the Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs (APSIA) and CIVICA – The European University of Social Sciences. Sciences Po was established in February 1872 as the École libre des sciences politiques (ELSP) by a group of French intellectuals, politicians and businessmen led by Émile Boutmy, and including Hippolyte Taine, Ernest Renan, Albert Sorel and Paul Leroy Beaulieu. The creation of the school was in response to widespread fears that the inadequacy of the French political and diplomatic corps would further diminish the country's international stature, as France grappled with a series of crises, including its defeat in the 1870 Franco-Prussian War, the demise of Napoleon III's regime, and the upheaval and massacre resulting from the Paris Commune. The founders of the school sought to reform the training of French politicians by establishing a new "breeding ground where nearly all the major, non-technical state commissioners were trained.". His innovative intellectual axis was to teach contemporary history, whereas political elites had only been taught ancient humanities for centuries, which they could still learn in universities at the same time. ELSP acquired a major role in France's political system. From 1901 to 1935, 92.5% of entrants to the Grands corps de l'État, the most powerful and prestigious administrative bodies in the French Civil Service, had studied there (this figure includes people who took civil service examination preparatory classes at Sciences Po but did not earn a degree and, in general, students were taking classes there on top of earning a degree at the University of Paris, in particular the Law Faculty). Other countries created similar schools in the following century. In 1875, the Istituto Cesare Alfieri [it] in Italy (now part of the University of Florence), at the end of the century, the École libre des sciences Politiques et Sociales in Belgium (not existing any more), the Deutsche Hochschule für Politik in Germany, the Columbia School of Political Science (now merged into the Columbia Graduate School of Arts and Sciences), the London School of Economics in the United Kingdom, and, after WW1, for the School of Foreign Service from Georgetown University in the United States and the Geneva Graduate Institute. The connection between Sciences Po and French institutions meant that the school also played a key role in the apparatus of the French Empires. In 1886, the university established a colonial school with the goal of training students to take on professions in the colonial administration in a way that "propagates [...] a more scientific and international colonialism". Many professors and members of the ELSP administration, such as Paul Leroy-Beaulieu, chair in colonial affairs at ELSP, Joseph Chailley-Bert, Jules Cambon, Charles Jonnart, Auguste Louis Albéric d’Arenberg and Ernest Roume, were also closely linked to or worked directly with the colonial government. The colonial branch of ELSP closed in 1893 after a state-sponsored colonial school was created in 1889; however positions in the administrations of French colonies and protectorates continued to accept graduates from the ELSP. Sciences Po underwent significant reforms in the aftermath World War II in 1945. At France's liberation from Nazi occupation, the public servants were accused of collaborating with the Vichy regime and Nazi Germany. Sciences Po was then directly concerned by the draining goal of the National Council of the Resistance. Communist politicians including Georges Cogniot accused the school to be the "home of collaboration" with Nazi Germany and proposed abolishing the ELSP entirely and founding a new state-run administration college on its premises. To fight against this, Roger Seydoux, Jacques Chapsal and André Siegfried, from the school, excluded the most compromised (with Vichy and Nazi Germany) members of the school's staff, defended the school against accusation of collaboration and built up a communication campaign to save the school. The choice would be made by France's Provisional Government, under Charles de Gaulle. Eight of its thirteen ministers were alumni from the school. They made the future of the school escape from the Parliament's control to end up in their own hands. Michel Debré, alumnus, Jules Jeanneney, alumnus whose son just came out of the school, and Roger Grégoire, alumnus, decided that the school would be preserved but under a new structure. Two separate legal entities were created: the Institut d'études politiques (IEP) and the Fondation Nationale des Sciences Politiques (English: National Foundation of Political Science) or FNSP. Both entities were tasked by the French government to ensure "the progress and the spread, both within and outside France, of political science, economics, and sociology". FNSP, a private foundation that receives generous subsidies from the government, manages the IEP de Paris, owns its buildings and libraries, and determines its budget. The two entities work together in lockstep, however, as the director of the school is, by tradition, also the administrator of FNSP. This institutional arrangement gives Sciences Po a unique status, as the school draws most of its resources through substantial government subsidies to FNSP, but does not subject it to many government interventions and regulations, giving it a much higher level of autonomy compared to other French universities and schools. The epithet Sciences Po is applied to both entities, which inherited the reputation previously vested in ELSP. The public-private nature of Sciences Po, Paris, also distinguishes it from a network of institutes of political studies throughout the country that were inspired by its curriculum, namely in Strasbourg, Lyon, Aix, Bordeaux, Grenoble, Toulouse, Rennes and Lille. They are not to be confused with the seven campuses of Sciences Po in France. The government also established in 1945 the École Nationale d'Administration (ENA), an elite postgraduate school for training government officials. From then on, the Grands Corps de l'Etat were obliged to recruit new entrants from ENA. Sciences Po became the school of choice for those hoping to enter the ENA, and so retained its dominant place in educating high-ranking officials. Between 1952 and 1969, 77.5% of the ENA's graduate student intake were Sciences Po alumni. FNSP received a significant donations from the Rockefeller Foundation. FNSP published periodicals such as la Revue française de science politique, le Bulletin analytique de documentation, la Chronologie politique africaine, and the Cahiers de la Fondation as well as its seven research centres and main publishing house, Presses de Sciences Po. Sciences Po was substantially reformed from the mid-1990s so as to diversify its focus beyond political science and beyond France, mainly under the influence of Olivier Duhamel, who formally had different roles during until his resignation in 2021. Sciences Po was also hit by a number of crises and controversies during this period. After the directorship of Alain Lancelot (1987-1997), the latter choose Olivier Duhamel to sponsor the candidacy of Richard Descoings, who became the director of Sciences Po with Duhamel as special advisor. Under the directorship of Richard Descoings (1997–2012), the school incorporated courses in various branches of the social sciences on top of political science, such as law, economics, history, and sociology. In addition, the school began requiring all its undergraduate students to spend a year abroad, and introduced a multilingual curriculum in French, English, and other languages. Sciences Po also began to expand outside Paris, establishing regional campuses throughout France. During this period, Sciences Po also implemented reforms in its admissions process. Previously, Sciences Po recruited its students exclusively on the basis of a competitive examination. This system was seen to favor students from prestigious preparatory high schools, largely attended by the children of the French political elite. In 2001, Sciences Po founded the Equal Opportunity Program, widening its admissions policy. This program enables the institution to recruit high-potential students at partner high schools in more disadvantaged parts of France who, due to a social, academic, and financial constraints, would not otherwise have been able to attend Sciences Po. From 2001 to 2011, the proportion of scholarship students at Sciences Po went from 6 to 27 percent with around 30% of all students at Sciences Po currently receiving some form of scholarship. The reforms Descoings spearheaded were at times controversial, however, and his leadership style came under heavy criticism for "reigning as almighty king" and to implement a "management of fear". A further report by the French Court of Audit in 2012 severely criticized Sciences Po under the Descoings leadership for its opaque, and possibly illegal, financial management, notably with regard to management salaries, in particular to himself. After the sudden death of Richard Descoing, Frédéric Mion, a graduate of Sciences Po, ENA and École Normale Supérieure and former secretary general of Canal+, was appointed director of Sciences Po on 1 March 2013. It was criticized as a choice of Olivier Duhamel, even though the two other candidates were said to have a much stronger applications than the 9 pages given by Mion in his last minute candidacy with the sponsorship of Duhamel. Louis Vogel, former front-runner candidate who retracted his candidacy to protest against the governance process in Sciences Po, stated that an institution that want to have a place in the academic national and international environment cannot achieve such a thing without having an academic ("universitaire", a researcher and lecturer coming from the universités as opposed to the grandes écoles) at its head. Mion's intention to pursue Sciences Po's development as a "selective university of international standing" is detailed in the policy paper "Sciences Po 2022", published in the spring of 2014.[citation needed] The restructuring of Master's study into graduate schools continued with the creation of the School of Public Affairs and the Urban School in 2015 and the School of Management and Innovation in 2016. In early 2016, Sciences Po updated its governance structure, adopting new statutes for its two constituent bodies: the Fondation nationale des sciences politiques (FNSP) and the Institut d'études politiques de Paris (IEP). In late 2016, Sciences Po acquired a new site, the Hôtel de l'Artillerie in the 7th arrondissement of Paris, which it intends to make it a site of "educational renewal".[citation needed] In April 2018, Sciences Po students blocked the main entrance to the school in protest against Macron's education reforms which gives universités the power to set admission criteria and rank applicants (a power that Sciences Po has). In 2021, Sciences Po was hit by the Duhamel scandal, mainly put forward by the best-seller book La Familia Grande and newspaper articles from Le Monde and Nouvel Obs, a sexual violence scandal one and a succession crisis. Olivier Duhamel, director of the National Foundation of Sciences Po, Frédéric Mion, director of Sciences Po, and other members of the board of these institutions resigned. It led to appeals to a reform of the governance of Sciences Po. Instead, Sciences Po faced "ultimate attempts of a generation to maintain control of the designation of a successor for Duhamel". This process further tarnished the reputation of Sciences Po. L'Express later published a significant investigation on the transformations of Sciences Po since the 1990s, called "Sciences Po goes off the rails". Bénédicte Durand, interim administrator of Sciences Po, published in L’Express an op-ed stating that Sciences Po is facing "one of the most painful crisis of (the) history" of Sciences Po. She criticized the fact that the school has become the "target" of a "witch hunt" and is held responsible for "all the woes of the society" without "intellectual honesty", and told "hate-mongers" that Sciences Po will survive this crisis in spite of the "threats". The institute later published reports on deontology and sexual violence that were called by Nouvel Obs "abundant but shy". On 22 November 2021 Mathias Vicherat, former CEO of Danone, former spokesman of the French National Railways Network and former deputy cabinet director of the Mayor in Paris, assumed office as the new director of Sciences Po. This appointment has been criticized, because Vicherat does not have an academic background and would have been chosen as the former classmate and friend of the president. Vicherat pledged to name someone with an academic experience as number 2 to compensate his background. He wants to reinforce the private sector outcomes of the Sciences Po diploma. In 2022, the book "Une jeunesse engagée" was published, describing the evolution of Sciences Po student body over the decades. In 2022, 70% of the students considered themeselves as part of an elite, whereas only 53% did in 2002. 55% of the students voted for left-wing politician Jean-Luc Mélenchon and 71% of the students consider themselves as left-wing, whereas 57% did in 2002. The book also described a place where knowledge and study have little place and where students focus on networking and the dismay of students and lecturers in front of this new reality. Further controversies occurred, including one around the cancellation of two lectures by Peggy Sastre and Leonardo Orlando around the theory of evolution of Charles Darwin and gender studies, with the direct involvement of Vicherat. Since December 2023, the director Mathias Vicherat is under police investigation for domestic violence, in the context of cross-complaints between him and his wife. Vicherat "contests the acts of violence that have been reported in the press and on social networks" and added: "I have never, under any circumstances, committed such acts. I would like to emphasize that at the end of our police custody, no complaint was lodged, and no measure of judicial control or deportation was taken". Student representative campaigned for his resignation and led campaigns of disruptions of school activities. Under pressure, Vicherat temporarily withdrew from the administrative activities in the school. Both Vicherat and his wife published a statement, including: ""Elements relating to our private lives were leaked to the press yesterday. Separations are rarely obvious, and should not in any way be the subject of communication in the media or on social networks"; they asked "that serenity may return to [their] families". Student representatives wrote a statement calling Vicherat’s statement "indecent" and adding "In reality, there's not even a need to explain, as his resignation is the only possible outcome." They continued disruptive activities, like blocking the school entrance to students and staff. A special committee concluded that no ethical duty has been breached and Vicherat has been reinstated in January 2024, while remaining under police investigation. Due to this event, the atmosphere in Sciences Po has been difficult. In students’ general assemblies, students who had a reputation for being right-wing were said on microphone to be "indesirable" and violently removed from assemblies, others who have voiced the concern for the presumption of innocence have been shouted out of the room. Students testified anonymously being anxious and not expressing a dissenting view, otherwise they will be blacklisted as "fascist" by their peers. Vicherat’s wife has stated on Instagram being "desperate and shocked to see this media frenzy surrounding [her] private life and that of [her] ex-spouse [...] The sadness of couples belongs to couples, and it's never all white on one side and all black on the other. It has to stop." In student groups, a student wrote: "In meetings, Mathias Vicherat is incapable of maintaining his composure, throwing tantrums, shouting, tearing his hair out, etc. It may seem trivial to you, but a director who calls the student representatives on their personal number without any justification and at any time, to put pressure on them while completely losing his temper, is unheard of and unacceptable." The polemist Gaspard Gantzer, colleague and friend of Vicherat, explained in the press that Vicherat is innocent until proven guilty and that Sciences Po’s students are now radicalized by the new left that wants to prevent people who think differently to express themselves. He added that this trend is dangerous for democracy. On March 13, 2024, Vicherat resigned as the Director of Sciences Po and the administrator of the Fondation Nationale des Sciences Po after being ordered to stand trial on the aforementioned charges of domestic abuse. Sciences Po has seven campuses in France, with each specialising in different regions of the globe. Every May, at the end of the academic year, all seven campuses come together for the inter-campus Collegiades de SciencesPo tournament, also known as the MiniCrit. At the tournament, students represent each campus and compete against one another in arts and athletic competitions. Different events include athletic games such as volleyball and football, as well as artistic competitions such as music and dance. The Paris campus is spread across several buildings concentrated around the Boulevard Saint-Germain in the 6th and 7th arrondissements. The historic centre of Sciences Po at 27 rue Saint-Guillaume houses the head office and central library since 1879. It is also home to Sciences Po's two largest teaching halls, the Amphitheatres Émile Boutmy and Jacques Chapsal. Other buildings include: 117, boulevard Saint-Germain: School of Journalism 199, boulevard Saint-Germain: Doctoral School 174 and 224, boulevard Saint-Germain: offices and classrooms 13, rue de l'Université / The René Rémond building: Law School and administrative offices 8, rue Jean-Sébastien-Bach: Urban School 28, rue des Saints-Pères: Paris School of International Affairs (PSIA) 56, rue des Saints-Pères: Language Lab, audiovisual service and a cartography workshop. 56, rue Jacob: Research Center for History (Centre d'histoire de Sciences Po) and International Relations (Centre d'études et de recherches internationales) The Paris campus enrolls about 3,000 undergraduate students, almost a third of whom are international exchange students. Sciences Po purchased in 2016 the Hôtel de l’Artillerie, a 17th-century former monastery of 14,000 m2 located 200 meters from its campus on rue Saint-Guillaume, from the French Ministry of Defense and refurbished the building for a total cost of around 200 million euros in total (estimation). The new facility which opened in 2022, hosts 7 graduate schools including School of Public Affairs, Paris School of International Affairs, Law School, Urban School, School of Management and Impact, School of Journalism and the School of Research. Furthermore, the new Saint Thomas campus is home to the scientific department and the institute of innovation as well as the Sciences Po's Center for Entrepreneurship. It will provide social housing for 50 to 100 students with need-based aid from the State. Located in the region of Burgundy in a 19th-century building, the Dijon campus was created in 2001. The regional specialisation is on the European Union, specifically Central and Eastern Europe, and is taught in French. The elective languages offered are Hungarian, Polish, Romanian, Russian and Czech. Located on the coast of Normandy, Le Havre has hosted the undergraduate Euro-Asian Programme (taught in English) since 2007. The elective languages offered are Chinese, Japanese and Korean, and French as a Foreign Language courses for students without a B1-equivalent level. Students primarily choose to spend their third year abroad in an Asian country. Established in the French Riviera city of Menton in 2005, the campus is located in an entirely renovated 19th-century building overlooking the Mediterranean. According to the Sciences Po brochure, the Menton Campus' regional specialisation is on the Middle Eastern and the Mediterranean, and it welcomes 300 students each year. The undergraduate programme is taught through two language tracks (French or English) and several elective languages are offered: Arabic, Turkish, Italian, Spanish, Persian, Hebrew, and French as a Foreign Language for those without a CEFR B1-equivalent level in French. The third mandatory year abroad is spent in the Middle East or elsewhere. Established in the region of Lorraine in 2000, the Nancy campus is located in an 18th century heritage site, the Hôtel des Missions Royales. The curriculum is taught in French, English and German, as its regional specialisation focuses on the European Union and French-German relations. The elective languages offered are German, English, French as a foreign language and also Italian, Spanish, Russian, Swedish or Arabic. Opened in 2010, the campus is located in the heart of the historic city of Poitiers in the Hôtel Chaboureau, a renovated building dating from the 15th century. The regional specialisation is on Latin America and the Iberian Peninsula. The undergraduate programme is conducted mainly in French, with some courses in English and Spanish. The elective languages offered are Spanish and Portuguese. The Reims campus opened in September 2010. It is housed in the 17th century College des Jesuits. Despite being the most recent campus, it is the largest of the regional campuses of Sciences Po, with over 1,600 undergraduates. Over half of their students are international.[2] The campus offers two regional specialisations, one on North America (taught in English) and the other on Africa (taught in French). Additionally, through a partnership with the University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne (URCA), the Reims Campus offers a dual degree in social sciences & humanities and life sciences entitled "Environment, Society, Sustainability." The elective languages offered are English, Spanish, German, Italian or Arabic, and French as a foreign language for students who do not have a B1 level of French. As of January 10th 2022, Crystal Cordell Paris has served as campus director, taking over from previous director Tilman Turpin.[3] Sciences Po operates under a dual governance model composed of two entities: the Fondation nationale des sciences politiques (FNSP), a private non-profit foundation, and the Institut d’études politiques de Paris or Paris Institute of Political Studies, a public higher education institution. These two bodies constitute Sciences Po, which is the official term used to designate them collectively. The FNSP is responsible for the strategic direction and administrative and financial management of Sciences Po. It is administered by a board of directors. The role of the Paris Institute of Political Studies is to ensure teaching, research and library services, like all international research universities. Its governing bodies consist of the Board of Directors, the Student Life and Education Committee and the Academic Board. The Executive Committee is the institution’s operational steering committee. It brings together the directors of Sciences Po’s various divisions and offices under the authority of the President of Sciences Po. The Executive Committee implements the strategic direction and makes operational decisions on running and managing the institution. Sciences Po's resources have grown threefold over the past 15 years, from €55 million in 2000 to €128 million in 2010 to €197 million in 2018.[citation needed] The French government’s support for the institution, in the form of structural public subsidies, has increased from €36 million in 2000 to €69.3 million in 2018.[citation needed] At the same time, growth in the institution's own resources has led to a gradual decline in the relative share of public funds in Sciences Po's overall budget. This figure has decreased by more than one-third, from 66% in 2000 to approximately 35% in 2018.[citation needed] Sciences Po's own resources have grown significantly. They have been multiplied by six: from €18.3 million in 2000 to €127.2 million in 2018. These resources now account for a majority of the budget. The institution took on a debt of €191 million in 2016 in order to fund the acquisition of its new Paris campus and undertake the restoration of the site. This debt is partially guaranteed by the Paris City Council. The academic bodies of Sciences Po consist of the Undergraduate College, six professional schools, and the Doctoral School. The Sciences Po Undergraduate College offers a three-year Bachelor of Arts degree with a multidisciplinary foundation in the humanities and social sciences with emphasis on civic, linguistic, artistic, and digital training. In the first year, students take foundational courses in six disciplines - economics, history, humanities, law, political science, and sociology. In the second year, students choose a multidisciplinary major – Politics & Government, Economics & Societies, or Political Humanities. The third year is spent abroad on an exchange programme with a partner university. In addition, each campus offers a different regional specialisation which anchors students' intellectual objectives, the regions are: Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America, Middle East-Mediterranean, and North America. Sciences Po offers dual bachelor's degrees with Columbia University, Keio University, University College London, Freie Universität Berlin, University of British Columbia, the University of Sydney, the National University of Singapore, the University of Hong Kong, and the University of California at Berkeley. The current dean of the Undergraduate College is Stéphanie Balme. In 2021, 15,284 students applied to the Undergraduate College across all three admissions pathways (the exam procedure, the Equal Opportunity Programme, and the international procedure). 1,630 students were accepted, for an admission rate of 7%. Sciences Po has an acceptance rate of around 10% on Parcoursup (the national admissions platform for higher education) in 2021. At the graduate level, Sciences Po's seven schools offer one- and two-year Master's programmes and PhD programmes. All graduate programmes are delivered on the Sciences Po campus in Paris. Sciences Po also hosts dual Master's programmes with international partners. Students enrolled in these dual degree programmes spend one year at Sciences Po in Paris and one year at the partner university. The Undergraduate College (Collège universitaire) is the home of all undergraduate students. At the graduate level, there are seven professional schools: School of Public Affairs Paris School of International Affairs Sciences Po Law School Urban School School of Management and Innovation School of Journalism Doctoral School The Doctoral School offers Master and PhD programmes in law, economics, history, political science, or sociology. The PhD programme contains roughly 600 doctoral candidates. Research at Sciences Po covers economics, law, history, sociology and political science, while also taking in interdisciplinary topics such as cities, political ecology, sustainable development, socio-economics and globalization. Sciences Po is home to a research community that includes over 200 researchers and 350 PhD candidates. In 2015, 32% of the school's budget was devoted to research. That year, 65% of its research publications were in French, 32% in English and 3% in other languages. The institute has research centers, seven of which are affiliated with France's National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS). Center for Socio-Political Data (CDSP), which provides scientifically validated data for international survey programs. It also supports training in data collection and analysis. Centre for European Studies and Comparative Politics (CEE), which focuses on inter-disciplinary European studies; participation, democracy and government; election analyses; the restructuring of the state and public action. Centre for International Studies (CERI), which produces comparative and historical analysis on foreign societies, international relations, and political, social and economic phenomena. Centre for Political Research (CEVIPOF), which investigates political attitudes, behaviour and parties, as well as political thought and the history of ideas. Centre for History (CHSP), whose research focuses on: arts, knowledge and culture; wars, conflicts and violence; states, institutions and societies; the political and cultural history of contemporary France; from local to global; international history and its levels. Centre for the Sociology of Organisations (CSO), which conducts research on the sociology of organisations, sociology of public policy, and economic sociology. It also studies issues related to higher education and research, healthcare, sustainable development, the evolution of firms, and the transformation of the state. Center for Studies in Social Change (OSC), which conducts research on topics such as urban, school and gender inequalities, stratification and social mobility, and ethno-racial or social segregation. Department of Economics, which investigates areas such as labour markets, international economics, political economy, microeconomics and development. Law School, whose research focuses on globalisation, legal cultures and the economics of law. It has also produced work on the theory and history of law, public and private international law and intellectual property. Médialab, which studies the way data generated by new information technologies is produced, circulated and exploited. The Observatoire Français des Conjonctures Économiques (OFCE), which is both a research centre and an independent economic forecasting body. Its stated mission is to "ensure that the fruits of scientific rigour and academic independence serve the public debate about the economy". In addition to these research units, the institute has recently established three major research programs – the LIEPP, DIME-SHS and MaxPo. The Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire d'Evaluation des Politiques Publiques (LIEPP) analyzes public policy based on qualitative, comparative, and quantitative methods. The laboratory has been selected by an international scientific jury as a "Laboratoire d'Excellence" (Labex) that will be financed for the next ten years by the French government. Données Infrastructures et Méthodes d'Enquête en Sciences Humaines et Sociales (DIME-SHS) aims to collect and disseminate data for use in humanities and social sciences research. The Max Planck Sciences Po Center on Coping with Instability in Market Societies (known as MaxPo), was founded in 2012 in co-operation with the Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies (MPIfG). It investigates how individuals, organizations, and nation-states deal with various forms of economic and social instability. It is located at Sciences Po's Paris campus. Founded in 1871, the nucleus of the school's research is the Bibliothèque de Sciences Po. The library offers a collection of more than 950,000 titles in the field of social sciences. In 1982, the Ministry of National Education made the Bibliothèque the Centre for Acquisition and Dissemination of Scientific and Technical Information in the field of political science, and since 1994, it has been the antenna associated with the Bibliothèque Nationale de France. The Bibliothèque de Sciences Po is also the main French partner in the International Bibliography of the Social Sciences, which is based at the London School of Economics. Founded in the 1950s, Presses de Sciences Po is the publishing house of Sciences Po. It publishes academic works related to the social sciences. Sciences Po organizes public lecture events. Recent guest speakers have included Ban Ki-moon, General David Petraeus, Condoleezza Rice, former President of Brazil Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Eric Schmidt, Joseph Stiglitz, Sheryl Sandberg, Mario Draghi, UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova and Harvard University professor Michael Sandel. Since 2007 it has organized the Franco-British Dialogue Lecture Series in collaboration with the LSE and the French Embassy in London. The lectures are held every term at the LSE's European Institute. In rankings based on English-speaking publications, in 2022, Sciences Po ranks 3rd globally for the study of Politics in the QS World University Subjects Rankings, whereas it is ranked 39th in social sciences by Times Higher Education. Sciences Po has been called France's "leading university in the social sciences". It is considered to be the most prestigious of all of the IEP (instituts d'études politiques – IEPs or Institutes of Political Studies) in France, and is the only one allowed to refer to itself with the epithet "Sciences Po" without indicating the name of the city where it is located, under a legal agreement among the campuses. Other campuses can use the term "Sciences Po" to refer to themselves only when followed by the names of the cities where they are located, such as "Sciences Po Lille" or "Sciences Po Grenoble". Sciences Po is widely regarded to be an elite institution due to its selectivity in admissions and its close connections to powerful networks within French society. It has been described as a "school of power" that has emulated abroad. Because this elite status is associated with social reproduction, Sciences Po launched an "Equal Opportunity Programme" in 2001, to increase the representation of working class families, which as of 2013, make up 9% of students. Sciences Po has been described as a school prioritising professional networks over expertise. Its diversification beyond political science and history in the 1990s would have resulted in limited expertise on each subject. As a result, the school is nicknamed "Sciences Pipeau" (pronounced and sometimes spelled "Sciences Pipo", "pipeau" meaning "scam" or "nonsense" in colloquial French) by the general public and within the school. A class on legal regulatory frameworks given in English was nicknamed "Legal Bullshit" because the instructors were not comfortable teaching in English. The school has therefore been criticized by outside observers and students for not having them acquire an actual expertise. The sociologist Nicolas Jounin, alumnus of Sciences Po, talked about an "intellectual imposture" in an op-ed called "it is time to be done with Sciences Po". The journalist at France Culture Guillaume Erner stated that the institution is "only advertisement and artifice". According "Le Monde", students in the school would be sometimes "disillusioned" after having "fantasized" about the school. The institute has been described as having low expectations from its students. According to Le Monde, "when students educated in a faculty of social science join a master at Sciences Po, their academic level is often higher than those who followed multi-disciplinary education at an institute of political science". The Law courses at Sciences Po have also received criticism for holding lower standards than those at full law degrees; a student both at Sciences Po and at Paris II told L'Express: "In Law (at Paris II), I spend three days on an essay and I have 8 (out of 20); at Sciences Po, I spend three hours on an essay and I have 16 (out of 20)." In 2012, lecturers at Sciences Po criticized instructions they received from the school telling them not to take into account grammar mistakes in their marking. The trend would furthermore be a decline of the level; according to Le Monde, the cause would be the 2001 "Equal Opportunity Programme", but a lecturer in the school stated in 2021 that the reason is more the desire to attract international students and therefore the need to mark more leniently: all marks are harmonized so that the average mark would always be the same. The school has also been criticized for its close-mindedness and for its self-persuasion to be an elite institution. Libération stated in an editorial that the school have not understood that it is not special in the outside world. Peter Gumbel called Sciences Po and other "Grandes Écoles" "elite colleges [which] have become a machine for perpetuating a brilliant but blinkered, often arrogant and frequently incompetent ruling freemasonry". The academic Gilles Devers criticized the institution for being the "base of the conservatism, and the mold of the molluscs that make the public elite" where "dissenting ideas are only admitted if they strengthen the system". Sciences Po has also been accused of being unduly helped by the media and politicians. "Almost every French newspaper is run by an alumnus of Sciences Po", and most of the journalists in France are alumni from Sciences Po, so it would give the school "an unparalleled media coverage" and permit it to "cultivate a culture of secrecy" about its internal affairs.[better source needed] "Sciences-Po is under-criticized," analyzes a professor for Mediapart, "Those who teach there have no interest, and not necessarily the urge, to do so. Those who are not there can hope to be there one day." The journalist Ariane Chemin stated in 2013 that, because so many journalists come from Sciences Po, the school has an unduly good public reputation. The institute has also been criticized for the unfair favoritism it would be the subject of from the State, in which many public servants would be alumni of the school. It is partly state-funded, and some, including institutes of political studies in the provinces, have indeed accused it of receiving a disproportionate share of public money. In 2012, for example, Sciences Po Lille student representatives called Sciences Po (Paris) the "coronation of State inequity". Nicolas Jounin stated that the school is a "financial hold-up". Professionnaly switching from important roles in the public sector to lucrative positions in the private sector is coloquially called "pantouflage" in France, and generally has a negative view, but was advised by the director Mathias Vicherat to the students of the school. Sciences Po is funded in large part by public money and is a semi-public institute but is governed as a private institution. It has been described by Alain Garigou as governed from 1872 to 2013 in compliance with the "discreet rules of the bourgeoisie". The founder Emile Boutmy stayed the director until his death in 1906 and his successor stayed until he was 90 years old in 1936. In 2013, the process of designation of a successor for Richard Descoings has been openly criticized. Louis Vogel, professor of law, former president of the Society of Presidents of university, of Paris 2 University and of Sorbonne University and Sciences Po alumnus, had announced its candidacy based on bringing the school closer to the universités in a new international environment. He was presented as the front-runner as his profile and experience matched the best the advertised job profile. Louis Vogel was one of the three preselected candidacies but ended up retracting its candidacy before the final choice. He stated that the pre-selection also chose candidates who did not fit with the job profile, showed that the real desired profile was different, and that he did not want to endorse with his candidacy a process that is in opposition with his convictions. He further stated that Sciences Po "is sending a bad signal" and that they will have to solve their issue internally. The student vice-president of the executive board said that this decision is a "disavowal" for the research committee of Sciences Po. Two other candidates publicly criticized the process. In the end, Frédéric Mion made a last-minute candidacy with a light application of 9 pages and was chosen with the sponsorship of Olivier Duhamel. In 2021, after the Duhamel scandal, and the resignations of Olivier Duhamel and Frédéric Mion, the process for the designation of the new head of the National Foundation, a new board of the Foundation and a new head the of institute (Sciences Po itself) was heated and largely criticized. The press talked about a "bad soap" filled with "low blows", and alumni and academics talked about a "grotesque" "parody of democracy" According to Challenges, people close to Duhamel who are still members of the board of the National Foundation and who will be leaving are creating ad hoc committees, outside of the status of the Foundation, to process to votes in which they have a preponderant voice to choose in advance who can be a candidate to become the head and the new members of the board, who will select afterwards the director of Sciences Po itself. After several votes which have been criticized for their lack of due process, Laurence Bertrand has been pre-selected to become the new head of the Foundation. Another candidate judged "hardly credible" the legitimacy of the process. A third candidate published an op-ed in Le Monde exposing the details of what he called a "tragicomedy". In the end, Mathias Vicherat, former CEO of Danone, was chosen. This appointment has been criticized, because Vicherat does not have an academic background. He allegedly has been chosen as a friend and former classmate of Emmanuel Macron. A lecturer at the Institute said: "The whole procedure was shamelessly rigged so that in the end, only the candidacy of Mathias Vicherat, the President's friend, with no academic experience, remained. They methodically discarded all serious candidates." Camille Kouchner, daughter of Bernard Kouchner, published a book in which she wrote that her step-father Olivier Duhamel, at that time president of the Foundation of Sciences Po which was the "heart of [his] power" for 30 years, sexually abused his step-son for two years during his childhood. She denounced the "microcosm of powerful people, [at] Saint-Germain-des-Prés" (headquarters of Sciences Po) who "knew" according to her, but acted "like nothing happened".[citation needed] Newspapers further unearthed a series of controversial attitudes toward the sexuality of minors. It led to a series of investigations on the environment of Duhamel at Sciences Po and on the way they dealt with these abuses. The scandal "shook" Sciences Po (Le Monde) and put it into turmoil (France Culture). The scandal was compared to a "bomb" launched on Sciences Po (Le Figaro), to an "unpinned grenade thrown on Sciences Po" (Le Temps and Courrier International) and to a "shockwave" on Sciences Po (The Times, La Croix etc.). Frederic Mion had been alerted, in particular by Aurélie Filippetti in 2019, former Ministry of Culture, of the situation but a "law of silence" had been put in place in the family regarding this. Mion declared he thought it was a "rumour" and that he should have taken the issue more seriously. He told Le Monde: "I let myself be fooled". According to Le Temps, a group of lecturers knew these allegations, some of them since 2008. They didn't break the silence, justifying themselves by the possible prescriptive period or that these facts were part of the "familial saga" in a hedonist context and "complex parents-children relations" in the 1970s. The scandal eventually led to a series of resignations under pressure at Sciences Po. After Duhamel himself resigned, both students of Sciences Po and public figures asked for the resignation of Frédéric Mion, director of Sciences Po, who first refused to do so. Mion, who Duhamel hand-picked in controversial circumstances as director of Sciences Po with a salary of 200,000 euros, first acknowledged "errors in judgment in [his] handling of the allegations", and after a continuous pressure to do so, resigned in the end. It later became apparent that he had lied to the inspectors to protect at least 6 other people inside Sciences Po. Marc Guillaume, former secretary of state, current prefect of the Paris region, and a close associate of Duhamel, resigned from the National Foundation of Sciences Po. Through Sciences Po, Duhamel had a large "network of influence" in politics, newspapers, TV channels, finance, etc. and therefore the scandal attained many people because of their link with the institution. Their role in protecting this intellectual environment has been questioned. Duhamel's power has extended to Emmanuel Macron and Édouard Philippe (former prime minister), both Sciences Po alumni, and both are trying to distance themselves from the "Dumahel case". Elisabeth Guigou, former minister of Justice, resigned from the national commission on incest. The scandal has also highlighted the power of the Foundation of Sciences Po, less well known than Sciences Po itself but "at the heart of strategical decisions since 1945", and that the FNSP and Sciences Po are "untouchable with the power of their network". Following the Duhamel scandal, Sciences Po issued a statement condemning "all forms of sexualized violence" and declaring "its shock and astonishment". It also stated: "The fight against sexual and gender-based violence is at the heart of our institution's core values and actions." After Richard Descoing, head of the school from 1997 to 2012, died under suspicious circumstances, it was revealed that he had sex with students, and made no case of Dominique Strauss-Kahn's habit of "seducing" young students. Descoing has also been accused of sending burning messages to students, but no further inquiry was made. Descoing had a controversial night life and relation to drugs, and was found dead in a hotel in suspicious circumstances. After the New York v. Strauss-Kahn case, DSK had to stop giving lectures at Sciences Po. He admitted orgies with young women[who?][where?] but had denied any violence. In February 2021, hundreds of students and former students shared on Twitter allegations of rape or sexual abuse at several Instituts d'études politiques, and claimed that despite denunciations of victims, "colleagues and staff [were] unwilling to take their complaints seriously". A hashtag #SciencesPorcs ("Sciences Pigs", similar to the French #Metoo hashtag #Balancetonporcs) has been widely used to do so. Among many op-eds dealing with the 2021 crisis at Sciences Po, two male alumni published in L'Express an op-ed specific to the sexual violence scandal, stating their disagreement with the "caricature" that is made of Sciences Po, which is allegedly the object of "passions, sometimes irrational ones" in the public "imaginary" because of the elite status they say the institute has; they assured there is no systemic problem regarding sexual violence in Sciences Po. Bénédicte Durand, interim administrator of the school, further told Le Figaro that "no, there is no rape culture in Sciences Po". The school published a report on sexual and sexist violence that was called "abundant but shy". Students have created the associations "Alwanat" and "Being Black at Sciences Po" to denounce open anti-Arab, anti-Muslim, anti-Black and anti-Asian hate by staff and students in the Reims and Menton campuses. Students anonymously asked the institute to recognise the existence of racism in Sciences Po. Many students and some members of the French Parliament have expressed concern about the enforcement of racialism in Sciences Po. Sciences Po has been criticized in 2022 for "censoring" lectures on Darwinism and the theory of evolution, considered by some critics as the "ultimate taboo" in the institution. However, the director of Sciences Po Vicherat insisted that Darwin is not censored at the institution. The institution has been accused in 2021 by two members of Parliament, in particular Annie Genevard, to give additional points to students using the controversial écriture inclusive. Sciences Po has denied this claim and it has been widely reported as fake news, but Le Figaro news has found the information to be true and some media have taken back their assessment of this information as being fake news. Alain Lancelot, director of Sciences Po from 1987 to 1996, was investigated for financial mismanagement by the French Court of Audit. Since 1997, the institution has been hit by a number of scandals, notably concerning the leadership of Richard Descoings, its director from 1997 to 2012. Descoings, director from 1997 to 2012, had been criticized for offering large sums of money (through salary rise, free accommodation, etc.) to diverse members of staff, including his wife, in spite of the fact that Sciences Po is partly stately funded. In February 2012, it was revealed that an inspector of the French Court of Audit, in charge of investigating the financial behaviour of Sciences Po, was at the same time employed by Sciences Po. On 3 April 2012, Descoings was found dead in his Manhattan luxury hotel room during a trip where he was representing Sciences Po in New York. The police initially concluded that his death had been caused by an overdose, but the final coronary report eventually stated that he died a natural death. Descoings' energy on this last day and the missing phones and computer have raised questions as to the precise circumstances of his death. In October 2012, the Court of Audit reprimanded Sciences Po for financial mismanagement, accusing it of opaque remuneration procedures, unwarranted expenses claims and excessive pay rises for managers. The Court noted that the school's complex legal status – a public institute managed by a private trust – had contributed to a dysfunction and waste. It also criticized the French government for increasing state funding for the school without insisting on additional public oversight. Sciences Po has also been accused of prevailing results over morals. In November 2012, the government dismissed Hervé Crès [fr], Sciences Po's interim director, but he sought the school's permanent directorship all the same, reasoning that Alain Lancelot and Richard Descoings, former Sciences Po directors, had also been reprimanded by the Court of Audit and yet performed well in their management of the school. In July 2015, Jean-Claude Casanova, the former president of the Foundation Nationale des Sciences Politiques, the private trust which manages Sciences Po, was fined €1500 for failing to properly consult the Foundation's Administrative Council over budgeting decisions involving public money. The Court of Financial and Budgetary Discipline eventually found Casanova guilty, but gave him a lenient sentence because the procedures had some part of regularity and because it was not customary in Sciences Po to follow all the financial rules. In February 2016, the Court of Audit noted that reforms had been made, but stated that greater transparency was still needed. Frédéric Mion, the then director of Sciences Po, defended the school's record and asked the judges to write their report again. Originally, only the "maîtrise en droit" delivered after 4 years of study by universités (as opposed to Grandes écoles like Sciences Po) was giving access to the legal profession. As soon as 2004, fearing for the access to the bar and legal professions to be open to institutions that are not faculties of law in universités, 54 professors of law signed a long text in the 'Recueil Dalloz' (major French legal journal), called "The Fight for the Law". They pointed out in particular the problem of the quality of the knowledge of legal professionals and of their deontology, should it be otherwise. They managed to have the education in law to have a special place in the French Code of Education. The move was co-led by Guillaume Drago, professor at Paris II Panthéon-Assas, and François Gaudu, professor at Paris 1 Pantheon-Sorbonne. In 2007, however, a governmental decree authorized Sciences Po students to pass the Bar exam, providing they take a master's degree with the mention "law". Academics in law labeled such a move as a "coup" and created an online petition called "call against the questioning of the utility of legal studies in the education of lawyers" ("appel contre la remise en cause de l'utilité des études juridiques dans la formation des avocats"). 445 academics publicly signed the petition, which is 15% of all French academics in law. The unity of the French academic body was noted: left- and right-wing professors, professors from Paris and outside Paris, in public law or private law... were in favor of the move. Students’ unions supported it. The union of (French) law school's deans "totally" associated itself to the move too. These critics said that it is not be a problem if Sciences Po was offering 8 semesters of law, as required as a general rule, to access to the bar; that, however, Sciences Po is be offering only general courses in social sciences with only a "sprinkling of law" in the masters programs; that it is not be enough to become a barrister (avocat) and it puts into question the utility of the law to become one. According to them, i creates barristers with a cheap education in law and is detrimental, in particular, for the citizens who take the services of barristers who did not have a proper education in law. To them, with this decree, the law was becoming a marketing product in a service of a school of political science that has many connections with politicians. They allegedly have preferred Sciences Po to keep with political sciences. In 2009, Sciences Po created the "École de droit de Sciences Po" ("law school", as opposed in French to a faculté de droit, "faculty of law"), delivering masters (graduate) degrees only. In 2008, partly as an answer, Paris II Panthéon-Assas created a collège de droit (undergraduate level) and then an "école de droit" (graduate level) on top of its faculty of law to attract top students in France. A lot of universities followed this model, and created these highly selective "colleges" or "schools". Sciences Po has been criticized for the abuse of the title of "professor" from their adjunct lecturers. Only 7% of the teaching body have permanent employment. People lecturing only a few hours call themselves "professor at Sciences Po". This creates an artificial advertisement, both for Sciences Po advertising a prestigious "staff" and for politicians and journalists linking themselves to this prestigious network. It has been customary to graduate in Sciences Po in addition to a law school or a grande école in Paris, therefore many of these graduates are also graduates of the latter. Most the alumni network is composed of students who received lectures in Sciences in addition to another studies. In 2016, the Sciences Po Alumni Association declared that there were 55,000 alumni. Many alumni are notable for their roles in fields such as politics or business. French Presidents who attended Sciences Po Five of the eight presidents of the French Fifth Republic have attended Sciences Po, including Georges Pompidou (in addition to the École normale supérieure), François Mitterrand (in addition to the Paris Law Faculty), Jacques Chirac, Nicolas Sarkozy (who did not graduate; in addition to the law school of Paris Nanterre University), François Hollande (in addition to HEC and Paris II), and Emmanuel Macron. Acting president Alain Poher (in addition to Mines ParisTech) is also an alumnus. A number of French politicians who are Sciences Po alumni also graduated from Ecole Nationale d'Administration (ENA), as the Sciences Po degree and its preparatory programmes prepare well for the competitive entrance to ENA. According to a study published in Le Monde in 2017, 14% (81 of the 577) of French members of parliament elected the same year were Sciences Po graduates, the most represented university in the National Assembly. The French Castex government included a number of Sciences Po graduates, including Florence Parly, Bruno Le Maire, and Jean-Michel Blanquer. Some politicians having a role in international organisations were also students at Sciences Po, including Simone Veil, former President of the European Parliament; Boutros Boutros-Ghali, former UN Secretary General; Pascal Lamy, former Director-General of the World Trade Organisation; Michel Camdessus and Dominique Strauss-Kahn, former presidents of the International Monetary Fund; Jean-Claude Trichet, former President of the European Central Bank; and Marisol Touraine, Chair of Unitaid Executive Board. Sciences Po is also alma mater to politicians including Władysław Grabski (Prime Minister of Poland 1920, 1923-1925), Habib Bourgiba (Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Tunisia 1956-1957 and the first President of the Tunisian Republic 1957-1987), Joseph Ki-Zerbo (Burkinabé advocate for African independence), Mohammad Mosaddegh (Prime Minister of Iran 1951-1953), Pierre Trudeau (Prime Minister of Canada 1968–1979, 1980–1984), Thanat Khoman (Thai Minister of Foreign Affairs 1959-1971 and Deputy Prime Minister 1981-1983) and Salome Zourabichvili (President of Georgia since 2018). Among the recipients of Sciences Po doctorate honoris causa are Václav Havel (2009), Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (2011), Elena Zhemkova (2022), and Angela Merkel (2023). Senior French diplomats including Jean-Marcel Jeanneney (France's first Ambassador to Algeria) François Delattre (currently Permanent Representative of France to the UN), Gérard Araud (former ambassador to the USA), Sylvie Bermann (currently ambassador to Russia), Bernard Émié (currently Director of the DGSE), Jean-Maurice Ripert (former Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations, Ambassador of France to Russia, and Ambassador of France to China), and Maurice Gourdault-Montagne (currently ambassador to China) are also alumni. The writer Marcel Proust for one year, the founder of the modern Olympics Pierre de Coubertin for one year, fashion designer Christian Dior, author Leïla Slimani, author Emmanuel Carrère, Harvard University Professor of political science Stanley Hoffmann, Chinese linguist Ma Jianzhong, Director of Paris Peace Forum Justin Vaïsse, journalist Arthur Dreyfus, researcher, Margaret Maruani, political scientist Tiago C. Peixoto, and former Le Monde editor Jean-Marie Colombani have all graduated from Sciences Po. Jurist and 1907 Nobel Peace Prize laureate Louis Renault taught international law at Sciences Po from its foundation in 1875 until his death in 1918. Economist Jean-Paul Fitoussi has taught at Sciences Po since 1982. Élie Halévy taught history of English political ideas and socialism at Sciences Po from 1896 until his death in 1937. Pierre Renouvin, a French historian of international relations, taught at Sciences Po from 1938 to 1970 Arbitrator Emmanuel Gaillard taught at the Law School until his death. The philosopher, anthropologist and sociologist Bruno Latour taught at Sciences Po from 2006 until his death in 2022. Pierre Hassner, a Romanian-French geopolitologist and philosopher, was Director Emeritus of Research at the Sciences Po Center for International Studies and Research. Jean-Luc Parodi, a French political scientist, worked at the Sciences Po Center of Political Research for the entirety of his career. 1945–1959 : André Siegfried 1959–1971 : Pierre Renouvin 1971–1981 : François Goguel 1981–2007 : René Rémond 2007–2016 : Jean-Claude Casanova 2016–2021 : Olivier Duhamel 2021 : Louis Schweitzer (interim) 2021–present : Laurence Bertrand Dorléac Émile Boutmy Eugène d'Eichtal Roger Seydoux Michel Gentot Alain Lancelot Richard Descoings Frédéric Mion Mathias Vicherat Directors of the Paris Institute of Political Studies and Administrators of the National Foundation of Political Sciences 1872–1906 : Émile Boutmy 1906–1936 : Eugène d'Eichtal 1945–1947 : Roger Seydoux 1947–1979 : Jacques Chapsal 1979–1987 : Michel Gentot 1987–1996: Alain Lancelot 1997–2012: Richard Descoings 2012: Hervé Crès (interim) 2012–2013: Jean Gaeremynck (interim) 2013–2021: Frédéric Mion 2021–2021: Bénédicte Durand (interim) 2021–2024: Mathias Vicherat 2024–present: Jean Bassères (interim) Education portal France portal Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs École nationale d'administration Grandes écoles Grands établissements Instituts d'études politiques List of Sciences Po honorary doctorate laureates Paris School of International Affairs "Sciences Po rejoint la Conférence des grandes écoles". Archived from the original on 7 May 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2019. "Governance & Budget". Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 17 August 2022. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Sciences Po : l'historienne Laurence Bertrand Dorléac qualifiée pour prendre la tête de la FNSP". Le Monde.fr (in French). 10 April 2021. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "CEPR Research Fellow Sergeï Guriev appointed Sciences Po Provost". CEPR. Archived from the original on 17 August 2022. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Sciences Po Paris, Campus européen franco-allemand à Nancy - Forum Franco-Allemand". www.ffa-dff.org. Archived from the original on 17 August 2022. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Bienvenue à Poitiers Presente". POITIERS PRESENTE (in French). Archived from the original on 17 August 2022. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Les membres de Couperin", Couperin.org (in French), Paris, archived from the original on 17 November 2022, retrieved 12 July 2018 Paris, Sciences Po, FNSP 27 rue Saint Guillaume 75007. "Home". Sciences Po Stories. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 30 May 2017.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Adenor, Jean-Loup (3 December 2021). "Pantouflage : le conseil décomplexé du directeur de Sciences Po à ses étudiants". www.marianne.net (in French). Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 25 April 2022. Chillaud, Matthieu (October 2014). "IR in France: state and costs of a disciplinary variety". Review of International Studies. 40 (4): 803–824. doi:10.1017/S0260210513000521. ISSN 0260-2105. S2CID 145486611. Archived from the original on 23 June 2023. Retrieved 23 June 2023. figaro, le (2 February 2015). "L'utilisation du nom «Sciences Po» est désormais réglementée". Le Figaro Etudiant (in French). Archived from the original on 23 June 2023. Retrieved 20 July 2023. Science, London School of Economics and Political. "CIVICA gets greenlight from the European Commission". London School of Economics and Political Science. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Emile Boutmy, l'inventeur de Sciences Po, modèle du défunt Richard Descoings". L'Obs. 14 January 2013. Archived from the original on 21 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Sciences Po Institut d'études politiques Fondation nationale des sciences politiques 1945-1979". Centre d’histoire de Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 12 October 2005. Retrieved 21 February 2022. Garrigou, Alain (March 1999). "Sciences-Po, laminoir des élites françaises". Le Monde diplomatique (in French). Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 21 February 2022. Nord, Philip (2002). The Jacobin Legacy in Modern France: Essays in Honour of Vincent Wright. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 116. ISBN 9780199256464. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 30 May 2017. LSE: A History of the London School of Economics and Political Science, 1895–1995. Oxford University Press. 1 June 1995. p. 73. ISBN 9780198202400. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 11 August 2018. Page, Arnaud. "Socialisme et sciences sociales : Sidney Webb et la création de la London School of Economics". OpenEdition Journals. Vincent, Gérard; Dethomas, Anne-Marie (January 1987). Sciences po: Histoire d'une réussite. Plon. ISBN 9782259260770. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 22 February 2022. "Former une élite coloniale à l'aube du XXe siècle | SciencesPo - Dossiers documentaires". dossiers-bibliotheque.sciencespo.fr. Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2020. "1886-1887 : Programme de l'Ecole libre des sciences politiques : Ecole libre des sciences politiques (Paris) : Free Download, Borrow, and Streaming". Internet Archive. 1886. Retrieved 24 August 2020. "Une vision libérale de la colonisation | SciencesPo - Dossiers documentaires". dossiers-bibliotheque.sciencespo.fr. Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2020. "Former une élite coloniale à l'aube du XXe siècle | SciencesPo - Dossiers documentaires". dossiers-bibliotheque.sciencespo.fr. Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2020. "Reform of the civil service". Archived from the original on 13 August 2015. Nord, Philip (2002). The Jacobin Legacy in Modern France: Essays in Honour of Vincent Wright. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 138. ISBN 9780199256464. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Le statut juridique de Sciences Po: la dualité FNSP et IEP de Paris" Centre d'histoire de Sciences Po Archived 20 June 2004 at the Wayback Machine Nord, Philip (2002). The Jacobin Legacy in Modern France: Essays in Honour of Vincent Wright. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 141. ISBN 9780199256464. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2020. Devine, Summerfield (1998). International Dictionary of University Histories. Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers. p. 147. ISBN 9781134262175. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2017. Nord, Philip (2002). The Jacobin Legacy in Modern France: Essays in Honour of Vincent Wright. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 117. ISBN 9780199256464. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Sciences Po, cœur du pouvoir d'Olivier Duhamel". Le Monde.fr. 8 January 2021. Archived from the original on 6 March 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2021 – via Le Monde. Noack, Rick (29 October 2014). "7 countries where Americans can study at universities, in English, for free (or almost free)". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 16 November 2017. Retrieved 5 October 2017. "Sciences Po ― an elite institution's introspection on its power, position and worth in French society" NYU Department of Journalism, 9 September 2003. Kahlenberg, Richard D. (13 September 2011). "An Affirmative-Action Success". The Chronicle of Higher Education Blogs: Innovations. Archived from the original on 10 July 2015. Retrieved 5 October 2017. "In France, a Bastion of Privilege No More". The New York Times. 4 September 2011. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 21 February 2017. Retrieved 5 October 2017. Maillard, Benoît Floc'h et Matteo (16 January 2015). "Sciences Po Paris : 64% des admis viennent de province". Le Monde (in French). ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 6 October 2017. Retrieved 9 October 2017. Lindgaard, Jade. "Sciences-Po: bienvenue à la Cour du roi Richard!". Mediapart. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2017. Lindgaard, Jade. "Sciences-Po: un "new management" version "management de la peur"". Mediapart. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2017. "Sciences Po: la Cour des comptes accable Descoigns". 8 October 2012. Archived from the original on 5 July 2019. Retrieved 5 July 2019. Brafman, Nathalie (2 March 2013). "Un pur produit de l'élite française pour Sciences Po". Le Monde (in French). ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017. Lefilliâtre, Jérôme. "Guillaume, Mion, Duhamel : Sciences-Po, le pouvoir des trois". Libération. Archived from the original on 9 February 2021. Retrieved 9 March 2021. "Sciences Po: "J'aurai beau tout faire, je ne serai jamais énarque ou normalien", explique Louis Vogel". Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. "Sciences Po ouvre une "École des affaires publiques"". Le Figaro Etudiant (in French). Archived from the original on 10 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017. "Sciences Po va ouvrir son "école du management et de l'innovation"". Le Point (in French). 3 October 2016. Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017. Décret n° 2015-1829 du 29 décembre 2015 portant approbation des statuts de la Fondation nationale des sciences politiques, 29 December 2015, archived from the original on 8 August 2017, retrieved 21 June 2017 "L'hôtel de l'Artillerie va accueillir le futur campus de Sciences-po". Le Parisien. 14 May 2017. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017. "Paris: French students blockade prestigious Sciences Po university". 18 April 2018. Archived from the original on 10 July 2018. Retrieved 9 July 2018. "La familia grande, livre le plus vendu de la semaine". Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Affaire Duhamel: l'urgence de réformer la gouvernance de Sciences Po Paris". Challenges. 17 February 2021. Archived from the original on 17 February 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2021. "Sciences Po s'enlise dans la crise de succession". Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "Sciences Po: une historienne de l'art pour remplacer Duhamel". Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "Sciences-Po Paris : les foisonnants mais timides rapports sur la déontologie et les violences sexistes et sexuelles". Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2021. "Sciences Po : n'en déplaise aux semeurs de haine". L'Express (in French). 16 April 2021. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 21 February 2022. "First Interview with our New President". Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 29 November 2021. Retrieved 29 November 2021. Taburet, Marceau (10 November 2021). "Qui est Mathias Vicherat, le nouveau directeur de Sciences-Po Paris?". Liberation (in French). Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 21 February 2022. Jacque, Philippe; Le Neve, Soazig (20 November 2021). "Mathias Vicherat, un homme de réseaux à la tête de Sciences Po Paris". Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 21 February 2022. Adenor, Jean-Loup (12 March 2021). "Pantouflage : le conseil décomplexé du directeur de Sciences Po à ses étudiants". Marianne (in French). Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 21 February 2022. "Le réseau avant le mérite : à Sciences Po, la désillusion des étudiants". 6 October 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Dans la tête d'un étudiant de Sciences Po". Le Monde.fr. 5 October 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Sciences Po au cœur d'une polémique à cause d'un séminaire annulé sur Darwin et le genre". Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. ""C'est devenu le tabou ultime" : Quand Sciences Po censure Darwin". 26 June 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Peggy Sastre – Quand Sciences Po censure Darwin". 20 July 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Sciences Po : "Les études de genre ? Un mouvement sectaire grimé en discipline universitaire"". 29 September 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. [Le directeur de Sciences Po Paris, Mathias Vicherat, placé en garde à vue pour violences conjugales https://www.lemonde.fr/societe/article/2023/12/04/le-directeur-de-sciences-po-paris-mathias-vicherat-place-en-garde-a-vue-pour-violences-conjugales_6203849_3224.html] [Accusation de violences conjugales : le directeur de Sciences-Po Mathias Vicherat propose sa «mise en retrait provisoire» https://www.liberation.fr/societe/droits-des-femmes/accusation-de-violences-conjugales-mathias-vicherat-propose-sa-mise-en-retrait-provisoire-20231211_KWLYF5OZH5EOZBL7CIA64ALJ3Q/] [Sciences-po Paris : le directeur Mathias Vicherat, accusé de violences conjugales, « propose » sa « mise en retrait » https://www.leparisien.fr/societe/sciences-po-paris-le-directeur-mathias-vicherat-accuse-de-violences-conjugales-propose-sa-mise-en-retrait-11-12-2023-7AY5JWHMHZBFPBQJCJFO2RA5PY.php] [Violences conjugales : Mathias Vicherat dit « entendre l’émotion » de Sciences Po Paris après sa garde à vue https://www.lemonde.fr/societe/article/2023/12/05/violences-conjugales-mathias-vicherat-dit-entendre-l-emotion-de-sciences-po-paris_6204059_3224.html] [Violences conjugales : Mathias Vicherat va reprendre son poste à la tête de Sciences Po https://www.lepoint.fr/societe/violences-conjugales-mathias-vicherat-va-reprendre-son-poste-a-la-tete-de-sciences-po-24-01-2024-2550627_23.php] [« Si c’est ça l’élite de demain… » : l’affaire Vicherat divise les étudiants de Sciences Po https://www.lepoint.fr/societe/a-sciences-po-les-etudiants-divises-sur-la-mise-en-retrait-du-directeur-12-12-2023-2546800_23.php] [Affaire Vicherat à Sciences Po : « On ne peut pas pousser vers la sortie un directeur qui n’a commis aucune faute ! » https://www.lepoint.fr/education/affaire-vicherat-a-sciences-po-on-ne-peut-pas-pousser-vers-la-sortie-un-directeur-qui-n-a-commis-aucune-faute-15-12-2023-2547147_3584.php] Wiels, Jason; Goury-Laffont, Victor (13 March 2024). "Elite French university boss resigns amid domestic violence accusations". POLITICO. Retrieved 14 March 2024. "Collégiades : 7 campus en compétition | Sciences Po Collège universitaire". SciencesPo.fr. 7 June 2017. Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 18 July 2019. "Our campuses". Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. Retrieved 6 May 2017. "Le campus". Sciences Po and University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 6 October 2017. Retrieved 6 May 2017. "Paris campus | Sciences Po Undergraduate College". 24 February 2017. Archived from the original on 28 September 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020. "/ L'Hôtel de l'Artillerie – Sciences Po". sciencespo.fr. Archived from the original on 29 April 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2017. "Sciences Po achète l'Hôtel de l'Artillerie pour créer un campus dans Paris » VousNousIls". 17 June 2016. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2017. "Opening of 1, Saint Thomas Campus". Sciences Po. 8 March 2023. Archived from the original on 8 March 2023. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "Sciences Po se dote d'un grand campus au cœur de Paris". Les Échos. France. 17 June 2016. Archived from the original on 24 July 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2017. "L'hôtel de l'Artillerie, future vitrine pédagogique de Sciences po Paris". www.letudiant.fr. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Dijon campus | Sciences Po Undergraduate College". 24 February 2017. Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020. "Dijon Campus". College. Archived from the original on 19 September 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023. "Le Havre campus | Sciences Po Undergraduate College". 24 February 2017. Archived from the original on 28 September 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020. "Le Havre campus". College. Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023. "Menton campus | Sciences Po Undergraduate College". 24 February 2017. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020. "Menton campus". College. Archived from the original on 10 July 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023. "Nancy campus | Sciences Po Undergraduate College". 23 February 2017. Archived from the original on 21 June 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020. "Nancy campus". College. Archived from the original on 19 September 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023. "Poitiers campus | Sciences Po Undergraduate College". 24 February 2017. Archived from the original on 10 August 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020. "Poitiers campus". College. Archived from the original on 19 September 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023. "Poitiers campus". College. Archived from the original on 19 September 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023. "Reims campus | Sciences Po Undergraduate College". 24 February 2017. Archived from the original on 28 September 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020. "Reims campus". College. Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023. "Reims campus". College. Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023. "La Fondation Nationale des Sciences Politiques". Sciences Po (in French). Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. "Institut d'études politiques de Paris". Sciences Po (in French). Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. "Gouvernance & budget". Sciences Po (in French). Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. "Sciences Po : quel budget pour quelle(s) vision(s) ?". La Péniche (in French). Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. Mérieux, Alice (28 January 2022). "Comment Sciences Po va payer son prestigieux nouveau campus?". Challenges (in French). Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. "Undergraduate Studies". Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 16 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Bachelor of Arts". College. Archived from the original on 27 June 2023. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "Bachelor of Arts". College. Archived from the original on 27 June 2023. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "Bachelor of Arts". College. Archived from the original on 27 June 2023. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "2021 Post-Baccalaueate Admissions: Who entered Sciences PO via general route on Parcoursup?". Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 10 May 2022. "Inside the mind of a Sciences Po student". Le Monde.fr. 15 October 2022. Archived from the original on 23 June 2023. Retrieved 23 June 2023. "Graduate Studies". Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Graduate Studies at Sciences Po". Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 6 February 2018. Retrieved 6 May 2017. "Home – Sciences Po Research". sciencespo.fr. 3 December 2014. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "Research at Sciences Po in 2015". Issuu. Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "Research Centers – Sciences Po Research". sciencespo.fr. 20 June 2014. Archived from the original on 8 May 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. INA. "Médialab de Sciences Po : cartographier le web pour les sciences sociales / E-dossier de l'audiovisuel : sciences humaines et sociales et patrimoine numérique / E-dossiers de l'audiovisuel / Publications / INA Expert – Accueil – Ina". ina-expert.com. Archived from the original on 19 September 2023. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "OFCE About..." ofce.sciences-po.fr. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "Research Units – Sciences Po Research". sciencespo.fr. 10 March 2015. Archived from the original on 5 May 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "Page d'accueil – Sciences Po liepp". sciencespo.fr. Archived from the original on 8 May 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "What is LIEPP? – Sciences Po liepp". sciencespo.fr. 23 September 2014. Archived from the original on 10 April 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "Page d'accueil – Sciences Po dime-shs". sciencespo.fr. Archived from the original on 27 June 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "MaxPo – About the Center". maxpo.eu. Archived from the original on 11 March 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "Cross-cutting Programmes – Sciences Po Research". sciencespo.fr. 6 October 2014. Archived from the original on 18 April 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "Sciences Po Paris Overview: Introducing Sciences Po" Sciences Po Website, 2001. "IBSS Boosts Coverage of French Social Science Journals", IBSS Archived 24 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine, 2005. "Presses de Sciences Po", Sciences Po Website, 21 October 2004. "Sciences Po: France's Leading University in the Social Sciences". Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2017. "Justice: A lecture and discussion with Harvard Professor Michael J. Sandel – Sciences Po School of Public Affairs". sciencespo.fr. 6 April 2016. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2017. "Irina Bokova – Guest speaker at PSIA – Sciences Po psia". sciencespo.fr. 7 April 2015. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2017. Haas, Annette. "LSE and Sciences Po – Academic partners – Academic Partnerships – Services and divisions – Staff and students – Home". London School of Economics. Archived from the original on 1 June 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2017. Lane, Philippe (8 July 2011). Franco-British Academic Partnerships: The Next Chapter (1 ed.). Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. p. 12. ISBN 9781781386569. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2017. "Sciences Po". Top Universities. 9 December 2012. Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 6 March 2020. "Sciences Po". Top Universities. Archived from the original on 13 April 2020. Retrieved 20 June 2023. "New Double Degree Programme: Sciences Po - NUS". La France à Singapour. Archived from the original on 19 September 2023. Retrieved 20 June 2023. Chillaud, Matthieu (October 2014). "IR in France: state and costs of a disciplinary variety". Review of International Studies. 40 (4): 803–824. doi:10.1017/S0260210513000521. ISSN 0260-2105. S2CID 145486611. Archived from the original on 23 June 2023. Retrieved 23 June 2023. figaro, le (2 February 2015). "L'utilisation du nom "Sciences Po" est désormais réglementée". Le Figaro Etudiant (in French). Archived from the original on 23 June 2023. Retrieved 23 June 2023. Conley, Marjorie (9 September 2003). "Sciences Po ? an elite institution's introspection on its power, position and worth in French society". Portfolio, The Journalism of Ideas. New York University. Archived from the original on 8 October 2016. Retrieved 10 August 2016. Koh, Aaron (2016). Elite Schools: Multiple Geographies of Privilege. New York; Oxon: Routledge. p. 193. ISBN 978-1--138-77940-2. Guttenplan, D.D. (4 May 2001). "In France, a Bastion of Privilege No More". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 10 August 2016. "In France, a Bastion of Privilege No More". The New York Times. 4 September 2011. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 21 February 2017. Retrieved 9 October 2017. Cote, James E.; Furlong, Andy (3 June 2016). Routledge Handbook of the Sociology of Higher Education. Routledge. p. 311. ISBN 978-1-317-67777-2. Archived from the original on 18 August 2021. Retrieved 28 January 2021. BEAUVAIS, Anne-Sophie; CAUCHY, Pascal (19 January 2017). Sciences Po pour les Nuls. edi8. ISBN 9782412024003. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2020 – via Google Books. "L'école de l'élite : Sciences Pipo ? du 05 mars 2013 - France Inter". www.franceinter.fr. 5 March 2013. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "pipeau – Traduction en anglais – exemples français – Reverso Context". context2.reverso.net. Archived from the original on 19 September 2023. Retrieved 23 August 2017. Tabellion, Elsa (21 March 2017). "Sciences Po déçoit-il ses élèves de 1ere année ?". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 15 April 2017. Retrieved 16 April 2017. Fabre, Benjamin (6 April 2015). L'art de pipoter: Se faire des amis et triompher en société : mode d'emploi. Éditions Tut-tut. ISBN 9782367040745. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2020 – via Google Books. Brunel, Manuel de guérilla à l'usage des femmes, p. 29. figaro, le. "Mon avis sur Sciences Po : "On en sait un peu sur tout, mais on ne sera jamais expert"". Le Figaro Etudiant. Archived from the original on 2 December 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Sciences Po, l'enquête inédite (2/3) : les dessous du "projet Harvard"". Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. Lichfield, John (17 May 2013). "Liberte, inegalite, fraternite: Is French elitism holding the country back?". The Independent. Archived from the original on 30 July 2016. Retrieved 10 August 2016. Nicolas Jounin, in Il est temps d'en finir avec Sciences Po ! Archived 24 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine "Les comptes de Sciences Pipo". 9 October 2012. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "Faire Sciences Po, entre fantasme et désillusion". Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Démocratiser le recrutement sans renoncer à l'élitisme, la difficile ligne de crête des Sciences Po". Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2021. "Le déclin de Sciences Po est-il amorcé ?". Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Démocratiser le recrutement sans renoncer à l'élitisme, la difficile ligne de crête des Sciences Po". Le Monde.fr. 31 March 2021. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2021. "Le modèle Sciences Po dans la tourmente avec les polémiques sur la « culture du viol » et l'« islamophobie »". Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. [1] Archived 7 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine Sciences Po peine à dépasser l’entre-soi "Sciences Po, l'enquête inédite (1/3) : malgré le scandale Duhamel, un implacable entre-soi". Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Sciences-Po n'a pas compris qu'elle n'était pas une institution à part". Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Sciences-Pipeau : Plus rentable que de braquer une banque". Actualités du droit (in French). 10 September 2012. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 21 February 2022. "MondialNews – Toute l'Actualité". www.mondialnews.com. Archived from the original on 11 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. Lindgaard, Jade. "Sciences-Po: une stratégie de communication qui élimine les questions gênantes". Mediapart. Archived from the original on 18 March 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2017. Ariane Chemin in France Inter, L'école de l'élite : Sciences Pipo ? Archived 17 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine "Sciences Po : le sacre de l'Etat inégalitaire". Le HuffPost. 6 February 2012. Archived from the original on 5 March 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Sciences Po par soi-même". Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. "Louis Vogel : pourquoi je suis candidat à Sciences po". Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. "Louis Vogel serait le favori pour diriger Sciences Po". Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. "Sciences Po : Louis Vogel se retire de la course". Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. "Louis Vogel : "Sciences Po envoie un mauvais signal"". Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. Le Monde, Sciences Po : le candidat Louis Vogel claque la porte, 27 février 2013 "A Sciences Po, la succession d'Olivier Duhamel se fait dans un climat tendu". Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "Le mauvais feuilleton de Sciences-Po continue". Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "Succession à Sciences-Po : jeux d'influence, coups bas et bataille idéologique". Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "Sciences Po : l'historienne Laurence Bertrand Dorléac qualifiée pour prendre la tête de la FNSP". Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "Succession à Sciences Po : « Quelles leçons retenir de cette tragi-comédie ? »". Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "Olivier Duhamel, l'inceste et les enfants du silence". Le Monde.fr. 4 January 2021. Archived from the original on 6 March 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2021 – via Le Monde. Cohen, Roger (5 January 2021). "Prominent French Intellectual Steps Down Amid Accusations of Incest". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 March 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2021. "High-profile French political scientist accused of sexually abusing stepson". The Guardian. 5 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "" Il était sa propre planète et on gravitait autour " : quand Olivier Duhamel régnait sur Sanary". 13 January 2021. Archived from the original on 5 March 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021. ""La familia grande", l'inceste comme mécanisme de domination". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on 6 March 2021. Retrieved 8 March 2021. "Sciences Po secouée par l'affaire Duhamel". LEFIGARO. 7 January 2021. Archived from the original on 8 January 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2021. "Pourquoi l'affaire Duhamel plonge-t-elle Sciences Po dans la tourmente ?". France Culture. 12 January 2021. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 7 March 2021. "L'onde de choc de l'affaire Duhamel". LEFIGARO. 5 January 2021. Archived from the original on 5 March 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021. "A Sciences Po, le scandale mine la fabrique de l'élite". Le Temps. 12 January 2021. Archived from the original on 28 January 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021 – via www.letemps.ch. Paris, Adam Sage. "Frédéric Mion, head of grande école Sciences Po, admits he brushed aside incest allegations". Archived from the original on 11 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021 – via www.thetimes.co.uk. "Affaire Duhamel, l'onde de choc à la Fondation des sciences politiques". La Croix. 13 January 2021. Archived from the original on 28 January 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021 – via www.la-croix.com. magazine, Le Point (7 January 2021). "Affaire Duhamel : le directeur de Sciences Po admet avoir été alerté". Le Point. Archived from the original on 8 January 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2021. Mallet, Victor (8 January 2021). "Child incest scandal shakes French intelligentsia". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 10 January 2021. "Vu de Suisse. L'affaire Kouchner/Duhamel, une "grenade dégoupillée lancée sur Sciences Po"". Courrier international. 13 January 2021. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021. "Affaire Duhamel : des étudiants de Sciences Po demandent la démission de leur directeur". France 3 Paris Ile-de-France. Archived from the original on 8 January 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2021. Mugerin, Daniel. "Sciences-Po : après l'affaire Duhamel, une seule solution, la démission du directeur". Libération. Archived from the original on 21 February 2021. Retrieved 9 March 2021. Paris, Un collectif d'étudiants de Sciences-Po. "Affaire Duhamel : "Nous, étudiantes et étudiants, demandons la démission du directeur de Sciences-Po Frédéric Mion"". Libération. Archived from the original on 22 February 2021. Retrieved 9 March 2021. à 15h46, Par Le Parisien avec AFP Le 18 janvier 2021 (18 January 2021). "Affaire Duhamel : des étudiants demandent de nouveau la démission du directeur de Sciences-po". leparisien.fr. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Méheut, Constant (9 February 2021). "Head of Elite French University Resigns Following Professor Incest Case". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 February 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2021. "Affaire Olivier Duhamel : le rapport qui a poussé Frédéric Mion à démissionner de Sciences Po". Le Monde.fr. 10 February 2021. Archived from the original on 20 February 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2021 – via Le Monde. "Affaire Olivier Duhamel : plusieurs proches du politologue ont démissionné de leur fonction". Franceinfo. 14 January 2021. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021. Lefilliâtre, Jérôme (11 January 2021). "Olivier Duhamel, loi du silence et réseau d'influence". Libération.fr. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021. "Affaire Duhamel : "pourquoi tant de personnes n'ont rien dit", s'interroge Aurore Bergé". SudOuest.fr. 16 January 2021. Archived from the original on 17 January 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021. "L'Elysée et l'entourage d'Edouard Philippe tentent de tenir " l'affaire Olivier Duhamel " à distance". Le Monde.fr. 25 January 2021. Archived from the original on 31 January 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021 – via Le Monde. Garrigou, Alain (1 March 2021). "Petits secrets entre amis à Sciences Po". Le Monde diplomatique. Archived from the original on 6 March 2021. Retrieved 5 March 2021. Goldstein, Joseph (4 April 2012). "Few Answers in Death of Scholar From France (Published 2012)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Les derniers secrets de Richard Descoings, prince des confusions". Le Journal du Dimanche. Archived from the original on 5 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. à 07h00, Par Le 17 mai 2015 (17 May 2015). "Sexe, drogue et Sciences-po". leparisien.fr. Archived from the original on 11 January 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Olivier Duhamel accusé d'inceste: SciencesPo et la malédiction des affaires de mœurs". 7 January 2021. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. "Dominique Strauss-Kahn forced to reveal his sexual proclivities". The Independent. 11 February 2015. Archived from the original on 1 January 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2021. Paris, Charles Bremner. "Elite French university caught up in deluge of sex abuse allegations". Archived from the original on 20 February 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2021 – via www.thetimes.co.uk. "Elite university drawn into France's sex abuse scandal". The Week UK. Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2021. "France's elite confronted by sexual abuse scandals". BBC News. 19 February 2021. Archived from the original on 20 February 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2021. "Sciences Po : "Nous ne nous reconnaissons pas dans la caricature qui est faite"". Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "« Non, il n'y a pas de culture du viol à Sciences Po »". Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2021. "Racisme sur les campus de Sciences Po". Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. "À Sciences Po Paris, l'idéologie racialiste fait peu à peu son nid". LEFIGARO. 10 January 2021. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021. "Race, genre, wokisme et... Sorcières : Sciences Po Reims sous emprise américaine". 28 September 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Peggy Sastre : "Ce qui m'inquiète, c'est que Sciences Po forme 90% de l'élite française"". 9 August 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Les étudiants de Sciences Po qui n'utilisent pas l'écriture inclusive sont-ils pénalisés ?". Archived from the original on 5 March 2021. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "À Sciences Po Paris, des points bonus accordés pour l'utilisation de l'écriture inclusive". Archived from the original on 7 March 2021. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "A Science-po, des copies pénalisées faute d'écriture inclusive ? C'est faux !". LCI. 19 February 2021. Archived from the original on 4 March 2021. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "Sciences Po : la Cour des comptes demande des poursuites". Challenges. 22 November 2012. Archived from the original on 6 October 2016. Retrieved 26 May 2017. Bonnet, François (8 October 2012). "Dossier: Sciences-Po, la fuite en avant et les scandales". Mediapart. Archived from the original on 28 August 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016. "La dérive financière de Sciences Po et la complaisance de l'État". 12 October 2012. Archived from the original on 17 February 2017. Retrieved 16 February 2017. "La dérive financière de Sciences Po et la complaisance de l'État". Contrepoints. 12 October 2012. Archived from the original on 17 February 2017. Retrieved 16 February 2017. Lindgaard, Jade. "Les dirigeants de Sciences-Po touchent des superbonus". Mediapart. Archived from the original on 28 August 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016. Lindgaard, Jade. "Quand Sciences-Po salarie son contrôleur". Mediapart. Archived from the original on 18 March 2017. Retrieved 28 August 2016. "Cops Believe French Scholar Accidentally Overdosed". Archived from the original on 13 September 2016. "Richard Descoings est mort". Le Monde. 30 May 2012. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016. Mullen, Jethro (4 April 2012). "French educator found dead in New York was dynamic, controversial figure". CNN. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 16 February 2017. "Educpros : actualités et services pour les professionnels de l'éducation. – Educpros.fr" (PDF). blog.educpros.fr. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016. comptes, Cour des. "Sciences Po : une forte ambition, une gestion défaillante / Archives / Actualités / Accueil / Cour des Comptes – Cour des comptes". ccomptes.fr. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Floc'h, Benoît (8 July 2012). "La Cour des comptes fustige la gestion de Sciences Po". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 9 August 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016. "Document : la réponse de Sciences-Po à la Cour des comptes". L'Obs. 10 October 2012. Archived from the original on 7 September 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Sciences Po : l'Etat repousse la nomination d'Hervé Crès". Archived from the original on 28 August 2016. "Scandale des salaires à Sciences Po : Jean-Claude Casanova renvoyé devant la Cour de discipline budgétaire". Le Monde. 24 July 2015. Archived from the original on 8 October 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016. Floc'h, Benoît (4 December 2015). "Jean-Claude Casanova condamné dans l'" affaire Sciences Po "". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 8 October 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016. Décodeurs, Les (10 February 2016). "Ce qu'il faut retenir du rapport de la Cour des comptes 2016 en 7 graphes". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 24 August 2017. Retrieved 26 May 2017. "Prise de bec entre la Cour des comptes et Sciences-Po". Challenges. 10 February 2016. Archived from the original on 16 March 2017. Retrieved 26 May 2017. Ait-Aoudia, Myriam (2013). "Le droit dans la concurrence. Mobilisations universitaires contre la création de diplômes de droit à Sciences Po Paris". Cairn (in French). Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 21 February 2022. "L'Université défend son monopole dans la formation des futurs avocats". Le Monde.fr. 21 April 2007. Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021 – via Le Monde. "Filières d'excellence à la fac". Franceinfo. 13 February 2013. Archived from the original on 20 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Universités : les cursus pour étudiants brillants". LEFIGARO. 29 September 2010. Archived from the original on 6 March 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Les charmes cachés de l'université". L'Obs. 27 December 2013. Archived from the original on 16 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Polémique sur les " parcours d'excellence " en droit". Le Monde.fr. 24 June 2015. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021 – via Le Monde. "Prof à Sciences Po, un label très convoité". Le Monde.fr. 15 January 2021. Archived from the original on 31 January 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021 – via Le Monde. "De Marcel Proust à Florian Zeller : les écrivains diplômés de Sciences Po". Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2021. Dumont, Yves (2016). Administrateur de sociétés : pourquoi pas moi ?: Méthodes et conseils pour rechercher et obtenir un mandat d'administrateur (in French). Eyrolles. p. 215. ISBN 978-2-212-56419-8. Archived from the original on 20 October 2021. Retrieved 28 January 2021. Antonelli, Gilberto; Rehbein, Boike (6 July 2017). Inequality in Economics and Sociology: New Perspectives. Taylor & Francis. p. 101. ISBN 978-1-317-19315-9. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2021. Delchet-Cochet, Karen (3 November 2020). Circular Economy: From Waste Reduction to Value Creation. John Wiley & Sons. p. 17. ISBN 978-1-78630-573-2. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2021. Zerouala, Faïza (11 May 2012). "A l'école des présidents de la Vème République". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "ENA and Civil Service Exams: Record Results for Sciences Po Students". Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 22 September 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2022. Le Foll, Clément (26 June 2017). "Les diplômés de grandes écoles surreprésentés à l'Assemblée nationale". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 13 July 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "Remaniement : quelles études ont fait les ministres du gouvernement Castex ?". Les Echos Start (in French). 7 July 2020. Archived from the original on 8 January 2021. Retrieved 10 January 2021. "Biographie de Dominique Strauss Kahn". edubourse.com. 21 October 2021. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "François Delattre, porte-voix de la France à l'ONU". Le Monde.fr. 19 April 2017. Archived from the original on 23 April 2017. Retrieved 1 June 2017. D.C., Ambassade de France aux Etats-Unis – Washington. "L'Ambassadeur – France in the United States / Embassy of France in Washington, D.C." France in the United States / Embassy of France in Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on 6 June 2017. Retrieved 1 June 2017. Po, Alumni Sciences. "Manifestation Alumni Sciences Po : Dinner Debate with H.E Sylvie Bermann, French Ambassador to the UK". sciences-po.asso.fr. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 1 June 2017. "Biographie de M. Bernard Emié, Ambassadeur de France en Algérie – La France en Algérie". Archived from the original on 25 April 2017. "L'ambassadeur – La France en Chine". Archived from the original on 9 January 2017. "Alumni – Sciences Po International". sciencespo.fr. 4 February 2015. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 18 December 2021. "Alumni – Sciences Po International". sciencespo.fr. 4 February 2015. Archived from the original on 24 April 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. DROIT, LE MONDE DU (6 September 2012). "Emmanuel Gaillard élu professeur à l'École de Droit de Sciences Po" (in French). Archived from the original on 21 February 2022. Retrieved 21 February 2022. "Bruno Latour – Sciences Po – MedialabSciences Po – Medialab". medialab.sciences-po.fr. Archived from the original on 5 August 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2017. Richard Descoings, Sciences Po. De la Courneuve à Shanghai, préface de René Rémond, Paris: Presses de Sciences Po, 2007 (ISBN 2-7246-0990-5) Jacques Chapsal, " L'Institut d'études politiques de l'Université de Paris ", Annales de l'Université de Paris, n° 1, 1950 " Centenaire de l'Institut d'études politiques de Paris (1872–1972) ", brochure de l'Institut d'études politiques de Paris, 1972 A Sciences-Po, les voyages forment la jeunesse, Monde Diplomatique, Février 2006 Pierre Favre, Cent dix années de cours à l'École libre des sciences politiques et à l'Institut d'études politiques de Paris (1871–1982), thèse de doctorat, 2 volumes, 1986 Gérard Vincent, Sciences Po. Histoire d'une réussite, Orban, Paris, 1987 Marie-Estelle Leroty, L'Enseignement de l'histoire à l'École libre des sciences politiques et à l'Institut d'études politiques de l'Université de Paris de 1943 à 1968, mémoire de diplôme d'études approfondies dirigé par Jean-François Sirinelli, Institut d'études politiques de Paris, 2000 Anne Muxel (direction), Les Étudiants de Sciences Po, Paris: Presses de Sciences Po, 2004, ISBN 2-7246-0937-9: Résultats d'une grande enquête menée en janvier 2002 auprès des élèves par le Cevipof Comité national d'évaluation des établissements publics à caractère scientifique, culturel et professionnel, Rapport d'évaluation de l'Institut d'études politiques de Paris, Septembre 2005 Cyril Delhay, Promotion ZEP. Des quartiers à Sciences Po, Paris: Hachette, 2006, ISBN 2-01-235949-3 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Institut d'études politiques de Paris. Sciences Po (FNSP and IEP Paris) official English-version website Histoire@Politique (journal published by the IEP-Paris) In France, a Bastion of Privilege No More New York Times, September 2011 48°51′15.02″N 2°19′42.49″E﻿ / ﻿48.8541722°N 2.3284694°E﻿ / 48.8541722; 2.3284694