Hyōgo Prefecture (兵庫県, Hyōgo-ken) is a prefecture of Japan located in the Kansai region of Honshu. Hyōgo Prefecture has a population of 5,469,762 (as of 1 June 2019[update]) and a geographic area of 8,400 square kilometres (3,200 square miles). Hyōgo Prefecture borders Kyoto Prefecture to the east, Osaka Prefecture to the southeast, and Okayama and Tottori prefectures to the west. Kōbe is the capital and largest city of Hyōgo Prefecture, and the seventh-largest city in Japan, with other major cities including Himeji, Nishinomiya, and Amagasaki. Hyōgo Prefecture's mainland stretches from the Sea of Japan to the Seto Inland Sea, where Awaji Island and a small archipelago of islands belonging to the prefecture are located. Hyōgo Prefecture is a major economic center, transportation hub, and tourist destination in western Japan, with 20% of the prefecture's land area designated as Natural Parks. Hyōgo Prefecture forms part of the Kobe metropolitan area and Osaka metropolitan area, the second-most-populated urban region in Japan after the Greater Tokyo area and one of the world's most productive regions by GDP. Present-day Hyōgo Prefecture includes the former provinces of Harima, Tajima, Awaji, and parts of Tanba and Settsu. In 1180, near the end of the Heian period, Emperor Antoku, Taira no Kiyomori, and the Imperial court moved briefly to Fukuhara, in what is now the city of Kobe. There the capital remained for five months. Himeji Castle, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, is in the city of Himeji. Southern Hyōgo Prefecture was severely devastated by the 6.9 Mw Great Hanshin earthquake of 1995, which destroyed major parts of Kobe and Awaji, as well as Nishinomiya and Ashiya and the neighboring Osaka Prefecture, killing nearly 6,500 people. Hyōgo has coastlines on two seas: to the north, the Sea of Japan, to the south, the Seto Inland Sea. On Awaji Island, Hyōgo borders the Pacific Ocean coastline in the Kii Channel. The northern portion is sparsely populated, except for the city of Toyooka, The central highlands are only populated by tiny villages. Most of Hyōgo's population lives on the southern coast, which is part of the Osaka-Kobe-Kyoto metropolitan area. Awaji is an island that separates the Inland Sea and Osaka Bay, lying between Honshu and Shikoku. Summertime weather throughout Hyōgo is hot and humid. As for winter conditions, the north of Hyōgo tends to receive abundant snow, whilst the south receives only the occasional flurry. Hyōgo borders on Osaka Prefecture, Kyoto Prefecture, Tottori Prefecture and Okayama Prefecture. As of 31 March 2008,[update] 20% of the total land area of the prefecture was designated as Natural Parks, namely the Sanin Kaigan and Setonaikai National Parks; Hyōnosen-Ushiroyama-Nagisan Quasi-National Park; and Asago Gunzan, Harima Chūbu Kyūryō, Inagawa Keikoku, Izushi-Itoi, Kasagatayama-Sengamine, Kiyomizu-Tōjōko-Tachikui, Onzui-Chikusa, Seiban Kyūryō, Seppiko-Mineyama, Tajima Sangaku, and Taki Renzan Prefectural Natural Parks. Aioi相生市 Akashi明石市 Akō赤穂市 Amagasaki尼崎市 Asago朝来市 Ashiya芦屋市 Awaji淡路市 Himeji姫路市 Itami伊丹市 Kakogawa加古川市 Kasai加西市 Katō加東市 Kawanishi川西市 Kobe (capital)神戸市 Miki三木市 Minamiawaji南あわじ市 Nishinomiya西宮市 Nishiwaki西脇市 Ono小野市 Sanda三田市 Shisō宍粟市 Sumoto洲本市 Takarazuka宝塚市 Takasago高砂市 Tamba-Sasayama丹波篠山市 Tanba丹波市 Tatsunoたつの市 Toyooka豊岡市 Yabu養父市 Fukusaki福崎町 Harima播磨町 Ichikawa市川町 Inagawa猪名川町 Inami稲美町 Kami香美町 Kamigōri上郡町 Kamikawa神河町 Sayō佐用町 Shin'onsen新温泉町 Taishi太子町 Taka多可町 Awaji Island Ieshima Islands Two major artificial islands are located Hyōgo Prefecture: Rokkō Island Port Island Sanin Kaigan National Park Setonaikai National Park Hyōnosen-Ushiroyama-Nagisan Quasi-National Park Hyōnosen-Ushiroyama-Nagisan Quasi-National Park (Mt. Hyonosen view from Yabu) Hyōnosen-Ushiroyama-Nagisan Quasi-National Park (Torokawataira in Kami) Sanin Kaigan National Park (Takeno Beach in Toyooka) Sanin Kaigan National Park (Tajima-mihonoura of Sanin Coast in Shinonsen) The city of Akō and the only town in Akō District (Kamigōri), were scheduled to merge and the city would still retain the name Akō. Akō District would be defunct if the merger was successful. However, the merger has not taken place. As in all prefectures nationwide, agriculture, forestry, and fisheries play a big role in the economy of Hyogo Prefecture. Hyōgo Prefecture also has an IT industry, many heavy industries, metal and medical, Kobe Port being one of the largest ports in Japan. Kobe Port also hosts one of the world's fastest supercomputers, and Hyogo Prefecture passed laws to keep Kobe Port free of nuclear weapons (a nuclear-free zone) since the year 1975. Hyōgo is a part of the Hanshin Industrial Region. There are two research institutes of Riken, natural sciences research institute in Japan, in Kobe and Harima. "SPring-8", a synchrotron radiation facility, is in Harima. Himeji Castle in Himeji (UNESCO World Heritage Site) Jōdo-ji in Ono Ichijō-ji in Kasai Kakurin-ji in Kakogawa Taisan-ji in Kobe Chōkō-ji in Katō Chorakuji in Kami, Hyōgo (Mikata) Jōdo-ji in Ono Ichijo-ji in Kasai Kakurin-ji in Kakogawa Chorakuji-daibutsu Kitano-chō Yamamoto-dōri Izushi Sasayama Kitano-chō Yamamoto-dōri Izushi Sasayama Hyōgo Prefectural Museum of Art in Nada Ward, Kobe Kobe City Museum in Chuo Ward, Kobe Kobe Maritime Museum in Chuo Ward, Kobe KOSETSU Museum of Art in Higashinada Ward, Kobe Hakutsuru Fine Art Museum in Higashinada Ward, Kobe Himeji City Museum of Art in Himeji Asago Art Village in Asago Ashiya City Museum of Art & History in Ashiya TEKISUI MUSEUM OF ART in Ashiya Osamu Tezuka Manga Museum in Takarazuka Hyōgo Prefectural Museum of Art in Kobe Kobe City Museum in Kobe KOSETSU Museum of Art in Kobe Himeji City Museum of Art in Himeji Asago Art Village in Asago Osamu Tezuka Manga Museum in Takarazuka Sonoda Women's University St. Thomas University (ex-Eichi University) – closed in 2015 Takarazuka University Koshien University Kwansei Gakuin University (Sanda Campus) Kobe College Kwansei Gakuin University Otemae University Mukogawa Women's University Ashiya University Kobe University Kobe University of Commerce Kobe Gakuin University Kobe City University of Foreign Studies Kobe Women's University Kobe Shukugawa Gakuin University Kobe Institute of Computing Konan University University of Marketing and Distribution Sciences University of Hyogo Hyogo University of Teacher Education University of Hyogo Hyogo University Himeji Institute of Technology Himeji Dokkyo University Himeji Kinki University University of Hyogo University of Hyogo There are 163 public and 52 private high schools within Hyogo prefecture. Of the public high schools, some are administered by the Hyogo prefectural government, whilst the others are administered by local municipalities. Ashiya International Secondary School, founded 2003 The sports teams listed below are based in Hyōgo. Football (soccer) Vissel Kobe (Kobe) INAC Kobe Leonessa (Women's) (Kobe) Baseball Orix Buffaloes (Kobe) Hanshin Tigers (Nishinomiya) Volleyball Hisamitsu Springs (Kobe) JT Marvelous (Nishinomiya) Rugby Kobelco Steelers (Kobe) World Fighting Bull (Kobe) Basketball Kobe Storks (Kobe) A popular troupe of Takarazuka Revue plays in Takarazuka. Arima Onsen in the south of the province in Kita-ku, Kobe is one of the Three Ancient Springs in Japan. The north of Hyogo Prefecture has sightseeing spots such as Kinosaki Onsen, Izushi, and Yumura Onsen. Takeda Castle in Asago is often referred to locally as the "Machu Picchu of Japan". The matsuba crab and Tajima beef are both national delicacies. Arima Onsen, Kobe Million-dollar view, Kobe Harborland – Meriken Park area in Kobe Awaji Yumebutai in Awaji Kuchiganaya in Asago Kinosaki Onsen Yumura Onsen Tonomine highland in Kamikawa Toyooka Stork Park Takeda Castle Miyuki Street New Year's midnight traditional sale, Himeji Nishinomiya Shrine's Ebisu Festival in January Yanagihara Ebisu Festival in January, Kobe Tada Shrine's Genji Festival in April, Kawanishi Kobe Festival and Parade in May Aioi Peron Festival in May Himeji Yukata Festival in June Dekansho Bon Dancing Festival in August, Sasayama Nada Fighting Festival, Himeji Kobe Luminarie in December Ako Chushingura Parade JR West San'yō Shinkansen JR Kobe Line Wadamisaki Line San'yō Main Line San'in Line Fukuchiyama Line (JR Takarazuka Line) Kakogawa Line Bantan Line Kishin Line Akō Line Hankyu Railway Kobe Line Kobe Kosoku Line Itami Line Imazu Line Koyo Line Takarazuka Line Nose Railway Myoken Line Nissei Line Shintetsu Arima Line Kobe Kosoku Line Sanda Line Kōen-Toshi Line Ao Line Kobe Municipal Subway Seishin-Yamate Line Kaigan Line Hokushin Line Hojo Railway (Ao-Hojo) Hanshin Railway Main Line Kobe Kosoku Line Mukogawa Line Hanshin Nanba Line Sanyo Railway Main Line Aboshi Line Chizu Express Kitakinki Tango Railway Miyazu Line Kobe New Transit Port Liner Rokkō Liner Chūgoku Expressway San'yō Expressway Kobe-Awaji-Naruto Expressway Meishin Expressway Maizuru-Wakasa Expressway Bantan Expressway Second Shinmei road Hanshin Expressway Route 2 Route 9 Route 28 Route 29 Route 43 Route 171 Route 173 Route 174 (Sannomiya-Kobe Port) Route 175 Route 176 Route 178 Route 179 Route 250 Route 312 Route 372 Route 373 Route 426 Route 427 Route 428 Route 429 Route 436 Route 477 Route 482 Route 483 Kobe Port – Mainly international container hub port Akashi Port Shikama Port – Mainly Shōdo Island route ferry Kobe Airport Konotori Tajima Airport Ume Aoki, manga artist Mana Ashida, child actress from Nishinomiya Koichi Domoto, singer of KinKi Kids Heath, musician, singer-songwriter and bassist of X Japan is from Amagasaki Hiro Fujiwara, manga artist Miracle Hikaru, comedian and impersonator is from Toyooka Kanō Jigorō, founder of the martial art Judo Jun, musician, singer-songwriter and guitarist of Phantasmagoria is from Kobe Shinji Kagawa, footballer from Kobe Tomoya Kanki, drummer of One Ok Rock Takumi Kawanishi (J-pop idol singer and dancer, member of JO1) Tomomi Ogawa, bassist of Scandal Itzuki Yamazaki, professional wrestler from Ieshima Kaoru, guitarist of Dir En Grey Ayaka Kimura, actress, former singer of Coconuts Musume is from Kobe Keiko Kitagawa, actress from Pretty Guardian Sailor Moon and Buzzer Beat was born in Kobe Miho Komatsu, singer and songwriter from Kobe Yūji Kuroiwa, politician from Kobe, current governor of Kanagawa Prefecture Kamui Kobayashi, former Sauber and Toyota Racing driver from Amagasaki Chisa Maekawa, singer of Girl Next Door Kiyomatsu Matsubara, ichthyologist, herpetologist and marine biologist Hitoshi Matsumoto, comedian, from Amagasaki Aya Matsuura, singer is from Himeji Ryuto Kazuhara, vocalist of Generations from Exile Tribe is from Amagasaki Mina Myoui – American-born Japanese singer of South Korean group Twice. Raised in Nishinomiya Hiro Matsushita – Businessman, former driver in Champ Car series. Chairman of Swift Engineering & Swift Xi Miyavi, musician, although born in Konohana-ku, Osaka grew up in Kawanishi Minako Nishiyama, contemporary artist Rena Nōnen known professionally as Non (のん, Non), actress, singer, fashion model from Kamikawa Masamune Shirow, manga artist was born in Kobe So Taguchi, outfielder for the Chicago Cubs Masahiro Tanaka, pitcher for the New York Yankees Nagaru Tanigawa, creator of the Haruhi Suzumiya series was born in Kinki Tsuneko Taniuchi, contemporary performance artist Fumito Ueda, video game creator of Ico, Shadow of the Colossus, and The Last Guardian Juri Ueno, Japanese Academy Award-winning actress best known for her performances in Swing Girls and the live-action adaptation of Nodame Cantabile, is from Kakogawa Shota Yasuda, guitarist of Kanjani Eight is from Amagasaki Piko, musician, Vocaloid singer born in Kobe, Hyōgo Hyogo entered a sister state relationship with Washington state in the United States on October 22, 1963, the first such arrangement between Japan and the United States. In 1981, a sister state agreement was drawn up between Hyogo and the state of Western Australia in Australia. To commemorate the 10th anniversary of this agreement in 1992, the Hyogo Prefectural Government Cultural Centre was established in Perth. Banshu Yamasaki Iris Garden Fastest Computer in the world The Hyōgo Prefectural Government has expressed the view that the "Prefectural song does not exist" and denied the fact that currently, this song has been enacted in 1947. 金旻革 (2015-01-01). "布く新憲法 ゆくては明かるし…幻の兵庫県民歌". Kobe Shimbun. Archived from the original on 2016-03-09. Retrieved 2015-01-09. "2020年度国民経済計算（2015年基準・2008SNA） : 経済社会総合研究所 - 内閣府". 内閣府ホームページ (in Japanese). Retrieved 2023-05-18. Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric. (2005). "Hyōgo prefecture" in Japan Encyclopedia, pp. 363-365, p. 363, at Google Books; "Kansai" in Japan Encyclopedia, p. 477, p. 477, at Google Books. Nussbaum, "Kobe" in Japan Encyclopedia, p. 537, p. 537, at Google Books. Nussbaum, "Provinces and prefectures" in Japan Encyclopedia, p. 780, p. 780, at Google Books. Statistics Bureau of Japan "General overview of area figures for Natural Parks by prefecture" (PDF). Ministry of the Environment. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 April 2012. Retrieved 4 February 2012. City.ako.hyogo.jp Archived 2006-07-08 at the Wayback Machine "XII Income of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries" (PDF). Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-09-19. Retrieved 2017-10-02. "RIKEN Advanced Institute for Computational Science". Archived from the original on 2017-09-26. Retrieved 2017-10-02. "JAL Guide to Japan – Matsuba Crab". Archived from the original on 2015-04-05. Retrieved 2015-04-02. Camden, Jim (August 20, 2013). "Washington, Japan celebrate 50 years". Spokesman-Review. Archived from the original on March 11, 2018. Retrieved March 11, 2018. "Celebrating 50 years with Hyogo, Japan". Washington State Library. August 19, 2013. Archived from the original on March 11, 2018. Retrieved March 11, 2018. "Sister Cities – City of Perth". Archived from the original on 2015-05-30. Hyogo.com.au Archived 2015-04-02 at the Wayback Machine Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric and Käthe Roth (2005). Japan Encyclopedia. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5. OCLC 58053128. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hyōgo Prefecture. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Hyōgo. Official Hyōgo prefecture homepage Hyōgo prefecture tourist guide Hyōgo Business & Cultural Center Medical Services in Hyōgo prefecture