The Ligue Magnus, currently known as Synerglace Ligue Magnus for sponsorship reasons, is the top men's division of the French ice hockey pyramid, established in 1906. The league operated under a variety of names before taking that of its championship trophy, the Magnus Cup, in 2004. The trophy was in turn named for Frenchman and IIHF founder Louis Magnus. Teams from the Ligue Magnus can participate in the IIHF's annual Champions Hockey League (CHL), competing for the European Trophy. Participation is based on the strength of the various leagues in Europe (excluding the European/Asian Kontinental Hockey League). Going into the 2022–23 CHL season, the Ligue Magnus was ranked the No. 9 league in Europe, allowing them to send their top team to compete in the CHL. 12 teams play a 44-game regular season. The schedule is fully balanced and there are no geographic conferences. Regulation wins are worth 3 points, as per international rules. The top 8 teams qualify for the Magnus Cup playoffs, with all series contested in a best-of-seven format. The remaining 4 teams play a 6-game round-robin, at the end of which the last-place team is relegated. The Magnus Cup champions qualify for the following season's Champions Hockey League. All Ligue Magnus teams also take part in the French Cup. Game night rosters must include at least 10 players who have spent 3 or more years in the French hockey system before the age of 21. French citizenship itself is not a requirement to qualify for non-import status, as long as the player meets the above criteria. Conversely, a citizen of France who was fully trained in a foreign country will count as an import regardless of his French citizenship. On 22 December 2013 Grenoble and Briançon played an outdoor regular season game at Stade des Alpes, the home of former Ligue 1 soccer club GF38. A sellout attendance of 19,767 set a league record. Another outdoor game took place on 30 December 2016, when Lyon hosted Grenoble at Parc OL, the home field of seven-time Ligue 1 champions Olympique Lyonnais. The event drew a record 25,182 attendance. In 2016, the league signed its first naming rights deal with Saxoprint, the online printing subsidiary of German conglomerate Cewe, and became known as Saxoprint Ligue Magnus for the following two seasons. In 2018, mobile ice rink supplier Synerglace became the series' new title sponsor. Select regular season and playoff games air on cable and broadband television channel Sport en France. All league games can be streamed for a monthly subscription fee of approximately €10. The service, managed by Finnish company Fanseat, employed a man-operated main camera for the first three years, before shifting to PlaySight automated technology in 2019. Hockey Dangles '16: Saxoprint Magnus Edition, an arcade-style mobile video game based on the league, was released for Android and iOS devices in September 2016. Gothiques Ducs Hormadi Boxers Diables Rouges Jokers Pionniers Rapaces Brûleurs de Loups Spartiates Aigles Dragons Albatros de Brest Chamois de Chamonix Corsaires de Dunkerque Drakkars de Caen Ducs de Dijon Jets de Viry-Essonne Ours de Villard-de-Lans Pingouins de Morzine-Avoriaz Sangliers Arvernes de Clermont-Ferrand Avalanche du Mont-Blanc Diables Noirs de Tours Scorpions de Mulhouse Séquanes de Besançon Flammes Bleues de Reims Charles Ramsay Trophy (top scorer) Albert Hassler Trophy (most valuable French player) Marcel Claret Trophy (most sportsmanlike team) Raymond Dewas Trophy (most sportsmanlike player) Jean-Pierre Graff Trophy (most promising player) Jean Ferrand Trophy (most valuable goaltender) Camil Gélinas Trophy (coach of the year) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ligue Magnus. Philippe Bozon (St. Louis Blues, Genève-Servette HC) Alain Daigle (Chicago Blackhawks) Evgeny Davydov (HC CSKA Moscow, Winnipeg Jets) Steve Gainey (Dallas Stars, Phoenix Coyotes) Cristobal Huet (Los Angeles Kings, Montreal Canadiens, Washington Capitals, Chicago Blackhawks) Steve Montador (Calgary Flames, Florida Panthers, Anaheim Ducks, Boston Bruins, Buffalo Sabres) Steven Reinprecht (Calgary Flames, Colorado Avalanche, Florida Panthers, Los Angeles Kings, Phoenix Coyotes) Mark Rycroft (St. Louis Blues, Colorado Avalanche) Richard Sévigny (Montreal Canadiens, Quebec Nordiques) Claude Verret (Buffalo Sabres, Lausanne HC, Rochester Americans) In addition, Bob Gainey (Montreal Canadiens) and Brian Propp (Philadelphia Flyers) have played in the second tier of French hockey. Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in France, the full regular season was played but the 2020 play-offs were cancelled, and no team was crowned Magnus Cup champion for the 2019–20 season. Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in France, the regular season was terminated at its mid-point, the 2021 play-offs were cancelled, and (unlike 2019–20) regular season champion Rouen were crowned Magnus Cup champion of France for the 2020–21 season. "Championnat de France 1906/07". hockeyarchives.info. Hockeyarchives. Retrieved 11 February 2021. Règlements généraux de la Saxoprint Ligue Magnus. Issy-Les-Moulineaux: Fédération Française de Hockey sur Glace. August 2020. Riglet, Sébastien (31 December 2016). "Winter Game : 25182 personnes au Parc OL, vraiment ?". LeSportDauphinois.com. JHN Média. Retrieved 1 January 2017. "La D1 de hockey devient la "Saxoprint Ligue Magnus"". lexpress.fr. AFP. 6 January 2016. Retrieved 11 February 2021. Mandin, Louise (18 June 2018). "Synerglace succède à Saxoprint en tant que partenaire-titre de la Ligue Magnus". sportstrategies.com. Sport Stratégies. Warnier, Mathieu (24 September 2020). "Ligue Magnus : Le championnat arrive sur Sport en France". sports.orange.fr. Orange. Retrieved 11 February 2020. Mucret, Leslie (21 August 2019). "La FFHG prolonge son partenariat avec Fanseat". sportmag.fr. Even'Dia. Archived from the original on 10 April 2021. Retrieved 3 March 2021. Hockey Dangles'16 Saxoprint Magnus Edition - Trailer FR (Trailer) (in French). Toulon: GamYo Studio. 29 July 2016. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2016. French Ice Hockey Federation Ligue Magnus AJPH (players' association) Results