Sir James Paul McCartney CH MBE (born 18 June 1942) is an English singer, songwriter and musician who gained worldwide fame with the Beatles, for whom he played bass guitar and shared primary songwriting and lead vocal duties with John Lennon. One of the most successful composers and performers of all time, McCartney is known for his melodic approach to bass-playing, versatile and wide tenor vocal range, and musical eclecticism, exploring genres ranging from pre–rock and roll pop to classical, ballads, and electronica. His songwriting partnership with Lennon is the most successful in modern music history. Born in Liverpool, McCartney taught himself piano, guitar, and songwriting as a teenager, having been influenced by his father, a jazz player, and rock and roll performers such as Little Richard and Buddy Holly. He began his career when he joined Lennon's skiffle group, the Quarrymen, in 1957, which eventually evolved into the Beatles in 1960. Sometimes called "the cute Beatle", McCartney later immersed himself in the London avant-garde scene and played a key role in incorporating experimental aesthetics into the Beatles' studio productions. Starting with the 1967 album Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, he gradually became the band's de facto leader, providing creative impetus for most of their music and film projects. Many of his Beatles songs, including "And I Love Her", "Yesterday", "Eleanor Rigby", and "Blackbird", rank among the most covered songs in history. Although primarily a bassist with the Beatles, he played a number of other instruments, including keyboards, guitars, and drums, on various songs. After the Beatles disbanded, he debuted as a solo artist with the 1970 album McCartney and went on to form the band Wings with his first wife, Linda, and Denny Laine. Under McCartney's leadership, Wings became one of the most successful bands of the 1970s. He wrote or co-wrote their US or UK number-one hits, such as "My Love", "Band on the Run", "Listen to What the Man Said", "Silly Love Songs", and "Mull of Kintyre". He resumed his solo career in 1980 and has been touring as a solo artist since 1989. Apart from Wings, his UK or US number-one hits include "Uncle Albert/Admiral Halsey" (with Linda), "Coming Up", "Pipes of Peace", "Ebony and Ivory" (with Stevie Wonder), and "Say Say Say" (with Michael Jackson). Beyond music, he has been involved in projects to promote international charities related to animal rights, seal hunting, land mines, vegetarianism, poverty, and music education. McCartney has written or co-written a record 32 songs that have topped the Billboard Hot 100 and, as of 2009[update], he had sales of 25.5 million RIAA-certified units in the US. His honours include two inductions into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame (as a member of the Beatles in 1988 and as a solo artist in 1999), an Academy Award, a Primetime Emmy Award, 18 Grammy Awards, an appointment as a Member of the Order of the British Empire in 1965, and a knighthood in 1997 for services to music. As of 2020, he is one of the wealthiest musicians in the world, with an estimated fortune of £800 million. McCartney was born on 18 June 1942 at Walton Hospital in the Walton area of Liverpool, where his mother, Mary Patricia (née Mohin), had qualified to practise as a nurse. Both of his parents were of Irish descent. McCartney has a younger brother, Peter Michael, and a younger stepsister, Ruth, born to his father Jim's second wife, Angie, during her first marriage. Paul and Michael were baptised in their mother's Catholic faith, even though their father was a former Protestant who had turned agnostic. Religion was not emphasised in the household. According to his biographer Peter Ames Carlin, McCartney's parents came from the "lowest rungs of the working class" but had experienced some upward social mobility during their lifetimes. Before the war, Jim had worked as a salesman for the cotton merchants A. Hannay and Co., having been promoted from his job as a sample boy in their warehouse; when the war broke out, Hannay's was shuttered, and Jim was employed as a lathe turner at Napier's defence engineering works, volunteering for the fire brigade at night. The growing family was rehoused at a flat in Knowsley in 1944 and then in a council housing development in Speke in 1946. After the war, Jim returned to his job at the cotton merchants with a reduced income. Mary's work as a visiting midwife was much more remunerative. McCartney attended Stockton Wood Road Primary School in Speke from 1947 until 1949, when he transferred to Joseph Williams Junior School in Belle Vale because of overcrowding at Stockton. In 1953, he was one of only three students out of 90 to pass the 11-Plus exam, meaning he could attend the Liverpool Institute, a grammar school rather than a secondary modern school. In 1954, he met schoolmate George Harrison on the bus from his suburban home in Speke. The two quickly became friends; McCartney later admitted: "I tended to talk down to him because he was a year younger." The type of people that I came from, I never saw better! [...] I mean, the Presidents, the Prime Minister, I never met anyone half as nice as some of the people I know from Liverpool who are nothing, who do nothing. They're not important or famous. But they are smart, like my dad was smart. I mean, people who can just cut through problems like a hot knife through butter. The kind of people you need in life. Salt of the earth. — Paul McCartney, Playboy interview, 1984 Mary McCartney's midwifery paid well, and her earnings enabled them to move into 20 Forthlin Road in Allerton, where they lived until 1964. She rode a bicycle to her patients; McCartney described an early memory of her leaving at "about three in the morning [the] streets ... thick with snow". On 31 October 1956, when McCartney was 14, his mother died of an embolism as a complication of surgery for breast cancer. McCartney's loss later became a connection with John Lennon, whose mother, Julia, died in 1958 when Lennon was 17. McCartney's father was a trumpet player and pianist who led Jim Mac's Jazz Band in the 1920s. He kept an upright piano in the front room, encouraged his sons to be musical and advised McCartney to take piano lessons. However, McCartney preferred to learn by ear. When McCartney was 11, his father encouraged him to audition for the Liverpool Cathedral choir, but he was not accepted. McCartney then joined the choir at St Barnabas' Church, Mossley Hill. McCartney received a nickel-plated trumpet from his father for his fourteenth birthday, but when rock and roll became popular on Radio Luxembourg, McCartney traded it for a £15 Framus Zenith (model 17) acoustic guitar, since he wanted to be able to sing while playing. He found it difficult to play guitar right-handed, but after noticing a poster advertising a Slim Whitman concert and realising that Whitman played left-handed, he reversed the order of the strings. McCartney wrote his first song, "I Lost My Little Girl", on the Zenith, and composed another early tune that would become "When I'm Sixty-Four" on the piano. American rhythm and blues influenced him, and Little Richard was his schoolboy idol; "Long Tall Sally" was the first song McCartney performed in public, at a Butlin's Filey holiday camp talent competition. At the age of fifteen on 6 July 1957, McCartney met John Lennon and his band, the Quarrymen, at the St Peter's Church Hall fête in Woolton. The Quarrymen played a mix of rock and roll and skiffle, a type of popular music with jazz, blues and folk influences. Soon afterwards, the members of the band invited McCartney to join as a rhythm guitarist, and he formed a close working relationship with Lennon. Harrison joined in 1958 as lead guitarist, followed by Lennon's art school friend Stuart Sutcliffe on bass, in 1960. By May 1960, the band had tried several names, including Johnny and the Moondogs, Beatals and the Silver Beetles. They adopted the name the Beatles in August 1960 and recruited drummer Pete Best shortly before a five-engagement residency in Hamburg. In 1961, Sutcliffe left the band, and McCartney became their bass player. It is disputed whether he did so reluctantly or actively sought out the role. While in Hamburg, they recorded professionally for the first time and were credited as the Beat Brothers, who were the backing band for English singer Tony Sheridan on the single "My Bonnie". This resulted in attention from Brian Epstein, who was a key figure in their subsequent development and success. He became their manager in January 1962. Ringo Starr replaced Best in August, and the band had their first hit, "Love Me Do", in October, becoming popular in the UK in 1963, and in the US a year later. The fan hysteria became known as "Beatlemania", and the press sometimes referred to McCartney as the "cute Beatle". McCartney co-wrote (with Lennon) several of their early hits, including "I Saw Her Standing There", "She Loves You", "I Want to Hold Your Hand" (1963) and "Can't Buy Me Love" (1964). In August 1965, the Beatles released the McCartney composition "Yesterday", featuring a string quartet. Included on the Help! LP, the song was the group's first recorded use of classical music elements and their first recording that involved only a single band member. "Yesterday" became one of the most covered songs in popular music history. Later that year, during recording sessions for the album Rubber Soul, McCartney began to supplant Lennon as the dominant musical force in the band. Musicologist Ian MacDonald wrote, "from [1965] ... [McCartney] would be in the ascendant not only as a songwriter, but also as instrumentalist, arranger, producer, and de facto musical director of the Beatles." Critics described Rubber Soul as a significant advance in the refinement and profundity of the band's music and lyrics. Considered a high point in the Beatles catalogue, both Lennon and McCartney said they had written the music for the song "In My Life". McCartney said of the album, "we'd had our cute period, and now it was time to expand." Recording engineer Norman Smith stated that the Rubber Soul sessions exposed indications of increasing contention within the band: "the clash between John and Paul was becoming obvious ... [and] as far as Paul was concerned, George [Harrison] could do no right—Paul was absolutely finicky." In 1966, the Beatles released the album Revolver. Featuring sophisticated lyrics, studio experimentation, and an expanded repertoire of musical genres ranging from innovative string arrangements to psychedelic rock, the album marked an artistic leap for the Beatles. The first of three consecutive McCartney A-sides, the single "Paperback Writer" preceded the LP's release. The Beatles produced a short promotional film for the song, and another for its B-side, "Rain". The films, described by Harrison as "the forerunner of videos", aired on The Ed Sullivan Show and Top of the Pops in June 1966. Revolver also included McCartney's "Eleanor Rigby", which featured a string octet. According to Gould, the song is "a neoclassical tour de force ... a true hybrid, conforming to no recognizable style or genre of song". Except for some backing vocals, the song included only McCartney's lead vocal and the strings arranged by producer George Martin. The band gave their final commercial concert at the end of their 1966 US tour. Later that year, McCartney completed his first musical project independent of the group—a film score for the UK production The Family Way. The score was a collaboration with Martin, who used two McCartney themes to write thirteen variations. The soundtrack failed to chart, but it won McCartney an Ivor Novello Award for Best Instrumental Theme. Upon the end of the Beatles' performing career, McCartney sensed unease in the band and wanted them to maintain creative productivity. He pressed them to start a new project, which became Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, widely regarded as rock's first concept album. McCartney was inspired to create a new persona for the group, to serve as a vehicle for experimentation and to demonstrate to their fans that they had musically matured. He invented the fictional band of the album's title track. As McCartney explained, "We were fed up with being the Beatles. We really hated that fucking four little mop-top approach. We were not boys we were men ... and [we] thought of ourselves as artists rather than just performers." Starting in November 1966, the band adopted an experimental attitude during recording sessions for the album. Their recording of "A Day in the Life" required a forty-piece orchestra, which Martin and McCartney took turns conducting. The sessions produced the double A-side single "Strawberry Fields Forever"/"Penny Lane" in February 1967, and the LP followed in June. Based on an ink drawing by McCartney, the LP's cover included a collage designed by pop artists Peter Blake and Jann Haworth, featuring the Beatles in costume as the Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, standing with a host of celebrities. The cover piqued a frenzy of analysis. After Brian died ... Paul took over and supposedly led us you know ... we went round in circles ... We broke up then. That was the disintegration. I thought, 'we've fuckin' had it.' — John Lennon, Rolling Stone magazine, 1970 Epstein's death in August 1967 created a void, which left the Beatles perplexed and concerned about their future. McCartney stepped in to fill that void and gradually became the de facto leader and business manager of the group that Lennon had once led. In his first creative suggestion after this change of leadership, McCartney proposed that the band move forward on their plans to produce a film for television, which was to become Magical Mystery Tour. According to Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn, the project was "an administrative nightmare throughout". McCartney largely directed the film, which brought the group their first unfavourable critical response. However, the film's soundtrack was more successful. It was released in the UK as a six-track double extended play disc (EP) and as an identically titled LP in the US, filled out with five songs from the band's recent singles. The only Capitol compilation later included in the group's official canon of studio albums, the Magical Mystery Tour LP achieved $8 million in sales within three weeks of its release, higher initial sales than any other Capitol LP up to that point. The Beatles' animated film Yellow Submarine, loosely based on the imaginary world evoked by McCartney's 1966 composition, premiered in July 1968. Though critics admired the film for its visual style, humour and music, the soundtrack album issued six months later received a less enthusiastic response. By late 1968, relations within the band were deteriorating. The tension grew during the recording of their eponymous double album, also known as the "White Album". Matters worsened the following year during the Let It Be sessions, when a camera crew filmed McCartney lecturing the group: "We've been very negative since Mr. Epstein passed away ... we were always fighting [his] discipline a bit, but it's silly to fight that discipline if it's our own". In March 1969, McCartney married his first wife, Linda Eastman, and in August, the couple had their first child, Mary, named after his late mother. Abbey Road was the band's last recorded album, and Martin suggested "a continuously moving piece of music", urging the group to think symphonically. McCartney agreed, but Lennon did not. They eventually compromised, agreeing to McCartney's suggestion: an LP featuring individual songs on side one and a long medley on side two. In October 1969, a rumour surfaced that McCartney had died in a car crash in 1966 and was replaced by a lookalike, but this was quickly refuted when a November Life magazine cover featured him and his family, accompanied by the caption "Paul is still with us". John Lennon privately left the Beatles in September 1969, though agreed not to go public with the information to not jeopardise ongoing business negotiations. McCartney was in the midst of business disagreements with his bandmates, largely concerning Allen Klein's management of the group, when he announced his own departure from the group on 10 April 1970. He filed a suit for the band's formal dissolution on 31 December 1970, and in March 1971 the court appointed a receiver to oversee the finances of the Beatles' company Apple Corps. An English court legally dissolved the Beatles' partnership on 9 January 1975, though sporadic lawsuits against their record company EMI, Klein, and each other persisted until 1989. I didn't really want to keep going as a solo artist ... so it became obvious that I had to get a band together ... Linda and I talked it through and it was like, "Yeah, but let's not put together a supergroup, let's go back to square one." — McCartney As the Beatles were breaking up in 1969–70, McCartney fell into a depression. His wife helped him pull out of that condition by praising his work as a songwriter and convincing him to continue writing and recording. In her honour, he wrote "Maybe I'm Amazed", explaining that with the Beatles breaking up, "that was my feeling: Maybe I'm amazed at what's going on ... Maybe I'm a man and maybe you're the only woman who could ever help me; Baby won't you help me understand ... Maybe I'm amazed at the way you pulled me out of time, hung me on the line, Maybe I'm amazed at the way I really need you." He added that "every love song I write is for Linda." In 1970, McCartney continued his musical career with his first solo release, McCartney, a US number-one album. Apart from some vocal contributions from Linda, McCartney is a one-man album, with McCartney providing compositions, instrumentation and vocals. In 1971, he collaborated with Linda and drummer Denny Seiwell on a second album, Ram. A UK number one and a US top five, Ram included the co-written US number-one hit single "Uncle Albert/Admiral Halsey". Later that year, ex-Moody Blues guitarist Denny Laine joined the McCartneys and Seiwell to form the band Wings. McCartney had this to say on the group's formation: "Wings were always a difficult idea ... any group having to follow [the Beatles'] success would have a hard job ... I found myself in that very position. However, it was a choice between going on or finishing, and I loved music too much to think of stopping." In September 1971, the McCartneys' daughter Stella was born, named in honour of Linda's grandmothers, both of whom were named Stella. Following the addition of guitarist Henry McCullough, Wings' first concert tour began in 1972 with a debut performance in front of an audience of seven hundred at the University of Nottingham. Ten more gigs followed as they travelled across the UK in a van during an unannounced tour of universities, during which the band stayed in modest accommodation and received pay in coinage collected from students, while avoiding Beatles songs during their performances. McCartney later said, "The main thing I didn't want was to come on stage, faced with the whole torment of five rows of press people with little pads, all looking at me and saying, 'Oh well, he is not as good as he was.' So we decided to go out on that university tour which made me less nervous ... by the end of that tour I felt ready for something else, so we went into Europe." During the seven-week, 25-show Wings Over Europe Tour, the band played almost solely Wings and McCartney solo material: the Little Richard cover "Long Tall Sally" was the only song that the Beatles had previously recorded. McCartney wanted the tour to avoid large venues; most of the small halls they played had capacities of fewer than 3,000 people. In March 1973, Wings achieved their first US number-one single, "My Love", included on their second LP, Red Rose Speedway, a US number one and UK top five. McCartney's collaboration with Linda and former Beatles producer Martin resulted in the song "Live and Let Die", which was the theme song for the James Bond film of the same name. Nominated for an Academy Award, the song reached number two in the US and number nine in the UK. It also earned Martin a Grammy for his orchestral arrangement. Music professor and author Vincent Benitez described the track as "symphonic rock at its best". After the departure of McCullough and Seiwell in 1973, the McCartneys and Laine recorded Band on the Run. The album was the first of seven platinum Wings LPs. It was a US and UK number one, the band's first to top the charts in both countries and the first ever to reach Billboard magazine's charts on three separate occasions. One of the best-selling releases of the decade, it remained on the UK charts for 124 weeks. Rolling Stone named it one of the Best Albums of the Year for 1973, and in 1975, Paul McCartney and Wings won the Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Performance for the song "Band on the Run", and Geoff Emerick won the Grammy for Best Engineered Recording for the album. In 1974, Wings achieved a second US number-one single with the title track. The album also included the top-ten hits "Jet" and "Helen Wheels", and earned the 418th spot on Rolling Stone's list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. In 1974, McCartney hired guitarist Jimmy McCulloch and drummer Geoff Britton to replace McCullough and Seiwell. Britton subsequently quit during recording sessions in 1975 and was replaced by Joe English. Wings followed Band on the Run with the chart-topping albums Venus and Mars (1975) and Wings at the Speed of Sound (1976). In 1975, they began the fourteen-month Wings Over the World Tour, which included stops in the UK, Australia, Europe and the US. The tour marked the first time McCartney performed Beatles songs live with Wings, with five in the two-hour set list: "I've Just Seen a Face", "Yesterday", "Blackbird", "Lady Madonna" and "The Long and Winding Road". Following the second European leg of the tour and extensive rehearsals in London, the group undertook an ambitious US arena tour that yielded the US number-one live triple LP Wings over America. In September 1977, the McCartneys' third child was born, a son they named James. In November, the Wings song "Mull of Kintyre", co-written with Laine, was quickly becoming one of the best-selling singles in UK chart history. The most successful single of McCartney's solo career, it achieved double the sales of the previous record holder, "She Loves You", and went on to sell 2.5 million copies and hold the UK sales record until the 1984 charity single, "Do They Know It's Christmas?" London Town (1978) spawned a US number-one single ("With a Little Luck"), and continued Wings' string of commercial successes, making the top five in both the US and the UK. Critical reception was unfavourable, and McCartney expressed disappointment with the album. Back to the Egg (1979) featured McCartney's assemblage of a rock supergroup dubbed "Rockestra" on two tracks. The band included Wings along with Pete Townshend, David Gilmour, Gary Brooker, John Paul Jones, John Bonham and others. Though certified platinum, critics panned the album. Wings completed their final concert tour in 1979, with twenty shows in the UK that included the live debut of the Beatles songs "Got to Get You into My Life", "The Fool on the Hill" and "Let It Be". In 1980, McCartney released his second solo LP, the self-produced McCartney II, which peaked at number one in the UK and number three in the US. As with his first album, he composed and performed it alone. The album contained the song "Coming Up", the live version of which, recorded in Glasgow, Scotland, in 1979 by Wings, became the group's last number-one hit. By 1981, McCartney felt he had accomplished all he could creatively with Wings and decided he needed a change. The group discontinued in April 1981 after Laine quit following disagreements over royalties and salaries. In 1982, McCartney collaborated with Stevie Wonder on the Martin-produced number-one hit "Ebony and Ivory", included on McCartney's Tug of War LP, and with Michael Jackson on "The Girl Is Mine" from Thriller. "Ebony and Ivory" was McCartney's record 28th single to hit number one on the Billboard 100. The following year, he and Jackson worked on "Say Say Say", McCartney's most recent US number one as of 2014[update]. McCartney earned his latest UK number one as of 2014[update] with the title track of his LP release that year, "Pipes of Peace". In 1984, McCartney starred in the musical Give My Regards to Broad Street, a feature film he also wrote and produced and which included Starr in an acting role. It was disparaged by critics: Variety described the film as "characterless, bloodless, and pointless"; while Roger Ebert awarded it a single star, writing, "you can safely skip the movie and proceed directly to the soundtrack". The album fared much better, reaching number one in the UK and producing the US top-ten hit single "No More Lonely Nights", featuring David Gilmour on lead guitar. In 1985, Warner Brothers commissioned McCartney to write a song for the comedic feature film Spies Like Us. He composed and recorded the track in four days, with Phil Ramone co-producing. McCartney participated in Live Aid, performing "Let it Be", but technical difficulties rendered his vocals and piano barely audible for the first two verses, punctuated by squeals of feedback. Equipment technicians resolved the problems and David Bowie, Alison Moyet, Pete Townshend and Bob Geldof joined McCartney on stage, receiving an enthusiastic crowd reaction. McCartney collaborated with Eric Stewart on Press to Play (1986), with Stewart co-writing more than half the songs on the LP. In 1988, McCartney released Снова в СССР, initially available only in the Soviet Union, which contained eighteen covers; recorded over the course of two days. In 1989, he joined forces with fellow Merseysiders Gerry Marsden and Holly Johnson to record an updated version of "Ferry Cross the Mersey", for the Hillsborough disaster appeal fund. That same year, he released Flowers in the Dirt; a collaborative effort with Elvis Costello that included musical contributions from Gilmour and Nicky Hopkins. McCartney then formed a band consisting of himself and Linda, with Hamish Stuart and Robbie McIntosh on guitars, Paul "Wix" Wickens on keyboards and Chris Whitten on drums. In September 1989, they launched the Paul McCartney World Tour, his first in over a decade. During the tour, McCartney performed for the largest paying stadium audience in history on 21 April 1990, when 184,000 people attended his concert at Maracanã Stadium in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. That year, he released the triple album Tripping the Live Fantastic, which contained selected performances from the tour. McCartney ventured into orchestral music in 1991 when the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Society commissioned a musical piece by him to celebrate its sesquicentennial. He collaborated with composer Carl Davis, producing Liverpool Oratorio. The performance featured opera singers Kiri Te Kanawa, Sally Burgess, Jerry Hadley and Willard White with the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra and the choir of Liverpool Cathedral. Reviews were negative. The Guardian was especially critical, describing the music as "afraid of anything approaching a fast tempo", and adding that the piece has "little awareness of the need for recurrent ideas that will bind the work into a whole". The paper published a letter McCartney submitted in response in which he noted several of the work's faster tempos and added, "happily, history shows that many good pieces of music were not liked by the critics of the time so I am content to ... let people judge for themselves the merits of the work." The New York Times was slightly more generous, stating, "There are moments of beauty and pleasure in this dramatic miscellany ... the music's innocent sincerity makes it difficult to be put off by its ambitions". Performed around the world after its London premiere, the Liverpool Oratorio reached number one on the UK classical chart, Music Week. In 1991, McCartney performed a selection of acoustic-only songs on MTV Unplugged and released a live album of the performance titled Unplugged (The Official Bootleg). During the 1990s, McCartney collaborated twice with Youth of Killing Joke as the musical duo "the Fireman". The two released their first electronica album together, Strawberries Oceans Ships Forest, in 1993. McCartney released the rock album Off the Ground in 1993. The subsequent New World Tour followed, which led to the release of the Paul Is Live album later that year. Starting in 1994, McCartney took a four-year break from his solo career to work on Apple's Beatles Anthology project with Harrison, Starr and Martin. He recorded a radio series called Oobu Joobu in 1995 for the American network Westwood One, which he described as "widescreen radio". Also in 1995, Prince Charles presented him with an Honorary Fellowship of the Royal College of Music—"kind of amazing for somebody who doesn't read a note of music", commented McCartney. In 1997, McCartney released the rock album Flaming Pie. Starr appeared on drums and backing vocals in "Beautiful Night". Later that year, he released the classical work Standing Stone, which topped the UK and US classical charts. In 1998, he released Rushes, the second electronica album by the Fireman. In 1999, McCartney released Run Devil Run. Recorded in one week, and featuring Ian Paice and David Gilmour, it was primarily an album of covers with three McCartney originals. He had been planning such an album for years, having been previously encouraged to do so by Linda, who had died of cancer in April 1998. McCartney did an unannounced performance at the benefit tribute, "Concert for Linda", his wife of 29 years who died a year earlier. It was held at the Royal Albert Hall in London on 10 April 1999, and was organised by two of her close friends, Chrissie Hynde and Carla Lane. Also during 1999, he continued his experimentation with orchestral music on Working Classical. In 2000, he released the electronica album Liverpool Sound Collage with Super Furry Animals and Youth, using the sound collage and musique concrète techniques that had fascinated him in the mid-1960s. He contributed the song "Nova" to a tribute album of classical, choral music called A Garland for Linda (2000), dedicated to his late wife. Having witnessed the September 11 attacks from the JFK airport tarmac, McCartney was inspired to take a leading role in organising the Concert for New York City. His studio album release in November that year, Driving Rain, included the song "Freedom", written in response to the attacks. The following year, McCartney went out on tour with a new band that included guitarists Rusty Anderson and Brian Ray, accompanied by Paul "Wix" Wickens on keyboards and Abe Laboriel Jr. on drums. They began the Driving World Tour in April 2002, which included stops in the US, Mexico and Japan. The tour resulted in the double live album Back in the US, released internationally in 2003 as Back in the World. The tour earned a reported $126.2 million, an average of over $2 million per night, and Billboard named it the top tour of the year. The group continues to play together; McCartney has played live with Ray, Anderson, Laboriel, and Wickens longer than he played live with the Beatles or Wings. In July 2002, McCartney married Heather Mills. In November, on the first anniversary of George Harrison's death, McCartney performed at the Concert for George. He participated in the National Football League's Super Bowl, performing "Freedom" during the pre-game show for Super Bowl XXXVI in 2002 and headlining the halftime show at Super Bowl XXXIX in 2005. The English College of Arms honoured McCartney in 2002 by granting him a coat of arms. His crest, featuring a Liver bird holding an acoustic guitar in its claw, reflects his background in Liverpool and his musical career. The shield includes four curved emblems which resemble beetles' backs. The arms' motto is Ecce Cor Meum, Latin for "Behold My Heart". In 2003, the McCartneys had a child, Beatrice Milly. In July 2005, he performed at the Live 8 event in Hyde Park, London, opening the show with "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" (with U2) and closing it with "Drive My Car" (with George Michael), "Helter Skelter", and "The Long and Winding Road". In September, he released the rock album Chaos and Creation in the Backyard, for which he provided most of the instrumentation. In 2006, McCartney released the classical work Ecce Cor Meum. The rock album Memory Almost Full followed in 2007. In 2008, he released his third Fireman album, Electric Arguments. Also in 2008, he performed at a concert in Liverpool to celebrate the city's year as European Capital of Culture. In 2009, after a four-year break, he returned to touring and has since performed over 80 shows. More than forty-five years after the Beatles first appeared on American television during The Ed Sullivan Show, he returned to the same New York theatre to perform on Late Show with David Letterman. On 9 September 2009, EMI reissued the Beatles catalogue following a four-year digital remastering effort, releasing a music video game called The Beatles: Rock Band the same day. McCartney's enduring fame has made him a popular choice to open new venues. In 2009, he performed three sold-out concerts at the newly built Citi Field, a venue constructed to replace Shea Stadium in Queens, New York. These performances yielded the double live album Good Evening New York City later that year. In 2010, McCartney opened the Consol Energy Center in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; it was his first concert in Pittsburgh since 1990 due to the old Civic Arena being deemed unsuitable for McCartney's logistical needs. In July 2011, McCartney performed at two sold-out concerts at the new Yankee Stadium. A New York Times review of the first concert reported that McCartney was "not saying goodbye but touring stadiums and playing marathon concerts". In August 2011, McCartney left EMI and signed with Decca Records, the same record company that famously rejected The Beatles back in January 1962. McCartney was commissioned by the New York City Ballet, and in September 2011, he released his first score for dance, a collaboration with Peter Martins called Ocean's Kingdom on Decca Records. Also in 2011, McCartney married Nancy Shevell. He released Kisses on the Bottom, a collection of standards, in February 2012, the same month that the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences honoured him as the MusiCares Person of the Year, two days prior to his performance at the 54th Annual Grammy Awards. McCartney remains one of the world's top draws. He played to over 100,000 people during two performances in Mexico City in May, with the shows grossing nearly $6 million. In June 2012, McCartney closed Queen Elizabeth's Diamond Jubilee Concert held outside Buckingham Palace, performing a set that included "Let It Be" and "Live and Let Die". He closed the opening ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London on 27 July, singing "The End" and "Hey Jude" and inviting the audience to join in on the coda. Having donated his time, he received £1 from the Olympic organisers. On 12 December 2012, McCartney performed with three former members of Nirvana (Krist Novoselic, Dave Grohl, and guest member Pat Smear) during the closing act of 12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief, seen by approximately two billion people worldwide. On 28 August 2013, McCartney released the title track of his upcoming studio album New, which came out in October 2013. A primetime entertainment special was taped on 27 January 2014 at the Ed Sullivan Theater with a 9 February 2014 CBS airing. The show featured McCartney and Ringo Starr, and celebrated the legacy of the Beatles and their groundbreaking 1964 performance on The Ed Sullivan Show. The show, titled The Night That Changed America: A Grammy Salute to The Beatles, featured 22 classic Beatles songs as performed by various artists, including McCartney and Starr. In May 2014, McCartney cancelled a sold-out tour of Japan and postponed a US tour to October due to begin that month after he contracted a virus. He resumed the tour with a high-energy three-hour appearance in Albany, New York on 5 July 2014. On 14 August 2014, McCartney performed in the final concert at Candlestick Park in San Francisco, California before its demolition; this was the same venue at which the Beatles played their final concert for a paying audience in 1966. In 2014, McCartney wrote and performed "Hope for the Future", the ending song for the video game Destiny. In November 2014, a 42-song tribute album titled The Art of McCartney was released, which features a wide range of artists covering McCartney's solo and Beatles work. Also that year, McCartney collaborated with American rapper Kanye West on the single "Only One", released on 31 December. In January 2015, McCartney collaborated with West and Barbadian singer Rihanna on the single "FourFiveSeconds". They released a music video for the song in January and performed it live at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards on 8 February 2015. McCartney featured on West's 2015 single "All Day", which also features Theophilus London and Allan Kingdom. In February 2015, McCartney performed with Paul Simon for the Saturday Night Live 40th Anniversary Special. McCartney and Simon performed the first verse of "I've Just Seen a Face" on acoustic guitars, and McCartney later performed "Maybe I'm Amazed". McCartney shared lead vocals on the Alice Cooper-led Hollywood Vampires supergroup's cover of his song "Come and Get It", which appears on their debut album, released on 11 September 2015. On 10 June 2016, McCartney released the career-spanning collection Pure McCartney. The set includes songs from throughout McCartney's solo career and his work with Wings and the Fireman, and is available in three different formats (2-CD, 4-CD, 4-LP and Digital). The 4-CD version includes 67 tracks, most of which were top-40 hits. McCartney appeared in the 2017 adventure film Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales, in a cameo role as Uncle Jack. In January 2017, McCartney filed a suit in United States district court against Sony/ATV Music Publishing seeking to reclaim ownership of his share of the Lennon–McCartney song catalogue beginning in 2018. Under US copyright law, for works published before 1978 the author can reclaim copyrights assigned to a publisher after 56 years. McCartney and Sony agreed to a confidential settlement in June 2017. On 20 June 2018, McCartney released "I Don't Know" and "Come On to Me" from his album Egypt Station, which was released on 7 September through Capitol Records. Egypt Station became McCartney's first album in 36 years to top the Billboard 200, and his first to debut at number one. On 26 July 2018, McCartney played at The Cavern Club, with his regular band of Anderson, Ray, Wickens and Abe Laboriel Jr. The gig was filmed and later broadcast by BBC, on Christmas Day 2020, as Paul McCartney at the Cavern Club. McCartney's 18th solo album, McCartney III, was released on 18 December 2020, via Capitol Records; it became his first number-one solo album in the UK since Flowers in the Dirt in 1989. The album was recorded in England during the COVID-19 lockdowns and continues McCartney's trend of self-titled solo albums with him playing all of the instruments. An album of "reinterpretations, remixes, and covers" titled McCartney III Imagined was released on 16 April 2021. McCartney's book The Lyrics: 1956 to the Present was released in November 2021. Described as a "self-portrait in 154 songs", the book is based on conversations McCartney had with the Irish poet Paul Muldoon. The Lyrics was named Book of the Year by both Barnes & Noble and Waterstones. McCartney's "Got Back" tour ran from 28 April 2022 to 16 June 2022 in the United States, his first in the country since 2019. The tour concluded on 25 June 2022 when McCartney headlined Glastonbury Festival, a week after his 80th birthday. Performing on the Pyramid Stage, he became the oldest solo headliner at the festival. Special guests were Dave Grohl and Bruce Springsteen. In 2022, he received the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Documentary or Nonfiction Series at the 74th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards, as a producer for the documentary The Beatles: Get Back. In 2023, McCartney published the book 1964: Eyes of the Storm, a collection of recently discovered photos he had taken at the height of Beatlemania. McCartney is a largely self-taught musician, and his approach was described by musicologist Ian MacDonald as "by nature drawn to music's formal aspects yet wholly untutored ... [he] produced technically 'finished' work almost entirely by instinct, his harmonic judgement based mainly on perfect pitch and an acute pair of ears ... [A] natural melodist—a creator of tunes capable of existing apart from their harmony." McCartney likened his approach to "the primitive cave artists, who drew without training". The Messiah has arrived! — McCartney on Elvis Presley, The Beatles Anthology, 2000 McCartney's earliest musical influences include Elvis Presley, Little Richard, Buddy Holly, Carl Perkins, and Chuck Berry. When asked why the Beatles did not include Presley on the Sgt. Pepper cover, McCartney replied, "Elvis was too important and too far above the rest even to mention ... so we didn't put him on the list because he was more than merely a ... pop singer, he was Elvis the King." McCartney stated that for his bassline for "I Saw Her Standing There", he directly quoted Berry's "I'm Talking About You". McCartney called Little Richard an idol, whose falsetto vocalisations inspired McCartney's own vocal technique. McCartney said he wrote "I'm Down" as a vehicle for his Little Richard impersonation. In 1971, McCartney bought the publishing rights to Holly's catalogue, and in 1976, on the fortieth anniversary of Holly's birth, McCartney inaugurated the annual "Buddy Holly Week" in England. The festival has included guest performances by famous musicians, songwriting competitions, drawing contests and special events featuring performances by the Crickets. Best known for primarily using a plectrum or pick, McCartney occasionally plays fingerstyle. He was strongly influenced by Motown artists, in particular James Jamerson, whom McCartney called a hero for his melodic style. He was also influenced by Brian Wilson, as he commented: "because he went to very unusual places". Another favourite bassist of his is Stanley Clarke. McCartney's skill as a bass player has been acknowledged by bassists including Sting, Dr. Dre bassist Mike Elizondo, and Colin Moulding of XTC. McCartney has consistently been ranked at or near the top of lists of the best bass players ever. He was voted the best rock bassist in Creem's 1973 and 1974 Reader Poll Results and the third best rock bassist in its 1975 and 1977 Reader Poll Results. He was voted the third best bassist of all time in a 2011 Rolling Stone readers' poll and, in 2020, the same magazine ranked him the ninth greatest bassist of all time. In 2020, Bass Player magazine ranked him the third best bass player of all time. He was voted the fifth greatest bassist of all time in a 2021 MusicRadar readers' poll. Music critic J. D. Considine ranked McCartney the second best bass player. Paul is one of the most innovative bass players ... half the stuff that's going on now is directly ripped off from his Beatles period ... He's an egomaniac about everything else, but his bass playing he'd always been a bit coy about. — Lennon, Playboy magazine published in January 1981 During McCartney's early years with the Beatles, he primarily used a Höfner 500/1 bass, although from 1965, he favoured his Rickenbacker 4001S for recording. While typically using Vox amplifiers, by 1967, he had also begun using a Fender Bassman for amplification. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, he used a Wal 5-String, which he said made him play more thick-sounding basslines, in contrast to the much lighter Höfner, which inspired him to play more sensitively, something he considers fundamental to his playing style. He changed back to the Höfner around 1990 for that reason. He uses Mesa Boogie bass amplifiers while performing live. MacDonald identified "She's a Woman" as the turning point when McCartney's bass playing began to evolve dramatically, and Beatles biographer Chris Ingham singled out Rubber Soul as the moment when McCartney's playing exhibited significant progress, particularly on "The Word". Bacon and Morgan agreed, calling McCartney's groove on the track "a high point in pop bass playing and ... the first proof on a recording of his serious technical ability on the instrument." MacDonald inferred the influence of James Brown's "Papa's Got a Brand New Bag" and Wilson Pickett's "In the Midnight Hour", American soul tracks from which McCartney absorbed elements and drew inspiration as he "delivered his most spontaneous bass-part to date". Bacon and Morgan described his bassline for the Beatles song "Rain" as "an astonishing piece of playing ... [McCartney] thinking in terms of both rhythm and 'lead bass' ... [choosing] the area of the neck ... he correctly perceives will give him clarity for melody without rendering his sound too thin for groove." MacDonald identified the influence of Indian classical music in "exotic melismas in the bass part" on "Rain" and described the playing as "so inventive that it threatens to overwhelm the track". By contrast, he recognised McCartney's bass part on the Harrison-composed "Something" as creative but overly busy and "too fussily extemporised". McCartney identified Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band as containing his strongest and most inventive bass playing, particularly on "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds". If I couldn't have any other instrument, I would have to have an acoustic guitar. — McCartney, Guitar Player, July 1990 McCartney primarily flatpicks while playing acoustic guitar, though he also uses elements of fingerpicking. Examples of his acoustic guitar playing on Beatles tracks include "Yesterday", "Michelle", "Blackbird", "I Will", "Mother Nature's Son" and "Rocky Raccoon". McCartney singled out "Blackbird" as a personal favourite and described his technique for the guitar part in the following way: "I got my own little sort of cheating way of [fingerpicking] ... I'm actually sort of pulling two strings at a time ... I was trying to emulate those folk players." He employed a similar technique for "Jenny Wren". He played an Epiphone Texan on many of his acoustic recordings, but also used a Martin D-28. Linda was a big fan of my guitar playing, whereas I've got my doubts. I think there are proper guitar players and then there are guys like me who love playing it. — McCartney, Guitar Player, July 1990 McCartney played lead guitar on several Beatles recordings, including what MacDonald described as a "fiercely angular slide guitar solo" on "Drive My Car", which McCartney played on an Epiphone Casino. McCartney said of the instrument: "if I had to pick one electric guitar it would be this." McCartney bought the Casino in 1964, on the knowledge that the guitar's hollow body would produce more feedback. He has retained that original guitar to the present day. He contributed what MacDonald described as "a startling guitar solo" on the Harrison composition "Taxman" and the "shrieking" guitar on "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" and "Helter Skelter". MacDonald also praised McCartney's "coruscating pseudo-Indian" guitar solo on "Good Morning Good Morning". McCartney also played lead guitar on "Another Girl". During his years with Wings, McCartney tended to leave electric guitar work to other group members, though he played most of the lead guitar on Band on the Run. In 1990, when asked who his favourite guitar players were he included Eddie Van Halen, Eric Clapton and David Gilmour, stating, "but I still like Hendrix the best". He has primarily used a Gibson Les Paul for electric work, particularly during live performances. In addition to these guitars, McCartney is known to use and own a range of other electric guitars, usually favouring the Fender Esquire and its subsequent incarnation, the Fender Telecaster, using the latter with a sunburst finish on Wings' tours in the 1970s. He also owns a rare Ampeg Dan Armstrong Plexi guitar, the only left handed one known to be in existence, which appeared in the Wings video for "Helen Wheels". McCartney is known for his belting power, versatility and wide tenor vocal range, spanning over four octaves. He was ranked the 11th greatest singer of all time by Rolling Stone, voted the 8th greatest singer ever by NME readers and number 10 by Music Radar readers in the list of "the 30 greatest lead singers of all time". Over the years, McCartney has been named a significant vocal influence by Chris Cornell, Billy Joel, Steven Tyler, Brad Delp, and Axl Rose. McCartney's vocals have crossed several music genres throughout his career. On "Call Me Back Again", according to Benitez, "McCartney shines as a bluesy solo vocalist", while MacDonald called "I'm Down" "a rock-and-roll classic" that "illustrates McCartney's vocal and stylistic versatility". MacDonald described "Helter Skelter" as an early attempt at heavy metal, and "Hey Jude" as a "pop/rock hybrid", pointing out McCartney's "use of gospel-style melismas" in the song and his "pseudo-soul shrieking in the fade-out". Benitez identified "Hope of Deliverance" and "Put It There" as examples of McCartney's folk music efforts while musicologist Walter Everett considered "When I'm Sixty-Four" and "Honey Pie" attempts at vaudeville. MacDonald praised the "swinging beat" of the Beatles' twenty-four bar blues song, "She's a Woman" as "the most extreme sound they had manufactured to date", with McCartney's voice "at the edge, squeezed to the upper limit of his chest register and threatening to crack at any moment." MacDonald described "I've Got a Feeling" as a "raunchy, mid-tempo rocker" with a "robust and soulful" vocal performance and "Back in the U.S.S.R." as "the last of [the Beatles'] up-tempo rockers", McCartney's "belting" vocals among his best since "Drive My Car", recorded three years earlier. McCartney also teasingly tried out classical singing, namely singing various renditions of "Besame Mucho" with the Beatles. He continued experimenting with various musical and vocal styles throughout his post-Beatles career.[text–source integrity?] "Monkberry Moon Delight" was described by Pitchfork's Jayson Greene as "an absolutely unhinged vocal take, Paul gulping and sobbing right next to your inner ear", adding that "it could be a latter-day Tom Waits performance". McCartney played piano on several Beatles songs, including "She's a Woman", "For No One", "A Day in the Life", "Hello, Goodbye", "Lady Madonna", "Hey Jude", "Martha My Dear", "Let It Be" and "The Long and Winding Road". MacDonald considered the piano part in "Lady Madonna" as reminiscent of Fats Domino, and "Let It Be" as having a gospel rhythm. MacDonald called McCartney's Mellotron intro on "Strawberry Fields Forever" an integral feature of the song's character. McCartney played a Moog synthesiser on the Beatles song "Maxwell's Silver Hammer" and the Wings track "Loup (1st Indian on the Moon)". Ingham described the Wings songs "With a Little Luck" and "London Town" as being "full of the most sensitive pop synthesizer touches". McCartney played drums on the Beatles' songs "Back in the U.S.S.R.", "Dear Prudence", "Martha My Dear", "Wild Honey Pie" and "The Ballad of John and Yoko". He also played all the drum parts on his albums McCartney, McCartney II and McCartney III, as well as on Wings' Band on the Run, and most of the drums on his solo LP Chaos and Creation in the Backyard. His other drumming contributions include Paul Jones' rendition of "And the Sun Will Shine" (1968), Steve Miller Band's 1969 tracks "Celebration Song" and "My Dark Hour", and "Sunday Rain" from the Foo Fighters' 2017 album Concrete and Gold. In the mid-1960s, when visiting artist friend John Dunbar's flat in London, McCartney brought tapes he had compiled at then-girlfriend Jane Asher's home. They included mixes of various songs, musical pieces and comments made by McCartney that Dick James made into a demo for him. Heavily influenced by American avant-garde musician John Cage, McCartney made tape loops by recording voices, guitars and bongos on a Brenell tape recorder and splicing the various loops. He referred to the finished product as "electronic symphonies". He reversed the tapes, sped them up, and slowed them down to create the desired effects, some of which the Beatles later used on the songs "Tomorrow Never Knows" and "The Fool on the Hill". While at school during the 1950s, McCartney thrived at art assignments, often earning top accolades for his visual work. However, his lack of discipline negatively affected his academic grades, preventing him from earning admission to art college. During the 1960s, he delved into the visual arts, explored experimental cinema, and regularly attended film, theatrical and classical music performances. His first contact with the London avant-garde scene was through artist John Dunbar, who introduced McCartney to art dealer Robert Fraser. At Fraser's flat he first learned about art appreciation and met Andy Warhol, Claes Oldenburg, Peter Blake, and Richard Hamilton. McCartney later purchased works by Magritte, whose painting of an apple had inspired the Apple Records logo. McCartney became involved in the renovation and publicising of the Indica Gallery in Mason's Yard, London, which Barry Miles had co-founded and where Lennon first met Yoko Ono. Miles also co-founded International Times, an underground paper that McCartney helped to start with direct financial support and by providing interviews to attract advertiser income. Miles later wrote McCartney's official biography, Many Years from Now (1997). McCartney became interested in painting after watching artist Willem de Kooning work in de Kooning's Long Island studio. McCartney took up painting in 1983, and he first exhibited his work in Siegen, Germany, in 1999. The 70-painting show featured portraits of Lennon, Andy Warhol, and David Bowie. Though initially reluctant to display his paintings publicly, McCartney chose the gallery because events organiser Wolfgang Suttner showed genuine interest in McCartney's art. In September 2000, the first UK exhibition of McCartney's paintings opened, featuring 500 canvases at the Arnolfini Gallery in Bristol, England. In October 2000, McCartney's art debuted in his hometown of Liverpool. McCartney said, "I've been offered an exhibition of my paintings at the Walker Art Gallery ... where John and I used to spend many a pleasant afternoon. So I'm really excited about it. I didn't tell anybody I painted for 15 years but now I'm out of the closet". McCartney is lead patron of the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts, a school in the building formerly occupied by the Liverpool Institute for Boys. When McCartney was a child, his mother read him poems and encouraged him to read books. His father invited Paul and his brother Michael to solve crosswords with him, to increase their "word power", as McCartney said. In 2001, McCartney published Blackbird Singing, a volume of poems and lyrics to his songs for which he gave readings in Liverpool and New York City. In the foreword of the book, he explains: "When I was a teenager ... I had an overwhelming desire to have a poem published in the school magazine. I wrote something deep and meaningful—which was promptly rejected—and I suppose I have been trying to get my own back ever since". His first children's book was published by Faber & Faber in 2005, High in the Clouds: An Urban Furry Tail, a collaboration with writer Philip Ardagh and animator Geoff Dunbar. Featuring a squirrel whose woodland home is razed by developers, it had been scripted and sketched by McCartney and Dunbar over several years, as an animated film. The Observer labelled it an "anti-capitalist children's book". In 2018, he wrote the children's book Hey Grandude! together with illustrator Kathryn Durst, which was published by Random House Books in September 2019. The book is about a grandpa and his three grandchildren with a magic compass on an adventure. A follow-up, titled Grandude's Green Submarine, was released in September 2021. I think there's an urge in us to stop the terrible fleetingness of time. Music. Paintings ... Try and capture one bloody moment please. — McCartney In 1981, McCartney asked Geoff Dunbar to direct a short animated film called Rupert and the Frog Song; McCartney was the writer and producer, and he also added some of the character voices. His song "We All Stand Together" from the film's soundtrack reached No. 3 in the UK Singles Chart. In 1992, he worked with Dunbar on an animated film about the work of French artist Honoré Daumier, which won them a BAFTA award. In 2004, they worked together on the animated short film Tropic Island Hum. The accompanying single, "Tropic Island Hum"/"We All Stand Together", reached number 21 in the UK. McCartney also produced and hosted The Real Buddy Holly Story, a 1985 documentary featuring interviews with Keith Richards, Phil and Don Everly, the Holly family, and others. In 1995, he made a guest appearance on the Simpsons episode "Lisa the Vegetarian" and directed a short documentary about the Grateful Dead. Since the Rich List began in 1989, McCartney has been the UK's wealthiest musician, with an estimated fortune of £730 million in 2015. In addition to an interest in Apple Corps and MPL Communications, an umbrella company for his business interests, he owns a significant music publishing catalogue, with access to over 25,000 copyrights, including the publishing rights to the musicals Guys and Dolls, A Chorus Line, Annie and Grease. He earned £40 million in 2003, the highest income that year within media professions in the UK. This rose to £48.5 million by 2005. McCartney's 18-date On the Run Tour grossed £37 million in 2012. McCartney signed his first recording contract, as a member of the Beatles, with Parlophone Records, an EMI subsidiary, in June 1962. In the United States, the Beatles recordings were distributed by EMI subsidiary Capitol Records. The Beatles re-signed with EMI for another nine years in 1967. After forming their own record label, Apple Records, in 1968, the Beatles' recordings would be released through Apple although the masters were still owned by EMI. Following the break-up of the Beatles, McCartney's music continued to be released by Apple Records under the Beatles' 1967 recording contract with EMI which ran until 1976. Following the formal dissolution of the Beatles' partnership in 1975, McCartney re-signed with EMI worldwide and Capitol in the US, Canada and Japan, acquiring ownership of his solo catalogue from EMI as part of the deal. In 1979, McCartney signed with Columbia Records in the US and Canada—reportedly receiving the industry's most lucrative recording contract to date, while remaining with EMI for distribution throughout the rest of the world. As part of the deal, CBS offered McCartney ownership of Frank Music, publisher of the catalogue of American songwriter Frank Loesser. McCartney's album sales were below CBS' expectations and reportedly the company lost at least $9 million on the contract. McCartney returned to Capitol in the US in 1985, remaining with EMI until 2006. In 2007, McCartney signed with Hear Music, becoming the label's first artist. He returned to Capitol for 2018's Egypt Station. In 1963, Dick James established Northern Songs to publish the songs of Lennon–McCartney. McCartney initially owned 20% of Northern Songs, which became 15% after a public stock offering in 1965. In 1969, James sold a controlling interest in Northern Songs to Lew Grade's Associated Television (ATV) after which McCartney and John Lennon sold their remaining shares although they remained under contract to ATV until 1973. In 1972, McCartney re-signed with ATV for seven years in a joint publishing agreement between ATV and McCartney Music. Since 1979, MPL Communications has published McCartney's songs. McCartney and Yoko Ono attempted to purchase the Northern Songs catalogue in 1981, but Grade declined their offer. Soon afterward, ATV Music's parent company, Associated Communications Corp., was acquired in a takeover by businessman Robert Holmes à Court, who later sold ATV Music to Michael Jackson in 1985. McCartney has criticised Jackson's purchase and handling of Northern Songs over the years. In 1995, Jackson merged his catalogue with Sony for a reported £59,052,000 ($95 million), establishing Sony/ATV Music Publishing, in which he retained half-ownership. Northern Songs was formally dissolved in 1995, and absorbed into the Sony/ATV catalogue. McCartney receives writers' royalties which together are 33+1⁄3 percent of total commercial proceeds in the US, and which vary elsewhere between 50 and 55 percent. Two of the Beatles' earliest songs—"Love Me Do" and "P.S. I Love You"—were published by an EMI subsidiary, Ardmore & Beechwood, before signing with James. McCartney acquired their publishing rights from Ardmore in 1978, and they are the only two Beatles songs owned by MPL Communications. McCartney first used drugs in the Beatles' Hamburg days when they often used Preludin to maintain their energy while performing for long periods. Bob Dylan introduced them to cannabis in a New York hotel room in 1964; McCartney recalls getting "very high" and "giggling uncontrollably". His use of the drug soon became habitual, and according to Miles, McCartney wrote the lyrics "another kind of mind" in "Got to Get You into My Life" specifically as a reference to cannabis. During the filming of Help!, McCartney occasionally smoked a joint in the car on the way to the studio during filming, and often forgot his lines. Director Richard Lester overheard two physically attractive women trying to persuade McCartney to use heroin, but he refused. Introduced to cocaine by Robert Fraser, McCartney used the drug regularly during the recording of Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, and for about a year in total but stopped because of his dislike of the unpleasant melancholy he felt afterwards. Initially reluctant to try LSD, McCartney eventually did so in late 1966, and took his second "acid trip" in March 1967 with Lennon after a Sgt. Pepper studio session. He later became the first Beatle to discuss the drug publicly, declaring: "It opened my eyes ... [and] made me a better, more honest, more tolerant member of society." McCartney made his attitude about cannabis public in 1967, when he, along with the other Beatles and Epstein, added his name to a July advertisement in The Times, which called for its legalisation, the release of those imprisoned for possession, and research into marijuana's medical uses. In 1972, a Swedish court fined McCartney £1,000 for cannabis possession. Soon after, Scottish police found marijuana plants growing on his farm, leading to his 1973 conviction for illegal cultivation and a £100 fine. As a result of his drug convictions, the US government repeatedly denied him a visa until December 1973. Arrested again for marijuana possession in 1975 in Los Angeles, Linda took the blame, and the court soon dismissed the charges. In January 1980, when Wings flew to Tokyo for a tour of Japan, customs officials found approximately 8 ounces (230 g) of cannabis in his luggage. Years later, McCartney said, "I don't know what possessed me to just stick this bloody great bag of grass in my suitcase. Thinking back on it, it almost makes me shudder." They arrested McCartney and brought him to a local jail while the Japanese government decided what to do. After ten days, they released and deported him without charge. In 1984, while McCartney was on holiday in Barbados, authorities arrested him for possession of marijuana and fined him $200. Upon his return to England, he stated that cannabis was less harmful than the legal substances alcohol, tobacco and glue, and that he had done no harm to anyone. In 1997, he spoke out in support of decriminalisation of cannabis: "People are smoking pot anyway and to make them criminals is wrong." McCartney quit cannabis in 2015, citing a desire to set a good example for his grandchildren. Since 1975, McCartney has been a vegetarian. He and his wife Linda were vegetarians for most of their 29-year marriage. They decided to stop consuming meat after Paul saw lambs in a field as they were eating a meal of lamb. Soon after, the couple became outspoken animal rights activists. In his first interview after Linda's death, he promised to continue working for animal rights, and in 1999, he spent £3,000,000 to ensure Linda McCartney Foods remained free of genetically engineered ingredients. In 1995, he narrated the documentary Devour the Earth, written by Tony Wardle. McCartney is a supporter of the animal-rights organisation People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. He has appeared in the group's campaigns, and in 2009, McCartney narrated a video for them titled "Glass Walls", which was harshly critical of slaughterhouses, the meat industry, and their effect on animal welfare. McCartney has also supported campaigns headed by the Humane Society of the United States, Humane Society International, World Animal Protection, and the David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation. Following McCartney's marriage to Mills, he joined her in a campaign against land mines, becoming a patron of Adopt-A-Minefield. In a 2003 meeting at the Kremlin with Vladimir Putin, ahead of a concert in Red Square, McCartney and Mills urged Russia to join the anti-landmine campaign. In 2006, the McCartneys travelled to Prince Edward Island to raise international awareness of seal hunting. The couple debated with Danny Williams, Newfoundland's then Premier, on Larry King Live, stating that fishermen should stop hunting seals and start seal-watching businesses instead. McCartney also supports the Make Poverty History campaign. McCartney has participated in several charity recordings and performances, including the Concerts for the People of Kampuchea, Ferry Aid, Band Aid, Live Aid, Live 8, and the recording of "Ferry Cross the Mersey". In 2004, he donated a song to an album to aid the "US Campaign for Burma", in support of Burmese Nobel Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi. In 2008, he donated a song to Aid Still Required's CD, organised as an effort to raise funds to assist with the recovery from the devastation caused in Southeast Asia by the 2004 tsunami. In 2009, McCartney wrote to Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, asking him why he was not a vegetarian. As McCartney explained, "He wrote back very kindly, saying, 'my doctors tell me that I must eat meat'. And I wrote back again, saying, you know, I don't think that's right ... I think he's now being told ... that he can get his protein somewhere else ... It just doesn't seem right—the Dalai Lama, on the one hand, saying, 'Hey guys, don't harm sentient beings ... Oh, and by the way, I'm having a steak.'" In 2012, McCartney joined the anti-fracking campaign Artists Against Fracking. Save the Arctic is a campaign to protect the Arctic and an international outcry and a renewed focus concern on oil development in the Arctic, attracting the support of more than five million people. This includes McCartney, Archbishop Desmond Tutu and 11 Nobel Peace Prize winners. In 2015, following British prime minister David Cameron's decision to give Members of Parliament a free vote on amending the law against fox hunting, McCartney was quoted: "The people of Britain are behind this Tory government on many things but the vast majority of us will be against them if hunting is reintroduced. It is cruel and unnecessary and will lose them support from ordinary people and animal lovers like myself." After the 2016 Orlando shooting, McCartney expressed his solidarity for the victims during a concert in Berlin. During the COVID-19 pandemic, McCartney called for Chinese wet markets (which sell live animals, including wild ones) to be banned. He expressed concern over both the health impacts of the practice as well as its cruelty to animals. In 2020 McCartney commented on ecocide, stating that he "recently heard about this campaign to make ecocide a crime at the International Criminal Court. The idea is clearly catching on... and not before time if we are to prevent further devastation of the planet." McCartney is one of the 100 contributors to the book Dear NHS: 100 Stories to Say Thank You, of which all proceeds go to NHS Charities Together and The Lullaby Trust. McCartney has publicly professed support for Everton F.C. and has also shown favour for Liverpool F.C. In 2008, he ended speculation about his allegiance when he said: "Here's the deal: my father was born in Everton, my family are officially Evertonians, so if it comes down to a derby match or an FA Cup final between the two, I would have to support Everton. But after a concert at Wembley Arena I got a bit of a friendship with Kenny Dalglish, who had been to the gig and I thought 'You know what? I am just going to support them both because it's all Liverpool.'" McCartney's first serious girlfriend in Liverpool was Dorothy "Dot" Rhone, whom he met at the Casbah club in 1959. According to Spitz, Rhone felt that McCartney had a compulsion to control situations. He often chose clothes and makeup for her, encouraging her to grow her blonde hair to simulate Brigitte Bardot's hairstyle, and at least once insisting she have her hair restyled, to disappointing effect. When McCartney first went to Hamburg with the Beatles, he wrote to Rhone regularly, and she accompanied Cynthia Lennon to Hamburg when they played there again in 1962. The couple had a two-and-a-half-year relationship, and were due to marry until Rhone's miscarriage. According to Spitz, McCartney, now "free of obligation", ended the engagement. McCartney first met British actress Jane Asher on 18 April 1963 when a photographer asked them to pose at a Beatles performance at the Royal Albert Hall in London. The two began a relationship, and in November of that year he took up residence with Asher at her parents' home at 57 Wimpole Street in Marylebone, central London. They had lived there for more than two years before the couple moved to McCartney's own home in St John's Wood in March 1966. He wrote several songs while living with the Ashers, including "Yesterday", "And I Love Her", "You Won't See Me" and "I'm Looking Through You", the latter three having been inspired by their romance. They had a five-year relationship and planned to marry, but Asher broke off the engagement after she discovered that McCartney had become involved with Francie Schwartz, an American screenwriter who moved to London at age 23, thinking she could sell a script to the Beatles. Schwartz met McCartney and he invited her to move into his London house, where events ensued that possibly broke up his relationship with Asher. Linda Eastman was a music fan who once commented, "all my teen years were spent with an ear to the radio." At times, she skipped school to see artists such as Fabian, Bobby Darin and Chuck Berry. She became a popular photographer with several rock groups, including the Jimi Hendrix Experience, the Grateful Dead, the Doors and the Beatles, whom she first met at Shea Stadium in 1966. She commented, "It was John who interested me at the start. He was my Beatle hero. But when I met him the fascination faded fast, and I found it was Paul I liked." The pair first became properly acquainted on 15 May 1967 at a Georgie Fame concert at The Bag O'Nails club, during her UK assignment to photograph rock musicians in London. As Paul remembers, "The night Linda and I met, I spotted her across a crowded club, and although I would normally have been nervous chatting her up, I realised I had to ... Pushiness worked for me that night!" Linda said this about their meeting: "I was quite shameless really. I was with somebody else [that night] ... and I saw Paul at the other side of the room. He looked so beautiful that I made up my mind I would have to pick him up." The pair married in March 1969. About their relationship, Paul said, "We had a lot of fun together ... just the nature of how we aren't, our favourite thing really is to just hang, to have fun. And Linda's very big on just following the moment." He added, "We were crazy. We had a big argument the night before we got married, and it was nearly called off ... [it's] miraculous that we made it. But we did." After the break-up of the Beatles, the two collaborated musically and formed Wings in 1971. They faced derision from some fans and critics, who questioned her inclusion. She was nervous about performing with Paul, who explained, "she conquered those nerves, got on with it and was really gutsy." Paul defended her musical ability: "I taught Linda the basics of the keyboard ... She took a couple of lessons and learned some bluesy things ... she did very well and made it look easier than it was ... The critics would say, 'She's not really playing' or 'Look at her—she's playing with one finger.' But what they didn't know is that sometimes she was playing a thing called a Minimoog, which could only be played with one finger. It was monophonic." He went on to say, "We thought we were in it for the fun ... it was just something we wanted to do, so if we got it wrong—big deal. We didn't have to justify ourselves." Former Wings guitarist McCullough said of collaborating with Linda, "trying to get things together with a learner in the group didn't work as far as I was concerned." They had four children—Linda's daughter Heather (legally adopted by Paul), Mary, Stella, and James—and remained married until Linda's death from breast cancer at age 56 in 1998. After Linda died, Paul said, "I got a counsellor because I knew that I would need some help. He was great, particularly in helping me get rid of my guilt [about wishing I'd been] perfect all the time ... a real bugger. But then I thought, hang on a minute. We're just human. That was the beautiful thing about our marriage. We were just a boyfriend and girlfriend having babies." In 2002, McCartney married Heather Mills, a former model and anti-landmine campaigner. In 2003, the couple had a child, Beatrice Milly, named in honour of Mills's late mother and one of McCartney's aunts. They separated in April 2006 and divorced acrimoniously in May 2008. In 2004, he commented on media animosity toward his partners: "[the British public] didn't like me giving up on Jane Asher ... I married [Linda], a New York divorcee with a child, and at the time they didn't like that". McCartney married New Yorker Nancy Shevell in a civil ceremony at Marylebone Town Hall, London, on 9 October 2011. The wedding was a modest event attended by a group of about 30 relatives and friends. The couple had been together since November 2007. Shevell is vice president of a family-owned transportation conglomerate which owns New England Motor Freight. She is a former member of the board of the New York area's Metropolitan Transportation Authority. Shevell is about 18 years younger than McCartney. They had known each other for about 20 years prior to marrying, having met because both had homes in the Hamptons. Though McCartney had a strained relationship with Lennon post-Beatles, they briefly became close again in early 1974, and played music together on one occasion. In later years, the two grew apart. McCartney often phoned Lennon, but was apprehensive about the reception he would receive. During one call, Lennon told him, "You're all pizza and fairytales!" In an effort to avoid talking only about business, they often spoke of cats, babies, or baking bread. On 24 April 1976, McCartney and Lennon were watching an episode of Saturday Night Live at Lennon's home in the Dakota when Lorne Michaels made a $3,000 cash offer for the Beatles to reunite. While they seriously considered going to the SNL studio a few blocks away, they decided it was too late. This was their last time together. VH1 fictionalised this event in the 2000 television film Two of Us. McCartney's last telephone call to Lennon, days before Lennon and Ono released Double Fantasy, was friendly: "[It is] a consoling factor for me, because I do feel it was sad that we never actually sat down and straightened our differences out. But fortunately for me, the last phone conversation I ever had with him was really great, and we didn't have any kind of blow-up", he said. John is kinda like a constant ... always there in my being ... in my soul, so I always think of him. — McCartney, Guitar World, January 2000 On 9 December 1980, McCartney followed the news that Lennon had been murdered the previous night; Lennon's death created a media frenzy around the surviving members of the band. McCartney was leaving an Oxford Street recording studio that evening when he was surrounded by reporters who asked him for his reaction; he responded: "It's a drag". The press quickly criticised him for what appeared to be a superficial response. He later explained, "When John was killed somebody stuck a microphone at me and said: 'What do you think about it?' I said, 'It's a dra-a-ag' and meant it with every inch of melancholy I could muster. When you put that in print it says, 'McCartney in London today when asked for a comment on his dead friend said, "It's a drag".' It seemed a very flippant comment to make." He described his first exchange with Ono after the murder, and his last conversation with Lennon: I talked to Yoko the day after he was killed, and the first thing she said was, "John was really fond of you." The last telephone conversation I had with him we were still the best of mates. He was always a very warm guy, John. His bluff was all on the surface. He used to take his glasses down, those granny glasses, and say, "it's only me." They were like a wall you know? A shield. Those are the moments I treasure. In 1983, McCartney said: "I would not have been as typically human and standoffish as I was if I knew John was going to die. I would have made more of an effort to try and get behind his 'mask' and have a better relationship with him." He said that he went home that night, watched the news on television with his children and cried most of the evening. In 1997, he said that Lennon's death made the remaining ex-Beatles nervous that they might also be murdered. He told Mojo magazine in 2002 that Lennon was his greatest hero. In 1981, McCartney sang backup on Harrison's tribute to Lennon, "All Those Years Ago", which featured Starr on drums. McCartney released "Here Today" in 1982, a song Everett described as "a haunting tribute" to McCartney's friendship with Lennon. Discussing his relationship with McCartney, Harrison said: "Paul would always help along when you'd done his ten songs—then when he got 'round to doing one of my songs, he would help. It was silly. It was very selfish, actually ... There were a lot of tracks, though, where I played bass ... because what Paul would do—if he'd written a song, he'd learn all the parts for Paul and then come in the studio and say (sometimes he was very difficult): 'Do this'. He'd never give you the opportunity to come out with something." After Harrison's death in November 2001, McCartney said he was "a lovely guy and a very brave man who had a wonderful sense of humour". He went on to say: "We grew up together and we just had so many beautiful times together—that's what I am going to remember. I'll always love him, he's my baby brother." On the first anniversary of his death, McCartney played Harrison's "Something" on a ukulele at the Concert for George; he would perform this rendition of the song on many subsequent solo tours. He also performed "For You Blue" and "All Things Must Pass", and played the piano on Eric Clapton's rendition of "While My Guitar Gently Weeps". During a recording session for The Beatles in 1968, the two got into an argument over McCartney's critique of Starr's drum part for "Back in the U.S.S.R.", which contributed to Starr temporarily leaving the band. Starr later commented on working with McCartney: "Paul is the greatest bass player in the world. But he is also very determined ... [to] get his own way ... [thus] musical disagreements inevitably arose from time to time." McCartney and Starr collaborated on several post-Beatles projects, starting in 1973 when McCartney contributed instrumentation and backing vocals for "Six O'Clock", a song McCartney wrote for Starr's album Ringo. McCartney played a kazoo solo on "You're Sixteen" from the same album. Starr appeared as a fictional version of himself in McCartney's 1984 film Give My Regards to Broad Street, and played drums on most tracks of the soundtrack album, which includes re-recordings of several McCartney-penned Beatles songs. Starr played drums and sang backing vocals on "Beautiful Night" from McCartney's 1997 album Flaming Pie. The pair collaborated again in 1998, on Starr's Vertical Man, which featured McCartney's backing vocals on three songs, and instrumentation on one. In 2009, the pair performed "With a Little Help from My Friends" at a benefit concert for the David Lynch Foundation. They collaborated on Starr's album Y Not in 2010. McCartney played bass on "Peace Dream", and sang a duet with Starr on "Walk with You". On 7 July 2010, Starr was performing at Radio City Music Hall in New York with his All-Starr Band in a concert celebrating his seventieth birthday. After the encores, McCartney made a surprise appearance, performing the Beatles' song "Birthday" with Starr's band. On 26 January 2014, McCartney and Starr performed "Queenie Eye" from McCartney's new album New at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards. McCartney inducted Starr into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in April 2015, and played bass on his 2017 album Give More Love. On 16 December 2018, Starr and Ronnie Wood joined McCartney onstage to perform "Get Back" at his concert at London's O2 Arena. Starr also made an appearance on the final day of McCartney's Freshen Up tour in July 2019, performing "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band (Reprise)" and "Helter Skelter". McCartney was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988 as a member of the Beatles and again as a solo artist in 1999. In 1979, the Guinness Book of World Records recognised McCartney as the "most honored composer and performer in music", with 60 gold discs (43 with the Beatles, 17 with Wings) and, as a member of the Beatles, sales of over 100 million singles and 100 million albums, and as the "most successful song writer", he wrote jointly or solo 43 songs which sold one million or more records between 1962 and 1978. In 2009, Guinness World Records again recognised McCartney as the "most successful songwriter" having written or co-written 188 charted records in the United Kingdom, of which 91 reached the top 10 and 33 made it to number one. McCartney has written, or co-written, 32 number-one singles on the Billboard Hot 100: twenty with the Beatles; seven solo or with Wings; one as a co-writer of "A World Without Love", a number-one single for Peter and Gordon; one as a co-writer on Elton John's cover of "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds"; one as a co-writer on Stars on 45's "Medley"; one as a co-writer with Michael Jackson on "Say Say Say"; and one as writer on "Ebony and Ivory" performed with Stevie Wonder. As of 2009[update], he has 15.5 million RIAA-certified units in the United States as a solo artist, plus another 10 million with Wings. Credited with more number ones in the UK than any other artist, McCartney has participated in twenty-four chart topping singles: seventeen with the Beatles, one solo, and one each with Wings, Stevie Wonder, Ferry Aid, Band Aid, Band Aid 20 and "The Christians et al." He is the only artist to reach the UK number one as a soloist ("Pipes of Peace"), duo ("Ebony and Ivory" with Wonder), trio ("Mull of Kintyre", Wings), quartet ("She Loves You", the Beatles), quintet ("Get Back", the Beatles with Billy Preston) and as part of a musical ensemble for charity (Ferry Aid). "Yesterday" is one of the most covered songs in history, with more than 2,200 recorded versions, and, according to the BBC, "the track is the only one by a UK writer to have been aired more than seven million times on American TV and radio and is third in the all-time list ... [and] is the most played song by a British writer [last] century in the US". His 1968 Beatles composition "Hey Jude" achieved the highest sales in the UK that year and topped the US charts for nine weeks, which is longer than any other Beatles single. It was also the longest single released by the band and, at seven minutes eleven seconds, was at that time the longest number one. "Hey Jude" is the best-selling Beatles single, achieving sales of over five million copies soon after its release. In July 2005, McCartney's performance of "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" with U2 at Live 8 became the fastest-released single in history. Available within forty-five minutes of its recording, hours later it had achieved number one on the UK Official Download Chart. In December 2020, the release of his album McCartney III and its subsequent charting at number 2 on the US Billboard 200 earned McCartney the feat of being the first artist to have a new album in the top two chart positions in each of the last six decades. 18-time Grammy Award winner: Nine as a member of the Beatles Six as a solo artist Two as a member of Wings One as part of a joint collaboration Two-time inductee – Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: Class of 1988 as a member of the Beatles Class of 1999 as a solo artist 1965: Member of the Order of the British Empire 1971: Academy Award winner (as a member of the Beatles) 1988: Honorary Doctor of the University degree from University of Sussex 1997: Knighted by Queen Elizabeth II for services to music 2000: Fellowship into the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors 2008: BRIT Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music 2008: Honorary Doctor of Music degree from Yale University 2010: Gershwin Prize for his contributions to popular music 2010: Kennedy Center Honors 2012: Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame 2012: Légion d'Honneur for his services to music 2012: MusiCares Person of the Year 2015: 4148 McCartney, asteroid named after him by the International Astronomical Union's Minor Planet Center 2017: Appointed Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH) in the 2017 Birthday Honours for services to music Solo McCartney (1970) Ram (1971) (with Linda McCartney) McCartney II (1980) Tug of War (1982) Pipes of Peace (1983) Give My Regards to Broad Street (1984) Press to Play (1986) CHOBA B CCCP (1988) Flowers in the Dirt (1989) Off the Ground (1993) Flaming Pie (1997) Run Devil Run (1999) Driving Rain (2001) Chaos and Creation in the Backyard (2005) Memory Almost Full (2007) Kisses on the Bottom (2012) New (2013) Egypt Station (2018) McCartney III (2020) Wings Wild Life (1971) Red Rose Speedway (1973) Band on the Run (1973) Venus and Mars (1975) Wings at the Speed of Sound (1976) London Town (1978) Back to the Egg (1979) Classical Paul McCartney's Liverpool Oratorio (1991) (with Carl Davis) Standing Stone (1997) Working Classical (1999) Ecce Cor Meum (2006) Ocean's Kingdom (2011) (dance score with Peter Martins) The Fireman (McCartney and Youth) Strawberries Oceans Ships Forest (1993) Rushes (1998) Electric Arguments (2008) Other The Family Way (1967) (soundtrack) Thrillington (1977) (Ram instrumental) Liverpool Sound Collage (2000) (with Super Furry Animals & The Beatles archival sound) Twin Freaks (2005) (remix album with DJ Freelance Hellraiser) McCartney III Imagined (2021) (remix album) Wings tours Source: Wings University Tour (1972) Wings Over Europe Tour (1972) Wings 1973 UK Tour (1973) Wings Over the World tour (1975–1976) Wings UK Tour 1979 (1979) Solo tours Source: The Paul McCartney World Tour (1989–1990) Unplugged Tour 1991 (1991) The New World Tour (1993) Driving World Tour (2002) Back in the World Tour (2003) '04 Summer Tour (2004) The 'US' Tour (2005) Secret Tour 2007 (2007) Summer Live '09 (2009) Good Evening Europe Tour (2009) Up and Coming Tour (2010–2011) On the Run Tour (2011–2012) Out There Tour (2013–2015) One on One (2016–2017) 2018 Secret Gigs (2018) Freshen Up (2018–2019) Got Back (2022–2023) Pop music portal Rock music portal England portal Grammy Award records – Most Grammys won by a male artist List of animal rights advocates List of British Grammy winners and nominees List of highest-grossing live music artists Paul is dead – urban legend/conspiracy theory that Paul McCartney is dead List of largest music deals Outline of the Beatles The Beatles timeline Jim McCartney's father Joe played an E-flat tuba. McCartney's father also pointed out the bass parts in songs on the radio, and often took his sons to local brass band concerts. In 1963, the Beatles released two studio albums: Please Please Me and With the Beatles. Two more albums followed in 1964: A Hard Day's Night and Beatles for Sale. Also included on Revolver was "Here, There and Everywhere", a McCartney composition which is his second favourite after "Yesterday". Written by McCartney as a commentary on his childhood in Liverpool, "Penny Lane" featured a piccolo trumpet solo inspired by Bach's second Brandenburg concerto. The Beatles was the band's first Apple Records LP release; the label was a subsidiary of Apple Corps, a conglomerate formed as part of Epstein's plan to reduce the group's taxes. When the Beatles were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988, their first year of eligibility, McCartney did not attend the ceremony, stating that unresolved legal disputes would make him "feel like a complete hypocrite waving and smiling with [Harrison and Starr] at a fake reunion". The Beatles released twenty-two UK singles and twelve LPs, of which seventeen singles and eleven LPs reached number one on various charts. The band topped the US Billboard Hot 100 twenty times, and recorded fourteen number-one albums, as Lennon and McCartney became one of the most celebrated songwriting partnerships of the 20th century. McCartney was the primary writer of five of their last six US number-one singles: "Hello, Goodbye" (1967), "Hey Jude" (1968), "Get Back (1969)", "Let It Be" and "The Long and Winding Road" (1970). McCartney peaked in the UK at number two, spending thirty-two weeks in the charts. Wings' first album together, Wild Life, reached the top ten in the US and the top twenty in the UK, staying on the UK charts for nine weeks. In May 1973, Wings began a 21-show tour of the UK, this time with supporting act Brinsley Schwarz. "Live and Let Die" became a staple of McCartney's live shows, its modern sound well-suited for the pyrotechnics and laser light displays Wings employed during their 1970s stadium performances. Band on the Run became the UK's first platinum LP. Wings at the Speed of Sound peaked in the UK at number 2, spending 35 weeks in the charts. In the UK, NME was alone in ranking the album number 1. The LP reached number 1 on three charts in the US. In 1977, McCartney released the album Thrillington, an orchestral arrangement of Ram, under the pseudonym Percy "Thrills" Thrillington, with a cover designed by Hipgnosis. During the production of London Town, McCulloch and English quit Wings; they were replaced by guitarist Laurence Juber and drummer Steve Holly. Other factors in Wings' split included tension caused by the disappointment of their last effort, Back to the Egg, and McCartney's 1980 marijuana bust in Japan, which resulted in the cancelling of the tour and caused a major loss of wages for the group. Laine claimed that a significant cause of their dissolution was McCartney's reluctance to tour, fearing for his personal safety after the 1980 murder of Lennon. McCartney's then-spokesman said, "Paul is doing other things, that's all". Wings produced a total of seven studio albums, two of which topped the UK charts and four the US charts. Their live triple LP, Wings over America, was one of only a few live albums ever to achieve the top spot in America. They made six US Billboard number-one singles, including "Listen to What the Man Said" and "Silly Love Songs", as well as eight top-ten singles. They achieved eight RIAA-certified platinum singles and six platinum albums in the US. In the UK, they achieved one number-one and twelve top-ten singles, as well as two number-one LPs. Tug of War was a number-one album in both the UK and the US. Pipes of Peace peaked in the UK at number 4, spending 23 weeks in the charts. The LP reached number 15 in the US and is McCartney's most recently recorded RIAA certified platinum studio album as of 2012[update]. "Spies Like Us" peaked in the UK at number 13 spending 10 weeks in the charts. The single reached number 7 in the US and is McCartney's most recently recorded US top-ten as of 2012. Press to Play reached number 8 in the UK, and number 30 in the US. In 1989, "Ferry Cross the Mersey" reached number 1 in the UK. Flowers in the Dirt is McCartney's most recent UK number-one album as of 2012; it reached number 21 in the US. Tripping the Live Fantastic reached number 17 in the UK and number 26 in the US. During the ten-month, 104-show Tripping the Live Fantastic tour, McCartney played as many as fourteen Beatles songs a night, comprising nearly half the performance Unplugged: The Official Bootleg reached number 7 in the UK and number 14 in the US. Off the Ground reached number 5 in the UK and number 17 in the US. Paul is Live reached number 34 in the UK and number 78 in the US. For the New World Tour, Whitten was replaced by drummer Blair Cunningham. McCartney's 1993 tour of the US was the second highest grossing effort of the year in America, bringing in $32.3 million from twenty-four shows. Flaming Pie reached number 2 in the UK and the US. It also yielded McCartney's highest charting UK top-twenty hit song as of 2012[update], "Young Boy", which reached number 19. Run Devil Run reached number 12 in the UK and number 27 in the US. Driving Rain reached number 46 in the UK and number 26 in the US. Back in the US reached number 8 in the US, and Back in the World reached number 5 in the UK. During the Driving World Tour McCartney performed twenty-three Beatles songs in a thirty-six song set, including an all-Beatles encore. In June 2005, McCartney released the electronica album Twin Freaks, a collaborative project with bootleg producer and remixer Freelance Hellraiser consisting of remixed versions of songs from his solo career. Chaos and Creation in the Backyard is McCartney's most recent top-ten album as of 2012[update]. It reached number 10 in the UK, and number 6 in the US. It was supported by a UK top-twenty hit single, his most recent as of 2014[update], "Fine Line", which failed to chart in the US, and "Jenny Wren", which reached number 22 in the UK. McCartney followed the release of Chaos and Creation in the Backyard with the 'US' Tour, the tenth top earning act of 2005 in the US, taking in over $17 million in ticket sales for eight shows. During the opening performance of the tour, he played thirty-five songs, of which twenty-three were Beatles tracks. Ecce Cor Meum reached number 2 on the classical charts in both the UK and the US. Memory Almost Full reached number 3 in the US and spending fifteen weeks in the charts. As of 2014[update], it remains McCartney's most recent top-five album. Electric Arguments reached number 67 on the Billboard 200 and number one on the Independent Albums chart. In November 2010, iTunes made available the official canon of thirteen Beatles studio albums, Past Masters and the 1962–1966 and 1967–1970 greatest-hits compilations, making the group among the last of the seminal classic rock artists to offer their music for sale on the digital marketplace. McCartney's band performed thirty-seven songs during 8 May 2012, performance in Mexico City, twenty-three of which were Beatles tracks. As of 2012[update], Elvis Presley has achieved the most UK number-ones as a solo artist with eighteen. "Hey Jude" was covered by several prominent artists, including Elvis Presley, Bing Crosby, Count Basie and Wilson Pickett. Doyle, Patrick (13 November 2020). "Musicians on Musicians: Taylor Swift & Paul McCartney". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 30 November 2020. Retrieved 13 November 2020. "Paul McCartney". Front Row. 26 December 2012. BBC Radio 4. Archived from the original on 20 February 2014. Retrieved 18 January 2014. Newman, Jason (23 August 2011). "It Takes Two: 10 Songwriting Duos That Rocked Music History". billboard.com. Archived from the original on 23 June 2018. Retrieved 5 October 2017. By any measure, no one comes close to matching the success of The Beatles' primary songwriters. Elmes, John (5 December 2008). "The 10 Most Covered Songs". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 8 January 2020. Conradt, Stacy (30 November 2017). "10 of the Most Covered Songs in Music History". Mental Floss. Archived from the original on 31 December 2020. Retrieved 17 December 2020. Savage, Mark (13 May 2020). "Rihanna rockets onto Sunday Times Rich List". BBC News. Archived from the original on 13 May 2020. Retrieved 13 May 2020. Spitz 2005, p. 75. Wright, Jade (14 January 2013). "Macca, me and my mum's marzipan butties – Beatles star Paul McCartney's stepmum on life just outside the spotlight". Liverpool Echo. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. Miles 1997, p. 4: (primary source); Benitez 2010, p. 1: (secondary source). Carlin 2009, p. 11. Carlin 2009, pp. 8–9. Benitez 2010, p. 1: Transferred to Joseph Williams Junior School due to overcrowding at Stockton; Carlin 2009, p. 13: Transferred to Joseph Williams in 1949. For his attendance at Joseph Williams Junior School see: "Beatle's schoolboy photo auction". BBC News. 16 August 2009. Archived from the original on 2 May 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012.; For McCartney passing the 11-plus exam see: Miles 1997, p. 9: (primary source); Benitez 2010, pp. 1–2: (secondary source). Benitez 2010, p. 2: The two soon became friends, "I tended to talk down to him because he was a year younger"; Spitz 2005, pp. 82–83: On grammar school versus secondary modern, 125: On meeting Harrison. Playboy Interview, December 1984 "20 Forthlin Road". infobritain.co.uk. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Benitez 2010, p. 2: "Mary was the family's primary wage earner"; Harry 2002, pp. 340–341: "where they lived through 1964". Miles 1997, p. 6. Benitez 2010, p. 2: On Mary's death (secondary source); Miles 1997, p. 20: On Mary's death (primary source); Womack 2007, p. 10: Mary died from an embolism. Miles 1997, p. 31. Miles 1997, pp. 22–23. Spitz 2005, p. 71. Miles 1997, pp. 23–24. Welch, Chris (1984). Paul McCartney: The Definitive Biography. London: Proteus Books. p. 18. ISBN 978-0-86276-125-7. Miles 1997, p. 21: Jim gave McCartney a nickel-plated trumpet which was later traded for a Zenith acoustic guitar; Spitz 2005, p. 86: when rock and roll became popular on Radio Luxembourg. Miles 1997, p. 21. Harry 2002, pp. 509: McCartney: "The first song I ever sang in public was "Long Tall Sally"., 533–534: Harry: "Long Tall Sally", was "The first number Paul ever sang on stage". Spitz 2005, p. 93. Spitz 2005, p. 95: "The Quarrymen played a spirited set of songs—half skiffle, half rock 'n roll". Lewisohn 1992, p. 18. Lewisohn 1992, pp. 18–22. Lewisohn 1992, pp. 17–25. Norman 1981, pp. 145, 146 Miles 1997, p. 74: McCartney: "Nobody wants to play bass, or nobody did in those days".;Gould 2007, p. 89: On McCartney playing bass when Sutcliffe was indisposed., Gould 2007, p. 94: "Sutcliffe gradually began to withdraw from active participation in the Beatles, ceding his role as the group's bassist to Paul McCartney". Spitz 2005, pp. 249–251. Miles 1997, pp. 84–88. Lewisohn 1992, p. 59: "Love Me Do", Lewisohn 1992, p. 75: Replacing Best with Starr., Lewisohn 1992, pp. 88–94: "Beatlemania" in the UK., Lewisohn 1992, pp. 136–140: "Beatlemania" in the US; Miles 1997, p. 470: the cute Beatle; Spitz 2005, p. 330: Starr joining the Beatles in August 1962. Lewisohn 1992, pp. 350–351. For song authorship see: Harry 2002, p. 90: "Can't Buy Me Love", Harry 2002, p. 439: "I Saw Her Standing There"; Harry 2000a, pp. 561–562: "I Want to Hold Your Hand"; and MacDonald 2005, pp. 66–68: "I Saw Her Standing There", MacDonald 2005, pp. 83–85: "She Loves You", MacDonald 2005, pp. 99–103: "I Want to Hold Your Hand", MacDonald 2005, pp. 104–107: "Can't Buy Me Love", MacDonald 2005, pp. 171–172; For release dates, US and UK peak chart positions of the preceding songs see: Lewisohn 1992, pp. 350–351. Buk 1996, p. 51: Their first recording that involved only a single band member; Gould 2007, p. 278: The group's first recorded use of classical music elements in their music. MacDonald 2005, pp. 157–158: "Yesterday" as the most covered song in history. MacDonald 2005, p. 172. Levy 2005, p. 18: Rubber Soul is described by critics as an advancement of the band's music; Brown & Gaines 2002, pp. 181–82: As they explored facets of romance and philosophy in their lyrics. MacDonald 2005, pp. 169–170: "In My Life" as a highlight of the Beatles catalogue.; Spitz 2005, p. 587: Both Lennon and McCartney have claimed lead authorship for "In My Life". The Beatles 2000, p. 197. Harry 2000b, p. 780. Gould 2007, p. 348. MacDonald 2005, p. 195: The first of three consecutive McCartney A-sides; Lewisohn 1992, pp. 350–351: Revolver's release was preceded by "Paperback Writer". The Beatles 2000, p. 214: "the forerunner of videos"; Lewisohn 1992, pp. 221–222: The films aired on The Ed Sullivan Show and Top of the Pops. Gould 2007, p. 350: "neoclassical tour de force", Gould 2007, p. 402: "a true hybrid". Harry 2002, pp. 313–316. Everett 1999, p. 328. Lewisohn 1992, p. 230. Blaney 2007, p. 8. Harry 2000a, p. 970: Rock's first concept album; MacDonald 2005, p. 254: McCartney sensed unease among the bandmates and wanted them to maintain creative productivity. Miles 1997, p. 303: McCartney creating a new identity for the group. Miles 1997, p. 303. Lewisohn 1992, p. 232. Emerick & Massey 2006, p. 158: Martin and McCartney took turns conducting; Gould 2007, pp. 387–388: Recording "A Day in the Life" required a forty-piece orchestra. Sounes 2010, pp. 161–162. Gould 2007, pp. 391–395: The Sgt. Pepper cover featured the Beatles as the imaginary band alluded to in the album's title track, standing with a host of celebrities (secondary source); The Beatles 2000, p. 248: Standing with a host of celebrities (primary source); Miles 1997, p. 333: On McCartney's design for the Sgt. Pepper cover (primary source); Sounes 2010, p. 168: On McCartney's design for the Sgt. Pepper cover (secondary source). Gould 2007, pp. 391–395: The Sgt. Pepper cover attracted curiosity and analysis; Miles 1997, p. 333: On McCartney's design for the Sgt. Pepper cover (primary source); Sounes 2010, p. 168: On McCartney's design for the Sgt. Pepper cover (secondary source). Wenner 2000, pp. 24–25. Brown & Gaines 2002, p. 247. Benitez 2010, pp. 8–9. Lewisohn 1992, pp. 238–239. Gould 2007, pp. 455–456. Harry 2000a, p. 699. Gould 2007, p. 487: Critical response; Lewisohn 1992, p. 278: Filming of the promotional trailer, Lewisohn 1992, p. 304: Yellow Submarine soundtrack release. Lewisohn 1992, pp. 276–304. Gould 2007, p. 470: Apple Corps formed as part of Epstein's business plan; Lewisohn 1992, p. 278: The Beatles' first Apple Records LP release. Brown & Gaines 2002, p. 299: "We've been very negative since Mr. Epstein passed away"; Lewisohn 1992, pp. 276–304: The White Album, Lewisohn 1992, pp. 304–314: Let It Be. Sounes 2010, pp. 171–172: Paul and Linda's first meeting; Sounes 2010, pp. 245–248: On their wedding; Sounes 2010, p. 261: On the birth of their first child Mary. Gould 2007, p. 563. Gould 2007, pp. 593–594. Lewisohn 1992, p. 349: McCartney's departure from the Beatles (secondary source); Miles 1998, pp. 314–316: McCartney's departure from the Beatles (primary source); Spitz 2005, pp. 243, 819–821: Lennon's personal appointment of Klein, Spitz 2005, pp. 832–833: McCartney's disagreement with Lennon, Harrison, and Starr over Klein's management of the Beatles. Harry 2002, p. 753. Roberts 2005, p. 54. Lewisohn 1992, pp. 350–351: US and UK singles and album release dates with peak chart positions; Gould 2007, pp. 8–9: "one of the greatest phenomena in the history of mass entertainment", "widely regarded as the greatest concentration of singing, songwriting, and all-around musical talent that the rock'n'roll era has produced"; Spitz 2005, p. 856: "not anything like anything else ... [a] vastness of talent ... of genius, incomprehensible". For song authorship see: MacDonald 2005, pp. 333–334: "Get Back", MacDonald 2005, pp. 272–273: "Hello, Goodbye", MacDonald 2005, pp. 302–304: "Hey Jude", MacDonald 2005, pp. 337–338: "Let it Be", MacDonald 2005, pp. 339–341: "The Long and Winding Road"; For release dates, US and UK peak chart positions of the preceding songs see: Lewisohn 1992, pp. 350–351. Lewisohn 2002, p. 29. Heatley, Michael; Hopkinson, Frank. The Girl in the Song: The Real Stories Behind 50 Rock Classics, Pavilion Books (2010) e-book "Maybe I'm Amazed" Archived 2 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, The Beatles Bible Harry 2002, pp. 556–563: McCartney; Blaney 2007, p. 31: McCartney, a US number one. Roberts 2005, p. 312: Peak UK chart position and weeks on charts for McCartney. Ingham 2009, pp. 105: Ram, 114–115: "Uncle Albert/Admiral Halsey"; McGee 2003, p. 245: Peak US chart positions for Ram. Lewisohn 2002, p. 7. McGee 2003, p. 245: Peak UK and US chart positions for Wild Life; Roberts 2005, p. 312: Peak UK chart position and weeks on chart for Wild Life. Sounes 2010, pp. 287–288: Birth of Stella; Harry 2002, pp. 613–615: Stella McCartney. Harry 2002, p. 845: "traveled across the UK"; Ingham 2009, p. 106: "Scrupulously avoiding Beatles songs". Harry 2002, p. 847. Harry 2002, p. 845. Harry 2002, pp. 641–642: "My Love", Harry 2002, pp. 744–745: Red Rose Speedway; McGee 2003, p. 245: Peak US chart positions for Red Rose Speedway; Roberts 2005, p. 312: Peak UK chart position for Red Rose Speedway. Harry 2002, pp. 515–516: "Live and Let Die"; Harry 2002, pp. 641–642: "My Love". Benitez 2010, p. 50: "symphonic rock at its best"; Harry 2002, pp. 515–516: "Live and Let Die" US chart peak; Roberts 2005, p. 311: "Live and Let Die" UK chart peak. Sounes 2010, p. 304: Pyrotechnics; Sounes 2010, p. 329: Laser lighting display; Sounes 2010, p. 440: Performing "Live and Let Die" with pyrotechnics, 1993; Sounes 2010, pp. 512–513: Performing "Live and Let Die" with pyrotechnics, 2002. McGee 2003, pp. 248–249. Benitez 2010, pp. 51–60: Band on the Run; Roberts 2005, p. 312: Band on the Run a number-one album in the UK with 124 weeks on the charts. McGee 2003, p. 60. Harry 2002, pp. 53–54: "Band on the Run" (single). "Band on the Run ranked 418th greatest album". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 20 December 2010. Retrieved 18 July 2021. Benitez 2010, pp. 61–62. Harry 2002, pp. 882–883: Venus and Mars, Harry 2002, pp. 910–911: Wings at the Speed of Sound; Roberts 2005, p. 312: Peak UK chart position for Venus and Mars. McGee 2003, p. 245: NME ranking Wings at the Speed of Sound number 1, and the LP was number 1 on three charts in the US; Roberts 2005, p. 312: Peak UK chart position and weeks on charts for Wings at the Speed of Sound. Blaney 2007, p. 116: "And for the first time, McCartney included songs associated with the Beatles, something he'd been unwilling to do previously"; Harry 2002, pp. 848–850: Wings Over the World Tour; Ingham 2009, p. 107: "featuring a modest handful of McCartney's Beatle tunes"; McGee 2003, p. 85: "Paul decided it would be a mistake not to ... [perform] a few Beatles songs." Harry 2002, pp. 912–913: Wings over America; Lewisohn 2002, p. 83: "After extensive rehearsals in London". Carlin 2009, pp. 247–248: Birth of James; Doggett 2009, p. 264: one of the best-selling singles in UK chart history. Ingham 2009, pp. 107–108: "Mull of Kintyre"; Benitez 2010, p. 86: "the biggest hit of McCartney's career". Harry 2002, pp. 840–841: Thrillington Hipgnosis cover art; Lewisohn 2002, p. 168: Thrillington. Blaney 2007, pp. 122–125. Benitez 2010, p. 79. Harry 2002, pp. 42–43: Back to the Egg, Harry 2002, pp. 530–532: London Town, Harry 2002, pp. 758–760: the Rockestra; Ingham 2009, p. 108: London Town and Back to the Egg; McGee 2003, p. 245: Back to the Egg certified platinum. Harry 2002, pp. 845–851: Wings tours details, Harry 2002, pp. 850–851: Wings UK Tour 1979; Ingham 2009, p. 108: Wings UK Tour 1979. Harry 2002, p. 578: He composed all the music and performed the instrumentation himself; Lewisohn 2002, p. 167: McCartney II a UK number-one, and a US top-five. Benitez 2010, pp. 100–103: McCartney II; Blaney 2007, pp. 136–137: "Coming Up". Benitez 2010, pp. 96–97. Benitez 2010, pp. 96–97: On Wings' April dissolution, McCartney fearing for his personal safety and the commercial disappointment of Back to the Egg; Blaney 2007, p. 132: "Back to the Egg spent only eight weeks in the British charts, the shortest chart run of any Wings album".; Doggett 2009, pp. 276: "Paul is doing other things, that's all".; George-Warren 2001, p. 626: McCartney's reluctance to tour for fear of his personal safety; McGee 2003, p. 144: On McCartney's reluctance to tour out of fear for his personal safety, and Laine's statement that this was a significant contributing factor to Wings' dissolution. Ingham 2009, pp. 109–110: Wings disbanded in 1981; McGee 2003, p. 245: US and UK chart positions of Wings' LPs; Harry 2002, pp. 904–910: Wings, 912–913: Wings over America; Lewisohn 2002, p. 163: one of few live albums ever to achieve the top spot in America. McGee 2003, pp. 244–245: Wings' US and UK singles and albums chart positions; Harry 2002, pp. 511–512: "Listen to What the Man Said", 788: "Silly Love Songs" Harry 2002, p. 311: "Ebony and Ivory"; Harry 2002, pp. 361–362: "The Girl Is Mine"; Harry 2002, p. 820: Eric Stewart. Blaney 2007, p. 153. American Top 40 replay. Green Bay, Wisconsin. 22 May 1982. Event occurs at 9:55am. Harry 2002, pp. 720–722: Pipes of Peace album and song., Harry 2002, pp. 776–777: "Say Say Say"; Roberts 2005, p. 311: Last UK number one single; For the peak US chart position of Pipes of Peace see: Blaney 2007, p. 159. For the RIAA database see: "RIAA: Searchable Database". the Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on 30 August 2014. Retrieved 24 June 2012.; Roberts 2005, p. 312: Peak UK chart position and weeks on charts for Pipes of Peace; Blaney 2007, p. 159: US chart peak for Pipes of Peace. Harry 2002, pp. 365–374: Give My Regards to Broad Street (film); Harry 2002, p. 817: Starr in Give My Regards to Broad Street. Ebert, Roger (1 January 1984). "Give My Regards to Broad Street review". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved 1 February 2024. Blaney 2007, p. 167: Peak US chart position for "No More Lonely Nights", (number 6); Graff 2000, p. 40: Gilmour on guitar; Harry 2002, pp. 368–369: "No More Lonely Nights". Blaney 2007, p. 171. Blaney 2007, p. 171: Peak US and UK chart positions for "Spies Like Us"; Benitez 2010, p. 117: "Became a top-ten hit for McCartney"; Roberts 2005, p. 311: Peak UK chart position for "Spies Like Us". Sounes 2010, pp. 402–403. Blaney 2007, p. 177. Blaney 2007, p. 177: Peak UK and US chart positions for Press to Play; Roberts 2005, p. 8: Peak UK chart position for Press to Play. Harry 2002, p. 100: Снова в СССР; Harry 2002, p. 728: Press to Play; Harry 2002, p. 820: Eric Stewart. Harry 2002, pp. 327–328. Roberts 2005, pp. 688–689. Harry 2002, pp. 272–273: Elvis Costello; Harry 2002, pp. 337–338: Flowers in the Dirt. Blaney 2007, p. 191: Peak US chart position for "Flowers in the Dirt" (#21); Roberts 2005, p. 312: Peak UK chart position for "Flowers in the Dirt" (#1). Harry 2002, p. 851: the Paul McCartney World Tour band; Sounes 2010, pp. 420–421: the Paul McCartney World Tour band. Badman 1999, p. 444. Harry 2002, p. 851. Blaney 2007, p. 201. Sounes 2010, p. 512. Harry 2002, pp. 526–528: Liverpool Oratorio. Harry 2002, p. 528. Rothstein, Edward (20 November 1991). "Review/Music; McCartney's 'Liverpool Oratorio'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 May 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2012. Benitez 2010, p. 134: Performed around the world; Blaney 2007, p. 210: on the UK classical chart, Music Week. Harry 2002, pp. 873–874: Unplugged: the Official Bootleg. Blaney 2007, p. 205. Harry 2002, pp. 332–334. Harry 2002, p. 656. Blaney 2007, p. 215. Harry 2002, pp. 685–686, 687: The New World Tour. Blaney 2007, p. 219. Sounes 2010, p. 429. Everett 1999, p. 282. Miles 1997, pp. 218–219. Sounes 2010, p. 458: Honorary Fellowship, Sounes 2010, p. 477: McCartney; "Yeah, it's kind of amazing for somebody who doesn't read a note of music". Blaney 2007, pp. 224. Blaney 2007, p. 223: The peak UK chart position for "Young Boy", Blaney 2007, p. 224: Starr on "Beautiful Night", Blaney 2007, p. 225: Peak US chart position for Flaming Pie; Roberts 2005, p. 311: Peak UK chart position for "Young Boy", Roberts 2005, p. 312: Peak UK chart position for Flaming Pie. Blaney 2007, p. 229. Harry 2002, pp. 335–336: Flaming Pie; Harry 2002, p. 807: Standing Stone; Harry 2002, p. 770: Rushes Blaney 2007, p. 241. Graff 2000, p. 40; Harry 2002, pp. 593–595: Linda's battle with cancer., Harry 2002, pp. 765–766: Run Devil Run. Harry 2002, pp. 710–711. Harry 2002, pp. 528–529. Harry 2002, pp. 350–351: "Choral"; George-Warren 2001, pp. 626–627: "Classical". Harry 2002, pp. 268–270: The Concert for New York City; Harry 2002, pp. 346–347: "Freedom". Blaney 2007, p. 255. Benitez 2010, p. 15: New band details; Sounes 2010, pp. 510–511: New band details. Sounes 2010, pp. 517–518. Blaney 2007, p. 261: Peak US chart position for Back in the U.S.; Roberts 2005, p. 312: Peak UK chart position for Back in the World. For tour box office gross see: Waddell, Ray (28 December 2002). "The Top Tours of 2002: Veterans rule the roost, with Sir Paul leading the pack". Billboard. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. Retrieved 12 June 2012. Deruso, Nick (9 May 2013). "Interview of Brian Ray on Paul McCartney". Something Else!. Archived from the original on 6 February 2017. Retrieved 6 February 2017. Harry 2002, pp. 577: McCartney's marriage to Mills; Doggett 2009, pp. 332–333: Concert for George. Harry 2002, pp. 825–826: McCartney performing at Super Bowl XXXVI in 2002; Sandford 2006, p. 396: McCartney performing at Super Bowl XXXIX in 2005. "Ex-Beatle granted coat of arms". BBC News. 22 December 2002. Archived from the original on 19 June 2012. Retrieved 1 July 2012. Sounes 2010, p. 523. Blaney 2007, pp. 268–269. Blaney 2007, p. 268. Molenda 2005, pp. 68–70. Blaney 2007, p. 269: Peak UK and US chart positions for "Fine Line"; Blaney 2007, p. 271: Peak UK and US chart positions for Chaos and Creation in the Backyard; Blaney 2007, p. 274: Peak UK chart position for "Jenny Wren". For 30 November 2005 Los Angeles setlist see: "Paul McCartney: The U.S. Tour". paulmcartney.com. 30 November 2005. Archived from the original on 3 June 2014. Retrieved 24 June 2012.; For the Billboard boxscores see:Waddell, Ray (5 August 2006). "Top Tours Take Center Stage". Billboard. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. Retrieved 13 June 2012. Blaney 2007, p. 276. Sounes 2010, pp. 540–541. "Memory Almost Full – Paul McCartney". Billboard. 23 June 2007. Archived from the original on 21 November 2021. Retrieved 2 July 2012. Sounes 2010, p. 559. "Electric Arguments – the Fireman". Billboard. 13 December 2008. Archived from the original on 27 October 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2012. "Paul McCartney Treats Liverpool to 'A Day in the Life' Live Debut". Rolling Stone. 2 June 2008. Archived from the original on 1 July 2008. Retrieved 3 May 2012. "Paul McCartney Stuns Manhattan With Set on Letterman's Marquee". Rolling Stone. 16 July 2009. Archived from the original on 8 May 2012. Retrieved 4 May 2012. For 9 September 2009 remasters see: "The Beatles' Entire Original Recorded Catalogue Remastered by Apple Corps Ltd" (Press release). EMI. 7 April 2009. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012.; For the Beatles: Rock Band see: Gross, Doug (4 September 2009). "Still Relevant After Decades, The Beatles Set to Rock 9 September 2009". CNN. Archived from the original on 6 November 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012. Sounes 2010, p. 560. Mervis, Scott (14 June 2010). "Paul McCartney sells out two shows at Consol". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012. For "among the last" of the classic rock catalogues available online see: La Monica, Paul R. (7 September 2005). "Hey iTunes, Don't Make It Bad ..." CNNMoney.com. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012.; For the Beatles catalogue available on iTunes see: Aswad, Jem (16 November 2010). "Beatles End Digital Boycott, Catalog Now on iTunes". Rolling Stone. New York. Archived from the original on 17 December 2010. Retrieved 17 November 2010. Pareles, Jon (16 July 2011). "A Gentle Reminder of Paul McCartney's Survival and Vitality". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 March 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2012. Perpetua, Matthew (23 August 2011). "Paul McCartney Signs to Label That Rejected the Beatles". Rolling Stone. New York: Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 11 July 2023. "Paul McCartney: Ocean's Kingdom". paulmcartney.com. 2 October 2011. Archived from the original on 13 May 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2012. "Sir Paul McCartney marrying for the third time". BBC News. 9 October 2011. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2012. "Paul McCartney: Kisses On The Bottom". paulmccartney.com. Archived from the original on 20 May 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2012.; For McCartney's MusiCares award, and his performance at the 54th Grammy Awards see: "Paul McCartney Is 2012 MusiCares Person of the Year". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. 13 September 2011. Archived from the original on 4 September 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012. For the Billboard boxscores on the Mexico City shows see: "Charts:Current Box Score". Billboard. Archived from the original on 19 July 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012. "Paul McCartney: On the Run". paulmcartney.com. Archived from the original on 29 May 2012. Retrieved 24 June 2012. Sutherland, Mark (5 June 2012). "Paul McCartney, Elton John Honor Queen at Diamond Jubilee Concert". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2013. "Sir Paul to end London 2012 opening ceremony". BBC News. 5 June 2012. Archived from the original on 5 June 2012. Retrieved 5 June 2012. "Paul McCartney Olympics Payment: Singer Paid One Pound ($1.57) For Big Gig". Huffington Post. 30 July 2012. Archived from the original on 31 July 2012. Retrieved 5 August 2012. Shriver, Jerry; Deutsch, Lindsay (13 December 2012). "Springsteen, Kanye, Stones, McCartney rock Sandy relief". USA Today. Archived from the original on 18 September 2017. Retrieved 13 December 2012. Greenwald, David (28 August 2013). "Paul McCartney's 'New' Single Lands, Album Due in October: Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on 30 August 2013. Retrieved 31 August 2013. Gans, Andrew. "Anna Kendrick, David Letterman, John Mayer, Keith Urban, Katy Perry, Sean Penn, Stevie Wonder and More Set for CBS' Beatles Tribute; Song List Announced" Playbill.com, 7 February 2014 Demetriou, Danielle (19 May 2014). "Paul McCartney cancels a string of Japan concerts due to unspecified 'virus'". telegraph.co.uk. Telegraph Media Group Ltd. Archived from the original on 19 May 2014. Retrieved 20 May 2014. Vozick-Levinson, Simon (6 July 2014). "Paul McCartney Bounces Back in Albany". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 16 July 2014. Retrieved 21 July 2014. "Paul McCartney Closes Candlestick Park 'in Style' – Rolling Stone". Rolling Stone. 15 August 2014. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 27 September 2014. Sinclair, Brendan (7 July 2012). "Paul McCartney working with Bungie". GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 9 July 2012. Retrieved 7 July 2012. "Destiny End Credits Easter Egg reveals Paul McCartney's Song Hope for the Future". Gamespot. 11 September 2014. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Bob Dylan, Kiss and More Cover Paul McCartney for Tribute Comp – Rolling Stone". Rolling Stone. 9 September 2014. Archived from the original on 27 September 2014. Retrieved 27 September 2014. Markman, Rob. "Kanye West Drops New Song For The New Year: Listen To 'Only One'". MTV. Archived from the original on 3 January 2015. Retrieved 1 January 2015. White, Caitlin (25 January 2015). "Rihanna Dropped Her New Song With Kanye And Paul McCartney—Hear 'FourFiveSeconds'". MTV News. Archived from the original on 14 February 2015. Retrieved 11 February 2015. Kreps, Daniel (31 January 2015). "Watch Rihanna, Kanye and McCartney on 'FourFiveSeconds' Video Shoot". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 11 February 2015. Retrieved 11 February 2015. Payne, Chris (11 February 2015). "The 2015 Grammys: Best and Worst Moments". Billboard. Archived from the original on 10 February 2015. Retrieved 9 February 2015. "Kanye West – "All Day" (Feat. Allan Kingdom, Theophilus London, & Paul McCartney)". Stereogum. 2 March 2015. Archived from the original on 4 March 2015. Blistein, Joel (16 February 2015). "Paul McCartney, Miley Cyrus, Paul Simon Captivate at 'SNL 40'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 17 February 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2015. Britton, Luke Morgan (5 August 2015). "Alice Cooper details 'Hollywood Vampires' album featuring Paul McCartney, Dave Grohl and Johnny Depp". NME. Archived from the original on 28 September 2015. Retrieved 27 September 2015. Foreman, Polly (31 March 2016). "Paul McCartney announces career-spanning compilation". uncut.co.uk. Archived from the original on 9 April 2016. Retrieved 2 April 2016. "Pure McCartney". Facebook. 31 March 2016. Archived from the original on 18 September 2017. Retrieved 1 April 2016. "67 Tracks of Pure McCartney ..." paulmccartney.com. 31 March 2016. Archived from the original on 4 April 2016. Retrieved 1 April 2016. "Paul McCartney Joins Johnny Depp & Crew For 'Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales'". Deadline.com. 24 March 2016. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 26 December 2016. "We can't work it out: Paul McCartney to sue Sony for rights to Beatles classics". The Guardian. 18 January 2017. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 19 January 2017. Retrieved 19 January 2017. "Sir Paul McCartney sues Sony over Beatles songs". BBC News. 19 January 2017. Archived from the original on 19 January 2017. Retrieved 19 January 2017. "Beatles song rights dispute: Paul McCartney and Sony ATV work it out". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. 3 July 2017. Archived from the original on 4 May 2018. Retrieved 4 July 2018. "Paul McCartney Settles with Sony/ATV to Reclaim Beatles Copyright". fortune.com. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 4 July 2018. Blistein, Jon (19 June 2018). "Paul McCartney Details New Double A-Side Single". rollingstone.com. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 4 July 2018. "Paul McCartney scores first number one album in United States in 36 years". Sky News. Archived from the original on 17 September 2018. Retrieved 17 September 2018. "Paul McCartney at the Cavern Club". Archived from the original on 20 November 2021. Retrieved 20 November 2021. "Paul McCartney Setlist at Cavern Club, Liverpool". setlist.fm. Archived from the original on 20 November 2021. Retrieved 20 November 2021. Martoccio, Angie (21 October 2020). "Paul McCartney Announces New Album, 'McCartney III'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 20 August 2021. Retrieved 21 October 2020. "LadBaby land third Christmas No.1 with fastest-selling single of 2020". Music Week. Archived from the original on 27 December 2020. Retrieved 27 December 2020. "'It's just me': an exclusive interview with Paul McCartney about McCartney III". Loud and Quiet. 21 October 2020. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 21 October 2020. Kreps, Daniel (11 March 2021). "Paul McCartney Taps St. Vincent, Beck, Phoebe Bridgers for 'III Imagined' Album". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 12 March 2021. Retrieved 12 March 2021. Kreps, Daniel (24 February 2021). "Paul McCartney Announces 'The Lyrics: 1956 to the Present' Memoir". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "The Lyrics: 1956 to the Present is the 2021 Barnes & Noble Book of the Year!". B&N Reads. 18 November 2021. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2022. "Waterstones Book of the Year 2021". Waterstones.com. Archived from the original on 19 March 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2022. Blistein, Jon (18 February 2022). "Paul McCartney Will Get Back to the Road on 'Got Back' Tour". rollingstone.com. Rolling Stone, LLC. (Penske Media Corporation). Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 28 April 2022. "Sir Paul McCartney makes history as oldest solo headliner at Glastonbury". ITV News. 25 June 2022. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. "Sir Paul McCartney set to make history as oldest solo headliner at Glastonbury". The Independent. 25 June 2022. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. "BBC Music – Glastonbury, 2022, Paul McCartney". BBC. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. "Watch Dave Grohl and Bruce Springsteen join Paul McCartney on stage at Glastonbury 2022". NME. 26 June 2022. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. Carey, Matthew (4 September 2022). "Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Director Peter Jackson Win Emmys For 'The Beatles: Get Back'". Deadline. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. "Rediscovering Paul McCartney's photos of The Beatles' 1964 invasion – CBS News". www.cbsnews.com. 18 June 2023. Archived from the original on 18 June 2023. Retrieved 18 June 2023. "See Paul McCartney's personal photos of The Beatles from his book '1964: Eyes of the Storm'". USA TODAY. Archived from the original on 17 June 2023. Retrieved 18 June 2023. MacDonald 2005, p. 12: Natural melodist, MacDonald 2005, p. 13: Perfect pitch and an acute pair of ears. Benitez 2010, p. 134. The Beatles 2000, p. 21: "the Messiah has arrived!", (primary source); Spitz 2005, p. 41: "The Messiah had arrived", (secondary source). Harry 2000a, pp. 140–141: Chuck Berry; Harry 2002, pp. 420–425: Buddy Holly, Harry 2002, p. 727: Elvis Presley; Mulhern 1990, p. 33: Carl Perkins and Little Richard; Spitz 2005, pp. 41, 92, 97, 124: Presley, Spitz 2005, pp. 131–133, 225, 538: Holly, Spitz 2005, pp. 134, 374, 446, 752: Berry. Harry 2002, p. 727. MacDonald 2005, pp. 66–67: "According to McCartney, the bassline was taken from "...I'm Talking About You"; Mulhern 1990, p. 18: McCartney: "I'm not gonna tell you I wrote the thing when Chuck Berry's bass player did; Miles 1997, p. 94: McCartney: "I played exactly the same notes as he did and it fitted our number perfectly". Mulhern 1990, p. 33. MacDonald 2005, p. 156: (secondary source); Miles 1997, p. 201: (primary source). Harry 2002, pp. 420–425: "Buddy Holly Week" 1976–2001. Bacon & Morgan 2006, p. 28. Bacon & Morgan 2006, pp. 38–39. Mulhern 1990, p. 18: The influence of Motown and James Jamerson, Mulhern 1990, p. 22: Stanley Clarke. Bacon & Morgan 2006, p. 8. "Creem magazine selected readers poll results". Archived from the original on 20 January 2012. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Rolling Stone Readers Pick the Top Ten Bassists of All Time". Rolling Stone. 31 March 2011. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "The 50 Greatest Bassists of All Time". Rolling Stone. 1 July 2020. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "The 100 best bass players of all time". Bass Player. 10 August 2020. Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "The 30 greatest bassists of all time – ranked". MusicRadar. 9 June 2021. Archived from the original on 23 November 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Steve Parker Micro Site – New Book of Rock Lists". Archived from the original on 29 July 2013. Retrieved 23 November 2023. Sheff 1981, p. 142. Babiuk 2002, pp. 16–17: Höfner 500/1, Babiuk 2002, pp. 44–45: Rickenbacker 4001, Babiuk 2002, pp. 85–86, 92–93, 103, 116, 134, 140, 173, 175, 187, 211: Vox amplifiers; MacDonald 2005, p. 298: Fender Bassman. Jisi 2005, p. 42. Mulhern 1990, p. 19. MacDonald 2005, pp. 133–134: "She's a Woman"; Ingham 2009, p. 299: "began to come into its own". Bacon & Morgan 2006, pp. 10, 44: Rubber Soul as the starting point for McCartney's bass improvement, Bacon & Morgan 2006, p. 98: "a high point in pop bass playing". MacDonald 2005, pp. 178–180. Bacon & Morgan 2006, pp. 112–113. MacDonald 2005, pp. 196–198. MacDonald 2005, p. 349. Jisi 2005, p. 45–46. Mulhern 1990, p. 22. MacDonald 2005, pp. 157–158: "Yesterday", MacDonald 2005, pp. 174–175: "I'm Looking Through You", MacDonald 2005, pp. 175–176: "Michelle", MacDonald 2005, pp. 291–292: "Blackbird", MacDonald 2005, pp. 305–306: "Mother Nature's Son", MacDonald 2005, p. 308: "Rocky Raccoon", MacDonald 2005, p. 315: "I Will". Molenda 2005, p. 79. Babiuk 2002, pp. 146–147, 152, 161, 164: Epiphone Texan; Babiuk 2002, pp. 215, 218, 222, 239: Martin D-28. Mulhern 1990, p. 23. Babiuk 2002, p. 149: "If I had to pick one electric guitar"; MacDonald 2005, pp. 166–167: "Drive My Car", "fiercely angular slide guitar solo". "PAUL MCCARTNEY EXPLAINS HOW JIMI HENDRIX MADE HIM BUY HIS FAVOURITE GUITAR". Guitar.com | All Things Guitar. 13 August 2020. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2020. MacDonald 2005, pp. 200–201: "Taxman", MacDonald 2005, pp. 232–234: "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band", MacDonald 2005, pp. 234–235: "Good Morning Good Morning", MacDonald 2005, pp. 297–298: "Helter Skelter". MacDonald 2005, p. 145. McGee 2003, p. 165. James E. Perone (17 October 2012). The Album: A Guide to Pop Music's Most Provocative, Influential, and Important Creations. ABC-CLIO. p. 585. ISBN 978-0-313-37907-9. Archived from the original on 18 September 2017. "Gear Rundown: Paul McCartney". 7 July 2017. Archived from the original on 4 December 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020. Coplan, Chris (25 May 2014). "Axl Rose is NOT the singer with the widest range". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on 27 May 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2014. "The Vocal Ranges of the World's Greatest Singers". Concert Hotels. Archived from the original on 14 August 2015. "100 Greatest Singers – Paul McCartney". The Rolling Stone. 3 December 2010. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. "The greatest singers ever – as voted by you". NME. 21 June 2011. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. "The 30 Greatest Lead Singers of All Time". The Music Radar. 7 December 2010. Archived from the original on 19 December 2014. "Soundgarden singer Chris Cornell goes quiet". Stuff. stuff.co.nz. 6 June 2015. Archived from the original on 16 April 2016. Retrieved 13 February 2016. "33 Years Ago: Billy Joel Channels the Beatles on 'The Nylon Curtain'". stuff.co.nz. 23 September 2015. Archived from the original on 20 February 2016. "'Steven Tyler's 'Abbey Road' Tribute To Paul McCartney!'". Society Of Rock. 13 May 2015. Archived from the original on 15 February 2016. "Remembering Brad Delp". stuff.co.nz. Archived from the original on 25 September 2013. "Axl Rose responds to list calling him 'world's greatest singer'". Rolling Stone. 28 May 2014. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Benitez 2010, p. 68: "Call Me Back Again"; MacDonald 2005, p. 156: "I'm Down". MacDonald 2005, pp. 297–298: "Helter Skelter", MacDonald 2005, pp. 302–304: "Hey Jude". Benitez 2010, p. 128: "Put It There", Benitez 2010, p. 138: "Hope of Deliverance"; Everett 1999, pp. 112–113: "When I'm Sixty-Four", Everett 1999, pp. 189–190: "Honey Pie". MacDonald 2005, pp. 133–134. MacDonald 2005, pp. 309–310: "Back in the U.S.S.R"., MacDonald 2005, p. 332: "I've Got a Feeling", a "raunchy, mid-tempo rocker" with a "robust and soulful" performance. "Paul McCartney on The Fireman". Clash. Archived from the original on 16 February 2016. "Paul McCartney – McCartney II". The Essential. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 13 February 2016. "Press to Play". MaccaFan.net. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. "Paul McCartney/Linda McCartney – Ram". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on 16 February 2016. MacDonald 2005, pp. 178–180: "She's a Woman", MacDonald 2005, pp. 205–206: "For No One", MacDonald 2005, pp. 227–232: "A Day in the Life", MacDonald 2005, pp. 272–273: "Hello, Goodbye", MacDonald 2005, pp. 275–276: "Lady Madonna", MacDonald 2005, pp. 302–304: "Hey Jude", MacDonald 2005, p. 322: "Martha My Dear", MacDonald 2005, pp. 337–338: "Let It Be", MacDonald 2005, pp. 339–341: "The Long and Winding Road". MacDonald 2005, pp. 275–276: "Lady Madonna", MacDonald 2005, pp. 337–338: "Let It Be". MacDonald 2005, p. 219. MacDonald 2005, p. 357: "Maxwell's Silver Hammer"; Benitez 2010, p. 46: "Loup (1st Indian on the Moon)". Ingham 2009, p. 117: "the most sensitive pop synthesizer touches"; Blaney 2007, p. 123: McCartney playing keyboards on "London Town". MacDonald 2005, p. 309: "Wild Honey Pie", MacDonald 2005, pp. 309–310: "Back in the USSR", MacDonald 2005, pp. 310–311: "Dear Prudence", MacDonald 2005, p. 322: "Martha My Dear", MacDonald 2005, pp. 345–347: "The Ballad of John and Yoko". Benitez 2010, p. 19: McCartney, Benitez 2010, p. 52: Band on the Run, Benitez 2010, p. 99: McCartney II; Molenda 2005, pp. 68–70: he played most of the instrumentation himself. "Paul Jones – And The Sun Will Shine – The Dog Presides". beatleshelp.net. Archived from the original on 23 December 2014. Retrieved 23 December 2014. Lewisohn, Mark (2013). The Beatles: All These Years: Volume I: Tune In. New York: Crown Archetype. p. 309. ISBN 978-1-4000-8305-3. Castleman, Harry; Podrazik, Walter J. (1977). "1969 – "But If Paul's Alive, How Did He Die?". All Together Now – The First Complete Beatles Discography 1961–1975 (Second ed.). New York: Ballantine Books. p. 78. ISBN 978-0-345-25680-5. Kim, Michelle (2 August 2017). "Paul McCartney Plays Drums On Foo Fighters' New Album". Pitchfork. Pitchfork Media. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 1 September 2019. Miles 1997, pp. 217–218. Miles 1997, pp. 219–220. MacDonald 2005, pp. 185–193: Tape loops used on "Tomorrow Never Knows"; Everett 1999, pp. 138–139: Tape loops used on "The Fool on the Hill". Carlin 2009, pp. 44–45. Harry 2002, p. 307. Miles 1997, p. 243. Miles 1997, pp. 256–267. Harry 2000a, pp. 549–550: Indica Gallery renovation and Lennon meeting Ono; Harry 2002, pp. 549–550: Miles as McCartney's official biographer; Miles 1997, pp. 232, 237–238: Barry Miles and IT. Spitz 2005, p. 84. Miles 1997, p. 266. Sounes 2010, p. 453. "McCartney art makes UK debut". BBC News. 29 September 2000. Archived from the original on 14 March 2003. "McCartney and Yoko art exhibitions, 20 October 2000". BBC News. 20 October 2000. Archived from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.; "Walker Gallery Exhibition: 24 May – 4 August 2002". liverpoolmuseums.org.uk. Archived from the original on 23 December 2003. Retrieved 3 May 2012. Harry 2002, pp. 517–526. Miles 1997, p. 12: "word power" (primary source); Spitz 2005, p. 82: "word power" (secondary source). Horovitz, Michael (14 October 2006). "Roll over, Andrew Motion". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 30 September 2013. Retrieved 13 July 2009. McCartney 2001, p. 13. Merritt, Stephanie (17 December 2005). "It took him years to write ..." The Observer. London. Archived from the original on 30 September 2013. Retrieved 3 May 2012. "Hey Grandude!". Random House Books. Archived from the original on 27 September 2019. Retrieved 27 September 2019. McCartney, Paul (2021). Grandude's Green Submarine. Illustrated by Kathryn Durst. Penguin Books. ISBN 9780241472965. Ingham 2009, p. 219. Harry 2002, p. 767. "McCartney releases frog follow-up". BBC News. 29 February 2004. Archived from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012. Harry 2002, p. 862. Blaney 2007, p. 266. The Real Buddy Holly Story (DVD). White Star (copyright MPL Communications and BBC TV). 2004. ASIN B0002VGTBQ. Harry 2002, pp. 386–387: the Grateful Dead documentary, 789: "Lisa the Vegetarian", 862. "Sir Paul McCartney tops 2015 musicians' rich list". BBC News Online. 23 April 2015. Archived from the original on 24 April 2015. Retrieved 25 April 2015. For MPL's ownership of over 25,000 songs see: "Sir Paul is 'pop billionaire'". BBC News. 6 January 2002. Archived from the original on 7 July 2009. Retrieved 13 July 2009.; Harry 2002, pp. 630–632: MPL's ownership of Guys and Dolls, A Chorus Line, and Grease; Sounes 2010, p. 348: MPL's ownership of Annie. "McCartney tops media rich list". BBC News. 30 October 2003. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008. Retrieved 3 January 2010. "48 million in 2005". The Telegraph. London. 18 May 2006. Archived from the original on 24 February 2008. Retrieved 22 May 2010. Casciato, Paul (11 April 2013). "McCartney tops UK music rich list, Adele richest youngster". Reuters. Archived from the original on 4 June 2013. Retrieved 4 June 2013. McGee 2003, pp. 125–126. Dannen, Frederic, Hit Men: Power Brokers and Fast Money Inside the Music Business, Vintage Books, London, 1991, (ISBN 0099813106), pp. 126–127 Blaney 2007, pp. 287–297: McCartney's discography, with release label detail; Roberts 2005, pp. 311–312: McCartney discography with release label detail. For McCartney's current record label see: Hermis, Will (7 February 2012). "Paul McCartney: Kisses on the Bottom". Rolling Stone: Reviews. Archived from the original on 18 June 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012.; For his joining Hear as their first artist see: "McCartney joins Starbucks label". BBC News. 22 March 2007. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012. Spitz 2005, p. 365. Leeds, Jeff; Sorkin, Andrew Ross (13 April 2006). "Michael Jackson Bailout Said to Be Close". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 September 2011. Retrieved 26 June 2012. Harry 2002, pp. 456–459: McCartney was unhappy about Jackson's purchase and handling of Northern Songs; Southall & Perry 2006, p. 203: Northern Songs dissolved and absorbed into Sony/ATV. Southall & Perry 2006, p. 195. Harry 2002, p. 536: The only Beatles songs owned by MPL Communications; Southall & Perry 2006, pp. 192–193: McCartney acquired the publishing rights for "Love Me Do" and "P.S. I Love You". Miles 1997, pp. 66–67. Miles 1997, pp. 186–189. Brown & Gaines 2002, p. 182: Habitual marijuana use by McCartney and the Beatles; Miles 1997, p. 190: Marijuana references in Beatles songs. Miles 1997, pp. 67–68. Miles 1997, p. 247: Cocaine use during Sgt. Pepper recording sessions; Miles 1997, pp. 384–385: McCartney used the drug for about a year then stopped. Miles 1997, pp. 379–380: First LSD "trip", Miles 1997, p. 382: Second LSD "trip". Brown & Gaines 2002, p. 228. Miles 1997, pp. 386–387. Harry 2002, pp. 300–307: Drugs. Performing Songwriter, Paul McCartney: 9 Days in a Tokyo Jail Archived 3 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Lydia Hutchinson, 16 January 2011. Harry 2002, pp. 459–461. Harry 2002, pp. 300–307. Harry 2002, p. 306. "Paul McCartney reveals what made him finally stop smoking cannabis". Independent.co.uk. 30 May 2015. Archived from the original on 24 June 2016. Retrieved 10 June 2016. Food Programme (27 January 2013). "Food in the life of Sir Paul McCartney". BBC Radio 4. Archived from the original on 7 January 2017. Retrieved 27 June 2017. "FoodProgramme-20130127-FoodInTheLifeOfSirPaulMccartney.mp3". bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 4 July 2018. Harry 2002, pp. 880–882. For McCartney's pledge to continue Linda's animal rights work see: "McCartney vows to keep animal rights torch alight". BBC News. 5 August 1998. Archived from the original on 6 January 2008. Retrieved 29 January 2007.; For McCartney ensuring that Linda McCartney Foods remained GMO free, see: "GM-free ingredients". BBC News. 10 June 1999. Archived from the original on 30 September 2009. Retrieved 3 January 2010. "Devour the Earth". World Preservation Foundation. Archived from the original on 7 January 2013. "Video: Paul McCartney narrates Peta video on slaughterhouses". The Telegraph. London. 7 December 2009. Archived from the original on 22 September 2013. Retrieved 26 May 2013. "Paul Supports New Pro-Vegetarian PETA UK Campaign: 'Celebrate Life'". PaulMcCartney.com. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Michael, Destries (7 December 2009). "Paul McCartney Narrates "If Slaughterhouses Had Glass Walls.."". Ecorazzi. Archived from the original on 22 November 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2012. "Tiger Time". David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation. Archived from the original on 13 December 2012. "Sir Paul McCartney Supports HSI and The HSUS' Be Cruelty-Free Campaign". Humane Society of the United States. Archived from the original on 1 November 2012. For McCartney becoming a patron of Adopt-A-Minefield see: "McCartney calls for landmine ban". BBC News. 20 April 2001. Archived from the original on 30 September 2009. Retrieved 3 January 2010. "President Vladimir Putin received a legendary singer and former Beatle, Paul McCartney, and his wife, Heather Mills". en.kremlin.ru. 24 May 2003. Archived from the original on 15 September 2018. Retrieved 21 September 2018. "Interview transcript, McCartney and Heather, Larry King Live, Seal cull". CNN. 3 March 2006. Archived from the original on 11 May 2010. Retrieved 22 May 2010. "Make Poverty History: Celebrity Supporters & Events". Look to the Stars. Archived from the original on 5 January 2013. Retrieved 19 January 2013. Harry 2002, pp. 270: Concerts for the People of Kampuchea, 327–328: "Ferry Cross the Mersey", 514–515: Live Aid; Roberts 2005, pp. 49: Band Aid & Band Aid 20, 187: Ferry Aid. For the "US Campaign for Burma" see: "US campaign for Burma protest". BBC News. 20 June 2005. Archived from the original on 8 May 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2012.; For the Aid Still Required CD see: "Aid Still Required". Aid Still Required. Archived from the original on 29 May 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012. Ellen, Barbara (17 July 2010). "Interview: Paul McCartney". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 15 September 2013. Retrieved 11 May 2012. Navarro, Mireya (29 August 2012). "Yoko Ono and Sean Lennon Organize Artists Against Fracking". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 17 May 2016. "Greenpeace Blocks Two Major Oil Rigs to 'Save the Arctic'". TRANSCEND Media Service. Archived from the original on 22 January 2016. Retrieved 27 September 2014. "Hundreds of Protests in 36 Countries Demand Release of Arctic 30". EcoWatch. 18 October 2013. Archived from the original on 4 November 2014. Retrieved 27 September 2014. Dathan, Matt (10 July 2015). "'A bunch of lying b*****ds' – Brian May and Paul McCartney hit out at David Cameron's 'cruel and unnecessary' bid to bring back fox hunting". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 12 July 2015. Retrieved 12 July 2015. Ruby, Jennifer (15 June 2016). "Sir Paul McCartney drapes rainbow flag around him during emotional tribute to Orlando shooting victims". Evening Standard. London. Archived from the original on 24 July 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2022. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (15 April 2020). "Paul McCartney calls for 'medieval' Chinese markets to be banned over coronavirus". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 April 2020. Retrieved 15 April 2020. "Supporters of Ecocide Law". Stop Ecocide International. Archived from the original on 6 June 2023. Retrieved 21 June 2023. "Green Energy and Sacrifice Zones: Ecocide?". WFM/IGP. Archived from the original on 9 June 2023. Retrieved 21 June 2023. "The Case For Criminalizing Ecocide". www.globalissues.org. 28 February 2023. Archived from the original on 21 June 2023. Retrieved 21 June 2023. Moore, Sam (17 April 2020). "Paul McCartney and Ricky Gervais among 100 contributors to 'Dear NHS' charity book". NME. Archived from the original on 26 August 2021. Retrieved 26 August 2021. For McCartney's support of Everton, see: "Macca's a blue". Everton Football Club. Archived from the original on 10 March 2009. Retrieved 8 March 2010.; For McCartney's support of Liverpool, see: "Did The Beatles Hide Their Footballing Love Away?". Haymarket Media Group. 15 July 2008. Archived from the original on 8 March 2012. Retrieved 6 May 2012. Prentice, David (5 July 2008). "Sir Paul McCartney's Everton 'secret' was no surprise". Everton Banter. Archived from the original on 21 August 2008. Retrieved 10 May 2012. Spitz 2005, p. 163. Miles 1997, p. 69. Miles 1997, p. 69: Encouraging Rhone to grow her hair long like Bardot; Spitz 2005, p. 171: Rhone had her hair re-styled to disappointing effect. Spitz 2005, pp. 239–240. Spitz 2005, p. 348. Miles 1997, pp. 101–102. Spitz 2005, p. 439. Miles 1997, pp. 104–107: Living at the Asher home, 254: McCartney's move to his home in St. John's Wood. Miles 1997, p. 108. Harry 2002, pp. 27–32: Jane Asher, Harry 2002, pp. 777–778: Francie Schwartz. "Francie Schwartz". McCartney Times. 10 December 2016. Archived from the original on 29 March 2019. Retrieved 25 August 2019. Harry 2002, p. 585. Harry 2002, p. 587. Miles 1997, p. 432. Harry 2002, p. 45: Paul and Linda's first meeting, Harry 2002, p. 587: "Pushiness worked for me that night!"; Miles 1997, pp. 432–434: Linda's UK assignment to photograph rock musicians in London. Miles 1997, pp. 514–515. Miles 1997, p. 525. Harry 2002, pp. 904–910. Lewisohn 2002, p. 45. Blaney 2007, p. 84. Harry 2002, pp. 585–601. Harry 2002, pp. 600–601. Harry 2002, pp. 568–578. "Sir Paul McCartney and Heather Mills finalise divorce". The Telegraph. 12 May 2008. Archived from the original on 20 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "McCartney's lament: I can't buy your love". The Sydney Morning Herald. 12 June 2004. Archived from the original on 8 May 2012. "Sir Paul McCartney marries US heiress Nancy Shevell". BBC News. 9 October 2011. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Chan, Sewell (7 November 2007). "Former Beatle Linked to Member of M.T.A. Unit". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 June 2011. Retrieved 5 May 2012. "Nancy Shevell – Vice President – Administration". New England Motor Freight. Archived from the original on 11 October 2011. Retrieved 17 October 2011. Donohue, Pete; Connor, Tracy (25 January 2012). "Mrs. Paul McCartney quits MTA board". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 15 September 2012. "Meet Paul McCartney's Third Wife". ABC News. Archived from the original on 8 September 2015. Retrieved 25 August 2019. Badman 1999, pp. 122–123; Doggett 2009, pp. 218–219; Sandford 2006, pp. 227–229 Miles 1997, p. 587. Miles 1997, p. 588. Miles 1997, p. 590. Harry 2002, pp. 504–505: On 24 April 1976, the two were watching Saturday Night Live, last time Lennon and McCartney spent time together; Miles 1997, p. 592: Lennon: "We nearly got a cab, but we were actually too tired". Harry 2002, pp. 869–870. Goodman, Joan. "Playboy Interview: Paul and Linda McCartney". Playboy. 31, no. 12 (December 1984): 82. Graff 2000, p. 40: "John is kinda like a constant ... always there in my being,Graff 2000, p. 96: "in my soul, so I always think of him". Carlin 2009, pp. 255–257. Harry 2002, p. 505. Miles 1997, p. 594. Harry 2002, p. 506. Harry 2002, p. 20. Everett 1999, p. 10. Glazer, Mitchell. "Growing Up at 33⅓: The George Harrison Interview". Crawdaddy (February 1977): 35–36. Poole, Oliver; Davies, Hugh (1 December 2001). "I'll always love him, he's my baby brother, says tearful McCartney". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 4 May 2012. Doggett 2009, pp. 332–333. Harry 2003, pp. 138–139. Harry 2002, p. 816; Miles 1997, p. 495: "Paul ticked Ringo off over a fluffed tom-tom fill. They had already argued about how the drum part should be played ... and Paul's criticisms finally brought matters to a head"; MacDonald 2005, p. 310: "The ill-feeling ... finally erupted ... after an argument with McCartney over the drum part". Harry 2002, p. 816. "Song of the Day: "Six O'clock", Ringo Starr". NJ.com. 16 December 2010. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 27 September 2014. Stewart, Barbara (2006). The Complete How to Kazoo. Workman. ISBN 978-0-7611-4221-8. Archived from the original on 22 January 2016. Retrieved 27 September 2014. Blaney 2007, pp. 279–281. Gardner, Elysa (6 April 2009). "McCartney, Starr reunite for Lynch Foundation benefit". USA Today. Archived from the original on 20 January 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2012. Kreps, Daniel (19 November 2009). "Ringo Starr Recruits Paul McCartney for New Album "Y Not"". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2012. Greene, Andy (7 July 2012). "Paul McCartney Surprises Fans at Ringo Birthday Gig". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 24 June 2012. Retrieved 2 August 2012. "Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr Grammys Performances: Beatles Reunite For 'Queenie Eye'". The Huffington Post. 22 January 2014. Archived from the original on 5 November 2014. Retrieved 27 September 2014. Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr reunited to perform Beatles classics at Dodger Stadium Archived 18 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine, CNN.com 14 July 2019. Accessed on 26 July 2019 McWhirter, Norris (1980). Guinness Book of World Records. London: Sterling Publishing. pp. 235, 250, 251. ISBN 978-0-8069-0168-8. Glenday, Craig (2009). Guinness World Records 2009. London: Bantam Books. p. 290. ISBN 978-0-553-59256-6. For McCartney's number-one singles with the Beatles and Wings see: "Most No. 1s By Artist (All-Time)". Billboard. 6 August 2008. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 20 March 2014.; Bronson 1992, p. 150: "A World Without Love" performed by Peter and Gordon, Bronson 1992, p. 388: "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" performed by Elton John; Bronson 1992, p. 554: "Medley" by Stars on 45; Bronson 1992, p. 555: "Ebony and Ivory" with Stevie Wonder;Bronson 1992, p. 581: "Say Say Say" with Michael Jackson, Bronson 1992, p. 808: McCartney's thirty-two Billboard Hot 100 number-ones. "Top Selling Artists". RIAA. Archived from the original on 19 July 2012. Retrieved 7 July 2012. Roberts 2005, p. 49: Band Aid & Band Aid; Roberts 2005, pp. 20, 54–55: the Beatles; Roberts 2005, p. 187: Ferry Aid; Roberts 2005, pp. 311–312: Solo, Wings, Stevie Wonder and "The Christians et al." Roberts 2005, pp. 398–400. Roberts 2005, pp. 311–312. For 2,200 recorded versions see: "Sir Paul is Your Millennium's greatest composer". BBC News. 3 May 1999. Archived from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012.; "Most Recorded Song". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on 10 September 2006. Retrieved 9 June 2012.; MacDonald 2005, p. 157: "the most 'covered' song in history"; For "Yesterday" airing more than seven million times on American TV and radio see: "McCartney's Yesterday earns US accolade". BBC News. 17 December 1999. Archived from the original on 21 March 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012. Bronson 1992, p. 247. Sounes 2010, p. 223. Harry 2000a, pp. 516–518. Caulfield, Keith. "Taylor Swift's 'Evermore' Spends Second Week at No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on 11 January 2021. Retrieved 30 December 2020. London Gazette 1965, pp. 5487–5489. Spitz 2005, p. 556. Anon. "University of Sussex Honorary Degrees Committee List of Honorary Graduates". Archived from the original on 19 January 2016. Badman 1999, p. 563. Harry 2002, pp. 38, 242. For the Brit Award, see: "Sir Paul McCartney picks up special Brit award in London". NME. 20 February 2008. Archived from the original on 2 March 2008. Retrieved 3 May 2012.; For the honorary degree from Yale, see: "Yale gives Paul McCartney honorary music degree". USA Today. 26 May 2008. Archived from the original on 2 November 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012. Pareles, Jon (2 June 2010). "McCartney Is Honored at White House". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013. Retrieved 4 May 2012. Becker, Bernie; Southall, Ashley (5 December 2010). "Glittering Tributes for Winners of Kennedy Center Honors". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 January 2015. Retrieved 7 July 2012. Sinha, Piya (9 February 2012). "Paul McCartney finally gets Walk of Fame star". Reuters. Archived from the original on 10 February 2012. Retrieved 9 February 2012. "Paul McCartney awarded French Legion of Honor". SBS News. 8 September 2012. Archived from the original on 28 October 2012. Retrieved 25 October 2012. "Minor planet number 4148 has been named in honor of former Beatle Paul McCartney". IAU Minor Planet Center. Archived from the original on 20 May 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2010. "No. 61962". The London Gazette (Supplement). 17 June 2017. p. B25. "Queens Birthday Honours: McCartney a Companion of Honour". BBC News. 16 June 2017. Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 27 June 2017. "The arms of Sir Paul McCartney, Kt., M.B.E." College of Arms. Archived from the original on 8 February 2003. Retrieved 16 October 2019. Andreybz (17 November 2006). "Ringo Starr – The Cooler". Archived from the original on 31 January 2019. Retrieved 8 April 2018 – via YouTube. "Tuesday (2001)". bfi.org.uk. Archived from the original on 8 April 2018. Retrieved 8 April 2018. "Paul McCartney and Wings in The Bruce McMouse Show". paulmccartney.com. 10 January 2019. Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 18 January 2019. "If These Walls Could Sing Premieres At Abbey Road". AbbeyRoad.com. Harry 2002, pp. 845–851: Wings tours details; Lewisohn 2002, pp. 170–171: Wings tours dates. For solo tour details see: "Paul McCartney: Tour archives". paulmccartney.com. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 4 July 2012. "NEW DATE ADDED: Paul Announces North American 'Got Back' Tour". PaulMcCartney.com. 18 February 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. Babiuk, Andy (2002). Beatles Gear: All the Fab Four's Instruments, from Stage to Studio (Revised ed.). Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-0-87930-731-8. Bacon, Tony; Morgan, Gareth (2006). Paul McCartney – Bass Master – Playing the Great Beatles Basslines (1st ed.). Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-0-87930-884-1. Badman, Keith (1999). The Beatles After the Breakup 1970–2000: A Day-by-Day Diary (2001 ed.). Omnibus. ISBN 978-0-7119-8307-6. Benitez, Vincent Perez (2010). The Words and Music of Paul McCartney: The Solo Years. Praeger. ISBN 978-0-313-34969-0. Benitez, Vincent P. (2019). "'That Was Me' in 'Vintage Clothes': Intertextuality and the White Album Songs of Paul McCartney." In The Beatles through a Glass Onion: Reconsidering the White Album, ed. Mark Osteen, 213–29. Tracking Pop Series. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-07408-2. Blaney, John (2007). Lennon and McCartney: Together Alone (1st ed.). Jawbone Press. ISBN 978-1-906002-02-2. Bronson, Fred (1992). The Billboard Book of Number One Hits (3rd revised ed.). Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-8230-8298-8. Brown, Peter; Gaines, Steven (2002). The Love You Make: An Insider's Story of The Beatles. New American Library. ISBN 978-0-451-20735-7. Buk, Askold (1996). "Strum Together". Guitar World: Acoustic (17). Carlin, Peter Ames (2009). Paul McCartney: A Life. Touchstone. ISBN 978-1-4165-6209-2. Doggett, Peter (2009). You Never Give Me Your Money: The Beatles After the Breakup (1st US hardcover ed.). Harper. ISBN 978-0-06-177446-1. Emerick, Geoff; Massey, Howard (2006). Here, There and Everywhere: My Life Recording the Music of The Beatles. Gotham. ISBN 978-1-59240-269-4. Everett, Walter (1999). The Beatles as Musicians: Revolver through the Anthology. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-512941-0. George-Warren, Holly, ed. (2001). The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll (2005 revised and updated ed.). Fireside. ISBN 978-0-7432-9201-6. Gould, Jonathan (2007). Can't Buy Me Love: The Beatles, Britain and America (First Paperback ed.). Three Rivers Press. ISBN 978-0-307-35338-2. Graff, Gary (January 2000). "Yesterday & Today". Guitar World. 20 (1). Glenday, Craig, ed. (2008). Guinness World Records 2009. Guinness World Records. ISBN 978-1-904994-37-4. Harry, Bill (2000a). The Beatles Encyclopedia: Revised and Updated. Virgin. ISBN 978-0-7535-0481-9. Harry, Bill (2003). The George Harrison Encyclopedia. Virgin. ISBN 978-0-7535-0822-0. Harry, Bill (2000b). The John Lennon Encyclopedia. Virgin. ISBN 978-0-7535-0404-8. Harry, Bill (2002). The Paul McCartney Encyclopedia. Virgin. ISBN 978-0-7535-0716-2. Ingham, Chris (2009). The Rough Guide to The Beatles (3rd ed.). Rough Guides. ISBN 978-1-84836-525-4. Jisi, Chris (October 2005). "He Can Work It Out". Bass Player. 16 (10). Kastan, David Scott (2006). Oxford Encyclopedia of British Literature. Vol. 1. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-516921-8. Levy, Joe, ed. (2005). Rolling Stone's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time (First Paperback ed.). Wenner Books. ISBN 978-1-932958-61-4. Lewisohn, Mark (1992). The Complete Beatles Chronicle:The Definitive Day-By-Day Guide to the Beatles' Entire Career (2010 ed.). Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-56976-534-0. Lewisohn, Mark, ed. (2002). Wingspan: Paul McCartney's Band on the Run. Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-86032-1. "Most Excellent Order of the British Empire". The London Gazette (supplement). 4 June 1965. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009. Retrieved 11 May 2010. MacDonald, Ian (2005). Revolution in the Head: The Beatles' Records and the Sixties (3rd (2007) ed.). Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-55652-733-3. McCartney, Paul (2001). Mitchell, Adrian (ed.). Blackbird singing: Poems and Lyrics 1965–1999. W. W. Norton and Company Inc. ISBN 978-0-393-02049-6. McGee, Garry (2003). Band on the Run: A History of Paul McCartney and Wings. Taylor Trade. ISBN 978-0-87833-304-2. Miles, Barry (1997). Paul McCartney: Many Years From Now (1st Hardcover ed.). Henry Holt & Company. ISBN 978-0-8050-5248-0. Miles, Barry (1998). The Beatles: A Diary—An Intimate Day by Day History (2009 ed.). JG Press. ISBN 978-1-57215-010-2. Miles, Barry (2001). The Beatles Diary Volume 1: The Beatles Years. Omnibus. ISBN 978-0-7119-8308-3. Molenda, Michael (November 2005). "Here, There, and Everywhere". Guitar Player. 39 (11). Mulhern, Tom (July 1990). "Paul McCartney". Guitar Player. 24, No.7 (246). Norman, Philip (1981). Shout!. MJF Books. Roberts, David, ed. (2005). British Hit Singles & Albums (18 ed.). Guinness World Records Limited. ISBN 978-1-904994-00-8. Sandford, Christopher (2006). McCartney. Carroll & Graf. ISBN 978-0-7867-1614-2. Sheff, David (1981). Golson, G. Barry (ed.). The Playboy Interviews with John Lennon & Yoko Ono. Playboy Press. ISBN 978-0-87223-705-6. Sounes, Howard (2010). Fab: An Intimate Life of Paul McCartney. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81783-0. Southall, Brian; Perry, Rupert (2006). Northern Songs: The True Story of the Beatles Song Publishing Empire. Omnibus. ISBN 978-1-84609-237-4. Spitz, Bob (2005). The Beatles: The Biography. Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 978-0-316-80352-6. The Beatles (2000). The Beatles Anthology. Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-3636-4. Wenner, Jann (2000). George-Warren, Holly (ed.). Lennon Remembers. Verso. ISBN 978-1-85984-600-1. Womack, Kenneth (2007). Long and Winding Roads: The Evolving Artistry of the Beatles. Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-1746-6. Barrow, Tony (2005). John, Paul, George, Ringo & Me: The Real Beatles Story. Thunder's Mouth. ISBN 978-1-56025-882-7.[permanent dead link] Barrow, Tony (2004). Paul McCartney. Carlton Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84442-822-9. Benitez, Vincent P. (2012). "Ram (1971)" and "Band on the Run (1973)." In The Album: A Guide to Pop Music's Most Provocative, Influential, and Important Creations, ed. James E. Perone, 147–56; 275–85. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers. The Album[permanent dead link] Davies, Hunter (2009). The Beatles: The Authorized Biography (3rd revised ed.). W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-33874-4. Gambaccini, Paul (1993). Paul McCartney: In His Own Words. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-86001-239-9. Gambaccini, Paul (1996). The McCartney Interviews: After the Break-Up (2 ed.). Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-7119-5494-6. Gracen, Jorie B. (2000). Paul McCartney: I Saw Him Standing There. Watson-Guptill Publications. ISBN 978-0-8230-8372-5. Kirchherr, Astrid; Voormann, Klaus (1999). Hamburg Days. Guildford, Surrey: Genesis Publications. ISBN 978-0-904351-73-6. Martin, George (1979). All You Need Is Ears. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-11482-4. Martin, George; Pearson, William (1994). Summer of Love: The Making of Sgt. Pepper. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-60398-7. McCartney, Linda (with Paul, Mary, and Stella McCartney). Linda McCartney's Family Kitchen: Over 90 Plant-Based Recipes to Save the Planet and Nourish the Soul. (Voracious/Little, Brown, and Co., 2021) ISBN 978-0-316-49798-5 Peel, Ian (2002). The Unknown Paul McCartney: McCartney and the avant-garde. Reynolds & Hearn. ISBN 978-1-903111-36-9. Raymer, Miles (2010). How to Analyze the Music of Paul McCartney. ABDO Publishing Company. ISBN 978-1-61613-531-7. Paul McCartney at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Paul McCartney on Facebook Paul McCartney at AllMusic Paul McCartney discography at Discogs Paul McCartney in the Hollywood Walk of Fame Directory "Rupert and the Frog". Archived from the original on 24 November 2005. Retrieved 5 April 2014. – Paul McCartney's animation 24 November 2005 Paul McCartney at IMDb Paul McCartney at the TCM Movie Database Paul McCartney interview on BBC Radio 4 Desert Island Discs, 26 December 1984 Linda McCartney's Family Kitchen – In Conversation with Paul, Mary and Stella (Paul McCartney's official YouTube channel) – Interview, 6 October 2021.