Ant-Man is a 2015 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics characters of the same name: Scott Lang and Hank Pym. Produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the 12th film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). The film was directed by Peyton Reed from a screenplay by the writing teams of Edgar Wright and Joe Cornish, and Adam McKay and Paul Rudd. It stars Rudd as Scott Lang / Ant-Man alongside Evangeline Lilly, Corey Stoll, Bobby Cannavale, Michael Peña, Tip "T.I." Harris, Anthony Mackie, Wood Harris, Judy Greer, Abby Ryder Fortson, David Dastmalchian, and Michael Douglas as Hank Pym. In the film, Lang must help defend Pym's Ant-Man shrinking technology and plot a heist with worldwide ramifications. Development of Ant-Man began in April 2006 with the hiring of Wright to direct and co-write with Cornish. By April 2011, Wright and Cornish had completed three drafts of the script and Wright shot test footage for the film in July 2012. Pre-production began in October 2013 after being put on hold so that Wright could complete The World's End. Casting began in December 2013, with the hiring of Rudd to play Lang. In May 2014, Wright left the project citing creative differences, though he still received screenplay and story credits with Cornish. The following month, Reed was brought in to replace Wright, while McKay was hired to contribute to the script with Rudd. Filming took place between August and December 2014 in San Francisco and Metro Atlanta. Ant-Man held its world premiere at the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on June 29, 2015, and was released in the United States on July 17, as the final film in Phase Two of the MCU. It grossed more than $519 million worldwide and received positive reviews from critics, who generally welcomed the film's smaller stakes than other MCU films, as well as its cast (particularly Rudd, Peña, Lilly, and Douglas), humor, and visual effects. Two sequels have been released: Ant-Man and the Wasp (2018) and Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania (2023). In 1989, scientist Hank Pym resigns from S.H.I.E.L.D. after discovering their attempt to replicate his Ant-Man shrinking technology. Believing the technology would be dangerous if replicated, Pym vows to hide it for as long as he lives. In the present day, Pym's estranged daughter, Hope van Dyne, and former protégé, Darren Cross, have forced him out of his company, Pym Technologies. Cross is close to perfecting a shrinking suit of his own, the Yellowjacket, which horrifies Pym. Upon his release from prison, well-meaning thief Scott Lang moves in with his old cellmate, Luis. Lang visits his daughter Cassie unannounced and is chastised by his former wife Maggie and her police-detective fiancé, Paxton, for not providing child support. Unable to hold down a job because of his criminal record, Lang agrees to join Luis' crew and commit a burglary. Lang breaks into a house and cracks its safe, but only finds what he believes to be an old motorcycle suit, which he takes home. After trying the suit on, Lang accidentally shrinks himself to the size of an insect. Terrified by the experience, he returns the suit to the house, but is arrested on the way out. Pym, the homeowner, visits Lang in jail and smuggles the suit into his cell to help him break out. Pym, who manipulated Lang through an unknowing Luis into stealing the suit as a test, wants Lang to become the new Ant-Man to steal the Yellowjacket from Cross. Having been spying on Cross after discovering his intentions, Hope and Pym train Lang to fight and to control ants. While Hope harbors resentment towards Pym about her mother Janet's death, he reveals that Janet, known as the Wasp, disappeared into a subatomic Quantum Realm while disabling a Soviet nuclear missile in 1987. Pym warns Lang that he could suffer a similar fate if he overrides his suit's regulator. They send him to steal a device that will aid their heist from the Avengers' headquarters, where he briefly fights Sam Wilson. Cross perfects the Yellowjacket and hosts an unveiling ceremony at Pym Technologies' headquarters. Lang, along with his crew and a swarm of flying ants, infiltrates the building during the event, sabotages the company's servers, and plants explosives. When he attempts to steal the Yellowjacket, he, along with Pym and Hope, are captured by Cross, who intends to sell both the Yellowjacket and Ant-Man suits to Hydra. Lang breaks free and he and Hope dispatch most of the Hydra agents, though one flees with a vial of Cross' particles and Pym is shot. Lang pursues Cross, while the explosives detonate, imploding the building as Pym and Hope escape. Cross dons the Yellowjacket and attacks Lang before Lang is arrested by Paxton. Cross takes Cassie hostage to lure Lang into another fight. Lang overrides the regulator and shrinks to subatomic size to penetrate Cross' suit and sabotage it to shrink uncontrollably, seemingly killing Cross. Lang disappears into the Quantum Realm but manages to reverse the effects and returns to the macroscopic world. Out of gratitude for Lang's heroism, Paxton covers for Lang to keep him out of prison. Seeing that Lang survived and returned from the Quantum Realm, Pym wonders if his wife is alive as well. Later, Lang meets up with Luis, who tells him that Wilson is looking for him. In a mid-credits scene, Pym shows Hope a new Wasp prototype suit and offers it to her. In a post-credits scene, Steve Rogers and Wilson have Bucky Barnes in their custody. Unable to contact Tony Stark because of "the accords", Wilson mentions that he knows someone who can help. Paul Rudd as Scott Lang / Ant-Man: A former systems engineer at VistaCorp and petty criminal who acquires a suit that allows him to shrink in size but increase in strength. Regarding Rudd's casting, producer Kevin Feige said, "Look at that origin of the petty crook who comes into contact with a suit and does his best to make good, and then look at someone like Paul Rudd, who can do slightly unsavory things like break into people's houses and still be charming and who you root for and whose redemption you will find satisfaction in." Director Peyton Reed compared Lang to George Clooney's character Danny Ocean from Ocean's Eleven, saying, "He's a guy trying to create a new life for himself and find redemption." To get in shape for the role, Rudd worked with trainers and cut alcohol, fried foods, and carbohydrates out of his diet. Rudd stated that in preparation for his role, he "basically didn't eat anything for about a year ... I took the Chris Pratt approach to training for an action movie. Eliminate anything fun for a year and then you can play a hero." Rudd signed a multi-film contract with Marvel, with Feige saying it was "three [films]-plus-plus to appear in other things." Evangeline Lilly as Hope van Dyne: The daughter of Hank Pym and Janet van Dyne and senior board member of Pym Technologies who helps Darren Cross take over the company. Throughout the film, character progression brings Hope closer to becoming a hero. Lilly described her character as "capable, strong, and kick-ass", but said that being raised by two superheroes resulted in Hope being "a pretty screwed up human being... and the clear message sent by my name is that I'm not a big fan of my father and so I took my mother's name." She added that Van Dyne's "arc in the movie is trying to find a relationship" with Pym. Originally cast by Wright, Lilly was reluctant to take the role after he left the project until she read the revised script and got a chance to meet with Reed. Feige said that Van Dyne was the more obvious choice to take up the mantle of Ant-Man, being "infinitely more capable of actually being a superhero" than Lang, and that the reason she does not is because of Pym's experience with losing her mother, rather than sexism, which Feige felt would not be a problem for Pym in modern times. Lilly signed a multi-film contract with Marvel. Corey Stoll as Darren Cross / Yellowjacket: A former protégé of Pym's who takes over his mentor's company and militarizes a similar version of the Ant-Man technology to create the Yellowjacket suit. Stoll described the suit as "the next generation of Ant-Man's suit", with a sleeker, more militaristic look as "if Apple had designed a battle suit." As for his character, Stoll said that Cross was more like Hank Pym than "Thanos or Loki, who are villains that know it", since Cross is a "brilliant scientist, who is not ethically pure" with shades of gray. Unlike Rudd, who wore a practical costume as Ant-Man, Stoll wore a motion capture suit while performing as Yellowjacket. Reed explained that this decision was made early on when creating and filming with a real Yellowjacket costume was found to be impractical. Bobby Cannavale as Jim Paxton: A San Francisco Police Department officer who is engaged to Lang's former wife Maggie. Cannavale stated that Rudd and McKay convinced him to join the film during the rewriting process before Marvel approached him, saying, "They sort of pumped [my] part up a bit...I really went on good faith [taking the role] because they're so secretive [at Marvel] about the script. I just trusted them." He also added that the process felt like an indie film instead of a large-scale blockbuster, and that he was able to improvise frequently along with the other actors. Patrick Wilson was originally cast in the role, before leaving the film because of scheduling conflicts brought on by the filming delay. Michael Peña as Luis: Lang's former cellmate and member of his crew. Peña stated that he modeled Luis' vocal style and positive outlook on life "on a friend of a friend", saying, "That's just the way he talks and the cadence. He's got this grin on the entire time and he doesn't care. He's the kind of guy where you're like 'Hey, what'd you do this weekend?' and he's like 'I went to jail, dawg,' with a smile on his face. Not a lot of people do that. Not a lot of people think of life on those terms." Peña signed a contract with Marvel for three films. Tip "T.I." Harris as Dave: A member of Lang's crew. Harris described Dave as Lang's "homeboy". Harris also revealed that he was not permitted to read the entire script, explaining "You're just handed scenes as the film [went] along, and when you do that, it's like a blank canvas, 'This is what I'm going to do for this scene,' and you can remember previous performances and remain consistent with that. The energy created by the ensemble you have around you, it contributes to the outlook or the final view of what your character has become, and what he meant to the story." Anthony Mackie as Sam Wilson / Falcon: An Avenger who is a former pararescueman trained by the military in aerial combat using a specially designed wing pack. On including Falcon, Reed said that it was not done just to include the character, rather "[i]t served a plot point; a purpose in our story" and allowed them to enhance Peña's "tip montages", which were written by production writers Gabriel Ferrari and Andrew Barrer, also adding Falcon "seemed like the right character — not a marquee character like Iron Man or Thor, but the right level of hero." Rudd and McKay decided to include Falcon after watching Captain America: The Winter Soldier. Wood Harris as Gale: A police officer and Paxton's partner. Judy Greer as Maggie: Lang's estranged former wife. Abby Ryder Fortson as Cassie Lang: Lang and Maggie's daughter. David Dastmalchian as Kurt: A member of Lang's crew. Dastmalchian, who is American, worked with actress Isidora Goreshter to learn how to speak in his character's Russian accent. On his character, Dastmalchian said that he "had this idea that Kurt was born and raised in a town even further out than Siberia and he was just an amazing computer wizard who fell in with the wrong people. But he was obsessed with two things: Saturday Night Fever and Elvis Presley, hence the polyester shirts unbuttoned too far and the hair in that pompadour." Dastmalchian later stated that the character's last name was Goreshter, as a tribute to the actress. Michael Douglas as Hank Pym: A former S.H.I.E.L.D. agent, entomologist, and physicist who became the original Ant-Man in 1963 after discovering the subatomic particles that make the transformation possible. He later mentors Lang to take over the role. Douglas compared his decision to join a superhero film to his role in Behind the Candelabra saying, "Sometimes—like [when] they didn't see you for Liberace—you've got to shake them up a little bit and have some fun." Describing Pym, Douglas said, "He's sort of a Northern California, formal guy. He's lost control of his company. He lives in sort of a time warp. He was always a bit of a tinkerer. He's got a lab, plus a lot of other stuff, in his basement that we find out about. He's certainly bitter about what happened with his company and deeply scared of what the future might hold—because he himself, after having gotten small so many times, it's difficult. He looks and tries to find a guy that he can work with and has the right characteristics, which is [Scott]." Douglas indicated that he would not be wearing the Ant-Man suit. Additionally, John Slattery and Hayley Atwell reprise their roles as Howard Stark and Peggy Carter, respectively, from previous MCU media. Slattery stated that his involvement in Ant-Man was "not that much more" than his participation in Iron Man 2, while Atwell described her appearance as being "more of a cameo". Gregg Turkington appears as Dale, the manager of a Baskin-Robbins store; and Martin Donovan plays Mitchell Carson, a former member of S.H.I.E.L.D. who works for Hydra and looks to purchase the Yellowjacket technology. YouTuber Anna Akana portrays a writer in Luis' story at the end of the film. Garrett Morris, who portrayed Ant-Man in a Saturday Night Live sketch in the 70s, appears as a taxi driver. Ant-Man co-creator Stan Lee makes a cameo appearance in the film as a bartender. Chris Evans and Sebastian Stan make uncredited appearances during the post-credits scene as Steve Rogers and Bucky Barnes, respectively. Hayley Lovitt makes a nonspeaking cameo as Janet van Dyne / Wasp. Lovitt was cast for her "saucer-like, Michelle Pfeiffer eyes", since Pfeiffer was Reed's dream casting for Wasp; Pfeiffer would later be cast as the character for the sequel Ant-Man and the Wasp. Tom Kenny provides the voice of a toy rabbit that Scott gives to Cassie. Comedian Tom Scharpling portrayed someone selling a lottery ticket to Lang, in a scene that was cut from the theatrical release. Development of an Ant-Man film began as early as the late 1980s, when Ant-Man co-creator Stan Lee pitched the idea to New World Pictures, Marvel Comics' parent company at the time. However, Walt Disney Pictures was developing a film based on a similar concept, Honey, I Shrunk the Kids, and although Ant-Man went into development, nothing came to fruition. In 2000, Howard Stern met with Marvel in an attempt to purchase the film rights to Ant-Man. In May of that year, Artisan Entertainment announced a deal with Marvel to co-produce, finance, and distribute a film based on Ant-Man. In 2003, Edgar Wright and his writing partner Joe Cornish wrote a treatment for Artisan, with Wright explaining that it revolved around Scott Lang as a burglar "so he could have gone slightly in the Elmore Leonard route", though Artisan wanted the film to be "like a family thing". However, Wright believed that the treatment was never sent to Marvel. A year later, the duo pitched the film to Marvel Studios' then head of production, Kevin Feige. In April 2006, Marvel Studios hired Wright to direct and co-write Ant-Man with Cornish as part of the company's first slate of independently produced films. Wright would also co-produce the film with his Big Talk Productions partner Nira Park. "The thing I like about Ant-Man is that it's not like a secret power, there's no supernatural element or it's not a genetic thing. There's no gamma rays. It's just like the suit and the gas, so in that sense, it really appealed to me in terms that we could do something high-concept, really visual, cross-genre, sort of an action and special effects bonanza, but funny as well." —Screenwriter Edgar Wright At the 2006 San Diego Comic-Con International, Wright said he was intrigued by the story's high concept and character. Wright also stressed that the film would not be a spoof but an action-adventure with some comedic elements and would incorporate both the Hank Pym and Scott Lang incarnations of the character. Wright said that he was looking to "do a prologue where you see Pym as Ant-Man in action in the 60s, in sort of Tales to Astonish mode basically, and then the contemporary, sort of flash-forward, is Scott Lang's story, and how he comes to acquire the suit, how he crosses paths with Hank Pym, and then, in an interesting sort of Machiavellian way, teams up with him." The next February, Wright said that the project was in "a holding pattern" while the script was being revised, and that he had been doing research for the film by studying nanotechnology. In March 2008, Wright said that the first draft of the script had been completed and he was working on the second. Stan Lee tweeted in February 2010 that Marvel was prepping the film and that he met with Wright for lunch to discuss the character. Wright noted that there was no timetable for the film because Marvel did not consider the character to be one of their bigger, tentpole properties, so "It's more like me and Kevin Feige saying...'Let's make a good script that works, that's all about a great genre film, and that isn't necessarily relying on anything else'". At the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con International, Wright remarked that because his film would be an origin story and would not be released until after The Avengers, the first Avengers film would not include Ant-Man, although Wright acknowledged that the character might appear in future Avengers films. In January 2011, Wright stated that he had resumed writing the script for the film following the conclusion of the international promotion for Scott Pilgrim vs. the World, and by April he and Cornish delivered the second draft of Ant-Man to Marvel. At the 2011 San Diego Comic-Con International, Wright revealed a third draft had been handed in. In May 2012, Feige said that the project was "as close as it's ever been" while Wright teased the film by tweeting a pictogram of Ant-Man. In June, Wright spent just under a week shooting footage for a reel that would be used to test out the potential look and tone of his movie, as well as to decide how convincing Ant-Man's powers look on screen. The test footage was screened to audiences during the Marvel Studios panel at the 2012 San Diego Comic-Con International, with Wright confirming that Ant-Man would be happening. Germain Lussier of /Film felt the footage worked and was "awesome", as "it had a totally different vibe from the other Marvel films. It was much more like something you'd recognize from Hot Fuzz." Lussier, along with Katy Rich of CinemaBlend, also enjoyed the costume design choice. Reed said the costume design was influenced by Asian tokusatsu superheroes such as Ultraman and Inframan. That October, Disney scheduled the film for release on November 6, 2015. Feige stated in January 2013 that Ant-Man would be part of Phase Three of the Marvel Cinematic Universe, and indicated in May that the screenplay needed to be modified in order to fit into the universe, as the project had been in development before the first Iron Man film. Feige also stated that shooting was slated to begin sometime in 2014, and that casting would begin towards the end of 2013. In July 2013, Wright said that he and Cornish had completed the script for the film and that Marvel allowed him to delay its production so that he could complete The World's End, as that film's producer Eric Fellner was diagnosed with cancer. In August 2013, after Joss Whedon, director of Avengers: Age of Ultron, announced that Hank Pym would not be Ultron's creator, Wright said Ultron was never a part of the story of Ant-Man, explaining that "just to sort of set up what Ant-Man does is enough for one movie". Wright described Ant-Man as a stand-alone film but said it would fit into the larger continuity of the Marvel Cinematic Universe, explaining, "I like to make it standalone because I think the premise of it needs time. I want to put the crazy premise of it into a real world, which is why I think Iron Man really works because it's a relatively simple universe; it's relatable. I definitely want to go into finding a streamlined format where you use the origin format to introduce the main character and further adventures can bring other people into it." Wright also stated that pre-production for Ant-Man would begin in October and filming would begin in 2014. The next month, Disney moved the film's release date up to July 31, 2015. In October 2013, Wright revealed that he was in Los Angeles to work on Ant-Man by tweeting a photograph from the production of the June 2012 test reel. Joseph Gordon-Levitt and Paul Rudd were soon being considered for the lead role, though Gordon-Levitt dismissed his consideration as a rumor. Feige stated that Ant-Man would be a "heist movie", and that a casting announcement for Hank Pym would come before the end of 2013. The next month, Feige stated that Eric O'Grady's Ant-Man would not be featured in the film, while Rudd became the front-runner to play Hank Pym, and casting for the character's girlfriend had begun. Around that time, the filmmakers' intentions to shoot in the United Kingdom were dashed because of a lack of studio space, which Wright believed was due to the plan by Pinewood Shepperton to add fifteen studios to their facility, which was rejected in part by the local council in May 2013 because the project was eyeing protected land. By the end of the month, the film was scheduled to be shot in the U.S. instead. In December 2013, Wright, a fan of the comic book since childhood—owning copies of Tales to Astonish #27 featuring "The Man in the Ant-Hill" storyline and Marvel Premiere #47 featuring the first appearance of Scott Lang— stated that the difference between Ant-Man and other films featuring size-changing is "other shrinking movies are usually about somebody trapped small. This is different in that he can actually change size and he can do that at will, so it becomes more of a power than an impediment." Wright also talked about the challenge of directing a superhero film, saying, "Shaun and Hot Fuzz and World's End are all R-rated films. I like the challenge of making a PG-13 film. Because you've got to entertain in a different way. You don't have the same tools." By December 19, Rudd was in negotiations to star in the film, and Marvel announced that he had been cast as Ant-Man the next day. In January 2014, Wright posted a screenshot on his blog from the Avengers: Earth's Mightiest Heroes episode "To Steal an Ant-Man", which features Hank Pym and introduces the Scott Lang character, with the caption "homework". Michael Douglas was subsequently cast as Pym, with Rudd confirmed to play Lang. Michael Peña was offered an unspecified role in the film, and filming was scheduled to take place at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Fayette County, Georgia, while Disney changed the release date once again, moving the film up to July 17, 2015. The next month, Evangeline Lilly entered early talks to portray the female lead, and Wright announced on his blog that Bill Pope, who he worked with on Scott Pilgrim vs. the World and The World's End, would be his director of photography. By March, Wright and Cornish turned in a fifth draft of the script, amid alleged disputes on the direction the script was taking. As well, Wright and Cornish wrote a scene intended for the post-credits of Avengers: Age of Ultron that would have acted as a prelude to the film. Corey Stoll entered negotiations for an undisclosed role in the film, and by April, Patrick Wilson and Matt Gerald were cast in undisclosed roles. "Ant-Man is interesting because he was one of the original Avengers, which I think people forget about. So, I like that idea in the movie universe... I also like that it's this sort of passing of the torch. There's sort of a weird mentor / pupil thing happening between Michael Douglas' character Hank Pym and Scott Lang, which Paul Rudd plays. Hank Pym used to be old Ant-Man and he is trying to find someone to be the new Ant-Man. I like that. I think that's sort of a classic Marvel Comics thing and something that we really haven't seen in that universe." —Peyton Reed, director of Ant-Man On May 23, 2014, Marvel and Wright jointly announced that Wright was leaving the project due to "differences in their vision of the film", and that the studio was closing in on a new director. On the split, Wright said, "I wanted to make a Marvel movie but I don't think they really wanted to make an Edgar Wright movie." He also added that at one point, Marvel wanted to do a draft of the script without him, which was "a tough thing to move forward" as Wright has written all of the previous films he directed. Wright continued, "Suddenly becoming a director-for-hire on it, you're sort of less emotionally invested and you start to wonder why you're there, really." The majority of Wright's crew also left the project in the wake of his departure. By May 30, Adam McKay had entered negotiations to replace Wright, but he pulled out of negotiations the next day out of respect for Wright, who he was friends with. On June 7, Marvel announced that Peyton Reed would direct the film, with McKay contributing to the film's script; McKay felt this was the perfect result since he would not be replacing Wright, but was able to help Rudd, who he was also friends with. Other directors that had been under consideration include Ruben Fleischer, Rawson Marshall Thurber, Nicholas Stoller, Michael Dowse, and David Wain. Later in June, Feige stated the film was still intended to be released on the July 17, 2015, date, with production slated to begin on August 18, 2014. Feige elaborated that "much of the movie will still be based very much on [Wright and Cornish's] draft and the DNA of what Edgar has created up to this point", with Reed stepping in to direct and McKay reworking only parts of the script. "[Reed] wanted to be sure that he wasn't just inheriting something or following someone else's lead. Or wasn't inheriting something that the evil studio had watered down to be something bad," Feige continued. "He looked at everything, he talked with us, and he said 'Number one, I agree with the direction you're going in. And number two, I can add to it.'" McKay confirmed that Rudd helped him rewrite the script, calling Rudd "great with dialogue", adding "the two of us holed up in hotel rooms on the east and west coast, and I think it was like six to eight weeks we just ground it out and did a giant rewrite of the script. I was really proud of what we did, I really thought we put some amazing stuff in there and built on an already strong script from Edgar Wright and sort of just enhanced some stuff." Rudd elaborated, "The idea, the trajectory, the goal, and the blueprint of it all, is really Edgar and Joe. It's their story. We changed some scenes, we added new sequences, we changed some characters, we added new characters. If you took the two scripts and held them up together they'd be very different—but the idea is all theirs." Some additions to the film that had not been featured in Wright's version included Janet van Dyne, the Quantum Realm, and a fight with an Avenger. According to Reed, the Quantum Realm was the MCU's version of the microverse, which could not be called that due to legal reasons. The alternate name was suggested by consultant Spiros Michalakis, a quantum physicist and staff researcher at the California Institute of Technology, to "inject elements of modern physics into the script". Reed also offered contributions to the revised script, as did Lilly and Stoll, who contributed ideas to help flesh out their respective characters. Lilly's character received a fuller arc and more action sequences as a result. One of the important things when joining the film for Reed was emphasizing both Hope and Janet van Dyne more, given the Wasp being "a crucial part" of the Ant-Man comics. For their efforts, McKay and Rudd were credited as additional writers of the screenplay, with Wright and Cornish credited for the screenplay and story. Wright also held an executive producer credit on the film. By the end of July, Wilson left the film because of scheduling conflicts brought on by the filming delay, and characters being played by Gerald and Kevin Weisman were cut in McKay's revised script. Also, Reed indicated that in addition to Georgia, filming would take place in San Francisco. The next month, Reed revealed that Scott Lang's daughter would appear in the film, and Gabriel Ferrari and Andrew Barrer were hired to make further revisions to the script. Ferrari and Barrer were hired after Reed read their spec script Die in a Gunfight which Reed felt was "really interesting". Eric Pearson, a member of Marvel Studios' writing program who had written the Marvel One-Shot films, did uncredited work on the film as well, scripting the strip club scene and Stan Lee's cameo. After reading the revised script, Evangeline Lilly felt that the film was "pulled" more into the MCU than Wright's version which "was much more in the Edgar Wright camp of films." She added that, while Wright's version was "incredible" and would have been great to film and watch, "it wouldn't have fit in the Marvel Universe. It would have stuck out like a sore thumb, no matter how good it was. It just would have taken you away from this cohesive universe they're trying to create. And therefore it ruins the suspended disbelief that they've built." Arnim Zola from Captain America: The First Avenger and Captain America: The Winter Soldier was considered to make an appearance in the film, with concept art created depicting him in his robot body from the comics. Principal photography began on August 18, 2014, in San Francisco, under the working title Bigfoot. Scenes were shot in the Tenderloin neighborhood and Buena Vista Park. By the end of September 2014, production on Ant-Man moved to Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Fayette County, Georgia, and David Callaham completed a rewrite of the film. Filming also took place at the State Archives building in Downtown Atlanta, to double as Pym Technologies, which is located on Treasure Island, San Francisco in the film. In October 2014, Martin Donovan was added to the cast, and Feige revealed that Ant-Man would no longer start Phase Three of the Marvel Cinematic Universe and would instead be the final film of Phase Two. When told by /Film's Germain Lussier that this placement between Avengers: Age of Ultron and Captain America: Civil War made the film feel like an afterthought, Feige replied, It's not [an after thought]. The truth is the phases mean a lot to me and some people but...Civil War is the start of Phase Three. It just is. And Ant-Man is a different kind of culmination of Phase Two because it very much is in the MCU. You meet new characters and you learn about Hank Pym and his lineage with the MCU over the years. But at the same time, it also picks up the thread of Age of Ultron in terms of heroes—major heroes, Avengers—coming from unexpected places... And in that way it connects a lot. Also, Hank Pym's attitude towards Avengers, towards S.H.I.E.L.D., and kind of the cinematic universe in general, is much more informed after the events of Age of Ultron, and in a certain way, before the events of Civil War. Feige later expanded on this by saying, "[W]e put Ant-Man at the end of Phase Two as opposed to the beginning of Phase Three, because it sets up a lot of the things you're going to see heading into Phase Three, one of which is this mind-bending, reality-altering landscape [in Doctor Strange]." On December 5, 2014, Reed announced on social media that principal photography on Ant-Man had been completed. For the film, cinematographer Russell Carpenter used a 1.85 aspect ratio shot with Arri Alexa XT and M cameras, using the M for fight sequences and helicopter filming. Camera operator Peter Rosenfeld said, "Russell and Peyton's decision to shoot in 1.85 was a good call, since at 2.39 there's insufficient height in frame to appreciate the vertical aspects of [Ant-Man] going from standing full-size to falling through a crack in the floor." Carpenter and Technicolor also devised a lookup table (LUT) to darken the color palette. Carpenter said, "For a lot of recent comedies I've kept my LUTs kind of 'Kodak' – saturated and upbeat. But this show needed something different that affected skin tones and the Ant-Man suit, which dates back to the 1980s, so it looks a little run-down. What I loved about this LUT was how it allowed the costume to retain the color but took it from fire-engine red to something a little more weathered." The filmmakers made extensive use of macro photography. Production designer Shepherd Frankel said, "It's more visually interesting to depict things from Ant-Man's point of view instead of seeing him from a normal perspective. But we wanted a realistic realization, not Honey, I Shrunk the Kids with its oversized set pieces." Rebecca Baehler served as the director of macro photography, taking cues from Carpenter. Carpenter said vibration became "a tremendous problem" when moving the camera during the macro photography because "one inch off the ground is like fifteen feet in the air. From an ant's perspective, you move four inches, to a human perspective, that's a football field!" The filmmakers needed a creative solution, so they turned to Baehler, who had a background in commercial "tabletop" photography. In order to add Rudd's performance as Ant-Man when in the macro world, a Centroid facial motion-capture set-up was used, with a five-camera array of Alexas surrounding Rudd. Rosenfeld explained, "One camera was set up vertically while the others were horizontal with overlapping image areas, all set to record at 48 frames per second. This maximized resolution and provided 3D modeling [of] Paul's performance." Reed would then call out story moments with Rudd performing "facial expressions that would later be composited on a CG Ant-Man". Entomologist Steven Kutcher provided suggestions to the filmmakers on how to film live ants. Following the completion of principal photography, Marvel released an updated synopsis revealing that Jordi Mollà was included in the cast and the names of several supporting characters. However, Mollà subsequently did not appear in the theatrical release of the film. Reed explained that the film's original opening, which was filmed and cut in the editing process, featured a standalone sequence similar to the opening of a James Bond film, where an unseen Pym was attempting to retrieve some microfilm from Mollà's character, Castillo, a Panama army general. Reed stated the scene was going to show Ant-Man's powers, without seeing him, almost "like an Invisible Man sequence, and it's really, really cool. It started to feel tonally disconnected from the movie we were making and story-wise, and it also kind of like, it set a standalone adventure, but it didn't just connect to the rest of our story...It felt like vestige of those earlier drafts [by Wright and Cornish], which as a standalone thing was really cool." Dan Lebental and Colby Parker, Jr. served as film editors. In March 2015, Hayley Atwell confirmed that she would reprise her role as Peggy Carter in the film. In April 2015, Reed stated that the film was not completed yet and would be undergoing "a little bit of additional" filming. In June 2015, Feige confirmed that the character of Janet van Dyne would be seen, though the film would not address Pym and Van Dyne's infamous domestic abuse storyline in the comics, saying, "We hint at a temper in a way that people who know the stories might go, 'Oh, perhaps that's a bit of [Hank's] character,' but not in a way that would ever indicate [he beat his wife]." Also in the month, Reed confirmed there would be a post-credit sequence "that may tie into the other films." Feige revealed the post-credit sequence was footage shot by Anthony and Joe Russo for Captain America: Civil War, saying the clip would be seen in that film, though it may be "different takes...different angles." On June 25, 2015, Reed announced on social media that production of Ant-Man was officially complete. In early July 2015, an international teaser trailer revealed that Anthony Mackie would appear in the film as Sam Wilson / Falcon. Mackie appears in the post-credit sequence as well, along with Chris Evans and Sebastian Stan as Steve Rogers / Captain America and Bucky Barnes / Winter Soldier, respectively. Stan stated the scene that was used for the post-credit sequence was shot in May 2015, and would appear in the middle of Civil War. Reed also said that the end of the film originally had a sequence where Ant-Man went after Carson to retrieve the stolen vial of Cross' particles, "... But then for a couple reasons, it felt like maybe we should leave those particles out there." For the title sequences, Marvel again went with design firm Sarofsky, who had done the credits for both Captain America: The Winter Soldier and Guardians of the Galaxy, with the credits "intricately connected to the film's overall narrative." Visual effects for the film were provided by Industrial Light & Magic (ILM), Lola VFX, Double Negative, Luma Pictures, and Method Studios, with previsualization by The Third Floor. Double Negative handled the scenes featuring shrunken characters, incorporating the macro photography and motion capture performances shot in principal photography with digital models of the characters. Double Negative also worked on Ant-Man's shrinking effect, in coordination with ILM to be used by all vendors, which showed the outline of his body – an element from the comics. Visual effects supervisor Alex Wuttke said, "It's like a little time echo. As Ant-Man shrinks in almost a stop motion way he would leave behind outlines of the poses he'd been in as he shrinks down... We'd have two CG cameras rendering the action from different points along the timeline with slightly different framings. One would be the main shot camera, the other would be a utility camera that would provide renders of static poses of Ant-Man at different points along the timeline." For the flashbacks in 1989, Douglas and Donovan appeared de-aged via CGI, alongside Atwell as Carter (aged in makeup and with CGI) and John Slattery as Howard Stark. To de-age Douglas, Lola VFX used a similar process and technology that was used to make Steve Rogers skinny in Captain America: The First Avenger and Carter older in Captain America: The Winter Soldier as well as footage of Douglas' other films from the late 1980s as reference. Dax Griffin served as Douglas' body double and an additional reference for Lola, because of his "striking resemblance of Michael when he was about 40". For Donovan, he only needed to be de-aged about a decade, so no double was used. The work on him focused on his eyes, neck, and chin. Atwell wore a wig on set, along with a fine layer of latex makeup to give the skin a more leathery look, with Lola transposing the facial features of an elderly actress onto her face. Method and Luma both worked on creating the various ants seen in the film, with Method creating the several species of ants, to share among the vendors. Luma also handled many of the scenes at Pym Technologies when Ant-Man attempts to acquire the Yellowjacket. ILM worked on the Falcon fight sequence, having done Falcon visual effects in The Winter Soldier. Using practical suit pieces built by Legacy Effects, ILM mixed live-action shots with digital take-overs and fully digital shots to create the sequence. ILM also handled the sequences in the Quantum Realm, providing an array of microscopic and largely psychedelic imagery for the subatomic shrinking, taking advantage of procedural fractal rendering techniques the studio had utilized on Lucy. In February 2014, Wright announced that Steven Price would score the film. However, Price left soon after Wright's departure from the project in May 2014. In January 2015, Christophe Beck, who worked with Reed on Bring It On, was hired to replace Price. Describing the film's score, Beck said, "For Ant-Man, I wanted to write a score in the grand symphonic tradition of my favorite superhero movies, with a sweeping scope and a big, catchy main theme. What makes this score stand out among other Marvel movies, though, is a sneaky sense of fun since it is, after all, not only a superhero movie, but also a heist comedy." Hollywood Records released the soundtrack digitally on July 17, 2015, and had a physical release on August 7. In March 2014, ABC aired a one-hour television special, Marvel Studios: Assembling a Universe, which included a sneak peek of Ant-Man. In July 2014, Reed, Rudd, Douglas, Lilly, and Stoll appeared at Marvel Studios' panel at the 2014 San Diego Comic-Con International to help promote the film and screen a visual effects test featuring Rudd and Douglas. In October 2014, Marvel Comics' Editor-in-Chief Axel Alonso stated there are comic tie-in plans for the film. In November 2014, ABC aired another one-hour television special titled, Marvel 75 Years: From Pulp to Pop!, which featured behind the scenes footage of Ant-Man. Marvel Comics' February 2015 solicitations released in December 2014, revealed a two-issue comic tie-in, Marvel's Ant-Man Prelude, following Hank Pym as Ant-Man on a mission during the Cold War. A second comic tie-in, Marvel's Ant-Man—Scott Lang: Small Time, was released digitally on March 3, 2015. It explains Lang's circumstances at the beginning of the film. A virtual pinball based on the film was released on July 14, 2015, by Zen Studios. In January 2015, Disney officially began the film's marketing campaign by releasing a miniature "ant-sized" teaser trailer, a full-sized version of the same teaser trailer, a poster, a cover on Entertainment Weekly, and a full-length trailer during the premiere of the television series Agent Carter. Scott Mendelson of Forbes, said, "It was darn-clever for Disney to put out a miniature 'can't see anything without a microscope' version of the now-standard trailer for the trailer. I sighed just a little when they 'gave in' and released a human-sized version, realizing that Disney had just released what amounted to a teaser to a teaser to a trailer... But nonetheless, credit where credit is due, Disney was able to turn a single theatrical trailer into three separate news drops in about five days." Mendelson went on to say that "the peppy, witty trailer above is a general audience sell. Marvel knows the geeks will come if only to throw stones, but it's the mainstream audience that needs to be sold. So far, so good." However, Graeme McMillan of The Hollywood Reporter criticized the trailer for its placement during the broadcast premiere of Agent Carter, its tone, its soundtrack, and for being thematically similar to other trailers from Marvel Studios. McMillan concluded, "The Ant-Man trailer isn't bad, per se; it is, however, impressively underwhelming, which almost seems worse. Thanks to the last-minute exit of original writer-director Edgar Wright and the subsequent struggle to find a replacement, Ant-Man has become the movie that people are expecting to be Marvel's first failure, in critical if not financial terms, at least; this trailer, which fails to convince and gets by on goodwill for those involved and the Marvel brand as much as anything else, doesn't do enough — or anything, really — to persuade audiences that that's not the case." The trailer generated 29 million views worldwide in three days, the third-largest viewership for a Marvel Studios film, behind trailers for Iron Man 3 and Avengers: Age of Ultron. In April 2015, Marvel debuted a second trailer for Ant-Man. Mendelson said it was "frankly the Ant-Man trailer that we've been waiting for. It's not just funny and exciting, it's an 'Ah ha!' moment when we realize just what exactly an Ant-Man movie has to offer." Also in April, miniature billboards promoting Ant-Man with battery-powered LED lights began appearing in Melbourne, Brisbane and other areas around Queensland, Australia as part of a street marketing campaign for the film. The next month, Marvel, in partnership with Dolby Laboratories, Visa, and Raspberry Pi, announced the "Ant-Man Micro-Tech Challenge", aimed at females aged 14 through 18, to create DIY projects involving micro technology and readily accessible and found materials. Winners teamed with STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics education) programs in their areas to lead teams in recreating their projects. In June, Marvel released posters featuring Ant-Man juxtaposed with Iron Man's armor, Captain America's shield, and Thor's hammer Mjolnir. Mendelson compared this to Disney's marketing campaign for Lilo & Stitch that put the protagonist into iconic scenes from other Disney cartoons. A six-minute IMAX preview of the film began screening before showings of Jurassic World, and scenes from the film were shown at Disney California Adventure's Bug's Life Theater in 3D with in-theater effects. In early July 2015, Marvel began a viral marketing campaign featuring Leslie Bibb, reprising her role from the Iron Man films as journalist Christine Everhart, reporting for the faux news program WHIH Newsfront. In the program, Everhart discuses the fallout from the events of Avengers: Age of Ultron, Lang's imprisonment, and events leading to Captain America: Civil War. Also in July, Michael Douglas and executives from Marvel Entertainment rang the closing bell of the New York Stock Exchange in celebration of the release of Ant-Man. Disney spent $34.8 million on television advertising for the film, more than the $26.9 million spent for Avengers: Age of Ultron, since the former was a new property. In December 2015, to commemorate the home media release of Ant-Man, the 360 Company launched a website that offers visitors a view of various London landmarks from the perspective of an ant in a Google Street View–type experience. The company commissioned photographer Will Pearson to capture ten different locations including Tower Bridge, Oxford Circus, the British Museum, St Paul's Cathedral and Nelson's Column using a 360° miniature camera that sat centimeters off of the ground. Ant-Man premiered at the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on June 29, 2015, and opened the 2015 Fantasia International Film Festival on July 14, 2015, along with Miss Hokusai. The film was released in France on July 14, and was released in North America on July 17, in 3D and IMAX 3D. The film was released in the United States in 3,800 theaters, with the breakdown of 3,100 3D screens, 361 IMAX screens, 388 large format screens and 133 D-Box screens. Ant-Man had originally been scheduled for release on November 6, 2015. In September 2013, the release was moved to July 31, 2015, before changing for a final time to July 17, 2015, in January 2014. An unfinished version of the film was screened on June 24, 2015, at CineEurope. Ant-Man was the last film released in Phase Two of the MCU. Ant-Man was released for digital download by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on November 17, 2015, and on Blu-ray, Blu-ray 3D, and DVD on December 8. The digital and Blu-ray releases include behind-the-scenes featurettes, audio commentary, deleted scenes, and a blooper reel. Upon its first week of release on home media in the U.S., the film debuted at number two on the Nielsen VideoScan First Alert chart, which tracks overall disc sales, as well as the dedicated Blu-ray Disc sales chart, with 63% of unit sales coming from Blu-ray. The film was also collected in the 13-disc box set, titled "Marvel Cinematic Universe: Phase Two Collection", which includes all of the Phase Two films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. It was released on December 8, 2015. In April 2023, Disney+ added the ability to view the film with American Sign Language (ASL) featuring ASL performer Jac Cook. The service was created by Deluxe Media and Grupo Steno, with Delbert Whetter from RespectAbility serving as an ASL consultant along with Douglas Ridloff, who previously was the ASL consultant on the film Eternals (2021) and the Disney+ series Hawkeye (2021). Ant-Man grossed $180.2 million in North America and $339.1 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $519.3 million. Deadline Hollywood calculated the film's net profit as $103.9 million, accounting for production budgets, marketing, talent participations, and other costs; box office grosses and home media revenues placed it 14th on their list of 2015's "Most Valuable Blockbusters". Ant-Man made $6.4 million from its Thursday night showings in North America, with 48% of tickets sales for IMAX and other large-format showings, and $23.4 million on its opening day, including Thursday's previews, making it the second-lowest opening day for a Marvel film, only ahead of 2008's The Incredible Hulk ($21.4 million). It fell 18% to earn $19.25 million on Saturday, and for its opening weekend total, earned $57.2 million. It marked the second-lowest debut for Marvel ahead of the $55.4 million debut of The Incredible Hulk in 2008. IMAX contributed $6.1 million to the opening gross, with premium large format screens comprising $6.4 million and Cinemark XD comprising $1.3 million, respectively. Ant-Man continued Marvel's streak of number one opening films, giving the studio its twelfth consecutive win. Disney reported that the film drew the largest share of families (28%) and women (32%) of any Marvel superhero title. It was also the biggest live-action opening ever for Rudd (breaking Knocked Up's record of $30.7 million) and a record opening for Douglas. It continued to be the top film at the box office in its second weekend. Outside North America, it earned $55.4 million in its opening weekend from 37 countries, debuting in third place at the international box office behind the Chinese film Monster Hunt and Minions as well as an IMAX opening of $9.1 million. The top openings were the UK ($6 million), Mexico ($5.6 million), and Russia ($4.9 million). It had the biggest opening for a first-installment Marvel film in Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, and Thailand. The film's opening in South Korea in early September 2015 earned $9.3 million, the highest opening for an international market at the time, before being surpassed by the Chinese opening in mid-October 2015, which earned $42.4 million, with $5.1 million coming from IMAX. The large opening weekend in China helped Ant-Man place first at the international box office for the first time, with the Chinese opening the second largest for an MCU film in the country behind Avengers: Age of Ultron. The film stayed at number one in China for a second week, earning an additional $22 million. As of November 1, 2015[update], the largest markets are China with $101.3 million, followed by the UK with $25.4 million, and South Korea with $18.9 million. The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 83%, with an average score of 6.9/10, based on 342 reviews. The website's consensus reads, "Led by a charming performance from Paul Rudd, Ant-Man offers Marvel thrills on an appropriately smaller scale – albeit not as smoothly as its most successful predecessors." On Metacritic, the film has an average score of 64 out of 100, based on 43 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film an "A" grade on an A+ to F scale, while those at PostTrak gave it 4 out of 5 stars. Justin Chang of Variety said the film "succeeds well enough as a genial diversion and sometimes a delightful one, predicated on the rarely heeded Hollywood wisdom that less really can be more." Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter remarked, "Although the story dynamics are fundamentally silly and the family stuff, with its parallel father-daughter melodrama, is elemental button-pushing, a good cast led by a winning Paul Rudd puts the nonsense over in reasonably disarming fashion." Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times wrote, "Playful in unexpected ways and graced with a genuinely off-center sense of humor, Ant-Man (engagingly directed by Peyton Reed) is light on its feet the way the standard-issue Marvel behemoths never are." Kim Newman of Empire wrote that it "straddles as many genres as the Avengers films have characters but manages to do most of them pretty well. Extremely likable, with a few moments of proper wonder." A. O. Scott of The New York Times said, "This film is a passable piece of drone work from the ever-expanding Marvel-Disney colony." For some critics, Ant-Man is seen as one of the more exceptional films in the Marvel franchise. Richard Brody of The New Yorker cited the film as "the non-bombastic superhero movie" that strays from the grandiose tone of other films in its genre, stating that the film is "a bracing, giddy delight.... [a neoclassical comedy] more closely related to Alfred Hitchcock's [To Catch a Thief] and to hectically skimpy B-movies than to the other members of the Marvel family." Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com praised how the film "[f]eels handmade, not Marvel factory-approved. [It reminded me] of Zemeckis when Zemeckis was fun." In May 2016, ten months after Ant-Man was released, Seitz admitted that his "affection for it has increased with time" and compared its sweet and melodramatic sensibility to Spider-Man 2. Conversely, Alonso Duralde of TheWrap said the film "serves up jokes that don't land and thrills that don't thrill." Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times said Ant-Man "is a lightweight, cliché-riddled origins story that veers between inside-joke comedy, ponderous redemption story lines and admittedly nifty CGI sequences that still seem relatively insignificant compared to the high stakes and city-shattering destruction that take place in most of the Avengers movies." Catherine Shoard of The Guardian wrote, "Ant-Man is a cut-and-shut muddle, haunted by [Edgar Wright's] ghost, produced by a high-end hot dog factory, by turns giddying and stupefying." Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal said that it is "a film that will surely be popular, given Marvel's marketing might, but one that's woefully short on coherence and originality." Christopher Orr of The Atlantic said, "It's difficult to shake the sense that the film was assembled hurriedly and somewhat haphazardly. Which, from all available evidence, is exactly what happened." A sequel, Ant-Man and the Wasp, was released on July 6, 2018, with Reed returning as director. Production writers Barrer and Ferrari wrote the screenplay with Rudd, Chris McKenna, and Erik Sommers. Rudd, Lilly, Cannavale, Peña, Harris, Greer, Dastmalchian, Fortson and Douglas all reprise their roles from Ant-Man, and are joined by Michelle Pfeiffer as Janet van Dyne, Laurence Fishburne as Bill Foster, Hannah John-Kamen as Ghost, Randall Park as Jimmy Woo, and Walton Goggins as Sonny Burch. A third Ant-Man film, titled Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania, was released on February 17, 2023, with Reed returning to direct and Jeff Loveness writing the script. Rudd, Lilly, Douglas, and Pfeiffer reprise their roles, while Kathryn Newton takes over as Cassie Lang. Jonathan Majors joins as Kang the Conqueror. List of films featuring miniature people The events of the film are set in mid-2015, according to the book The Marvel Cinematic Universe: An Official Timeline (2023), following the events of Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015). As depicted in Captain America: Civil War (2016) "Ant-Man [2D]". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. "Ant-Man (2015)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved November 3, 2016. 2015 Feature Film Study (PDF). FilmL.A. Inc. (Report). p. 21. Retrieved November 19, 2017. Sylt, Christian (April 27, 2018). "Disney Reveals Financial Muscle Of 'Avengers: Infinity War'". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2018. Sandwell, Ian (October 25, 2023). "Marvel confirms official MCU timeline from Phase 1 to Phase 4". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 25, 2023. Retrieved November 5, 2023. Lussier, Germain (June 22, 2015). "65 Things We Learned on the Set of Marvel's 'Ant-Man'". /Film. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015. "Director Peyton Reed and Writer Adam McKay Join Marvel's Ant-Man". Marvel.com. June 7, 2014. Archived from the original on January 9, 2014. Retrieved June 7, 2014. "Ant-Man Plot Points, Arrow & Sin City 2 Trailers, X-Men: Days, Avengers 2 Movie News". Newsarama. April 24, 2014. Archived from the original on April 25, 2014. Retrieved April 24, 2014. Kroll, Justin (January 13, 2014). "Michael Douglas to Star as Hank Pym in Marvel's Ant-Man". Variety. Archived from the original on December 22, 2013. Retrieved January 13, 2014. "Ant-Man Official Website". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved June 3, 2015. Fischer, Russ (July 8, 2015). "Latest "Ant-Man" Viral Video Holds Scott Lang To His Crimes". /Film. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015. Collis, Clark (January 8, 2015). "Exclusive First Look at Ant-Man". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 9, 2015. Retrieved January 8, 2015. Chi, Paul (July 14, 2015). "Paul Rudd on 'Ant-Man' Training: 'I Took the Chris Pratt Approach'". Variety. Archived from the original on July 15, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2015. Kilday, Gregg (June 24, 2015). "Paul Rudd and Marvel's Kevin Feige Reveal 'Ant-Man's' Saga, from Director Shuffle to Screenplay Surgery to Studio's "Phase Three" Plans". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2015. Kit, Borys (February 5, 2014). "Evangeline Lilly in Talks to Join 'Ant-Man'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 6, 2014. Retrieved February 5, 2014. "SDCC 2014: Official: Evangeline Lilly & Corey Stoll Join Marvel's Ant-Man". Marvel.com. July 26, 2014. Archived from the original on July 29, 2014. Retrieved July 26, 2014. Vary, Adam (December 2, 2014). "Evangeline Lilly Tried To Quit Acting, But Acting Would Not Quit Her". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on December 3, 2014. Retrieved December 3, 2014. Collis, Clark (January 9, 2015). "Corey Stoll talks about playing 'Ant-Man' villain Yellowjacket". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 10, 2015. Retrieved January 9, 2015. Nicholson, Matt (June 22, 2015). "Ant-Man Set And Edit Bay Visit: Making Marvel's Underdog Movie". IGN. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Keyes, Rob (June 22, 2015). "How Does Wasp Factor Into Marvel's 'Ant-Man' Movie?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 23, 2015. Empire Magazine #141: Evangeline Lilly, Benedict Wong - December 12, 2014. Empire. December 12, 2014. Event occurs at 1:06:50. Archived from the original on May 11, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2014 – via SoundCloud. Lussier, Germain (June 22, 2015). "65 Things We Learned on the Set of Marvel's 'Ant-Man'". /Film. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Siegel, Lucas (July 26, 2014). "SDCC 2014: Marvel Studios Panel Ant-Man Villain Revealed, Thanos Appears, GotG 2 Release Date". Archived from the original on August 7, 2014. Retrieved July 26, 2014. Kroll, Justin (March 24, 2014). "'House of Cards' Actor Joins Marvel's 'Ant-Man'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 25, 2014. Retrieved March 25, 2014. nerdrepository (July 28, 2014). Comic-Con 2014: Corey Stoll Talks 'Ant-Man' Role, Yellowjacket Costume. Archived from the original on October 30, 2021. Retrieved August 1, 2014 – via YouTube. O'Connell, Sean (October 1, 2014). "Here's How Ant-Man Could Beat The Hell Out Of The Hulk". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on October 2, 2014. Retrieved October 2, 2014. Keyes, Rob (June 22, 2015). "Paul Rudd & Corey Stoll Talk Ant-Man & Yellowjacket Costume Differences". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 23, 2015. Zemler, Emily (March 20, 2015). "Bobby Cannavale on Bobby Collins, Meeting Pacino and De Niro, and Joining Ant-Man". Esquire. Archived from the original on March 21, 2015. Retrieved March 20, 2015. Marnell, Blair (May 31, 2015). "Ant-Man Trivia and Fun Facts". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on July 26, 2015. Retrieved June 1, 2015. Yamato, Jen; Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 25, 2014). "Comic-Con: Major Cast Exits On 'Ant-Man' Include Patrick Wilson". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved July 25, 2014. Damore, Meagan (July 6, 2015). "New "Ant-Man" Featurette Introduces Scott Lang's Crew". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved July 6, 2015. Will Corona Pilgrim (w), Wellinton Alves, Daniel Govar (p), Manny Clark (i). Ant-Man – Scott Lang: Small Time, no. 1 (March 3, 2015). Marvel Comics. Smith, C. Molly (July 18, 2015). "Michael Peña is Ant-Man's comedic breakout". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 20, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015. Huver, Scott (July 16, 2015). "Interview: "Ant-Man's" Michael Peña Talks Stealing Scenes, Marvel Film Future". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 20, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2015. "'Ant-Man' Additional Credits; Jordi Molla Cast as Villain". Stitch Kingdom. December 10, 2014. Archived from the original on December 11, 2014. Retrieved December 12, 2014. "Production Begins On Marvel's Ant-Man". Marvel.com. August 18, 2014. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved August 19, 2014. Obenson, Tambay A. (October 15, 2014). "T.I. Teases His 'Ant-Man' Role - "I Play a Superhero's Homeboy"". Indiewire. Archived from the original on November 8, 2015. Retrieved November 4, 2015. Gallagher, Brian (July 17, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Interview with T.I. (Exclusive)". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on July 17, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015. Libbey, Dirk (July 5, 2015). "Ant-Man Clip Confirms A Major Marvel Cameo". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2015. Ryan, Mike (July 6, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Director Peyton Reed Details What's New And What Was Kept From Edgar Wright's 'Ant-Man' Script". UPROXX. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2015. Buchanan, Kyle (July 17, 2015). "Spoiler Bomb: Ant-Man's Surprise Twists and Cameos, Explained". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 18, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015. Davis, Erik (July 7, 2015). "Interview: Marvel Studios President Kevin Feige on 'Ant-Man,' 'Doctor Strange' and More". Fandango.com. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved July 17, 2015. "The HeyUGuys Interview: Judy Greer on Men, Women and Children, Twitter and Marvel's Ant-Man". HeyUGuys.com. December 3, 2014. Archived from the original on December 3, 2014. Retrieved December 3, 2014. Keyes, Rob (January 7, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Trailer Analysis And Character Guide". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 8, 2015. Retrieved March 30, 2015. Metz, Nina (July 20, 2015). "David Dastmalchian geeks out over 'Ant-Man' role". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on July 20, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015. Dastmalchian, David [@dastmalchian] (September 9, 2021). "He has a last name! Goreshter. We decided that about 7 years ago when my friend Isidora Goreshter helped me with my dialect for my audition" (Tweet). Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2023 – via Twitter. Bacle, Ariana (July 28, 2014). "Peyton Reed and Edgar Wright exchanged 'some emails' about 'Ant-Man'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved July 28, 2014. Milliken, Mary (January 13, 2014). "Michael Douglas wants to surprise audiences with Marvel's 'Ant-Man'". Reuters. Archived from the original on March 31, 2014. Retrieved January 14, 2014. Wigler, Josh (September 8, 2014). "Paul Rudd Is Too Ripped For His 'Ant-Man' Costume". MTV. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2014. Truitt, Brian (August 19, 2014). "First look: Rudd's on the road to being 'Ant-Man'". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 20, 2014. Retrieved August 19, 2014. Ching, Albert (March 29, 2015). "ECCC: Hayley Atwell Talks "Marvel's Agent Carter", "Ant-Man" Appearance". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 28, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2015. Goldman, Eric (March 27, 2015). "Ant-Man: John Slattery On Reprising His Role As Howard Stark". IGN. Archived from the original on March 29, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Perry, Spencer (June 22, 2015). "From the Set and Edit Bay of Marvel's Ant-Man". Superhero Hype!. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Mallenbaum, Carly (July 17, 2015). "Here's why Ant-Man works at Baskin-Robbins". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 17, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015. Ford, Rebecca (October 6, 2014). "Marvel's 'Ant-Man' Adds Martin Donovan (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. Retrieved October 6, 2014. Boone, Josh (July 16, 2015). "13 'Ant-Man' Easter Eggs and References to Marvel Comics, The Avengers, and...Spider-Man!". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on July 18, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2015. Spangler, Todd (October 18, 2017). "Anna Akana Teen Dramedy 'Youth & Consequences' on YouTube Red Sets Cast". Variety. Archived from the original on January 22, 2018. Retrieved February 6, 2018. Burlingame, Russ (July 17, 2015). "Ant-Man's Most Overlooked Cameo: Ant-Man Himself". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 20, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015. Keyes, Rob (April 30, 2015). "Stan Lee on Upcoming Marvel Cameos & Our 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Giveaway". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 2, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2015. "Ant-Man post credit scenes revealed - spoilers in here!". Irish Examiner. July 8, 2015. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved July 17, 2015. Lee, Gloria (July 17, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Movie Reviews and Ratings: 2015 Film Stars Paul Rudd, Evangeline Lilly, Corey Stoll, and Bobby Cannavale". Christianity Daily. Archived from the original on July 20, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015. Couch, Aaron (July 2, 2018). "'Ant-Man and the Wasp' Director on Wooing Michelle Pfeiffer and His Marvel Future". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 4, 2018. Retrieved July 6, 2018. Robinson, Tasha (July 24, 2015). "Ant-Man leaves many unanswered questions, large and small". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on February 25, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2016. Lang, Brad (August 26, 2022). "Watch: Ant-Man 3 Director Cuts An Actor from Quantumania in a Live Interview". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 27, 2022. Retrieved August 27, 2022. Howe, Sean (2012). Marvel Comics: The Untold Story. HarperCollins. p. 311. ISBN 978-0-06-199210-0. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help) Eggertsen, Chris (July 20, 2015). "HOWARD STERN'S SURPRISING 'ANT-MAN' REVELATION". HitFix. Archived from the original on July 22, 2015. Retrieved July 20, 2015. Fleming, Michael (May 16, 2000). "Artisan deal a real Marvel". Variety. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015. Reynolds, Simon (May 26, 2014). "Edgar Wright's Ant-Man: Timeline of the long-in-development Marvel movie". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on May 29, 2014. Retrieved May 28, 2014. Ball, Ryan (April 28, 2006). "Marvel Taps Elf, Shaun Directors". Animation. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Douglas, Edward (July 25, 2006). "Exclusive: Edgar Wright Talks Ant-Man". Superhero Hype!. Archived from the original on July 11, 2012. Retrieved July 22, 2012. Carle, Chris (July 24, 2006). "Comic-Con 2006: Ant-Man Panel". IGN. Archived from the original on December 16, 2011. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Head, Steve (February 15, 2007). "Exclusive: Hot Fuzz Helmer Commences Them". IGN. Archived from the original on September 19, 2009. Retrieved July 20, 2012. "Exclusive Interview: Edgar Wright". Moviehole.net. Archived from the original on March 17, 2007. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Ferris, Glen (March 10, 2008). "Exclusive: Edgar Wright Talks Ant Man". Empire. Archived from the original on October 16, 2012. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Douglas, Edward (February 9, 2010). "Is Marvel Moving Forward with Ant-Man?". Superhero Hype!. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Marshall, Rick (February 11, 2010). "EXCLUSIVE: Edgar Wright Explains His 'Ant-Man' Priorities". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 12, 2012. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Eisenberg, Eric (July 27, 2010). "Edgar Wright Says His Ant-Man Script Is An Origin Story, Wouldn't Fit with the Avengers". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on April 22, 2012. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Zeitchik, Steven (January 12, 2011). "'Ant-Man' crawls forward". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 9, 2012. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Mortimer, Ben (April 9, 2011). "Ant-Man Script Update". Superhero Hype!. Archived from the original on May 15, 2012. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Sitterson, Aubrey (July 25, 2011). "'Ant-Man' Movie Wouldn't Just Be For 'Avengers' Experts, Director Says". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 28, 2012. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Melrose, Kevin (May 7, 2012). "Edgar Wright Teases Ant-Man With Mysterious Image". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 19, 2012. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Kit, Borys (June 28, 2012). "Edgar Wright Directing 'Ant-Man' Test Reel (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 2, 2012. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Hewitt, Chris (July 15, 2012). "Comic-Con: Ant-Man Is Confirmed". Empire. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved July 20, 2012. Lussier, Germain (July 14, 2012). "Is 'Ant-Man' Marvel's First Comedy? Edgar Wright Screens Test Footage [Comic-Con 2012]". /Film. Archived from the original on October 29, 2014. Retrieved March 15, 2015. Rich, Kathy; Eisenberg, Eric (July 14, 2012). "Edgar Wright Shows Ant-Man Test Footage To Comic Con Crowd". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 15, 2015. Kelley, Shamus (October 2, 2018). "The Surprising Tokusatsu Influences of Ant-Man". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on October 3, 2018. Retrieved November 16, 2019. Goldberg, Matt (October 15, 2012). "ANT-MAN Set for November 6, 2015; IRON MAN 3 and THOR: THE DARK WORLD Confirmed for 3D; Disney Announces More Release Dates and Changes". Collider. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved October 15, 2012. Wigler, Josh (January 25, 2013). "'Ant-Man,' 'Doctor Strange' Lead Marvel's Phase Three". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2021. Breznican, Anthony (May 2, 2013). "Beyond 'Iron Man 3': New images and revelations from Marvel's Phase Two -Ant-Man". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 5, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2013. Nicholson, Matt (July 15, 2013). "Edgar Wright: Ant-Man Script is All Done". IGN. Archived from the original on August 21, 2013. Retrieved July 15, 2013. Dibdin, Emma (July 12, 2013). "Edgar Wright: 'Ant-Man script is complete' - video". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 15, 2013. Retrieved July 12, 2013. Fleming, Mike Jr. (December 18, 2013). "Is 'Anchorman's Paul Rudd Superhero Material? 'Ant-Man' In The Offing". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2013. Silverio, Ben (August 1, 2013). "Exclusive: Ultron Was Not EVER A Part Of Edgar Wright's 'Ant-Man'". ScienceFiction.com. Archived from the original on August 6, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2013. Ryan, Mike (August 20, 2013). "Edgar Wright, 'The World's End' Director, On Why We Won't See Ultron In 'Ant-Man'". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on August 20, 2013. Retrieved August 20, 2013. Taylor, Drew (August 21, 2013). "Interview: Edgar Wright Talks 'The World's End,' Completing The Cornetto Trilogy, 'Ant-Man' & Much More". IndieWire. Archived from the original on August 22, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2013. Weintraub, Steve (August 25, 2013). "Edgar Wright Talks THE WORLD'S END, Deleted Scenes, IMAX, 3D, Dwayne Johnson, ANT-MAN, His Sci-Fi Movie COLLIDER, and So Much More". Collider. Archived from the original on August 27, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2013. "Disney Moves Up 'Ant-Man' Release To Summer 2015". Deadline Hollywood. September 9, 2013. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved September 9, 2013. "Edgar Wright Teases 'Ant-Man' Production in New Tweet [UPDATE]". Huffington Post. October 2, 2013. Archived from the original on October 6, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013. Kroll, Justin (October 14, 2013). "Marvel Likes Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Paul Rudd for 'Ant-Man' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on May 6, 2014. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Jagernauth, Kevin (October 15, 2013). "Joseph Gordon-Levitt Denies 'Ant-Man' Chatter, Says Rumors That He's Passed Any Tests Are "Lies"". IndieWire. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved October 15, 2013. Butler, Tom (October 23, 2013). "Kevin Feige: Expect Ant-Man Casting News Before Year Is Out". IGN. Archived from the original on October 26, 2013. Retrieved October 23, 2013. Bibbiani, William (November 8, 2013). "Exclusive Interview: Kevin Feige on Thor and Marvel's Future". CraveOnline. Archived from the original on April 3, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2013. Kit, Borys (November 25, 2013). "'Star Wars: Episode VII,' 'Batman-Superman' and 3 Other Hot Movies Looking for Stars". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2013. Tartaglione, Nancy (November 26, 2013). "Pinewood Earnings Grow Amid UK Studio Capacity Crunch; Whither Expansion?". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 26, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2013. Rosser, Michael (November 26, 2013). "Edgar Wright: Ant-Man won't shoot in UK". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on December 1, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2013. Keyes, Rob (November 27, 2013). "'Ant-Man' Not Shooting in Edgar Wright's Homeland But Will Embrace His Style". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 27, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. Dennis, Matt (November 28, 2013). "Exclusive: Edgar Wright on Marvel's 'Ant-Man' movie". Cult Box. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved December 3, 2013. Hodgson, Claire (December 2, 2013). "Edgar Wright says Ant-Man will be similar to other Marvel films that 'focus on grounding the hero'". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved December 3, 2013. "Edgar Wright talks Ant-Man". SFX. December 11, 2013. Archived from the original on December 14, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2013. Kroll, Justin (December 18, 2013). "Paul Rudd to Star in Marvel's 'Ant-Man'". Variety. Archived from the original on December 22, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2013. Sneider, Jeff (December 18, 2013). "Paul Rudd to Play Ant-Man in Edgar Wright's Marvel Movie (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on June 3, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2013. "Paul Rudd Set to Star in Marvel's Ant-Man". Marvel.com. December 19, 2013. Archived from the original on May 19, 2014. Retrieved December 19, 2013. McMillan, Graeme (January 6, 2014). "Edgar Wright Shares 'Ant-Man' Tease". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 9, 2014. Retrieved January 7, 2014. Han, Angie (January 6, 2014). "Edgar Wright's 'Ant-Man' Homework Hints at Multiple Ant-Men". /Film. Archived from the original on January 9, 2014. Retrieved January 8, 2014. Snieder, Jeff (January 14, 2014). "Michael Pena Offered Role in Marvel's 'Ant-Man' Alongside Paul Rudd, Michael Douglas (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on January 15, 2014. Retrieved January 14, 2014. Brett, Jennifer (January 18, 2014). "Michael Douglas, Paul Rudd heading back to Atlanta for "Ant Man"". Access Atlanta. Archived from the original on January 23, 2014. Retrieved January 18, 2014. Kroll, Justin (January 23, 2014). "Marvel's 'Ant-Man' Moves into Former Superman-Batman Release Date". Variety. Archived from the original on June 5, 2014. Retrieved January 23, 2014. Goldberg, Matt (February 16, 2014). "Bill Pope to Handle Cinematography for ANT-MAN; GRAVITY Composer Steven Price to Write the Score". Collider. Archived from the original on February 18, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2014. Riesman, Abraham (April 8, 2015). "A Timeline of Ant-Man's Troubled Production History [Updated]". Vulture. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015. Fleming, Mike Jr. (February 27, 2014). "Patrick Wilson To Join Marvel's 'Ant-Man'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. Retrieved February 27, 2014. "Matt Gerald Lands Villainous 'Ant-Man' Role; Kenneth Choi In Court For 'The Whole Truth'". Deadline Hollywood. April 4, 2014. Archived from the original on April 6, 2014. Retrieved April 5, 2014. AMC Theatres (July 29, 2014). Director Peyton Reed Talks ANT MAN at Comic Con 2014 with AMC. Archived from the original on October 30, 2021. Retrieved August 7, 2014 – via YouTube. Graser, Mark (May 23, 2014). "Edgar Wright Exits Marvel's 'Ant-Man' as Director". Variety. Archived from the original on May 24, 2014. Retrieved May 23, 2014. Romano, Nick (June 24, 2017). "Edgar Wright explains how Ant-Man departure led to Baby Driver". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 24, 2017. Retrieved June 26, 2017. "The ANT-MAN Director Derby Narrows (Again) To Two New Finalists!". Ain't It Cool News. June 6, 2014. Archived from the original on June 10, 2014. Retrieved June 15, 2014. Oldham, Stuart (May 30, 2014). "Adam McKay to Replace Edgar Wright as 'Ant-Man' Director". Variety. Retrieved May 31, 2014. Kit, Borys (May 31, 2014). "Adam McKay Pulls Out of 'Ant-Man' Director Negotiations". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 1, 2014. Retrieved May 31, 2014. Davids, Brian (December 20, 2018). "'Vice' Director Adam McKay Is Interested in a 'Silver Surfer' Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 21, 2018. Retrieved December 20, 2018. Happy Sad Confused (December 20, 2018). Adam McKay. Retrieved December 21, 2018. Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (May 30, 2014). "'Ant-Man' Director Contenders Include Adam McKay, Ruben Fleischer". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 30, 2014. Retrieved May 30, 2014. Puchko, Kristy (June 4, 2014). "Ant-Man Loses Another Director As Rawson Thurber Passes". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on June 6, 2014. Retrieved June 6, 2014. Fleming, Mike Jr. (June 4, 2014). "'Huntsman 2' Helmer Short List: Frank Darabont, Gavin O'Connor, Andy Muschietti". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 6, 2014. Retrieved June 4, 2014. Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (June 6, 2014). "'Ant-Man' Director Contenders Include Peyton Reed, David Wain". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 9, 2014. Retrieved June 7, 2014. Maytum, Matt (June 20, 2014). "Marvel's Kevin Feige updates on Guardians Of The Galaxy, Thanos, Ant-Man, TV shows and Doctor Strange". Total Film. Archived from the original on June 24, 2014. Retrieved June 21, 2014. "Kevin Feige Talks Ant-Man, Guardians Of The Galaxy And Doctor Strange". Empire. July 18, 2014. Archived from the original on July 20, 2014. Retrieved July 20, 2014. Tilly, Chris (July 15, 2014). "Kevin Feige Explains Why Peyton Reed Is The Right Director For Ant-Man". IGN. Archived from the original on July 17, 2014. Retrieved July 15, 2014. Chitwood, Adam (October 17, 2014). "Adam McKay Talks Rewriting ANT-MAN with Paul Rudd; Reveals They Added "a Giant Action Sequence", Made the Film Bigger and "a Little More Aggressive"". Collider. Archived from the original on October 20, 2014. Retrieved October 17, 2014. Collis, Clark (January 8, 2015). "'Ant-Man' star Paul Rudd was 'devastated' by the departure of Edgar Wright". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 9, 2015. Retrieved January 8, 2015. Patches, Matt (July 7, 2018). "Ant-Man and the Wasp's director on half-size Paul Rudd & Morrissey references". Polygon. Archived from the original on October 25, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2018. Francisco, Eric (May 24, 2017). "Ant-Man Could Destroy Superman, Says Quantum Physics". Inverse. Archived from the original on June 12, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017. Wickman, Kase (November 11, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Director Wants To Make Sure The Sequel's Wasp Is As Awesome As Possible". MTV. Archived from the original on November 14, 2015. Retrieved November 12, 2015. Sneider, Jeff (April 22, 2015). "Marvel's 'Ant-Man' Resolves Writing Credit Dispute (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 25, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2015. O'Connell, Sean (February 2015). "Ant-Man: Edgar Wright Is Still Involved In This Capacity". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 11, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2015. Dickson, Evan (July 29, 2014). "ANT-MAN Director Peyton Reed Talks Stepping Into Edgar Wright's Shoes, the State of the Script and the Film's Villains at Comic-Con". Collider. Archived from the original on July 31, 2014. Retrieved July 30, 2014. Screen Rant (August 5, 2014). Ant-Man - Peyton Reed Interview Comic-Con 2014. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved August 6, 2014 – via YouTube. Graser, Marc (August 6, 2014). "'Ant-Man' Back on Track as Shoot Kicks Off in Atlanta". Variety. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 6, 2014. Couch, Aaron (November 2, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Writer on the Secret to Revitalizing a Franchise". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 6, 2017. Polowy, Kevin (November 3, 2017). "How 'Thor: Ragnarok' screenwriter (and former pizza guy) Eric Pearson became Marvel's go-to script doctor". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on November 4, 2017. Retrieved November 18, 2017. Leadbeater, Alex (November 11, 2016). "Ant-Man Concept Art Reveals Arnim Zola Was Originally in the Film". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 12, 2016. Retrieved November 11, 2016. Aleaziz, Hamed (August 14, 2014). "'Ant-man' movie filming in S.F. next week?". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 15, 2014. Retrieved August 14, 2014. Walljasper, Matt (September 22, 2014). "Update: What's filming in Atlanta now?". Atlanta. Archived from the original on September 26, 2014. Retrieved October 1, 2014. Fleming, Mike Jr. (September 30, 2014). "After Moving Slow As Corpse, 'Zombieland 2' Gets Writer And Urgency". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 1, 2014. Retrieved September 30, 2014. "Trees removed for Atlanta film production sparks outrage". WSB-TV. October 6, 2014. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Lussier, Germain (June 22, 2015). "65 Things We Learned on the Set of Marvel's 'Ant-Man'". /Film. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Sciretta, Peter (October 28, 2014). "Watch: All Of Your Marvel Phase 3 Questions Answered By Marvel Head Kevin Feige". /Film. Archived from the original on October 29, 2014. Retrieved October 30, 2014. Lussier, Germain (April 11, 2015). "Kevin Feige Explains 'Ant-Man's' MCU Significance; New Trailer Out Monday". SlashFilm. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2015. Reed, Peyton (December 5, 2014). "And that's it! Principal photography on ANT-MAN is now complete. The ants have left the building. Stay tuned..." Twitter. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Martin, Kevin H. (July 23, 2015). "Big As Life". ICG Magazine. Archived from the original on July 24, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Seymour, Mike (July 19, 2015). "Ant-Man: Marvel's heist film". FX Guide. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved July 20, 2015. King, Darryn (July 6, 2018). "The Science (and the Scientists) Behind 'Ant-Man'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 29, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2018. Eisenberg, Eric (July 21, 2015). "Ant-Man Originally Had A Completely Different Opening Scene". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved July 22, 2015. Collis, Clark (April 9, 2015). "Ant-Man: EW preview". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 11, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2015. Nicholson, Matt (June 22, 2015). "Ant-Man Set And Edit Bay Visit: Making Marvel's Underdog Movie Page 3 of 3". IGN. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Lussier, Germain (June 22, 2015). "65 Things We Learned on the Set of Marvel's 'Ant-Man'". /Film. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Sciretta, Peter (June 29, 2015). "When Will You See the First Clip From 'Captain America: Civil War'?". /Film. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2015. Weintraub, Steve (July 23, 2015). "Kevin Feige on ANT-MAN Post-Credits Scenes, SPIDER-MAN, Marvel at Disneyland, and More". Collider. Archived from the original on July 26, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015. Reed, Peyton (June 25, 2015). "ANT-MAN is officially completed, and I can't wait for you to see it". Twitter. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved June 25, 2015. Trumbore, Dave (September 18, 2015). "'Captain America: Civil War': Sebastian Stan Talks Winter Soldier, Returns Fire at Zack Snyder". Collider. Archived from the original on September 20, 2015. Retrieved September 19, 2015. Eisenberg, Eric (July 20, 2015). "Ant-Man Ending: What Was Originally Going To Happen". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2015. Wolfe, Jennifer (July 20, 2015). "Marvel Returns to Sarofsky for 'Ant-Man' Main-On-End Titles". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved July 22, 2015. Rich, Katey (July 17, 2015). "Ant-Man Director Peyton Reed on the Film's Most Impressive Effect . . . and the Backup Plan". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on July 19, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015. Wasley, Alice (July 16, 2015). "Ant-Man VFX Supervisor On The Power Of Shrinkage". The Credits. Archived from the original on July 22, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015. "Christophe Beck to Score Marvel Studios' 'Ant-Man". Film Music Reporter. January 6, 2015. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved January 7, 2015. McCue, Michelle (June 16, 2015). "Composer Christophe Beck Talks Score For ANT-MAN". WeAreMovieGeeks.com. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved June 20, 2015. "'Ant-Man' Soundtrack Details". Film Music Reporter. July 15, 2015. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2015. "Marvel Studios: Assembling a Universe TV Special Premieres March 18 on ABC". Marvel.com. February 27, 2014. Archived from the original on February 28, 2014. Retrieved February 27, 2014. Breznican, Anthony (March 18, 2014). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron': Marvel reveals new Scarlet Witch and Quicksilver concept art". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 19, 2014. Retrieved March 19, 2014. Alonso, Axel; Ching, Albert (October 31, 2014). "AXEL-IN-CHARGE: How Marvel's Big Movie Week Impacts Publishing". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on November 3, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2014. Goldman, Eric (November 4, 2014). "Looking Back At How The Marvel Age Began". IGN. Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2014. ""Darth Vader" Arrives, "Spider-Verse" Concludes In Marvel's February 2015 Solicitations". Comic Book Resources. December 5, 2014. Archived from the original on December 2, 2014. Retrieved December 5, 2014. "Marvel's Ant-Man - Scott Lang: Small Time MCU Infinite Comic #1". Comixology. Archived from the original on April 13, 2015. Retrieved March 21, 2015. Matulef, Jeffrey (July 2, 2015). "Zen Studios brings Paul Rudd to pinball in Ant-Man". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021. Mendelson, Scott (January 6, 2015). "Marvel's 'Ant-Man' Gets Full-Size Trailer". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved January 7, 2015. McMillan, Graeme (January 7, 2015). "Why Marvel's 'Ant-Man' Trailer Was a Small, But Important, Misstep (Analysis)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 10, 2015. Retrieved January 7, 2015. Collis, Clark (January 9, 2015). "'Ant-Man' trailer attracts a giant-sized 29 million views". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 9, 2015. Retrieved January 9, 2015. Mendelson, Scott (April 13, 2015). "New 'Ant-Man' Trailer Pits Ant-Man Against Thomas The Tank Engine". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2015. Sampson, Mike (April 13, 2015). "Tiny 'Ant-Man' Billboards Appearing in Public as Part of Clever Marvel Marketing Stunt". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on April 21, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2015. "Ant-Man Micro-Tech Challenge: Learn More". Disney Educational Productions and Marvel. Archived from the original on June 1, 2015. Retrieved June 1, 2015. Mendelson, Scott (June 11, 2015). "New 'Ant-Man' Avengers-Themed Character Posters Are 'Lilo And Stitch' Style Marketing". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 13, 2015. Retrieved June 11, 2015. Cavanaugh, Patrick (June 8, 2015). "Get an Extended Look at Marvel's 'Ant-Man' in IMAX Theaters June 12". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on June 9, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2015. Slater, Shawn (June 5, 2015). "See an Exclusive Sneak Peek of 'Ant-Man' at Disney California Adventure Park Starting June 19". Disney Parks Blog. Archived from the original on June 8, 2015. Retrieved June 6, 2015. WHIH World News (Marvel Studios) (July 2, 2015). WHIH: NEWSFRONT Promo - July 2, 2015. Retrieved July 2, 2015. Smith, C. Molly (July 2, 2015). "Marvel links Ant-Man to greater MCU in fake news report". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. "Watch Michael Douglas Ring the Closing Bell at the New York Stock Exchange". Marvel.com. July 13, 2015. Archived from the original on July 14, 2015. Retrieved July 13, 2015. McClintock, Pamela (September 8, 2015). "Summer Movie Ad Buys: 'Mission: Impossible,' 'Mad Max' Get Biggest U.S. Spend". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 11, 2015. Retrieved September 9, 2015. "Taking Ants on a Tour of London". The 360 Company. January 6, 2016. Archived from the original on April 7, 2020. Retrieved April 6, 2020. "Marvel To Broadcast ANT-MAN Premiere Red Carpet Online". Newsarama. June 26, 2015. Archived from the original on June 29, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015. Siegemund-Broka, Austin (May 6, 2015). "'Ant-Man,' 'Miss Hokusai' to Open Fantasia Festival". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Natalie (July 14, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Will Grow To $115M-$125M In Global Bow, But Will Bump Heads With 'Minions' In U.S. – Box Office Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 15, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2015. Han, Angie (April 8, 2015). "'Star Wars: Rogue One', 'Captain America: Civil War', and More Get IMAX Releases". /Film. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Mendelson, Scott (May 6, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Poster Wants To Remind You Of 'Iron Man' Poster". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. Ritman, Alex (June 24, 2015). "CineEurope: Disney Debuts 'The Finest Hours' Trailer, 'Zootopia' Footage, Screens 'Ant-Man'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved June 25, 2015. Truitt, Brian (October 15, 2015). "Watch: Michael Peña steals this exclusive 'Ant-Man' Blu-ray trailer". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 15, 2015. Retrieved October 15, 2015. Arnold, Thomas K. (December 16, 2015). "'Minions,' 'Ant-Man' Top Home-Video Sales Charts". Variety. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved December 17, 2015. Goldberg, Matt (October 23, 2015). "'Marvel Cinematic Universe: Phase Two Collection' Unveiled; Contains First Look at Phase 3". Collider. Archived from the original on October 24, 2015. Retrieved October 23, 2015. Zogbi, Emily (April 15, 2023). "Ant-Man Launches Disney+'s First ASL Option". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. Retrieved April 27, 2023. Fleming, Mike Jr. (March 21, 2016). "No. 14 'Ant-Man' – 2015 Most Valuable Movie Blockbuster Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 23, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2016. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 19, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Smaller Than 'Thor' & 'Captain America'; 'Trainwreck' Second High For Judd Apatow – Sunday Final Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 18, 2015. Retrieved July 20, 2015. Mendelson, Scott (July 18, 2015). "Box Office: 'Ant-Man' Nabs Second-Smallest Marvel Friday With $22.6M". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 20, 2015). "'Ant-Man' & 'Minions' Smaller In Actuals; 'Trainwreck' Starts To Party – Weekend Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2015. McClintock, Pamela (July 19, 2015). "Box Office: 'Ant-Man' No. 1 With $58M; 'Trainwreck' Laughs to $30.2M". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 26, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Has Bragging Rights At The B.O. Over Adam Sandler's 'Pixels' – Sunday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved July 26, 2015. Tartaglione, Nancy (July 20, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Shrinks A Tick; China's 'Monster' Smash Tops Overseas; 'Minions' No. 1 WW – Intl Box Office Actuals". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 20, 2015. Retrieved July 20, 2015. Tartaglione, Nancy (September 8, 2015). "'Terminator', 'Hitman' Lead Sluggish Frame; 'Compton' Tops 5 Markets – International Box Office Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Retrieved September 9, 2015. Tartaglione, Nancy (October 20, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Supersizes With $42.4M China Bow; 'Crimson Peak' Climbs To $13.6M – International Box Office Actuals". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved October 21, 2015. Mendelson, Scott (October 18, 2015). "Weekend Box Office: 'Ant-Man' Tops 'Thor' After $43M China Bow, 'Pan' Plunges, 'Steve Jobs' Expands". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 20, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2015. Tartaglione, Nancy (October 26, 2015). "'The Martian' Orbits $400M Global; 'Straight Outta Compton' Nears $200M; 'Ghost Dimension' Solid – Intl B.O. Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 26, 2015. Retrieved October 27, 2015. Tartaglione, Nancy (September 20, 2015). "'Inside Out' & 'Ant-Man' Reach New Global Box Office Milestones". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 21, 2015. Retrieved September 20, 2015. Tartaglione, Nancy (November 2, 2015). "Sony's Sizzling 'Spectre', 'Hotel Transylvania 2' Top Charts In Strong Frame – Intl Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 3, 2015. Retrieved November 4, 2015. "Ant-Man". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Ant-Man". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved July 17, 2015. Chang, Justin (July 8, 2015). "Film Review: 'Ant-Man'". Variety. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015. McCarthy, Todd (July 8, 2015). "'Ant-Man': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015. Turan, Kenneth (July 15, 2015). "Review: Marvel comes up big with playful 'Ant-Man'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2015. Newman, Kim (July 8, 2015). "Ant-Man: Small-time crook". Empire. Archived from the original on July 14, 2015. Retrieved August 7, 2015. Scott, A. O. (July 16, 2015). "Review: 'Ant-Man,' With Paul Rudd, Adds to a Superhero Infestation". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 12, 2017. Retrieved July 16, 2015. Brody, Richard (July 23, 2015). ""Ant-Man" Is a Superhero Movie for Skeptics". The New Yorker. Retrieved June 13, 2019. Seitz, Matt Zoller [@mattzollerseitz] (July 15, 2015). "ANT MAN is as good as you've heard. Feels handmade, not Marvel factory-approved. Reminded of Zemeckis when Zemeckis was fun" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Seitz, Matt Zoller [@mattzollerseitz] (May 2, 2016). "I know ANT-MAN has faded for some, but my affection for it has increased with time. Basically sweet/comedic/melodramatic, like SPIDER-MAN 2" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Duralde, Alonso (July 8, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Review: Paul Rudd's Charisma Gets Stepped On in Marvel's Latest Offering". TheWrap. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015. Roeper, Richard (July 15, 2015). "'Ant-Man': As Marvel movies go, too small in scale and ambition". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on July 15, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2015. Shoard, Catherine (July 8, 2015). "Ant-Man review: diminishing returns for latest expansion of Marvel universe". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2015. Morgenstern, Joe (July 16, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Review: A Shrunken Summer Spectacular". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on August 9, 2015. Retrieved August 7, 2015. Orr, Christopher (July 17, 2015). "Ant-Man: A Small Defeat for Marvel". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on July 19, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015. Giardina, Carolyn (January 4, 2016). "Star Wars Among Nominees for ACE Eddie Awards for Film Editing". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Grobar, Matt; Pedersen, Erik (January 29, 2016). "ACE Eddie Awards: Mad Max & The Big Short Take Top Prizes; TV Trophies To Mad Men, Amy Schumer – Winners List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 4, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Ritman, Alex (February 14, 2016). "BAFTA Awards: Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 12, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Critics' Choice Awards: The Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. January 17, 2016. Archived from the original on April 11, 2021. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "2016 Dragon Awards Winners". Locus. September 6, 2016. Archived from the original on December 8, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2023. Shepherd, Jack (March 21, 2016). "Empire Awards 2016: Winners in full as Star Wars and Mad Max: Fury Road dominate". The Independent. Archived from the original on March 21, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "2015 Georgia Film Critics Association Awards". CBS News. January 8, 2016. Archived from the original on November 25, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2023. Giardina, Carolyn (February 27, 2016). "Golden Reel Awards: The Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 3, 2016. Retrieved March 1, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 10, 2015). "Golden Trailer Nominations: Jurassic World, Furious 7 Propel Universal To Leading 44". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 18, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Pedersen, Erik (May 6, 2015). "Golden Trailer Awards: Furious 7 Peels Out With Best In Show". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved November 26, 2023. Lee, Ashley (April 8, 2016). "Universal, Fox Top Golden Trailer Awards Nominees". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Nolfi, Joey (May 5, 2016). "2016 Golden Trailer Awards winners list". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Feinberg, Scott (October 20, 2015). "Hollywood Music in Media Awards: Sam Smith, Lady Gaga, Brian Wilson Among Nominees (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 21, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2023. Guevara, Ruben (November 12, 2015). "Hollywood Music in Media Awards Honor Mad Max: Fury Road, Beasts of No Nation, Peanuts". IndieWire. Archived from the original on March 21, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2023. "MTV Movie Awards Winners: Complete List". Variety. April 9, 2016. Archived from the original on March 20, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Kids' Choice Awards: The Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. March 12, 2016. Archived from the original on January 2, 2021. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Nakamura, Reid (February 24, 2016). "Star Wars: The Force Awakens Leads Saturn Awards Nominees". TheWrap. Archived from the original on March 21, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Cohen, David S. (June 23, 2016). "The Force Awakens Rings Up Eight Saturn Awards". Variety. Archived from the original on December 28, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Teen Choice Awards 2015 Winners: Full List". Variety. August 16, 2015. Archived from the original on January 9, 2021. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Giardina, Carolyn (February 3, 2016). "VES Awards Winners: Star Wars Takes Top Prize". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 21, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Perry, Spencer (August 1, 2017). "Production Officially Begins on Ant-Man and the Wasp!". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on August 1, 2017. Retrieved August 1, 2017. Breznican, Anthony (July 22, 2017). "Michelle Pfeiffer will play Janet Van Dyne in Ant-Man and The Wasp". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 29, 2022). "'Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania' & 'The Marvels' Swap Release Dates". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Gemmill, Allie (December 10, 2020). "'Ant-Man 3' Title and Kathryn Newton Casting for MCU Threequel Revealed". Collider. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. Kit, Borys (April 3, 2020). "'Ant-Man 3' Finds its Writer With 'Rick and Morty' Scribe (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 4, 2020. Retrieved April 3, 2020. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ant-Man (film). Wikiquote has quotations related to Ant-Man (film). Official website Ant-Man at IMDb Portals:  Film  United States  Speculative fiction