Crinum mauritianum ("Mauritius Swamp-lily" or "Lys du Pays") is a herbaceous plant belonging to the family Amaryllidaceae, and endemic to Mauritius. Crinum mauritianum has long, narrow, stiff (slightly succulent) leaves, that are initially held erect and often curve upwards. The leaves are light green, and strongly canaliculate (grooved) on the upper, adaxial side. Formerly widespread across the wetter areas of Mauritius, it was believed to be extinct, but was rediscovered in 1973, near Midlands Dam (Barrage de Midlands). It has become an ornamental in Mauritius, frequently used in landscaping, due to its white flowers and partially succulent, upwards curving leaves. It can therefore easily be confused with the non-native species Crinum asiaticum, which is also used for public landscaping in Mauritius. However, that species has broader, strap-shaped leaves. The narrow, stiffer, often upturned leaves of C.mauritianum are relatively unique and can be used to distinguish it from the introduced species of Crinum. The species was long used in traditional medicine by Mauritians, specifically for treating rheumatism and inflammation. It is therefore currently being investigated for medicinal benefits. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Crinum mauritianum. Wikispecies has information related to Crinum mauritianum. Heywood, V. H. and Jackson, P. W., 2012. Tropical Botanic Gardens: Their Role in Conservation and Development. Academic Press, Nature. p.101. "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-02-14. Retrieved 2020-01-06.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Marais, W., 1975. Selection of a neotype for Crinum mauritianum Lodd.(-Amaryllidaceae). Kew bulletin. Rummun, N., Neergheen-Bhujun, V.S., Pynee, K.B., Baider, C. and Bahorun, T., 2018. The role of endemic plants in Mauritian traditional medicine–Potential therapeutic benefits or placebo effect?. Journal of ethnopharmacology, 213, pp.111-117. Neergheen, V.S., Bahorun, T., Soobrattee, M.A. and Aruoma, O.I., A SURVEY OF THE MAURITIAN ENDEMIC FLORA FOR POTENTIAL PROPHYLAXIS. Neergheen, V.S., Bahorun, T., Jen, L.S. and Aruoma, O.I., 2007. Bioefficacy of Mauritian endemic medicinal plants: Assessment of their phenolic contents and antioxidant potential. Pharmaceutical biology, 45(1), pp.9-17. v t e