The flag of Republika Srpska within Bosnia and Herzegovina was adopted on 12 May 1992. The flag is a rectangular tricolor with three equal horizontal bands of red, blue and white. It is almost identical to the civil flag of Serbia, but with different aspect ratio of 1:2 instead of 2:3 and slightly different color shades.The flag very similar to that of Misiones Province in Argentina. In 2007, the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina declared the flag of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the coat of arms of Republika Srpska, and other symbols of Republika Srpska unconstitutional. The court ruled that the symbols did not represent the non-Serb ethnicities living in Republika Srpska. However, the flag of Republika Srpska was deemed to be in line with the constitution. The court ruled that though the combination of the colors relates to the Serbian tricolor, the use of red, blue, and white are considered to be pan-Slavic colors as well. The Serb tricolor has been used as the basis for other flags, most notably as Serbia's national flag. Montenegro has also used the Serbian tricolor with varying shades of blue. Under communist Yugoslavia, the republics of Serbia and Montenegro had flags of same design and colors. Montenegro changed its flag in 1993 by altering the proportion and shade of blue in its flag and used this flag until 2004. The Serbian tricolor was also the basis for the flag of the Serb minority in Croatia. The Serbian tricolor defaced with a Serbian cross is used as the flag of the Serbian Orthodox Church. The Republika Srpska's flag is popular among many Bosnian Serbs and they prefer to fly it or the Serbian flag instead of the flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Unofficial flag of Republika Srpska, depicting Serbian cross on tricolor (frequently used in 1990s) Unofficial flag of Republika Srpska charged with emblem Unofficial flag of Republika Srpska charged with former coat of arms (1995–2007) Standard of the president of Republika Srpska (2007-present) Standard of the President of Republika Srpska (1995-2007) Standard used by Prime minister of Republika Srpska (1995-2007) Former standard of the President of National Assembly of Republika Srpska (1995-2007) Former standard of Minister of defence of Republika Srpska (1995-2007) Bosnia and Herzegovina portal Flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina Flag of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Flag of the Republic of Serbian Krajina Misiones Province in Argentina "Одлука о облику и изгледу заставе Српске Републике Босне и Херцеговине" . Службени гласник српског народа у БиХ (in Serbian). 12 May 1992 – via Wikisource. Heimer, Zeljko. "The FAME: Republic of Srpska". zeljko-heimer-fame.from.hr. Retrieved 2018-03-18. Flag of Republika Srpska crwflags.com "Bosnia's 'Foreign' Flag Still Draws Mixed Feelings". www.balkaninsight.com. 2017. v t e v t e