Torrejón de Ardoz (Spanish pronunciation: [toreˈxon de aɾˈðoθ]) is a municipality of Spain belonging to the Community of Madrid. The European Union Satellite Centre (SatCen), an agency of the European Union, is located in Torrejón de Ardoz. It is also the location of the headquarters of the Instituto Nacional de Técnica Aeroespacial (INTA), the Spanish space agency. The Torrejón Air Base/Madrid–Torrejón Airport also lies on the municipality. Torrejón comes from torre ("tower"); the suffix -jón is a diminutive that ultimately makes reference to the small or unimportant nature of the noun. The Ardoz add-on comes from the namesake creek. While there is no certainty of the origin of Torrejón de Ardoz, it probably dates from the 12th century, associated to fortifications built to protect Alcalá de Henares. It was part of the Land of Alcalá for all purposes until 1554, when it was granted the status of town. In 1843 it was the place of a short battle between general Ramón Narvaez and senator Antonio Seoane, as part of the rebellion against Espartero. The United States Air Force jointly occupied the Torrejón Air Base, installed in 1955, under agreements made with Francisco Franco. The base was subject of criticism since its beginnings and a meeting place of pacifist demonstrations attended by progressives and ecologists. One of the election platforms of Felipe González's Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) was to close the base to the American fighter wing. Once González became prime minister, the lease of the then 401st Tactical Fighter Wing (now the 401st Air Expeditionary Group) was not renewed and the F-16 fighter wing left the base in the early 1990s. It is located to the east of the city of Madrid, near the A-2, the highway connecting Madrid and Barcelona. With the city located at the right-bank (north) of the Henares the relief of the municipality gently decreases in elevation from north to south. Three small creeks pass through the municipality emptying into the Henares. From West to East: Arroyo del Valle, Arroyo Pelayo, and Arroyo Ardoz. The highest point lies in the North of the municipality, standing at 623 m above sea level. The municipality has a total area of 32.49 km2. Artists El Chojin, rapper Pilar Rubio, television presenter Military personnel Frederick M. Padilla, U.S. Marine major general Politicians Kate Brown, governor of Oregon Sportpeople David Andújar, footballer Wallace Bryant, basketball player Jorge Garbajosa, basketball player Guti, footballer Antonio Guzmán Núñez, footballer Kane, wrestler Sergio Mora, footballer Mario Rivillos Plaza, futsal player Manuel Romero, footballer Crime Patrick Nogueira, murderer. Lived with his uncle, aunt and cousins before his family moved to Pioz. Citations Municipal Register of Spain 2018. National Statistics Institute. Cruz Plaza, García Lledó & Martín-Serrano García 1991, p. 754. Torrejón Townhall website (in Spanish) Torrejón Townhall website (in Spanish) Alpuente 1997. Merino Arribas et al. 2004, p. 1. Merino Arribas et al. 2004, p. 3. Merino Arribas et al. 2004, p. 4. "Valores climatológicos normales. Torrejón de Ardoz". Bibliography Alpuente, Moncho (5 July 1997). "El ruido de la historia". El País. Cruz Plaza; García Lledó; Martín-Serrano García (1991). "Torrejón de Ardoz". Arquitectura y Desarrollo Urbano. Comunidad de Madrid (Zona Centro) (PDF). Vol. I. Madrid: Dirección General de Arquitectura & Colegio Oficial de Arquitectos de Madrid. pp. 750–782. ISBN 84-451-0297-4. Merino Arribas, José María; Ruiz Esteban, Yolanda; Gutiérrez Torrecilla, Luis Miguel; García Manzanero, Fernando (2004) [1986]. Torrejón, una historia viva (PDF). Ayuntamiento de Torrejón de Ardoz. ISBN 84-505-4177-8. Municipal elections in Torrejón de Ardoz Madrid-Torrejón Airport