Makedonski Železnici (MŽ; Macedonian: Македонски Железници (МЖ), "Macedonian Railways") is the public enterprise for railways in North Macedonia. Railway operations are run by Železnici na Republika Severna Makedonija Transport and the infrastructure maintained by Makedonski Železnici Infrastruktura. The Republic of North Macedonia is a member of the International Union of Railways (UIC). The UIC Country Code for the Republic of North Macedonia is 65. Macedonian Railways operates 1,435 mm (4 ft 8+1⁄2 in) standard gauge rail tracks in North Macedonia and maintains 925 km (575 mi) of lines, 315 km (196 mi) of which are electrified with the 25 kV 50 Hz AC system. Macedonian Railways Transport operates a large number of train sets, which consist of passenger trains (diesel and electric trains) and freight trains. A contract for the purchase of 6 new passenger train sets, manufactured by China's CRRC Corporation at the Zhuzhou Electric Locomotive Works, was signed in 2014. The first train-set arrived in August 2015. Each train consists of 3 rail cars, and is designed to carry 200 passengers. They will be used on routes from Skopje to Bitola, Gevgelija, Kičevo, Kumanovo, and Veles. This is the first time North Macedonia has bought new passenger trains since its independence, and the first time a Chinese EMU or DMU manufacturer has entered the European market. The first standard gauge line in the area, from Skopje to Thessaloniki was built in 1873 during Ottoman rule. North Macedonia has a well-developed railroad system. It is connected to Kosovo via Volkovo in the northwest, to Serbia via Tabanovci in the north and to Greece via Gevgelija in the southeast and via Kremenica in the southwest. North Macedonia's main rail line between the Serbian and Greek borders, from Tabanovci to Gevgelija, is entirely electrified. The railway company has its headquarters in the capital Skopje. The original city railway station was partially destroyed in the 1963 earthquake and now houses the Museum of the City of Skopje. The new principal railway station forms the upper level of the integrated Transportation Center Skopje. All domestic lines are operated by Macedonian Railways, with links from Skopje to Tetovo, Gostivar and Kicevo in the west, to Volkovo in the northwest, to Kumanovo and Tabanovci in the north, to Sveti Nikole, Štip, and Kocani in the east, to Veles, Negotino and Gevgelija in the south - southeast and to Bogomila, Prilep and Bitola in the southwest. According to a local journalists' report dated 2011, passenger service within the country is quite slow, and trains and stations are often poorly maintained. Nonetheless, the inexpensive rail service is well patronized, and on occasions trains are standing-room only. In April 2023, commemorating 150 year since the arrival of the first train in today's North Macedonia, the Museum of Macedonian Railways was opened in Skopje. The main north–south line from Niš in Serbia to the port of Thessaloniki in Greece on the Aegean Sea (Corridor X), passes through Kumanovo, Skopje, Zelenikovo, Veles, Negotino, Demir Kapija, Miravci and Gevgelija. Intercity trains link Kumanovo, Skopje, Zelenikovo, Veles, Negotino (Kavadarci), Demir Kapija, Miravci (Valandovo) and Gevgelija (Bogdanci) with Serbian Railways and Greek railways. Connections to Bulgarian State Railways are via Niš in Serbia and via Thessaloniki in Greece. Intercity trains from Kosovo Railways link Skopje with Pristina. In 2010, Makedonski Železnici joined Cargo 10, a joint venture with other railways in the region. In July 2022 a contract was signed involving modernisation and construction works on the: Kumanovo – Beljakovci and the Beljakovci – Kriva Palanka lines which would connect North Macedonia to Varna (Bulgaria) and to the Black Sea. A tender for a new 23.4km of track to include 22 tunnels and 52 bridges was offered in January 2024. A proposal from 2020 for: A 66 km (41 mi) link in the West, from Kičevo to the Albanian border, which would connect North Macedonia to Durrës (Albania) and to the Adriatic Sea. The Ministry of Transport and Communication has begun studies for the renewal and reconstruction of several section of the corridor X: Renewal and reconstruction of railway track on the 16 km (9.9 mi) section between Bitola and Kremenica as a part of the Xd branch of Corridor X Reconstruction of the 14 km (8.7 mi) railway section between Kumanovo and Deljadrovci Reconstruction of the 35 km (22 mi) railway section between Dračevo and Veles High speed railway: A 50km section of the corridor X, Skopje-Niš, Serbia-Belgrade to be upgraded to operate high speed trains. New Chinese Trains to Arrive in Macedonia in August Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine, July 7, 2015 “走出去”的中国动车串起世界“经济圈”, 2015-7-17 Aleksandar Pisarev (Александар Писарев), Патување со Македонски железници (Traveling with Makedonski Železnici), 2011-05-11 "ЗА 150-ГОДИШНИНАТА, ОТВОРЕН МУЗЕЈ НА МАКЕДОНСКАТА ЖЕЛЕЗНИЦА". SDK. 7 April 2023. "Macedonian railways to join Cargo 10". ICT magazine. Archived from the original on 2010-10-26. Retrieved 2010-09-26. "North Macedonia signs EUR 200 million rail contracts". 25 July 2022. "North Macedonia, Supervision for Renewal with Reconstruction of the Railway Section Bitola–Kremenica, as part of Xd of Corridor X". Retrieved 23 November 2023. "North Macedonia and Serbia plan construction of high-speed railway". 20 November 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Makedonski Železnici. Macedonian Railways Macedonian Railways - Infrastructure More information about the Macedonian Railways Macedonian passenger trains - photo gallery