Basketball at the 2016 Summer Olympics was the nineteenth appearance of the sport of basketball as an official Olympic medal event. It took place at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and was held from 6 August to 21 August 2016. The preliminary and knockout round matches for men were played inside the Carioca Arena 1 in Olympic Park which seated up to 16,000 spectators. The matches for women were played at the Youth Arena. This marked the first time that the men's and women's Olympic tournaments were played in multiple/separate venues. The host country Brazil failed to make it to the quarterfinals of both the men's and women's tournaments, after being eliminated from the group stage. Three countries in both categories took all of the medals: the United States (who took both gold medals), Serbia and Spain. Carioca Arena 1, the largest among the three Carioca Arenas, and Youth Arena, are the arenas that are being used for the basketball tournaments. The Ginásio do Maracanãzinho, site of the 1954 FIBA World Championship and the 1963 FIBA World Championship, hosted the indoor volleyball tournaments instead. Carioca Arena 1 hosted the entire men's tournament and the women's knockout stage, while Youth Arena hosted the women's preliminary round. The National Olympic Committees might enter up to one 12-player men's team and up to one 12-player women's team. Just as in 2012, the Olympic hosts were not guaranteed an Olympic berth. On 9 August 2015, it was announced that the Brazil men's and women's national teams would compete in the Olympic Basketball Tournament at the 2016 Rio Games after FIBA's Central Board decided to grant them automatic places at its meeting in Tokyo. The competition consisted of two stages; a group stage followed by a knockout stage. The teams were divided into two groups of six countries, playing every team in their group once. Two points were awarded for a victory, one for a loss. The top four teams per group qualified for the quarter-finals. Source: FIBA Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head points difference; 4) head-to-head number of points scored. Source: FIBA Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head points difference; 4) head-to-head number of points scored. (H) Hosts Notes: In games among the four teams at 3–2, Croatia and Spain were 2–1 while Argentina and Lithuania were 1–2. Croatia beat Spain 72–70, and Lithuania beat Argentina 81–73. The knockout stage was a single-elimination tournament consisting of three rounds. Semi-final losers played for the bronze medal. The competition consisted of two stages; a group stage followed by a knockout stage. The teams were divided into two groups of six countries, playing every team in their group once. Two points were awarded for a victory, one for a loss. The top four teams per group qualified for the quarter-finals. Source: FIBA Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head points difference; 4) head-to-head number of points scored. (H) Hosts Notes: Head-to-head record: France 3 pts, +8 PD; Turkey 3 pts, −2 PD; Japan 3 pts, −6 PD Source: FIBA Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head points difference; 4) head-to-head number of points scored. The knockout stage was a single-elimination tournament consisting of three rounds. Semi-final losers played for the bronze medal. The following referees were selected for the tournament. Ahmed Al-Bulushi Steven Anderson Scott Paul Beker Ilija Belošević Chahinaz Boussetta Christos Christodoulou Natalia Cuello Cuello Duan Zhu Juan González Lauren Holtkamp Hwang In-tae Damir Javor Carlos Julio Karen Lasuik Olegs Latisevs Leandro Lezcano Guilherme Locatelli Robert Lottermoser Cristiano Maranho Vaughan Mayberry Anne Panther Ferdinand Pascual Piotr Pastusiak Sreten Radović José Reyes Borys Ryzhyk Stephen Seibel Roberto Vázquez Eddie Viator Nadege Anaize Zouzou Wheelchair basketball at the 2016 Summer Paralympics "Brazil's national teams granted automatic places at 2016 Olympic Basketball Tournament". FIBA. 9 August 2015. Archived from the original on 8 September 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2015. "Qualification System – Games of the XXXI Olympiad" (PDF). FIBA. February 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Italy, Philippines and Serbia to host Olympic Qualifying Tournaments; France to stage Women's Tournament". FIBA. 19 January 2016. Archived from the original on 17 November 2017. Retrieved 19 January 2016. Referees Wikimedia Commons has media related to Basketball at the 2016 Summer Olympics. International Basketball Federation official website Rio Olympics Basketball Schedule "Basketball at the 2016 Summer Olympics (Rio2016.com)". Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Retrieved 12 June 2016.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Basketball at the 2016 Summer Olympics at SR/Olympics (archived) Results Book – Basketball