The Heydar Aliyev Center (Azerbaijani: Heydər Əliyev Mərkəzi) is a 57,500 m2 (619,000 sq ft) building complex in Baku, Azerbaijan, designed by Iraqi-British architect Zaha Hadid and noted for its distinctive architecture and flowing, curved style that eschews sharp angles. The main contractor, Dia Holdings, is owned by actors that are linked to Azerbaijan's ruling Aliyev family's network of offshore companies. The center is named after Heydar Aliyev (1923–2003), the first secretary of Soviet Azerbaijan from 1969 to 1982, and president of Azerbaijan Republic from October 1993 to October 2003. In 2007, Zaha Hadid was appointed as the design architect of the Center after a competition. The Center houses a conference hall (auditorium), a gallery hall and a museum. The project is intended to play an integral role in the intellectual life of the city. Located close to the city center, the site plays a pivotal role in the redevelopment of Baku. The Heydar Aliyev Center represents a fluid form which emerges by the folding of the landscape's natural topography and by the wrapping of individual functions of the Center. All functions of the Center, together with entrances, are represented by folds in a single continuous surface. This fluid form gives an opportunity to connect the various cultural spaces whilst at the same time, providing each element of the Center with its own identity and privacy. As it folds inside, the skin erodes away to become an element of the interior landscape of the Center. The Heydar Aliyev Center had an official soft-opening ceremony on 10 May 2012 held by the president of Azerbaijan Ilham Aliyev. Extending on eight floor levels, the center accommodates a 1,000-seat auditorium, temporary exhibition spaces, a conference center, workshops, and a museum. The building was nominated for awards in 2013 at both the World Architecture Festival and the biennial Inside Festival. In 2014, the Center won the Design Museum's Design of the Year Award 2014 despite concerns about the site's human rights record. This makes Hadid the first woman to win the top prize in that competition. The building was featured in Extreme Engineering, a documentary television series that airs on the Discovery Channel and the Science Channel. The episode called "Azerbaijan's Amazing Transformation" was aired on 22 April 2011 as part of season 9. The building was seen on The Grand Tour episode entitled "Sea to unsalty sea," with presenter Jeremy Clarkson praising the building and Hadid. The building was also featured on the "postcard" of Samra Rahimli for the postcard of Azerbaijan at the Eurovision Song Contest 2016 and in a Google Doodle in 2017. On 29 June 2012, the Heydar Aliyev Center held the official opening of Crans Montana Forum, attended by the President of Azerbaijan Ilham Aliyev, President of Georgia Mikheil Saakashvili, President of Macedonia Gjorge Ivanov, President of Montenegro Filip Vujanović, as well as foreign public figures, MPs, intellectuals, and business circles. On 3 July 2012, the Center held the ceremony of the official seeing-off of the Azerbaijani delegation to take part in the 2012 Summer Olympic Games in London. The ceremony was attended by the President Republic of Azerbaijan, President of the National Olympic Committee Ilham Aliyev and his spouse Mehriban Aliyeva. Photo banners reflecting the Olympic movement in Azerbaijan were installed in the lobby of the Heydar Aliyev Center. President of Azerbaijan Ilham Aliyev made a speech at the ceremony. On 20 July 2012, a fire started on the roof of the building at about 11:30am. It was quickly put out by firemen, and it was initially reported that the fire only damaged the roof of the building, leaving the interior only slightly damaged, mainly because of the water used by firemen to extinguish the fire. The fire was found to have resulted from negligence in the use of welding equipment in the roof; three Turkish contractors were subsequently charged under Azerbaijan's criminal code. The resulting damage was found to have had "grave consequences and material damage on a large scale". Subsequent to sixteen months of repairs, it was formally (re)opened on 5 November 2013. On 2 and 3 November 2013, Moscow music theater Helikon Opera under the direction of the People's Artist of Russia Dmitry Bertman, presented performances at the Heydar Aliyev Center. On 2 November, the Helikon-Opera presented a gala concert "The Enduring Love", a program that included lyric songs by Marilyn Monroe, Tina Turner, Elton John, Celine Dion, Whitney Houston, and the Beatles. On 3 November, the artists performed the opera Siberia by the Italian composer Umberto Giordano staged by Dmitry Bertmann. On 21 June 2013, the Center held the exhibition of works by American artist Andy Warhol titled "Life, Death, and Beauty" supervised by Gianni Mercurio, dated for the 85th anniversary of the artist. The exhibition for the first time in Azerbaijan displayed over one hundred works by the artist, including featurettes by Warhol. There were shown photos of the author, portraits of the world film, music, and fashion stars, as well as other world-renowned works, including Flowers, Camouflage, The Last Supper, Male Hands Praying, and Electric Chair. On 6 August, the artist's birthday, Baku residents and visitors could freely visit the exhibition, which ran until 9 September. On 1 October 2013, the Heydar Aliyev Center held a personal exhibition of the People's Artist of Azerbaijan, vice-president of the Russian Academy of Arts Tahir Salahov, titled "At the turn of the century". The exhibition was dated for the 85th anniversary of the artist. His great contribution to the development of Azerbaijani fine art was highlighted at the exhibition opening. The artistic heritage of Salahov is an integral part of the art of not only Azerbaijan, but also the entire former Soviet Union. He is recognized as one of the founders of the "severe style" in painting. The exhibition featured over 100 works by the artist, created at different times, and his works on the carpets. Among the exhibits were the portraits of Heydar Aliyev, the composer Gara Garayev and Dmitri Shostakovich, the musician Mstislav Rostropovich, the works Aidan, Morning. Absheron, Koroglu, Absheron triptych – Ateshgah, The Caspian today, Maiden Tower, and other well-known works of the people's artist. The exhibition ran until 8 November 2013. In 2017, the center also opened its doors to the Contemporary Turkish Art Exhibition, a collection of art pieces by various Turkish artists. On 27 May 2019, the Heydar Aliyev Center hosted the "Masterpieces of History" exhibition, which included ancient artifacts from Georgia and Azerbaijan. The majority of artifacts belong to Gajar epoch and include ceramic and metal works, canvases, miniatures and belongings of Fatali Khan, including his portrait. The exhibition also featured photographic collection by Dmitri Yermakov, a participant of the Russian-Ottoman War of 1877-1878. On 29 November 2018, the Almost Alive exhibition was held at the Heydar Aliyev Center. The exhibition consisted of deformed figures of extraordinary dimensions, monochrome statues, and pieces representing various body parts. The exhibition featured works created by Daniel Firman, Duane Hanson, Tony Matelli, Mel Ramos, Mathilde ter Heijne, Robert Graham, Allen Jones, Zharko Basheski, George Segal and other artists. On 22 May 2019, Zurab Tsereteli opened an exhibition at the Heydar Aliyev Center. The exhibition was dedicated to Zurab Tsereteli's 85th anniversary. Thirty paintings and statues brought from Moscow, Tbilisi and London were displayed at the exhibition. On 26 November 2018, Strauss Festival Orchestra Vienna held a concert at the Heydar Aliyev Center. The orchestra had also appeared with concerts at the Heydar Aliyev Center back in 2014 and 2016. Jaggi Vasudev, also known as Sadguru, gave a lecture in the Heydar Aliyev Center on 10 November 2018. The subject constitutes a comprehensive system derived from centuries-old yoga studies aiming at profound and sustainable personal transformation. The Mini Azerbaijan exhibition on the second floor features models of 24 historical and architectural buildings. Visitors can also learn about the history and architecture of buildings exhibited in both Azerbaijani and English. Among exhibited buildings are those dated to the Middle Ages (Maiden Tower, Momine Khatun Mausoleum), 19th century (Baku Bazaar, Azerbaijan State Philharmonic Hall, Ismailiyya Palace), USSR era (Government House, Green Theatre), 21st century (Baku Crystal Hall, Flame Towers) as well as the buildings being constructed (Baku Olympic Stadium, State Oil Fund of the Republic of Azerbaijan). The Heydar Aliyev Center maintains close ties with a number of international agencies, peer structures abroad, museums and exhibition centers. The Center has organized events and exhibitions as a result of joint cooperation with different organization, museums and exhibitions of Austria, Belgium, Great Britain, France, Italy, Russia, Slovenia, Turkey and so on. At the same time, it has conducted a number of projects in Great Britain, Israel, Italy, Hungary, Romania, Russia, Turkey, Japan and others. Center has become a member of various international organizations. The International Association of Exhibitions and Events (IAEE) The Association's major goal is to provide support to the agencies involved in the organization of events and exhibitions through resources and information, and the development of the exhibition industry. The Center enjoys the IAEE membership as of 17 September 2013.[needs update] The International Congress and Convention Association (ICCA) The ICCA is the world s leading association in the field of organizing and accommodating international events with 90 member states at the moment. The Center became the ICCA member as of 10 October 2013.[needs update] The International Association of Convention Centers (AIPC) The Association the Center acceded as of 15 September 2014 unites professional managers of convention centers and exhibitions halls, with more than 50 member states currently represented. The Association of Event Organizers (AEO) The association unites organizations involved in the management, operation and sales of events. Sharing best practices in security and sustainability matters, as well as technical and financial issues, constitutes the major objective of the AEO, with the Heydar Aliyev Center being a member to as of 15 December 2014.[needs update] "Fire Strikes Heydar Aliyev Center In Baku". 20 July 2012. Retrieved 20 July 2017. Joseph, Giovannini. "Heydar Aliyev Center" 17 September 2013. Candea, Stefan (4 April 2013). "Offshore Companies Link Corporate Mogul, Azerbaijan's President". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. "The Heydar Aliyev Center By Zaha Hadid Architects In Baku, Azerbaijan | Yatzer". Yatzer. 15 November 2013. Retrieved 17 January 2018. Zaha Hadid Architects. Heydar Aliyev Centre Archived 5 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine "President of Azerbaijan Took Part in the Opening of the Heydar Aliyev Center (Russian)". Archived from the original on 12 May 2012. Retrieved 11 May 2012. "Heydar Aliyev Center - Baku, Azerbaijan | Zaha Hadid Architects" Inexhibit, 14 October 2016 "Heydar Aliyev Centre by Zaha Hadid Architects." Dezeen Magazine, 11 July 2013. Montgomery, Angus. "Zaha Hadid building is 'best design of 2014'". designweek.co.uk. Retrieved 30 June 2014. Wainwright, Oliver (30 June 2014). "Wave of protest as Zaha Hadid's Baku prizewinner causes controversy". theguarian.com. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "Dame Zaha Hadid awarded the Riba Gold Medal for architecture - BBC News". BBC News. 24 September 2015. Retrieved 24 September 2015. "Celebrating Zaha Hadid". The official opening ceremony of the Crans Montana Forum has been held in Baku Turkish Weekly, Fire Hits Heydar Aliyev Center in Baku Archived 23 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine Fire in Heydar Aliyev Center - video Fire at Heydar Aliyev Center extinguished Emergency Ministry issues statement on fire at Heydar Aliyev Center "3 Turks officially impeached in fire raising in Heydar Aliyev Center in Baku". ABC.AZ. Fineko Informational & Analytic Agency. 24 July 2012. Retrieved 29 November 2015.[permanent dead link] "A criminal investigation into a fire in the Heydar Aliyev Center is passed to court". Contact Online news. Turan News Agency. 16 March 2013. Retrieved 29 November 2015. "Opening of the Heydar Aliyev Centre in Baku, Azerbaijan". Baku Magazine. Condé Nast International. 21 November 2013. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 29 November 2015. The Enduring Love Gala Concert and Siberia Opera to perform for the first time in Baku An exhibition of works by Andy Warhol will held at the Heydar Aliyev Center Tahir Salahov's solo exhibition will be launched at the Heydar Aliyev Center "Contemporary Turkish Art Exhibition opens at Heydar Aliyev Center [PHOTO]". 7 September 2017. "Heydər Əliyev Mərkəzi". heydaraliyevcenter.az. Retrieved 1 July 2019. "Heydər Əliyev Mərkəzi". heydaraliyevcenter.az. Retrieved 1 July 2019. ""Hyperrealistic Sculpture. Almost Alive" exhibition opened at Heydar Aliyev Center". azertag.az. Retrieved 2 August 2019. "Heydər Əliyev Mərkəzi". heydaraliyevcenter.az. Retrieved 1 July 2019. "Exhibition of well-known artist Zurab Tsereteli opens at Heydar Aliyev Center". azertag.az. Retrieved 2 August 2019. "Heydər Əliyev Mərkəzi". heydaraliyevcenter.az. Retrieved 1 July 2019. "Vienna Strauss Festival Orchestra to perform in Baku". AzerNews.az. 10 August 2018. Retrieved 2 August 2019. "Heydər Əliyev Mərkəzi". heydaraliyevcenter.az. Retrieved 1 July 2019. "Worldwide known Sadhguru to lecture at the Heydar Aliyev Center". Trend.Az. 21 September 2018. Retrieved 2 August 2019. "Official web-site of President of Azerbaijan Republic - NEWS » Events". 1news. "No comment. Выставочный зал "Мини-Азербайджан" в Центре Гейдара Алиева – ВИДЕО". 1news.az.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Heydər Əliyev Mərkəzi". Wikimedia Commons has media related to Heydar Aliyev Cultural Center. Official website Photos: Construction Process at Heydar Aliyev Center Heydar Aliyev Center publications at Archidust