Hyperdub is a British, London-based electronic music record label and former webzine, founded by Steve Goodman, a.k.a. Kode9. The label was formed in 2004, and grew out of the UK's early dubstep scene. Artists signed to the label have included Burial, Cooly G, Dean Blunt, DJ Rashad, DVA, Fatima Al Qadiri, Ikonika, Jessy Lanza, Klein, Laurel Halo and Zomby. RBMA called Hyperdub "one of the UK's most celebrated underground labels." Kode9 initially founded Hyperdub as a webzine in 1999, which blended a focus on forward-thinking UK dance music with theoretical writing. The label was founded in 2004; its first release was "Sine of the Dub", a collaboration between Kode9 and The Spaceape. Subsequent releases established the label as an influential label within the UK's early dubstep scene, including Burial's self-titled debut album, which The Wire magazine named their number one album of 2006. The label would then become associated with styles such as UK funky and Chicago footwork through its signing of artists like Cooly G and DJ Rashad. More recently, the label has signed diverse artists working across electronic music, including Laurel Halo, Fatima Al Qadiri, Jessy Lanza, and Klein. 2000F & J Kamata Angel-Ho [pt] Black Chow The Bug (Kevin Martin) Babyfather (a.k.a. Dean Blunt, DJ Escrow and co.) Burial Cooly G Darkstar Dean Blunt D.O.K DJ Hank DJ Rashad DJ Spinn DJ Taye DJ Tre Endgame doon kanda Fhloston Paradigm Fatima Al Qadiri Flowdan Foodman Funkystepz Heavee Hype Williams (a.k.a. Dean Blunt, Inga Copeland and co.) Ikonika Ill Blu Inga Copeland Jessy Lanza Joker Kode9 King Midas Sound (Kevin Martin) Klein Kyle Hall Laurel Halo LD Lee Gamble Lila Tirando a Violeta Lily Baxter Loraine James L.V. Mana Mark Pritchard Martyn Morgan Zarate Nazar Okzharp and Manthe Ribane Ossie Pressure Proc Fiskal Quarta330 Samiyam Scratcha DVA Spaceape Terror Danjah Walton Zomby List of record labels "Hyperdub Biography - The IMO Records Blog". Archive.is. Archived from the original on 3 August 2007. Retrieved 2 May 2006. "Under the Covers: The Art of Hyperdub". Red Bull Music Academy. Retrieved 14 June 2010. Rewind 2006, The Wire no. 275, January 2007. Bacher, Hannah. "Hyperdub: An Oral History". Red Bull Music Academy. Retrieved 4 October 2008.[dead link] Hyperdub official website Hyperdub discography at Discogs