Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast (Ukrainian: Іва́но-Франкі́вська о́бласть, romanized: Ivano-Frankivska oblast), also referred to as Ivano-Frankivshchyna (Ukrainian: Іва́но-Франкі́вщина), is an oblast (region) in western Ukraine. Its administrative center is the city of Ivano-Frankivsk. It has a population of 1,351,822 (2022 estimate). The area, also known as Prykarpattia, was part of the historical region of Galicia, where the Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia flourished. After World War I, the area became part of the Second Polish Republic and was administered as part of Stanisławów Voivodeship until the invasion of Poland. The area was annexed by the Soviet Union and was known as Stanislav Oblast until 1962, when its administrative center was renamed after the Ukrainian writer Ivan Franko. Kolomyia was a historical center of the oblast and remains a major cultural center of Pokuttia, the traditional name for the southern part of the oblast. On November 9, 1962, a decree was issued by the Presidium of the Verkhovna Rada of the UkrSSR, according to which: "Taking into account the wishes of the labor collectives of the city and region, the Presidium of the Verkhovna Rada of the USSR decided to rename the city of Stanislav (Stanislaviv) to Ivano-Frankivsk, and the Stanislav Oblast to Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast." The renaming was timed to the 300th anniversary of the city's founding and in honor of the outstanding Ukrainian writer Ivan Franko. As with the rest of Ukraine's oblasts Ivano-Frankivsk may also be known by its matronymical name Ivano-Frankivshchyna (Ukrainian: Івано-Франківщина). However, that name did not receive general public acceptance and commonly Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast is almost always called Prykarpattia (en. Prekarpathians) – a historic name for the same region. (Geographically the historic region covers a much larger portion of Ukraine than just the Ivano-Frankivsk region.) Formerly as Stanislavshchyna or Stanyslavivshchyna – Ukrainian: Станіславщина, Станиславівщина. Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast borders Lviv Oblast to its north and west, Zakarpattia Oblast to its south-west, has a 50-km long state border with Romania (Maramureș County) to its immediate south, and it borders Chernivtsi Oblast to the south-east and Ternopil Oblast to the east. It is situated partly in the Eastern European Plain and partly Carpathian Foothills. The oblast may be divided into three regions: mountainous, pre-mountainous, and plains. The climate is mildly-continental and damp with cool summers and mild winters. The average monthly temperature in June is 18 °C (64 °F) with 12 to 16 °C (54 to 61 °F) in the mountains. The average monthly temperature in January is −4 °C (25 °F) with −6 °C (21 °F) in the mountains. Average precipitation varies annually around 650 mm (25.6 in) with 1,550 mm (61 in) in the mountains. The region is situated between two main regional tectonic plates: Carpathian fold belt and Volhynia-Podillya plate. The most prominent features of the first one are the Carpathian Mountains, while the second one - Dniester river. The Carpathian Mountains contribute tremendously to the change in relief of Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast and their elevation rises from north-east to south-west stretching along the oblast's south-western border. The elevation of the oblast varies from 230 m (755 ft) to 2,061 m (6,762 ft) above sea level. The mountains occupy almost one half of the whole Oblast and consist of two main mountain ranges: the Gorgany (highest peak – Mt. Syvulia Major (1,836 m / 6024 ft)) and the Chornohora range (highest peak – Mt. Hoverla (2,061 m / 6,762 ft). The rest of Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast is located within the Dniester river and Prut river valleys. The plains of the oblast are part of the Carpathian Foothills and Opillia Upland (part of Podillia Upland) which are cut through by Dniester. The upland has a temperate-climate habitat mixed with grassland and woodland – also known as the forest steppe. The relief of the region consists mostly of rolling hills of 230-400 m (755-1312 ft) over the sea level. Near river valleys are common canyons and ravines. A particular feature of the southern region of the Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast is Stanislav Canyon, in the so-called Kherson Mountains, a deep cut in the local topography where episodic water flowing into the Baltic has steeply eroded a canyon formation. The Dniester flows mainly through the Halych Raion and along the administrative border between Ivano-Frankivsk and Ternopil Oblasts. The territory of the region within immediate proximity to the river is traditionally known as Opillia. Opillia, however, stretches far beyond the oblast and only covers two of its raions: Halych Raion and Rohatyn Raion, both located in the north. Relief in the area consists of rolling hills uplands.[citation needed] The Carpathian foothills consist mostly of low denudation accumulative uplands, while the right bank of Dniester along the border with the Ternopil Oblast depicts karst type relief of Pokuttia Upland. Because of it near that area along Dniester relief shows forms of canyon. Pokuttia Upland between Bystrytsia of Nadvirna and Prut River (Prut-Bystrytsia Upland) serves as drainage divide within the oblast between Dniester and Prut. Carpathian foothills have two depressions: one is at the confluence of Bystrytsia of Solotvyn, Bystrytsia of Nadvirna, Vorona and Bystrytsia rivers, called Bystrytsia Depression, and another is around the city of Kalush, called Kalush Depression. Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast has a plethora of rivers, waterfalls, mountainous brooks, and smaller ponds, but there is almost no other type of bodies of water such as lakes and water reservoirs. Most of rivers either flow into Dniester or Prut River (tributary of Danube). The total water drainage area of the region is 13,900 km2 (5,400 sq mi). Segments of Dniester and Cheremosh River are used as administrative borders with Ternopil and Chernivtsi oblasts respectfully. The water drainage divide between Dniester and Prut cuts the region through middle of following districts: Nadvirna Raion, Kolomyia Raion, Tlumach Raion, and Horodenka Raion. The region is a home to some 456 preserved areas (on June 1, 2006) of some 195,633 ha (483,420 acres), 30 out of which are of all-national importance with an area of 108,742 ha (268,710 acres) and the rest of a local importance. In the Ivano-Frankivsk Region is located a strict nature reserve Gorgany that was created in 1996. There are five national parks in the region. There are numerous natural monuments of feature and habitat management areas (zakaznyks). The government in the region is headed by the chairman of the regional state administration (for simplicity sake - governor) appointed by the President of Ukraine. The governor appoints his deputies forming his regional governing cabinet to supervise the government policies in the region. Aside of the state administration the region has its own council that is headed by its chairman. The composition of the council depends on the popular vote in the region, while the chairman is elected within the elected council. Regional State Administration Regional State Administration consists of the chairman and his deputies (5) supported by the "aparat" of the administration. Within the administration are numerous departments, each of them headed by a chief of department. The Ivano-Frankivsk Region State Administration has 17 departments and other government institutions such as the Children Service, regional state archives, and others. Office of State Administration Chief Department of Economy Chief Financial Department Chief Department industry and infrastructure development Chief Department of tourism, Euro-integration, foreign relations, and investments Chief Department of legal and interior policies Chief Department of family, youth, and sports Chief Department of labor and social security Department of culture Chief Department of agro-industrial development Chief Department of regional development and construction Department of communal management Department of urban development and architecture Chief Department of Education and Science Chief Department of Health Security Department of Extraordinary Situation and Protection of Population from Consequences of the Chornobyl Catastrophe Media Department Department of resources and management support Children Service Inspection of the State Technical Supervision Inspection of quality and formation of resources of agricultural products State Archives of the Region Ivano-Frankivsk regional center for preparation and improving the qualification of workers of bodies of state power, bodies of local self-governing, state enterprises, institutions, and organizations Regional council Chairman: Oleksandr Sych (Svoboda) Since July 2020, Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast is administratively subdivided into six districts (raions). The Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast was administratively subdivided into 14 districts (raions) as well as 6 cities (municipalities) which represented a separate raion and in direct subordination to the regional government, among which are Bolekhiv, Kalush, Kolomyia, Yaremche, and the administrative center of the region, Ivano-Frankivsk. Burshtyn became the 6th city of regional importance in 2014. The formation of the region was established in 1921 in the Second Polish Republic and was in majority preserved during the Soviet times. Most of the districts (former powiats) were reestablished as well in 1960s. The major industrial and cultural centers of the region were given a wider form of autonomy and assigned as the cities of regional subordination. The oblast has 15 cities which are (alphabetical order): Bolekhiv, Burshtyn, Dolyna, Halych, Horodenka, Ivano-Frankivsk, Kalush, Kolomyia, Kosiv, Nadvirna, Rohatyn, Sniatyn, Tlumach, Tysmenytsia, and Yaremche. Five of those cities are of regional importance and the other ten are of district importance. All cities have its own council and mayor that represent a local form of self-government allowed by the laws on local administration and the Constitution of Ukraine. City municipalities of the region are independent from any district administration. Within the region there are 24 urbanized settlements (towns) which are a special settlement classification inherited from the Soviet municipal organization. Three of those towns serve as administrative centers of their respective districts. Each town has its own council that along with surrounding village councils compose a district administration which has its own executive branch, District State Administration, appointed by the President of Ukraine. Towns do not have a mayoral office and their head of the council serves as the main representative of the whole settlement. All other settlements in the region are considered rural and accounted for some 765 localities including villages and 20 selyshches (smaller villages) which are administered by 477 village councils. Some village municipalities consist of several villages, while others are a single-village municipality. There are several villages that are part of city municipalities such as Ivano-Frankivsk, Bolekhiv, and Yaremcha, while all others are spread out across the districts of the region. When on November 27, 1939, the Soviet regime was established in Stanisławów Voivodeship, the Polish administrative division of it was kept almost the same until January 17, 1940. Only two powiats Stryj and Żydaczów were transferred away. On December 4, 1939, the voivodeship was officially renamed into Stanislav Oblast. In 1940 the oblast was redivided into 37 raions and two municipalities (cities of oblast subordination). The administrative centers of the former raions were following settlements: Bohorodchany (town), Bolekhiv (city), Bilshivtsi (town), Bukachivtsi (village), Burshtyn (town), Voinylov (village), Vyhoda (village), Halych (town), Hvizdets (town), Horodenka (town), Delyatyn (town), Dolyna (city), Zhabie (village), Zhovten (town), Zabolotiv (town), Kalush (city), Kolomyia (city), Korshiv (village), Kosiv (city), Kuty (town), Lanchyn (town), Lysets (town), Nadvirna (city), Novytsya (village), Obertyn (town), Otynya (town), Pechenizhyn (town), Rohatyn (city), Rozhnyativ (town), Snyatyn (city), Solotvyn (town), Stanislav (city), Tlumach (city), Tysmenytsya (town), Chernelytsya (town), Yabluniv (town), Yaremcha (village). Two municipalities were cities of Stanislav and Kolomyia. On November 11, 1940, Delyatyn Raion was liquidated. On November 16, 1940, Novytsya Raion was re-administrated under town of Perehinske. During the World War II the region was occupied by the Nazi Germany (see Operation Barbarossa). Along with Lviv, Drohobych and Tarnopil oblasts, it was reorganized on August 1, 1941, into Distrikt Galizien centered in Lemberg and annexed to the General Government. The area of the former Stanislav Oblast was divided into three kreis (counties): Kalusz, Stanislau, and Kolomea. On July 27, 1944, the region was liberated from the Nazi Germany by the Soviet Army (see Lvov–Sandomierz Offensive). The administrative division of Stanislav Oblast was reinstated and confirmed on January 1, 1947, with the same 36 raions and two municipalities as their existed before the war. Several settlements, however, had their status elevated. The status of a town obtained Bukachivtsi, Vyhoda, and Yaremcha, while Halych and Horodenka became recognized as cities. The next major changes in the region took place in the late 1950s. In 1957 five raions were liquidated: Vyhoda, Zhovten, Kuty, Pechenizhyn, and Chernelytsia. Then another five were liquidated in 1959: Bukachivtsi, Korshiv, Perehinske, Solotvyn, and Stanislav. On December 30, 1962, within the oblast was created the Verkhovyna Industrial Raion, centered in a town of Verkhovyna. On October 28, 1963, another major change took place when raions of the oblast were re-administered into the six rural raions, one – industrial, and two municipalities. There were the following administrative centers: Bohorodchany, Halych, Horodenka, Kalush, Kolomyia, Kosiv, Dolyna (municipalities – Ivano-Frankivsk (new name) and Kolomyia). On January 4, 1965, Dolyna Industrial Raion Raion was redesigned into the regular raion, while five other previous raions were recreated: Nadvirna, Rohatyn, Rozhniativ, Sniatyn, and Tlumach. On December 8, 1966, there were created Verkhovyna and Ivano-Frankivsk raions. That was the last major re-administration of the oblast. On March 20, 1972, in the city of Kalush was created a municipality and it became a city of oblast subordination. On December 30, 1977, the same thing happened to Yaremcha status of which was elevated as well. On March 28, 1982, the Ivano-Frankivsk Raion was re-administrated under the Tysmenytsya Raion. On October 21, 1993, the city of Bolekhiv became of an oblast subordination with its own municipality. On December 14, 2006, Yaremcha was renamed into Yaremche. According to the Ukrainian Census of 2001 most of the population consider themselves Ukrainians with a small Russian diaspora mostly located within the city of Ivano-Frankivsk. The Russian language is the dominant foreign language in the region and well understood by everyone. Among other common foreign languages are Polish, English, and German languages. The population in the region as the rest of the country was on substantial decline. The dominant religion in Ivano-Frankvisk Oblast is Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, professed by 57% of the population. Another 35% is Eastern Orthodox and 6% are unaffiliated generic Christians. Adherents of Roman Catholic Church and Protestantism make up 1% of the population respectively. 0-14 years: 16.7% (male 118,518/female 112,130) 15-64 years: 69.5% (male 468,589/female 489,596) 65 years and over: 13.8% (male 63,324/female 126,635) (2013 official) total: 37.3 years male: 34.7 years female: 40.0 years (2013 official) Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast is home of numerous cultural festivals. There are numerous natural and architectural benchmarks that are scattered throughout the region. One of the famous festivals is the Ukrainian International festival of ethnic music and land art "Sheshory" that usually takes place in the picturesque Hutsul village of the Kosiv Raion Sheshory since 2003. From 2007, however the festival has spread throughout the country taking place in Podolia, Kyiv Oblast, and other places. In August 2010 the village of Spas in the Kolomyia Raion hosted a culinary event Smachny Spas in association with "Sheshory", while in July of the same year another eco-cultural event Trypilske kolo in the Rzhyschiv city of Kyiv region. The city of Ivano-Frankivsk hosts several other festivals such as the All-Ukrainian festival of art collectives "Carpathian Spring" that takes place every May. Every two year the festival of modern art "Impreza" takes place every other year. Every odd year the city hosts the festival national-patriotic music and poetry "Freedom". Since May 2001 every year the city of Ivano-Frankivsk is the capital of the European blacksmith movement hosting the "Festival of blacksmith" and the art exhibition "Ornamental Forging" that takes place at the Mickewicz Square and neighboring Andrii Sheptytsky Square in city's old town. On the territory of Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast are located numerous monuments of architectural heritage. On February 8, 1994, near the city of Halych was established the National preserve of Ancient Halych. Among other important sites in the region is the Church of the Holy Spirit located in the city of Rohatyn as well as the Maniava Skete. Near the village of Maniava in Ivano-Frankivsk Raion. The oblast also accounts for some number of various wooden churches of Boykos and Hutsuls traditional architecture. In the Kalush Raion (western part of the region) visitors can find the Carpathian Train that still uses a narrow gauge railway system. Train is used for its direct purpose transporting wood as well as for a tourist recreation. The biggest benchmark of the region is the Hoverla mountain, the tallest in the nation. However, due to increased touristic activities in the post-Soviet times the mountain is a subject to a high degree of pollution. No less interesting destination serve the Dovbush rocks that are located near the city of Bolekhiv in mountains. That location was a base of an anti-Polish Peasant movement. Near the Maniava Skete is located the highest waterfall in Ukraine, the Maniava waterfall (20 m). In the same Bohorodchany Raion visitors may find the local mud volcano located near the village of Starunia. It was noticed for the first time in 1977 after an earthquake that took place in Romania. Bukovel ski resort, centralized around the village of Polianytsia, on the ridge-lines of the Carpathian Mountain range at an elevation of 900 m (3,000 ft) represents a major all seasons tourist destination in the region. It is one of the most popular ski resorts in Eastern Europe and in 2012 was named the fastest growing ski resort in the world. Bukovel consists of 16 ski lifts with approximately 50 kilometers of pistes. As well as skiing visitors to the resort can enjoy 7 world class hotels, chalets with swimming pools and saunas, as well as numerous other recreational activities ranging from family friendly leisurely activities to extreme sports. During the warmer months the resort boasts cross-country and downhill mountain biking trails. Over 6,000 people visit the resort every year. Recently,[when?] a monument of cultural heritage was erected in the city of Kolomyya in Pokuttya. The Pysanka Museum was built in 2000 and is the only museum dedicated to pyanskas in the world. Another interesting historical site is the cavern complex in the Dovbush Rock. The site is dedicated to the legendary freedom fighter Oleksa Dovbush who in legend fights against the Polish szlachta. The rock complex is located about 7 miles (11 km) south west from Bolekhiv near village of Bubnysche. The Church of the Holy Spirit, built in 1598, is located in the north of the Oblast in the small city of Rohatyn. In 1979 Sofia Rotaru performed the song "Krai" ([Native] Land) about Prykarpattia. In the song Rotaru calls Prykarpattia the land of the Cheremosh and Prut rivers. Through Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast runs one European route E50 which travels through the city of Rohatyn in the north. It coincides with the Ukrainian International highway M12 which is the only highway of that classification in the region. The highway travels from Zhydachiv in Lviv Oblast and after passing Rohatyn travels towards Berezhany in Ternopil Oblast. Besides that highway, through the region run three highways of national importance. H09 traveling from Lviv the route enters the region from the north near Rohatyn and after passesing the cities of Ivano-Frankivsk and Yaremcha continues on towards Rakhiv going over the Carpathian ridge. H10 starts in Stryi, passes through Ivano-Frankivsk, Kolomyia and Sniatyn, and continues on towards Chernivtsi. H18 starts from the center of Ivano-Frnkivsk and through Tysmenytsia (Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast) and Monastyryska (Ternopil Oblast), terminating in Ternopil. There is also small network of minor P-highways. P20 runs from Tyaziv (north of Ivano-Frankivsk) through Tlumach and Horodenka to Sniatyn. P21 runs from Dolyna over the Carpathian to Khust (Zakarpattia Oblast). P24 runs from Tatariv (Yaremche municipality) to Verkhovyna, Kosiv, Kolomyia, Hvizdets, Horodenka, and Ternopil Oblast. P38 runs from Bohorodchany to the village of Stara Huta. P62 runs from Verkhniy Yaseniv (Verkhovyna Raion) to Usteriky, then by the Prut valley and the Chernivtsi Oblast border travels to Kuty where it turns into Chernivtsi Oblast towards Storozhynets. T-network (09) includes: T0901 - Kalush, Yasen, Kuzmynets T0902 - Borshniv-Osada, Rozhniativ, Kosmach, Nadvirna T0903 - Halych, Medukha, Zastavche, Pidhaitsi T0904 - Ozeryany, Obertyn, Hvizdets, Zabolotiv, Rozhniv, Kuty T0905 - Delyatyn, Lanchyn, Kolomyia T0906 - Ivano-Frankivsk, Cherniiv, Nadvirna, Bystrytsia T0909 - Kosiv, Rozhniv, Sniatyn T0910 - Kalush, Burshtyn T0911 - Bolekhiv, Tysiv, Kozakivka T0915 - Pistyn, Mykytyntsi, Verkhniy Verbizh T1417 - (Lviv Oblast) Kurovychi, Peremyshlyany, Rohatyn T1419 - (Lviv Oblast) Kalush, Zhuravno, Zhydachiv, Rozdil, Mykolaiv T2601 - (Chernivtsi Oblast) / (Romanian border) (route 209G) Seliatyn, Parkulyna, Dykhtynets, Marynychi, Pidzakharychi, Kuty, Sloboda Banyliv, Chortoryia, Hlynytsia, Chernivtsi T2621 - (Chernivtsi Oblast) Horodenka, Khreshchatyk T2648 - (Chernivtsi Oblast) Vyzhnytsia, Kuty, Pidzakharychi Castles and fortresses Pniv Castle Chernylitsky Castle Rakovet Castle Galician castle Pniv Castle Galician castle Manyava waterfall Bukhtivetsky Waterfall Sukil Waterfalls Zamlatsky waterfall Dzvinka Waterfall Pidgurkalo Waterfall Ternoshorsky Huk Skruntar Waterfall Sukil Falls (Javorivska Niagara) Bukhtivetsko-Bystrytskyi Gurkalo Ilemsk Polyanytsky waterfall Cossack Tears (waterfall) The highest of the Mysterious waterfalls Gurkalo Lypivsky Waterfall Yavorivsky Huk Tsiva Upper hiccups One of Babi's waterfalls Lyubizhnyansky Huk is small Shepitsky Huk small Under Chimney upper Under Komin Maly Kuzmynets Kazarka waterfall Nova Kazarka waterfall Upper Bukhtivetskyi waterfall July Waterfall on the Zelenitsa River Kryvopilskyi Nizhny Volyots Bagrovetsky Waterfall Lower Roztoka Waterfall Rakovetsky waterfall Velikorozhynsky Huk Dovbush Waterfall Bell Waterfall Kubeivsky Huk Bogdan waterfall Hutsul plays trembita trumpet Hutsuls in traditional dress in wedding ceremony in Vorokhta People born in Prykarpattya include: Historical figures Yaroslav Osmomysl, prince of Halych Roxelana, chief consort of Ottoman sultan Suleiman the Magnificent Semen Vysochan [uk], a leader of the Khmelnytsky Uprising beginning in 1648 Potocki family, Polish high nobles (magnates) Józef Potocki, Great Hetman of the Crown Oleksa Dovbush, 18th century folk hero Stepan Bandera, Ukrainian independence activist Dmytro Vitovsky, Austro-Hungarian and later Ukrainian separatist politician and military leader Writers Mariyka Pidhiryanka Vasyl Stefanyk Les Martovych [uk] Ivan Vahylevych Marko Cheremshyna Manès Sperber Artists Sviatoslav Hordynsky [uk], founder of the Association of Independent Ukrainian Artists Mariia Stefiuk, opera singer Mika Newton, singer Dmytro Pavlychko, poet Poland's Stanisławów Voivodeship (1921–1939) List of Canadian place names of Ukrainian origin – Ukrainian immigrants to Canada brought place names from this oblast to Saskatchewan and Alberta; a few one-room schools had names of villages from this region. Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast local election, 2006 List of heads of government in Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast and Stanislawow Voivodeship Notes Syvak, Nina; Ponomarenko, Valerii; Khodzinska, Olha; Lakeichuk, Iryna (2011). Veklych, Lesia (ed.). Toponymic Guidelines for Map and Other Editors for International Use (PDF). scientific consultant Iryna Rudenko; reviewed by Nataliia Kizilowa; translated by Olha Khodzinska. Kyiv: DerzhHeoKadastr and Kartographia. p. 20. ISBN 978-966-475-839-7. Retrieved 2020-10-06. {{cite book}}: |website= ignored (help) Zelenskyy, Volodymyr (8 July 2021). "Зеленський замінив очільника Івано-Франківської ОДА" [Zelensky replaces the head of the Ivano-Frankivsk Regional State Administration] (in Ukrainian). Lb.ua [uk]. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. "Валовии регіональнии продукт". "Stanislav Canyon (Kherson Mountains)". find-way.com.ua. Retrieved 22 March 2022. "Tourism in the Ivano-Frankivsk Region (government website)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-10-07. Retrieved 2011-03-15. "Чисельність наявного населення України (Actual population of Ukraine) Archived April 6, 2022, at the Wayback Machine" (PDF) (in Ukrainian). State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Retrieved 11 July 2021. Про утворення промислових районів і віднесення деяких міст республіки до категорії міст обласного підпорядкування "Main Administration of Statistics in Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast" (in Ukrainian). Main Administration of Statistics in Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast. Archived from the original on March 15, 2012. Retrieved July 9, 2013. "Religious preferences of the population of Ukraine". Sociology poll by Razumkov Centre, SOCIS, Rating and KIIS about the religious situation in Ukraine (2015) Shehsory festival Archived 2011-08-09 at the Wayback Machine (in Ukrainian) Офіційний сайт заповідника Ancient Halych Archived 2010-01-16 at the Wayback Machine Krai by Rotaru on YouTube Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast official site Oblast council official site Archived 2013-07-19 at archive.today (in Ukrainian) "JewishGalicia.net" – Jewish history in the Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast Handbook on history of Communist Party and Soviet Union History of the region Передати Виноградську сільраду Тлумацького району до складу Коломийського району. History of administrative territorial division of the region since 18th century Archived 2012-03-10 at the Wayback Machine 48°39′30″N 24°30′18″E﻿ / ﻿48.65833°N 24.50500°E﻿ / 48.65833; 24.50500