Kyiv (also spelled Kiev) is the capital and most populous city of Ukraine. It is in north-central Ukraine along the Dnieper River. As of 1 January 2022, its population was 2,952,301, making Kyiv the seventh-most populous city in Europe. Kyiv is an important industrial, scientific, educational, and cultural center in Eastern Europe. It is home to many high-tech industries, higher education institutions, and historical landmarks. The city has an extensive system of public transport and infrastructure, including the Kyiv Metro. The city's name is said to derive from the name of Kyi, one of its four legendary founders. During its history, Kyiv, one of the oldest cities in Eastern Europe, passed through several stages of prominence and obscurity. The city probably existed as a commercial center as early as the 5th century. A Slavic settlement on the great trade route between Scandinavia and Constantinople, Kyiv was a tributary of the Khazars, until its capture by the Varangians (Vikings) in the mid-9th century. Under Varangian rule, the city became a capital of Kievan Rus', the first East Slavic state. Completely destroyed during the Mongol invasions in 1240, the city lost most of its influence for the centuries to come. Coming under Lithuania, then Poland and then Russia, the city would grow from a frontier market into an important centre of Orthodox learning in the sixteenth century, and later of industry, commerce, and administration by the ninenteenth. The city prospered again during the Russian Empire's Industrial Revolution in the late 19th century. In 1918, when the Ukrainian People's Republic declared independence from the Russian Republic after the October Revolution there, Kyiv became its capital. From the end of the Ukrainian-Soviet and Polish-Soviet wars in 1921, Kyiv was a city of the Ukrainian SSR, and made its capital in 1934. The city suffered significant destruction during World War II but quickly recovered in the postwar years, remaining the Soviet Union's third-largest city. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union and Ukrainian independence in 1991, Kyiv remained Ukraine's capital and experienced a steady influx of ethnic Ukrainian migrants from other regions of the country. During the country's transformation to a market economy and electoral democracy, Kyiv has continued to be Ukraine's largest and wealthiest city. Its armament-dependent industrial output fell after the Soviet collapse, adversely affecting science and technology, but new sectors of the economy such as services and finance facilitated Kyiv's growth in salaries and investment, as well as providing continuous funding for the development of housing and urban infrastructure. Kyiv emerged as the most pro-Western region of Ukraine; parties advocating tighter integration with the European Union dominate during elections. English: Kyiv (/ˈkiːjɪv/ KEE-yiv, /kiːv/ KEEV) or Kiev (/ˈkiːɛv/ KEE-ev) Ukrainian: Київ, romanized: Kyiv, pronounced [ˈkɪjiu̯] [citation needed] Russian: Киев (pre-1918 Кіевъ), romanized: Kiev, pronounced [ˈkʲi(j)ɪf] The traditional etymology, stemming from the Primary Chronicle, is that the name is a derivation of Kyi (Ukrainian: Кий, Russian: Кий (pre-1918 Кій)), the legendary eponymous founder of the city. According to Oleg Trubachyov's etymological dictionary from the Old East Slavic name *Kyjevŭ gordŭ (literally, "Kyi's castle", "Kyi's gord"), from Proto-Slavic *kyjevъ, This etymology has been questioned, for instance by Mykhailo Hrushevsky who called it an "etymological myth", and meant that the names of the legendary founders are in turn based on place names. According to the Canadian Ukrainian linguist Jaroslav Rudnyckyj, the name can be connected to the Proto-Slavic root *kyjь, but should be interpreted as meaning 'stick, pole' as in its modern Ukrainian equivalent Кий. The name should in that case be interpreted as 'palisaded settlement'. Kyiv is the romanized official Ukrainian name for the city, and it is used for legislative and official acts. Kiev is the traditional English name for the city, but because of its historical derivation from the Russian name, Kiev lost favor with many Western media outlets after the outbreak of the Russo-Ukrainian War in 2014 in conjunction with the KyivNotKiev campaign launched by Ukraine to change the way that international media were spelling the city's name. The first known humans in the region of Kyiv lived there in the late paleolithic period (Stone Age). The population around Kyiv during the Bronze Age formed part of the so-called Trypillian culture, as evidenced by artifacts from that culture found in the area. During the early Iron Age certain tribes settled around Kyiv that practiced land cultivation, husbandry and trading with the Scythians and ancient states of the northern Black Sea coast. Findings of Roman coins of the 2nd to the 4th centuries suggest trade relations with the eastern provinces of the Roman Empire. Notable archaeologists of the area around Kyiv include Vikentiy Khvoyka. Scholars continue to debate when the city was founded: The traditional founding date is 482 CE, so the city celebrated its 1,500th anniversary in 1982. Archaeological data indicates a founding in the sixth or seventh centuries, with some researchers dating the founding as late as the late 9th century. There are several legendary accounts of the origin of the city. One tells of members of a Slavic tribe (Eastern Polans), brothers Kyi (the eldest, after whom the city was named), Shchek, Khoryv, and their sister Lybid, who founded the city (See the Primary Chronicle). Another legend states that Saint Andrew passed through the area in the 1st century. Where the city is now he erected a cross, where a church later was built. Since the Middle Ages an image of Saint Michael has represented the city as well as the duchy. There is little historical evidence pertaining to the period when the city was founded. Scattered Slavic settlements existed in the area from the 6th century, but it is unclear whether any of them later developed into the city. On the Ptolemy world map there are several settlements indicated along the mid-stream of Borysthenes, among which is Azagarium, which some historians believe to be the predecessor to Kyiv. However, according to the 1773 Dictionary of Ancient Geography of Alexander Macbean, that settlement corresponds to the modern city of Chernobyl. Just south of Azagarium, there is another settlement, Amadoca, believed to be the capital of the Amadoci people living in an area between the marshes of Amadoca in the west and the Amadoca mountains in the east. Another name for Kyiv mentioned in history, the origin of which is not completely clear, is Sambat, which apparently has something to do with the Khazar Empire. The Primary Chronicle says the residents of Kyiv told Askold "there were three brothers Kyi, Shchek, and Khoriv. They founded this town and died, and now we are staying and paying taxes to their relatives the Khazars". In De Administrando Imperio, Constantine Porphyrogenitus mentions a caravan of small cargo boats which assembled annually, and writes, "They come down the river Dnieper and assemble at the strong-point of Kyiv (Kioava), also called Sambatas". At least three Arabic-speaking 10th century geographers who traveled the area mention the city of Zānbat as the chief city of the Russes. Among them are ibn Rustah, Abu Sa'id Gardezi, and an author of the Hudud al-'Alam. The texts of those authors were discovered by Russian orientalist Alexander Tumansky. The etymology of Sambat has been argued by many historians, including Grigoriy Ilyinsky, Nikolay Karamzin, Jan Potocki, Nikolay Lambin, Joachim Lelewel, and Guðbrandur Vigfússon. The Primary Chronicle states that at some point during the late 9th or early 10th century Askold and Dir, who may have been of Viking or Varangian descent, ruled in Kyiv. They were murdered by Oleg of Novgorod in 882, but some historians, such as Omeljan Pritsak and Constantine Zuckerman, dispute that, arguing that Khazar rule continued as late as the 920s, leaving historical documents such as the Kievan Letter and Schechter Letter. Other historians suggest that Magyar tribes ruled the city between 840 and 878, before migrating with some Khazar tribes to the Carpathian Basin. The Primary Chronicle mentions Hungarians passing near Kyiv. Askold's Grave was previously known as "Uhorske urochyshche" (Hungarian place). According to the aforementioned scholars the building of the fortress of Kyiv was finished in 840 under the leadership of Keő (Keve), Csák, and Geréb, three brothers, possibly members of the Tarján tribe. The three names appear in the Kyiv Chronicle as Kyi, Shchek, and Khoryv and may be not of Slavic origin, as Russian historians have always struggled to account for their meanings and origins. According to Hungarian historian Viktor Padányi, their names were inserted into the Kyiv Chronicle in the 12th century, and they were identified as old-Russian mythological heroes. The city of Kyiv stood on the trade route between the Varangians and the Greeks. In 968 the nomadic Pechenegs attacked and then besieged the city. By 1000 CE the city had a population of 45,000. In March 1169, Grand Prince Andrey Bogolyubsky of Vladimir-Suzdal sacked Kyiv, leaving the old town and the prince's hall in ruins. He took many pieces of religious artwork - including the Theotokos of Vladimir icon - from Vyshhorod. In 1203, Prince Rurik Rostislavich and his Kipchak allies captured and burned Kyiv. In the 1230s, the city was besieged and ravaged several times by different Rus princes. The city had not recovered from these attacks when, in 1240, the Mongol invasion of Rus', led by Batu Khan, completed the destruction of Kyiv. These events had a profound effect on the future of the city and on the East Slavic civilization. Before Bogolyubsky's pillaging, Kyiv had had a reputation as one of the largest cities in the world, with a population exceeding 100,000 at the beginning of the 12th century. In the early 1320s, a Lithuanian army led by Grand Duke Gediminas defeated a Slavic army led by Stanislav of Kyiv at the Battle on the Irpen' River and conquered the city. The Tatars, who also claimed Kyiv, retaliated in 1324–1325, so while Kyiv was ruled by a Lithuanian prince, it had to pay tribute to the Golden Horde. Finally, as a result of the Battle of Blue Waters in 1362, Algirdas, Grand Duke of Lithuania, incorporated Kyiv and surrounding areas into the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. In 1482, Crimean Tatars sacked and burned much of Kyiv. At the time of the Lithuanian rule, the core of the city was located in Podil and there was a Lithuanian Kyiv Castle [uk] with 18 towers on the Zamkova Hora which served as a residence of Vladimir Olgerdovich, Grand Prince of Kyiv, and subsequently of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania (e.g. Vytautas). With the 1569 Union of Lublin, when the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth was established, the Lithuanian-controlled lands of the Kyiv region (Podolia, Volhynia, and Podlachia) were transferred from the Grand Duchy of Lithuania to the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland, and Kyiv became the capital of Kyiv Voivodeship. The 1658 Treaty of Hadiach envisaged Kyiv becoming the capital of the Grand Duchy of Rus' within the Polish–Lithuanian–Ruthenian Commonwealth, but this provision of the treaty never went into operation. Occupied by Russian troops since the 1654 Treaty of Pereyaslav, Kyiv became a part of the Tsardom of Russia from 1667 on the Truce of Andrusovo and enjoyed a degree of autonomy. None of the Polish-Russian treaties concerning Kyiv have ever been ratified. In the Russian Empire, Kyiv was a primary Christian centre, attracting pilgrims, and the cradle of many of the empire's most important religious figures, but until the 19th century, the city's commercial importance remained marginal. In 1834, the Russian government established Saint Vladimir University, now called the Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv after the Ukrainian poet Taras Shevchenko (1814–1861). (Shevchenko worked as a field researcher and editor for the geography department). The medical faculty of Saint Vladimir University, separated into an independent institution in 1919–1921 during the Soviet period, became the Bogomolets National Medical University in 1995. During the 18th and 19th centuries, the Imperial Russian Army and ecclesiastical authorities dominated city life;[citation needed] the Russian Orthodox Church had involvement in a significant part of Kyiv's infrastructure and commercial activity. In the late 1840s the historian, Mykola Kostomarov (Russian: Nikolai Kostomarov), founded a secret political society, the Brotherhood of Saint Cyril and Methodius, whose members put forward the idea of a federation of free Slavic peoples with Ukrainians as a distinct and separate group rather than a subordinate part of the Russian nation; the Russian authorities quickly suppressed the society. Following the gradual loss of Ukraine's autonomy, Kyiv experienced growing Russification in the 19th century, by means of Russian migration, administrative actions, and social modernization. At the beginning of the 20th century the Russian-speaking part of the population dominated the city centre, while the lower classes living on the outskirts retained Ukrainian folk culture to a significant extent.[citation needed] However, enthusiasts among ethnic Ukrainian aristocrats, soldiers, and merchants made attempts to preserve the native culture in Kyiv, by clandestine book-printing, amateur theatre, folk studies, etc. During the Russian industrial revolution in the late 19th century, Kyiv became an important trade and transportation centre of the Russian Empire, specialising in sugar and grain export by railway and on the Dnieper river. By 1900, the city had also become a significant industrial centre, with a population of 250,000. Landmarks of that period include the railway infrastructure, the foundation of numerous educational and cultural facilities, and notable architectural monuments (mostly merchant-oriented). In 1892, the first electric tram line of the Russian Empire started running in Kyiv (the third in the world). Kyiv prospered during the late 19th century Industrial Revolution in the Russian Empire, when it became the third most important city of the Empire and the major centre of commerce in its southwest. In the turbulent period following the 1917 Russian Revolution, Kyiv became the capital of several successive Ukrainian states and was caught in the middle of several conflicts: World War I, during which German soldiers occupied it from 2 March 1918 to November 1918, the Russian Civil War of 1917 to 1922, and the Polish–Soviet War of 1919–1921. During the last three months of 1919, Kyiv was intermittently controlled by the White Army. Kyiv changed hands sixteen times from the end of 1918 to August 1920. From 1921 to 1991, the city formed part of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, which became a founding republic of the Soviet Union in 1922. The major events that took place in Soviet Ukraine during the interwar period all affected Kyiv: the 1920s Ukrainization as well as the migration of the rural Ukrainophone population made the Russophone city Ukrainian-speaking and bolstered the development of Ukrainian cultural life in the city; the Soviet industrialization that started in the late 1920s turned the city, a former centre of commerce and religion, into a major industrial, technological and scientific centre; the 1932–1933 Great Famine devastated the part of the migrant population not registered for ration cards; and Joseph Stalin's Great Purge of 1937–1938 almost eliminated the city's intelligentsia In 1934, Kyiv became the capital of Soviet Ukraine. The city boomed again during the years of Soviet industrialization as its population grew rapidly and many industrial giants were established, some of which exist today. In World War II, the city again suffered significant damage, and Nazi Germany occupied it from 19 September 1941 to 6 November 1943. Axis forces killed or captured more than 600,000 Soviet soldiers in the great encircling Battle of Kyiv in 1941. Most of those captured never returned alive. Shortly after the Wehrmacht occupied the city, a team of NKVD officers who had remained hidden dynamited most of the buildings on the Khreshchatyk, the main street of the city, where German military and civil authorities had occupied most of the buildings; the buildings burned for days and 25,000 people were left homeless. Allegedly in response to the actions of the NKVD, the Germans rounded up all the local Jews they could find, nearly 34,000, and massacred them at Babi Yar in Kyiv on 29 and 30 September 1941. In the months that followed, thousands more were taken to Babi Yar where they were shot. It is estimated that the Germans murdered more than 100,000 people of various ethnic groups, mostly civilians, at Babi Yar during World War II. Kyiv recovered economically in the post-war years, becoming once again the third-most important city of the Soviet Union. The catastrophic accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant in 1986 occurred only 100 km (62 mi) north of the city. However, the prevailing south wind blew most of the radioactive debris away from Kyiv. In the course of the collapse of the Soviet Union the Ukrainian parliament proclaimed the Declaration of Independence of Ukraine in the city on 24 August 1991. In 2004–2005, the city played host to the largest post-Soviet public demonstrations up to that time, in support of the Orange Revolution. From November 2013 until February 2014, central Kyiv became the primary location of Euromaidan. During the onset of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, Russian forces attempted to seize Kyiv but were repelled by Ukrainian forces on the outskirts of the city. Following the Russian retreat from the region in April 2022, Kyiv has been subject to frequent aerial attacks. Geographically, Kyiv is on the border of the Polesia woodland ecological zone, a part of the European mixed woods area, and the East European forest steppe biome. However, the city's unique landscape distinguishes it from the surrounding region. Kyiv is completely surrounded by Kyiv Oblast. Originally on the west bank, today Kyiv is on both sides of the Dnieper, which flows southwards through the city towards the Black Sea. The older and higher western part of the city sits on numerous wooded hills (Kyiv Hills), with ravines and small rivers. Kyiv's geographical relief contributed to its toponyms, such as Podil ("lower"), Pechersk ("caves"), and uzviz (a steep street, "descent"). Kyiv is a part of the larger Dnieper Upland adjoining the western bank of the Dnieper in its mid-flow, and which contributes to the city's elevation change. The northern outskirts of the city border the Polesian Lowland. Kyiv expanded into the Dnieper Lowland on the left bank (to the east) as late as the 20th century. The whole portion of Kyiv on the left bank of the Dnieper is generally referred to as the Left Bank (Лівий берег, Livyi bereh). Significant areas of the left bank Dnieper valley were artificially sand-deposited, and are protected by dams. Within the city the Dnieper River forms a branching system of tributaries, isles, and harbors within the city limits. The city is close to the mouth of the Desna River and the Kyiv Reservoir in the north, and the Kaniv Reservoir in the south. Both the Dnieper and Desna rivers are navigable at Kyiv, although regulated by the reservoir shipping locks and limited by winter freeze-over. In total, there are 448 bodies of open water within the boundaries of Kyiv, which include the Dnieper itself, its reservoirs, and several small rivers, dozens of lakes and artificially created ponds. They occupy 7949 hectares. Additionally, the city has 16 developed beaches (totalling 140 hectares) and 35 near-water recreational areas (covering more than 1,000 hectares). Many are used for pleasure and recreation, although some of the bodies of water are not suitable for swimming. According to the UN 2011 evaluation, there were no risks of natural disasters in Kyiv and its metropolitan area. Kyiv has a warm-summer humid continental climate (Köppen Dfb). The warmest months are June, July, and August, with mean temperatures of 13.8 to 24.8 °C (56.8 to 76.6 °F). The coldest are December, January, and February, with mean temperatures of −4.6 to −1.1 °C (23.7 to 30.0 °F). The highest ever temperature recorded in the city was 39.4 °C (102.9 °F) on 30 July 1936. The coldest temperature ever recorded in the city was −32.9 °C (−27.2 °F) on 11 January 1951. Snow cover usually lies from mid-November to the end of March, with the frost-free period lasting 180 days on average, but surpassing 200 days in some years. The municipality of the city of Kyiv has a special legal status within Ukraine compared to the other administrative subdivisions of the country. The most significant difference is that the city is considered as a region of Ukraine (see Regions of Ukraine). It is the only city that has double jurisdiction. The Head of City State Administration – the city's governor – is appointed by the president of Ukraine, while the Head of the City Council – the mayor of Kyiv – is elected by local popular vote. The mayor of Kyiv is Vitali Klitschko, who was sworn in on 5 June 2014, after he had won the 25 May 2014 Kyiv mayoral elections with almost 57% of the votes. Since 25 June 2014, Klitschko is also Head of Kyiv City Administration. Klitschko was last reelected in the 2020 Kyiv local election with 50.52% of the votes, in the first round of the election. Most key buildings of the national government are along Hrushevskoho Street (vulytsia Mykhaila Hrushevskoho) and Institute Street (vulytsia Instytutska). Hrushevskoho Street is named after the Ukrainian academician, politician, historian, and statesman Mykhailo Hrushevsky, who wrote an academic book titled: "Bar Starostvo: Historical Notes: XV–XVIII" about the history of Bar, Ukraine. That portion of the city is also unofficially known as the government quarter (урядовий квартал). The city state administration and council is in the Kyiv City council building on Khreshchatyk Street. The oblast state administration and council is in the oblast council building on ploshcha Lesi Ukrainky ("Lesya Ukrainka Square"). Government buildings in Kyiv The seat of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine The presidential administration building The Ministry of Foreign Affairs The seat of Kyiv City State and City Council on Khreshchatyk Street The growing political and economic role of the city, combined with its international relations, as well as extensive internet and social network penetration, have made Kyiv the most pro-Western and pro-democracy region of Ukraine; (so called) National Democratic parties advocating tighter integration with the European Union receive most votes during elections in Kyiv. In a poll conducted by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology in the first half of February 2014, 5.3% of those polled in Kyiv believed "Ukraine and Russia must unite into a single state", nationwide this percentage was 12.5. The Dnieper River naturally divides Kyiv into the Right Bank and the Left Bank areas. Historically on the western right bank of the river, the city expanded into the left bank only in the 20th century. Most of Kyiv's attractions as well as the majority of business and governmental institutions are on the right bank. The eastern "Left Bank" is predominantly residential. There are large industrial and green areas in both the Right Bank and the Left Bank. Kyiv is further informally divided into historical or territorial neighbourhoods, each housing from about 5,000 to 100,000 inhabitants. The first known formal subdivision of Kyiv dates to 1810 when the city was subdivided into 4 parts: Pechersk, Starokyiv, and the first and the second parts of Podil. In 1833–1834 according to Tsar Nicholas I's decree, Kyiv was subdivided into 6 police raions (districts); later being increased to 10. In 1917, there were 8 Raion Councils (Duma), which were reorganised by bolsheviks into 6 Party-Territory Raions. During the Soviet era, as the city was expanding, the number of raions also gradually increased. These newer districts of the city, along with some older areas were then named in honour of prominent communists and socialist-revolutionary figures; however, due to the way in which many communist party members eventually, after a certain period of time, fell out of favour and so were replaced with new, fresher minds, so too did the names of Kyiv's districts change accordingly. The last district reform took place in 2001 when the number of districts was decreased from 14 to 10. Under Oleksandr Omelchenko (mayor from 1999 to 2006), there were further plans for the merger of some districts and revision of their boundaries, and the total number of districts had been planned to be decreased from 10 to 7. With the election of the new mayor-elect (Leonid Chernovetskyi) in 2006, these plans were shelved. Each district has its own locally elected council with jurisdiction over a limited scope of affairs. According to the official registration statistics, there were 2,847,200 residents within the city limits of Kyiv in July 2013. According to the All-Ukrainian Census, the population of Kyiv in 2001 was 2,611,300. The historic changes in population are shown in the side table. According to the census, some 1,393,000 (53.3%) were female and 1,219,000 (46.7%) were male. Comparing the results with the previous census (1989) shows the trend of population ageing which, while prevalent throughout the country, is partly offset in Kyiv by the inflow of working age migrants. Some 1,069,700 people had higher or completed secondary education, a significant increase of 21.7% since 1989. The June 2007 unofficial population estimate based on amount of bakery products sold in the city (thus including temporary visitors and commuters) gave a number of at least 3.5 million people. Kyiv's ethnic composition has shifted greatly over the last centuries. According to the census of March 2, 1874 [uk], conducted by the local branch of the Russian Geographical Society, there were 127,205 people living in Kyiv. Of these, 80% spoke "Russian," 11% spoke "Jewish," 6% spoke Polish and 2% spoke German. Of the "Russian" speakers, 39% were recorded as speaking Little Russian (Ukrainian), which meant that Ukrainian speakers accounted for 30% of the city as a whole. Of the remaining "Russian" speakers, however, there were only 10% who spoke Greater Russian (Russian) and 2% who spoke Belarusian. The remaining 49% spoke in "generally Russian speech." According to the official census of 1897, the number of Great Russian speakers rose to 54%; speakers of Little Russian accounted for 22%. Jewish speakers accounted for 12%, Polish 6.7%. By the September 1917 city-census of Kyiv, conducted by the authorities of the Ukrainian People's Republic, the Ukrainian share of the population had been reduced to only 16%, while Russians now made up a majority at 50%. The March 1919 Kyiv city census, conducted by the Bolshevik authorities, showed an increase in the percentage of the population identifying as Ukrainian to 25%. From then on, the city's Ukrainian population once again began to expand in terms of their share of the population, slowly returning to its former level. By the 1926 Soviet census, Ukrainians, at 41.6%, had once again begun to outnumber Russians, who made up 25.5%. By the 1959 Soviet census, Kyiv was once more a Ukrainian majority city, with 60% of the population identifying as such, the same percentage as in 1874. According to the 2001 census data, more than 130 nationalities and ethnic groups reside within the territory of Kyiv. Ukrainians constitute the largest ethnic group in Kyiv, accounting for 2,110,800 people, or 82.2% of the population. Russians comprise 337,300 (13.1%), Jews 17,900 (0.7%), Belarusians 16,500 (0.6%), Poles 6,900 (0.3%), Armenians 4,900 (0.2%), Azerbaijanis 2,600 (0.1%), Tatars 2,500 (0.1%), Georgians 2,400 (0.1%), Moldovans 1,900 (0.1%). A 2015 study by the International Republican Institute found that 94% of Kyiv was ethnic Ukrainian, and 5% ethnic Russian. Most of the city's non-Slav population comprises Tatars, South Caucasians, and other peoples from the former Soviet Union. Both Ukrainian and Russian are commonly spoken in the city; approximately 75% of Kyiv's population responded "Ukrainian" to the 2001 census question on their native language, roughly 25% responded "Russian". According to a 2006 survey, Ukrainian is used at home by 23% of Kyivans, 52% use Russian, and 24% switch between both. In the 2003 sociological survey, when the question "What language do you use in everyday life?" was asked, 52% said "mostly Russian", 32% "both Russian and Ukrainian in equal measure", 14% "mostly Ukrainian", and 4.3% "exclusively Ukrainian". According to the census of 1897, of Kyiv's approximately 240,000 people approximately 56% of the population spoke the Russian language, 23% spoke the Ukrainian language, 13% spoke Yiddish, 7% spoke Polish and 1% spoke the Belarusian language. A 2015 study by the International Republican Institute found that the languages spoken at home in Kyiv were Ukrainian (27%), Russian (32%), and an equal combination of Ukrainian and Russian (40%). The Jews of Kyiv are first mentioned in a 10th-century letter. The Jewish population remained relatively small until the nineteenth century. A series of pogroms was carried out in 1882, and another in 1905. On the eve of World War I, the city's Jewish population was over 81,000. In 1939 there were approximately 224,000 Jews in Kyiv, some of whom fled the city ahead of the German invasion of the Soviet Union that began in June 1941. On 29 and 30 September 1941, nearly 34,000 Kievvan Jews were massacred at Babi Yar by the Wehrmacht, SS, Ukrainian Auxiliary Police, and local collaborators. Jews began returning to Kyiv at the end of the war, but experienced another pogrom in September 1945. In the 21st century, Kyiv's Jewish community numbers about 20,000. There are two major synagogues in the city: the Great Choral Synagogue and the Brodsky Choral Synagogue. Modern Kyiv is a mix of the old (Kyiv preserved about 70 percent of more than 1,000 buildings built during 1907–1914) and the new, seen in everything from the architecture to the stores and to the people themselves. When the capital of the Ukrainian SSR was moved from Kharkiv to Kyiv many new buildings were commissioned to give the city "the gloss and polish of a capital". In the discussions that centered on how to create a showcase city center, the current city center of Khreshchatyk and Maidan Nezalezhnosti (Independence Square) were not the obvious choices. Some of the early, ultimately not materialised, ideas included a part of Pechersk, Lypky, European Square, and Mykhailivska Square. The plans of building massive monuments (of Vladimir Lenin and Stalin) were also abandoned, due to lack of money (in the 1930s–1950s) and because of Kyiv's hilly landscape. Experiencing rapid population growth between the 1970s and the mid-1990s, the city has continued its consistent growth after the turn of the millennium. As a result, Kyiv's central districts provide a dotted contrast of new, modern buildings among the pale yellows, blues, and greys of older apartments. Urban sprawl has gradually reduced, while population densities of suburbs has increased. The most expensive properties are in the Pechersk and Khreshchatyk areas. It is also prestigious to own a property in newly constructed buildings in the Kharkivskyi neighborhood or Obolon along the Dnieper. Ukrainian independence at the turn of the millennium has heralded other changes. Western-style residential complexes, modern nightclubs, classy restaurants and prestigious hotels opened in the centre. And most importantly, with the easing of the visa rules in 2005, Ukraine is positioning itself as a prime tourist attraction, with Kyiv, among the other large cities, looking to profit from new opportunities. The centre of Kyiv has been cleaned up and buildings have been restored and redecorated, especially Khreshchatyk and Maidan Nezalezhnosti. Many historic areas of Kyiv, such as Andriivskyi Descent, have become popular street vendor locations, where one can find traditional Ukrainian art, religious items, books, game sets (most commonly chess) as well as jewellery for sale. At the United Nations Climate Change Conference 2009, Kyiv was the only Commonwealth of Independent States city to have been inscribed into the TOP30 European Green City Index (placed 30th). Kyiv's most famous historical architecture complexes are the St. Sophia Cathedral and the Kyiv Pechersk Lavra (Monastery of the Caves), which are recognized by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site. Noteworthy historical architectural landmarks also include the Mariinskyi Palace (designed and constructed from 1745 to 1752, then reconstructed in 1870), several Eastern Orthodox churches such as St. Michael's Cathedral, St. Andrew's, St. Volodymyr's, St. Cyril's, the reconstructed Golden Gate and others. One of Kyiv's widely recognized modern landmarks is the highly visible giant Mother Ukraine statue made of titanium standing at the National Museum of the History of Ukraine in the Second World War on the Right bank of the Dnieper. Other notable sites is the cylindrical Salut hotel, across from Glory Square and the eternal flame at the World War Two memorial Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, and the House with Chimaeras. Among Kyiv's best-known monuments are Mikhail Mikeshin's statue of Bohdan Khmelnytsky astride his horse near St. Sophia Cathedral, the venerated Vladimir the Great (St. Vladimir), the baptizer of Rus', overlooking the river above Podil from Saint Volodymyr Hill, the monument to Kyi, Shchek and Khoryv and Lybid, the legendary founders of the city at the Dnieper embankment. On Independence Square in the city centre, two monuments elevate two of the city protectors; the historic protector of Kyiv Michael Archangel atop a reconstruction of one of the old city's gates and a modern invention, the goddess-protector Berehynia atop a tall column. Architecture and historically significant sites and monuments in Kyiv Golden Gate Holy Dormition Cathedral St. Sophia Cathedral St. Volodymyr's Cathedral St. Michael's Golden-Domed Monastery Cathedral of St Nicholas, Pokrovsky Nunnery St. Nicholas Roman Catholic Cathedral Saint Andrew's Church Mariinskyi Palace National Bank of Ukraine "House with Chimaeras" Brodsky Choral Synagogue – Moorish Revival architecture Kyiv was the historic cultural centre of the East Slavic civilization and a major cradle for the Christianization of Kievan Rus. Kyiv retained through centuries its cultural importance and even at times of relative decay, it remained the centre of primary importance of Eastern Orthodox Christianity. Its sacred sites, which include the Kyiv Pechersk Lavra (the Monastery of the Caves) and the Saint Sophia Cathedral are probably the most famous. Attracting pilgrims for centuries and now recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, they remain the primary religious centres as well as major tourist attractions. The above-mentioned sites are also part of the Seven Wonders of Ukraine collection. In September 2023, the UNESCO World Heritage Committee placed the Saint Sophia Cathedral and Kyiv Pechersk Lavra on the List of World Heritage in Danger. According to the committee, although the Ukrainian government has taken action to protect the sites, "optimal conditions are no longer met to fully guarantee the protection of the Outstanding Universal Value of the property and that it is threatened by potential danger due to the war”. The list is protected by the 1972 UNESCO Convention, ratified by both Russia and Ukraine. Inclusion on the list is intended to mobilize urgent international support. Kyiv's theatres include the Kyiv Opera House, Ivan Franko National Academic Drama Theater, Lesya Ukrainka National Academic Theater, the Kyiv Puppet Theater, October Palace, National Philharmonic of Ukraine and others. In 1946 Kyiv had four theatres, one opera house and one concert hall, but most tickets then were allocated to "privileged groups". Other significant cultural centres include the Dovzhenko Film Studios, and the Kyiv Circus. The most important of the city's many museums are the Kyiv State Historical Museum, National Museum of the History of Ukraine in the Second World War, the National Art Museum, the Museum of Western and Oriental Art, the Pinchuk Art Centre and the National Museum of Russian art. In 2005, Kyiv hosted the 50th annual Eurovision Song Contest and in 2017 the 62nd annual Eurovision Song Contest. Numerous songs and paintings were dedicated to the city. Some songs became part of Russian, Ukrainian and Jewish folklore. The most popular songs are "How not to love you, Kyiv of mine?" and "Kyiv Waltz". Renowned Ukrainian composer Oleksandr Bilash wrote an operetta called "Legend of Kyiv". It is said that one can walk from one end of Kyiv to the other in the summertime without leaving the shade of its many trees. Most characteristic are the horse-chestnuts (каштани, kashtany). Kyiv is known as a green city with two botanical gardens and numerous large and small parks. The National Museum of the History of Ukraine in the Second World War is here, which offers both indoor and outdoor displays of military history and equipment surrounded by verdant hills overlooking the Dnieper river. Among the numerous islands, Venetsiiskyi (or Hydropark) is the most developed. It is accessible by metro or by car, and includes an amusement park, swimming beaches, boat rentals, and night clubs. Other major islands include Trukhaniv, Muromets, and Dolobetskyi. The Victory Park (Park Peremohy) near Darnytsia subway station is a popular destination for strollers, joggers, and cyclists. Boating, fishing, and water sports are popular pastimes in Kyiv. The area lakes and rivers freeze over in the winter and ice fishermen are a frequent sight, as are children with their ice skates. However, the peak of summer draws out a greater mass of people to the shores for swimming or sunbathing, with daytime high temperatures sometimes reaching 30 to 34 °C (86 to 93 °F).[citation needed] The centre of Kyiv (Maidan Nezalezhnosti and Khreschatyk Street) becomes a large outdoor party place at night during summer months, with thousands of people having a good time in nearby restaurants, clubs and outdoor cafes. The central streets are closed for auto traffic on weekends and holidays. Andriivskyi Descent is one of the best known historic streets and a major tourist attraction in Kyiv. The hill is the site of the Castle of Richard the Lionheart; the baroque-style St Andrew's Church; the home of Kyiv born writer, Mikhail Bulgakov; the monument to Yaroslav the Wise, the Grand Prince of Kyiv and of Novgorod; and numerous other monuments. A wide variety of farm produce is available in many of Kyiv's farmer markets with the Bessarabskyi Market in the very centre of the city being most famous. Each residential region has its own market, or rynok. Here one will find table after table of individuals hawking everything imaginable: vegetables, fresh and smoked meats, fish, cheese, honey, dairy products such as milk and home-made smetana (sour cream), caviar, cut flowers, housewares, tools and hardware, and clothing. Each of the markets has its own unique mix of products with some markets devoted solely to specific wares such as automobiles, car parts, pets, clothing, flowers, and other things. At the city's southern outskirts, near the historic Pyrohiv village, there is an outdoor museum officially called the Museum of Folk Architecture and Life of Ukraine. It has an area of 1.5 square kilometres (1 sq mi). This territory houses several "mini-villages" that represent by region the traditional rural architecture of Ukraine. Kyiv also has numerous recreational attractions like bowling alleys, go-cart tracks, paintball venues, billiard halls and even shooting ranges. The 100-year-old Kyiv Zoo is on 40 hectares and according to CBC "the zoo has 2,600 animals from 328 species". Kyiv is home to some 40 different museums. In 2009 they recorded a total of 4.3 million visits. The National Museum of the History of Ukraine in the Second World War is a memorial complex commemorating the Eastern Front of World War II in the hills on the right-bank of the Dnieper in Pechersk. Kyiv fortress is the 19th-century fortification buildings situated in Ukrainian capital Kyiv, that once belonged to western Russian fortresses. These structures (once a united complex) were built in the Pechersk and neighbourhoods by the Russian army. Some of the buildings are restored and turned into a museum called the Kyiv Fortress, while others are in use in various military and commercial installations. The National Art Museum of Ukraine is a museum dedicated to Ukrainian art. The Golden Gate is a historic gateway in the ancient city's walls. The name Zoloti Vorota (Golden Gate) is also used for a nearby theatre and a station of the Kyiv Metro. The small Ukrainian National Chernobyl Museum acts as both a memorial and historical center devoted to the events surrounding the 1986 Chernobyl disaster and its effect on the Ukrainian people, the environment, and subsequent attitudes toward the safety of nuclear power as a whole. Kyiv has many professional and amateur football clubs, including Dynamo Kyiv, Arsenal Kyiv and FC Obolon Kyiv but only Dynamo Kyiv play in the Ukrainian Premier League. Of these three, Dynamo Kyiv has had the most success over the course of its history. For example, up until the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the club won 13 USSR Championships, 9 USSR Cups, and 3 USSR Super Cups, thus making Dynamo the most successful club in the history of the Soviet Top League. Other prominent non-football sport clubs in the city include: the Sokil Kyiv ice hockey club and BC Budivelnyk basketball club. Both of these teams play in the highest Ukrainian leagues for their respective sports. Budivelnyk was founded in 1945, Sokil was founded in 1963, during the existence of the Soviet Union. Both these teams play their home games at the Kyiv Palace of Sports. During the 1980 Summer Olympics held in the Soviet Union, Kyiv held the preliminary matches and the quarter-finals of the football tournament at its Olympic Stadium, which was reconstructed specially for the event. From 1 December 2008, the stadium underwent a full-scale reconstruction in order to satisfy standards put in place by UEFA for hosting the Euro 2012 football tournament; the opening ceremony took place in the presence of president Viktor Yanukovych on 8 October 2011, with the first major event being a Shakira concert which was specially planned to coincide with the stadium's re-opening during Euro 2012. Other notable sport stadiums/sport complexes in Kyiv include the Valeriy Lobanovskyi Dynamo Stadium, the Palace of Sports, among many others. Most Ukrainian national teams play their home international matches in Kyiv. The Ukraine national football team, for example, will play matches at the re-constructed Olympic Stadium from 2011. Since introducing a visa-free regime for EU-member states and Switzerland in 2005, Ukraine has seen a steady increase in the number of foreign tourists visiting the country. Before the 2008–09 recession, the average annual growth in the number of foreign visits in Kyiv was 23% over a three-year period. In 2009, a total of 1.6 million tourists stayed in Kyiv hotels, of whom almost 259,000 (c. 16%) were foreigners. After UEFA Euro 2012, the city became the most popular destination for European tourists. A record number of 1.8 million foreign tourists was registered then along with about 2.5 million domestic tourists. More than 850,000 foreign tourists visited Kyiv in the first half of 2018, as compared to 660,000 tourists over the same period in 2013. As of 2018, the hotel occupancy rate from May to September averages 45–50%. Hostels and three-star hotels are approximately 90% full, four-star hotels 65–70%. Six five-star hotels average 50–55% occupancy. Ordinary tourists generally come from May to October, and business tourists from September to May. In 2014, the Kyiv city's council established the city's anthem. It became a 1962 song, "Yak tebe ne liubyty, Kyieve mii!" (Як тебе не любити, Києве мій!, roughly "How can I not love you, Kyiv of mine!"). The horse chestnut tree is one of the symbols of Kyiv. It was heavily present on the city's coat of arms used from 1969 to 1995. As with most capital cities, Kyiv is a major administrative, cultural, and scientific centre of the country. It is the largest city in Ukraine in terms of both population and area and enjoys the highest levels of business activity. On 1 January 2010, there were around 238,000 business entities registered in Kyiv. Official figures show that between 2004 and 2008 Kyiv's economy outstripped the rest of the country's, growing by an annual average of 11.5%. Following the global financial crisis that began in 2007, Kyiv's economy suffered a severe setback in 2009 with gross regional product contracting by 13.5% in real terms. Although a record high, the decline in activity was 1.6 percentage points smaller than that for the country as a whole. The economy in Kyiv, as in the rest of Ukraine, recovered somewhat in 2010 and 2011. Kyiv is a middle-income city, with prices comparable to many mid-size American cities (i.e., considerably lower than Western Europe). Because the city has a large and diverse economic base and is not dependent on any single industry or company, its unemployment rate has historically been relatively low – only 3.75% over 2005–2008. Indeed, even as the rate of joblessness jumped to 7.1% in 2009, it remained far below the national average of 9.6%. As of January 2022, the average monthly salary in Kyiv reached 21,347 UAH (€540) gross and 17,184 UAH (€430) net. Kyiv is the undisputed center of business and commerce of Ukraine and home to the country's largest companies, such as Naftogaz Ukrainy, Energorynok and Kyivstar. In 2010, the city accounted for 18% of national retail sales and 24% of all construction activity. Real estate is one of the major forces in Kyiv's economy. Average prices of apartments are the highest in the country and among the highest in eastern Europe. Kyiv also ranks high in terms of commercial real estate and has Ukraine's tallest office buildings (such as Gulliver and Parus) and some of Ukraine's biggest shopping malls (such as Dream Town and Ocean Plaza). In May 2011, Kyiv authorities presented a 15-year development strategy which calls for attracting as much as EUR82 billion of foreign investment by 2025 to modernize the city's transport and utilities infrastructure and make it more attractive for tourists. * – data not available; ** – calculated at annual average official exchange rate; *** – ILO methodology (% of workforce). Primary industries in Kyiv include utilities – i.e., electricity, gas and water supply (26% of total industrial output), manufacture of food, beverages and tobacco products (22%), chemical (17%), mechanical engineering (13%) and manufacture of paper and paper products, including publishing, printing and reproduction of recorded media (11%). The Institute of Oil Transportation is headquartered here. Kuznia na Rybalskomu, naval production Antonov Serial Production Plant (former Aviant), airplanes manufacturing Aeros, small aircraft production Kyiv Roshen Factory, confectionery Kyiv Arsenal (former arms manufacturer), specializes in production of optic-precision instruments Obolon, brewery Kyiv Aircraft Repair Plant 410, repair factory at Zhuliany Airport Scientific research is conducted in many institutes of higher education and, additionally, in many research institutes affiliated with the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences. Kyiv is home to Ukraine's ministry of education and science, and is also noted for its contributions to medical and computer science research. In 2016, UNIT Factory (Ukrainian National IT Factory) opened. It offers a completely new format of IT education. The education is completely free for all trainees subject to compliance with the terms of the program. Within this project are the Technology Companies' Development Center (TCDC), BIONIC University open inter-corporate IT-university, as well as two hi-tech laboratories—VR Lab (Crytek) and Smart City lab. Kyiv hosts many universities, the major ones being Kyiv National Taras Shevchenko University, the National Technical University "Kyiv Polytechnic Institute", Kyiv-Mohyla Academy and the Kyiv National University of Trade and Economics. Of these, the Mohyla Academy is the oldest, founded as a theological school in 1632, but Shevchenko University, founded in 1834, is the oldest in continuous operation. The total number of institutions of higher education in Kyiv approaches 200, allowing young people to pursue almost any line of study. While education traditionally remains largely in the hands of the state there are several accredited private institutions in the city. There are about 530 general secondary schools and about 680 nursery schools and kindergartens in Kyiv. Additionally, there are evening schools for adults, specialist technical schools, and the Evangel Theological Seminary. There are many libraries in the city, with the Vernadsky National Library, which is Ukraine's main academic library and scientific information centre, as well as one of the world's largest national libraries, being the largest and most important one. The National Library is affiliated with the Academy of Sciences in so far as it is a deposit library and thus serves as the academy's archives' store. The national library is the world's foremost repository of Jewish folk music recorded on Edison wax cylinders. Their Collection of Jewish Musical Folklore (1912–1947) was inscribed on UNESCO's Memory of the World Register in 2005. Local public transportation in Kyiv includes the Metro, buses and minibuses, trolleybuses, trams, taxi and funicular. There is also an intra-city ring railway service. The publicly owned and operated Kyiv Metro is the fastest, the most convenient and affordable network that covers most, but not all, of the city. The Metro is expanding towards the city limits to meet growing demand, having three lines with a total length of 66.1 kilometres (41.1 miles) and 51 stations (some of which are renowned architectural landmarks). The Metro carries around 1.422 million passengers daily accounting for 38% of the Kyiv's public transport load. In 2011, the total number of trips exceeded 519 million.[citation needed] The historic tram system was the first electric tramway in the former Russian Empire and the third one in Europe after the Berlin Straßembahn and the Budapest tramway. The tram system consists of 139.9 km (86.9 mi) of track, including 14 km (8.7 mi) two Rapid Tram lines, served by 21 routes with the use of 523 tram cars. Once a well maintained and widely used method of transport, the system is now gradually being phased out in favor of buses and trolleybuses. The Kyiv Funicular was constructed during 1902–1905. It connects the historic Uppertown, and the lower commercial neighborhood of Podil through the steep Saint Volodymyr Hill overseeing the Dnieper River. The line consists of two stations. All public road transport (except for some minibuses) is operated by the united Kyivpastrans municipal company. It is heavily subsidized by the city. The Kyiv public transport system, except for taxi, uses a simple flat rate tariff system regardless of distance traveled: tickets or tokens must be purchased each time a vehicle is boarded. Digital ticket system is already established in Kyiv Metro, with plans for other transport modes. The cost of one ride is far lower than in Western Europe. The taxi market in Kyiv is expansive but not regulated. In particular, the taxi fare per kilometer is not regulated. There is a fierce competition between private taxi companies.[citation needed] Kyiv represents the focal point of Ukraine's "national roads" system, thus linked by road to all cities of the country. European routes , and intersect in Kyiv. There are eight Dnieper bridges and dozens of grade-separated intersections in the city. Several new intersections are under construction. There are plans to build a full-size, fully grade-separated ring road around Kyiv. In 2009, Kyiv's roads were in poor technical condition and maintained inadequately. Traffic jams and lack of parking space are growing problems for all road transport services in Kyiv. Kyiv is served by two international passenger airports: the Boryspil Airport 30 kilometres (19 miles) away, and the smaller, municipally owned Zhuliany Airport on the southern outskirts of the city. There are also the Hostomel cargo airport and additional three operating airfields facilitating the Antonov aircraft manufacturing company and general aviation. Railways are Kyiv's main mode of intracity- and suburban transportation. The city has a developed railroad infrastructure including a long-distance passenger station, 6 cargo stations, depots, and repairing facilities. However, this system still fails to meet the demand for passenger service. Particularly, the Kyiv-Pasazhyrskyi railway station is the city's only long-distance passenger terminal (vokzal). Construction is underway for turning the large Darnytsia railway station on the left-bank part of Kyiv into a long-distance passenger hub, which may ease traffic at the central station. Bridges over the Dnieper River are another problem restricting the development of city's railway system. Presently, only one rail bridge out of two is available for intense train traffic. A new combined rail-auto bridge is under construction, as a part of Darnytsia project. In 2011, the Kyiv city administration established the new Urban Train for Kyiv. This service runs at standard 4- to 10-minute intervals throughout the day and follows a circular route around the city centre, which allows it to serve many of Kyiv's inner suburbs. Interchanges between the Kyiv Metro and Fast Tram exist at many of the urban train's station stops. Suburban 'Kyiv City Express' trains (colloquially known as elektrychka) are serviced by the publicly owned Ukrainian Railways. The suburban train service is fast, and unbeatably safe in terms of traffic accidents. But the trains are not reliable, as they may fall significantly behind schedule, may not be safe in terms of crime, and the elektrychka cars are poorly maintained and overcrowded in rush hours. There are nine elektrychka directions from Kyiv: Bila Tserkva - Uzyn Fastiv Klavdiievo Myronivka - Bohuslav Nizhyn Ukrainka Vasylkiv Vyshhorod Yahotyn More than a dozen of elektrychka stops are within the city allowing residents of different neighborhoods to use the suburban trains. DTEK Kyiv Electric Networks [uk] (formerly Kyivenergo) is the electric power distribution network operator for Kyiv, owned by oligarch Rinat Akhmetov. As of 2021[update] it had: 12,038 km of power transmission lines with a voltage of 0.4–110 kV 64 substations with a voltage of 35–110 kV 243 switchgears and 3728 transformer substations at 10 kV Kyivteploenergo [uk] operates a centralized heating system, which provides heating and hot water to customers through a network of pipes that distribute hot water from centralized heating plants to buildings throughout the city. It operates a 2700 km network, two of the largest combined heat and power plants in Ukraine CHP-5 and CHP-6, as well as the only waste incineration plant Energia (plant) [uk] operating in Ukraine. In line with the EU Third Energy Package, since 2019 state energy policy abandoned the Rotterdam plus system and has required transmission system operator (TSO) and regional utilities unbundling in order to separate electricity distribution and retail electricity supply. The national government has delegated responsibility for water and sanitation services to local authorities. Kyivvodokanal [uk] is a private joint-stock company that provides such services to Kyiv. The length of water supply networks is 4231 km, of which 1798 km are dilapidated. The length of sewage networks is 2662 km, of which 830 km are dilapidated. Kyiv is twinned with: Ankara, Turkey (1993) Ashgabat, Turkmenistan (2001) Astana, Kazakhstan (1998) Athens, Greece (1996) Baku, Azerbaijan (1997) Beijing, China (1993) Berlin, Germany (2023) Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (1997) Brasília, Brazil (2000) Bratislava, Slovakia (1969) Brussels, Belgium (1997) Bucharest, Romania (2022) Buenos Aires, Argentina (2000) Chicago, United States (1991) Chișinău, Moldova (1993) Copenhagen, Denmark (2023) Edinburgh, Scotland (1989) Florence, Italy (1967) Jakarta, Indonesia (2005) Kraków, Poland (1993) Kyoto, Japan (1971) Leipzig, Germany (1956) Lima, Peru (2005) Mexico City, Mexico (1997) Munich, Germany (1989) Odense, Denmark (1989) Osh Region, Kyrgyzstan (2002) Pretoria, South Africa (1993) Riga, Latvia (1998) Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (2000) Santiago, Chile (1998) Sofia, Bulgaria (1997) Suzhou, China (2005) Tallinn, Estonia (1994) Tampere, Finland (1954) Tashkent, Uzbekistan (1998) Tbilisi, Georgia (1999) Toulouse, France (1975) Vilnius, Lithuania (1991) Warsaw, Poland (1994) Wuhan, China (1990) Belgrade, Serbia (2002) Helsinki, Finland Jerusalem, Israel (2000) Lisbon, Portugal Paris, France Rome, Italy Stockholm, Sweden Toronto, Canada (1991) Tripoli, Libya (2001) Vienna, Austria Yerevan, Armenia (1995) Leonid Bronevoy (1928–2017), Soviet and Russian actor Mikhail Bulgakov (1891–1940), Soviet writer, medical doctor and playwright Eugenia Chuprina (born 1971), poet, novelist, writer and playwright Daniel the Traveller, 12th-century travel writer from the Kievan Rus' Ilya Ehrenburg (1891–1967), Soviet writer, journalist, translator and cultural figure André Grabar (1896–1990), historian of Romanesque art and the art of the Eastern Roman Empire and the Bulgarian Empire Dmytro Hnatyuk (1925–2016), Soviet and Ukrainian opera singer Olha Haidamaka (born 1990), Ukrainian artist Milton Horn (1906–1995), Russian-American sculptor Vladimir Horowitz (1903–1989), American classical pianist Viktor Ivanov (1909–1981), Soviet film director Milla Jovovich (born 1975), American actress Sonya Koshkina (born 1985), Ukrainian journalist, editor-in-chief Kateryna Kukhar (born 1982), prima ballerina Danylo Knyshuk (born 1978), Ukrainian sculptor Viacheslav Kryshtofovych (born 1947), Ukrainian film director and actor Ana Layevska (born 1982), Ukrainian-Mexican actress Boris Levit-Broun (born 1950), Russian poet, writer, and artist Serge Lifar (1905–1986), French ballet dancer Kazimir Malevich (1879–1935), pioneer of geometric abstract art and the originator of the avant-garde Suprematist movement Natalya Marchenkova (born 1948), animator and animation director, born in Kyiv Natalia Matsak (born 1982), ballet dancer Galyna Moskvitina (born 1963), painter Ivan Putrov (born 1980), dancer, former Principal with The Royal Ballet in London Maksym Petrenko (1983–2022), Ukrainian writer, scientist, inventor, educator, soldier Yudif Grigorevna Rozhavskaya (1923-1982), composer and pianist Yuriy Rybchynskyi (born 1945), poet and playwright Natalya Semenchenko (born 1976), professor, writer, and publicist Lev Shestov (1866–1938), Russian existentialist philosopher Oksana Shvets (1955–2022), Ukrainian actress Alexander Vertinsky (1889—1957), singer, composer, poet, cabaret artist and actor Ludmila Anatolievna Yaroshevskaya (1906–1975), composer Artemy Vedel (1767–1808), composer Nikolai Amosov (1913–2002), Soviet and Ukrainian heart surgeon and inventor Zino Davidoff (1906–1994), Swiss premium tobacco manufacturer; known as "King of Cigars" Jan Koum (born 1976), American computer programmer, CEO and co-founder of WhatsApp Viktor Kaspruk, (born 1955), political scientist Alexander Ostrowski (1893–1986), mathematician Borys Paton (1918–2020), scientist, chairman of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine Igor Sikorsky (1889–1972), Russian-American aviation pioneer Golda Meir (1898–1978), Israeli politician, the fourth Prime Minister of Israel Henry P. Melnikow, economic consultant to unions involved in labor Nikolai Berdyaev (1874–1948), Russian Orthodox religious and political philosopher Jonathan Markovitch (born 1967), Chief Rabbi of Kyiv Petro Mohyla (1596–1647), Metropolitan bishop of Kyiv from 1633 Mikhail Morgulis (1941–2021), Russian-language writer, editor and theologian Moses of Kiev, 12th century Talmudist Theophan Prokopovich (1681–1736), theologian, poet, mathematician and philosopher Eugeniusz Horbaczewski (1917–1944), Polish fighter pilot Yuliia "Taira" Paievska (born 1968), founder of "Taira's Angels" Oleg Blokhin (born 1952), Ukrainian football player Oleg Ladik (born 1971), Ukrainian-born Canadian Olympic wrestler Valeriy Lobanovskyi (1939–2002), Soviet and Ukrainian football coach Oleksandr Saliuk Jr. (born 1978), Ukrainian rally driver Andriy Shevchenko (born 1976), Ukrainian footballer Igor Slyusar (born 1989), Ukrainian professional ice hockey player Igor Skuz (born 1976), Ukrainian racing driver Oleg of Novgorod (c. 845–912), Rurikid prince who ruled 882–912 Olga of Kiev (c. 900–969), a regent of Kievan Rus' for her son Sviatoslav from 945 until 960 Nicholas Pritzker, scion of the Pritzker Family Vladimir the Great (c. 958–1015), Grand Prince of Kiev and ruler of Kievan Rus' from 980 to 1015 Israel Markovich Brodsky (1823–1888), businessman and philanthropist Kyiv Peninsula in Graham Land, Antarctica, is named after the city of Kyiv. Ukraine portal Europe portal List of national landmarks of cultural heritage in Kyiv List of crossings of the Dnieper River List of universities, colleges, and research institutions in Kyiv Outline of Ukraine Yehupetz See § Name for alternative spellings and pronunciations. "Kyiv – History". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 4 May 2015. Retrieved 9 March 2020. "Number of present population of Ukraine 1 January 2022" (PDF) (in Ukrainian). UkrStat.gov.ua. 1 January 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 20 February 2023. Oksana Lyachynska (31 May 2012). "Kyiv's 1,530th birthday marked with fun, protest". Kyiv Post. Archived from the original on 1 June 2014. Retrieved 16 May 2013. Vitali Klitschko sworn in as mayor of Kyiv Archived 11 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Interfax-Ukraine (5 June 2014) Poroshenko appoints Klitschko head of Kyiv city administration – decree Archived 4 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Interfax-Ukraine (25 June 2014) Poroshenko orders Klitschko to bring title of best European capital back to Kyiv Archived 14 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Interfax-Ukraine (25 June 2014) "Major Agglomerations of the World". Citypopulation.de. 1 January 2021. Archived from the original on 23 November 2019. Retrieved 23 September 2021. "Definition of KYIV". Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2023. "Kyiv definition and meaning". Collins English Dictionary. Archived from the original on 28 November 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2023. kievan. (n.d.). Dictionary.com Unabridged Archived 14 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine, retrieved 29 May 2013 from Dictionary.com "ВАЛОВИЙ РЕГІОНАЛЬНИЙ ПРОДУКТ У 2021 РОЦІ". "City Mayors: The 500 largest European cities (1 to 100)". www.citymayors.com. Archived from the original on 2 January 2010. Retrieved 19 February 2017. "Kiev". TheFreeDictionary.com. Archived from the original on 5 August 2018. Retrieved 4 July 2015. Magocsi, Paul Robert (2010). A History of Ukraine: The Land and Its Peoples (2nd, Revised ed.). University of Toronto Press. p. 481. ISBN 978-1-4426-9879-6. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 9 September 2017. Preston, Rich [@RichPreston] (25 February 2022). "And here's what the BBC Pronunciation Unit advises. We changed our pronunciation and spelling of Kiev to Kyiv in 2019" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Kyiv". Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary. Retrieved 24 February 2022. Jones, Daniel (2011). Roach, Peter; Setter, Jane; Esling, John (eds.). Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-15255-6. Wells, John C. (2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0. Trubachev, O. N., ed. (1987). "*kyjevъ/*kyjevo". Ėtimologicheskiĭ slovarʹ slavi͡anskikh I͡Azykov: Praslavi͡anskiĭ leksicheskiĭ fond (in Russian). Vol. 13 (*kroměžirъ–*kyžiti). Moscow: Nauka. pp. 256–257. Rudnyc'kyj, Jaroslav Bohdan (1962–1982). An etymological dictionary of the Ukrainian language. 2., rev. ed. Winnipeg: Ukrainian free acad. of sciences, pp. 660–663. "Kiev". Collins English Dictionary. HarperCollins. Archived from the original on 1 May 2021. Retrieved 14 November 2020. The entry is the same as the print edition of Collins Dictionary of English (13th ed.). Glasgow, UK: HarperCollins. 2018. It includes the note "Ukrainian name: Kyiv". For American English, the website also includes the definition from Webster's New World College Dictionary (4th ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. 2010. In the 2018 fifth edition, WNWCD changed the main headword to Kyiv, with Kiev as a see-also entry with the label "Russ. name for Kyiv". "Kiev". Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary. Merriam-Webster. Archived from the original on 13 November 2020. Retrieved 14 November 2020. Merriam–Webster's online dictionary entry has the headword "Kiev" with the label "variants: or Ukrainian Kyiv or Kyyiv." According to M–W's help on entries Archived 11 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine, the key word or signals an equal variant spelling: "these the two spellings occur with equal or nearly equal frequency and can be considered equal variants. Both are standard, and either one may be used according to personal inclination." Ukrainian Commission for Legal Terminology. "Kiev?, Kyiv?! Which is right?". UA Zone. Archived from the original on 26 May 2011. Retrieved 15 March 2011. "Kiev". Oxford Dictionary on Lexico.com. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 14 November 2020. The entry includes the usage note "Ukrainian name Kyiv", and the dictionary has a see-also entry for "Kyiv" cross-referencing this one. The entry text is republished from the print edition of the Oxford Dictionary of English (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. 2010. "Kiev". Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English Online. Pearson English Language Teaching. Archived from the original on 6 May 2017. Retrieved 14 November 2020. "Kyiv not Kiev: Why spelling matters in Ukraine's quest for an independent identity". The Atlantic Council. 21 October 2019. Archived from the original on 19 January 2020. Retrieved 26 May 2021. Kyiv Archived 24 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine at Ukrainian Soviet Encyclopedia Kiev Archived 24 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine in the Ukrainian Soviet Encyclopedia: "Населення періоду мідного віку на тер. К. було носієм т. з. трипільської культури; відомі й знахідки окремих предметів бронзового віку." "Kyiv Archived 4 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine", Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 9 March 2020. Petro Tolochko, Glib Ivakin, Yaroslava Vermenych. Kyiv Archived 26 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine. Encyclopedia of History of Ukraine. Rabinovich GA From the history of urban settlements in the eastern Slavs. In the book.: History, culture, folklore and ethnography of the Slavic peoples. M. 1968. 134. Ерофалов-Пилипчак, Борис (22 February 2019). Римский Киев: или Castrum Azagarium на Киево-Подоле. A+C. ISBN 9786177765010. Archived from the original on 21 June 2020. Retrieved 17 June 2020 – via Google Books. Hazlitt, William (22 February 1851). "The Classical Gazetteer: A Dictionary of Ancient Geography, Sacred and Profane". Whittaker. Archived from the original on 4 August 2020. Retrieved 17 June 2020 – via Google Books. Sigfús Blöndal. "The Varangians of Byzantium Archived 25 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine". History Archived 13 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Pechersk Raion in the Kiev City. dr. Viktor Padányi – Dentu-Magyaria p. 325, footnote 15 Lowe, Steven; Ryaboy, Dmitriy V. "The Pechenegs". Archived from the original on 27 October 2009. Retrieved 27 October 2009. Paul M. HOHENBERG; Lynn Hollen Lees; Paul M Hohenberg (2009). The Making of Urban Europe, 1000–1994. Harvard University Press. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-674-03873-8. Archived from the original on 28 July 2014. Retrieved 13 December 2015. Plokhy, Serhii (2006). The Origins of the Slavic Nations (PDF). Cambridge University Press. p. 42. ISBN 9780521864039. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 March 2017. Martin, Janet L. B. (2004) [1986]. Treasure of the Land of Darkness: The Fur Trade and Its Significance for Medieval Russia. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. p. 127. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511523199. ISBN 9780521548113. Janet Martin, Medieval Russia:980–1584, (Cambridge University Press, 1996), 100. The Destruction of Kiev, University of Toronto Research Repository Orest Subtelny (1989). Ukraine. A History. [Illustr.] (Repr.). CUP Archive. p. 38. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 13 December 2015. Jones, Michael (2000). The New Cambridge Medieval History, Volume 6, c.1300–c.1415. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-36290-0 Jerzy Lukowski, W. H. Zawadzki (2006). A concise history of Poland Archived 14 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Cambridge University Press. p.53. ISBN 0-521-61857-6 ""Ukraina: Lietuvos epocha, 1320–1569"". Bernardinai.lt (in Lithuanian). 3 May 2010. Archived from the original on 10 August 2023. Retrieved 10 August 2023. "Хто побудував київський замок?". Про Україну (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2023. Davies, Norman (1982). God's Playground: A History of Poland, Vol. 1: The Origins to 1795. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-05351-8 Magocsi, Paul Robert (1996). A History of Ukraine, University of Washington Press. ISBN 0-295-97580-6 Т.Г. Таирова-Яковлева, Иван Выговский // Единорогъ. Материалы по военной истории Восточной Европы эпохи Средних веков и Раннего Нового времени, вып.1, М., 2009: Под влиянием польской общественности и сильного диктата Ватикана сейм в мае 1659 г. принял Гадячский договор в более чем урезанном виде. Идея Княжества Руського вообще была уничтожена, равно как и положение о сохранении союза с Москвой. Отменялась и ликвидация унии, равно как и целый ряд других позитивных статей. Eugeniusz Romer, O wschodniej granicy Polski z przed 1772 r., w: Księga Pamiątkowa ku czci Oswalda Balzera, t. II, Lwów 1925, s. [358]. Eksteins, Modris (1999). Walking Since Daybreak. Houghton Mifflin. p. 87. ISBN 0-618-08231-X. "The Great Purge under Stalin 1937–38". brama.com. Archived from the original on 24 January 2010. Retrieved 14 January 2010. Orlando Figes The Whisperers: Private Life in Stalin's Russia, 2007, ISBN 0805074619, pages 227–315. Robert Gellately, Lenin, Stalin, and Hitler: The Age of Social Catastrophe (Knopf, 2007: ISBN 1-4000-4005-1), 720 pages. Daniel Goldhagen, Hitler's Willing Executioners (p. 290) – "2.8 million young, healthy Soviet POWs" killed by the Germans, "mainly by starvation... in less than eight months" of 1941–42, before "the decimation of Soviet POWs... was stopped" and the Germans "began to use them as laborers". "Babi Yar". Jewish Virtual Library. 2012. Archived from the original on 17 August 2014. Retrieved 6 July 2014. Andy Dougan, Dynamo: Triumph and Tragedy in Nazi-Occupied Kiev (Globe Pequot, 2004: ISBN 1-59228-467-1), p. 83. "Kiev and Babi Yar". Holocaust Encyclopedia. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 23 March 2010. Retrieved 13 March 2016. "У Києві біля водойм відкрито 32 зони для відпочинку, з яких 12 – із можливістю купання". kyivcity.gov.ua (in Ukrainian). 19 June 2020. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2020. "У Кличка розповіли, де в Києві можна купатися, а де тільки засмагати. Список". pravda.com.ua (in Ukrainian). 19 June 2020. Archived from the original on 24 June 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2020. "Urban agglomerations with 750,000 inhabitants or more in 2011 and types of natural risks". United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. April 2012. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2013. Kottek, M.; J. Grieser; C. Beck; B. Rudolf; F. Rubel (2006). "World Map of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification updated" (PDF). Meteorol. Z. 15 (3): 259–263. Bibcode:2006MetZe..15..259K. doi:10.1127/0941-2948/2006/0130. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 March 2012. Retrieved 24 August 2012. "ЦГО Кліматичні дані по м.Києву". cgo-sreznevskyi.kyiv.ua (in Ukrainian). Central Observatory for Geophysics. Archived from the original on 18 April 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2020. "ЦГО Кліматичні рекорди". cgo-sreznevskyi.kyiv.ua (in Ukrainian). Central Observatory for Geophysics. Archived from the original on 31 March 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2020. "Weather and Climate – The Climate of Kyiv" (in Russian). Weather and Climate (Погода и климат). Archived from the original on 13 December 2019. Retrieved 8 November 2021. "World Meteorological Organization Climate Normals for 1981–2010". World Meteorological Organization. Archived from the original on 17 July 2021. Retrieved 17 July 2021. Cappelen, John; Jensen, Jens. "Ukraine – Kyiv" (PDF). Climate Data for Selected Stations (1931–1960) (in Danish). Danish Meteorological Institute. p. 332. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 April 2013. Retrieved 1 April 2016. "Kiev, Ukraine - Detailed climate information and monthly weather forecast". Weather Atlas. Yu Media Group. Archived from the original on 3 July 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2019. Klitschko officially announced as winner of Kyiv mayor election Archived 7 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Interfax-Ukraine (4 June 2014) Vitali Klitschko wins in first round of Kyiv mayor election Archived 6 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Ukrinform (6 November 2020) Hrushevsky, M., Bar Starostvo: Historical Notes: XV–XVIII, St. Vladimir University Publishing House, Bol'shaya-Vasil'kovskaya, Building no. 29–31, Kiev, Ukraine, 1894; Lviv, Ukraine, ISBN 5-12-004335-6, pp. 1–623, 1996. Сюмар, Вікторія (22 May 2012). "Київ: стратегічна позиція чи "чемодан" без ручки?". Ukrayinska Pravda. Archived from the original on 1 May 2014. Retrieved 19 August 2013. Свобода, Радіо (31 October 2012). "Виборчі комісії фіксують перемогу опозиційних кандидатів у Києві". Радіо Свобода. Archived from the original on 22 February 2022. Retrieved 22 February 2022. Битва за Київ: чому посада мера вже не потрібна Кличку і чи будуть вибори взагалі (in Ukrainian). Kontrakty. 19 March 2013. Archived from the original on 24 August 2013. Retrieved 19 August 2013. У кожного киянина в голові – досвід Майдану (in Ukrainian). 20 April 2013. Archived from the original on 5 March 2022. Retrieved 19 August 2013. (in Ukrainian) Interactive parliamentary election 2012 result maps Archived 29 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine by Ukrayinska Pravda (in Ukrainian) Election results in Ukraine since 1998 Archived 3 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine, Central Election Commission of Ukraine Nations and Nationalism: A Global Historical Overview Archived 14 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine, ABC-CLIO, 2008, ISBN 1851099077 (page 1629) Ukraine on its Meandering Path Between East and West Archived 14 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine by Andrej Lushnycky and Mykola Riabchuk, Peter Lang, 2009, ISBN 303911607X (page 122) After the parliamentary elections in Ukraine: a tough victory for the Party of Regions Archived 17 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Centre for Eastern Studies (7 November 2012) Communist and Post-Communist Parties in Europe Archived 6 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine by Uwe Backes and Patrick Moreau, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2008, ISBN 978-3-525-36912-8 (page 396) Party of Regions gets 185 seats in Ukrainian parliament, Batkivschyna 101 – CEC Archived 31 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Interfax-Ukraine (12 November 2012) UDAR submits to Rada resolution on Ukraine's integration with EU, Interfax-Ukraine (8 January 2013) (in Ukrainian) Electronic Bulletin "Your Choice – 2012". Issue 4: Batkivshchyna Archived 3 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Ukrainian Center for Independent Political Research (24 October 2012) Ukraine's Party System in Transition? The Rise of the Radically Right-Wing All-Ukrainian Association "Svoboda" Archived 2 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine by Andreas Umland, Centre for Geopolitical Studies (1 May 2011) "Вибори-2012. Результати голосування" (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 25 August 2013. Retrieved 18 August 2013. How relations between Ukraine and Russia should look like? Public opinion polls' results Archived 23 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Kyiv International Institute of Sociology (4 March 2014) (in Ukrainian) Elections to Kyiv district councils will take place on October 30 [2022] – the decision of the Kyiv City Council Archived 3 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Interfax-Ukraine (3 February 2022) Чисельність населення м.Києва [Population of Kyiv city] (in Ukrainian). UkrStat.gov.ua. 1 November 2015. Archived from the original on 9 October 2020. Retrieved 9 January 2016. Vilenchuk, S.R.; Yatsuk, T.B., eds. (2009). Kyiv Statistical Yearbook for 2008. Kiev: Vydavnytstvo Konsultant LLC. p. 213. ISBN 978-966-8459-28-3. Kudritskiy, A. V. (1982). KIEV entsiklopedicheskiy spravochnik. Kiev: Glavnaya redaktsia Ukrainskoy Sovetskoy Entsiklopedii. p. 30. The most recent Ukrainian census, conducted on 5 December 2001, gave the population of Kyiv as 2 611 300 (Ukrcensus.gov.ua – Kyiv city Web address accessed on 4 August 2007). Estimates based on the amount of bakery products sold in the city (thus including temporary visitors and commuters) suggest a minimum of 3.5 million. "There are up to 1.5 mln undercounted residents in Kiev Archived 2 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine", Korrespondent, 15 June 2005 (in Russian) "There are up to 1.5 mln undercounted residents in Kiev". Korrespondent (in Russian). 15 June 2007. Archived from the original on 2 December 2008. Retrieved 2 September 2013. Hamm 1993, p. 103. Hamm 1993, p. 103-104. Makaryk, Irene Rima; Tkacz, Virlana (1 January 2010). Modernism in Kyiv: Kiev/Kyïv/Kiev/Kijów: Jubilant Experimentation. University of Toronto Press. p. 74. ISBN 978-1-4426-4098-6. Archived from the original on 25 April 2023. Retrieved 29 March 2023 – via Google Books. Kubijovyč, Volodymyr; Pavlovsky, Vadym; Stebelsky, Ihor; Zhukovsky, Arkadii (2017). "Kyiv". Encyclopedia of Ukraine. Archived from the original on 24 March 2023. Retrieved 29 March 2023. Kubijovyč, Volodymyr; Pavlovsky, Vadym; Stebelsky, Ihor; Zhukovsky, Arkadii. "Kyiv". Encyclopedia of Ukraine. Archived from the original on 24 March 2023. Retrieved 29 March 2023. "Ukrainian Municipal Survey, March 2–20 2015" (PDF). IRI. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 27 May 2015. According to the official 2001 census data: "Всеукраїнський перепис населення 2001 | Результати | Основні підсумки | Національний склад населення | місто Киів" (in Ukrainian). ukrcensus.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 14 December 2009. Retrieved 14 January 2010. "Всеукраїнський перепис населення 2001 | Результати | Основні підсумки | Мовний склад населення | місто Київ" (in Ukrainian). ukrcensus.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 25 January 2010. Retrieved 14 January 2010. "Kiev: the city, its residents, problems of today, wishes for tomorrow", Zerkalo Nedeli, 29 April – 12 May 2006. in Russian. Archived 17 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine, in Ukrainian Archived 17 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine "What language is spoken in Ukraine?". Welcome to Ukraine. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 12 February 2016. Первая всеобщая перепись населения Российской Империи 1897 г. Распределение населения по родному языку и уездам. г. Киев Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine (in Russian). "Kiev". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Archived from the original on 18 August 2016. Retrieved 24 May 2019. "The Jewish Community of Kiev". The Museum of the Jewish People at Beit Hatfutsot. Archived from the original on 13 June 2020. Retrieved 1 August 2019. "Kiev and Babi Yar". Holocaust Encyclopedia. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 3 January 2007. Gutman, Israel (1990). Encyclopedia of the Holocaust, vol. 1. Macmillan. pp. 133–6. "State-sponsored Anti-Semitism in Postwar USSR. Studies and Research Perspectives; Antonella Salomoni". Quest. Issues in Contemporary Jewish History / Questioni di storia ebraica contemporanea. 2 April 2010. Archived from the original on 22 January 2020. Retrieved 26 July 2012. alla levy. "Jewish People Around the World". Archived from the original on 31 August 2013. Retrieved 4 July 2015. Forgotten Soviet Plans For Kyiv Archived 4 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Kyiv Post (28 July 2011) Workpermit.com Archived 30 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 30 July 2006. Kiev.info Archived 27 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 20 June 2006. Kyiv found among greenest cities in Europe, Emirates News Agency (10 December 2009) Goukassian, Elena (15 September 2023). "Unesco adds sites in Kyiv and Lviv to list of world heritage in danger". The Art Newspaper. Archived from the original on 19 October 2023. Retrieved 14 October 2023. Anwer, Baraa (15 September 2023). "UNESCO puts 2 locations in war-ravaged Ukraine on its list of historic sites in danger". Associated Press News. Archived from the original on 19 October 2023. Retrieved 14 October 2023. "World Heritage in Danger". UNESCO World Heritage Convention. Archived from the original on 5 July 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2023. The Ukraine Archived 3 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Life, 28 October 1946 "Andreyevskiy Spusk". Hotels-Kiev.com. Optima Tours. Archived from the original on 1 September 2006. Retrieved 20 June 2006. "Andreevsky spusk". Kyiv Guide (in Russian). Archived from the original on 12 March 2007. Retrieved 20 June 2006. "Kiev zoo a 'concentration camp for animals'". CBC news. Associated Press. 23 March 2011. Archived from the original on 9 September 2013. Retrieved 27 April 2011. "Culture and Arts" (in Ukrainian). Kyiv Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2020. Trophies of Dynamo Archived 18 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine – Official website of Dynamo Kyiv "Kyiv opens host stadium for Euro 2012 final". Kyiv Post. 9 October 2011. Archived from the original on 22 October 2011. "Туристичні потоки". Ukrstat.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 5 August 2012. Retrieved 16 September 2011. "Головне управління статистики м.Києва – Туристичні потоки". kyiv.ukrstat.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "Number of foreign tourists in Kyiv growing". www.unian.info. Archived from the original on 30 October 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2020. The Kyiv council approved the Kyiv city anthem (Київрада затвердила гімн Києва) Archived 3 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Ukrayinska Pravda. 13 November 2014 "Thujoy Khreshchatyk". Why Kyivans miss chestnuts and how they became a symbol of the capital Archived 5 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Ukrayinska Pravda (29 May 2019) (in Ukrainian) Vilenchuk, R. G.; Mashkova, L. O., eds. (2010). Kyiv Statistical Yearbook for 2009. Kyiv: Vydavnytstvo Konsultant LLC. p. 58. ISBN 978-966-8459-28-3. "Gross Regional Product" (in Ukrainian). Kyiv Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 19 November 2010. "Gross Domestic Product" (in Ukrainian). State Statistics Committee. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013. Retrieved 19 November 2010. "Labour Market" (in Ukrainian). Kyiv Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2010. "Labour Market" (in Ukrainian). Kyiv Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013. Retrieved 23 November 2010. "Калькулятор зарплаты". uteka.ua. Archived from the original on 3 March 2020. Retrieved 18 February 2018. "Средняя зарплата в Украине [2019] ᐈ Средняя зарплата в Киеве и регионах". index.minfin.com.ua. Archived from the original on 10 February 2022. "Convert 21,347 Ukrainian Hryvnia to Euro – UAH to EUR Exchange Rates | Xe". Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2022. "Retail Sales" (in Ukrainian). Kyiv Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "Retail Sales" (in Ukrainian). State Statistics Committee. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2011. "Construction Works" (in Ukrainian). Kyiv Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 13 October 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "Construction Works" (in Ukrainian). State Statistics Committee. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2011. "Square Metre Prices in Ukraine". Global Property Guide. Archived from the original on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 2 June 2011. Santarovich, Andrey (27 May 2011). "Kyiv Development Strategy Calls for EUR82 billion in foreign investment" (in Russian). Business Information Network. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2011. "Statistical Bulletin (May 2012)" (PDF) (in Ukrainian). National Bank of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 3 July 2012. "Average Monthly Wage Dynamics" (in Ukrainian). Kyiv Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 1 October 2020. "Labour Market Indicators" (in Ukrainian). Kyiv Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Retrieved 1 October 2020. "Foreign Direct Investment" (in Ukrainian). Kyiv Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "Industrial Production by Economic Activity" (in Ukrainian). Kyiv Statistics Office. Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "UNIT Factory, a key element of the future innovation park, opened in Kyiv". kfund.ua. 16 November 2016. Archived from the original on 3 August 2019. Retrieved 18 November 2019. See also: Kyiv University official website Archived 10 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 28 July 2006. See also: KPI official website Archived 13 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine "National University of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy". Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 25 February 2022. See also: Osvita.org URL accessed on 20 June 2006 Archived 30 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine Vilenchuk, S. R.; Yatsuk, T.B., eds. (2009). Kyiv Statistical Yearbook for 2008. Kyiv: Vydavnytstvo Konsultant LLC. p. 283. ISBN 978-966-8459-28-3. "The Vernadsky National Library of Ukraine". Nbuv.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010. Retrieved 27 June 2010. "Collection of Jewish Musical Folklore (1912–1947)". UNESCO Memory of the World Programme. 16 May 2008. Archived from the original on 23 June 2008. Retrieved 14 December 2009. "Головне управління статистики м.Києва – Пасажирські перевезення АРХІВ 2011 року". kyiv.ukrstat.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2020. For a 2004 plan of the Kyiv tram, please see mashke.org Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine "Азаров дал добро на строительство кольцевой дороги вокруг Киева – Газета "ФАКТЫ и комментарии"". Fakty.ua. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "Вторая кольцевая дорога вокруг Киева обойдется в $5-5,5 млрд. – Последние новости Киева – Однако в направлении окружной дороги уже вся земля выкуплена | СЕГОДНЯ". Segodnya.ua. 27 June 2007. Archived from the original on 5 October 2020. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "Азаров прогнозирует начало строительства второй кольцевой дороги вокруг Киева в 2012 году | Новости Киева". Korrespondent.net. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 12 March 2013. Kyiv Administration: Roads Are In Poor Technical State Because They Have Reached End Of Their Service Lives And Annual Maintenance Volume Is Low Archived 16 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Ukrainian News Agency (12 June 2009) (in Russian) Archunion.com.ua Archived 6 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 20 June 2006. "Азаров запустил в Киеве городскую электричку | Экономика | РИА Новости – Украина". Ua.rian.ru. 13 August 2012. Archived from the original on 25 April 2012. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "Мапа сполучень". Kyiv City Express (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 4 June 2023. Retrieved 21 November 2023. "Наша компанія ДТЕК Київські електромереж". Archived from the original on 3 March 2021. Retrieved 12 August 2021. "Ukraine electricity generation: Investment opportunities". South Korean Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 2018. Archived from the original on 14 March 2023. Retrieved 14 March 2023. The World Bank. "SOS DANUBIS.org – Ukraine". International Association of Water Supply Companies in the Danube River Catchment Area. Archived from the original on 20 February 2023. Retrieved 20 February 2023. "Перелік міст, з якими Києвом підписані документи про поріднення, дружбу, співробітництво, партнерство" (PDF). kyivcity.gov.ua (in Ukrainian). Kyiv. 15 February 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 August 2021. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "Neue Städtepartnerschaft mit Kyiv: Vitali Klitschko in Berlin". berlin.de (in German). 11 September 2023. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 20 September 2023. "Nicuşor Dan: Am hotărât să aprobăm înfrăţirea dintre Bucureşti şi Kiev". mediafax.ro (in Romanian). Mediafax. 7 March 2022. Archived from the original on 5 March 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2022. Journalist, Magnus Ankerstjerne. "København vedtager venskabsaftale med Kyiv". TV 2 Kosmopol (in Danish). Archived from the original on 29 March 2023. Retrieved 29 March 2023. Beazley, Charles Raymond (1911). "Daniel of Kiev" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 7 (11th ed.). p. 808. "Marchenkova, Natalya". animator.ru. Archived from the original on 12 June 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2021. "Mogila, Peter" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 18 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 646. Bain, Robert Nisbet (1911). "Prokopovich, Theofan" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 22 (11th ed.). p. 434. Bain, Robert Nisbet (1911). "Oleg" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 20 (11th ed.). pp. 76–77. "Olga" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 20 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 80. Bain, Robert Nisbet (1911). "Vladimir, St" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 28 (11th ed.). p. 168. Kyiv Peninsula. Archived 10 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine SCAR Composite Gazetteer of Antarctica. Brutzkus, J. "The Khazar Origin of Ancient Kiev". Slavonic and East European Review. American Series, vol. 3, no. 1, 1944, pp. 108–124. JSTOR. Accessed 16 June 2020. Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Kiev (government)" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 15 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 788–789. Hamm, Michael F. (1993). Kiev. A portrait, 1800–1917. Kropotkin, Peter Alexeivitch; Bealby, John Thomas (1911). "Kiev (city)" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 15 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 789–790. Kyiv at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Travel information from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata Київська міська державна адміністрація – official web portal of the Kyiv City State Administration (in Ukrainian) Kyiv on Twitter Kyiv—Official Tourist Guide