Old orchestral and choral vocal recording in D minor From the website of the Presidency of Azerbaijan 2016 a cappella crowd vocal recording A cappella singing of the anthem by people at an army support rally in Baku in April 2016 Problems playing these files? See media help. "Azərbaycan marşı" is the national anthem of Azerbaijan. The music was composed by Uzeyir Hajibeyov, and the lyrics were written by poet Ahmad Javad. The government officially adopted the anthem in 1920, with the passage of the decree, "On the State Hymn of the Republic of Azerbaijan". In 1992, after the fall of the Soviet Union, Azerbaijan's government officially restored "Azərbaycan Marşı" as the national anthem. The Azerbaijan government has also officially declared the national anthem to be "the sacred symbol of the Azerbaijan state, its independence and unity." Since 2006, a fragment of the lyrics is depicted on the obverse of the 5 manat banknote. In 2011, to mark the 20th anniversary of independence, a stamp featuring the lyrics was issued. In 1919, during the formation of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, the new government announced it was accepting submissions from the public for a national anthem, coat of arms and state seal. A prize of 15,000 rubles would be awarded to the citizen who submitted the winning anthem. Azerbaijani composer Uzeyir Hajibeyov wrote two marches. In 1919, this work received the first award announced by the government of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic. The second march was the "March of Azerbaijan." According to Turkish musicologist Etem Üngör, "In those years, when Azerbaijan had not yet lost its independence, the march was chanted by military schools before lessons." In 1922, the "Azərbaycan marşı" was replaced by the Soviet communist anthem "The Internationale". In 1944, during World War II, the new Soviet national anthem replaced "The Internationale" and an additional anthem of the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic was installed. In 1989, following several years of changes brought by perestroika, composer Aydin Azimov arranged a modern recording of the anthem by a full symphony and chorus. That fall, "Azərbaycan marşı" was broadcast on television and radios in Azerbaijan, 70 years after it was introduced. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, in spring 1992, the leaders of the independent Azerbaijani government proposed that the original anthem should be restored as the anthem of Azerbaijan. The Milli Mejlis (National Assembly) signed it into law on 27 May 1992. Even though the "Azərbaycan marşı" was originally composed in A minor, the anthem is usually performed in G minor. Other versions also exist, such as those used in the Olympics, in D minor. Wikisource has original text related to this article: Azərbaycan marşı Regulations for the performance of the national anthem are set forth in the law signed by President Heydar Aliyev in 1996. While a performance of the anthem may include only music, only words, or a combination of both, the anthem must be performed using the official music and words prescribed by law. Once a performance has been recorded, it may be used for any purpose, such as in a radio or television broadcast.[citation needed] In 2012, Philip Sheppard with the London Philharmonic Orchestra recorded the anthem for the 2012 Summer Olympics and the 2012 Summer Paralympics. pronounced [ɑːzæɾbɑjˈdʒɑn mɑɾˈʃɯ]; "March of Azerbaijan" or "Azerbaijan March" See Help:IPA/Azerbaijani, Azerbaijani phonology and their sources. "The National Symbols of the Republic of Azerbaijan". Heydar Aliyev Foundation. Retrieved 23 January 2015. "Azərbaycan Respublikasının Dövlət himni haqqında" (PDF). mfa.gov.az. Retrieved 3 December 2018. "National currency: 5 manat". Central Bank of Azerbaijan. Retrieved 23 January 2015. "History of creation of the National Anthem of the Republic of Azerbaijan". azerbaijans.com. Retrieved 14 August 2014. Əliyev, Ilqar (2008). Azərbaycan Respublikasınn Dövlət Rəmzləri (in Azerbaijani). Baku: Nurlan. Üzeyir bəy Hacıbəyov ensiklopediyası [The Encyclopedia of Uzeyir Hajibeyov] (in Azerbaijani). Baku. 1996. p. 21.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) "142 - Azərbaycan Respublikasının Dövlət himni haqqında". e-qanun.az. Archived from the original on 8 May 2017. Retrieved 25 November 2017. "Azərbaycan Respublikasinin dövlət himni". Azərbaycan Respublikasinin Prezidenti yaninda Kütləvi Informasiya Vasitələrinin Inkişafina Dövlət Dəstəyi Fondu. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 25 November 2017. "National Anthems & Patriotic Songs - Azerbaijani National Anthem - Azərbaycan Marşı lyrics + English translation". lyricstranslate.com. "National Anthems & Patriotic Songs - Azerbaijani National Anthem - Azərbaycan Marşı lyrics + English translation (Version #3)". "London Philharmonic Orchestra & Philip Sheppard Azerbaijan: Azerbaijan Marsi". doremi.lv. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 14 August 2014. Azərbaycan Respublikasının Dövlət Himni, Musiqini dinləmək (Instrumental) Azərbaycan Respublikasının Dövlət Himni, Himni dinləmək (Vocal) Instrumental from The Copyright Agency of the Republic of Azerbaijan website