Seattle (/siˈætəl/ see-AT-əl) is a seaport city on the West Coast of the United States. It is the seat of King County, Washington. With a 2022 population of 749,256 it is the most populous city in both the state of Washington and the Pacific Northwest region of North America, and the 18th-most populous city in the United States. The Seattle metropolitan area's population is 4.02 million, making it the 15th-largest in the United States. Its growth rate of 21.1% between 2010 and 2020 made it one of the country's fastest-growing large cities. Seattle is situated on an isthmus between Puget Sound, an inlet of the Pacific Ocean, and Lake Washington. It is the northernmost major city in the United States, located about 100 miles (160 km) south of the Canadian border. A gateway for trade with East Asia, the Port of Seattle is the fourth-largest port in North America in terms of container handling as of 2021[update]. The Seattle area has been inhabited by Native Americans (such as the Duwamish, who had at least 17 villages around Elliot Bay) for at least 4,000 years before the first permanent European settlers. Arthur A. Denny and his group of travelers, subsequently known as the Denny Party, arrived from Illinois via Portland, Oregon, on the schooner Exact at Alki Point on November 13, 1851. The settlement was moved to the eastern shore of Elliott Bay in 1852 and named "Seattle" in honor of Chief Seattle, a prominent 19th-century leader of the local Duwamish and Suquamish tribes. Seattle currently has high populations of Native Americans alongside Americans with strong Asian, African, European, and Scandinavian ancestry, and, as of 2015, hosts the fifth-largest LGBT community in the U.S. Logging was Seattle's first major industry, but by the late 19th century the city had become a commercial and shipbuilding center as a gateway to Alaska during the Klondike Gold Rush. The city grew after World War II, partly due to the local Boeing company, which established Seattle as a center for its manufacturing of aircraft. Beginning in the 1980s, the Seattle area developed into a technology center; Microsoft established its headquarters in the region. In 1994, Internet retailer Amazon was founded in Seattle, and Alaska Airlines is based in SeaTac, Washington, serving Seattle–Tacoma International Airport, Seattle's international airport. The stream of new software, biotechnology, and Internet companies led to an economic revival, which increased the city's population by almost 50,000 in the decade between 1990 and 2000. The culture of Seattle is heavily defined by its significant musical history. Between 1918 and 1951, nearly 24 jazz nightclubs existed along Jackson Street, from the current Chinatown/International District to the Central District. The jazz scene nurtured the early careers of Ernestine Anderson, Ray Charles, Quincy Jones, and others. In the late 20th and early 21st century, the city also was the origin of several rock bands, including Foo Fighters, Heart, and Jimi Hendrix, and the subgenre of grunge and its pioneering bands, including Alice in Chains, Nirvana, Pearl Jam, Soundgarden, and others. Archaeological excavations suggest that Native Americans have inhabited the Seattle area for at least 4,000 years. By the time the first European settlers arrived, the Duwamish people occupied at least 17 villages in the areas around Elliott Bay. The name for the modern city of Seattle in Lushootseed, dᶻidᶻəlal̓ič, meaning "little crossing-over place", comes from one of these villages, which located at the present-day King Street Station. In May 1792, George Vancouver was the first European to visit the Seattle area during his 1791–1795 expedition for the Royal Navy, which sought to chart the Pacific Northwest for the British. In 1851, a large party of American pioneers led by Luther Collins made a location on land at the mouth of the Duwamish River; they formally claimed it on September 14, 1851. Thirteen days later, members of the Collins Party on the way to their claim passed three scouts of the Denny Party. Members of the Denny Party claimed land on Alki Point on September 28, 1851. The rest of the Denny Party set sail on the schooner Exact from Portland, Oregon, stopping in Astoria, and landed at Alki Point during a rainstorm on November 13, 1851. After a difficult winter, most of the Denny Party relocated across Elliott Bay and claimed land a second time at the site of present-day Pioneer Square, naming this new settlement Duwamps. Charles Terry and John Low remained at the original landing location, reestablished their old land claim and called it "New York", but renamed "New York Alki" in April 1853, from a Chinook word meaning, roughly, "by and by" or "someday". For the next few years, New York Alki and Duwamps competed for dominance, but in time Alki was abandoned and its residents moved across the bay to join the rest of the settlers. David Swinson "Doc" Maynard, one of the founders of Duwamps, was the primary advocate to name the settlement Seattle after Chief Seattle (Lushootseed: siʔaɫ, anglicized as "Seattle"), chief of the Duwamish and Suquamish tribes. The name "Seattle" appears on official Washington Territory papers dated May 23, 1853, when the first plats for the village were filed. In 1855, nominal land settlements were established. On January 14, 1865, the Legislature of Territorial Washington incorporated the Town of Seattle with a board of trustees managing the city. The Town of Seattle was disincorporated on January 18, 1867, and remained a mere precinct of King County until late 1869, when a new petition was filed and the city was re-incorporated December 2, 1869, with a mayor–council government. The corporate seal of the City of Seattle carries the date "1869" and a likeness of Chief Seattle in left profile. That same year, Seattle acquired the epithet of the "Queen City", a designation officially changed in 1982 to the "Emerald City". Seattle has a history of boom-and-bust cycles, like many other cities near areas of extensive natural and mineral resources. Seattle has risen several times economically, then gone into precipitous decline, but it has typically used those periods to rebuild solid infrastructure. The first such boom, covering the early years of the city, rode on the lumber industry. During this period the road now known as Yesler Way won the nickname "Skid Road", supposedly after the timber skidding down the hill to Henry Yesler's sawmill. The later dereliction of the area may be a possible origin for the term which later entered the wider American lexicon as Skid Row. Like much of the U.S. West, Seattle experienced onflicts between labor and management and ethnic tensions that culminated in the anti-Chinese riots of 1885–1886. This violence originated with unemployed whites who were determined to drive the Chinese from Seattle; anti-Chinese riots also occurred in Tacoma. Seattle had achieved sufficient economic success when the Great Seattle Fire of 1889 destroyed the central business district. However, a far grander city center rapidly emerged in its place. Finance company Washington Mutual, for example, was founded in the immediate wake of the fire. The Panic of 1893 hit Seattle hard. The second and most dramatic boom resulted from the Klondike Gold Rush, which ended the depression that had begun with the Panic of 1893. In a short time, Seattle became a major transportation center. On July 14, 1897, the S.S. Portland docked with its famed "ton of gold", and Seattle became the main transport and supply point for the miners in Alaska and the Yukon. Few of those working men found lasting wealth. However, it was Seattle's business of clothing the miners and feeding them salmon that panned out in the long run. Along with Seattle, other cities like Everett, Tacoma, Port Townsend, Bremerton, and Olympia, all in the Puget Sound region, became competitors for exchange, rather than mother lodes for extraction, of precious metals. The boom lasted into the early part of the 20th century, and funded many new Seattle companies and products. In 1907, 19-year-old James E. Casey borrowed $100 from a friend and founded the American Messenger Company (later UPS). Other Seattle companies founded during this period include Nordstrom and Eddie Bauer. Seattle brought in the Olmsted Brothers landscape architecture firm to design a system of parks and boulevards. The Gold Rush era culminated in the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition of 1909, which is largely responsible for the layout of today's University of Washington campus. A shipbuilding boom in the early part of the 20th century became massive during World War I, making Seattle somewhat of a company town. The subsequent retrenchment led to the Seattle General Strike of 1919, an early general strike in the country. A 1912 city development plan by Virgil Bogue went largely unused. Seattle was mildly prosperous in the 1920s but was particularly hard hit in the Great Depression, experiencing some of the country's harshest labor strife in that era. Violence during the Maritime Strike of 1934 cost Seattle much of its maritime traffic, which was rerouted to the Port of Los Angeles. The Great Depression in Seattle affected many minority groups, one being the Asian Pacific Americans; they were subject to racism, loss of property, and failed claims of unemployment due to citizenship status. Seattle was one of the major cities that benefited from programs such as the Works Progress Administration, CCC, Public Works Administration, and others. The workers, mostly men, built roads, parks, dams, schools, railroads, bridges, docks, and even historical and archival record sites and buildings. Seattle faced significant unemployment, loss of lumber and construction industries as Los Angeles prevailed as the bigger West Coast city. Seattle had building contracts that rivaled New York City and Chicago, but also lost to Los Angeles. Seattle's eastern farm land faded due to Oregon's and the Midwest's, forcing people into town. Hooverville arose during the Depression, leading to Seattle's growing homeless population. Stationed outside Seattle, the Hooverville housed thousands of men but very few children and no women. With work projects close to the city, Hooverville grew and the WPA settled into the city. A movement of women arose from Seattle during the Great Depression, fueled in part by Eleanor Roosevelt's 1933 book It's Up to the Women; women pushed for recognition, not just as housewives, but as the backbone to family. Using newspapers and journals Working Woman and The Woman Today, women pushed to be seen as equal and receive some recognition. The Great Depression did not impact the University of Washington negatively. As schools across Washington lost funding and attendance, the university actually prospered during the time period as they focused on growing their student enrollment. While Seattle public schools were influenced by Washington's superintendent Worth McClure, they still struggled to pay teachers and maintain attendance. Seattle was the home base of impresario Alexander Pantages who, starting in 1902, opened a number of theaters in the city exhibiting vaudeville acts and silent movies. He went on to become one of America's greatest theater and movie tycoons. Scottish-born architect B. Marcus Priteca designed several theaters for Pantages in Seattle, which were later demolished or converted to other uses. Seattle's surviving Paramount Theatre, on which he collaborated, was not a Pantages theater. War work again brought local prosperity during World War II, centered on the production of Boeing aircraft. The war dispersed the city's numerous Japanese-American businessmen due to the Japanese American internment. After the World War II, however, the local economy dipped. It rose again with Boeing's growing dominance in the commercial airliner market. Seattle celebrated its restored prosperity and made a bid for world recognition with the Century 21 Exposition, the 1962 World's Fair, for which the Space Needle was built. Another major local economic downturn was in the late 1960s and early 1970s, at a time when Boeing was heavily affected by the oil crises, loss of government contracts, and costs and delays associated with the Boeing 747. Many people left the area to look for work elsewhere, and two local real estate agents put up a billboard reading "Will the last person leaving Seattle – Turn out the lights." Seattle remained the corporate headquarters of Boeing until 2001, when the company separated its headquarters from its major production facilities; the headquarters were moved to Chicago. The Seattle area is still home to Boeing's Renton narrow-body plant and Everett wide-body plant. The company's credit union for employees, BECU, remains based in the Seattle area and has been open to all residents of Washington since 2002. On March 20, 1970, twenty-eight people were killed when the Ozark Hotel was burned by an unknown arsonist. The Wah Mee massacre in 1983 resulted in the killing of 13 people in an illegal gambling club in the Seattle Chinatown-International District. Prosperity began to return in the 1980s beginning with Microsoft's 1979 move from Albuquerque, New Mexico, to nearby Bellevue, Washington. Seattle and its suburbs became home to a number of technology companies, including Amazon, F5 Networks, RealNetworks, Nintendo of America, and T-Mobile. This success brought an influx of new residents with a population increase within city limits of almost 50,000 between 1990 and 2000, and saw Seattle's real estate become some of the most expensive in the country. Seattle in this period attracted attention as home to the companies opened operations in or around the city. In 1990, the Goodwill Games were held in the city. Three years later, in 1993, the APEC leaders was hosted in Seattle. The 1990s also witnessed a growing popularity in grunge music, a sound that was largely developed in Seattle's independent music scene. In 1993, the movie Sleepless in Seattle brought the city further national attention, as did the television sitcom Frasier. The dot-com boom caused a great frenzy among the technology companies in Seattle but the bubble ended in early 2001. In 1999, the World Trade Organization held its conference in Seattle, which was met with protest activity. The protests and police reactions to them largely overshadowed the conference itself. In 2001, the city was impacted by the Mardi Gras Riots and then by the Nisqually earthquake the following day. Another boom began as the city emerged from the Great Recession which commenced when Amazon.com moved its headquarters from North Beacon Hill to South Lake Union. This initiated a historic construction boom which resulted in the completion of almost 10,000 apartments in Seattle in 2017, which is more than any previous year and nearly twice as many as were built in 2016. Beginning in 2010, and for the next five years, Seattle gained an average of 14,511 residents per year, with the growth strongly skewed toward the center of the city, as unemployment dropped from roughly 9 percent to 3.6 percent. The city has found itself "bursting at the seams", with over 45,000 households spending more than half their income on housing and at least 2,800 people homeless, and with the country's sixth-worst rush hour traffic. Seattle is located between the saltwater Puget Sound (an arm of the Pacific Ocean) to the west and Lake Washington to the east. The city's chief harbor, Elliott Bay, is part of Puget Sound, which makes the city an oceanic port. To the west, beyond Puget Sound, are the Kitsap Peninsula and Olympic Mountains on the Olympic Peninsula; to the east, beyond Lake Washington and the Eastside suburbs, are Lake Sammamish and the Cascade Range. Lake Washington's waters flow to Puget Sound through the Lake Washington Ship Canal (consisting of two man-made canals, Lake Union, and the Hiram M. Chittenden Locks at Salmon Bay, ending in Shilshole Bay on Puget Sound).[citation needed] The sea, rivers, forests, lakes, and fields surrounding Seattle were once rich enough to support one of the world's few sedentary hunter-gatherer societies. The surrounding area lends itself well to sailing, skiing, bicycling, camping, and hiking year-round. The city is hilly in some places. Like Rome, the city is said to lie on seven hills; the lists vary but typically include Capitol Hill, First Hill, West Seattle, Beacon Hill, Queen Anne, Magnolia, and the former Denny Hill. The Wallingford, Delridge, Mount Baker, Seward Park, Washington Park, Broadmoor, Madrona, Phinney Ridge, Sunset Hill, Blue Ridge, Broadview, Laurelhurst, Hawthorne Hills, Maple Leaf, and Crown Hill neighborhoods are all located on hills. Many of the hilliest areas are near the city center, with Capitol Hill, First Hill, and Beacon Hill collectively constituting something of a ridge along an isthmus between Elliott Bay and Lake Washington. The break in the ridge between First Hill and Beacon Hill is man-made, the result of two of the many regrading projects that reshaped the topography of the city center. The topography of the city center was also changed by the construction of a seawall and the artificial Harbor Island (completed 1909) at the mouth of the city's industrial Duwamish Waterway, the terminus of the Green River. The highest point within city limits is at High Point in West Seattle, which is roughly located near 35th Ave SW and SW Myrtle St. North of the city center, Lake Washington Ship Canal connects Puget Sound to Lake Washington. It incorporates four natural bodies of water: Lake Union, Salmon Bay, Portage Bay, and Union Bay.[citation needed] Due to its location in the Pacific Ring of Fire, Seattle is in a major earthquake zone. On February 28, 2001, the magnitude 6.8 Nisqually earthquake did significant architectural damage, especially in the Pioneer Square area (built on reclaimed land, as are the Industrial District and part of the city center), and caused one fatality. Other strong earthquakes occurred on January 26, 1700 (estimated at 9 magnitude), December 14, 1872 (7.3 or 7.4), April 13, 1949 (7.1), and April 29, 1965 (6.5). The 1965 quake caused three deaths in Seattle directly and one more by heart failure. Although the Seattle Fault passes just south of the city center, neither it nor the Cascadia subduction zone has caused an earthquake since the city's founding. The Cascadia subduction zone poses the threat of an earthquake of magnitude 9.0 or greater, capable of seriously damaging the city and collapsing many buildings, especially in zones built on fill. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 142.5 square miles (369 km2), 84 square miles (220 km2) of which is land and 58.1 square miles (150 km2), water (41% of the total area). According to the Köppen climate classification system, Seattle has a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (Csb), while under the Trewartha system, it is labeled as an oceanic climate (Do). It has cool, wet winters and mild, relatively dry summers, covering characteristics of both. The climate is sometimes characterized as a "modified Mediterranean" climate because it is cooler and wetter than a "true" Mediterranean climate, but shares the characteristic dry summer (which has a strong influence on the region's vegetation). Temperature extremes are moderated by the adjacent Puget Sound, greater Pacific Ocean, and Lake Washington. Thus extreme heat waves are rare in the Seattle area, as are very cold temperatures (below about 15 °F; −9 °C). The Seattle area is the cloudiest region of the United States, due in part to frequent storms and lows moving in from the adjacent Pacific Ocean. With many more "rain days" than other major American cities, Seattle has a well-earned reputation for frequent rain. In an average year, at least 0.01 inches (0.25 mm) of precipitation falls on 150 days, more than nearly all U.S. cities east of the Rocky Mountains. However, because it often has merely a light drizzle falling from the sky for many days, Seattle actually receives significantly less rainfall (or other precipitation) overall than many other U.S. cities like New York City, Miami, or Houston. Seattle is cloudy 201 days out of the year and partly cloudy 93 days. According to the 2012–2016 American Community Survey (ACS), the racial makeup of the city was 65.7% White Non-Hispanic, 16.9% Asian, 6.8% Black or African American, 6.6% Hispanic or Latino of any race, 0.4% Native American, 0.9% Pacific Islander, 0.2% other races, and 5.6% two or more races. Seattle's population historically has been predominantly white. The 2010 census showed that Seattle was one of the whitest big cities in the country, although its proportion of white residents has been gradually declining. In 1960, whites constituted 91.6% of the city's population, while in 2010 they constituted 69.5%. According to the 2006–2008 American Community Survey, approximately 78.9% of residents over the age of five spoke only English at home. Those who spoke Asian languages other than Indo-European languages made up 10.2% of the population, Spanish was spoken by 4.5% of the population, speakers of other Indo-European languages made up 3.9%, and speakers of other languages made up 2.5%.[citation needed] Seattle's foreign-born population grew 40% between the 1990 and 2000 censuses. The Chinese population in the Seattle area has origins in mainland China, Hong Kong, Southeast Asia, and Taiwan. The earliest Chinese-Americans that came in the late 19th and early 20th centuries were almost entirely from Guangdong Province. The Seattle area is also home to a large Vietnamese population of more than 55,000 residents, as well as over 30,000 Somali immigrants. The Seattle-Tacoma area is also home to one of the largest Cambodian communities in the United States, numbering about 19,000 Cambodian Americans, and one of the largest Samoan communities in the mainland U.S., with over 15,000 people having Samoan ancestry. Additionally, the Seattle area had the highest percentage of self-identified mixed-race people of any large metropolitan area in the United States, according to the 2000 United States Census Bureau. According to a 2012 HistoryLink study, Seattle's 98118 ZIP code (in the Columbia City neighborhood) was one of the most diverse ZIP Code Tabulation Areas in the United States. According to the ACS 1-year estimates, in 2018, the median income of a city household was $93,481, and the median income for a family was $130,656. 11.0% of the population and 6.6% of families were below the poverty line. Of people living in poverty, 11.4% were under the age of 18 and 10.9% were 65 or older. It is estimated that King County has 8,000 homeless people on any given night, and many of those live in Seattle. In September 2005, King County adopted a "Ten-Year Plan to End Homelessness", one of the near-term results of which is a shift of funding from homeless shelter beds to permanent housing. In recent years, the city has experienced steady population growth, and has been faced with the issue of accommodating more residents. In 2006, after growing by 4,000 citizens per year for the previous 16 years, regional planners expected the population of Seattle to grow by 200,000 people by 2040. However, former mayor Greg Nickels supported plans that would increase the population by 60%, or 350,000 people, by 2040 and worked on ways to accommodate this growth while keeping Seattle's single-family housing zoning laws. The Seattle City Council later voted to relax height limits on buildings in the greater part of Downtown, partly with the aim to increase residential density in the city center. As a sign of increasing downtown core growth, the Downtown population crested to over 60,000 in 2009, up 77% since 1990. In 2021 Seattle experienced its first population decline in 50 years. Seattle has a relatively high number of adults living alone. According to the 2000 U.S. Census interim measurements of 2004, Seattle has the fifth highest proportion of single-person households nationwide among cities of 100,000 or more residents, at 40.8%. Seattle has a notably large lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender community. According to a 2006 study by UCLA, 12.9% of city residents polled identified as gay, lesbian, or bisexual. This was the second-highest proportion of any major U.S. city, behind San Francisco. Greater Seattle also ranked second among major U.S. metropolitan areas, with 6.5% of the population identifying as gay, lesbian, or bisexual. According to 2012 estimates from the United States Census Bureau, Seattle has the highest percentage of same-sex households in the United States, at 2.6 percent, surpassing San Francisco (2.5 percent). The Capitol Hill district has historically been the center of LGBT culture in Seattle. Seattle's economy is driven by a mix of older industrial companies and new economy internet and technology companies, as well as service, design, and clean technology companies. The city's gross metropolitan product (GMP) was $231 billion in 2010, making it the 11th largest metropolitan economy in the United States. The Port of Seattle, which also operates Seattle–Tacoma International Airport, is a major gateway for trade with Asia and cruises to Alaska. It also is the 8th largest port in the United States when measured by container capacity. Its maritime cargo operations merged with the Port of Tacoma in 2015 to form the Northwest Seaport Alliance. Although it was impacted by the Great Recession, Seattle has retained a comparatively strong economy, and is noted for start-up businesses, especially in green building and clean technologies. In February 2010, the city government committed Seattle to become North America's first "climate neutral" city, with a goal of reaching zero net per capita greenhouse gas emissions by 2030. Large companies continue to dominate the business landscape. Seven companies on Fortune 500's 2022 list of the United States' largest companies (based on total revenue) are headquartered in Seattle: Internet retailer Amazon (#2), coffee chain Starbucks (#120), freight forwarder Expeditors International of Washington (#225), department store Nordstrom (#245), forest products company Weyerhaeuser (#354), online travel company Expedia Group (#404) and real-estate tech company Zillow (#424) . Other Fortune 500 companies commonly associated with Seattle are based in nearby Puget Sound cities. Warehouse club chain Costco (#11), the largest retail company in Washington, is based in Issaquah. Microsoft (#14) is located in Redmond. Furthermore, Bellevue is home to truck manufacturer Paccar (#151). Other major companies headquartered in the area include Nintendo of America in Redmond, T-Mobile US in Bellevue, and Providence Health & Services (the state's largest health care system and fifth largest employer) in Renton. The city has a reputation for heavy coffee consumption; coffee companies founded or based in Seattle include Starbucks, Seattle's Best Coffee, and Tully's. There are also many successful independent artisanal espresso roasters and cafés.[needs update] Before moving its headquarters to Chicago and then ultimately Arlington County, Virginia, aerospace manufacturer Boeing (#60) was the largest company based in Seattle. Its largest division, Boeing Commercial Airplanes, is still headquartered within the Puget Sound region. The company also has large aircraft manufacturing plants in Everett and Renton; it remains the largest private employer in the Seattle metropolitan area. In 2006 former Seattle Mayor Greg Nickels announced a desire to spark a new economic boom driven by the biotechnology industry. Major redevelopment of the South Lake Union neighborhood is underway in an effort to attract new and established biotech companies to the city, joining biotech companies Corixa (acquired by GlaxoSmithKline), Immunex (now part of Amgen), Trubion, and ZymoGenetics. Vulcan Inc., the holding company of billionaire Paul Allen, is behind most of the development projects in the region. While some see the new development as an economic boon, others have criticized Nickels and the Seattle City Council for pandering to Allen's interests at taxpayers' expense. In 2005, Forbes ranked Seattle as the most expensive American city for buying a house based on the local income levels. Owing largely to the rapidly increasing cost of living, Seattle and Washington State have some of the highest minimum wages in the country, at $15 per hour for smaller businesses and $16 for the city's largest employers. Operating a hub at Seattle–Tacoma International Airport, Alaska Airlines maintains its headquarters in the city of SeaTac, next to the airport. Seattle is a hub for global health with the headquarters of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, PATH (global health organization), Infectious Disease Research Institute, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, and the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. In 2015, the Washington Global Health Alliance counted 168 global health organizations in Washington state. Many are headquartered in Seattle. Many of Seattle's neighborhoods host one or more street fairs or parades. Seattle has been a regional center for the performing arts for many years. The century-old Seattle Symphony Orchestra has won many awards and performs primarily at Benaroya Hall. The Seattle Opera and Pacific Northwest Ballet, which perform at McCaw Hall (opened in 2003 on the site of the former Seattle Opera House at Seattle Center), are comparably distinguished, with the Opera being particularly known for its performances of the works of Richard Wagner and the PNB School (founded in 1974) ranking as one of the top three ballet training institutions in the United States. The Seattle Youth Symphony Orchestras (SYSO) is the largest symphonic youth organization in the United States. The city also boasts lauded summer and winter chamber music festivals organized by the Seattle Chamber Music Society. The 5th Avenue Theatre, built in 1926, stages Broadway-style musical shows featuring both local talent and international stars. Seattle has "around 100" theatrical production companies and over two dozen live theatre venues, many of them associated with fringe theatre; Seattle is probably second only to New York for number of equity theaters (28 Seattle theater companies have some sort of Actors' Equity contract). In addition, the 900-seat Romanesque Revival Town Hall on First Hill hosts numerous cultural events, especially lectures and recitals. Between 1918 and 1951, there were nearly two dozen jazz nightclubs along Jackson Street, running from the current Chinatown/International District to the Central District. The jazz scene developed the early careers of Ray Charles, Quincy Jones, Bumps Blackwell, Ernestine Anderson, and others. Early popular musical acts from the Seattle/Puget Sound area include the collegiate folk group The Brothers Four, vocal group The Fleetwoods, 1960s garage rockers The Wailers and The Sonics, and instrumental surf group The Ventures, some of whom are still active. Seattle is considered the home of grunge music, having produced artists such as Nirvana, Soundgarden, Alice in Chains, Pearl Jam, and Mudhoney, all of whom reached international audiences in the early 1990s. The city is also home to such varied artists as avant-garde jazz musicians Bill Frisell and Wayne Horvitz, hot jazz musician Glenn Crytzer, hip hop artists Sir Mix-a-Lot, Macklemore, Blue Scholars, and Shabazz Palaces, smooth jazz saxophonist Kenny G, classic rock staples Heart and Queensrÿche, and alternative rock bands such as Foo Fighters, Harvey Danger, The Presidents of the United States of America, The Posies, Modest Mouse, Band of Horses, Death Cab for Cutie, and Fleet Foxes. Rock musicians such as Jimi Hendrix, Duff McKagan, and Nikki Sixx spent their formative years in Seattle. The Seattle-based Sub Pop record company continues to be one of the world's best-known independent/alternative music labels. Over the years, a number of songs have been written about Seattle. Seattle annually sends a team of spoken word slammers to the National Poetry Slam and considers itself home to such performance poets as Buddy Wakefield, two-time Individual World Poetry Slam Champ; Anis Mojgani, two-time National Poetry Slam Champ; and Danny Sherrard, 2007 National Poetry Slam Champ and 2008 Individual World Poetry Slam Champ. Seattle also hosted the 2001 national Poetry Slam Tournament. The Seattle Poetry Festival is a biennial poetry festival that (launched first as the Poetry Circus in 1997) has featured local, regional, national, and international names in poetry. The city also has movie houses showing both Hollywood productions and works by independent filmmakers. Among these, the Seattle Cinerama stands out as one of only three movie theaters in the world still capable of showing three-panel Cinerama films. Among Seattle's prominent annual fairs and festivals are the 24-day Seattle International Film Festival, Northwest Folklife over the Memorial Day weekend, numerous Seafair events throughout July and August (ranging from a Bon Odori celebration to the Seafair Cup hydroplane races), the Bite of Seattle, one of the largest Gay Pride festivals in the United States, and the art and music festival Bumbershoot, which programs music as well as other art and entertainment over the Labor Day weekend. All are typically attended by 100,000 people annually, as are the Seattle Hempfest and two separate Independence Day celebrations. Other significant events include numerous Native American pow-wows, a Greek Festival hosted by St. Demetrios Greek Orthodox Church in Montlake, and numerous ethnic festivals (many associated with Festál at Seattle Center). There are other annual events, ranging from the Seattle Antiquarian Book Fair & Book Arts Show; an anime convention, Sakura-Con; Penny Arcade Expo, a gaming convention; a two-day, 9,000-rider Seattle to Portland Bicycle Classic; and specialized film festivals, such as the Maelstrom International Fantastic Film Festival, the Seattle Asian American Film Festival, Children's Film Festival Seattle, Translation: the Seattle Transgender Film Festival, the Seattle Queer Film Festival, Seattle Latino Film Festival, and the Seattle Polish Film Festival. The Henry Art Gallery opened in 1927, the first public art museum in Washington. The Seattle Art Museum (SAM) opened in 1933 and moved to their current downtown location in 1991 (expanded and reopened in 2007); since 1991, the 1933 building has been SAM's Seattle Asian Art Museum (SAAM). SAM also operates the Olympic Sculpture Park (opened in 2007) on the waterfront north of the downtown piers. The Frye Art Museum is a free museum on First Hill. Regional history collections are at the Log House Museum in Alki, Klondike Gold Rush National Historical Park, the Museum of History and Industry, and the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture. Industry collections are at the Center for Wooden Boats and the adjacent Northwest Seaport, and the Museum of Flight. Regional ethnic collections include the National Nordic Museum, the Wing Luke Asian Museum, and the Northwest African American Museum. Seattle has artist-run galleries, including ten-year veteran Soil Art Gallery, and the newer Crawl Space Gallery. The Seattle Great Wheel, one of the largest Ferris wheels in the US, opened in June 2012 as a new, permanent attraction on the city's waterfront, at Pier 57, next to Downtown Seattle. The city also has many community centers for recreation, including Rainier Beach, Van Asselt, Rainier, and Jefferson south of the Ship Canal and Green Lake, Laurelhurst, Loyal Heights north of the Canal, and Meadowbrook. Woodland Park Zoo opened as a private menagerie in 1889 but was sold to the city in 1899. The Seattle Aquarium has been open on the downtown waterfront since 1977 (undergoing a renovation in 2006). The Seattle Underground Tour is an exhibit of places that existed before the Great Fire. Since the middle 1990s, Seattle has experienced significant growth in the cruise industry, especially as a departure point for Alaska cruises. In 2008, a record total of 886,039 cruise passengers passed through the city, surpassing the number for Vancouver, BC, the other major departure point for Alaska cruises. A 2024 Household Pulse Survey from the United States Census Bureau estimated that 64 percent of adults in the Seattle area never attend religious services or attend less than once a year, the highest percentage among large U.S. metropolitan areas. According to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center, the largest religious groupings are Christians (52%), followed by those of no religion (37%), Hindus (2%), Buddhists (2%), Jews (1%), Muslims (1%) and a variety of other religions have smaller followings. According to the same study by the Pew Research Center, about 34% of Seattleites are Protestant, and 15% are Roman Catholic. Meanwhile, 6% of the residents in Seattle call themselves agnostics, while 10% call themselves atheists. Notes A Originally founded in 1974, the MLS version of the Sounders franchise was legally re-incorporated in 2007 and entered the league for the 2009 season. Seattle has four major men's professional sports teams: the National Football League (NFL)'s Seattle Seahawks, Major League Baseball (MLB)'s Seattle Mariners, the National Hockey League (NHL)'s Seattle Kraken, and Major League Soccer (MLS)'s Seattle Sounders FC. Other professional sports teams include the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA)'s Seattle Storm, the National Women's Soccer League's Seattle Reign FC; and Major League Rugby (MLR)'s Seattle Seawolves. Seattle's professional sports history began at the start of the 20th century with the PCHA's Seattle Metropolitans, which in 1917 became the first American hockey team to win the Stanley Cup. In 1969, Seattle was awarded a Major League Baseball franchise, the Seattle Pilots. Based at Sick's Stadium in Mount Baker, home to Seattle's former minor-league teams, the Pilots played in Seattle for one season before relocating to Milwaukee and becoming the Milwaukee Brewers. The city, alongside the county and state governments, sued the league and was offered a second expansion team, later named the Seattle Mariners, as settlement. The Mariners began play in 1977 at the multi-purpose Kingdome, where the team struggled for most of its time. Relative success in the mid-to-late 1990s saved the team from being relocated and allowed them to move to a purpose-built baseball stadium, T-Mobile Park (formerly Safeco Field), in 1999. The Mariners have never reached a World Series and only appeared in the MLB playoffs five times, mostly between 1995 and 2001, but had Hall of Fame players and candidates like Ken Griffey Jr., Randy Johnson, Ichiro Suzuki, and Alex Rodriguez. The team tied the all-time MLB single regular season wins record in 2001 with 116 wins. From 2001 to 2022, the Mariners failed to qualify for the playoffs—the longest active postseason drought in major North American sports, at 20 seasons. The Seattle Seahawks entered the National Football League in 1976 as an expansion team and have advanced to the Super Bowl three times: 2005, 2013 and 2014. The team played in the Kingdome until it was imploded in 2000 and moved into Qwest Field (now Lumen Field) at the same site in 2003. The Seahawks lost Super Bowl XL in 2005 to the Pittsburgh Steelers in Detroit, but won Super Bowl XLVIII in 2013 by defeating the Denver Broncos 43–8 at MetLife Stadium. The team advanced to the Super Bowl the following year, but lost to the New England Patriots in Super Bowl XLIX on a last-minute play. Seahawks fans have set stadium noise records on several occasions and are collectively known as the "12th Man". Seattle Sounders FC has played in Major League Soccer since 2009, as the latest continuation of the original 1974 Sounders team of the North American Soccer League after an incarnation in the lower divisions of American soccer. Sharing Lumen Field with the Seahawks, the team set various attendance records in its first few MLS seasons, averaging over 43,000 per match and placing themselves among the top 30 teams internationally. The Sounders have won the MLS Supporters' Shield in 2014 and the U.S. Open Cup on four occasions: 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2014. The Sounders won the first of their two MLS Cup titles in 2016, defeating Toronto FC 5–4 in a penalty shootout in Toronto, before finishing as runners-up in a rematch against Toronto in MLS Cup 2017. In 2019 the Sounders made their first-ever home-field appearance in MLS Cup, once again against Toronto FC, and won the game 3–1 to earn their second MLS Cup title in front of a club-record attendance of 69,274. The stadium also hosted the second leg of the 2022 CONCACAF Champions League Final, played in front of 68,741 to break the tournament attendance record. The Sounders became the first MLS team to win a continental title since 2000 and the first to win the modern Champions League. Seattle's Major League Rugby team, the Seattle Seawolves, play in nearby Tukwila at Starfire Sports Complex, a small stadium that is also used by the Sounders for their U.S. Open Cup matches. The team began play in 2018 and won the league's inaugural championship. They successfully defended their title in the 2019 season and finished as runners-up in the 2022 championship game. From 1967 to 2008, Seattle was home to the Seattle SuperSonics of the National Basketball Association (NBA). A frequent playoff participant, the Sonics were the 1978–79 NBA champions, and also contended for the championship in 1978 and 1996. Following a team sale in 2006, a failed effort to replace the aging KeyArena, and settlement of a lawsuit to hold the team to the final two years of its lease with the city, the SuperSonics relocated to Oklahoma City and became the Oklahoma City Thunder ahead of the 2008–09 season. An effort in 2013 to purchase the Sacramento Kings franchise and relocate it to Seattle as a resurrected Sonics squad was denied by the NBA board of governors. The Seattle Storm of the Women's National Basketball Association have also played their games at KeyArena (now Climate Pledge Arena) since their foundation in 2000. The WNBA granted Seattle their expansion side following the popularity of the recently folded Seattle Reign, a women's professional basketball team that played from 1996 to 1998 in the rival American Basketball League. The Storm began as a sister team to the now-defunct Sonics of the NBA, but sold to separate Seattle-based ownership in 2006. Tied for the league record, the Storm have claimed the WNBA championship on four occasions, winning in 2004, 2010, 2018, and 2020. The team also won the first-ever WNBA Commissioner's Cup in 2021. The Seattle Thunderbirds hockey team has represented Seattle in the Canadian major-junior Western Hockey League since 1977. Originally playing in Mercer Arena and the Seattle Center Coliseum (which had hosted previous minor-league hockey teams), the Thunderbirds have been based at the ShoWare Center in the suburb of Kent since 2007, and have won one WHL championship in 2017. In 1974, Seattle was awarded a conditional expansion franchise in the National Hockey League; however, this opportunity did not come to fruition. In 2018, a new Seattle-based group successfully applied for an expansion team in the NHL, which was named the Seattle Kraken and began play in 2021. The SuperSonics' former home arena, KeyArena (now Climate Pledge Arena), underwent major renovations from 2018 to 2021 to accommodate the new NHL team. The NHL ownership group reached its goal of 10,000 deposits within 12 minutes of opening a ticket drive, which later increased to 25,000 in 75 minutes. Seattle Reign FC, a founding member of the National Women's Soccer League, was founded in 2012, holding their home games in Seattle from 2014 to 2018 and again since 2022. The team name was chosen to honor the defunct women's basketball team of the same name. The club played at Starfire Sports Complex in nearby Tukwila for the league's inaugural 2013 season before moving to Seattle Center's Memorial Stadium in 2014. Under new management, the team moved to Tacoma's Cheney Stadium in 2019, before moving to Seattle's Lumen Field in 2022. In 2020, OL Groupe, the parent company of French clubs Olympique Lyonnais and Olympique Lyonnais Féminin, became the team's majority owner and rebranded the club as OL Reign. The Seattle Reign name was restored in 2024. Seattle has also been home to various minor-league professional teams, of which currently Ballard FC and West Seattle Junction FC of USL League 2 in soccer remain. Representing the Seattle neighborhood of Ballard, Ballard FC was founded in 2022 as an independent, semi-professional soccer team in the fourth-division USL League 2. The team is owned by a group led by former Sounders player Lamar Neagle and won its first national title in 2023. Ballard FC's primary home is the 1,000-seat Interbay Soccer Stadium (also home to Seattle Pacific University's and Ballard High School's soccer teams), but during that field's renovations in the 2024 season, Ballard will play out of Memorial Stadium at the Seattle Center. Starting in 2024, Ballard FC's division will be joined by a new cross-town rival, West Seattle Junction FC representing the neighborhood of West Seattle. The short-lived Seattle Sea Dragons, originally the Dragons, of the XFL played at Lumen Field in the league's inaugural season in 2020 prior to its suspension due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Sea Dragons returned alongside the XFL in 2023 after the league's re-launch under new ownership. The team folded prior to the 2024 season during the XFL's merger with the United States Football League to form the United Football League. Seattle also boasts two collegiate sports teams based at the University of Washington and Seattle University, both competing in NCAA Division I for various sports. The University of Washington's athletic program, nicknamed the Huskies, competes in the Pac-12 Conference, and Seattle University's athletic program, nicknamed the Redhawks, mostly competes in the Western Athletic Conference. The Huskies teams use several facilities, including the 70,000-seat Husky Stadium for football and the Hec Edmundson Pavilion for basketball and volleyball. The two schools have basketball and soccer teams that compete against each other in non-conference games and have formed a local rivalry due to their sporting success. The Major League Baseball All-Star Game has been held in Seattle three times, once at the Kingdome in 1979, and twice at T-Mobile Field in 2001 and 2023. The NBA All-Star Game was also held in Seattle twice: the first in 1974 at the Seattle Center Coliseum and the second in 1987 at the Kingdome. Lumen Field hosted MLS Cup 2009, played between Real Salt Lake and the Los Angeles Galaxy, as a neutral site in front of 46,011 spectators. Seattle will be one of eleven US host cities for the 2026 FIFA World Cup, with matches played at Lumen Field and training facilities at Longacres in Renton, Washington. Seattle's mild, temperate, marine climate allows year-round outdoor recreation, including walking, cycling, hiking, skiing, snowboarding, kayaking, rock climbing, motor boating, sailing, team sports, and swimming. In town, many people walk around Green Lake, through the forests and along the bluffs and beaches of 535-acre (2.2 km2) Discovery Park (the largest park in the city) in Magnolia, along the shores of Myrtle Edwards Park on the Downtown waterfront, along the shoreline of Lake Washington at Seward Park, along Alki Beach in West Seattle, or along the Burke-Gilman Trail.[citation needed] Gas Works Park features the preserved superstructure of a coal gasification plant closed in 1956. Located across Lake Union from downtown, the park provides panoramic views of the Seattle skyline.[citation needed] Also popular are hikes and skiing in the nearby Cascade or Olympic Mountains and kayaking and sailing in the waters of Puget Sound, the Strait of Juan de Fuca, and the Strait of Georgia.[citation needed] Seattle is a charter city, with a mayor–council form of government. From 1911 to 2013, Seattle's nine city councillors were elected at large, rather than by geographic subdivisions. For the 2015 election, this changed to a hybrid system of seven district members and two at-large members as a result of a ballot measure passed on November 5, 2013. The only other elected offices are the city attorney and Municipal Court judges. All city offices are officially non-partisan. Like some other parts of the United States, government and laws are also run by a series of ballot initiatives (allowing citizens to pass or reject laws), referendums (allowing citizens to approve or reject legislation already passed), and propositions (allowing specific government agencies to propose new laws or tax increases directly to the people). Seattle is widely considered one of the most socially liberal cities in the United States. In the 2012 U.S. general election, a majority of Seattleites voted to approve Referendum 74 and legalize gay marriage in Washington state. In the same election, an overwhelming majority of Seattleites also voted to approve the legalization of the recreational use of cannabis in the state. Like much of the Pacific Northwest (which has the lowest rate of church attendance in the United States and consistently reports the highest percentage of atheism), church attendance, religious belief, and political influence of religious leaders are much lower than in other parts of America. Seattle's political culture is very liberal and progressive for the United States, with over 80% of the population voting for the Democratic Party. All precincts in Seattle voted for Democratic Party candidate Barack Obama in the 2012 presidential election. In partisan elections for the Washington State Legislature and United States Congress, nearly all elections are won by Democrats. Although local elections are nonpartisan, most of the city's elected officials are known to be Democrats, the most notable exception being Seattle City Attorney Ann Davison.[citation needed] In 1926, Seattle became the first major American city to elect a female mayor, Bertha Knight Landes. It has also elected an openly gay mayor, Ed Murray, and a third-party socialist councillor, Kshama Sawant. For the first time in United States history, an openly gay black woman was elected to public office when Sherry Harris was elected as a Seattle city councilor in 1991. In 2015, the majority of the city council was female. Bruce Harrell was elected as mayor in the 2021 mayoral election, succeeding Jenny Durkan, and took office on January 1, 2022. The mayor's office also includes three deputy mayors, appointed to advise the mayor on policies. In 2023, the city council voted to ban caste discrimination as part of the city's anti-discrimination laws. The ban is the first in the United States. Seattle lies within four districts on the King County Council: the 1st district includes the northeastern corner of the city; the 2nd district generally covers areas east of Interstate 5 and south of Northeast 65th Street; the 4th district consists of the northwestern neighborhoods of Ballard, Fremont, Magnolia, and Queen Anne; and the 8th district includes Downtown Seattle, First Hill, SODO, and West Seattle. At the state level, Seattle is divided into six districts that each have one state senator and two state representatives. Federally, Seattle is split between two congressional districts. Most of the city is in 7th congressional district, represented by Democrat Pramila Jayapal, the first Indian-American woman elected to Congress. She succeeded 28-year incumbent and fellow Democrat Jim McDermott. Part of southeastern Seattle is in the 9th congressional district, represented by Democrat Adam Smith since 1997. The border between the two districts follows the Tukwila city limits around Boeing Field, Interstate 5, South Dearborn Street, 4th Avenue South, James Street, Madison Street, East Union Street, Martin Luther King Jr. Way, and East Yesler Way. Of the city's population over the age of 25, 53.8% (vs. a national average of 27.4%) hold a bachelor's degree or higher, and 91.9% (vs. 84.5% nationally) have a high school diploma or equivalent. A 2008 United States Census Bureau survey showed that Seattle had the highest percentage of college and university graduates of any major U.S. city. The city was listed as the most literate of the country's 69 largest cities in 2005 and 2006, the second most literate in 2007 and the most literate in 2008 in studies conducted by Central Connecticut State University. Seattle Public Schools is the school district for the vast majority of the city. That school district desegregated without a court order but continue to struggle to achieve racial balance in a somewhat ethnically divided city (the south part of town having more ethnic minorities than the north). In 2007, Seattle's racial tie-breaking system was struck down by the United States Supreme Court, but the ruling left the door open for desegregation formulae based on other indicators (e.g., income or socioeconomic class). A very small portion of the city is within the Highline School District. The public school system is supplemented by a moderate number of private schools: Five of the private high schools are Catholic, one is Lutheran, and six are secular. Seattle is home to the University of Washington and its professional and continuing education unit, the University of Washington Educational Outreach. In 2017, U.S. News & World Report ranked the University of Washington eleventh in the world. The UW receives more federal research and development funding than any public institution. Over the last 10 years, it has also produced more Peace Corps volunteers than any other U.S. university. Seattle also has a number of smaller private universities, including Seattle University and Seattle Pacific University, the former a Jesuit Catholic institution, the latter a Free Methodist institution. The Seattle Colleges District operates three colleges: North Seattle College, Seattle Central College, and South Seattle College. Universities aimed at the working adult are the City University and Antioch University. Seminaries include Western Seminary and a number of arts colleges, such as Cornish College of the Arts, Pratt Fine Arts Center. In 2001, Time magazine selected Seattle Central Community College as community college of the year, saying that the school "pushes diverse students to work together in small teams." As of 2019[update], Seattle has one major daily newspaper, The Seattle Times. The Seattle Post-Intelligencer, known as the P-I, published a daily newspaper from 1863 to March 17, 2009, before switching to a strictly on-line publication. There is also the Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce, and the University of Washington publishes The Daily, a student-run publication, when school is in session. The most prominent weeklies are the Seattle Weekly and The Stranger; both consider themselves "alternative" papers. The weekly LGBT newspaper is the Seattle Gay News. Real Change is a weekly street newspaper that is sold mainly by homeless persons as an alternative to panhandling. There are also several ethnic newspapers, including The Facts, Northwest Asian Weekly and the International Examiner as well as numerous neighborhood newspapers.[citation needed] Seattle is also well served by television and radio, with all major U.S. networks represented, along with at least five other English-language stations and two Spanish-language stations. Seattle cable viewers also receive CBUT 2 (CBC) from Vancouver, British Columbia.[citation needed] Non-commercial radio stations include NPR affiliates KUOW-FM 94.9 and KNKX 88.5 (Tacoma), as well as classical music station KING-FM 98.1. Other non-commercial stations include KEXP-FM 90.3 (affiliated with the UW), community radio KBCS-FM 91.3 (affiliated with Bellevue College), and high school radio KNHC-FM 89.5, which broadcasts an electronic dance music radio format, is owned by the public school system and operated by students of Nathan Hale High School. Many Seattle radio stations are available through Internet radio, with KEXP in particular being a pioneer of Internet radio. Seattle also has numerous commercial radio stations. In a March 2012 report by the consumer research firm Arbitron, the top FM stations were KRWM (adult contemporary format), KIRO-FM (news/talk), and KISW (active rock) while the top AM stations were KOMO (all news), KJR (AM) (all sports), KIRO (AM) (all sports). The University of Washington is consistently ranked among the country's leading institutions in medical research, earning special merits for programs in neurology and neurosurgery. Seattle has seen local developments of modern paramedic services with the establishment of Medic One in 1970. In 1974, a 60 Minutes story on the success of the then four-year-old Medic One paramedic system called Seattle "the best place in the world to have a heart attack." Three of Seattle's largest medical centers are located on First Hill. Harborview Medical Center, the public county hospital, is the only Level I trauma hospital in a region that includes Washington, Alaska, Montana, and Idaho. Virginia Mason Medical Center and Swedish Medical Center's two largest campuses are also located in this part of Seattle, including the Virginia Mason Hospital. This concentration of hospitals resulted in the neighborhood's nickname "Pill Hill". Located in the Laurelhurst neighborhood, Seattle Children's, formerly Children's Hospital and Regional Medical Center, is the pediatric referral center for Washington, Alaska, Montana, and Idaho. The Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center has a campus in the Eastlake neighborhood. The University District is home to the University of Washington Medical Center which, along with Harborview, is operated by the University of Washington. Seattle is also served by a Veterans Affairs hospital on Beacon Hill, a third campus of Swedish in Ballard, and UW Medical Center - Northwest near Northgate Station. The first streetcars appeared in 1889 and were instrumental in the creation of a relatively well-defined downtown and strong neighborhoods at the end of their lines. The advent of the automobile began the dismantling of rail in Seattle. Tacoma–Seattle railway service ended in 1929 and the Everett–Seattle service came to an end in 1939, replaced by automobiles running on the recently developed highway system. Rails on city streets were paved over or removed, and the opening of the Seattle trolleybus system brought the end of streetcars in Seattle in 1941. This left an extensive network of privately owned buses (later public) as the only mass transit within the city and throughout the region. King County Metro provides regular bus service in the city and county, and the South Lake Union Streetcar line and the First Hill Streetcar line. Seattle is one of the few cities in North America whose bus fleet includes electric trolleybuses. Sound Transit provides an express bus service within the metropolitan area, two Sounder commuter rail lines between the suburbs and downtown, and its 1 Line light rail line between Northgate and Angle Lake. Washington State Ferries, which manages the largest network of ferries in the United States and third largest in the world, connects Seattle to Bainbridge and Vashon Islands in Puget Sound and to Bremerton and Southworth on the Kitsap Peninsula. King Street Station in Pioneer Square serves Amtrak intercity trains and Sounder commuter trains, and is located adjacent to the International District/Chinatown light rail station. According to the 2007 American Community Survey, 18.6% of Seattle residents used one of the three public transit systems that serve the city, giving it the highest transit ridership of all major cities without heavy or light rail prior to the completion of Sound Transit's 1 Line. The city has also been described by Bert Sperling as the fourth most walkable U.S. city and by Walk Score as the sixth most walkable of the fifty largest U.S. cities. Seattle–Tacoma International Airport, locally known as Sea-Tac Airport and located just south in the neighboring city of SeaTac, is operated by the Port of Seattle and provides commercial air service to destinations throughout the world. Closer to downtown, Boeing Field is used for general aviation, cargo flights, and testing/delivery of Boeing airliners. A secondary passenger airport, Paine Field, opened in 2019 and is located in Everett, 25 miles (40 km) north of Seattle. It is predominantly used by Boeing and their large assembly plant located nearby. The main mode of transportation, however, is the street system, which is laid out in a cardinal directions grid pattern, except in the central business district where early city leaders Arthur Denny and Carson Boren insisted on orienting the plats relative to the shoreline rather than to true North. Only two roads, Interstate 5 and State Route 99 (both limited-access highways) run uninterrupted through the city from north to south. From 1953 to 2019, State Route 99 ran through downtown Seattle on the Alaskan Way Viaduct, an elevated freeway on the waterfront. However, due to damage sustained during the 2001 Nisqually earthquake the viaduct was replaced by a tunnel. The 2-mile (3.2 km) Alaskan Way Viaduct replacement tunnel was originally scheduled to be completed in December 2015 at a cost of US$4.25 billion. The world's largest tunnel boring machine, named "Bertha", was commissioned for the project, measuring 57 feet (17 m) in diameter. The tunnel's opening was delayed to February 2019 due to issues with the tunnel boring machine, which included a two-year halt in excavation. Seattle has the 8th worst traffic congestion of all American cities, and is 10th among all North American cities according to Inrix. The city has started moving away from the automobile and towards mass transit. From 2004 to 2009, the annual number of unlinked public transportation trips increased by approximately 21%. In 2006, voters in King County passed the Transit Now proposition, which increased bus service hours on high ridership routes and paid for five limited-stop bus lines called RapidRide. After rejecting a roads and transit measure in 2007, Seattle-area voters passed a transit only measure in 2008 to increase ST Express bus service, extend the Link light rail system, and expand and improve Sounder commuter rail service. A light rail line (now the 1 Line) from downtown heading south to Sea-Tac Airport began service in 2009, giving the city its first rapid transit line with intermediate stations within the city limits. An extension north to the University of Washington opened on March 19, 2016, followed by the Northgate extension in October 2021. Further extensions are planned to reach Lynnwood to the north, Federal Way to the south, and Bellevue and Redmond to the east by 2026. Voters in the Puget Sound region approved an additional tax increase, part of the Sound Transit 3 package, in November 2016 to expand light rail to West Seattle and Ballard as well as Tacoma, Everett, and Issaquah. Water and electric power are municipal services, provided by Seattle Public Utilities and Seattle City Light, respectively. Other utility companies serving Seattle include Puget Sound Energy (natural gas, electricity), Seattle Steam Company (steam), Waste Management, Inc and Recology CleanScapes (curbside recycling, composting, and solid waste removal), CenturyLink, Frontier Communications, Wave Broadband, and Comcast (telecommunications and television).[citation needed] About 90% of Seattle's electricity is produced using hydropower. Less than 2% of electricity is produced using fossil fuels. Seattle Public Utilities manages two tap water supply systems on the Cedar River and Tolt River. These systems are fed by melted snowpack in the Cascade Mountains over the autumn and winter that fill reservoirs as they melt. The city's wastewater system includes 1,422 miles (2,288 km) of sewers that reach treatment plants that discharge into Puget Sound; a 485-mile (781 km) network of separate tunnels for stormwater serve other treatment facilities. Older areas of the city have a combined sewer system that dumps stormwater and untreated wastewater into Puget Sound during overflow events. Seattle has the following sister cities: Beersheba, Israel Bergen, Norway Cebu City, Philippines Chongqing, China Christchurch, New Zealand Daejeon, South Korea Galway, Ireland Gdynia, Poland Haiphong, Vietnam Kaohsiung, Taiwan Kobe, Japan Limbe, Cameroon Mombasa, Kenya Nantes, France Pécs, Hungary Perugia, Italy Reykjavík, Iceland Sihanoukville, Cambodia Surabaya, Indonesia Tashkent, Uzbekistan List of people from Seattle List of television shows set in Seattle USS Seattle—two ships November 13, 1851, is often referred to as the unofficial date of Seattle's founding, when much of the Denny Party arrived at Alki Point. However, the first White settlers to inhabit the area had already arrived in September, which included some members of the Denny clan. The modern city did not take shape until the following spring after much of the party abandoned Alki to move across the bay. The name "Seattle" didn't become official until May 23, 1853. Mean monthly maxima and minima (i.e. the highest and lowest temperature readings during an entire month or year) calculated based on data at said location from 1991 to 2020. Official records are restricted to SeaTac Airport from January 1945 onward. From 15% sample The division currently rotates its headquarters between sites within the region; the previous one in Renton was put up for sale in April 2021. "2022 U.S. Gazetteer Files: Washington". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "QuickFacts: Seattle city, Washington". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved August 20, 2021. "List of 2020 Census Urban Areas". census.gov. United States Census Bureau. Retrieved January 8, 2023. "2020 Population and Housing State Data". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved August 22, 2021. Balk, Gene (October 2, 2012). "When can you call yourself a Seattleite?". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved October 19, 2018. Wilson-Codega, Lily. "About Seattle: Sister Cities". City of Seattle. Retrieved October 19, 2018. "Total Gross Domestic Product for Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA (MSA)". Federal Reserve Economic Data. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. December 18, 2023. Retrieved January 26, 2024. "Zip Code Lookup". USPS. Archived from the original on November 12, 2015. "Zip Code Lookup". USPS. Archived from the original on November 12, 2015. "Seattle". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey, United States Department of the Interior. "U.S. Census Bureau QuickFacts: Seattle city, Washington". Balk, Gene (March 26, 2018). "Seattle just one of 5 big metros last year that had more people move here than leave, census data show". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 7, 2018. Gutman, David; Shapiro, Nina (August 12, 2021). "Seattle grew by more than 100,000 people in past 10 years, King County population booms, diversifies, new census data shows". The Seattle Times. Retrieved August 20, 2021. "Seaport Statistics". Port of Seattle. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Doree Armstrong (October 4, 2007). "Feel the beat of history in the park and concert hall at two family-friendly events". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved November 1, 2007. Speidel, William C. (1967). Sons of the Profits or There's No Business Like Grow Business The Seattle Story 1851–1901. Nettle Creek. pp. 12–13. ISBN 9780914890065. At the time, the Schooner "Exact" was outfitting in Portland for a voyage to Queen Charlotte Island with gold prospectors, and for a reasonable price the captain was willing to touch at Puget Sound en route. She started from Portland on November 5, 1851 and headed out over the Columbia River Bar after touching at Astoria two days later. Gene Balk (March 20, 2015). "Survey ranks Seattle area 5th for LGBT population – so many people is that?". The Seattle Times. Heylin, Clinton (2007). Babylon's Burning: From Punk to Grunge. Conongate. p. 606. ISBN 978-1-84195-879-8. Lange, Greg (October 15, 2000). "Seattle and King County's First European Settlers". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 14, 2007. "The people and their land". Puget Sound Native Art and Culture. Seattle Art Museum. July 4, 2003. Archived from the original on June 13, 2010. Retrieved April 21, 2006. (Publication date per "Native Art of the Northwest Coast: Collection Insight") Walt Crowley (March 13, 2003). "Native American tribes sign Point Elliott Treaty at Mukilteo on January 22, 1855". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 14, 2007. Dawn Bates; Thom Hess; Vi Hilbert (1994). Lushootseed Dictionary. University of Washington Press. p. 91. ISBN 978-0-295-97323-4. Waterman, T. T. (2001). sdaʔdaʔ gʷəɬ dibəɬ ləšucid ʔacaciɬtalbixʷ. Lushootseed Press. p. 44. ISBN 979-8750945764. George Vancouver; John Vancouver (1801). A voyage of discovery to the North Pacific ocean, and round the world. London: J. Stockdale. ISBN 978-0-665-18642-4. Tom (May 22, 2015). "Bird's-Eye View of Seattle and King County in 1891". Cool Old Photos. Retrieved March 5, 2019. Greg Lange (March 8, 2003). "Luther Collins Party, first King County settlers, arrive at mouth of Duwamish River on September 14, 1851". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 14, 2007. Greg Lange (December 16, 2000). "Collins party encounters Denny party scouts at Duwamish Head near future site of Seattle on September 27, 1851". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 14, 2007. Walt Crowley (August 31, 1998). "Seattle – a Snapshot History of Its Founding". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 14, 2007. "The Pioneer Square-Skid Road National Historic District Statement of Significance" (PDF). seattle.gov. City of Seattle. n.d. Retrieved July 10, 2022. James R. Warren (October 23, 2001). "Seattle at 150: Charles Terry's unlimited energy influenced a city". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved October 14, 2007. Speidel, William (1967). Sons of the Profits. Seattle: Nettle Creek Publishing Company. pp. 27–55. Greg Lange (March 28, 2001). "Charles Terry homesteads site of Alki business district on May 1, 1852". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 14, 2007. Thomas R. Speer, ed. (July 22, 2004). "Chief Si'ahl and His Family". Duwamish Tribe. Archived from the original on February 13, 2009. Retrieved October 14, 2007. Includes bibliography. Kenneth G. Watson (January 18, 2003). "Seattle, Chief Noah". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 14, 2007. Murray Morgan (1982) [First published 1951, 1982 revised and updated, first illustrated edition]. Skid Road: an Informal Portrait of Seattle. Seattle and London: University of Washington Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-295-95846-0. Greg Lange; Cassandra Tate (November 4, 1998). "Legislature incorporates the Town of Seattle for the first time on January 14, 1865". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 14, 2007. "Seattle City Symbols". City of Seattle. Retrieved February 28, 2014. Greg Lange. " "Seattle receives epithet Queen City in 1869". HistoryLink. Retrieved June 27, 2022. Emmett Shear (Spring 2002). "Seattle: Booms and Busts". Yale University. Author has granted blanket permission for material from that paper to be reused in Wikipedia. Now at s:Seattle: Booms and Busts. Junius Rochester (October 7, 1998). "Yesler, Henry L." HistoryLink. Retrieved October 1, 2007. George Kinnear (January 1, 1911). Anti-Chinese Riots At Seattle, Wn.. February 8, 1876. Retrieved October 4, 2007. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help) Kinnear's article, originally appearing in the Seattle Post-Intelligencer, was later privately published in a small volume. Walt Crowley (January 25, 2003). "Seattle burns down in the Great Fire on June 6, 1889". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 1, 2007. "Hard Drive to the Klondike: Promoting Seattle During the Gold Rush". National Park Service. February 18, 2003. Archived from the original on November 3, 2007. Retrieved October 1, 2007. J. Kingston Pierce (November 24, 1999). "Panic of 1893: Seattle's First Great Depression". HistoryLink. Retrieved December 18, 2008. Greg Lange (January 14, 1999). "Klondike Gold Rush". HistoryLink.org. Retrieved October 1, 2007. "Park History – Olmsted Parks". Seattle Parks and Recreation. Retrieved November 30, 2015. Greg Lange (May 5, 2003). "Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition opens for a 138-day run on June 1, 1909". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 1, 2007. Patrick McRoberts (February 4, 1999). "Seattle General Strike, 1919, Part I". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 1, 2007. BOLA Architecture + Planning & Northwest Archaeological Associates, Inc., "Port of Seattle North Bay Project DEIS: Historic and Cultural Resources" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 23, 2011. Retrieved July 26, 2008., Port of Seattle, April 5, 2005, pp. 12–13 (which is pp. 14–15 of the PDF). Retrieved July 25, 2008. Nash, Phil (2009). "Asian Pacific Americans During the Great Depression". AsianWeek. 5: 4. ProQuest 367348258. Dorpat, Paul; McCoy, Genevieve (1998). Building Washington. Seattle: Tartu Publications. Berner, Richard (1992). Seattle 1921–1940: From Boom to Bust. Seattle: Charles Press. Mullins, William (1991). The Depression and the Urban West Coast, 1929–1933. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. ISBN 9780253339355. Mullins, William (1975). San Francisco and Seattle During the Hoover Years of the Depression: 1929–1933. Seattle: University of Washington. Roy, Donald (1935). Hooverville: A Study of a Community of Homeless Men in Seattle. Seattle: University of Washington. Orleck, Annelise (1993). "We Are the Mythical Thing Called the Public". Feminist Studies. 19: 147–172. doi:10.2307/3178357. JSTOR 3178357. Moreo, Dominic (1996). Schools in the Great Depression. New York: Garland Publishing. ISBN 9780815320395. Gates, Charles (1961). The First Century at the University of Washington. Seattle: University of Washington Press. Statt, Daniel (March 5, 2001). "Pantages, Alexander (1876-1936)". HistoryLink. Retrieved May 3, 2021. "History of Seattle: The "Jet City" Takes Off". Seattle's Convention and Visitors Bureau. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Alan J. Stein (April 18, 2000). "Century 21 – The 1962 Seattle World's Fair, Part I". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 1, 2007. Greg Lange (June 8, 1999). "Billboard appears on April 16, 1971, near Sea–Tac, reading: Will the Last Person Leaving Seattle—Turn Out the Lights". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 1, 2007. The real estate agents were Bob McDonald and Jim Youngren, as cited at Don Duncan, Washington: the First One Hundred Years, 1889–1989 (Seattle: The Seattle Times, 1989), 108, 109–110; The Seattle Times, February 25, 1986, p. A3; Ronald R. Boyce, Seattle–Tacoma and the Southern Sound (Bozeman, Montana: Northwest Panorama Publishing, 1986), 99; Walt Crowley, Rites of Passage: A Memoir of the Sixties in Seattle (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1995), 297. Kristi Heim (March 21, 2006). "Chicago's got the headquarters, but Seattle's still Jet City, USA". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011. Retrieved October 1, 2007. Gates, Dominic (August 22, 2020). "Boeing's 787 choice could gut Washington state's aircraft industry". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 3, 2021. Engleman, Eric (October 3, 2004). "State's largest credit union grows by distancing itself from Boeing name". Puget Sound Business Journal. Retrieved May 3, 2021. "Seattle, WA Deadly Hotel Fire, Mar 1970". Walla Walla Union-Bulletin. March 20, 1970. Archived from the original on April 2, 2013. Retrieved October 24, 2020. Natalie Singer (September 7, 2006). "23 years haven't erased grief caused by Wah Mee Massacre". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 14, 2011. Retrieved December 18, 2008. "Information for Students: Key Events In Microsoft History". Microsoft Visitor Center Student Information. Archived from the original on August 5, 2010. Retrieved October 1, 2005. Basnet, Neetish (October 14, 2022). "Largest Tech Employers". Puget Sound Business Journal. Retrieved December 11, 2022. Strategic Planning Office (March 2011). "Basic Population and Housing Unit Characteristics: Decennial Census" (PDF). City of Seattle. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 18, 2013. Retrieved February 28, 2014. Jane Hodges (August 20, 2005). "Seattle area 'sticker shock' is a matter of perception". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 22, 2011. Retrieved September 29, 2007. David Wilma (February 25, 2004). "Ted Turner's Goodwill Games open in Seattle on July 20, 1990". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 1, 2007. Friedman, Thomas L. (November 21, 1993). "The Pacific Summit: Leaders at Summit Seek Strong Pacific Community". The New York Times. Retrieved May 3, 2021. Pray, D., Helvey-Pray Productions (1996). Hype!. Republic Pictures. Fox, David J. (June 28, 1993). "'Sleepless' Surprises Hollywood : Movies: Romantic comedy opens with a strong $17 million; 'Last Action Hero' falls 50% at box office. 'Jurassic Park' collects another $28 million. – latimes". Articles.latimes.com. Retrieved May 29, 2015. Lee Gomes (November 8, 2006). "The Dot-Com Bubble Is Reconsidered – And Maybe Relived". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 4, 2007. Gomes considers the bubble to have ended with the peak of the March 2000 peak of NASDAQ. David M. Ewalt (January 27, 2005). "The Bubble Bowl". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved October 4, 2007. Ewalt refers to the advertising on Super Bowl XXXIV (January 2000) as "the dot-com bubble's Waterloo". David Wilma (March 1, 2000). "Protests against the World Trade Organization (WTO) continue on December 1, 1999". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 1, 2007. "Double dose of woe strikes historic Seattle neighborhood". CNN. March 1, 2001. Retrieved December 11, 2008. Rosenberg, Mike (December 30, 2016). "Seattle's record apartment boom is ready to explode; what it means for rents". The Seattle Times. Retrieved January 11, 2018. Rosenberg, Mike (March 10, 2017). "Record construction frenzy sweeps downtown Seattle; more building to come". seattletimes.com. Retrieved March 27, 2017. Gene Balk (September 13, 2015). "Seattle's population boom approaching Gold Rush numbers". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 30, 2015. Daniel DeMay (October 13, 2015). "Thanks to an influx of tech jobs, Seattle is booming – but it's not easy to deal with". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved November 30, 2015. "Chapter Three – Native American Cultures". The First Americans. Four Directions. Archived from the original on March 29, 2006. Retrieved October 20, 2007.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Howard Morphy (1999). "Traditional and modern visual art of hunting and gathering peoples". In Richard B. Lee (ed.). The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Hunters and Gatherers. Cambridge University Press. p. 443. ISBN 978-0-521-57109-8. Department of Transportation. "Highest Elevations in Seattle and The Twenty Steepest Streets in Seattle". City of Seattle. Archived from the original on May 23, 2003. Retrieved October 4, 2007. Crowley, Walt (January 14, 2003). "Seattle's Seven Hills". HistoryLink. Retrieved April 12, 2010. Schulz, William H. (November 15, 2006). "Landslide susceptibility revealed by LIDAR imagery and historical records, Seattle, Washington" (PDF). United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 18, 2009. Retrieved March 5, 2009. Peterson, Lorin & Davenport, Noah C. (1950), Living in Seattle, Seattle: Seattle Public Schools, p. 44. Walt Crowley (March 2, 2001). "Earthquake registering 6.8 on Richter Scale jolts Seattle and Puget Sound on February 28, 2001". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 1, 2007. Greg Lange (February 1, 1999). "Earthquake hits Washington Territory on December 14, 1872". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 5, 2007. Greg Lange (January 1, 2000). "Earthquake hits Puget Sound area on April 13, 1949". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 5, 2007. Greg Lange (March 2, 2000). "Earthquake rattles Western Washington on April 29, 1965". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 4, 2007. "Seattle Fault Zone – implications for earthquake hazards". United States Geological Survey. June 15, 2007. Archived from the original on September 16, 2007. Retrieved October 4, 2007. Ray Flynn; Kyle Fletcher (July 2, 2002). "The Cascadia Subduction Zone – What is it? How big are the quakes? How Often?". University of Washington Department of Earth and Space Sciences. Archived from the original on April 17, 2009. Retrieved October 4, 2007. "US Gazetteer files: 2010, 2000, and 1990". United States Census Bureau. February 12, 2011. Retrieved April 23, 2011. "Seattle the next Saint-Tropez? Not quite, but Mediterranean climate trends continue". Q13 FOX News. June 8, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2018. "Seattle, Washington Köppen Climate Classification (Weatherbase)". Weatherbase. Retrieved November 4, 2018. Bloom, Jessi; Boehnlein, Dave (February 4, 2016). Practical Permaculture: for Home Landscapes, Your Community, and the Whole Earth. Timber Press. ISBN 9781604697421. Climatology. Jones & Bartlett Publishers. 1942. p. 207. ISBN 978-1-284-05427-9. "Seattle - WA" (PDF). South Seattle College. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 4, 2018. Kottek, M.; J. Grieser; C. Beck; B. Rudolf; F. Rubel (2006). "World Map of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification updated". Meteorol. Z. 15 (3): 259–263. Bibcode:2006MetZe..15..259K. doi:10.1127/0941-2948/2006/0130. Retrieved February 15, 2007. "3 Concept and classification". Global ecological zoning for the global forest resources assessment 2000. Rome: UN Food and Agriculture Organization. Forestry Department. 2001. Retrieved December 30, 2011. Dale D. Goble; Paul W. Hirt (March 15, 2012). Northwest Lands, Northwest Peoples: Readings in Environmental History. University of Washington Press. pp. 58–59. ISBN 978-0-295-80137-7. "What Is The Olympic Rain Shadow?". KOMOTV.com. October 4, 2006. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved September 28, 2007. "Mean Number of Days with Precipitation 0.01 Inch or More". NOAA Satellites and Information. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. "National Climatic Data Center: Cloudiness – Mean Number of Days". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on May 31, 2012. "National Weather Service - NWS Seattle". NWS Seattle, WA. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "NowData – NOAA Online Weather Data". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved June 27, 2021. "Summary of Monthly Normals 1991–2020". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved May 20, 2021. "WMO Climate Normals for Seattle/Seattle–Tacoma INTL A, WA 1961–1990". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on June 27, 2023. Retrieved July 18, 2020. "Seattle, WA - Detailed climate information and monthly weather forecast". Weather Atlas. Yu Media Group. Retrieved January 1, 2020. "About Seattle - OPCD - seattle.gov". www.seattle.gov. "Census of Population and Housing". Census.gov. Retrieved June 4, 2016. "US Census Bureau Quickfacts: Seattle city, Washington". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved June 16, 2023. "Explore Census Data". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved November 20, 2021. "Seattle (city), Washington". State & County QuickFacts. U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on March 27, 2014. Retrieved April 26, 2014. Cite error: The named reference pop was invoked but never defined (see the help page). Bear, Charla (June 29, 2012). "Why is Seattle such a white city?". KPLU. Retrieved June 30, 2012. Race, Hispanic or Latino, Age, and Housing Occupancy: 2010 more information 2010 Census Redistricting Data (Public Law 94-171) Summary File . Factfinder2census.gov. (2010). Retrieved December 30, 2011. "Overview of Race and Hispanic Origin: 2010" (PDF). Census.gov. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 29, 2011. Retrieved October 13, 2013. "Seattle in Focus: A Profile from Census 2000". The Brookings Institution. November 2003. Retrieved September 28, 2007. "Vietnamese American Population". Archived from the original on August 18, 2007. Retrieved August 17, 2007. "Translation Seattle". Lingo-Star. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved August 24, 2013. Turnbull, Lornet (September 17, 2004). "1,500 Cambodian refugees face deportation for crimes". The Seattle Times. ISSN 0745-9696. Archived from the original on May 1, 2008. "Puget Sound's Samoan community awaits news". The Seattle Times. September 30, 2009. Archived from the original on October 3, 2009. Retrieved April 26, 2012. Lornet Turnbull (September 28, 2008). "This is who I am: Defining mixed-race identity". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2012. Cassandra Tate (August 13, 2012). "Southeast Seattle ZIP Code 98118: Neighborhood of Nations". HistoryLink.org Essay 10164. Retrieved March 10, 2014. U.S. Census Bureau. "2018 ACS 1-Year Estimates". data.census.gov. Retrieved June 7, 2020. "A Roof Over Every Bed in King County" within ten years" (PDF). The Committee to End Homelessness in King County. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 17, 2008. Retrieved September 28, 2007. "Council Adopts Strategies to Implement "Ten-Year Plan to End Homelessness"". King County. September 19, 2005. Archived from the original on January 21, 2007. Retrieved September 28, 2007. Young, Bob (August 15, 2006). "Nickels backs 60% increase in city's population by 2040". The Seattle Times. ISSN 0745-9696. Archived from the original on July 5, 2009. Seattle has added about 4,000 residents a year over the past 16 years. If the city did nothing, planners predict it would gain 200,000 residents by 2040. Bob Young (April 4, 2006). "High-rise boom coming to Seattle?". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 4, 2007. Retrieved September 28, 2007. Talton, Jon (March 17, 2012). "Seattle blessed by downtown's upswing". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 24, 2012. Balk, Gene (May 26, 2022). "Seattle's population dropped, but another King County city saw fastest growth in WA". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on October 18, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. US Census Bureau (March 16, 2004). "City and County Data Book 2000: Cities with 100,000 or More Population Ranked by Subject". US Census Bureau. Archived from the original (TXT) on March 27, 2010. Retrieved December 17, 2007. Gary J. Gates (October 2006). "Same-sex Couples and the Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual Population: New Estimates from the American Community Survey" (PDF). UCLA School of Law. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 9, 2013. Retrieved November 21, 2012. Gene Balk (September 27, 2013). "Seattle overtakes San Francisco as No. 1 city for gay couples". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved October 24, 2013. "How did Capitol Hill become Seattle's gay neighborhood?". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. September 15, 2016. "Gross Metropolitan Product". Greyhill Advisors. Retrieved October 13, 2011. "Gross Metropolitan Product". U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. September 29, 2011. Retrieved October 13, 2011. "Seaport Statistics". portseattle.org. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved February 23, 2011. Roberts, C.R. (August 4, 2015). "Tacoma, Seattle ports agree on final Northwest Seaport Alliance details". The News Tribune. Tacoma, Washington. Retrieved March 11, 2017. Clark, Kate (December 30, 2019). "In the shadow of Amazon and Microsoft, Seattle startups are having a moment". TechCrunch. Retrieved August 17, 2020. "Council Wants City to Go Carbon Neutral in 20 Years". SeattleMet. February 22, 2010. Retrieved February 1, 2017. "Fortune 500". Fortune. 2017. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved December 18, 2017. Catharine Reynolds (September 29, 2002). "The List; Seattle: An Insider's Address Book". The New York Times. Retrieved October 21, 2001. Seattle's coffee culture has become America's "Starbucks Company Profile" (PDF). Starbucks. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 16, 2011. Retrieved October 21, 2007. Braiden Rex-Johnson (2003). Pike Place Market Cookbook. Foreword by Tom Douglas. Sasquatch Books. p. 195. ISBN 978-1-57061-319-7. Craig Harris (August 15, 2007). "Markets prompt Tully's to delay IPO". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved October 21, 2007. Gates, Dominic (April 6, 2021). "Boeing puts up for sale its Commercial Airplanes headquarters campus outside Seattle". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 22, 2021. "Locke Unveils Boeing 7E7 Tax Cut Wish List". KOMO. July 24, 2009 [1st pub. June 9, 2003]. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014. George Howland Jr. (June 23, 2004). "The Billion-Dollar Neighborhood". Seattle Weekly. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved September 28, 2007. Sara Clemence (July 14, 2005). "Most Overpriced Places in the U.S. 2005". Forbes. Retrieved September 28, 2007. "Minimum wage climbs to $16 per hour for Seattle's largest employers". King 5 News. December 30, 2018. "Media Contacts: Alaska Airlines". Alaska Airlines. Retrieved December 11, 2008. "Infographics". www.wghalliance.org. Archived from the original on April 28, 2016. Retrieved February 15, 2016. "Community Events". Archived from the original on June 25, 2007. Retrieved October 20, 2007. "About". Seattle Symphony Orchestra. Archived from the original on September 8, 2016. Retrieved October 21, 2015. "About". Pacific Northwest Ballet. Retrieved December 11, 2022. "Met Opera and Seattle Opera to Co-Produce Gluck's Final Operatic Masterpiece "Iphigénie en Tauride"" (PDF). Press release. Metropolitan Opera. December 18, 2006. Retrieved October 21, 2007. This press release from New York's Metropolitan Opera describes the Seattle Opera as "one of the leading opera companies in the United States... recognized internationally..." "Wagner". Seattle Opera. Retrieved October 21, 2007. Matthew Westphal (August 21, 2006). "Seattle Opera's First International Wagner Competition Announces Winners". Playbill Arts. Archived from the original on April 17, 2008. Retrieved October 21, 2007. Tracy, Allison (August 11, 2006). "Master's spinoff is coming to the Pillow". The Berkshire Eagle. Pittsfield, Massachusetts. p. 35. "Home page". SYSO. Retrieved October 21, 2007. Hahn, Sumi Seattle Chamber Music Society's summer festivals: for newbies and longtime fans. The Seattle Times, July 6, 2008. Retrieved December 30, 2011. Eric L. Flom (April 21, 2002). "Fifth (5th) Avenue Theatre". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 19, 2007. Examples of local talent are Billy Joe Huels (lead singer of the Dusty 45s) starring in Buddy – The Buddy Holly Story and Sarah Rudinoff in Wonderful Town. National-level stars include Stephen Lynch in The Wedding Singer, which went on to Broadway and Cathy Rigby in Peter Pan Misha Berson (February 11, 2006). "Eager-to-please new musical raids the 1980s". The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 25, 2007. Brendan Kiley (January 31, 2008). "Old Timers, New Theater". The Stranger. p. 27. Retrieved January 9, 2009. "around 100 theater companies ... Twenty-eight have some sort of Actors' Equity contract ..." "Theater Calendar". The Stranger. October 18, 2007. p. 45. This lists 23 distinct venues in Seattle hosting live theater (in the narrow sense) that week; it also lists 7 other venues hosting burlesque or cabaret, and three hosting improv. In any given week, some theaters are "dark". Misha Berson (February 16, 2005). "A new wave of fringe theater groups hits Seattle". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011. Retrieved October 26, 2007. This article mentions five fringe theater groups that were new at that time, each with a venue. Daniel C. Schechter (2002). Pacific Northwest. Lonely Planet. p. 33. ISBN 978-1-86450-377-7. Stuart Eskenazi (March 1, 2005). "Where culture goes to town". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 17, 2007. Retrieved October 19, 2007. Clark Humphrey (May 4, 2000). "Rock Music – Seattle". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 3, 2007. Lori Patrick (August 2, 2007). "Skip your commute for a 'Traffic Jam' with a twist, a Hip Hop & Spoken Word Mashup at City Hall, Aug. 16". City of Seattle. Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2007. "Indie and Team Semis results". National Poetry Slam 2006. August 12, 2006. Archived from the original on August 30, 2006. Retrieved October 6, 2007. "Home". Seattle Poetry Slam. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2007. John Marshall (August 19, 2007). "Eleventh Hour's volunteers deserve credit for a strong poetry fest revival". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved October 6, 2007.[permanent dead link] Kristin Dizon (June 10, 2004). "Now showing in Seattle: an explosion of indie theaters". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved January 9, 2009. Moira Macdonald (February 23, 2003). "Looking back at Cinerama format". The Seattle Times. Retrieved January 9, 2009. "Cruise Seattle". Port of Seattle. Archived from the original on September 22, 2009. Retrieved October 16, 2009. Annie Wagner (May 25–31, 2006). "Everything SIFF". The Stranger. Retrieved September 28, 2007. Judy Chia Hui Hsu (July 23, 2007). "Rains wash records away". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 4, 2007. Retrieved October 9, 2007. Casey McNerthney (August 14, 2007). "Where there's smoke, there's Hempfest". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved October 9, 2007.[permanent dead link] Misha Berson (September 3, 2007). "Report from Bumbershoot: Monday: Strong attendance, but not a record: 8:30 pm". The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 9, 2007. Kyung M. Song (June 30, 2008). "Marchers soak in the sun, gay pride". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 17, 2012. "Create Your Seattle Center Experience". Seattle Center. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved October 21, 2007. "Home page". The Seattle Antiquarian Book Fair & Book Arts Show. Retrieved October 26, 2007. "Sakura-Con English-language site". Asia Northwest Cultural Education Association. Retrieved October 25, 2007. Relevant information is on "Location" and "History" pages. Regina Hackett (August 24, 2007). "Video games rule at Penny Arcade Expo". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved October 26, 2007.[permanent dead link] Amy Rolph (July 13, 2007). "9,000 bicyclists ready to ride in annual event". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved October 9, 2007.[permanent dead link] "Home page". Three Dollar Bill Cinema. Archived from the original on July 2, 2007. Retrieved October 25, 2007. "Seattle Film Office: Filming in Seattle: Film Events and Festivals". Office of Film and Music. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011. Retrieved February 23, 2011. "About the Henry". Henry Art Gallery. Retrieved October 9, 2015. Dave Wilma. "Seattle Art Museum opens in Volunteer Park on June 23, 1933". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 9, 2007. "Seattle Parks Department official site". City of Seattle. 2013. Retrieved September 20, 2023. Karlins, N. F. "Frye Art Museum". Artnet. Retrieved September 20, 2023. Scott, Carrie E. A. "And the Galleries Marched in Two by Two". CS&P Art Advisory. Archived from the original on July 2, 2014. "About SOIL". SOIL Gallery. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved October 27, 2007. "About the gallery". Crawl Space Gallery. Archived from the original on September 6, 2006. Retrieved October 27, 2007. Jennifer Sullivan (June 29, 2012). "The Seattle Great Wheel opens to a big crowd". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2012. "Community Centers". City of Seattle. Retrieved October 21, 2007. Walt Crowley (July 8, 1999). "Woodland Park Zoo – A Snapshot History". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 9, 2007. Patrick McRoberts (January 1, 1999). "Seattle Aquarium opens to excited crowds on May 20, 1977". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 9, 2007. Ken Van Vechten (November 13, 2011). "History hidden in Seattle's basement". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 25, 2012. Kristin Jackson (April 26, 2009). "First cruise ship docks at Seattle's new $72 million terminal". The Seattle Times. Retrieved June 1, 2009. Balk, Gene (February 29, 2024). "Seattle is the least-religious large metro area in the U.S." The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 29, 2024. "Religious Landscape Study". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. Retrieved November 10, 2015. Major U.S. metropolitan areas differ in their religious profiles, Pew Research Center "America's Changing Religious Landscape". Pew Research Center: Religion & Public Life. May 12, 2015. "2021-22 Seattle Kraken Schedule and Results". Hockey-Reference.com. Sports Reference. Retrieved June 3, 2022. Bogert, Tom (November 10, 2019). "2019 MLS Cup breaks Seattle Sounders all-time attendance record". Major League Soccer. Retrieved June 3, 2022. "Starfire Sports – Indoor/Outdoor Soccer – Seattle, Renton, Kent". www.starfiresports.com. Allen, Percy (May 6, 2022). "Storm put on a show in front of Climate Pledge Arena crowd, blowing out Minnesota in opener". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Evans, Jayda (June 3, 2023). "OL Reign lose to Thorns for first time since 2019 to cap soccer twinbill". The Seattle Times. Retrieved August 6, 2023. Evans, Jayda (August 5, 2023). "Ballard FC prevails in a thrilling USL League Two final". The Seattle Times. Retrieved August 6, 2023. "West Seattle Junction FC to join USL League Two in 2024" (Press release). USL League Two. January 3, 2024. Retrieved January 3, 2024. Greg Lange (March 14, 2003). "Seattle Metropolitan hockey team wins the Stanley Cup on March 26, 1917". HistoryLink. Retrieved September 29, 2007. Caple, Jim (August 24, 2016). "Seattle Pilots barely remembered, except through Brewers, 'Ball Four'". ESPN. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Zimmerman, Hy (January 27, 1980). "Baseball left town in 1970, but came back to occupy Dome". The Seattle Times. pp. L8–L9. Stein, Alan J. (April 8, 1999). "Seattle Pilots Baseball Team". HistoryLink. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Divish, Ryan (December 19, 2018). "Goodbye, Safeco Field. The Mariners' stadium is now called T-Mobile Park". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 19, 2018. Stone, Larry (July 14, 2017). "Why didn't star-studded Mariners from 1995–2001 reach World Series?". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Greg Johns (July 13, 2011). "Mariners celebrate anniversary of 116-win club". Major League Baseball. Archived from the original on July 5, 2014. Retrieved May 22, 2015. Brewer, Jerry (October 5, 2022). "After 21 years of pain, Seattle baseball fans feel something new: Hope". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Drosendahl, Glenn (November 3, 2012). "Seattle Seahawks". HistoryLink. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Memmott, Mark (December 3, 2013). "Seahawks Fans Cause Earthquake, Set Noise Record". NPR. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Romero, José Miguel (March 20, 2009). "Sounders FC debuts with dazzling 3–0 victory". The Seattle Times. Retrieved September 4, 2015. Pentz, Matt (October 21, 2015). "Seattle Sounders to set MLS single-season attendance record on Sunday". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Ruthven, Graham (May 14, 2018). "Is the Seattle Sounders' era as an MLS superclub coming to an end?". The Guardian. Retrieved December 17, 2018. "Seattle Sounders FC capture first-ever MLS Supporters' Shield with victory over LA Galaxy". MLSsoccer.com. October 25, 2014. Archived from the original on November 28, 2014. Retrieved September 4, 2015. Pentz, Matt (September 18, 2014). "Sounders win 4th U.S. Open Cup". The Seattle Times. Retrieved September 4, 2015. Parker, Graham (December 10, 2016). "Seattle Sounders hold nerve in shootout to clinch first ever MLS Cup". The Guardian. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Dart, Tom (November 10, 2019). "Opportunistic Sounders see off Toronto FC for second MLS Cup title in four years". The Guardian. Retrieved November 10, 2019. Streeter, Kurt (May 5, 2022). "Sounders' Breakthrough Title Cements Seattle's Soccer Bona Fides". The New York Times. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Krasnoo, Ryan (June 8, 2017). "Reliving the top three Seattle Sounders U.S. Open Cup matches at Starfire Sports". Seattle Sounders FC. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Monahan, Terry (July 7, 2018). "Seawolves win inaugural Major League Rugby championship". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 5, 2018. Monahan, Terry (June 16, 2019). "'I can't explain this feeling': Seawolves repeat as Major League Rugby champions with try as time expires". Seattle Times. Retrieved June 17, 2019. Pengelly, Martin (June 25, 2022). "New York win Major League Rugby championship game against Seattle". The Guardian. Retrieved January 3, 2024. "NBA Board of Governors Approve Sonics Move to Oklahoma City Pending Resolution of Litigation". National Basketball Association. April 18, 2008. Archived from the original on May 20, 2017. Retrieved May 22, 2015. "NBA approves Sonics' move to Oklahoma". KOMO-TV. Associated Press. April 18, 2008. Archived from the original on April 30, 2008. Retrieved April 18, 2008. "Kings to stay in Sacramento as owners reject Seattle move". National Basketball Association. Associated Press. May 15, 2013. Retrieved November 6, 2015. Mayers, Joshua. "Seattle's professional women's soccer team will be called Reign FC". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Allen, Percy (September 12, 2018). "The champs are back! Seattle Storm wins the 2018 WNBA championship". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Copeland, Kareem (October 6, 2020). "Breanna Stewart and Sue Bird grab another ring as Seattle Storm wins WNBA title". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 7, 2020. "Preliminaries are Over; Kent to Become Home to Events Center". City of Kent. July 27, 2007. Archived from the original on January 27, 2012. Retrieved December 11, 2008. Kaplan, Emily (November 4, 2018). "Seattle gets NHL expansion team, to debut in 2021–22 season". Retrieved November 4, 2018. "Seattle applies for NHL expansion team". National Hockey League. February 13, 2018. Retrieved February 14, 2018. Baker, Geoff (February 13, 2018). "Seattle group files application for NHL expansion team to play at KeyArena". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 14, 2018. "Oak View Group unveils tweaked KeyArena renovation design". seattlepi.com. Retrieved January 21, 2018. Baker, Geoff (March 1, 2018). "Seattle surpasses 25,000 NHL season ticket commitments in just over an hour, OVG says". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 2, 2018. "Seattle Reign win NWSL Shield for 2nd straight season". ESPN. August 27, 2015. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Evans, Jayda (March 17, 2022). "With move to Lumen Field, OL Reign get set to embark on a new era in Seattle". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 31, 2022. Evans, Jayda (January 9, 2024). "OL Reign transform to Seattle Reign FC in throwback to original name and crest". Retrieved January 9, 2024. Evans, Jayda (May 21, 2022). "Ballard FC kicks off its existence with passionate fan base already installed and an easy win". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 31, 2022. "Ballard FC to Play 2024 Season at Memorial Stadium". Ballard FC. Retrieved January 3, 2024. Hanson, Scott (December 5, 2018). "Seattle one of eight franchises in the new XFL". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 5, 2018. "XFL Reveals Names, Logos for its Eight Teams". xfl.com. October 31, 2022. Retrieved December 11, 2022. "Seattle Sea Dragons axed in XFL merger with USFL". KIRO 7 News. January 1, 2024. Retrieved January 2, 2024. Pentz, Matt (September 24, 2016). "Washington Huskies, Seattle U Redhawks prepare to face off in mutually beneficial rivalry match". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Allen, Percy (August 15, 2018). "Storm will play at UW's Alaska Airlines Arena in 2019 while KeyArena is under construction". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 17, 2018. "Husky Stadium to debut after $280M renovation". USA Today. Associated Press. August 29, 2013. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Hanson, Scott (July 3, 2023). "What you need to know for the 2023 MLB All-Star Game in Seattle". The Seattle Times. Retrieved August 6, 2023. "NBA All-Star Game History". National Basketball Association. February 13, 2015. Retrieved May 22, 2015. Kelley, Mason (November 23, 2009). "Real Salt Lake Wins M.L.S. Cup". The New York Times. p. D1. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Evans, Jayda (June 16, 2022). "Seattle selected as one of 11 U.S. cities to host 2026 men's World Cup". The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Richard C. Berner (1991). Seattle 1900–1920: From Boomtown, Urban Turbulence, to Restoration. Seattle: Charles Press. p. 97. ISBN 978-0-9629889-0-5. "Seattle City Council Members, 1869–present Chronological Listing". Seattle City Archives. Retrieved July 19, 2008. Ethics and Elections Commission. "Seattle Form of Government". City of Seattle. Retrieved October 3, 2007. "Ballot Initiatives - CityArchives". Retrieved January 15, 2024. Wilson, Reid (July 30, 2021). "Angst grips America's most liberal city". The Hill. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Washington State Referendum 74 Passage Voter Map". The Seattle Lesbian. December 11, 2002. Archived from the original on November 10, 2016. Retrieved February 17, 2013. "Marijuana initiative wildly popular in Seattle & Eastside". The Seattle Times. December 3, 2012. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved February 17, 2013. Killen, Patricia O'Connell; Silk, Mark (2004). Religion and Public Life in the Pacific Northwest. AltaMira Press. ISBN 978-0-7591-0624-6. "Charting the unchurched in America". USA Today. March 7, 2002. Retrieved May 23, 2010. Religious identification in the U.S. Religioustolerance.org. Retrieved December 30, 2011. Neil Modie (August 15, 2005). "Where have Seattle's lefties gone?". The Seattle Times. Retrieved September 28, 2007. Office of the City Clerk. "Mayor Bertha Knight Landes". City of Seattle. Retrieved November 28, 2013. "McGinn concedes election to Seattle's mayor-elect Ed Murray". KOMO News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved November 28, 2013. Emily Heffter. "Socialist Sawant ready to shake up Seattle City Council". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 28, 2013. Sherry Harris. "Out and Elected in the USA: 1974–2004". OutHistory.org. Retrieved November 14, 2015. Tisa M. Anders (March 29, 2013). "Harris, Sherry D. (1957– )". BlackPast.org. Retrieved November 14, 2015. "Seattle City Council to be younger, more female, diverse". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 12, 2015. "Seattle becomes first U.S. city to ban caste discrimination". NBC News. The Associated Press. February 21, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. 2022 Metropolitan King County Council Districts (Map). King County Elections. January 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2024. 2022 Legislative Districts (Map). King County Elections. February 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "Overview of the Legislative Process". Washington State Legislature. Retrieved January 16, 2024. 2022 Congressional Districts (Map). King County Elections. February 2022. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Beekman, Daniel; Thompson, Lynn; Rowe, Claudia (November 8, 2016). "Pramila Jayapal defeats Brady Walkinshaw in Washington's 7th Congressional District". The Seattle Times. Retrieved September 13, 2017. Brunner, Jim (December 1, 2023). "U.S. Rep. Adam Smith's Bellevue home spray-painted with demands for Gaza cease-fire". The Seattle Times. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "ACS: Ranking Table – Percent of People 25 Years and Over Who Have Completed a Bachelor's Degree". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on October 13, 2004. Retrieved August 27, 2008. Sandi Doughton (December 28, 2007). "Minneapolis ousts Seattle as most literate city". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 31, 2007. Retrieved December 28, 2007. U.S. Census Bureau Geography Division (December 21, 2020). 2020 Census – School District Reference Map: King County, WA (PDF) (Map). 1:80,000. U.S. Census Bureau. p. 2. Retrieved August 3, 2022. "Parents involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1 Et Al" (PDF). Supreme Court of the United States. June 28, 2007. Retrieved October 3, 2007. Cassandra Tate (September 7, 2002). "Busing in Seattle: A Well-Intentioned Failure". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 3, 2007. "High court rejects school integration plans". The Seattle Times. June 28, 2007. Archived from the original on October 1, 2007. Retrieved October 3, 2007. "School Guide". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on May 13, 2011. Retrieved October 3, 2007. "Best Global University Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. September 8, 2017. "Fast Facts 2017" (PDF). University of Washington. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 1, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Andrew Goldstein (September 10, 2001). "Seattle Central". Time. Archived from the original on November 2, 2007. Retrieved September 28, 2007. "Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce". Retrieved November 3, 2007. Mike Lewis (August 17, 2006). "A new history at Seattle Weekly". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved October 28, 2007.[permanent dead link] "TV Listings (Zip Code 98101)". Zap2It. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2012. Brier Dudley (April 30, 2007). "At KEXP, technology and music embrace". The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 21, 2007. Celina Kareiva (April 8, 2012). "KRWM edges out KIRO in March Seattle radio rankings". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. "Cobb honored as one of 'Resuscitation Greats'". UW School of Medicine Online News. August 16, 2002. Retrieved September 29, 2007. "King County Medic One: A History of Excellence". King County. March 29, 2007. Archived from the original on July 7, 2007. Retrieved October 3, 2007. "Trauma Center". UW Medicine. Archived from the original on October 24, 2007. Retrieved October 3, 2007. Tom Boyer (August 19, 2005). "Pill Hill property sells for a bundle". The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 3, 2007. "UW Medicine – UW Medical Center Northwest". wsha.org. Washington State Hospital Association. August 10, 2015. Retrieved December 11, 2022. Walt Crowley (September 19, 2000). "Interurban Rail Transit in King County and the Puget Sound Region – A Snapshot History". HistoryLink.org. Retrieved September 29, 2007. "The South Lake Union Streetcar". Seattle Department of Transportation. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved September 29, 2007. "New to Sound Transit?". Sound Transit. Retrieved December 31, 2019. "1 Line - Northgate - Angle Lake". Sound Transit. Retrieved December 27, 2023. "History". Washington State Department of Transit. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved September 29, 2007. Lindblom, Mike (May 28, 2019). "Chinatown International District wary of Sound Transit plans for a second light-rail station there". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 20, 2020. Les Christie (June 29, 2007). "New Yorkers are Top Transit Users". CNNMoney.com. Retrieved August 17, 2008. Cindy Perman (April 19, 2011). "Most Walkable Cities". CNBC. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved August 28, 2016. "2011 City and Neighborhood Rankings". Walk Score. Retrieved August 24, 2012. Blethen, Ryan (March 4, 2019). "How the first day of commercial flights from Paine Field went". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 8, 2019. Baskas, Harriet (February 27, 2019). "Paine Field: What to expect when 'Seattle's second airport' opens March 4". USA Today. Retrieved March 8, 2019. Junius Rochester (November 10, 1998). "Maynard, Dr. David Swinson (1808–1873)". HistoryLink. Retrieved October 3, 2007. McNerthney, Casey (January 10, 2020). "Seattle's State Route 99 Tunnel opens to traffic on February 4, 2019". HistoryLink. Retrieved April 26, 2020. "INRIX Traffic Scorecard". April 28, 2013. Public Transportation Fact Book (PDF) (57th ed.). American Public Transportation Association. April 2006. p. 14. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 10, 2012. Retrieved August 25, 2012. Public Transportation Fact Book (PDF) (62nd ed.). American Public Transportation Association. April 2011. p. 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 13, 2012. Retrieved August 25, 2012. "Transit Now". King County Department of Transportation. Archived from the original on December 30, 2011. Retrieved December 30, 2011. Cohen, Josh (November 28, 2017). "Sound Transit (King, Pierce, and Snohomish counties)". HistoryLink. Retrieved February 26, 2024. "Capitol Hill, UW light-rail stations open to big crowds". The Seattle Times. March 19, 2016. Retrieved March 20, 2016. Lindblom, Mike; Baruchman, Michelle (October 2, 2021). "New light-rail stations now open at U District, Roosevelt and Northgate". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 1, 2021. Lindblom, Mike (August 18, 2022). "More delays for light rail to Bellevue, Redmond, Federal Way, Lynnwood". The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 13, 2022. Regional Transit System Plan Archived August 24, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. (PDF). soundtransit.org. Retrieved December 30, 2011. "Sound Transit 3 wins, despite rejection from Pierce County". The Seattle Times. November 9, 2016. Retrieved December 22, 2016. "Seattle City Light | Fuel Mix". Seattle.gov. Retrieved October 13, 2013. Ryan, John (November 22, 2023). "Seattle got dark and rainy again. Do we still need to conserve water?". KUOW. Retrieved February 14, 2024. Swanson, Conrad (February 4, 2024). "WA's mountain snow recharges our drinking water, powers our lives. Now it's turning to rain". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 14, 2024. Scigilano, Eric (March 14, 2019). "In subterranean Seattle, thousands of miles of tunnels, pipes and cables keep the city running". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 14, 2024. Bernton, Hal; Gutman, David (December 5, 2019). "As costs soar, King County wants to redo water-pollution agreement with state and feds". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 14, 2024. "Seattle's Sister Cities". Seattle: Office of International Relations. Long, Priscilla (September 12, 1988). "Seattle-Tashkent Peace Park in Uzbekistan is dedicated in Tashkent and at Seattle Center on September 12, 1988". HistoryLink.org. Retrieved July 22, 2022. Jones, Nard (1972). Seattle. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-01875-3. Morgan, Murray (1982) [1951]. Skid Road: an Informal Portrait of Seattle (revised and updated, first illustrated ed.). Seattle and London: University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-0-295-95846-0. Ochsner, Jeffrey Karl, ed. (1998) [1994]. Shaping Seattle Architecture: A Historical Guide to the Architects. Seattle and London: University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-0-295-97366-1. Sale, Roger (1976). Seattle: Past to Present. Seattle and London: University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-0-295-95615-2. Speidel, William C. (1978). Doc Maynard: The Man Who Invented Seattle. Seattle: Nettle Creek Publishing Company. pp. 196–197, 200. ISBN 978-0-914890-02-7. Speidel, William C. (1967). Sons of the profits; or, There's no business like grow business: the Seattle story, 1851–1901. Seattle: Nettle Creek Publishing Company. pp. 196–197, 200. ISBN 978-0-914890-00-3. Klingle, Matthew (2007). Emerald City: An Environmental History of Seattle. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-11641-0. MacGibbon, Elma (1904). "Seattle, the city of destiny" (DJVU). Leaves of knowledge. Washington State Library's Classics in Washington History collection. Shaw & Borden. OCLC 61326250. Pierce, J. Kingston (2003). Eccentric Seattle: Pillars and Pariahs Who Made the City Not Such a Boring Place After All. Pullman, Washington: Washington State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87422-269-2. Sanders, Jeffrey Craig. Seattle and the Roots of Urban Sustainability: Inventing Ecotopia (University of Pittsburgh Press; 2010) 288 pages; the rise of environmental activism Seattle at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Texts from Wikisource Travel information from Wikivoyage Official website Historylink.org, history of Seattle and Washington Seattle Photographs from the University of Washington Digital Collections Seattle Historic Photograph Collection from the Seattle Public Library Archived October 23, 2013, at the Wayback Machine Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project Seattle, a National Park Service Discover Our Shared Heritage Travel Itinerary Portals:  Cities  North America  Pacific Northwest  Washington (state)  United States