Ursula Gertrud von der Leyen (German: [ˈʊʁzula ˈɡɛʁtʁuːt fɔn dɛɐ̯ ˈlaɪən] ; née Albrecht; born 8 October 1958) is a German physician and politician serving as the 13th president of the European Commission since 2019. She served in the German federal government between 2005 and 2019, holding successive positions in Angela Merkel's cabinet, most recently as federal minister of defence. Von der Leyen is a member of the centre-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and its EU affiliated group, the European People's Party (EPP). Ursula von der Leyen was born and raised in Brussels, Belgium, to German parents. Her father, Ernst Albrecht, was one of the first European civil servants. She was brought up bilingually in German and French, and moved to Germany in 1971 when her father became involved in German politics. She graduated from the London School of Economics in 1978, and in 1987, she acquired her medical license from Hanover Medical School. After marrying fellow physician Heiko von der Leyen, she lived for four years in the United States with her family in the 1990s. After returning to Germany she became involved in local politics in the Hanover region in the late 1990s, and she served as a cabinet minister in the state government of Lower Saxony from 2003 to 2005. In 2005, she joined the federal cabinet, first as minister of family affairs and youth from 2005 to 2009, then as minister of labour and social affairs from 2009 to 2013, and finally as minister of defence from 2013 to 2019, the first woman to serve as German defence minister. When she left office she was the only minister to have served continuously in Merkel's cabinet since Merkel became chancellor. She served as a deputy leader of the CDU from 2010 to 2019, and was regarded as a leading contender to succeed Merkel as chancellor of Germany and as the favourite to become secretary general of NATO after Jens Stoltenberg. British defence secretary Michael Fallon described her in 2019 as "a star presence" in the NATO community and "the doyenne of NATO ministers for over five years." In 2023, she was again regarded as the favourite to take the role. On 2 July 2019, von der Leyen was proposed by the European Council as the candidate for president of the European Commission. She was then elected by the European Parliament on 16 July; she took office on 1 December, becoming the first woman to hold the office. In November 2022 von der Leyen announced that her Commission would work to establish an International Criminal Tribunal for the Russian Federation. She was named the most powerful woman in the world by Forbes in 2022 and 2023. Von der Leyen was born in 1958 in Ixelles, Brussels, Belgium, where she lived until she was 13 years old. In the family, she has been known since childhood as Röschen, a diminutive of Rose. Her father Ernst Albrecht worked as one of the first European civil servants from the establishment of the European Commission in 1958, first as chef de cabinet to the European commissioner for competition Hans von der Groeben in the Hallstein Commission, and then as director-general of the Directorate-General for Competition from 1967 to 1970. She attended the European School, Brussels I until the age of 13. In 1971, she relocated to Sehnde in the Hanover region after her father had become CEO of the food company Bahlsen and involved in state politics in Lower Saxony. Her father served as Minister President of Lower Saxony (state prime minister) from 1976 to 1990, being re-elected in state parliament elections in 1978, 1982 and 1986. In 1980 he ran for the CDU nomination for the German chancellorship, backed by CDU chairman Helmut Kohl, but narrowly missed the candidacy to fellow conservative Franz Josef Strauß (who then lost the general election to the sitting chancellor Helmut Schmidt); in the 1990 state elections Ernst Albrecht lost his office to Gerhard Schröder, who later became German chancellor. Most of her ancestors were from the former states of Hanover and Bremen in today's northwestern Germany; she has one American great-grandmother of primarily British descent, with more distant French and Italian ancestors, and some ancestors from what is now Estonia, then part of former Russian Empire. The Albrecht family was among the hübsche ("courtly" or "genteel") families of the Electorate and Kingdom of Hanover—a state that was in a personal union with the United Kingdom—and her ancestors had been doctors, jurists and civil servants since the 17th century. Her great-great-grandfather George Alexander Albrecht moved to Bremen in the 19th century, where he became a wealthy cotton merchant, part of the Hanseatic elite and the Austro-Hungarian Consul from 1895. He married Baroness Louise Dorothea Betty von Knoop (1844–1889), a daughter of Baron Johann Ludwig von Knoop, one of the most successful entrepreneurs of the 19th century Russian Empire.[better source needed] Von der Leyen's father's grandparents were the cotton merchant Carl Albrecht (1875–1952) and Mary Ladson Robertson (1883–1960), an American who descended from a planter family in Charleston, South Carolina. Her American ancestors played a significant role in the British colonisation of the Americas, and she descends from many of the first English settlers of Carolina, Virginia, Pennsylvania and Barbados, and from numerous colonial governors. Among her ancestors were Carolina governors John Yeamans, James Moore, Robert Gibbes, Thomas Smith and Joseph Blake, Pennsylvania deputy governor Samuel Carpenter, and the American revolutionary and lieutenant governor of South Carolina James Ladson. The Ladson family were large plantation owners and her ancestor James H. Ladson owned over 200 slaves by the time slavery in the United States was abolished; her relatives and ancestors were among the wealthiest in British North America in the 18th century, and she descends from one of the largest slave traders in the Thirteen Colonies, Joseph Wragg. Carl and Mary were the parents of Ursula von der Leyen's grandfather, the psychologist Carl Albrecht, who was known for developing a new method of meditation and for his research on mystical consciousness. She is the niece of the conductor George Alexander Albrecht and a first cousin of the chief conductor of the Dutch National Opera Marc Albrecht. Contrary to persistent internet rumours, the Albrecht family is not related to the owners of the supermarket chain Aldi. In 1986, she married physician Heiko von der Leyen, a member of the von der Leyen family that made a fortune as silk merchants and was ennobled in 1786; her husband became a professor of medicine and the CEO of a medical engineering company. She met him at a university choir in Göttingen. They have seven children, born between 1987 and 1999. Von der Leyen is Lutheran. Ursula von der Leyen is a native speaker of German and French, and speaks English fluently, having lived for a combined five years in the United Kingdom and the United States. She lives with her family on a farm in Burgdorf near Hanover where they keep horses. She is a keen equestrian and has been involved in competitive horseriding. She moved to the Hanover Region in 1971 when her father entered politics to become minister-president of the state of Lower Saxony in 1976. In 1977, she started studying economics at the University of Göttingen. At the height of the fear of communist terrorism in West Germany, she fled to London in 1978 after her family was told that the Red Army Faction (RAF) was planning to kidnap her due to her being the daughter of a prominent politician. She spent more than a year in hiding in London, where she lived with protection from Scotland Yard under the name Rose Ladson to avoid detection and enrolled at the London School of Economics. A German diminutive of Rose, Röschen, had been her nickname since childhood, while Ladson was the name of her American great-grandmother's family, originally from Northamptonshire. She said that she "lived more than she studied", and that London was "the epitome of modernity: freedom, the joy of life, trying everything" which "gave me an inner freedom that I have kept till today". She returned to Germany in 1979 but lived with a security detail at her side for several years. In 1980, she switched to studying medicine and enrolled at the Hannover Medical School, where she graduated in 1987 and acquired her medical licence, specialising in women's health. From 1988 to 1992, she worked as an assistant physician at the Women's Clinic of the Hannover Medical School. Upon completing her doctoral studies, she defended the thesis and graduated as a Doctor of Medicine in 1991. Following the birth of twins, she was a housewife in Stanford, California, from 1992 to 1996, while her husband was a faculty member of Stanford University, returning to Germany in 1996. From 1998 to 2002, she taught at the Department of Epidemiology, Social Medicine and Health System Research at the Hannover Medical School.[citation needed] In 2001 she earned a Master of Public Health degree at the institution. In 2015, researchers collaborating at the VroniPlag Wiki reviewed von der Leyen's 1991 doctoral thesis and alleged that 43.5% of the thesis pages contained plagiarism, and in 23 cases citations were used that did not verify claims for which they were given. Multiple notable German academics such as Gerhard Dannemann [de] and Volker Rieble [de] publicly accused von der Leyen of intended plagiarism. The Hannover Medical School conducted an investigation and concluded in March 2016 that while the thesis contains plagiarism, no intention to deceive could be proven. The university decided not to revoke von der Leyen's medical degree. Critics questioned the independence of the commission that reviewed the thesis as von der Leyen personally knew its director from joint work for an alumni association. Various media outlets also criticised that the decision was nontransparent, not according to established rules, and failed to secure high academic standards. Ursula von der Leyen joined the CDU in 1990, and became active in local politics in Lower Saxony in 1996, shortly after she had returned to Germany after living in California. She was a member of the committee on social policy of CDU in Lower Saxony from 1996, and also became active in the association of medical doctors in the CDU party. Ursula von der Leyen was elected to the Parliament of Lower Saxony in the 2003 state election for Lehrte, the same constituency then-Chancellor Gerhard Schröder represented from 1986 to 1998. From 2003 to 2005 she was a minister in the state government of Lower Saxony, serving in the cabinet of Christian Wulff, with responsibility for social affairs, women, family, and health. In 2003, von der Leyen was part of a group assigned by the then–opposition leader and CDU chairwoman Angela Merkel to draft alternative proposals for social welfare reform in response to Chancellor Gerhard Schröder's "Agenda 2010". The so-called Herzog Commission, named after its chairman, the former German President Roman Herzog, recommended a comprehensive package of reform proposals including, among other things, decoupling health and nursing care premiums from people's earnings and levying a monthly lump sum across the board instead. Ahead of the 2005 federal elections, Angela Merkel chose Ursula von der Leyen to cover the family and social security portfolio in her shadow cabinet. In the negotiations to form a government following the election, von der Leyen led the CDU/CSU delegation in the working group on families; her co-chair from the SPD was Renate Schmidt. In 2005, Ursula von der Leyen was appointed Federal Minister of Family Affairs and Youth in the cabinet of Angela Merkel. On the 60th anniversary of the founding of Israel, von der Leyen participated in the first joint cabinet meeting of the governments of Germany and Israel in Jerusalem in March 2008. At the federal election of 2009, von der Leyen was elected to the Bundestag, Germany's Parliament, representing the 42nd electoral district of Hanover, alongside Edelgard Bulmahn of the Social Democrats. In the negotiations to form a coalition government following the elections, she led the CDU/CSU delegation in the working group on health policy; her co-chair from the FDP was Philipp Rösler. She was reappointed as family minister, but on 30 November 2009 succeeded Franz Josef Jung as Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs. During her time in office, von der Leyen cultivated the image of being the social conscience of the CDU and helped Merkel to move the CDU into the political centre-ground. In speaking out for increasing the number of childcare nurseries, for the introduction of a women's quota for listed companies' main boards, for gay marriage and a nationwide minimum wage, von der Leyen made enemies among the more traditionalist party members and won admirers on the left. Von der Leyen also lobbied for lowering the barriers to immigration for some foreign workers, in order to fight shortages of skilled workers in Germany. In 2013, she concluded an agreement with the Government of the Philippines that was aimed at helping Filipino health care professionals to gain employment in Germany. A vital provision of the agreement is that the Filipino workers are to be employed on the same terms and conditions as their German counterparts. Von der Leyen was initially considered the front-runner to be nominated by the ruling CDU/CSU parties for election as President of Germany in the 2010 presidential election, but Christian Wulff was eventually chosen as the parties' candidate. The news media later reported that Wulff's nomination came as a blow to Merkel, whose choice of Leyen had been blocked by the two parties' more conservative state premiers. In November 2010, von der Leyen was elected (with 85% of the votes) as one of four deputies of CDU chairwoman Merkel, serving alongside Volker Bouffier, Norbert Röttgen and Annette Schavan. Later that month, she told the Bild am Sonntag newspaper that the CDU should consider establishing a formal voting process for choosing future candidates for Chancellor. In 2012, she was re-elected (with 69% of the votes) as one of Merkel's deputies as CDU chairwoman, this time serving alongside Bouffier, Julia Klöckner, Armin Laschet and Thomas Strobl. In the negotiations to form a government following the 2013 federal elections, von der Leyen led the CDU/CSU delegation in the labour policy working group, with Andrea Nahles of the SPD as her co-chair. In December 2013, Ursula von der Leyen was appointed by Merkel as Germany's first female defence minister. By placing a significant party figure such as von der Leyen at the head of the Defence Ministry, Merkel was widely seen as reinvigorating the scandal-ridden ministry's morale and prestige. Until her 2019 appointment as the president of the European Commission, she was the only minister to remain with Merkel since she became chancellor in 2005. In December 2014, von der Leyen had her fingerprint cloned by a German hacker who was able to use the commercially available VeriFinger product from Neurotechnology UAB to replicate her fingerprint using photographs taken with a "standard photo camera". In August 2016, von der Leyen joined the World Economic Forum board of trustees. In September 2016, von der Leyen chaired the EPP Defence Ministers Meeting, which gathers EPP defence ministers ahead of meetings of the Council of the European Union. Former British Secretary of State for Defence Michael Fallon noted in 2019 that she had been "a star presence" in the NATO community and "the doyenne of NATO ministers for over five years". She has faced domestic criticism for her leadership style, reliance on outside consultants, and continued gaps in military readiness. Within her first year in office, von der Leyen visited the Bundeswehr troops stationed in Afghanistan three times and oversaw the gradual withdrawal of German soldiers from the country as NATO was winding down its 13-year combat mission ISAF. In September 2015, she signalled that she was open to delaying the withdrawal of 850 German soldiers from Afghanistan beyond 2016 after the Taliban's surprise seizure of the northern city of Kunduz. German forces used to be based in Kunduz as part of NATO-led ISAF and remain stationed in the north of the country. She later opposed the troop withdrawal from Afghanistan. In the summer of 2014, she was instrumental in Germany's decision to resupply the Kurdish Peshmerga fighters with lethal assistance. Following criticism from German officials of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan's escalation of the Kurdish–Turkish conflict in August 2015, von der Leyen decided to let Germany's three-year Patriot missile batteries mission to southern Turkey lapse in January 2016 instead of seeking parliamentary approval to extend it. That same month, she participated in the first joint cabinet meeting of the governments of Germany and Turkey in Berlin. By April 2016, under von der Leyen's leadership, the German Federal Armed Forces announced they would commit 65 million Euro to establish a permanent presence at Incirlik Air Base, as part of Germany's commitment to the military intervention against ISIL. At the Munich Security Conference in February 2015, von der Leyen publicly defended the German refusal to supply Ukraine with weapons. Stressing that it was necessary to remain united in Europe over Ukraine, she argued that negotiations with Russia, unlike with the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant jihadists, were possible. Angela Merkel saw Ukraine and Russia as a chance to prove that in the 21st century, developed nations should solve disputes at the negotiating table, not with weapons, she said. She also noted that Russia has an almost infinite supply of weapons it could send to Ukraine. She questioned whether any effort by the West could match that or, more importantly, achieve the outcome sought by Ukraine and its supporters. On the contrary, von der Leyen said that giving the Ukrainians arms to help them defend themselves could have unintended and fateful consequences. "Weapons deliveries would be a fire accelerant," von der Leyen told the Süddeutsche Zeitung daily. She agreed with NATO SACEUR General Philip Breedlove that "it could give the Kremlin the excuse to openly intervene in this conflict." After Hungary used a water cannon and tear gas to drive asylum seekers back from the Hungarian-Serbian border in September 2015, during the European migrant crisis, von der Leyen publicly criticised the government of Prime Minister Viktor Orbán and called the measures "not acceptable and [...] against the European rules that we have". Under von der Leyen's leadership, the German parliament approved government plans in early 2016 to send up to 650 soldiers to Mali, boosting its presence in the U.N. peacekeeping mission MINUSMA in the West African country. In June 2014, von der Leyen introduced a €100 million plan to make the Bundeswehr more attractive to recruits, including by offering crèches for soldiers' children, limiting postings to match school term dates, and considerable rises in hardship allowances for difficult postings. In August 2014 in a debate over funding priorities, von der Leyen categorised as "vital to national interests" only sensor technology and crypto technology and left all other funding items as secondary. Economy Minister Sigmar Gabriel was unhappy with her and said that "this will have significant consequences for national defence procurement and European cooperation" as the key focus of the debate would determine where funding will be allocated. She admitted that "Germany would at present be unable to meet NATO requirements". For example, at this time the majority of the Luftwaffe was grounded, with 42 of its 109 Eurofighter Typhoons and 38 of 89 Tornado fighters ready for deployment. An external report had been commissioned and, with cost overruns rising into the billions of euros, all nine of the Bundeswehr's major projects had been delayed by between 30 and 360 months. This occurred one year into her tenure at Defense. In 2015, as a result of severe NATO–Russian tensions in Europe, Germany announced an increase in defence spending. In May 2015, the German government approved an increase in defence spending, at the time 1.3% of GDP, by 6.2% over the following five years, allowing the Ministry of Defense to modernise the army fully. Plans were also announced to expand the tank fleet to a potential number of 328, order 131 more Boxer armoured personnel carriers, increase the submarine fleet, and to develop a new fighter jet to replace the Tornado. Germany considered increasing the size of the army, and in May 2016 von der Leyen announced it would spend €130 billion on new equipment by 2030 and add nearly 7,000 soldiers by 2023 in the first German military expansion since the end of the Cold War.[better source needed] In February 2017, she announced that the number of Bundeswehr professional soldiers would increase from 178,000 to 198,000 by 2024. In April 2017 after Bundeswehr officials failed to properly investigate persistent reports of brutal hazing rituals, sexual humiliation, and bullying in military training, von der Leyen fired the army's training commander, Major General Walter Spindler, in 2017. As a consequence of improved Dutch–German cooperation, since 2014 two of the three Royal Netherlands Army Brigades are under German Command. In 2014, the 11th Airmobile Brigade was integrated into the German Division of fast forces (DSK). The German 414 Tank Battalion was integrated into the Dutch 43rd Mechanized Brigade. In turn, the Dutch 43rd Mechanized Brigade will be assigned to the 1st Panzer Division of the German army, with the integration starting at the beginning of 2016, and the unit becoming operational at the end of 2019. In February 2016 it was announced that the Seebatallion of the German Navy would start to operate under Royal Dutch Navy command. The Dutch-German military cooperation was seen in 2016 by von der Leyen and Dutch Minister of Defence Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert as an example for setting up a European defence union. A further proposal by von der Leyen, to allow non-German EU nationals to join the Bundeswehr, was met in July 2016 by strong opposition, even from her own party. According to a policy dictated by von der Leyen in February 2017, the Bundeswehr is to play a greater role as an "anchor army" for smaller NATO states, by improving coordination between its divisions and smaller members' Brigades. It was announced in February 2017 that the Czech Republic's 4th Rapid Deployment Brigade and Romania's 81st Mechanized Brigade would be integrated into Germany's 10 Armoured Division and Rapid Response Forces Division. In October 2014, von der Leyen pledged to get a grip on Germany's military equipment budget after publishing a KPMG report on repeated failures in controlling suppliers, costs and delivery deadlines, e.g., with the Airbus A400M Atlas transport plane, Eurofighter Typhoon jet and the Boxer armoured fighting vehicle. In January 2015, von der Leyen publicly criticised Airbus over delays in the delivery of A400M military transport planes, complaining that the company had a serious problem with product quality. Under her leadership, the ministry agreed to accept 13 million euros in compensation for delays in deliveries of both the second and third A400M aircraft. In 2016, she asked for an additional 12.7 million euros in damages for delays in the delivery of a fourth plane. Also in 2015, von der Leyen chose MBDA, jointly owned by Airbus, Britain's BAE Systems, and Italy's Leonardo S.p.A., to build the Medium Extended Air Defense System, but set strict milestones for it to retain the contract. During her May 2015 visit to India, von der Leyen expressed support for a project initiated by the Indian government to build six small German TKMS diesel-electric submarines for a total cost of $11 billion. In 2019, she also promoted the German government's decisions on arms exports to Saudi Arabia and Turkey. Since 2018 an investigative committee organised by Germany's Federal Audit Office has been looking into how contracts worth tens of millions of euros were awarded to external consultancy firms. The auditing office has found several irregularities in how the contracts were awarded. During the investigation, two of von der Leyen's phones were confiscated, but data from both phones have been deleted before being returned to the defence ministry. In turn, opposition lawmaker Tobias Linder has filed a criminal complaint against von der Leyen suspecting deliberate destruction of evidence relevant for the case. Von der Leyen was elected as a member of the CDU executive board in December 2014 and received 70.5% of the votes. As in her reelections in 2016 (72.4%) and 2018 (57.47%), this was the weakest of all results. As a cabinet member, von der Leyen was, for several years, regarded as one of the leading contenders to succeed Merkel as Chancellor. In 2010 she was Merkel's preferred candidate for President of Germany, but her nomination was blocked by the conservative wing of the CDU/CSU. From 2018 until her nomination as European Commission president she was described as the favourite to succeed Jens Stoltenberg as Secretary General of NATO. Die Welt reported that von der Leyen "is highly respected in the alliance" and that "all the [NATO] defence ministers listen when she speaks." On 2 July 2019, von der Leyen was proposed by the European Council as their candidate for the office of President of the European Commission. On 16 July, her nomination was approved by the European Parliament with 383 to 327 votes. Germany abstained from the vote to nominate her. An article in The Guardian said that the reason for Germany's refusal to support her nomination in the European Council was that von der Leyen was considered divisive in her home country. She is the first woman to hold the office and the first German since the commission's first president, Walter Hallstein. When she lived in Brussels, her little sister Benita-Eva died of cancer at the age of eleven and she remembered "the enormous helplessness of my parents" in view of the cancer. This inspired her to make cancer a focus of her government. At the press conference announcing her nomination, European Council President Donald Tusk noted von der Leyen's intention to retain Commission First-Vice-President Frans Timmermans during her administration. Timmermans has previously been one of the "lead candidates" (German: Spitzenkandidat) for the commission's presidency. As a candidate, she published a document entitled "My agenda for Europe", and was fêted for her commitment to "gender equality and gender mainstreaming" by at least one observer who sought to advance the "professional development of women in the field of international peace and security". Following her nomination as a candidate for Commission president, the Commission provided her with a salary, office, and staff in Brussels to facilitate negotiations between the EU institutions as to her election. These arrangements were extended, to enable a smooth transition, during her period as president-elect, until the new College of Commissioners was confirmed by the European Parliament and took office in November. In light of her new role, von der Leyen resigned her seat in the German Bundestag on 31 July 2019. Von der Leyen supported the proposed European Union–Mercosur free trade agreement, which would form one of the world's largest free trade areas. The fear is that the deal could lead to more deforestation of the Amazon rainforest as it expands market access to Brazilian beef. Von der Leyen unveiled the new proposed EU Commission's structure (whom she deemed to be a "geopolitical" one) on 10 September 2019, renaming a number of posts of the College of Commissioners to make them sound less formal and more goal-oriented, including the controversial portfolio for "Protecting our European Way of Life", a vice-presidency responsible for the coordination of migration, security, employment and education policies. The later portfolio's name drew heavy criticism, as it was considered to carry a xenophobic message linking the protection of the "European Way of Life" to migration policies. The proposed structure for the college also saw the "unexpected" promotion of EPP's Valdis Dombrovskis to a role of executive vice-president, up to a number of three executive vice-presidencies, equalling the roles entrusted to Timmermans and Margrethe Vestager. At the time of von der Leyen's nomination as president of the Commission, an investigative committee of the German parliament was investigating how, during her time as minister of defence of Germany, lucrative contracts from her ministry were awarded to outside consultants without proper oversight, and whether a network of informal personal connections facilitated those deals. In December 2019, German parliamentarians accused the German Defence Ministry of torpedoing the investigation into alleged wrongdoing in its consultant contracts by deleting data from the official phone of von der Leyen from the time she was Minister of Defence after it was declared evidence in the investigation, and by arguing that the deletion of the phone data was "for security reasons". In March 2020, von der Leyen's Commission turned down the idea of suspending the Schengen Agreement in order to introduce border controls around Italy, at that time the centre of the COVID-19 pandemic in Europe, The decision drew criticism from some European politicians. After some EU member states announced closure of their national borders to foreign nationals due to the COVID-19 pandemic, von der Leyen said that "Certain controls may be justified, but general travel bans are not seen as being the most effective by the World Health Organization. Moreover, they have a strong social and economic impact, they disrupt people's lives and business across the borders." Von der Leyen condemned the U.S. decision to restrict travel from the coronavirus-affected Europe to the United States. Von der Leyen supported the EU's imposition of sanctions against Belarus after the security services violently cracked down on street protests in Minsk and elsewhere against the 26-year authoritarian rule under President, Alexander Lukashenko. The protests took place after a disputed presidential election, which was contested by the opposition and designated by the EU as not free and fair. Sanctions were imposed after the Belarusian government diverted a civilian aircraft in order to seize an opposition figure, Roman Protasevich. Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis called for EU sanctions against Turkey (citing Belarus as precedent) over Turkey's incursions into Greek maritime zones in the eastern Mediterranean, including illegal drilling and the passage of the Oruç Reis, accompanied by a Turkish Navy ship, in Greek waters. Sanctions would require a unanimous decision of the EU Council of Ministers. While France and Austria fully backed Greece's position, Germany (which at the time held the rotating EU presidency) took a more ambiguous stance. Von der Leyen said that Turkey and Belarus are "two different situations". French-U.S. and French-Australia relations suffered a period of tension in September 2021 due to fallout from the AUKUS defence pact between the U.S., the United Kingdom, and Australia. The security pact is directed at countering Chinese power in the Indo-Pacific region. As part of the agreement, the U.S. agreed to provide nuclear-powered submarines to Australia. After entering into AUKUS, the Australian government cancelled an agreement that it had made with France for the provision of French conventionally powered submarines. Von der Leyen called the way France was treated "unacceptable" and demanded an explanation. The EU also demanded an apology from Australia. Due to a combination of unfavourable conditions, which involved soaring demand of natural gas, its diminished supply from Russia and Norway to the European markets, and less power generation by renewable energy sources such as wind, water and solar energy, Europe faced steep increases in energy prices in 2021. Some critics blamed a record-breaking surge in energy prices on the European Commission's Green Deal, which aims to make the EU climate neutral by 2050. Von der Leyen said that "Europe today is too reliant on gas and too dependent on gas imports. The answer has to do with diversifying our suppliers ... and, crucially, with speeding up the transition to clean energy." During the 2021 Israel–Palestine crisis, von der Leyen condemned the indiscriminate attacks by the Palestinian terrorist group Hamas on Israel. In December 2021 the former doctor expressed her concern that one-third of the European population still are not vaccinated. She said that "EU nations should open a debate around making COVID-19 vaccinations mandatory because too many people still refuse to get shots voluntarily." In April 2021, The New York Times reported that von der Leyen had exchanged electronic correspondence with Pfizer CEO Albert Bourla negotiating terms of sale of the COVID-19 vaccine to the EU. Emily O'Reilly, the European Ombudsman, accused von der Leyen of "maladministration" for failure to disclose that correspondence upon a FOI request, and for claiming that the messages had disappeared, and for further claiming that the vaccine line item of the EU's budget was confidential. Von der Leyen was first reported to have taken a personal role in negotiating the largest vaccine deal for the EU. The commission later clarified that Von der Leyen had no (formal) role in purchasing the vaccine. “The President of the Commission was not involved in the negotiations on the Covid vaccine contract,” said Health Commissioner Stella Kyriakides in the EU Parliament. At the time, the deal was estimated to be worth around €35 billion; it would cover the purchase of 900 million doses of the BioNTech/Pfizer COVID-19 vaccine if fully exercised, with an additional 900 million doses available for purchase. After the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said that Ukraine should become a member of the European Union, the Ukrainian people belong to the European family, but there is a long way to go and the war must end. On 8 April 2022 in the midst of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine Von der Leyen travelled to Kyiv (which had seen open hostilities only days earlier) to lend her support to the beleaguered Volodymyr Zelenskyy and his countrymen. She visited the site of the Bucha massacre, tweeted "My message to Ukrainian people: Those responsible for the atrocities will be brought to justice. Your fight is our fight." and vowed she would work towards that country's accession to the EU. "Our goal is to present Ukraine's application to the council this summer." She was accompanied by Josep Borrell, who expressed "confidence that EU states would soon agree to his proposal to provide Ukraine with an additional €500 million to support the armed forces in their fight against the Russian army". On 4 May 2022, she announced the European Union would seek to ban all imports of Russian crude oil and petroleum products. She said in a statement, "We must become independent from Russian oil, coal and gas." At a 2022 Europe Day event to celebrate the conclusion of the Conference on the Future of Europe, von der Leyen stated her agreement with the report prepared by panels of randomly selected EU citizens, that the Union needed to move away from unanimous voting in the Council when it comes to foreign policy decisions. In a June Politico interview, she expressed that her views had been shaped by the slow pace of the Union in adopting sanctions against Belarus and Russia due to unanimity requirements. She has stated however, that the Union should not completely move away from unanimity. During the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, von der Leyen travelled to Kyiv to support the Ukrainian people. On 18 July 2022 von der Leyen called Azerbaijan a reliable partner for energy supply, later signing an agreement with Azerbaijan government intended to diversify gas supplies in the context of the ongoing Russian-Ukraine war 2022. This sparked controversy when Azerbaijan attacked its neighbour Armenia just a few months later, and Azeri soldiers committed various documented atrocities including rapes and the murder of prisoners of war. Human rights activists claim that an EU president cannot condemn one dictator while embracing another, which was also expressed in the EU parliament by Martin Sonneborn. The deal will double Azerbaijan's natural gas imports through the Southern Gas Corridor by 2027. In April von der Leyen issued a video statement celebrating Israel's 75th Independence Day, noting that "the Jewish People could finally build a home in the Promised Land," adding that "You have literally made the desert bloom." In July 2023, she visited the Philippines and praised the improvement in human rights in the Philippines while meeting with Philippine President Bongbong Marcos. In October 2023, von der Leyen condemned "the military operation by Azerbaijan against the Armenian population of Nagorno-Karabakh and reaffirmed the need to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Armenia". During the October 2023 Israel–Hamas war, von der Leyen condemned the indiscriminate attacks by the Palestinian terrorist group Hamas on Israel, calling it "terrorism in its most despicable form" and saying "Israel has the right to defend itself against such heinous attacks". She announced that humanitarian aid to Gaza would be tripled. In December 2023, she came to Egypt and discussed the "strategic partnership" between the EU and Egypt with Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. In May 2023 at the Beyond Growth conference in the European Parliament, Ursula von der Leyen moderately criticised GDP-based economy saying that "a growth model centred on fossil fuels is simply obsolete" and "economic growth is not an end in itself". Approximately one hour later, the European Commission presented its economic forecast which talked about GDP and inflation without presenting any other parameters. When Economy Commissioner Paolo Gentiloni was asked whether the commission will change its mode of economy measuring following von der Leyer criticism he answered: "the Commission was considering a stronger role "not only [for] the environmental dimension, but the social dimension" in its recommendation and policies". Von der Leyen remarks came as part of a debate in the European Union whether it possible to not pass Planetary boundaries in a GDP based economy. The European Commission officially approved a measure to phase out palm oil–based biofuels by 2030. During a meeting with von der Leyen, Indonesian President Joko Widodo expressed concern about the EU Deforestation Regulation (EUDR), which aims to prevent products linked to deforestation from reaching the EU market. In 2022, the European Union recorded the highest number of unauthorised migrant arrivals since 2016. Von der Leyen tried to strike a deal with Tunisia's authoritarian President Kais Saied, with a focus on stopping illegal migration from Tunisia to Italy. In September 2023, more than 120 boats carrying around 7,000 migrants from Africa arrived on the Italian island of Lampedusa within 24 hours. Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni declared that she wrote to von der Leyen "to ask her to come with me to Lampedusa to personally realize the gravity of the situation we face, and to immediately accelerate the implementation of the agreement with Tunisia by transferring the agreed resources." In March 2024 von der Leyen was once again confirmed as the EPP's candidate for the Presidency of the European Commission. Opinion polls deem her re-election as certain. Von der Leyen is a member of the German branch of the European Movement. She is, or has been, also a member of several boards of trustees: Total E-Quality initiative, Member of the Board of Trustees Mädchenchor Hannover, Member of the Board of Trustees World Economic Forum (WEF), Member of the Board of Trustees (2016–2019) World Economic Forum on the Middle East and North Africa, Co-chair (2017) Munich Security Conference, Member of the Advisory Council (2013–2019) 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup, Member of the Board of Trustees (2010–2011) Ursula von der Leyen assumed her office as Federal Minister for Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and Youth in 2005. Amidst protest, particularly from the conservative wing of her party, the CDU, she introduced the Child Advancement Act [de] (Kinderförderungsgesetz), which reserved 4.3 billion euros for the creation of childcare structures throughout Germany. Von der Leyen also introduced the German Elternzeit, a paid parental leave scheme. Following Scandinavian models, the scheme reserves two additional months for fathers who go on parental leave as well (Vätermonate in German). This part of the law, in particular, attracted protest from some German conservatives. Catholic Bishop Walter Mixa accused von der Leyen of turning women into "birthing machines". Meanwhile, Bavarian colleagues from von der Leyen's sister party, the CSU, complained that men did not need a "diaper-changing internship". von der Leyen successfully influenced public opinion of her reforms with a 3-million-euro PR campaign, which was criticised for using public funds for political advocacy and for employing embedded marketing techniques. Ursula von der Leyen advocated the initiation of a mandatory blockage of child pornography on the Internet through service providers via a block list maintained by the Federal Criminal Police Office of Germany (BKA), thus creating the necessary infrastructure for extensive censorship of websites deemed illegal by the BKA. These actions brought her the nickname "Zensursula", a portmanteau word blending the German word for censorship ("Zensur") and her given name ("Ursula"). The combination of a sensitive topic like child pornography and internet censorship is said to have caused a rising interest in the Pirate Party. In July 2009, she referred to the problems of struggling against paedophile pornography on the internet as the responsible persons often use servers located in Africa or India, where, she said, "child pornography is legal". This claim was based on a 2006 study by the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children. However, child pornography is, in fact, illegal in India, which has much stricter rules about erotic media than Germany. She later expressed regret for having cited an inaccurate study. Von der Leyen was in charge of the request to ban and rate the Rammstein album Liebe ist für alle da by the Federal Review Board for Media Harmful to Minors. In 2013, von der Leyen unsuccessfully campaigned for a statutory quota for female participation in the supervisory boards of companies in Germany, requiring company boards to be at least 20% female by 2018, rising to 40% by 2023. Von der Leyen is a proponent of a more assertive German foreign policy. One striking example was the decision in September 2014 to send arms to Kurdish and Iraqi security forces. This decision broke a longstanding taboo on Germany's dispatching of weapons to a conflict zone. On the deteriorating relationship between Europe and Russia during the 2014 Crimean crisis, she argued that "the reliance on a functioning business relationship with Europe is much, much bigger in Russia" and that sanctions should prod the oligarchs and Russian business. She also called for more significant NATO backing of the Baltic states amid the Crimean dispute. Von der Leyen has supported close security cooperation with Saudi Arabia. German opposition parties criticised Germany's defence plan with Saudi Arabia, which has been waging war in Yemen and was condemned for massive human rights violations. In 2016, von der Leyen caused controversy after she refused to wear a hijab while visiting Saudi Arabia. She said: "It annoys me when women are to be pushed into wearing the abaya." In 2017 von der Leyen noted that "healthy democratic resistance of the younger generation" in Poland must be supported. In some Polish media, it was understood that she instigated opposition aimed to overthrow the allegedly anti-democratic and authoritarian PiS government; the statement was branded as scandalous. The Polish Foreign Minister made sarcastic comments about "Prussian tone of the Ode to Joy". The Polish Minister of Defence summoned the Germany military attache and demanded explanations. The German embassy in Warsaw and spokesman for the German defence ministry in Berlin issued conciliatory statements. The German media mostly ignored the incident; some acknowledged a "minor slip of the tongue" on the part of von der Leyen, yet also noted that German-Polish relations were "severely damaged". Von der Leyen responded to Donald Trump's criticism of the Russian-backed Nord Stream 2—a pipeline for delivering natural gas from Russia to Germany—in an interview with the BBC: "We have an independent energy supply, we are an independent country, we are just diversifying". In a 2011 interview with Der Spiegel, von der Leyen expressed her preference for "a united states of Europe – run along the lines of the federal states of Switzerland, Germany or the USA" which would capitalise on Europe's size by agreeing on core issues relating to finance, tax and economic politics. With 2014 marking the centenary of the start of World War I, von der Leyen – in her capacity as defence minister – inaugurated a memorial for the Armistice Day in Ablain-Saint-Nazaire alongside French President François Hollande and North Rhine-Westphalia State Premier Hannelore Kraft, as well as British and Belgian officials. In 2015, von der Leyen argued that a form of EU army should be a long-term goal. She also said that she was convinced about the goal of a combined military force, just as she was convinced that "perhaps not my children, but then my grandchildren will experience a United States of Europe". In March 2015, she and her counterparts from France and Poland, Jean-Yves Le Drian and Tomasz Siemoniak, revived a meeting format intended to promote cooperation between the three countries in crisis zones by holding their first meeting between the Weimar Triangle defence ministers since 2007. Following the 2016 European Union membership referendum in the United Kingdom, she argued that the UK had "paralysed" European efforts to integrate security policy and "consistently blocked everything with the label 'Europe' on it". She has described Brexit as "a burst bubble of hollow promises". In an interview with The Guardian days after her election to succeed Jean-Claude Juncker as President of the European Commission, she stated that the withdrawal deal agreed between Theresa May and chief Brexit negotiator Michel Barnier would remain the basis of any future talks. She also stated that the EU should extend the Brexit deadline beyond 31 October 2019. In November 2019, at Paris Peace Forum, von der Leyen said that there is need for stable and responsible leadership in Europe and that the bloc must increase foreign policy budget spending by one-third. On 7 September 2023, Ursula von der Leyen met the UAE President Mohammad bin Zayed in Abu Dhabi. The meeting included a discussion on the export of sanctioned goods through the Gulf state to Russia. She asked MbZ to be more cooperative and constructive in handling the issue. The EU expected the UAE to stop being a mediator supplying sanctioned goods to Russia. It had already sanctioned several Emirati entities that were alleged of directly supporting Russia's war. Von der Leyen and French President Emmanuel Macron raised the issue of human rights in China during their visit to China in April 2023, amid growing international criticism of China's repression of ethnic minorities, political dissidents, and civil society activists. They expressed their concerns over the situation in Xinjiang, where the Chinese government has detained an estimated one million Uyghurs and other Turkic Muslims in re-education camps, subjected them to forced labour, surveillance, and abuse. They also urged China to respect the autonomy and freedoms of Hong Kong. When the Federal Constitutional Court ruled in favour of tax equality for same-sex couples in 2013, von der Leyen came forward in support of equal adoption rights, arguing that "I know of no study that says that children growing up in same-sex partnerships fare any differently than children who grow up in heterosexual marriages or partnerships". In June 2017, von der Leyen voted against her parliamentary group's majority and in favour of Germany's introduction of same-sex marriage. On the 75th anniversary of Israel's independence, von der Leyen referred to Israel as a "vibrant democracy" in the Middle East that made "the desert bloom". These remarks were criticised by the foreign ministry of the Palestinian Authority. During the 2023 Israel–Hamas war, she was criticised for supporting Israel and not calling for a ceasefire. On 13 October 2023, she visited Israel to express solidarity with the country. She accused Iran of being "behind Hamas", saying that "Iran has no interest whatsoever in this region coming to peace. On the contrary, Iran wants to foment violence and chaos because that secures its influence." Ursula von der Leyen and other European leaders offered verbal and material support to Israel, including military aid. Ursula von der Leyen considers stopping climate change as a top priority.[citation needed] She is promoting green regulation and initiatives.[citation needed] She promoted the European Green Deal. She complained that "Global markets are now flooded with cheaper Chinese electric cars, and their price is kept artificially low by huge state subsidies".  Lithuania: Grand Cross of the Order for Merits to Lithuania (2 March 2017)  Mali: Commander of the National Order of Mali (4 April 2016)  Ukraine: Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise, 1st class (23 August 2022) 2023 – Honorary Doctorate, Université Toulouse Capitole 2022 – Honorary Doctorate, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev 2019 – Forbes' list of the World's 100 Most Powerful Women, position 4 2020 – Forbes' list of the World's 100 Most Powerful Women, position 4 2020 – Global Citizen Prize for World Leader 2022 – BBC 100 Women 2022 – Global Goalkeeper Award, presented by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation's Goalkeepers program 2022 – Forbes' list of the World's 100 Most Powerful Women, position 1 2023 – Forbes' list of the World's 100 Most Powerful Women, position 1 Ursula von der Leyen, C-reaktives Protein als diagnostischer Parameter zur Erfassung eines Amnioninfektionssyndroms bei vorzeitigem Blasensprung und therapeutischem Entspannungsbad in der Geburtsvorbereitung, doctoral dissertation, Hannover Medical School, 1990 Ursula von der Leyen, Maria von Welser, Wir müssen unser Land für die Frauen verändern. (in German) C. Bertelsmann Verlag, Munich, 2007, ISBN 978-3-570-00959-8 Ursula von der Leyen, Liz Mohn, Familie gewinnt. (in German) Verlag Bertelsmann Stiftung, Gütersloh, 2007, ISBN 978-3-89204-927-2 The process for electing the president of the European Commission is described in Article 17(7) of the Treaty on European Union. The European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker criticised Von der Leyen's decision, saying: "I don't like the idea that the European way of life is opposed to migration. Accepting those that come from far away is part of the European way of life." Philippe Lamberts, the president of the Greens–European Free Alliance at the European Parliament, said: "An all-white European Commission claiming to protect 'our European way of life' is a far cry from the idea of unity in diversity on which this union is built. Von der Leyen must present a better proposal". Arne Delfs (22 January 2014), "Merkel Succession Beckons After Von der Leyen's Defence Posting", Businessweek. Fallon, Michael (3 July 2019). "Yes, Ursula von der Leyen is an EU federalist, but she knows she can't afford to alienate Britain". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 – via www.telegraph.co.uk. Barnes, Joe (4 July 2023). "Joe Biden pushes for Ursula von der Leyen to be Nato chief". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 28 November 2023. "First woman nominated to lead EU Commission". BBC. 2 July 2019. Retrieved 2 July 2019. "EU leaders pick Germany's von der Leyen to lead Commission". POLITICO. 2 July 2019. Retrieved 2 July 2019. "MEPs back von der Leyen as EU Commission head". BBC News. 16 July 2019. "Consolidated version of the Treaty on European Union – TITLE III: PROVISIONS ON THE INSTITUTIONS – Article 17". eur-lex.europa.eu. Official Journal of the European Union. Retrieved 8 July 2019. "Statement by President von der Leyen on Russian accountability and the use of Russian frozen assets". European Commission. Retrieved 1 December 2022. "The World's Most Powerful Women 2022". Forbes. 6 December 2022. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 29 December 2023. "The World's Most Powerful Women 2023". Forbes. 5 December 2023. Archived from the original on 5 December 2023. Retrieved 29 December 2023. "Ursula von der Leyen: eine Karriere". www.ndr.de. Archived from the original on 16 July 2019. Barker, Alex; Peel, Michael; Jones, Claire; Mount, Ian; Roberts, Hannah (2 July 2019). "Christine Lagarde and Ursula von der Leyen: meet the EU's next leaders". Financial Times. Retrieved 2 July 2019. "Ursula von der Leyen – Biografie WHO'S WHO". www.whoswho.de. Tony Paterson (15 December 2013). "Ursula von der Leyen: Is this the next woman to become Chancellor of Germany?". The Independent. "Der denkmalgeschützte Bau drohte zu verfallen: Altes Knoop-Mausoleum für 90000 Euro restauriert". Bild (in German). Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 1 December 2011. Alexander Samuel Salley (ed.), Register of the National Society of the Colonial Dames of America in the State of South Carolina, p. 35, National Society of the Colonial Dames of America in the State of South Carolina, 1945. "Albrecht," in Deutsches Geschlechterbuch, Vol. 17, Görlitz 1910. Arthur Meredyth Burke, The Prominent Families of the United States of America Fischer, Frauke (13 February 2015). "Ehrengast mit Bremer Wurzeln". WESER-KURIER. "Chi è Ursula von der Leyen, che sarà la nuova presidente della Commissione Europea". Il Post. 2 July 2019. Erik Kirschbaum (22 April 2013), "Feisty German minister stands up to Merkel", Reuters. "Ursula von der Leyen" (in German). Wirtschaftswoche. Archived from the original on 2 March 2016. Retrieved 3 January 2016. Scally, Derek (2 July 2019). "Ursula von der Leyen profile: Who is proposed new EU Commission president?". Dublin: The Irish Times. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Katholische Nachrichten-Agentur; Jens Joest (27 November 2019). "Wie christlich ist die EU-Kommission unter Ursula von der Leyen? (How Christian is the EU Commission under Ursula von der Leyen?)". Kirche+Leben (Church+Life) (in German). Münster: Dialog Medien Publicity GmbH. Retrieved 7 September 2023. Alice von Bota (29 December 2006). "Small Talk auf höchster Ebene". Tagesspiegel (in German). Retrieved 1 December 2011. Valero, Carmen (4 July 2019). "Baronesa, con siete hijos y un castillo: así es Ursula von der Leyen, presidenta de la Comisión Europea". El Mundo (in Spanish). Retrieved 21 June 2021. ONLINE, RP (12 August 2015). "Reit-EM: Von der Leyen macht im Sattel eine gute Figur". RP ONLINE. "LSE alumna Ursula von der Leyen elected EU Commission head". London School of Economics and Political Science. 17 July 2019. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Mendick, Robert; Huggler, Justin (3 July 2019). "Ursula von der Leyen, nominee for EU top job, lived in London under alias to escape Baader-Meinhof gang". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 – via telegraph.co.uk. Crossland, David (15 December 2013). "'Heir to Angela Merkel' appointed Germany's first female defence minister". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Dr. Ursula von der Leyen". Christlich Demokratische Union Deutschlands. 14 March 2013. Archived from the original on 2 July 2019. Retrieved 2 July 2019. Magnis, Constantin (September 2013). "Röschen geht in die Verteidigung" [Rosie goes military]. Cicero (in German). Bittner, Jochen; Dausend, Peter (20 June 2016). ""Mehr gelebt als studiert"". Zeit Online (in German). Retrieved 21 June 2021. "Who is Germany's Ursula von der Leyen, the surprise candidate set to take the EU's top job?". thelocal.de. 3 July 2019. "Germany Appoints 1st Female Defense Minister", Defense News, 16 December 2013 Ursula Gertrud von der Leyen. C-reaktives Protein als diagnostischer Parameter zur Erfassung eines Amnioninfektionssyndroms bei vorzeitigem Blasensprung und therapeutischem Entspannungsbad in der Geburtsvorbereitung. Katalog der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek (Thesis). Moulson, Geir (2 July 2019). "Von der Leyen: pro-EU fixture in Merkel's Cabinets". AP News. "Who is Ursula von der Leyen, the New EU Commission President?". Time. Rahlf, Katharina (30 June 2009). Lorenz, Robert; Micus, Matthias (eds.). Ursula von der Leyen – Seiteneinsteigerin in zweiter Generation (in German). Springer-Verlag. p. 278. ISBN 978-3-531-91569-2. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help) "Biography of the Candidate for President". European Union, Directorate-General for Communication, European Commission. Retrieved 26 December 2022. Amann, Melanie (26 September 2015). "Verteidigungsministerin: Plagiatsjäger nehmen sich von der Leyens Doktorarbeit vor". Spiegel Online (in German). Retrieved 30 July 2019. "German Defense Minister Von der Leyen denies plagiarism | DW". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 2 August 2019. "Ursula von der Leyen: Kritiker bewerten Arbeit als "eindeutiges Plagiat"". WELT. 28 September 2015. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Plagiatsaffäre: Von der Leyen darf Doktortitel behalten". Spiegel Online. 9 March 2016. Retrieved 30 July 2019. Greiner, Lena; Gebauer, Matthias; Töpper, Verena (9 March 2016). "Trotz Plagiaten: Darum darf von der Leyen ihren Doktor behalten". Spiegel Online (in German). Retrieved 30 July 2019. Müller, Reinhard (10 March 2016). "Von der Leyen und Plagiat: Doktorspiele". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). ISSN 0174-4909. Retrieved 30 July 2019. Warnecke, Tilmann; Burchard, Amory (9 March 2016). "Ursula von der Leyen darf Doktortitel behalten". Der Tagesspiegel (in German). Retrieved 30 July 2019. Who is EU commission president Ursula von der Leyen Euronews Retrieved 16 July 2019 "Who is new EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen?". euronews. 16 July 2019. "German Opposition Split Over Reforms", Deutsche Welle, 8 October 2003. Matthew Tempest (17 August 2005), "Merkel unveils 'cabinet' ahead of German elections", The Guardian. Dempsey, Judy (18 August 2005). "Merkel puts small team forward". New York Times. Archived from the original on 27 April 2014. Timot Szent-Ivanyi (25 October 2005), "Gutverdiener sollen höhere Kassenbeiträge zahlen" Archived 10 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Berliner Zeitung. "Bilateral agreements reached at first Israeli-German intergovernmental consultations", Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs, press release of 17 March 2008. Elizabeth Fullerton (27 November 2009), "Merkel moves German family minister to labor job", Reuters. "Nachfolge von Franz Josef Jung: Von der Leyen wird Arbeitsministerin". Spiegel Online. 27 November 2009. "A guide to future chancellors?", The Economist, 21 December 2013. Stefan Wagstyl (15 December 2013), "Merkel cabinet choice set to restart debate on successor", Financial Times. Philip Oltermann (15 December 2013), "Ursula von der Leyen appointed as Germany's first female defence minister", in The Guardian dated 15 December 2013. Sabine Siebold, "Merkel says German multiculturalism has failed", Reuters, 16 October 2010 "Philippines and Germany conclude agreement to deploy Filipino health care professionals to Germany", Department of Foreign Affairs (Philippines) press release of 19 March 2013. "Köhler-Nachfolge: Arbeitsministerin Von der Leyen Favoritin". Nachrichten.at. 30 June 2010. Retrieved 1 December 2011. Madeline Chambers (9 June 2010), "Germans want opposition president in blow to Merkel", Reuters. Annika Breidthardt (13 November 2010), "Big German protests pressure Merkel before CDU meet", Reuters. Annett Meiritz und Philipp Wittrock (4 December 2012), Neue CDU-Führungsriege: Merkel und die fünf Fragezeichen Spiegel Online. Creutzburg, Dietrich; Schwenn, Kerstin. "Koalitionsverhandlungen: Ein ungleiches Paar". Faz.net – via www.faz.net. Jonathan Laurence (23 December 2013), "New Government, New Responsibilities: Will Merkel's Team of Rivals Do Anything Differently?" Brookings Institution. "Politician's fingerprint 'cloned from photos' by hacker". BBC News. 29 December 2014. Retrieved 26 August 2022. "Hacker fakes German minister's fingerprints using photos of her hands". the Guardian. 30 December 2014. Retrieved 26 August 2022. World Economic Forum Announces New Board of Trustees World Economic Forum, press release of 25 August 2016. Council of the EU and Ministerial meetings Archived 27 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine European People's Party (EPP). Andrea Shalal (18 October 2018), "German defense ministry orders reforms, inquiry into use of consultants", Reuters. "German defence minister makes surprise Afghanistan visit", Deutsche Welle, 13 December 2014. Madeline Chambers (29 September 2015), "Germany says no rigid deadlines for troops' stay in Afghanistan", Reuters. "German defense minister tells troops in Afghanistan to prepare for long haul". Deutsche Welle. 25 March 2018. Derek Chollet (25 March 2015), Europe's Rising Defence Stars[permanent dead link] Defence One. Erste Deutsch-Türkische Regierungskonsultationen in Berlin Federal Government of Germany, press release of 15 January 2016. Jennings, Gareth (4 May 2016). "Germany to set up permanent facilities at Incirlik". IHS Jane's Defence Weekly. 53 (18): 6. Gebauer, Matthias (25 April 2016). "Kampf gegen IS: Bundeswehr baut "Tornado"-Stützpunkt in der Türkei" [Fight against IS: Bundeswehr builds "Tornado" base in Turkey]. Spiegel Online (in German). Archived from the original on 26 April 2016. Retrieved 9 February 2019. Andrea Shalal and Tulay Karadeniz (13 June 2016), "Germany, Turkey to finalize deal on Incirlik base work in weeks-spokesman", Reuters. Herszenhorn, David M. (6 February 2015). "Ukraine Insists Any Pact With Russia Must Adhere to Terms of September Accord". The New York Times. "Top NATO General Warns of Russian Reaction to Arming Ukraine". The New York Times. 5 February 2015. Archived from the original on 20 February 2015. Laurens Cerulus (16 September 2015), "Germany says Hungary's use of tear gas is 'not acceptable'" Politico Europe Michael Nienaber (28 January 2016), "German parliament approves more soldiers for Mali, Iraq", Reuters Justin Huggler (2 June 2014), German army to offer soldiers crèches and flat-screen TVs The Daily Telegraph. Justin Huggler (12 September 2014), "After army crèches and cosy barracks, Germany has new idea for troops – shorter working hours", The Daily Telegraph. "German ministers at odds over 'vital' defense sectors". Deutsche Welle. 8 October 2014. "Germany to boost mid-term defense spending". Reuters. 17 March 2015. "Germany, Italy may increase submarine fleets". "Germany's Army To Procure 131 New Boxer Armored Personnel carriers". Defense News. 17 December 2015. "Germany plans to develop new fighter jet to replace Tornado". Channel NewsAsia. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. "German military to bring back mothballed tanks". DW.COM. Madeline Chambers (3 December 2015). "More assertive Germany considers bigger army as Syria vote looms". Reuters. Smale, Alison (5 June 2016). "In a Reversal, Germany's Military Growth Is Met With Western Relief". The New York Times. Retrieved 2 March 2017. Tomkiw, Lydia (10 May 2016). "Germany Announces First Military Expansion Since Cold War Amid Cyber Threats, US Pressure". International Business Times. Retrieved 2 March 2017. "Germany to Expand Bundeswehr to Almost 200,000 Troops". Deutsche Welle. 21 February 2017. Retrieved 2 March 2017. Ben Knight (27 April 2017), "German Defense Ministry sacks general over abuse scandals", Deutsche Welle. Fiorenza, Nicholas. "Dutch mechanized brigade to be integrated into German panzer division". Archived from the original on 22 March 2016. Retrieved 10 November 2016. Hoffmann, Lars (4 February 2016). "German Armed Forces To Integrate Sea Battalion Into Dutch Navy". Defensenews.com. Retrieved 2 March 2017. "Germany proposes allowing foreigners to join its army". 14 July 2016. Archived from the original on 15 April 2017. Retrieved 14 April 2017. "Bundesregierung – Europa – NATO: Investing more in security". bundesregierung.de. 16 February 2017. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017. "Germany, Romania and the Czech Republic deepen defence ties". Archived from the original on 17 February 2017. Retrieved 16 February 2017. Stefan Wagstyl (6 October 2014), "Ursula von der Leyen vows to tackle Germany military budget", Financial Times. Michael Nienaber and Victoria Bryan (23 January 2015), "Germany's Defense Minister Criticizes Airbus Over New A400M Delays" Archived 7 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine, New York Times Andrea Shalal (2 August 2016), Germany seeks further 12.7 mln euros from Airbus for A400M delays, Reuters Andrea Shalal (10 February 2017), "German, Dutch militaries agree to deepen cooperation: source", Reuters. Franz-Stefan Gady (27 May 2015), Will India Purchase German Stealth Submarines? The Diplomat. Douglas Busvine (27 May 2015), "Germany lobbies India to buy Eurofighters, submarines", Reuters. "Surge in German arms sales to Saudi Arabia and Turkey". Deutsche Welle. 10 January 2019. "Germany's Angela Merkel makes arms export pact with France". Deutsche Welle. 18 February 2019. Chazan, Guy (13 February 2020). "Ursula von der Leyen tries to contain fallout over consultant". Financial Times. Delcker, Janosch (15 July 2019). "The scandal hanging over Ursula von der Leyen". POLITICO. Von Der Burchard, Hans (14 January 2020). "Von der Leyen under pressure over second wiped phone". POLITICO. Knight, Ben (21 December 2019). "German Defense Ministry 'illegally' wiped phone data of Ursula von der Leyen". DW. Scott, Mark (21 December 2019). "German lawmaker files criminal complaint over von der Leyen's wiped phone". POLITICO. Schlechtes Ergebnis für von der Leyen, Spiegel Online, 7 December 2018 Merkels Erben, Philipp Wittrock, Spiegel Online, 6 December 2016 Hintergrund: Das neue CDU-Präsidium, General-Anzeiger, 9 December 2014 Stefan Wagstyl (9 December 2014), "Merkel eyes relief for German taxpayers", Financial Times. Dempsey, Judy (16 December 2013). "Merkel's Surprise: A Woman in Charge of Defense". Carnegie Endowment. "Merkel takes oath of office, begins third term", Deutsche Welle, 17 December 2013. Alison Smale (28 September 2014), "Seeking Global Role, German Military Stumbles", New York Times. Stefan Wagstyl (5 October 2014), "German defence ministry and arms industry come under fire", Financial Times. "Who are the EU's new leaders?". EUobserver. 2 July 2019. An interview with NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg, Foreign Policy Wird von der Leyen die nächste Nato-Generalsekretärin?, FAZ Von der Leyen als Nato-Generalsekretärin im Gespräch, Die Welt. Schiltz, Christoph B. (17 February 2018). "Verteidigungsministerin Ursula von der Leyen als Nato-Generalsekretärin im Gespräch". Die Welt – via www.welt.de. Oltermann, Philip (4 July 2019). "'Not the best candidate': Germans condemn own choice for top EU job". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 April 2021. Barigazzi, Jacopo; Herszenhorn, David M.; Bayer, Lili (2 July 2019). "EU leaders pick Germany's von der Leyen to lead Commission". POLITICO europe. Retrieved 2 July 2019. Donahue, Patrick; Bodoni, Stephanie (2 July 2018). "EU Leaders Tap Germany's Von Der Leyen as Commission Chief". Bloomberg. Retrieved 8 July 2019. "EU-Kommission: Von der Leyen sagt Krebs den Kampf an". Retrieved 6 December 2019. Ursula von der Leyen, "A Union that strives for more: My agenda for Europe, By candidate for President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen," 2019, p. 11, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/be- ta-political/files/political-guidelines-next-commission_en.pdf Johnston, Karin L. (November 2021). "Advancing Gender Equality in the European Union" (PDF). Women In International Security. Kostaki, Irene (5 July 2019). "Commission prepares for von der Leyen transition". New Europe. Retrieved 8 July 2019. "Deutscher Bundestag – Ausgeschiedene Abgeordnete der 19. Wahlperiode" [German Bundestag – Outgoing Members of the 19th legislature]. Deutscher Bundestag (in German). Retrieved 16 October 2019. "EU-Mercosur deal divides both sides of the Atlantic". EURACTIV. 11 July 2019. "Amazon fires spark European rift at G7 over Mercosur trade deal". Deutsche Welle. 24 August 2019. "We must not barter the Amazon rainforest for burgers and steaks". The Guardian. 2 July 2019. "Timmermans unhappy with Dombrovskis unexpected 'promotion'". www.euractiv.com. EURACTIV. 11 September 2019. Schumacher, Elizabeth (11 September 2019). "EU post to 'protect European way of life' called 'disgusting,' 'reprehensible'". www.dw.com. Deutsche Welle. Jon Stone (11 September 2019). "EU accused of adopting 'fascist rhetoric' with new Commissioner For Protecting Our European Way of Life to oversee immigration policy". The Independent. Nielsen, Nikolaj (10 September 2019). "'Migration' is now 'protecting European way of life'". euobserver.com. EUobserver. "New EU post to protect European Way of Life slammed as 'grotesque'". Reuters. 10 September 2019. "Juncker criticizes von der Leyen over 'European way of life' commissioner". Politico. 12 September 2019. "EU Parliament Chief Questions 'European Way of Life' Title". The New York Times. 12 September 2019. Delcker, Janosch (15 July 2019). "The scandal hanging over Ursula von der Leyen". Politico. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "Defense Ministry 'illegally' wiped von der Leyen's phone". www.dw.com. DW. 21 December 2019. "Coronavirus: EU rules out Schengen border closures amid Italy outbreak". Deutsche Welle. 24 February 2020. "Salvini and Le Pen Don't Have a Coronavirus Cure". Bloomberg. 25 February 2020. Matina Stevis-Gridneff (28 February 2020). "Coronavirus: Europe's open borders threatened by spread of disease". The Independent. "Coronavirus: European borders likely to remain open despite crisis in Italy, observers say". South China Morning Post. 7 March 2020. "Coronavirus Nightmare Could Be the End for Europe's Borderless Dream". The New York Times. 26 February 2020. Archived from the original on 26 February 2020. "Denmark, Poland and Czechs seal borders over coronavirus". Financial Times. 12 March 2020. "EU condemns Trump travel ban from Europe as virus spreads". Associated Press (AP). 12 March 2020. "EU Calls for Sanctions on Belarus After Disputed Elections". VOA News. 14 August 2020. Silvia Amaro, "The EU sanctions Belarus after 'state terrorism' — but experts aren't convinced they'll work", CNBC (25 May 2021). "Merkel and Macron vow to 'preserve' EU sovereignty in eastern Mediterranean". Euractiv. 21 August 2020. "Explainer: Why is a submarine deal sparking a diplomatic crisis?". www.aljazeera.com. "EU chief: Treatment of France 'not acceptable'". CNN. 20 September 2021. "Aukus row: EU officials demand apology from Australia over France's treatment before trade talks". The Guardian. 21 September 2021. "EU chief says key to energy crisis is pushing Green Deal". Associated Press. 20 October 2021. "The Green Brief: East-West EU split again over climate". Euractiv. 20 October 2021. "Energy crisis: The blame game has begun – but are some of the claims just hot air?". Sky News. 22 September 2021. "It is tempting to blame foreigners for Europe's gas crisis: The main culprit is closer to home". The Economist. 16 October 2021. "Europe's energy crisis: Continent 'too reliant on gas,' says von der Leyen". Euronews. 20 October 2021. "EU leaders condemn Hamas attacks". The European Times. 16 May 2021. "EU nations should debate mandatory vaccination, says von der Leyen". euronews. 1 December 2021. Stevis-Gridneff, Matina (28 April 2021). "How Europe Sealed a Pfizer Vaccine Deal With Texts and Calls". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 10 July 2022. "Von der Leyen text messages to Pfizer CEO 'should be released'". euronews. 28 January 2022. Retrieved 10 July 2022. Rankin, Jennifer (29 June 2022). "European Commission defiant over Von der Leyen's Pfizer texts". the Guardian. Retrieved 10 July 2022. "Warum die New York Times die EU-Kommission wegen einer SMS verklagt". tag eins Magazin (in German). 20 April 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2024. ""New York Times" verklagt EU-Kommission – offenbar wegen von der Leyen". www.t-online.de (in German). 13 February 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "European Parliament chiefs block public scrutiny of von der Leyen over Pfizer contract". POLITICO. 16 February 2023. Retrieved 28 November 2023. "Україна має вступити до ЄС – президент Єврокомісії". Слово і Діло (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 17 June 2022. "Ukraine war: Ursula von der Leyen's traumatic visit to Bucha, 'The EU stands with you,' she tells Zelensky". South China Morning Post. 9 April 2022. "As it happened: EU's Von der Leyen promises to speed up Ukraine membership process". FRANCE 24. 8 April 2022. Tito, Claudio (8 April 2022). "Ursula von der Leyen a Kiev per rassicurare Zelensky e sfidare Putin: "Dobbiamo dare un segnale"". la Repubblica. "'Unthinkable': Ursula von der Leyen shown mass grave in Bucha". Guardian News. YouTube. 8 April 2022. "Press conference in Ukraine by President von der Leyen, HRVP Borrell and President Zelensky". European Commission. YouTube. 9 April 2022. "EU oil ban adds pressure on Russia but obstacles remain: Analysts". Al Jazeera. 12 May 2022. "What are Europe's energy alternatives now that Russian gas is off the cards?". Euronews. 27 April 2022. "Conference on the Future of Europe". European Commission. Retrieved 15 October 2022. Council of the European Union. General Secretariat of the Council of the European Union (2022). Conference on the Future of Europe: Report on the Final Outcome (PDF). European Union. doi:10.2860/637445. ISBN 9789282487488. Retrieved 15 October 2022. p. 39: We citizens want a Europe in which decisions are made transparently and quickly, where the unanimity principle is reconsidered and in which we citizens are regularly and seriously involved "Von der Leyen backs ending unanimous voting in some areas of EU". euronews. 9 May 2022. Retrieved 15 October 2022. Herszenhorn, David M. (20 June 2022). "Commission president calls to end unanimity in EU foreign policy decisions". POLITICO. Retrieved 15 October 2022. "The EU is turning to more reliable energy suppliers". Twitter. 18 July 2022. "Press corner". European Commission – European Commission. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "Martin Sonneborn criticises Ursula Von der Leyen". Youtube (in German). 16 September 2022. "'By choosing Azerbaijan as a gas supplier, Ursula von der Leyen weakens the European Union'". Le Monde. 29 July 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "Scharfe Kritik an Von der Leyen im EU-Parlament: "Europa nicht den Leyen überlassen"". exxpress. 15 September 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "EU looks to autocracies in search for energy". EURACTIV. 19 July 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "EU agrees deal with Azerbaijan to double gas exports by". Euronews. 19 July 2022. "Ursula Von der Leyen slammed for 'You have literally made the desert bloom' message to Israel". Middle East Monitor. 27 April 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Dam, Philippe (14 February 2024). "Von der Leyen's Human Rights Hypocrisy". Human Rights Watch. "Joint Statement by European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan, 5 October 2023". neighbourhood-enlargement.ec.europa.eu. von der Leyen, Ursula [@vonderleyen] (7 October 2023). "I unequivocally condemn the attack carried out by Hamas terrorists against Israel. \ It is terrorism in its most despicable form. \ Israel has the right to defend itself against such heinous attacks" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "EU calls Gaza-war summit, triples aid to Palestinians". EUobserver. 15 October 2023. "EU: Egypt Support Risks Complicity in Abuses". Human Rights Watch. 19 December 2023. Allenbach-Ammann, János (15 May 2023). "EU Commission chief: Growth model based on fossil fuels 'simply obsolete'". Euractive. Retrieved 8 June 2023. "Fossil fuel-centred growth is obsolete, says EU's von der Leyen". Reuters. 15 May 2023. Retrieved 8 June 2023. Allenbach-Ammann, János (25 May 2023). "The case for engaging with post-growth economics". Euractive. Retrieved 8 June 2023. "Palm Oil Exporter Indonesia Concerned by EU's Deforestation Law". Jakarta Globe. 22 May 2022. "EU palm oil use and imports seen plummeting by 2032". Reuters. 8 December 2022. "Indonesia, Malaysia Deploy Ministers To Push Back on EU Palm Oil Restrictions". The New Lens. 31 May 2023. "Europe saw unauthorized migrant entry attempts hit a six-year high in 2022". CBS News. 13 January 2023. "What's behind the surge in migrant arrivals to Italy?". AP News. 15 September 2023. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "Migrants, Meloni: "Von der Leyen come to Lampedusa. Extraordinary measures in the Council of Ministers on Monday"". Italy 24 Press News. 15 September 2023. Mared Gwyn Jones (7 March 2024). "Europe's centre-right party clears path for von der Leyen's re-election, despite some objection". euronews.com. Ursula von der Leyen. Europa-Union Deutschland. Board of Trustees Total E-Quality. Board of Trustees Archived 2 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine Mädchenchor Hannover Foundation. World Economic Forum Announces New Board of Trustees World Economic Forum, press release of 25 August 2016. Meeting Overview: 2017 World Economic Forum on the Middle East and North Africa World Economic Forum. Advisory Council Munich Security Conference. WM-Kuratorium unter Vorsitz von Dr. Thomas Bach FIFA, press release of 30 September 2008. "BMFSFJ – Pressemitteilungen – Ursula von der Leyen: "Der Weg zum Ausbau der Kinderbetreuung ist frei"". 23 March 2010. Archived from the original on 23 March 2010. Bennhold, Katrin (17 January 2010). "Full portrait of von der Leyen's work". The New York Times (Press release). Getarnte Werbung – Die fragwürdigen PR-Kampagnen der Bundesregierung Archived 21 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine ("Stealth advertising – The questionable PR campaigns of the federal government"). Report Mainz, Südwestrundfunk, 27 August 2007 (in German) Focus Online: "Kinderpornografie: Der Traum von der Internetsperrung" (in German) Der Spiegel Online: "Zensursula" geht in die Offensive (in German) Reißmann, Ole (16 October 2009). "Stoppschild für Zensursula". Spiegel Online (in German). Spiegel.de. Retrieved 6 September 2011. "MDR: Interview". Archived from the original on 13 July 2011. online, heise (7 July 2009). "Familienministerium hält an Zahlen zur Verbreitung von Kinderpornographie fest". heise online. Peters, Katharina Graça (15 July 2009). "Ächtung von Kinderpornografie: Von der Leyen brüskiert Indien mit falscher Anschuldigung". Spiegel Online. "MDR.de "Von der Leyen gesteht Fehler ein"". Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. "Rammstein: "Liebe Ist Für Alle Da" wird verboten". Laut.de. Retrieved 1 December 2011. Quentin Peel (14 April 2013), "Merkel faces snub over women board quotas", Financial Times. Alison Smale (1 February 2014), "Spurred by Global Crises, Germany Weighs a More Muscular Foreign Policy", The New York Times. "German foreign policy: No more shirking", The Economist, 8 February 2014. Alison Smale (12 March 2014), "Ukraine Crisis Limits Merkel's Rapport with Putin", The New York Times. "German defense chief von der Leyen calls for stronger NATO backing in Ukraine crisis", Deutsche Welle, 23 March 2014. "German Bundeswehr to train Saudi army officers". Deutsche Welle. 8 December 2016. "Opposition parties condemn German defence plan with Saudi Arabia". The Local. 8 December 2016. "Germany to train Saudi soldiers despite Yemen war concerns". Deutsche Welle. 29 April 2019. "German minister causes controversy after refusing to wear hijab on Saudi visit". The Jerusalem Post. 14 December 2016. "Dieser gesunde demokratische Widerstand der jungen Generation dort auch in Polen, die muss man unterstützen. Also es ist unsere Aufgabe auch, sozusagen diesen Diskurs aufrecht zu erhalten", Polen empört über von der Leyen-Äußerung bei „Maybrit Illner", [in:] PI-News service 6 November 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2019 Szef MON reaguje na skandaliczne słowa niemieckiej minister resortu obrony. Antoni Macierewicz domaga się "złożenia wyjaśnień", [in:] WPolityce service 3 November 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2019; Skandaliczna wypowiedź niemieckiej minister obrony. Jest reakcja ministra Macierewicza, [in:] Niezalezna service 3 November 2017, Retrieved 3 July 2019; Polska reaguje na skandaliczną wypowiedź niemieckiej minister. Waszczykowski łagodnie, Macierewicz ostrzej...[permanent dead link], [in:] PrawdaObiektywna service 4 November 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2019; Skandaliczna wypowiedź niemieckiej minister. Polska odpowiada – Waszczykowski łagodnie, Macierewicz ostro, [in:] NajwyższyCzas service 3 November 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2019; Skandaliczna wypowiedź niemieckiej minister. Polska odpowiada – Waszczykowski łagodnie, Macierewicz ostro, [in:] Wolnosc24 service 3 November 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2019 He declared that von der Leyen tampered with Polish internal affairs, speculated about a German tendency to influence Polish domestic politics, and regretted reportedly increasingly patronizing German stand towards Poland. Szef MON wzywa attache obrony Niemiec. Lapsus językowy?, [in:] PolskieRadio service 4 November 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2019; Waszczykowski: Pomruki pruskiego tonu w tonacji "Ody do radości", [in:] Fronda service, undated. Retrieved 3 July 2019 Szef MON wzywa attache obrony Niemiec. Lapsus językowy?, [in:] PolskieRadio service 4 November 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2019 they claimed that German foreign policy was not forged on TV-shows, that von der Leyen's words were taken out of context and that the general tone of her statement was highly sympathetic towards Poland. Attache obrony Niemiec wezwany do MON. Ambasada "Mamy nadzieję, że to kończy sprawę", [in:] GazetaPrawna service 6 November 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2019; Justyna Suchecka, Ambasada Niemiec odpowiada Macierewiczowi: Nie kształtujemy polityki w trakcie talk-show, [in:] GazetaWyborcza service 4 November 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2019 "kleinen Ausrutscher" mostly because allegedly hysterical and oversensitive stand of the populist Warsaw government, "Endlich haben wir die deutschen Politiker erwischt"[permanent dead link], [in:] Spiegel Online service 8 November 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2019; similar tone in Gerhard Gnauck, Philip Kuhn, Von der Leyen löst Verstimmungen in Polen aus, [in:] Welt service 6 November 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2019 "Trump and Merkel exchange barbs in showdown over Russia's pipeline". Bloomberg. 11 July 2018. Helen Pidd (12 March 2014). "Ursula von der Leyen: Germany's next chancellor?". The Guardian. Natalie Muller (11 November 2014), Hollande, von der Leyen, Europe observe Armistice DayDeutsche Welle. "Juncker calls for collective EU army", Deutsche Welle, 8 March 2015. MoD Siemoniak: EU needs new security strategy Polskie Radio, 31 March 2015. Stefan Wagstyl (13 July 2016), Germany calls for more joint European military initiatives Financial Times. Crisp, James (2 July 2019). "EU picks Ursula von der Leyen – who called Brexit 'a burst bubble of hollow promises' – to be first woman to rule Brussels". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 – via www.telegraph.co.uk. Oltermann, Philip (18 July 2019). "Ursula von der Leyen: hard Brexit would be massive blow for both sides". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 18 July 2019. "Next EU Commission chief wants to increase foreign spending". 660 News. Retrieved 12 November 2019. Nardelli, Alberto; Baschuk, Bryce (7 September 2023). "EU Chief Presses UAE President on Russia Sanctions Evasion". Bloomberg. Retrieved 24 September 2023. "China and Tibet". Human Rights Watch. 13 January 2023. Archived from the original on 18 January 2023. Retrieved 5 April 2023. "European Commission chief's comments on Uyghurs fall short of expectations". Radio Free Asia. 7 April 2023. "China 2022". Amnesty International. 10 February 2023. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 5 April 2023. Melanie Amann, Dietmar Hipp and Peter Müller (11 June 2013), Vater and Vater: Gay Adoption Debate Flusters Conservatives Der Spiegel. Carsten Wagner (30 June 2017), "Ehe für alle": Niedersachsen-CDU uneins in Berlin Norddeutscher Rundfunk. "EU's 'Israeli independence' message rebuked in Palestine". Al Jazeera. "Palestinians condemn EU's von der Leyen for 'racist trope'". BBC. Von der Leyen accused of 'unacceptable bias' toward Israel. Politico. 14 October 2023. Malingre, Virginie (24 October 2023). "Von der Leyen fuels EU discontent after closely-watched Israel visit". Le Monde. "Von der Leyen doubles down on pro-Israel stance, lashes out at Iran". Politico. 22 October 2023. "West's backing, current global order gives Israel green light for Gaza assault: Expert". Anadolu Agency. 25 October 2023. "Von der Leyen outlines 'next phase of European Green Deal', with heavy industry focus". Euractiv. 13 September 2023. "Von der Leyen flexes green business muscles before EU polls". Deutsche Welle. 13 September 2023. "Germany's defmin to get high Lithuanian state award". Delfi. "Coopération militaire Mali-Allemagne : Mme Ursula Von Der Leyen décorée". news.abamako. "Указ Президента України №595/2022". President of Ukraine (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 10 September 2022. "Ursula von der Leyen à Toulouse : qu'est-ce que le titre honoris causa que la Présidente de la Commission européenne a reçu". midilibre.fr (in French). 9 June 2023. "Ben-Gurion University of the Negev – Conferment Ceremony of an Honorary Doctoral Degree upon Dr. Ursula Von Der Leyen". in.bgu.ac.il. Retrieved 14 June 2022. "The World's 100 Most Powerful Women". Forbes. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Bryer, Tania (21 December 2020). "European Commission's Ursula von der Leyen wins Global Citizen prize after turbulent year". CNBC. Retrieved 17 February 2021. "BBC 100 Women 2022: Who is on the list this year?". BBC News. Retrieved 10 December 2022. Beaty, Thalia (21 September 2022). "Gates Foundation prods UN, honors inspiration as Goalkeepers". AP News. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Pasquini, Maria (22 September 2022). "Bill and Melinda Gates Reunite for Foundation 1 Year After Divorce: We're 'Completely Committed to This'". Peoplemag. Retrieved 8 October 2023. DNB, Katalog der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek (Thesis) (in German). Portal.d-nb.de. Retrieved 1 December 2011. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ursula von der Leyen. Wikiquote has quotations related to Ursula von der Leyen. Official website