A mausoleum is an external free-standing building constructed as a monument enclosing the burial chamber of a deceased person or people. A mausoleum without the person's remains is called a cenotaph. A mausoleum may be considered a type of tomb, or the tomb may be considered to be within the mausoleum. The word mausoleum (from the Ancient Greek: μαυσωλείον) derives from the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus (near modern-day Bodrum in Turkey), the grave of King Mausolus, the Persian satrap of Caria, whose large tomb was one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. Historically, mausolea were, and still may be, large and impressive constructions for a deceased leader or other person of importance. However, smaller mausolea soon became popular with the gentry and nobility in many countries. In the Roman Empire, these were often in necropoles or along roadsides: the via Appia Antica retains the ruins of many private mausolea for kilometres outside Rome. When Christianity became dominant, mausolea were out of use. Later, mausolea became particularly popular in Europe and its colonies during the early modern and modern periods. A single mausoleum may be permanently sealed. A mausoleum encloses a burial chamber either wholly above ground or within a burial vault below the superstructure. This contains the body or bodies, probably within sarcophagi or interment niches. Modern mausolea may also act as columbaria (a type of mausoleum for cremated remains) with additional cinerary urn niches. Mausolea may be located in a cemetery, a churchyard or on private land. In the United States, the term may be used for a burial vault below a larger facility, such as a church. The Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels in Los Angeles, California, for example, has 6,000 sepulchral and cinerary urn spaces for interments in the lower level of the building. It is known as the "crypt mausoleum". In Europe, these underground vaults are sometimes called crypts or catacombs. Mausoleum of Mohammed V, monumental grave of the Moroccan king Mohammed V and his two sons, late King Hassan II and Prince Abdallah, in Rabat, Morocco. Bourguiba mausoleum, monumental grave of Habib Bourguiba, first president of Tunisia, in Monastir, Tunisia. El Alia Cemetery in Oued Smar, Algeria. John Garang De Mabior's mausoleum in Juba, South Sudan. Mastabas dating from ancient Egypt. Agostinho Neto's mausoleum in Luanda, Angola. Mathieu Kerekou's mausoleum in Natitingou, Benin. Mausolée du Guide Suprême du Patriotisme in Gitega, Burundi. Omar Bongo's mausoleum, a replica of the mausoleum of Mohammed V, in Franceville, Gabon. Léon M'ba's mausoleum in Libreville, Gabon. Kwame Nkrumah Mausoleum in Accra, Ghana. Atta Mills's mausoleum at Asomdwee Park in Accra, Ghana. Burma Camp military cemetery in Accra, Ghana. Mausoleum of Levy Mwanawasa, Frederick Chiluba, and Michael Sata at the Embassy Park Presidential Burial in Lusaka, Zambia. Domoni, burial place and location of Ahmed Abdallah's mausoleum, first president of Comoros. Marien Ngouabi's mausoleum and Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza's mausoleum in Brazzaville, Republic of Congo. Mausoleum of Félix Houphouët-Boigny, first president of Ivory Coast, in Yamoussoukro, Ivory Coast. Laurent Kabila's mausoleum in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo. Mausoleum of Joseph Kasa-Vubu in Singini, Tshela, Kongo Central, Democratic Republic of Congo. Gamal Abdel Nasser Mosque is a shrine and mausoleum in Cairo, Egypt, and the burial place of Gamal Abdel Nasser, second president of Egypt. The Unknown Soldier Memorial is a pyramid-shaped monument in Nasr City, Egypt. Royal Mausoleum of Mauretania, monumental grave of the Numidian Berber king Juba II and the Queen Cleopatra Selene II located on the road between Cherchell and Algiers, in Tipaza Province, Algeria. Al-Hussein Mosque is a shrine and mausoleum in Cairo, Egypt, and the purported burial place of Muhammad's grandson, Husayn ibn Ali. Qalawun complex, contains the mausoleum of Qalawun in Cairo, Egypt. Jedars, thirteen ancient monumental Berber mausoleums located south of Tiaret. Palm Grove Cemetery in Monrovia, Liberia. National Hall, mausoleum of the late president William Tubman in Monrovia, Montserrado, Liberia. Eyadema's family mausoleum in Kara, Togo. Kamuzu Banda's mausoleum in Lilongwe, Malawi. Bingu wa Mutharika, third president of Malawi, built a mausoleum in which his late first wife and Bingu himself are buried. Meles Zenawi's grave in the Holy Trinity Cathedral, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. King Sobhuza II Memorial Park in Lobamba, Eswatini. Julius Nyerere's mausoleum in Mwalimu Nyerere Museum Centre, Butiama, Tanzania. The Heroes Square in Maputo, Mozambique. Amilcar Cabral's mausoleum in Bissau, Guinea-Bissau. Mausoleum of Mzee Jomo Kenyatta, late president of Kenya, in Nairobi, Kenya. Jaramogi Oginga Odinga's mausoleum in Bondo, Kenya. Camayanne Mausoleum, monumental grave of Guinea's national heroes Samori Ture, Sekou Toure, and Alfa Yaya in the Grand Mosque of Conakry. Nnamdi Azikiwe's mausoleum in Onitsha, Nigeria. Tafawa Balewa's tomb in Bauchi, Nigeria. Mausoleum of Obafemi Awolowo in Ogun State, Nigeria. Sani Abacha's mausoleum in Kano, Nigeria. National Heroes Acre in Harare, Zimbabwe. Heroes' Acre in Windhoek, Namibia. Mausoleum of Mohammed V in Rabat, Morocco Habib Bourguiba's mausoleum in Monastir, Tunisia Gamal Abdel Nasser Mosque in Cairo, Egypt Agostinho Neto's Mausoleum in Luanda, Angola Kwame Nkrumah Memorial Park and Mausoleum in Accra, Ghana Mausoleum of the late President of Kenya Mzee Jomo Kenyatta in Nairobi, Kenya Kamuzu Banda Mausoleum in Lilongwe, Malawi Amilcar Cabral's mausoleum in Bissau, Guinea-Bissau Nnamdi Azikiwe's burial site, Onitsha, Nigeria. Mausoleum of late President Levy Mwanawasa at Embassy Park Presidential Burial in Lusaka, Zambia. Mausoleum of late President Frederick Chiluba at Embassy Park Presidential Burial in Lusaka, Zambia. Mausoleum of late President Michael Sata at Embassy Park Presidential Burial in Lusaka, Zambia. Tomb of Ahmad Shah Durrani in Kandahar, Afghanistan Mausoleum of Mohammad Zaher Shah (Hill of Teppe Maranjan) in Kabul Abdur Rahman Khan's Mausoleum in Kabul Bagh-e Babur, mausoleum of the founder of the Mughal Empire Mausoleum of Kazi Nazrul Islam Mausoleum of Lalon Shah Mausoleum of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Mausoleum of Three Leaders Mausoleum of Ziaur Rahman Mausoleum of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Mausoleum of Three Leaders Mausoleum of Lalon Shah List of mausoleums of Chinese monarchs Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor biggest underground mausoleum The pyramids of ancient China are also types of mausolea. Qianling Mausoleum in China, houses the remains of Emperor Gaozong of Tang and the ruling Empress Wu Zetian, along with 17 others in auxiliary tombs. Tomb and Mausoleum of Genghis Khan in Ordos City, Inner Mongolia. Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties Ming Xiaoling Mausoleum, Nanjing Thirteen Imperial Mausoleums of Ming Dynasty Emperors, Beijing Fuling Tomb, Shenyang Zhao Mausoleum (Qing Dynasty) Eastern Qing Tombs Western Qing Tombs Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum, Nanjing. Mausoleum of Yuan Shikai, Beiguan, Anyang. Mausoleum of Mao Zedong, Beijing. Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor in Xi'an, China Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum, Nanjing, China Mausoleum of Yuan Shikai, Beiguan, Anyang, China Mausoleum of Mao Zedong in Beijing, China Akbar's tomb at Agra, India Taj Mahal at Agra, India Qutb Shahi Tombs at Hyderabad, India Gol Gumbaz at Bijapur, India Humayun's Tomb at Delhi, India Tomb of Sher Shah Suri at Sasaram Bihar, India Safdarjung's Tomb at Delhi, India Bibi Ka Maqbara at Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India Taj Mahal in Agra, India Grave of Sukarno at Blitar, East Java, Indonesia Astana Giribangun at Karanganyar, Central Java, Indonesia Imogiri complex in Imogiri, Central Java is the cemetery for Mataram royals and the Hamengkubuwana Royals of Yogyakarta and Pakubuwono of Surakarta Grave of Bung Hatta at Jakarta, Indonesia Mausoleum O. G. Khouw at Jakarta, Indonesia Grave of Kyai Langgeng at Magelang, Central Java, Indonesia Grave of Sukarno Astana Giribangun Mausoleums of Emperors of Japan Mozu Tombs in Sakai, Osaka Prefecture, Japan Fukakusa no kita no Misasagi (深草北陵) in Kyoto, Japan Sennyū-ji, Kyoto, Japan Tsuki no wa no misasagi (月輪陵) Fushimi Momoyama no Misasagi (伏見桃山陵) in Kyoto, Japan Musashi Imperial Graveyard, is a mausoleum complex at Hachiōji, Tokyo, Japan Toyokuni Shrine at Higashiyama-ku, Kyoto, Japan. Mausoleum of Kampaku Toyotomi Hideyoshi, which was later destroyed by the Tokugawa clan. Nikkō Tōshō-gū at Nikkō, Tochigi Prefecture, Japan. It is part of the "Shrines and Temples of Nikkō", Mausoleum of Tokugawa Ieyasu, Tokugawa shōguns. Rinnō-ji at Nikkō, Tochigi Prefecture, Japan. The temple also administers the Taiyū-in Reibyō (大猷院霊廟), which is the mausoleum of Tokugawa Iemitsu, the third Tokugawa shōgun. Together with Nikkō Tōshō-gū and Futarasan Shrine. Zuihōden at Sendai, Miyagi Prefecture, Japan is the mausoleum complex of Date Masamune and his heirs, daimyō of the Sendai Domain Tamaudun, at Shuri, Okinawa, Japan Taiyū-in Reibyō at Nikkō, Tochigi Prefecture, Japan Tsuki no wa no misasagi in Sennyū-ji, Kyoto, Japan Fushimi Momoyama no Misasagi in Kyoto, Kyoto Prefecture, Japan. The entrance to Higashi Otani Mausoleum in Kyoto, Japan Makam Pahlawan at National Mosque of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Makam Diraja Mahmoodiah at Bukit Mahmoodiah in Jalan Mahmoodiah, Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia. Hang Kasturi Mausoleum at Jonker Walk, Melaka City, Melaka, Malaysia. Kedah Royal Mausoleum at Langgar, Kota Setar District, Kedah, Malaysia. Kelantan Royal Mausoleum Al-Ghufran Royal Mausoleum at Bukit Chandan in Jalan Istana, Kuala Kangsar, Malaysia. Hang Jebat Mausoleum in Melaka City, Melaka, Malaysia. Shah Alam Royal Mausoleum Tun Teja Mausoleum in Merlimau, Jasin District, Melaka, Malaysia. Seri Menanti Royal Mausoleum Sultan Abdul Samad Mausoleum in Jugra, Banting, Selangor, Malaysia. Makam Diraja Mahmoodiah at Bukit Mahmoodiah in Jalan Mahmoodiah, Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia Tomb of Jahangir at Shahdara, near Lahore, Pakistan. Mazar-e-Quaid at Karachi, Pakistan Tomb of Allama Iqbal at Lahore, Pakistan Data Durbar at Lahore, Pakistan Samadhi of Maharaja Ranjit Singh in Lahore, Pakistan Bhutto family mausoleum, Garhi Khuda Bakhsh, Sindh, Pakistan Muhammad Ali Jinnah Mausoleum in Karachi, Pakistan Shrine of Islamic Naqshbandi saints of Allo Mahar Sharif. Tomb of Allama Iqbal at Lahore, Pakistan The exterior view of the Mausoleum of Emperor Jahangir, located in Punjab, Pakistan Rizal Monument at Rizal Park in Manila, Philippines, houses the remains of Dr. Jose Rizal, national hero of the Philippines. Aguinaldo Shrine in Kawit, Cavite, Philippines. Mausoleum of the Veterans of the Revolution, enshrining participants in the 1896 revolution against the Spanish Empire. Quezon Memorial, in Quezon City, Philippines, houses the remains of President Manuel L. Quezon and his wife, Aurora. Marcos Museum and Mausoleum in Batac, Ilocos Norte, Philippines, housing the remains of President Ferdinand Marcos. National Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall, Taipei, Taiwan. National Dr. Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hall, Taipei, Taiwan. Mausoleum of late President Chiang Kai-shek, Taoyuan, Taiwan. Mausoleum of late President Chiang Ching-kuo, Taoyuan, Taiwan. Chen Tsyr-shiou Memorial Park, Former Mausoleum and Memorial of late Vice President Chen Cheng, Taishan District, New Taipei, Taiwan. National Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall in Taipei, Taiwan Mausoleum of late President Chiang in Taoyuan, Taiwan Konbaung tombs are a collection of mausoleums built by Konbaung Dynasty kings in Mandalay, Amarapura, and Inwa, Myanmar. Kandawmin Garden Mausolea, Myanmar. Martyrs' Mausoleum, Myanmar. Royal Cemetery at Wat Ratchabophit, Thailand Royal Tombs of the Joseon Dynasty, Korea Kim Koo Museum and Hyochang Park, Seoul, Republic of Korea (South Korea) Bandaranaike family Estate in Horagolla Bandaranaike Samadhi, Sri Lanka Kurjey Lhakhang, Bumthang Valley, Bumthang District, Bhutan Silver Pagoda, Phnom Penh, Cambodia Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum, Hanoi, Vietnam Kumsusan Palace of the Sun or Kim Il Sung Mausoleum, Pyongyang, Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) Yeongneung, King Sejong's mausoleum in Yeoju, South Korea Kumsusan Palace of the Sun, Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il's mausoleum in Pyongyang, North Korea Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum in Hanoi, Vietnam Türkmenbaşy Ruhy Mosque in Gypjak, Ashgabat, Turkmenistan Al-Khazneh at Petra, Jordan Mausoleum of Maussollos at Halicarnassus Mausoleum of Cyrus the Great in Pasargadae, Iran. Naqsh-e Rustam at Persepolis Iran, Tombs of Persian Achaemenid kings (522-486 BCE). Tomb of Ferdowsi in Mashhad, Iran. Tomb of Hafez (Hāfezieh) in Shiraz, Iran The Shrine of the Báb and the Shrine of Bahá'u'lláh in Haifa and Acre, Israel, respectively. Imam Husayn Mosque, Karbala – according to Shī‘ah belief, the head and body of Husayn ibn Ali, along with all others who fell at the Battle of Karbala are buried here. Imam Reza shrine in Mashhad, Iran The Mausoleum of Khomeini in Tehran, Iran Anıtkabir mausoleum of Atatürk the founder of the Republic of Turkey at Ankara, Turkey Celal Bayar Mausoleum in Bursa, Turkey Adnan Menderes's Mausoleum, in Istanbul, Turkey Turgut Özal's Mausoleum, in Istanbul, Turkey Süleyman Demirel Mausoleum in Atabey, Turkey Mausoleum of Yasser Arafat in Ramallah, West Bank Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates Anıtkabir, the mausoleum of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in Ankara, Turkey Mausoleum of Khomeini in Tehran, Iran Tomb of Hafez (Hāfezieh) in Shiraz, Iran Mausoleum of the Assad family in Qardaha, Syria The Khazneh at Petra is believed to be Nabataean King Aretas IV's mausoleum. The Green Dome, mausoleum of Muhammad, Abu Bakr, and Omar I, located in the Prophet's Mosque in Medina, Saudi Arabia The mausoleum of Imam Husayn Shrine in Karbala, Iraq Mausoleum of Cyrus the Great in Pasargadae, Iran Mausoleum of later Abbasid Caliph Ar-Rashid bi-llāh Imperial Crypt in Austria Church of Our Lady of Laeken in Belgium Batenberg Mausoleum in Sofia, Bulgaria Cathedral of Saint Domnius in Split, Croatia Royal Mausoleum and the Duchess of Kent's Mausoleum at Frogmore, England Trentham Mausoleum near Stoke-on-Trent, England Juselius Mausoleum in Finland Les Invalides in France Panthéon, Paris in France Bismarck Mausoleum outside Friedrichsruh in northern Germany Lajos Batthyány's Mausoleum in Budapest, Hungary Mausoleum of Augustus in Rome, Italy. Mausoleum of Hadrian in Rome, Italy Pantheon, Rome in Italy Mausoleum of Theodoric in Ravenna, Italy Mausoleum of Galla Placidia in Ravenna, Italy Mausoleum of Njegoš in Lovćen, Montenegro Wilhelm II Mausoleum in Doorn, Netherlands National Pantheon / Church of Santa Engrácia in Lisbon, Portugal Mausoleum of Marasesti in Marasesti, Romania Peter and Paul Cathedral in St. Petersburg, Russia Cathedral of the Archangel in Moscow, Russia Lenin's Mausoleum in Moscow, Russia Hamilton Mausoleum at Hamilton in Scotland Damat Ali-Pasha Mausoleum, Belgrade, Serbia House of Flowers in Belgrade, Serbia House of Karađorđević Mausoleum, St. George's Church, Oplenac in Topola, Serbia Valle de los Caídos, in San Lorenzo del Escorial, Spain Les Invalides in Paris, France The Panthéon in Paris, France Jusélius Mausoleum at the Käppärä Cemetery in Pori, Finland Mausoleum of Njegoš in Lovćen, Montenegro Lenin's Mausoleum in Moscow, Russia House of Flowers in Belgrade, Serbia Oplenac in Topola, Serbia Valle de los Caídos, in San Lorenzo del Escorial, Spain La Recoleta Cemetery, Buenos Aires Buenos Aires Metropolitan Cathedral, mausoleum of José de San Martín Mausoleum of Néstor Kirchner, Río Gallegos, Santa Cruz Cathedral of La Plata, mausoleum of Dardo Rocha Buenos Aires Metropolitan Cathedral, mausoleum of General San Martín in Buenos Aires, Argentina Cathedral Basilica of Our Lady of Peace, La Paz, mausoleum of Andrés de Santa Cruz General Cemetery of Santa Cruz Cementerio General de Cochabamba, mausoleum of "general del pueblo" René Barrientos Ortuño Cathedral Basilica of Our Lady of Peace, La Paz, mausoleum of Andrés de Santa Cruz, Bolivia Obelisk of São Paulo, mausoleum to the heroes of Constitutionalist Revolution in São Paulo, São Paulo Chico Xavier mausoleum in Uberaba, Minas Gerais São João Batista Cemetery, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro Monument to the Independence of Brazil in São Paulo JK Memorial in Brasília, Federal District Convent of Santo Antônio, Rio de Janeiro The Monument to the Independence of Brazil in São Paulo houses the sarcophagi of Emperor Pedro I of Brazil (also King of Portugal as Pedro IV) and his two wives The Imperial Mausoleum in the Cathedral of São Pedro de Alcântara in Petrópolis, Brazil. It is the final resting place of Emperor Pedro II of Brazil and other members of the Brazilian imperial family A mausoleum containing the remains of several Brazilian royals, as well as those of Franciscan friars, in the Convent of Santo Antônio, Rio de Janeiro The modernist JK Memorial is the burial place of Brazilian president Juscelino Kubitschek in Brasília, a city founded by Kubitschek himself Altar de la Patria of Chile Cementerio General de Santiago, Chile Altar de la Patria of Chile Central Cemetery of Bogotá, Colombia San Diego Cemetery, Quito Cathedral of Quito Mausoleo en el Centro Cívico Ciudad Alfaro, Montecristi, Ecuador National Pantheon of the Heroes National Pantheon of the Heroes in Asuncion, Paraguay Panteón de los Próceres Presbitero Maestro mausoleum and museum in Lima Cathedral Basilica of St. John the Apostle and Evangelist, Lima Presbitero Maestro mausoleum and museum in Lima, Peru Artigas Mausoleum, mausoleum of José Gervasio Artigas Artigas Mausoleum in Montevideo, Uruguay National Pantheon of Venezuela, mausoleum of Simón Bolívar National Pantheon of Venezuela, mausoleum of Simón Bolívar in Caracas, Venezuela Eaton family mausoleum at Mount Pleasant Cemetery in Toronto, Ontario Hart Massey's mausoleum at Mount Pleasant Cemetery in Toronto, Ontario Sir Henry Pellatt's mausoleum at Forest Lawn in Toronto, Ontario Santa Ifigenia Cemetery, Santiago de Cuba Altar de la Patria, mausoleum to the Founding Fathers of the Dominican Republic National Pantheon of the Dominican Republic Los Ilustres Cemetery San Salvador Cathedral Guatemala City General Cemetery Haiti's National Cemetery in Port-au-Prince, where François Duvalier, who ruled from 1957 to 1971, is buried Cementerio General, Trujillo El Ángel Victory column and mausoleum to the heroes of the Mexican Independence in Mexico City Monumento a la Revolución monument commemorating and mausoleum to the heroes of the Mexican Revolution in Mexico City Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral, Mexico City Panteon San Fernando, Mexico City Jardines Del Humaya, a cemetery with opulent multi-story and air-conditioned mausoleums of Mexican drug cartel members El Ángel Victory column and mausoleum to the heroes of the Mexican Independence in Mexico City, Mexico Monumento a la Revolución monument commemorating and mausoleum to the heroes of the Mexican Revolution in Mexico City, Mexico Cementerio General Occidental, Managua Central Park, Managua Omar Torrijos Mausoleum, Amador, Panama City Henry Flagler's mausoleum in St. Augustine, Florida Presidential memorials in the United States and Presidents' graves of the United States Grant's Tomb in New York, New York James A. Garfield Memorial in Cleveland, Ohio Abraham Lincoln's tomb in Springfield, Illinois MacArthur Memorial in Norfolk, Virginia Miles Mausoleum in Arlington National Cemetery Ferncliff Cemetery and Mausoleum in Hartsdale, New York Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California Queen of Heaven Mausoleum in Queen of Heaven Cemetery, Hillside, Illinois Rose Hills Memorial Park, Whittier, California Rose Chapel Mausoleum in Roseland Park Cemetery, Berkley, Michigan Shrine of the Good Shepherd Chapel Mausoleum in Green Bay, Wisconsin Wilhelm's Portland Memorial Funeral Home in Portland, Oregon Tacoma Mausoleum in Tacoma, Washington Tombs of the Uga mascots inside Sanford Stadium in Athens, Georgia Brigadier General Egbert Ludovicus Viele's Egyptian-style pyramid mausoleum in West Point, New York Rapper XXXTentacion's mausoleum at The Gardens of Boca Raton in Boca Raton, Florida Rapper Juice Wrld's mausoleum at Beverly Cemetery in Blue Island, Illinois Mausoleo a los Heroes de El Polvorín, at Cementerio Civil de Ponce in Ponce, Puerto Rico Mausolea in Cemetery of the Holy Rood on Long Island, New York The interior of the Spring Valley Mausoleum in Minnesota, listed on the National Register of Historic Places Percival Lowell – Mausoleum 2013 at the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona Massey Memorial in Wellington, New Zealand where New Zealand Prime Minister William Massey and his wife are interred. Savage Memorial at Bastion Point in Auckland, New Zealand where New Zealand Prime Minister Michael Joseph Savage is interred. List of types of funerary monument Morgue or mortuary National Cemetery Ohel (grave) Sepulchre Guard mounting ^ The plurals mausoleums and mausolea are both used in English, although mausoleums is more common. Toms, J. Mason (Winter 2019). "Arkansas Listings in the National Register of Historic Places: The Community Mausoleums of Cecil E. Bryan". Arkansas Historical Quarterly. 78 (4): 423–431. ISSN 0004-1823. "Anıtkabir'de yabancı ziyaretçi rekoru kırıldı". www.sozcu.com.tr (in Turkish). Retrieved 2022-05-12. Paul Veyne, in A History of Private Life: I. From Pagan Rome to Byzantium, Veyne, ed. (Harvard University Press) 1987:416. al-Qummi, Ja'far ibn Qūlawayh (2008). Kāmil al-Ziyārāt. trans. Sayyid Mohsen al-Husaini al-Mīlāni. Shiabooks.ca Press. p. 63. Look up mausoleum in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mausoleums. Mausolea and Monuments Trust, gazetteer of mausolea in England Marvelous Mausoleums Around The World – slideshow at The Huffington Post Portals:  Religion  Islam  Education  Psychology  Art  Architecture