Pokémon Go (stylized as Pokémon GO) is a 2016 augmented reality (AR) mobile game, part of the Pokémon franchise, developed and published by Niantic in collaboration with Nintendo and The Pokémon Company for iOS and Android devices. It uses mobile devices with GPS to locate, capture, train, and battle virtual Pokémon, which appear as if they are in the player's real-world location. The game is free-to-play; it uses a freemium business model combined with local advertising and supports in-app purchases for additional in-game items. The game launched with around 150 species of Pokémon, which had increased to around 700 by 2021. Pokémon Go was released to mixed reviews; critics praised the concept but criticized technical problems. It was one of the most used and profitable mobile apps in 2016, having been downloaded more than 500 million times worldwide by the end of the year. It is credited with popularizing location-based and AR technology, promoting physical activity, and helping local businesses grow due to escalated foot traffic. However, it attracted controversy for contributing to accidents and creating public nuisances. Various governments expressed concerns about security, and some countries regulate its use. The game had over 147 million monthly active users by May 2018, over a billion global downloads by early 2019, and grossed more than $6 billion in revenue by 2020. After establishing a game account, players create and customize their own avatars. Once created, an avatar is displayed on a map based on the player's geographical location. Features on the map include 'PokéStops' and 'Pokémon Gyms'. These PokéStops can be equipped with items called 'Lure Modules', which attract additional wild, and occasionally rare, Pokémon. Gyms serve as battle locations for team-based king of the hill matches. PokéStops and Gyms are typically located at places of interest. These locations were initially re-purposed portals from Ingress, Niantic's previous augmented reality (AR) game. This has led to PokéStops and Pokémon Gyms being placed at dangerous or inconvenient locations, such as a now-deleted Gym at the Korean Demilitarized Zone and Bagram Airforce Base, which was abandoned by U.S. forces in July 2021. Since 2019, these locations also include submissions from Go players which are largely reviewed by other players. As players move within their real world surroundings, their avatars move within the game's map. Different Pokémon species reside in different areas of the world; for example, Water-type Pokémon are generally found near water. When a player encounters a Pokémon, it may be viewed either in AR mode or with a live rendered, generic background. AR mode uses the camera and gyroscope on the player's mobile device to display an image of a Pokémon as though it were in the real world. Players can take screenshots of the Pokémon they encounter either with or without the AR mode activated. Although the game is free to play, it supports in-app purchases, where players can purchase additional Poké Balls and other in-game items. These items include Incense, which attracts Pokémon to the player as they move for sixty minutes, Lure Modules, which players use at PokéStops to attract Pokémon to their current location near the PokeStop, and Lucky Eggs, which double experience points gained for a thirty-minute period from use. All Pokémon are displayed with a Combat Power, which is a rough measure of how powerful that Pokémon is in battle. Generally, as players level up, they catch Pokémon with higher CP and Pokémon are somewhat harder to catch. The player can check how strong their Pokémon are by the "Appraisal" system. Unlike most other installments in the Pokémon series, players in Pokémon Go do not battle wild Pokémon to catch them. During an encounter with a wild Pokémon, a player may throw a Poké Ball at it by flicking it from the bottom of the screen up toward the Pokémon. If the Pokémon is caught, it will come under the ownership of the player. Factors in the success rate of catching a Pokémon include the Pokémon's catch rate, the timing, the type of Poké Ball used, etc. After catching a wild Pokémon, the player is awarded two types of in-game currencies: Candies and Stardust. The Candies awarded by a successful catch depend on what evolutionary chain a Pokémon belongs to. A player can use Stardust and Candies to raise a Pokémon's level and hence "Combat Power" (CP). However, only Candies are needed to evolve a Pokémon, except for certain Pokémon that might need special items. Each Pokémon evolution tree has its own type of Candy, which can only be used to evolve or level up. The maximum level a player can achieve was originally level 40, but expanded to 50 as of November 30, 2020. The player can also transfer the Pokémon back to the Pokémon Professor Willow to earn more Candies and create room for more Pokémon. Shiny Pokémon are available through multiple ways, mostly by chance. One popular goal of the game is to complete the entries in the Pokédex, a comprehensive Pokémon logbook, by catching and evolving them to collect every one in it. In September 2016, Niantic introduced a "Buddy Pokémon" feature, which allows players to pick a Pokémon to appear alongside them on the profile screen, and receive in-game rewards and bonuses based on the chosen Pokémon. The feature was released later that month. Certain Pokémon have different distances that they need to be walked in order to receive candy. The more the player walks in real time, the more candy they can earn. During the same update, Niantic made it impossible for players with rooted or jailbroken devices to log into the game in an effort to reduce and prevent cheating. On January 20, 2018, Pokémon Go held the first Community Day, a monthly event that increases the appearance rate of a specific Pokémon and offer an exclusive move to the final evolution of the featured Pokémon only if caught or evolved during the event window. Players also have a higher chance to catch the Shiny variant of the featured Pokémon. The first Community Day featured Pikachu, with the exclusive move Surf to Raichu. The game is regularly updated with new Pokémon, and as of March 25, 2022, there are just over 730 Pokémon in the game (not including regional varieties) out of a total 1008. Regional Pokémon are often released together, such as Hoenn region Pokémon released in December 2017, Alolan variants in May 2018, Sinnoh region Pokémon(along with the Sinnoh Stone item used to evolve them) released in October 2018, Unova region Pokémon (and the Unova Stone) in September 2019, Kalos region Pokémon in December 2020, and again more Alola region Pokémon in March 2022. Mythical and legendary Pokémon are often released individually (or in pairs/trios) in special events or quests. The first Legendary Pokémon released was Groudon, in December 2017. The Mythical Pokémon Meltan and its evolved form, Melmetal are so far the only Pokémon to have made their debut on Pokémon Go. Their release coincided with the release of Pokémon: Let's Go, Pikachu! and Let's Go, Eevee! on the Nintendo Switch, Pokémon Go introduced the new Mythical Pokémon Meltan originally as a teaser, later to be available to capture only in Pokémon Go via a "Mystery Box" item that could be obtained through transferring Pokémon from Pokémon Go to either Nintendo Switch Pokémon games, or by completing new Research Tasks. In August 2020, Mega Evolution came to Pokémon Go with four Pokémon able to Mega Evolve into five forms. Players earn experience points for various in-game activities. Players rise in level as they earn experience points (XP), with various features being progressively unlocked. Most-notably, at level five, the player can battle at a Pokémon Gym and join one of three color-coded teams (red for Team Valor, blue for Team Mystic, or yellow for Team Instinct), which act as factions battling for control of Gyms within the Pokémon Go world.[citation needed] In June 2017, Niantic announced that the game mechanics of Gyms would be revamped for a more teamwork-oriented experience; Gyms were disabled on June 19, 2017, with the new Gyms being released with the next app update a few days later. As of the update, Gyms included a spinnable component to receive in-game items such as Potions and Poké Balls. Additionally, Gyms are capped at containing six Pokémon, each of which must be unique in that Gym. Coins are now earned based on the amount of time the defending Pokémon has been in a Gym, as opposed to a one-per-day gym defender bonus of 10 coins per current defending Pokémon. Legendary, Mythical and Buddy Pokémon cannot be placed in Gyms.[citation needed] In July 2017, Raid Battles were introduced. Raid Battles consist of a group of players gathering to confront an over-leveled Pokémon located in a Gym. If the Pokémon is defeated, the players gain the chance to catch a regular version of it. Raid difficulties range from 1 to 5, with 1 being of the lowest difficulty, and 5 being the most difficult to defeat. Level 5 raids are exclusive to Legendary Pokémon. The first of these, Articuno and Lugia, were released on July 22, 2017, after the Go Fest, with Moltres and Zapdos following. From September to November, the 3 Legendary Beasts: Entei, Raikou and Suicune, were released shortly after, rotating regions every month. Following their departure, the Legendary Pokémon Ho-Oh appeared in Raid Battles from November 27, 2017, to December 12, 2017. In August 2020, level 3 Mega raids arrived with the introduction of Mega Evolution. At the same time, Level 2 and 4 raids were combined into Level 1 and 3 raids. In May 2022, Raid Battle were updated to include the addition of Mega Legendary Pokémon, which were turned to 6 stars, the highest currently in the game. The only Pokémon included in these Raids were Mega Latios and Mega Latias. In October 2022, a new form of raid battle called "Elite Raids" were introduced. Elite Raids differ to normal raids in a number of ways, most notably that they can only be battled in person, take 24 hours to start, and are extremely difficult, often requiring a large number of players to defeat the Pokémon. In May 2023, another new form of raid battles were introduced called "Shadow Raids". Shadow Raids may only be battled in person and award the chance to catch a Shadow Pokémon upon defeat. During the battle, the Pokémon may become "enraged", increasing both attack and defence, but can be returned to normal using a "Purified Gem". In December 2018, Niantic added player vs player Trainer Battles. In January 2020, Niantic rolled out an online battle format Go Battle League which allows players to fight other players worldwide. Unlike the Trainer Battles format introduced in 2018, Go Battle League does not require physical proximity, scanning QR code on each other's phone, knowing each other's friend code, or any other real-world interactions between players. Instead, participating players are automatically paired by the game server via some variant of the Elo rating system. In July 2019, Pokémon Go introduced Team GO Rocket battles. Team GO Rocket NPCs could be battled at PokéStops indicated with it twitching and being a dark color or in Team GO Rocket Balloons which follow the player on the map. After victory, the player has the opportunity to capture a "Shadow Pokémon" which are relatively low-leveled, angry-looking Pokémon. Shadow Pokémon have a higher attack stat but a lower defense stat than a normal Pokémon. After capture, the player can choose to purify the Shadow Pokémon. Purified Pokémon are higher-leveled than their Shadow counterparts, can learn an exclusive move when purified, and need fewer candies to evolve.[citation needed] The concept for the game was conceived in 2014 by Satoru Iwata of Nintendo and Tsunekazu Ishihara of The Pokémon Company as an April Fools' Day collaboration with Google, called the Google Maps: Pokémon Challenge. Ishihara was a fan of developer Niantic's previous transreality game, Ingress, and saw the game's concept as a perfect match for the Pokémon series. Niantic, a subsidiary of Google, used the crowdsourced data from Ingress to populate the locations for PokéStops and gyms within Pokémon Go, data from Google Maps to spawn specific Pokémon on certain terrain, and map display from OpenStreetMap since December 2017. The game's application logic uses the open source Kubernetes system - and due to the game's sheer scale of users, a number of bugs with the Kubernetes system was discovered and later fixed. Niantic was spun off from Google as an independent company in 2015 following the company reorganization into Alphabet Inc. In 2015, Ishihara dedicated his speech at the game's announcement on September 10 to Iwata, who had died two months earlier. Tatsuo Nomura, who joined Niantic in 2015 after he developed the Google Maps Pokémon Challenge, acted as Director and Product Manager for the game. The game's soundtrack was written by longtime Pokémon series composer, Junichi Masuda, who also assisted with some of the game's design. Among the game's graphic designers was Dennis Hwang, who previously created the logo of Gmail while working for Google. On March 4, 2016, Niantic announced a Japan-exclusive beta test would begin later that month, allowing players to assist in refining the game before its full release. The beta test was later expanded to other countries. On April 7, it was announced that the beta would expand to Australia and New Zealand. Then, on May 16, the signups for the field test were opened to the United States. The test came to an end on June 30. At the Comic-Con 2016, John Hanke, founder of Niantic, revealed the appearances of the three team leaders: Candela (Team Valor), Blanche (Team Mystic), and Spark (Team Instinct). Hanke conveyed that approximately 10% of the ideas for the game were implemented. Future updates, including the addition of trading, more Pokémon, implementation of Pokémon Centers at PokéStops, a patch for the "three step glitch", and easier training, were also confirmed. He also stated that Niantic would be continuing support for the game for "years to come". In an interview with TechCrunch in September 2016, Hanke hinted that player vs. player Pokémon battles would be released in a future update. In December 2016, coffeehouse chain Starbucks and telecommunications company Sprint collaborated with Nintendo to add PokéStops and gyms at certain locations of theirs throughout the United States. That same month, a companion app for Apple Watch devices was released, which allows users to receive notifications about nearby Pokémon, but does not allow for them to be caught. In January 2017, an additional 5,000 more Starbucks locations became available as gyms. In February 2017, an update was released which introduced over 100 species based in the Johto region from the second generation of the core Pokémon series, which were added alongside the original 151. The update also included the addition of new berries, new Pokémon encounter mechanics, and an expanded selection of avatar clothing options. Some of the Pokémon introduced in Ruby and Sapphire were added in late 2017, starting with a Halloween event in October and 50 more in December. A weather system was added alongside the latter, allowing real-world weather to affect gameplay. In November 2018, a game developed by Game Freak and heavily inspired by Pokémon Go, Pokémon: Let's Go, Pikachu! and Let's Go, Eevee! was released on the Nintendo Switch. This game will feature Pokémon Go style catching with Joy-Con and there has integration between the two games. In addition, new Pokémon Meltan was revealed in September, becoming the first new Pokémon to be released through Pokémon Go. On October 10, 2018, The Pokémon Company and Niantic announced plans to introduce Pokémon from Diamond and Pearl into Pokémon Go. On October 12, Niantic teased one of the Generation IV Pokémon that would be coming to Pokémon Go. On October 25, a feature known as Adventure Sync was announced, which will record the player's walking data in the background. On October 26, Niantic announced research tasks for Bug type Pokémon that will give players a chance to catch Shedinja throughout November. According to John Hanke in a January 2019 interview with Business Insider, 2018 saw Go become the game initially envisioned by Niantic. In 2020, Niantic made major changes to gameplay mechanisms to account for the COVID-19 pandemic which saw many players unable to leave their homes to play. These development shift saw changes like the addition of indoor step tracking to count toward in-game distance challenges, long distance PVP battles, increased "incense" effectiveness, increased spawn points, and a doubled player radius. The Pokémon Go Plus is a Bluetooth Low Energy wearable device, developed by Nintendo's Platform Technology Development division, that allows players to perform certain actions in the game without looking at their smart device. When a player is near a Pokémon or PokéStop, the Plus vibrates. The player can then press the button to capture the Pokémon or receive items from the PokéStop; the player cannot check what they have received until the next time they sign into the app onto their mobile device. The design consists of a Poké Ball and the shape of the Google Maps pin. The decision to create the device rather than create a smartwatch app was to increase uptake among players for whom a smartwatch is prohibitively expensive. It was released in the United Kingdom and North America on September 16, 2016. The game's official launch began on July 6, 2016, with releases in Australia, New Zealand, and the United States. Due to server strain from high demand upon release, Niantic CEO John Hanke stated that the release in other regions was to be "paused until Niantic was comfortable" fixing the issues. European releases started on July 13, and the game became available to most of the continent over the following ten days. The Japanese launch was initially reported to be on July 20; however, the game was delayed after a sponsorship deal with fast food chain McDonald's was leaked, instead releasing two days later. Although the game was proposed to be released in France on July 15, it was postponed until July 24 out of respect and due to safety concerns following a terrorist attack in Nice on July 14. Following the shut down of third-party apps and websites in late-July 2016—significantly reducing server strain—Niantic was able to continue pushing release worldwide. Central and South America and most of Southeast Asia subsequently saw releases in early August. Indonesia was the first Asian country to have the game playable, despite the game not being officially released in that region until August 6. In South Korea, the game was not officially released as major restrictions on the use of online mapping data exist. However, due to a glitch, a small area around Sokcho in the northeastern part of the country was considered a part of Niantic's North Korea mapping region, making the game fully playable in that area. Numerous people took advantage of the gap to play the game. Bus tickets from the capital city of Seoul sold out and people living within Sokcho shared information on free Wi-Fi areas to tourists. Players also discovered a gym in Panmunjom, along the Korean Demilitarized Zone; however, Niantic later removed it from the game. Following the release of Pokémon Go in Japan, parts of Busan also became playable as parts of the city are considered part of Japan's mapping area due to the proximity of Tsushima Island. The game officially released in the country in January 2017. In mainland China, Google services are banned by the Great Firewall, whereas the GPS function in the game is blocked by Niantic. Players of Pokémon Go in China have to download the game with App Store IDs from other regions and use VPN to access Google services in order to load the game, and some even use a GPS spoofing app to bypass the GPS blocking. Some players also downloaded a clone app called City Spirit Go, which was released shortly after Pokémon Go's beta test in Japan. As of 2020, the official game is still unplayable in most parts of China with GPS modules being blocked in-game.[citation needed] During its launch in Southeast Asia in August 2016, the game officially excluded Myanmar, but users in Thailand discovered that the game was fully playable in border cities near the nation. The game was released in the Balkans, Macau, and Central Asia in September 2016, and was also released throughout Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia by the end of the year. On September 11, 2018, the game appeared in Russia's App Store and Google Play Store over two years after the first launch. However, Niantic did not officially announce the release. In May 2019, the game was released on the Samsung Galaxy Store. Investors were buoyed by the response to the initial release of Pokémon Go on July 7, with Nintendo's share price rising by an initial 10% and by July 14 shares rose to as high as 50%. Despite Nintendo only owning a 32% stake in The Pokémon Company and an undisclosed stake in Niantic, Nintendo's market value increased by US$9 billion within five days of release of Pokémon Go. The trend continued for more than a week after the game's release and by July 19, the stock value of Nintendo more than doubled as compared to pre-release. Turnover sales reached a record-breaking ¥703.6 billion (US$6.6 billion); and trading of the stock accounted for a quarter of all trades on the Tokyo Stock Exchange's main board. The Financial Times believed that investors were speculating not on Pokémon Go as such, but on future Nintendo app releases being as successful as the company moves more into the mobile app market—an area they were historically reluctant to enter in the belief it would cannibalise its portable console and video game sales. Nintendo plans to release four more smartphone app games by March 2017, and investors remarked that Pokémon Go showed Nintendo still has some of the "most valuable character intellectual property in the world" with franchises such as Super Mario, The Legend of Zelda, and Metroid. By July 22, Nintendo gained ¥1.8 trillion ($17.6 billion) in market capitalization since the game's launch. However, following clarification from Nintendo that the company did not produce Pokémon Go nor had tangible financial gains from it, its stock fell by 18%—equating to a ¥708 billion ($6.7 billion) loss in market value—on July 25. This was the largest single-day decline for Nintendo since 1990 and the maximum one-day exchange of finances allowed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The company has an approximate 13% "effective economic stake" in the game, according to Macquarie Securities. The surge in stocks extended beyond Nintendo, with Tomy, TV Tokyo, and the Bank of Kyoto, among other companies, all seeing significant gains. Similarly, Zagg, which owns a company that manufactures battery cases, saw a 25% rise in its stock in relation to Pokémon Go. At launch, the game suffered from frequent server outages due to extreme usage. The global server usage expectation for the game was surpassed within 15 minutes of the game's release in Australia and New Zealand, and peaked at 50 times expected traffic, or 10 times the expected worst-case scenario. Frequent crashes and authentication errors plagued the game's release and persisted for several days. For the first two days after launch, players were unable to access the game through their Pokémon Trainer Club accounts; only Gmail-based accounts were able to gain access to the game. Servers again suffered frequent outages in Australia on July 11; players blamed people in the United Kingdom for bypassing local servers and using Australian ones to play the game before its official release. On July 16, a few hours after the release in many European countries, the game's servers temporarily went down. The outage was claimed by a hacking group called "PoodleCorp", who said they used a DDoS attack to take them down, although the problem was fixed later that day. The next day, the servers went down again as the game was launched in Canada. John Hanke issued an apology for the server issues at San Diego Comic Con 2016, stating "we weren't provisioned for what happened". Some early iOS installs of Pokémon Go required users to provide the app with full access to their Google accounts, thereby allowing the app to "access players' Gmail-based email, Google Drive-based files, photos and videos stored in Google Photos, and any other content within their Google accounts". The Pokémon Company and Niantic responded to the concerns, recognizing that the iOS app, at the time, "... erroneously requests full access permission for the user's Google account ..." However, Adam Reeve—the person who initially made claims of the security issues in a Tumblr post—later backtracked on his claim and was not "100 percent sure" it was valid. Dan Guido, CEO of the security company Trail of Bits, analyzed the app's programming and discovered that although the game did request full account access, this did not enable third-party usage as initially conveyed. Guido found that this did enable Niantic to access people's email addresses and phone numbers unintentionally. A subsequent iOS app update reduced the scope of access. Niantic also issued a statement assuring users that no information was collected nor was any information beyond what was necessary to use the app accessed. Alongside server issues, Pokémon Go suffered from several glitches. One of the more prominent bugs appeared in mid-July 2016 and rendered the game's tracking feature useless. Normally, this feature shows between zero and three footprints to inform the player of how close they are to a nearby Pokémon; however, it universally became "stuck" at three steps, earning it the name "three-step-glitch". Niantic removed the footstep feature altogether on July 30, sparking criticism from players. By August 1, players reported a new glitch that swaps their captured Pokémon with another creature at random. Another bug, confirmed by Niantic in August, inadvertently made capturing Pokémon more difficult. Some legendary Pokémon, which are rare and powerful versions of the creatures, were also obtained by players in a glitch, though they were later removed from the accounts of the trainers to keep the game fair. Reception Edit on Wikidata Pokémon Go released to "mixed or average" reviews, according to review aggregator Metacritic. Upon release, critics called the experience enjoyable, but noted the game's technical issues. Critics praised various aspects of Pokémon Go. Oscar Dayus (Pocket Gamer) said that the game was an immensely enjoyable experience and continued with how "the very personal nature of catching Pokémon in your own neighborhood made me smile more than any game has for years". Jeremy Parish (US Gamer) compared the game and its social aspects to a massively multiplayer online game. Reviewers also praised the game enabling the promotion of physical exercise. Terri Schwartz (IGN) said it was "secretly the best exercise app out there" and that it changed her daily walking routine. Patrick Allen (Lifehacker) wrote an article with tips about how to work out using Pokémon Go. Julia Belluz (Vox) said it could be the "greatest unintentional health fad ever" and wrote that one of the results of the game that the developers may not have realized was that "it seems to be getting people moving". Users took an extra 194 steps per day once they started using the app, which approximated to 26% more than usual. IGN named it the 100th best video game of all time in 2018. Philip Kollar and Allegra Frank (Polygon) both agreed that Pokémon Go was "an exciting social experience", but were not sure how long the game and its popularity would last, stating it could either last for coming years or "end up as a brush fire craze that the whole gaming world is talking about for a few weeks and then is forgotten". Other critics expressed more negative opinions of the game, with many citing frequent crashes and other technical issues, along with shallow gameplay. Kallie Plagge (IGN) said that although the game lacked in polish and depth, the overall experience made up for it. Matt Peckham (Time) criticized the game for its frequent crashes. Mike Cosimano (Destructoid) also took issue with the game, saying the original idea showed promise, but was improperly executed. Kat Brewster (The Guardian) wrote that although she thought Pokémon Go was not a good game, it was "a great experience". The server problems also received negative press. Miguel Concepcion (GameSpot) said that although he enjoyed the game's strong social appeal and visual design, the game's "initial iteration is a buggy mess on all levels", with one of the reasons being the constant server problems. Another glitch that appeared a few days after launch was the "three-step glitch", which made it impossible to "hunt down a specific Pokémon". Patricia Hernandez (Kotaku) said, "the three step glitch adds to what has been a terrible launch for Pokémon Go". Critics also emphasized on the large gap between the rural and urban players. Rural players seem to be at a major disadvantage when playing the game, while city players have access to more PokéStops and Gyms. Pokémon Go rapidly rose the American iOS App Store's "Top Grossing" and "Free" charts. The game has become the fastest game to top the App Store and Google Play, beating Clash Royale, and it became the most downloaded app on the App Store of any app in their first week. Within two days of release, it was installed on more than 5% of Android devices in the United States, according to SimilarWeb, According to Sensor Tower, the game was downloaded more than 10 million times within a week of release, becoming the fastest such app to do so, and reached 15 million global downloads by July 13. According to SurveyMonkey the game became the most active mobile game in the United States ever with 21 million active users on July 12, eclipsing Candy Crush Saga's peak of 20 million. By July 15, approximately 1.3 million people were playing the game in the Netherlands, despite the app not being officially released in the country at the time. On the day of release in Japan, more than 10 million people downloaded the game, including 1.3 million in the first three hours. By July 31, the game exceeded 100 million downloads worldwide, according to App Annie and Sensor Tower. On August 8, Pokémon Go reached the milestone of over 100 million downloads on Google Play alone after barely 33 days on the market. Through in-game purchases, the game generated more than $160 million by the end of July 2016, with App Annie reporting that Pokémon Go had generated around $10 million in revenue every day that month. The same month, Sensor Tower reported that the game had passed more than $200 million in worldwide revenue, beating every existing record set by Clash of Clans and Candy Crush by a wide margin. On August 12, 2016, the Financial Times reported that Pokémon Go reached $268 million in revenue after five weeks counting only the U.S., British, and German markets. The average daily usage of the app on Android devices in July 2016 exceeded that of Snapchat, Tinder, Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook. Due by the game's massive popularity, several app developers became focused on developing similar AR apps using available software development kits (SDK). By September 2, 2016, Pokémon Go had generated more than $440 million in worldwide revenue, according to Sensor Tower. By September 30, it had received 500 million downloads and grossed $470 million in 80 days, according to market research firm Newzoo. Pokémon Go reached the milestone of $600 million in revenue after only 90 days on the market, becoming the fastest mobile game ever to do so. Besides in-game purchases, partnerships with retail chains like Starbucks, McDonald's, Sprint, pay Niantic Labs for "Foot Traffic" on-demand of the retail shops. The game was awarded five Guinness World Records in August 2016: most revenue grossed by a mobile game in its first month ($206.5 million); most downloaded mobile game in its first month (130 million downloads); most international charts topped simultaneously for a mobile game in its first month (top game in 70 different countries); most international charts topped simultaneously for a mobile game in its first month (top grossing in 55 countries simultaneously); and fastest time to gross $100 million by a mobile game (reached in 20 days on July 26). By September 2016, Pokémon Go had been downloaded over 500 million times worldwide, and became the fastest game to make over $500 million in revenue. Pokémon Go was awarded the App Store's breakout hit of 2016. Pokémon Go was reported to be the most searched game on Google in 2016. Usage of the game in the United States peaked on July 15, and by mid-September, had lost 79% of its players there. Forbes said "the vaguely curious stopped playing and the more committed players ran up against a fairly unsatisfying endgame". In October 2016, Niantic released a Halloween-themed event, which saw a surge in revenue up to 133% as reported by Sensor Tower, placing the game back to top of the charts of highest grossing apps. It was reported that the game earned approximately $23.3 million between October 25 and 29, up from approximately $10 million between October 18 and 22. According to App Annie, Pokémon Go grossed an estimated $950 million in 2016. In February 2017, Pokémon Go was awarded being the best app at the Crunchies award event. By February 2017, the game has been downloaded more than 650 million times worldwide, with a reported $1 billion in revenue made, becoming the fastest mobile game ever to do so. By June 2017, the game was downloaded more than 750 million times, with an estimated revenue of $1.2 billion according to Apptopia. According to mobile app research firm Apptopia, approximately 60 million users were still playing the game a year after launch. In May 2018, The Pokémon Company announced that the game reached over 800 million downloads worldwide. Forbes estimated that the game may have come close to 900 million downloads by September 2018. The top five countries where it has received the most downloads are the United States (21%), Brazil (9.3%), India (8.6%), Mexico (5.5%), and Indonesia (5%). As of February 2019, the game has been downloaded by over 1 billion people worldwide. A report from SuperData Research ranked Pokémon Go as the 9th highest grossing mobile game of 2017, with an annual revenue of $890 million. Bloomberg estimated that Pokémon Go generated up to $2 billion in total revenue by late 2017. Two years from its initial launch, analyst firm Sensor Tower estimated the game had grossed over $1.8 billion from in-app purchases, reporting that players around the world continue to spend $2 million each day. SuperData Research reported that, in May 2018, Pokémon Go grossed $104 million in monthly revenue and had 147 million monthly active players, its highest since Summer 2016. In July 2018, Pokémon Go was the top-grossing mobile app of the month. Since the introduction of trading and friends features, Sensor Tower has reported that players spend an average of $2.5 million per day. Apptopia reported that, by September 2018, the game had grossed over $2 billion from in-app purchases; the top five countries where it has received the most revenue are Japan ($670 million), the United States ($550 million), Germany ($88 million), the United Kingdom ($86 million), and Australia ($52 million). It was the fourth highest-grossing game of 2018, with $1.3 billion, and in 2019 alone Pokémon Go earned $1.4 billion, according to Superdata Research, a division of Nielsen Media Research. Pokémon Go live events earned $249 million in tourism revenue during 2019. According to Sensor Tower in November 2020, Pokémon Go had accumulated nearly 600 million unique installs and generated almost $4.2 billion in revenue from in-game purchases via the iOS App Store and Google Play. Its largest market in terms of both installs and revenue is the United States, followed by Japan and Germany in revenue and by Brazil and Mexico in installs. During 2020, with the COVID-19 pandemic causing restrictions on the ability of players to play Go outside their homes, Niantic implemented new features which allowed players to play the game from inside their homes, and this was credited with increasing its playerbase throughout the year despite the restrictions. Despite a brief drop early in the pandemic, the number of monthly active users of the game rose by 45 percent between January and August 2020, and the game's revenue in 2020 was the highest in its history, exceeding even its 2016 revenue. The game generated more than $1 billion of revenue in the first 10 months of 2020 according to Sensor Tower, and it was the top-grossing mobile game of December 2020. Pokémon Go was one of the top five highest-grossing games of 2020 with an annual revenue of $1.92 billion according to SuperData Research, bringing the game's cumulative revenue to $6.46 billion by 2020. The game generated a further $641.6 million in the first half of 2021. The game was referred to as a "social media phenomenon" which has brought people together from all walks of life. 231 million people engaged in 1.1 billion interactions that mentioned Pokémon Go on Facebook and Instagram in the month of July. Numerous media outlets referred to the surge in popularity as "Pokémon Go Mania", or simply "Pokémania". The massive popularity of the game resulted in several unusual positive effects. For example, the game placed players where they can help catch criminals and report crimes in progress, although it has also placed some in harm's way, and has even aided law enforcement's community relations, albeit with caveats. Businesses also benefited from the nearby presence of PokéStops (or them being PokéStops themselves) with the concomitant influx of people, and the intense exploration of communities has brought local history to the forefront. The game was also seen bringing its players to places of worship, as many Pokégyms are located there. Despite some criticism by religious leaders, this was received positively by religious groups, who saw it as reminding adherents to come and pray. Some establishments considered purchasing lures in the game to attract additional players to PokéStops on their property. Within a week of its release, a secondary market emerged for the game, both for the resell of high-level accounts on Craigslist and PlayerUp, and for the sale of expert advice on Thumbtack. Wireless provider T-Mobile US started an offer for free data for a year for Pokémon Go sessions, and Yelp added a filter that only shows businesses which have a PokéStop nearby. National parks across the United States saw an influx of visitors due to the game, with "hundreds or thousands" of people visiting the National Mall and Memorial Parks in Washington, D.C. on the weekend following Pokémon Go's release in the country. Small museums with PokéStops placed at exhibits also reported increased attendance, such as the McNay Art Museum in San Antonio, Texas, and the Morikami Museum and Japanese Gardens in Boca Raton, Florida. Charity organizations also sought engagement from players, with animal shelters offering dog walks to people who want to hatch eggs. Eduardo Paes, then-mayor of Rio de Janeiro, stated that he hoped the app would be released in Brazil before the start of the 2016 Summer Olympics in the city (and it was, on August 3), and United States presidential candidates Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton mentioned the app during their 2016 election campaigns. In late July 2016, during a public address, the President of Italy, Sergio Mattarella, compared a political issue about the date of an incoming referendum as preposterous as the hunt for the Pokémon. Shortly after the game's release, Bellator mixed martial artist Michael Page celebrated a knockout of his match opponent, Evangelista Santos by putting on a red Ash Ketchum-like hat and rolling a prop Poké Ball in Santos's direction. On July 25, Dwayne Johnson released a promo video featuring MatPat and Ali-A with himself as a tough, rare Pokémon. The game was credited for popularizing AR, and was praised by genderfluid groups for letting the players choose a "style" instead of "gender". The game also had a positive impact among individuals with autism. The "Pokémon Theme" from the animated series saw a 630% increase in listeners on music streaming platform Spotify during the month of the game's release. Meanwhile, streaming services such as Hulu experienced an increased viewership of the Pokémon series and films. Nintendo reported that sales of the 3DS Pokémon games rose as a result of the game's popularity. A Twitch channel, Twitch Plays Pokémon Go, was created that mimics the crowd-played Twitch Plays Pokémon channel, allowing viewers to direct a virtual avatar in the game using an iPhone programmed to spoof its location. Niantic later issued permanent bans to those who cheated the game by means such as GPS spoofing and bots. Pokémon-themed pornography increased in popularity after the release of the game. xHamster, an adult video streaming website, reported that within 5 days of the game's release, Pokémon related terms were the most searched for videos. Another adult video streaming website, Pornhub, reported that Pokémon related searches spiked 136%. Pokémon Go was spoofed in the Maroon 5 music video, "Don't Wanna Know". In the 2016 Doctor Who Christmas special, "The Return of Doctor Mysterio", the Doctor creates a distraction by "flood[ing] the downstairs with Pokémon", causing the people to run off with their cell phones. In the episode "Looking for Mr. Goodbart" from the 28th season of The Simpsons, the people of Springfield become addicted to Peekimon Get, a parody of Pokémon Go. Go's release resulted in a resurgence in popularity for the Pokémon franchise as a whole. The Pokémon Sun and Moon games for the Nintendo 3DS, released later in 2016, was the best-selling video game for the 3DS with over 16 million copies sold, and this was partly attributed to the new fans to the series brought in by Go. In an interview, director of Sun and Moon Shigeru Ohmori remarked that the Ultra Sun and Ultra Moon sequels were designed partly to facilitate entry for newcomers to the franchise brought in by Go. The first Pokémon games for the Nintendo Switch, Pokémon: Let's Go, Pikachu! and Let's Go, Eevee!, took significant inspirations from Go. A line of official Go merchandise was released in November 2019. In addition to standard gameplay, the game has held several in-game and live events. The first live event officially held by Niantic was held in Charlotte, North Carolina, in May 2017. In July 2017, a community event was held in Grant Park, Chicago, in honor of the first anniversary of the game's release. Despite the fact that almost no information about the event, including ticket prices and attractions, was released by Niantic ahead of the ticket sale, over 20,000 tickets sold out within a half hour. During the event itself, attendees suffered connectivity issues and crashes, due to the heavy amount of localized cellular activity. Afterwards, Niantic announced that they would refund everybody who bought a ticket, as well as give them $100 of in-game currency. Following the event, around two dozen attendees filed suit against Niantic, seeking travel reimbursement. Following the event in Chicago, other events have been held in Chester, Yokohama, and San Jose. In September 2017, a series of events named "Safari Zone" was held in Unibail-Rodamco shopping centers in Oberhausen, Paris and Barcelona, with events the following month in Copenhagen, Prague, Stockholm and Amstelveen. In January 2018, Niantic announced monthly community event Community Day which aims to get players to meet up in their local areas. During a multi-hour period, players can encounter more frequent wild spawns of a particular Pokémon, an exclusive move for that Pokémon (or its evolution), an increased probability for the shiny form of that Pokémon, and bonuses such as extra stardust or XP. The Community Days in 2018 featured Pikachu (January 20), Dratini (February 24), Bulbasaur (March 25), Mareep (April 15), Charmander (May 19), Larvitar (June 16), Squirtle (July 8), Eevee (August 11–12), Chikorita (September 22), Beldum (October 21), and Cyndaquil (November 10). Pokémon Go in Syria is a photography series published in 2016 by Syrian artist Khaled Akil. Akil places Pokémon characters in destroyed Syrian streets as a reminder for a world lost behind the screen. While Pokémon Go was trending worldwide, Akil couldn't help but notice how the media forgot about the war in Syria, and visualised his idea in the form of digital collages. Khaled's Pokémon series quickly went viral across the globe after he posted it online. This photography series was exhibited in various locations including the American University Museum. The app was criticized for using locations such as cemeteries and memorials as sites to catch Pokémon, including the Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, the National September 11 Memorial & Museum, Arlington National Cemetery, the ANZAC War Memorial, and Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park. Niantic later removed content from sensitive areas such as the Hiroshima Memorial and Holocaust Museum. The game sparked complaints from Dutch company ProRail, who said that players entered their railway tracks, and fire stations told players to not impede their staff by congregating outside. The game's distribution of PokéStops and gyms (derived from the portals in Ingress, Niantic's science fiction-themed AR game) was noted to be sparser in many minority neighborhoods in a reflection of American demographics. Players in rural areas also complained about the lack of Pokémon spawns, PokéStops, and gyms in their area.Pokémon Go was criticized for game accessibility issues by players with physical disabilities. The AbleGamers Foundation COO, Steve Spohn, said that when Pokémon Go was compared to other mobile games, it "excludes disabled players to a significant degree". Police departments in various countries issued warnings, some tongue-in-cheek, regarding inattentive driving, trespassing, and being targeted by criminals due to being unaware of one's surroundings. In the state of New York, sex offenders are banned from playing the app while on parole. Bosnian players were warned to stay out of minefields left over from the 1990s Bosnian War. In Russia, a 21-year-old video blogger, Ruslan Sokolovsky, was arrested in September 2016 for two months after playing Pokémon Go at the Church of All Saints in Yekaterinburg, and eventually received a suspended sentence for three and a half years in prison for charges of blasphemy. People have suffered various injuries from accidents related to the game. In Japan, the first accident occurred within hours of the game's release. The first death in Japan attributed to Pokémon Go occurred in late August 2016. A distracted driver playing the game killed one woman and seriously injured another. The 39-year-old farmer did not notice the women crossing a street and struck them with his truck. The woman died of a broken neck. Japan's National Police Agency said it was the 79th Pokémon Go-related accident in the country. On August 11, 2016, a young girl in Cambodia was reportedly killed after being hit by a car while trying to capture a Pokémon on a road. The case was the first death related to Pokémon Go among Southeast Asian countries. In January 2017, Chinese-American civilian Jiansheng Chen was shot dead while playing Pokémon Go. Al-Azhar University in Cairo described the game as "harmful mania." A Cossack leader declared that it "smacks of Satanism", Kuwait banned the game from government sites, Indonesian officials deemed it a national security threat, and in Israel the IDF banned the game from Army bases out of security considerations. In Saudi Arabia, the General Secretariat of the Council of Senior Scholars declared, in light of a 2001 fatwa banning the Pokémon card game as a form of gambling, that the electronic app required a new ruling. This was also followed by both Indian and Malaysian Islamic leaders telling Indian and Malaysian Muslims to avoid the game. During Thailand's 2016 constitutional referendum polling, Pokémon Go players were told to refrain from entering polling stations. Thus the Thai National Broadcasting and Communications Commission intends to ask Niantic to remove Pokémon characters and PokéStops from locations such as government facilities, historic and religious sites, private property as well as dangerous spots such as narrow footpaths and rivers. Cambodia has banned the game in a former genocide site after Pokémon players showed up at the site. Vietnam has banned players from entering the government and defense offices. The Vietnamese Ministry of Information and Communications is also considering the game's negative impact to Vietnamese society, where many people left home at night, crossed the road or drove on the street with their eyes kept focused on phones, which brought the need to ban the game in the country. Following the move by other Southeast Asian neighbors, the Philippines also banned the game in all administration offices. According to a survey by Malaysian Employers Federation (MEF), around 4% of employers in Malaysia fired their staff for playing the game during working hours. Russia also voiced their concerns over the application, with Nikolay Nikiforov, the country's Minister of Communications and Mass Media, suspecting foreign intelligence agencies using the application to collect information, while some fundamentalist religious groups in the region claim it to be demonic. The Supreme Council of Virtual Space in Iran officially banned the game in August 2016 over security concerns. The same month, The Pentagon facility in U.S. restricted the use of the game on their property, citing security risks by collecting secret information. In the United Kingdom, 290 police incidents were reported to have occurred in July 2016 in the country due to the game. In September 2016, Niantic stopped supporting the CyanogenMod mobile operating system. This prevented users playing on CyanogenMod from playing the game from that point forward. In India, the Gujarat High Court issued a notice to Niantic, the developer of the popular AR-based game, on the grounds of "posing danger to public safety". The notice was issued on a PIL (Public Interest Litigation) seeking a ban on the location-based AR reality game in India. In addition, a second PIL was filed against the developers of Pokémon Go for hurting religious sentiments by showing images of eggs in places of worship of different religious groups. But the Indian Government refused to ban the game. Pokémon Go's targeted local advertising has been described by Shoshana Zuboff in The Age of Surveillance Capitalism as an experiment that initiated from Google to move targeted advertising from the digital domain (cost per click) into the physical domain (cost per visit) by the use of sponsored locations. "In the end we recognize that the probe was designed to explore the next frontier: the means of behavioral modification. The game about the game is, in fact, an experimental facsimile of surveillance capitalism's design for our future." Multiple unofficial, third-party apps were created to correspond with Pokémon Go. Notable apps include "Poké Radar" and "Helper for Pokémon Go", where players can crowdsource much of the Pokémon that can be found in the game at a particular time. At its peak of popularity, "Poké Radar" hit #2 on the Apple App Store, behind Pokémon Go itself. Another app, GoChat, which allows players to leave messages for other players at specific locations, accrued more than 1 million downloads in five days and reached the top 10 in the Apple App Store and Google Play Store. However, the app's developer Jonathan Zarra chose to leave the app unmonetized and had financial trouble keeping the app's servers online until bringing on angel investor and board member Michael Robertson. After acquiring significant funding, the app reached over 2 million active users. According to RiskIQ, at least 215 fake versions of the game were available by July 17, 2016. Several of these fake apps contained malicious programming and viruses. Launched on July 22, 2016, "Pokévision" enabled players to find exactly where Pokémon spawned and how much time was left until they despawned; the site used data hacked directly from the game. In the five days following the website's launch, 27 million unique visitors used the site. On July 31, multiple search apps and sites, including Pokévision, were disabled as they violated Niantic's terms of service. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Niantic responded by implementing changes and new features in the game which allowed players to easily play remotely. However, starting on August 1, 2021, Niantic began rolling back these changes as part of their Exploration Bonus Updates. Players in New Zealand and the United States were the first to receive the post-pandemic changes, and gradually, they were rolled out to the rest of the world "in accordance with recommendations from global health organizations." In fear of violations in health and personal safety regulations, as well as negatively impacting players with disabilities, the company has since received heavy criticism from the player base (including top players Brandon Tan and Nick Oyzon) due to their reverting safety measures implemented during the pandemic, in which gym and Pokéstop interaction distances were increased from 40 to 80 metres. Despite increasing rates of the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant in various U.S. states (resulting in overflowing hospitals), Niantic are firm on not keeping the pandemic bonuses. Players began boycotting Pokémon Go since in first week of August 2021. On Twitter, the #HearUsNiantic started trending worldwide as fans and players voiced their censure towards Niantic's decision in removing the pandemic bonuses. A letter was sent to Niantic, which responded to the community by stating that the pandemic changes will not stay. As Niantic are an AR company, part of their business strategy is to sell user data by players after completing AR Mapping tasks where they can log their surroundings at marked PokéStops in their in-game maps. The reduced distance means an increased potential for Niantic to generate more revenue. Another reason for their changes is for Niantic to preserve their image of being an AR tech giant; on their blog post they stated that it is their "mission" to "encourage outdoor exploration" and "to connect [people] to real places in the real world, and to visit places that are worth exploring." Players have also speculated that Niantic are rolling back the pandemic bonuses in an effort to send players closer to sponsored businesses such as McDonald's (marked by a PokéStop or gym), from which Niantic have made a lot of money. Video games portal List of Pokémon, the list of all of the original Pokémon by order See § Regional availability for exact release dates per region. At the time of the game's launch, only 145 of the original 151 Pokémon were available to players, four of which are regionally exclusive: Farfetch’d, Kangaskhan, Tauros and Mr. Mime are exclusive to East Asia, Australia, United States and Europe, respectively. shut down in March 2022 due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine Denham, Jess (July 12, 2016). "Pokémon Go has won the praise of gender fluid gamers". Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Osworth, Ali (July 9, 2016). "Pokémon Go Came Out In the US, Let's Catch 'Em All". Autostraddle. The Excitant Group. Archived from the original on July 11, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. Ungureanu, Horia (July 18, 2016). "Pokémon GO Tricks To Attract And Catch Pokémon: PokéStop Lure Module vs. Incense". Tech Times. Archived from the original on July 18, 2016. Retrieved July 18, 2016. Bastow, Clem (July 11, 2016). "From Pokéstops to Pikachu: everything you need to know about Pokémon Go". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 18, 2016. Retrieved July 18, 2016. Peckham, Matt (July 12, 2016). "Review: 'Pokémon Go' Is an Ingenious Idea With Too Many Rough Edges". TIME.com. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Cosimano, Mike (July 12, 2016). "Review: Pokemon Go". Destructoid. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Wehner, Mike (July 13, 2016). "The mysterious Pokémon Go gym at the border of North Korea and South Korea has disappeared". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. "Soldiers watch the US withdrawal from Bagram Airfield through the lens of Pokemon Go". Stars and Stripes. "Niantic will open Pokémon GO Pokéstop submissions to players worldwide next week". TechCrunch. August 19, 2019. Retrieved December 27, 2020. Concepcion, Miguel (July 12, 2016). "Pokemon GO Review". GameSpot. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Reilly, Luke (September 10, 2015). "Pokémon GO Coming to Smartphones". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved September 10, 2015. Takahashi, Dean (December 16, 2015). "How Pokémon Go will benefit from Niantic's lessons from Ingress on location-based game design". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved June 16, 2016. "53 Perfectly Timed Pokemon Go Screenshots". IGN. July 11, 2016. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. Eadicicco, Lisa (July 11, 2016). "Here's How to Play Pokémon Go". Archived from the original on July 11, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. "What are Combat Power (CP) and Hit Points (HP)?". Pokémon GO. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Tapsell, Chris. "Pokémon Go Appraisal and CP meaning explained: How to get the highest IV and CP values and create the most powerful team". eurogamer.net. Gamer Network Limited. Retrieved March 29, 2024. "Level 50 is now live in Pokémon Go for everyone". www.msn.com. Retrieved November 30, 2020. Martinez, Philip (July 6, 2016). "'Pokémon Go' Tips: How To Level Up And Evolve Your 'Mon". Player.One. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved January 22, 2018. Oleksinski, Johnny (July 11, 2016). "Here's how to master Pokemon Go". Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Purchese, Robert (September 3, 2016). "New Pokémon Go Buddy feature coming". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on September 4, 2016. Retrieved September 3, 2016. Dwilson, Stephanie Dube (September 10, 2016). "'Pokemon Go' Buddy Update Live: How to Get the New Feature". Archived from the original on September 11, 2016. Retrieved September 11, 2016. Tassi, Paul. "'Pokémon GO' Is Purging All Rooted And Jailbroken Devices From The Game To Curb Cheating". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 12, 2016. Retrieved September 11, 2016. "Introducing Pokémon GO Community Day!". Pokémon GO. Retrieved September 17, 2019. Tassi, Paul. "'Pokémon GO' Announces Its Second Community Day And New Exclusive Pokémon". forbes.com. Retrieved March 24, 2024. "Pokemon Go Complete Pokedex 2022, All Released and Missing Pokemon". Future Game Releases. March 23, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Gravvat, Liam; Munson, Olivia. "How many Pokémon are there? We counted every generation of Pokémon, including Scarlet and Violet". USA Today. Retrieved March 24, 2023. "Pokémon GO updated to version 0.85.2 for Android and 1.55.1 for iOS". Pokémon GO. "The Adventure Continues–Pokémon Originally Discovered in the Sinnoh Region are here!". Pokémon GO. Retrieved September 17, 2019. "The world of Pokémon GO expands with Pokémon originally discovered in the Unova region!". Pokémon GO. Retrieved September 17, 2019. "Kalos Celebration Event - Pokémon GO". Martinez, Phillip (December 2, 2020). "'Pokémon Go' Kalos Region: Everything You Need to Know About New Pokémon". Newsweek. Retrieved December 2, 2020. Knezevic, Kevin. "Pokemon Go March 2022 Events: Alola Pokemon, Legendary Raids and More". CNET. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Knezevic, Kevin (March 30, 2018). "New Pokemon Go Update Out Now, Adds Mew And Quest System". GameSpot. Retrieved March 30, 2018. Reynolds, Matthew (January 19, 2018). "Pokémon Go Legendary Pokémon - Kyogre counters, best Kyogre moveset and IVs, plus what we know about Mewtwo and other Legendaries". Eurogamer. Retrieved January 22, 2018. "Discover Meltan and more in celebration of Pokémon: Let's Go, Pikachu! and Pokémon: Let's Go, Eevee!". Pokémon GO. Retrieved September 17, 2019. Byford, Sam (August 26, 2020). "Pokémon Go adds powerful Mega Evolution forms". The Verge. Retrieved September 14, 2020. "Raid Battles and New Gym Features are Coming!". Niantic, Inc. Pokémon. Nintendo. Creatures Inc. GAME FREAK Inc. June 19, 2017. Archived from the original on June 21, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2017. Hernandez, Patricia (June 25, 2017). "Pokémon Go Players Are Making Themed Gyms with The New Update". Kotaku. Archived from the original on June 26, 2017. Retrieved June 26, 2017. "All current Raid Bosses in Pokémon Go January 2021". iMore. January 1, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2021. Gray, Laura (May 5, 2022). "Pokémon GO's New Mega Legendary Raids Are Already Awful". ScreenRant. Retrieved November 16, 2022. Jeffery, Maxwell (November 13, 2022). "What Are the Red Raid Eggs in Pokemon GO?". Gaming Intel. Retrieved November 16, 2022. Kuiper, El (May 23, 2023). "Get Ready for Shadow Raids in 'Pokémon GO'!". The Mary Sue. Retrieved June 15, 2023. "COMING SOON: Show your skills with Pokémon GO Trainer Battles!". Pokémon GO. Retrieved September 17, 2019. "'Pokémon Go' online battle feature starts rolling out". Engadget. January 29, 2020. Retrieved October 10, 2020. Avrip (March 4, 2020). "GO Battle League Rating System Explained". Pokemon GO Hub. Retrieved October 11, 2020. "Team GO Rocket invades Pokémon GO!". Pokémon GO. Retrieved September 17, 2019. "Shadow Pokémon & Purified Pokémon — Pokémon GO Help Center". niantic.helpshift.com. Retrieved September 15, 2022. "Google's April Fools' prank puts Pokemon in the real world". CNET. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved July 8, 2016. Shamsian, Jacob. "The story of Pokemon Go's creation explains the oddest thing about the game". Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Bogle, Ariel (July 11, 2016). "How the gurus behind Google Earth created 'Pokémon Go'". Mashable. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved January 23, 2018. Frank, Allegra (December 4, 2017). "Pokémon Go's maps now look a lot different". Polygon. Retrieved March 13, 2024. Stone, Luke (September 29, 2016). "Bringing Pokémon GO to life on Google Cloud". Google Cloud Blog. Retrieved July 17, 2021. "Niantic Labs, Maker Of Ingress, Spun Out Of Google As Its Own Company". TechCrunch. August 12, 2015. Archived from the original on September 9, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2020. "Pokémon go is brought up into the real world through iOS and Android". GeekSnack. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015. Retrieved September 17, 2015. Ogawa, Joshua (October 22, 2016). "'Pokemon Go' could evolve further". Nikkei Asian Review. Archived from the original on October 26, 2017. Retrieved October 26, 2017. "Google+ post by Niantic Labs". Google Plus. Niantic Labs. Archived from the original on November 9, 2016. Retrieved October 26, 2017. Weinberger, Matt. "The CEO behind 'Pokémon Go' explains why it's become such a phenomenon". Business Insider. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. "'Pokemon Go' is a work of art, not a social experiment". Los Angeles Times. July 15, 2016. Archived from the original on October 7, 2016. Frank, Allegra (March 4, 2016). "Pokémon Go heading out to the field in Japanese-only beta test". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 4, 2016. Vuckovic, Daniel (April 8, 2016). "Pokémon GO field testing is expanding to Australia and New Zealand". Vooks. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2016. The Pokémon GO Development Team (May 16, 2016). "Pokémon GO field testing expands to the United States". Niantic Labs. Archived from the original on June 16, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Pedersoli, Tiziano. "Warmer! Closer!". Niantic Labs. Archived from the original on June 30, 2016. Retrieved May 25, 2016. Dornbush, Jonathan (June 27, 2016). "Pokémon Go Period Ending This Week". IGN. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. Retrieved June 27, 2016. Cruz, Claudia (July 24, 2016). "Pokemon Go team leaders' names revealed, Eevee evolution trick confirmed". CNET. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. Kastrenakes, Jacob (July 24, 2016). "Everyone's making fun of Pokémon Go's Team Instinct leader". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. Frank, Allegra (July 25, 2016). "Pokémon Go still has secrets to uncover, from legendary finds to team leader lore". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. Phillips, Tom (July 25, 2016). "Pokémon Go's San Diego Comic-Con panel saw Team Leaders revealed". Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on July 26, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. Takahashi, Dean (September 15, 2016). "Pokémon Go chief promises player battles, live events, more creatures, and stable servers". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on August 3, 2017. Retrieved September 15, 2016. "Discover the Pokémon GO Frappuccino at Starbucks". Starbucks. Archived from the original on December 9, 2016. Retrieved December 8, 2016. Farokhmanesh, Megan (December 7, 2016). "Pokémon Go is adding 10.5K gym and pokéstop locations at Sprint stores". The Verge. Archived from the original on January 4, 2017. Retrieved January 4, 2017. Webster, Andrew (December 22, 2016). "Pokémon Go is finally available on the Apple Watch". The Verge. Archived from the original on January 4, 2017. Retrieved January 4, 2017. "5,000+ additional Starbucks locations in the United States are now PokéStops or Gyms". pokemongo.nianticlabs.com. Archived from the original on January 15, 2017. Retrieved January 24, 2017. "'Pokemon Go': See New Evolution Items And Pokemon Evolutions". Science Times. Archived from the original on February 26, 2017. Retrieved February 16, 2017. "'Pokémon Go' is getting a huge new update that adds 80 new Pokémon". Business Insider. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved February 16, 2017. Reynolds, Matthew (December 13, 2017). "Pokémon Go Gen 3 Pokémon list: Every creature from Ruby and Sapphire's Hoenn region you can catch right now". Eurogamer. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Farokhmanesh, Megan (May 29, 2018). "Two new Pokemon RPGs are coming to the Switch this November". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 30, 2018. Retrieved May 30, 2018. Plagge, Kallie (June 12, 2018). "Pokemon Let's Go Pikachu, Eevee: Everything We Know So Far". GameSpot. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved June 13, 2018. Frank, Allegra (October 10, 2018). "Meltan is Pokémon Go's first exclusive monster, with time-limited transfers". Polygon. Retrieved December 16, 2018. Hussain, Tamoor (October 10, 2018). "Pokemon Go: Gen 4 Sinnoh Region Starters And More Confirmed". GameSpot. Retrieved October 11, 2018. Tassi, Paul. "'Pokémon GO' Teasing 'Skilled Swimmer' Gen 4 Pokémon's Imminent Release". Forbes. Retrieved October 14, 2018. Webster, Andrew (October 25, 2018). "Pokémon Go will soon record your steps in the background". The Verge. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Martinez, Phillip (October 26, 2018). "Shedinja and Shiny Caterpie are coming to 'Pokémon Go' in November". Newsweek. Retrieved October 27, 2018. Hoffer, Christian (October 26, 2018). "'Pokemon Go' Will Add Missing "Gen 3" Pokemon in November". Comic Book. Retrieved October 27, 2018. Weinberger, Matt (January 21, 2019). "The CEO behind 'Pokémon Go' says the company is cash-flow positive as it becomes worth almost $4 billion". Business Insider. Retrieved April 10, 2019. "How Niantic evolved Pokémon GO for the year no one could go anywhere". TechCrunch. December 28, 2020. Retrieved January 14, 2021.[permanent dead link] Frank, Allegra (July 11, 2016). "Pokémon Go Plus: Everything you need to know". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Crecente, Brian (July 12, 2015). "Watch Future – Time killers: The strange history of wrist gaming". Polygon. Archived from the original on June 20, 2016. Retrieved June 16, 2016. "Pokemon Go Plus. Explained!". PokeStop Shop. Archived from the original on September 11, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2016. Russell, Jon (July 6, 2016). "Pokémon Go is launching on iOS and Android today". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on July 7, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2016. Sarkar, Samit (July 27, 2016). "Pokemon Go Plus delayed to September". Polygon. Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. Retrieved July 27, 2016. Wilson, Jason (July 7, 2016). "Pokémon Go launches in US on iOS and Android". Venture Beat. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved July 7, 2016. Matulef, Jeffrey. "Pokémon GO is out now in Australia and New Zealand". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on July 7, 2016. Retrieved July 8, 2016. "Pokemon Go Is Available Now on Android Devices". GameSpot. July 6, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2016. Webster, Andrew (September 10, 2015). "With Pokémon Go, Nintendo is showing that it takes mobile seriously". The Verge. Archived from the original on September 11, 2015. Retrieved September 11, 2015. Warren, Tom (July 13, 2016). "Pokémon Go arrives in Europe with German launch". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 13, 2016. "Pokemon Go unleashed in the UK". BBC. July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. "Pokémon GO available in Italy, Spain, and Portugal – Nintendo Everything". July 15, 2016. Archived from the original on July 16, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2016. "Pokémon GO Available in Twenty-Six New Countries". pokemongo.nianticlabs.com. July 16, 2016. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. "Pokemon Go is officially out in Ireland – GO!". Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. "Pokémon GO is now available in Canada!". Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. "El fenómeno de Pokémon Go se acapara de Puerto Rico pese a problemas con servidores". Univision (in Spanish). No. July 19, 2016. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. ""Pokémon Go" comienza a funcionar en Puerto Rico". Primera Hora (in Spanish). July 19, 2016. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. 「ポケモンＧＯ」、日本でも配信開始 (in Japanese). Tokyo: Nikkei News. Nikkei Quick New (NQN). July 22, 2016. Archived from the original on July 22, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2016. Collins, Yuji (July 18, 2016). "Pokemon Go release delayed in France following Nice attack". CNET. Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2016. Nakamura, Yuji (July 25, 2016). "Nintendo Plunges After Saying Pokemon Go's Impact Is Limited". Bloomberg Technology. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. "We are excited to share more details about Pokémon GO including the launch across Latin America!". pokemongo.nianticlabs.com. August 3, 2016. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Frank, Allegra (August 4, 2016). "Pokémon Go mapping sites were major resource suck, Niantic says". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. "Pokémon GO is now available in countries and regions across Asia and Oceania". pokemongo.nianticlabs.com. August 6, 2016. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Suzuki, Wataru (August 6, 2016). "'Pokemon Go' invades Southeast Asia". Nikkei Asian Review. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. "Pokémon GO available in five new countries and regions". pokemongo.nianticlabs.com. September 29, 2016. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. "Pokémon GO available in six new countries". pokemongo.nianticlabs.com. September 30, 2016. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. "Pokémon GO available in thirty-one new countries". pokemongo.nianticlabs.com. Niantic, Inc. Pokémon. Nintendo. Creatures Inc. GAME FREAK Inc. October 4, 2016. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. "Pokémon GO now available in eight new countries in the Middle East". pokemongo.nianticlabs.com. November 17, 2016. Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. "Pokémon GO is now available in India and other South Asian Countries!". pokemongolive.com. Niantic, Inc. Pokémon. Nintendo. Creatures Inc. GAME FREAK Inc. Archived from the original on December 14, 2016. Retrieved December 13, 2016. Van Boom, Daniel. "Pokemon Go craze finally hits South Korea". CNET. Archived from the original on January 24, 2017. Retrieved January 24, 2017. Mott, Nathaniel (March 12, 2022). "Niantic Shuts Down Pokemon Go in Russia, Belarus". PCMag. Retrieved June 14, 2023. "Game Pokemon Go appeared in Russia two years after the world launch". hybridtechcar. September 11, 2018. Archived from the original on March 22, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "Pokemon GO'dan sevindiren gelişme". Teknoloji Haberleri - ShiftDelete.Net. June 4, 2021. "Pokemon Go's International Rollout Paused as Servers Suffer Issues [UPDATE]". Gamespot. Archived from the original on July 11, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2016. "'Pokémon Go' international rollout will be 'paused' as players overload the system". Business Insider. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2016. Russell, Jon (July 19, 2016). "Pokémon Go will launch in Japan tomorrow with game's first sponsored location". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Mochizuki, Takashi (July 19, 2016). "McDonald's Unit to Sponsor Pokémon Go in Japan". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Gibbs, Samuel (July 20, 2016). "Pokémon Go Japan launch delayed by McDonald's sponsorship leak". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved July 20, 2016. Rodriguez, Cecilia (July 21, 2016). "Pokémon Go To Launch In France Amid Rampant Safety Concerns". Archived from the original on July 22, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2016. Francoise, Sarah (July 20, 2016). "Pokémon Go delays launch in France due to Nice attack". Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2016. Audureau, William (July 21, 2016). "" Pokémon Go " prépare son lancement en France". Le Monde.fr (in French). Retrieved July 22, 2016. Low, Aloysius (July 15, 2016). "Pokemon Go is strangely working in one Asian country: Indonesia". cnet.com. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. Buhori Dermawan, a developer working in the country's capital Jakarta, told CNET that he has been playing for about two weeks now, has gotten up to level 17 and has a healthy collection of 75 Pokemon in his Pokedex. '포켓몬 고' 지도반출 문제와 무관 (in Korean). Retrieved July 16, 2016. 제목 [참고]「‘포켓몬 고’ 미서비스, 구글 지도반출 불허 때문」 보도 관련. Molit.go.kr (in Korean). July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Gibbs, Samuel (July 13, 2016). "South Koreans flock to remote northern area to play Pokémon Go". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Sohn, Ji-young (July 24, 2016). "Korean retailers ride on 'Pokemon Go' craze". The Korean Herald. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. Yang, Yingzhi (July 14, 2016). "Chinese go to great lengths to get 'Pokemon Go' — and make a knockoff". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 16, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. RJ Vogt (August 10, 2016). "Pokemon Go works in Myanmar". The Myanmar Times. Archived from the original on August 10, 2016. Retrieved August 9, 2016. "Niantic Games Arrive to Samsung's Galaxy Store". "Nintendo shares soar as new Pokemon mobile game captures hearts". Reuters. July 8, 2016. Archived from the original on July 10, 2016. Retrieved July 10, 2016. "Nintendo shares up more than 50% since Pokemon Go release – BBC News". July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Blumenthal, Eli (July 25, 2016). "Investors learn Nintendo doesn't own Pokémon, stock tanks". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. "Nintendo value surges £6bn on new Pokémon app". The Guardian. July 11, 2016. Archived from the original on July 11, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. Etherington, Darrell (July 11, 2016). "Pokémon Go adds $9B to Nintendo's value, global rollout continues this week". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2016. "Nintendo market value doubles on Pokémon Go mania". The Guardian. Reuters. July 19, 2016. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. "Pokémon GO shows Nintendo the promise of mobile". The FT. July 11, 2016. Archived from the original on July 11, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. "Nintendo shares soar on Pokemon Go success". BBC News. July 11, 2016. Archived from the original on July 11, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. Nakamura, Yuji; Amano, Takashi (July 25, 2016). "Nintendo Slumps By Most Since 1990 on Dashed Pokemon Go Hopes". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. Hern, Alex (July 25, 2016). "Nintendo shares plummet after it points out it doesn't make Pokémon Go". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 26, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. Kitanaka, Anna (July 14, 2016). "Even Novelty Bakeries Soar as Pokemon Fever Boosts Japan Stocks". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. La Monica, Paul R. (July 18, 2016). "Pokemon Go sends smartphone battery stock soaring". CNN Money. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Thier, Dave (July 8, 2016). "'Pokemon GO' Servers Down For Many". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 7, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. "Pokémon Go servers were hit by 50 times higher traffic than expected". The Guardian. September 30, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2021. Frank, Allegra (July 8, 2016). "Pokémon Go's server issues have been driving people wild all day (update)". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. "Pokémon Go: Australian users report server problems due to high demand". The Guardian. Australian Associated Press. July 11, 2016. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. Good, Owen (July 16, 2016). "Hackers say they brought down Pokémon Go servers, but they're back up". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Worley, Will (July 16, 2016). "Pokemon Go has completely crashed, and a hacking group is claiming credit". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Velocci, Carli (July 16, 2016). "Pokémon Go Servers Reportedly Hacked Because It Was Bound to Happen". Gizmodo. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Thier, Dave (July 17, 2016). "'Pokémon GO' Servers Down As Game Launches In Canada". Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. Steinberg, Joseph (July 10, 2016). "Pokemon Go Users: Beware Two Major Security Risks". Inc. Retrieved July 10, 2016. Cunningham, Andrew. "iOS version of Pokemon Go is a possible privacy train wreck". ARS Technica. Archived from the original on July 11, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. Fleishman, Glenn. "Pokemon Go for iOS requires full Google account access". Macworld. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. "Pokemon Go … hand over all of your Google Gmail, Drive, Photos". The Register. Archived from the original on July 11, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. "'Pokémon Go' on iOS is digging deep into linked Google accounts (update)". Engadget. July 11, 2016. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Blue, Violet (July 15, 2016). "Don't believe the 'Pokémon Go' privacy hype". Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on July 16, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. Turton, William (July 11, 2016). "Pokémon Go Was Never Able To Read Your Email [Updated]". Gizmodo. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on July 18, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. Grubb, Jeff (July 12, 2016). "Pokémon Go iOS update fixes 'full access' to your Google email account". venturebeat. Archived from the original on August 12, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Frank, Allegra (July 19, 2016). "Pokémon Go's nearby Pokémon tracking stops working thanks to glitch". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on July 29, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016. Fahey, Mike (July 30, 2016). "Pokémon Go Update Fixes Three-Step Glitch By Removing Steps Entirely". Kotaku. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on July 31, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016. Molina, Brett (August 2, 2016). "'Pokémon Go' users lash out after latest update". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016. Frank, Allegra (August 1, 2016). "Pokémon Go's latest glitch is changing players' Pokémon after they're caught". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016. Paget, Mat (August 5, 2016). "Pokemon Go Bug Makes It Harder to Catch Pokemon; Dev Working on Fix". GameSpot. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. "Test: Pokémon GO (Taktik & Strategie)". 4Players.de. July 21, 2016. Retrieved August 12, 2020. "Pokémon Go review". GamesTM. Archived from the original on October 23, 2018. Retrieved August 12, 2020. "Pokemon GO Review: Catch 'Em for Real". GameZebo. July 11, 2016. Archived from the original on December 23, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2020. "Review: Pokémon GO". Hardcore Gamer. July 17, 2016. Retrieved August 12, 2020. Plagge, Kallie (July 12, 2016). "Pokemon Go Review". IGN. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 13, 2016. "Test : Pokémon GO : L'excellence sur la durée". Jeuxvideo.com. April 26, 2018. Retrieved August 12, 2020. "Pokémon GO review - GO outside and play it". Pocket Gamer. July 7, 2016. Retrieved August 12, 2020. Kollar, Philip; Frank, Allegra (July 14, 2016). "Pokémon Go review". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. Brewster, Kat. "Pokémon Go review – it may not be a good game, but it's a great experience". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 13, 2016. "Pokemon Go Review: Broken App, Amazing Community". USgamer. July 15, 2016. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2020. "Pokemon GO for iPhone/iPad Reviews". Metacritic. Paramount Streaming. Retrieved January 29, 2020. Dayus, Oscar (July 7, 2016). "Pokémon GO review – GO outside and play it". Pocket Gamer. Archived from the original on July 9, 2016. Retrieved July 10, 2016. "Did Pokémon GO Just Reinvent The MMO?". US Gamer. July 9, 2016. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 13, 2016. Schwartz, Terri (July 8, 2016). "Pokemon Go is Secretly the Best Exercise App out there". IGN. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Allen, Patrick (July 12, 2016). "The Pokémon Go Interval Training Workout". Lifehacker. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Belluz, Julia (July 12, 2016). "Pokémon Go may be the greatest unintentional health fad ever". Vox. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. McFarland, Matt (October 12, 2016). "Pokemon Go could add 2.83 million years to users' lives". CNN Money. Archived from the original on October 12, 2016. Retrieved October 12, 2016. "Top 100 Video Games of All Time". IGN. Retrieved March 26, 2018.[dead link] Hernandez, Patricia (July 19, 2016). "Pokémon Go's Three-Step Glitch Makes Tracking Pokémon Even Harder". Kotaku. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Johnson, Leif (July 6, 2017). "'Pokémon Go' Anniversary: One year later, it's still a city dweller's game". Retrieved September 12, 2017. Osborn, Alex (July 7, 2016). "Pokemon GO Is the Top Grossing App on the US App Store". IGN. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved July 8, 2016. "Pokémon GO Tips: How Buying PokéCoins Makes Nintendo Richer". International Business Times. July 7, 2016. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved July 8, 2016. Grubb, Jeff (July 11, 2016). "Pokémon Go outpaces Clash Royale as the fastest game ever to No. 1 on the mobile revenue charts". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Dillet, Romain (July 22, 2016). "Apple says Pokémon Go is the most downloaded app in its first week ever". TC. Archived from the original on July 22, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2016. "Pokemon Go doing well". July 11, 2016. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. Molina, Brett (July 20, 2016). "'Pokémon Go' fastest mobile game to 10M downloads". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 20, 2016. Retrieved July 21, 2016. Molina, Brett (July 13, 2016). "Report: 'Pokémon Go' downloads top 15 million". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 21, 2016. Lovelace, Berkeley Jr. (July 13, 2016). "'Pokemon Go' now the biggest mobile game in US history". CNBC. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Kemkes, Jimmy (July 15, 2016). "Pokemon GO Nederland heeft al 1,3 miljoen Pokémon trainers" (in Dutch). XGN. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2016. Soble, Jonathan (July 22, 2016). "Pokémon Go, With a Corporate Tie-in, Debuts in Japan". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 24, 2016. Retrieved July 23, 2016. Spitzer, Kirk (July 22, 2016). "Back home in Japan, Pokemon Go finds success is unreal". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 22, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2016. Moon, Mariella (August 1, 2016). "'Pokémon Go' hits 100 million downloads". Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016. "Pokémon GO passes 100 million Play Store downloads in just a month". August 8, 2016. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. "Pokémon GO on Google Play". Google Play. Archived from the original on July 16, 2017. Retrieved July 28, 2017. "Pokémon GO Passes $160 Million Worldwide Revenue, Usage Remains Strong". Sensor Tower App Marketing Blog. Archived from the original on August 4, 2016. "Pokémon GO: An Opportunity, Not a Threat". App Annie. July 29, 2016. Archived from the original on October 11, 2016. Retrieved July 29, 2016. "Ending a Historic First Month, Pokémon GO Has Passed $200 Million in Worldwide Revenue". Sensor Tower App Marketing Blog. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Murgia, Madhumita (August 12, 2016). "Pokémon Go crosses $250m in revenues since launch". Financial Times. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved August 28, 2016. Molina, Brett (July 12, 2016). "'Pokémon Go' beating Facebook, Tinder and Snapchat". Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. V., Cosmin (September 2, 2016). "Pokémon Go revenue skyrockets to more than $440 million since release". phoneArena. Archived from the original on September 3, 2016. Retrieved September 2, 2016. "Analysis of Pokémon GO: A Success Two Decades in the Making". Newzoo. September 30, 2016. Archived from the original on February 1, 2021. Retrieved January 30, 2021. "Pokemon Go Reaches $600 Million, Faster Than Any Mobile Game in History – Report". Archived from the original on October 23, 2016. "Starbucks". stories.starbucks.com. Retrieved November 23, 2020. Mochizuki, Takashi (July 19, 2016). "McDonald's Unit to Sponsor 'Pokémon Go' in Japan". Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved November 23, 2020. Farokhmanesh, Megan (December 7, 2016). "Pokémon Go is adding 10.5K gym and pokéstop locations at Sprint stores". The Verge. Retrieved November 23, 2020. Swatman, Rachel (August 10, 2016). "Pokémon Go catches five new world records". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved August 18, 2016. Perez, Sarah (September 8, 2016). "Pokémon Go becomes the fastest game to ever hit $500 million in revenue". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on September 9, 2016. Retrieved September 9, 2016. Kerr, Chris (December 7, 2016). "Clash Royale, Reigns, and Pokemon Go named in Apple's Best of 2016". Gamasutra. Archived from the original on December 8, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2016. Nieva, Richard. "Pokemon Go was Google Play's top game of 2016". CNET. Archived from the original on December 2, 2016. Retrieved December 1, 2016. "'Pokémon GO' Has Lost 79% Of Its Paying Players Since Launch, But That's Fine". Forbes. September 13, 2016. Archived from the original on September 10, 2017. Tassi, Paul. "Expect 'Pokémon GO' To Make More Halloween-Like Events After Huge 133% Revenue Jump". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 31, 2017. "Pokémon Go generated revenues of $950 million in 2016". VentureBeat. January 17, 2017. "2017 Crunchies: Best App". Tech Crunch. Archived from the original on February 16, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017. Nelson, Randy. "Pokémon GO Has Grossed $1 Billion Worldwide Since Launch". sensortower.com. Archived from the original on February 20, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Sarkar, Samit (February 27, 2017). "Pokémon Go hits 650 million downloads". Polygon. Archived from the original on February 28, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2017. The Pokémon GO team (June 8, 2017). "Celebrating the First Anniversary of Pokémon GO!". Pokémon GO Live. Niantic, Inc. Pokémon. Nintendo. Creatures Inc. GAME FREAK Inc. Archived from the original on June 26, 2017. Retrieved June 28, 2017. "Sensor Tower: Pokémon Go iOS revenues soar thanks to legendary monsters (Update)". July 26, 2017. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017. Bhasin, Kim (July 24, 2017). "Pokémon Go Never Went Away—and Neither Did Its Technical Woes". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on July 25, 2017. Retrieved July 25, 2017. "Pokemon Go captures 800 million downloads". Pocket Gamer. May 30, 2018. "Meltan Is More Than A Mythic, It's Genius Marketing Using 'Pokémon GO' As An Ad For Switch". Forbes. September 26, 2018. "Pokémon GO Catches $2 Billion Since Launch". Apptopia. September 25, 2018. Webster, Andrew (February 28, 2019). "Pokémon Go spurred an amazing era that continues with Sword and Shield". The Verge. Retrieved March 1, 2019. "2017 YEAR IN REVIEW: DIGITAL GAMES AND INTERACTIVE MEDIA" (PDF). SuperData Research. January 25, 2018. Hoffer, Christian (January 31, 2018). "Pokemon Go Made a Ton of Money in 2017". WWG. Retrieved February 2, 2018. Corrigan, Hope (September 6, 2017). "Pokemon Company Boss Says Trading and PvP Still Coming to Pokemon Go". IGN. Vincent, Brittany (July 6, 2018). "'Pokémon Go' Celebrates Two-Year Anniversary With $1.8 Billion Revenue Milestone". "Pokémon Go active player count highest since 2016 summer launch". Eurogamer. June 27, 2018. Vincent, Brittany (August 15, 2018). "Pokemon Go takes home the gold as the top grossing mobile app in July". Shacknews. Clayton, Natalie; Writer, Staff (August 28, 2018). "Pokemon Go sees daily revenue increase grow 39 per cent following trading update". pocketgamer.biz. Fogel, Stefanie (August 28, 2018). "'Pokémon Go' Earning $2.5 Million Daily Since Trading Update (Report)". "Pokemon Go captures over $2bn through player spending". Pocket Gamer. September 26, 2018. "Market Brief – 2018 Digital Games & Interactive Entertainment Industry Year In Review". SuperData Research. Nielsen Media Research. Archived from the original on January 21, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "Market Brief – 2019 Digital Games & Interactive Entertainment Industry Year In Review". SuperData Research. Nielsen Media Research. Archived from the original on April 9, 2020. Retrieved January 2, 2020. Partleton, Kayleigh (January 24, 2020). "Pokemon Go live events generated $249 million in tourism revenues in 2019". Pocket Gamer. Retrieved May 5, 2020. Chapple, Craig (November 3, 2020). "Pokémon GO Hits $1 Billion in 2020 as Lifetime Revenue Surpasses $4 Billion". Sensor Tower Blog. Retrieved December 27, 2020. Dodds, Laurence (December 25, 2020). "Pokémon Go enjoys 'improbable' renaissance as millions catch virtual monsters at home". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 12, 2022. Retrieved December 27, 2020. "Worldwide digital games market: December 2020". SuperData Research. Nielsen Company. January 22, 2021. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2021. "Games and interactive media earnings rose 12% to $139.9B in 2020". SuperData Research. Nielsen Company. January 6, 2021. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved January 6, 2021. "Pokémon GO Catches $5 Billion in Lifetime Revenue in Five Years". Sensor Tower. July 6, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2021. Duffy, Connor (July 11, 2016). "What is social media phenomenon Pokemon Go?". ABC News. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Kain, Erik. "'Pokémon GO' Is More Than Just a Game And It's Bringing People Together". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Johnson, Lauren (August 9, 2016). "231 Million People Talked about Pokemon Go on Facebook and Instagram in July". Adweek. Archived from the original on August 10, 2016. Retrieved August 11, 2016. Isaac, Mike (July 12, 2016). "Times Reporter Descends Into Pokémania". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 18, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Zinn, Jacob (July 14, 2016). "Pokémania is back! Bridging the generational divide between Pokémon Go". Saanich News. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Gepner, Abigail; Rosa, Jazmin; Rosenbaum, Sophia (July 12, 2016). "There's a Pokémon in my restaurant, and business is booming". New York Post. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. "Pokemon Go Mania Pushes Nintendo to the Next Level". Bloomberg. July 19, 2016. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Steinmetz, Katy (July 19, 2016). "The Surprising History Behind the Word Pokémon". Time. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. "Pokemon Go Is Helping Both Cops and Robbers Do Their Jobs". Fortune. July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Daye, Alison (July 13, 2016). "Pokémon Go helps two Marines to catch a murder suspect in Fullerton". CNN. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Staff Reports (July 13, 2016). "Four arrested after robbery in Auburn connected to 'Pokémon Go' app". Retrieved July 14, 2016. "Pokemon Go players tip Kuna police to alleged arson near church". The Idaho Statesman. July 11, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Cherelus, Gina (July 13, 2016). "Pokemon Go blamed for crimes but also aids embattled U.S. police". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 14, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Rocha, Veronica (July 16, 2016). "'You may NOT access our jail': Police and fire official air grievances over 'Pokemon Go'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. "Pokémon Go Brings Real Money to Random Bars and Pizzerias". Bloomberg.com. July 11, 2016. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Shields, Mike; Perlberg, Steven (July 13, 2016). "Ad Agencies Scramble to Form 'Pokémon Go' Strategies". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Shaw, Sydney (July 14, 2016). "How N.J. businesses are benefiting from Pokémon Go craze". Archived from the original on July 16, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Butcher, Amy (July 14, 2016). "Pokémon Go See the World in Its Splendor". NYT. Retrieved July 22, 2016. "Mosques, Churches and Temples – the religious landscape of Pokemon". On Religion. July 24, 2016. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. "Masjid Jadi Tempat Pokestop Game Pokemon GO, Begini Pandangan MUI" (in Indonesian). DetikCom. July 13, 2016. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. Ekstein, Nikki (July 14, 2016). "Pokemon Go is already a big boon for small museums". Houston Chronicle. Bloomberg. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. "People Are Already Flipping Pokémon Go Accounts". Wired. July 15, 2016. Archived from the original on July 16, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Bergen, Mark (July 14, 2016). "This startup wants to get you paid as a Pokémon Go expert". Recode. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. "T-Mobile offers free Pokémon Go data for a year, but not everyone is happy about it". Archived from the original on July 16, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Cohan, Peter. "T-Mobile Joins The 'Pokémon GO' Industrial Complex". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Dellinger, AJ (July 15, 2016). "Yelp becomes latest app to pivot to Pokémon Go companion with new PokéStop filter". Archived from the original on August 20, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Grubb, Jeff (July 15, 2016). "Yelp adds Pokémon Go filter so you can stop wasting time at PokéStop-less restaurants". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Carlton, Jim (July 13, 2016). "'Pokémon Go' Gives Boost to National Parks". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. "Shelter dogs benefit from Pokemon Go craze; Gamers are helping walk dogs". WILX. July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Grossman, Lena (July 14, 2016). "Rio's Mayor Really Wants Brazil to Get Pokémon Go Before the Olympics". TIME.com. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Mullen, Jethro (August 4, 2016). "Pokemon Go arrives in Rio in time for Olympics". CNNMoney. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2017. White, Daniel (July 14, 2016). "Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton Want to Catch Voters With Pokémon Go". TIME.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2016. Wright, David; Tatum, Sophie (July 14, 2016). "'Pokémon Go' finds its way onto the campaign trail". CNN. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2016. "Referendum, Mattarella: "Confronti su data e spacchettamenti surreali come caccia a Pokemon. Discutere nel merito"". Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). July 27, 2016. Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. Retrieved July 27, 2016. Edwards, James (July 17, 2016). "MMA fighter Michael Page celebrates knockout with Pokemon Go celebration". Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. Dosh, Kristi (July 25, 2016). "The Rock Gets His Own Pokemon Go-Inspired Character". Archived from the original on July 27, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Wingfield, Nick (July 13, 2016). "Unity Technologies, Maker of Pokémon Go Engine, Swells in Value". NYT. Archived from the original on July 16, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Derbyshire, Victoria (August 1, 2016). "Pokemon Go 'transformed teenager's life' – BBC News". BBC News. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Yam, Kimberly (July 22, 2016). "The Unexpected Effect Pokémon Go Had On A Boy With Autism". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Singal, Jesse (July 20, 2016). "How Pokémon Go Might Actually Be Helping Kids With Autism". Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Ayers, Mike (July 12, 2016). "Pokémon Tracks Get a Pokémon Go Bump on Spotify". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Lynch, Jason (July 13, 2016). "How TV and Streaming Networks Hope to Benefit From the Pokemon Go Frenzy". Archived from the original on July 16, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. Webster, Andrew (August 18, 2016). "Nintendo says Pokémon Go is driving 3DS Pokémon game sales". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2016. Miller, Paul (July 12, 2016). "Twitch Plays Pokémon Go is of course a thing". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Statt, Nick (August 12, 2016). "Niantic is now permanently banning Pokémon Go cheaters". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved August 12, 2016. DiDomizio, Nicolas (July 11, 2016). "Porn Sites Report Pokemon Porn Searches Skyrocketed This Weekend". Retrieved August 20, 2016. ENCALADA, DEBBIE. "Pokémon Porn Searches Are Popping Off Because Pokémon Go". Complex. Archived from the original on August 30, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2016. Grubb, Jeff (July 12, 2016). "Pornhub 'Pokémon' searches spike 136% following release of Pokémon Go". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. Koerber, Brian (July 12, 2016). "Pokémon Pornhub searches increased 136 percent since 'Pokémon Go' launched". Mashable. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. Leight, Elias (October 14, 2016). "See Maroon 5's 'Pokémon Go'-Themed 'Don't Wanna Know' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 15, 2016. Retrieved October 15, 2016. Carter, Chris (December 28, 2016). "Pokemon Go gets a quick off-screen cameo in Doctor Who". Destructoid. Archived from the original on December 29, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2016. "The Simpsons on FOX – "Looking for Mr. Goodbart"". The Futon Critic. Retrieved May 1, 2017. Hoffer, Christian (November 26, 2019). "Pokemon Go Gets Official Merchandise Just in Time for Christmas". WWG. Retrieved November 30, 2019. "Pokémon Sun and Moon break 3DS records with 10M units shipped globally". TechCrunch. November 18, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2019. Webster, Andrew (October 19, 2017). "How Pokémon Go helped shape the upcoming Ultra Sun and Moon on Nintendo 3DS". The Verge. Retrieved November 30, 2019. Segarra, Lisa Marie (November 15, 2018). "'Pokémon: New Let's Go Game Pushes 22-Year Old Franchise Into a New Era". Fortune. Retrieved November 30, 2019. Hoggins, Tom (November 13, 2018). "Pokémon Let's Go review: Is new Switch game next step for Pokémon Go players?". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 12, 2022. Retrieved November 30, 2019. "Pokemon Go Gets Official Merchandise Just in Time for Christmas". WWG. November 26, 2019. Retrieved November 30, 2019. Hern, Alex (October 25, 2016). "Pokémon Go Halloween: can a spooky 'event' tempt people back to catch 'em all?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 17, 2017. Etherington, Darrell (November 21, 2016). "Pokémon Go's Thanksgiving event gives players double XP and Stardust". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on September 17, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. Frank, Allegra (February 16, 2017). "Pokémon Go update brings cheap storage upgrades for all". Polygon. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. Frank, Allegra (May 4, 2017). "Pokémon Go's first community event is a hint of the game's future". Polygon. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. "#PokemonGO Fest! Celebrating the First Anniversary of Pokémon GO". Twitter. Retrieved July 20, 2017. "Pokémon GO Fest Chicago Tickets Go On Sale In 48 Hours And No One Knows What It Actually Is". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 17, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2017. "'Pokémon GO Fest' Tickets Already Sold Out". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 19, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2017. Hester, Blake (July 24, 2017). "Pokemon Go Fest Plagued with Connectivity Issues". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 25, 2017. Retrieved July 25, 2017. Tassi, Paul (July 24, 2017). "'There's A 20 Minute Line To Leave' – How Pokémon GO Fest Almost Became Gaming's Fyre Festival". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 24, 2017. Retrieved July 25, 2017. Frank, Allegra (July 27, 2017). "Some Pokémon Go Fest attendees are filing suit against Niantic (update)". Polygon. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved July 29, 2017. Holmes, David (July 24, 2017). "Chester goes Pokémon GO crazy". The Chester Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 17, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. Tanner, Dedmon. "New Pokemon Go Raid Bosses Sighted In Yokohama". ComicBook. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. "Pokemon GO Announces Two More Upcoming US Events". Game Rant. August 21, 2017. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. "Pokémon GO Safari Zone at Unibail-Rodamco – Pokémon GO". Pokémon GO. Niantic Labs. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. Hoffer, Christian (January 20, 2018). "Pokemon Go's Community Day: What You Need to Know". WWG. Retrieved January 21, 2018. "Pokémon GO Community Day". Pokémon GO. Niantic. Retrieved October 27, 2018. "You Need to Be Looking at 'Pokémon Go in Syria'". Vice.com. July 28, 2016. "Artist Khaled Akil imagines Pokémon Go in ravaged Syria". Aljazeera.net. "Syrian Artist Uses Pokémon Go to Create Powerful Images from His War-Ravaged Country". artnet news. July 27, 2016. "Artist Khaled Akil depicts Pokimon Go in the Syrian civil war". theyellowsparrow.com. July 24, 2016. "Khaled Akil: Pokemon Go in Syria". laurietobyedison.com. July 23, 2016. "The exhibition in the US showcasing the Arab world through an alternate lens". thenational.ae. November 11, 2018. "Photos: Can Pokémon Go get the world to care about the plight of Syrian children?". qz.com. July 23, 2016. "Hunting for Pokemon in the rubble of war-torn Syria". cnet. "Looking at War Torn Syria Through the Lens of Pokemon Go". thequint.com. July 26, 2016. "Artist Khaled Akil imagines Pokémon Go in ravaged Syria". Satish Sharma. "Artist's Pokémon Go in Syria project highlights plight of children living in war". barnebys.com. July 27, 2016. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved December 8, 2020. "Syrian Space: Images, Activism, and Cartographic Rendering". oarplatform.com. "Artist is Using Pokemon to Expose the Harsh Reality of the Syrian War Zone". interestingengineering.com. July 28, 2016. "Contemporary images cast a striking new light on the Arab world". washingtonpost.com. "Contemproray Photography From The Arab world". selectionsarts.com. December 19, 2018. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Velloso, Eduardo; Carter, Marcus (July 12, 2016). "Some places should be off limits for games such as Pokémon GO". The Conversation. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 13, 2016. "Holocaust Museum, Auschwitz want Pokémon Go hunts out". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 13, 2016. Phillips, Tom (July 12, 2016). "Holocaust museum pleads: stop playing Pokémon Go here". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 13, 2016. Chan, Melissa (July 12, 2016). "Pokémon Go Players Anger 9/11 Memorial Visitors: 'It's a Hallowed Place'". TIME.com. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. "People are now playing Pokémon Go at Arlington Cemetery". washingtonpost.com. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2016. "Pokemon Go away: Troublesome Sydney Pokestop shut down". BBC. August 2, 2016. Archived from the original on August 4, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016. D'Anastasio, Cecilia (August 9, 2016). "You Can No Longer Catch Pokémon At Hiroshima's Memorial Or The Holocaust Museum". kotaku.com. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved August 9, 2016. Middleton, Rachel (July 12, 2016). "Pokemon Go: Dutch rail operator tells Nintendo to change game after players wander onto tracks". International Business Times. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 13, 2016. Revesz, Rachel (July 12, 2016). "Pokémon Go: Gamers warned to pay attention to the law when searching for 'PokéStops'". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 13, 2016. Huffaker, Christopher (July 14, 2016). "There are fewer Pokemon Go locations in black neighborhoods, but why?". The Idaho Statesman. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Hoffer, Christian (July 9, 2016). "Pokemon GO Isn't Great in Rural Areas". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 5, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Baker, Chris (July 21, 2016). "Why 'Pokemon Go' Sucks in the Suburbs". RollingStone.com. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Hargarten, Jeff (August 3, 2016). "Why some places in Minnesota are better for playing Pokémon GO than others". StarTribune. Archived from the original on August 4, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Alexander, Julia (July 18, 2016). "Pokémon Go players with physical disabilities want better accessibility options". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on July 18, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. D'Anastasio, Cecilia (July 14, 2016). "Pokemon GO Can Be Depressing For Fans With Physical Disabilities". Kotaku. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Larson, Selena (July 12, 2016). "How Pokémon Go is creating a barrier for gamers with disabilities". Daily Dot. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Irby, Kate (July 11, 2016). "Police: Pokemon Go leading to increase in local crime". The Idaho Statesman. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Mehta, Diana; Cameron, Peter (July 14, 2016). "OPP warn Pokémon Go players of 'potential risk and harm' while searching for monsters". CBC Beta. CBC. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2016. Vasquez, Justina (August 2, 2016). "New York Bans Registered Sex Offenders From Pokémon Go". Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. "Pokemon Go: Bosnia players warned of minefields". BBC. July 19, 2016. Archived from the original on September 15, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. "Russian man faces 5 years in prison for playing Pokémon Go in a church". Meduza.io. September 3, 2016. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2016. Hjelmgaard, Kim (May 11, 2017). "Russian 'Pokemon Go' blogger convicted for playing in church". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 11, 2017. Retrieved May 11, 2017. "Mom says teenage daughter hit by car in Tarentum after playing 'Pokemon Go'". WPXI. July 13, 2016. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. "Auburn police: Driver crashes into tree while playing 'Pokemon Go'". auburnpub.com. July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. "'Pokemon Go' players fall off 90-foot ocean bluff". The San Diego Union-Tribune. July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Stortstrom, Mary (July 14, 2016). "Police: Don't fall 'catching them all'". The Journal. Martinsburg, West Virginia. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. A 12-year-old Jefferson County boy suffered a broken femur bone Tuesday night while playing the Pokemon game just off Shipley School Road. A Harpers Ferry first-responder said Wednesday morning the boy was running in the dark and fell off a five-foot-high storm sewer and suffered the leg injury. Ho, Victoria (July 22, 2016). "Japan suffers its first 'Pokémon Go' accident just hours after the game debuts". Mashable. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2016. McCormick, Rich (August 25, 2016). "Driver distracted by Pokémon Go kills woman in Japan". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 25, 2016. Retrieved August 25, 2016. "Campuchia: Mải bắt Pokemon trên phố, cô gái trẻ bị ô tô đâm chết thảm thương" (in Vietnamese). Auto Pro. August 12, 2016. Retrieved September 7, 2016. Stanglin, Doug (July 20, 2016). "Fatwa No. 21,758: Saudi-clerics ban Pokemon Go". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 20, 2016. Retrieved July 20, 2016. Zraick, Karen (July 20, 2016). "Nations of the World Confront the Pokémon Menace". New York Times. Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2016. "Saudi clerics: App version of Pokemon requires new ruling". Idaho Statesman. July 21, 2016. Retrieved July 21, 2016. "Fatwa against Pokemon Go in India". Times of India. August 5, 2016. Archived from the original on August 12, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2016. "Malaysian Islamic leaders say no to 'Pokemon Go'". The Japan Times. August 6, 2016. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2016. "Referendum Day: Pokemon hunting banned at polls". Agence France-Presse. Bangkok Post. August 7, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. Ono, Yukako (August 10, 2016). "Thailand to insist on Pokemon-free zones". Nikkei Asian Review. Archived from the original on August 11, 2016. Retrieved August 11, 2016. "Pokémon Go players banned from Cambodia genocide museum". The Guardian. Associated Press. August 10, 2016. Archived from the original on September 7, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2016. "Vietnam bans Pokemon Go from government, defence offices". New Straits Times. Reuters. August 18, 2016. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2016. Nguyen, Nam (August 20, 2016). "Pokemon Go may be banned in Vietnam". Vietnam Net. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2016. Morales, Neil Jerome (August 24, 2016). "The Philippines has banned Pokemon Go in public offices". Business Insider. Reuters. Archived from the original on September 15, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2016. "4% of employers in Malaysia have fired staff over Pokémon Go". Human Resources. September 26, 2016. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved September 27, 2016. "When Pokemon Virtual Reality Meets Russian Reality". The Moscow Times. July 30, 2016. Archived from the original on July 29, 2016. Retrieved July 30, 2016. "Pokemon Go banned by Iranian authorities over 'security'". BBC. August 5, 2016. Archived from the original on August 5, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. Gallagher, Brian (August 15, 2016). "Pokémon Go Banned by the Pentagon Because of Spy Threat". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved August 15, 2016. "Hundreds of Pokemon Go incidents logged by police". BBC News. August 29, 2016. Archived from the original on August 29, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2016. Gao, Richard (September 11, 2016). "How to play Pokémon GO (0.37+) on a rooted Android with Magisk". Android Police. Archived from the original on September 13, 2016. Retrieved September 14, 2016. Khan, Sami (September 15, 2016). "'Pokemon Go' release date in India: AR-game likely to be banned over safety concerns". International Business Times. Archived from the original on December 23, 2016. Zuboff, Shoshana (January 31, 2019). The age of surveillance capitalism : the fight for the future at the new frontier of power. London. p. 301. ISBN 978-1-78125-684-8. OCLC 1045067848.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Bell, Karissa (July 18, 2016). "Pokémon-tracking apps rise to the top of App Store". Mashable. Archived from the original on July 20, 2016. Retrieved July 18, 2016. Kovach, Steve (July 18, 2016). "A hot new app at the top of the App Store shows you where to find Pokémon — here's how 'Poke Radar' works". Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Kovach, Steve (July 18, 2016). "The #2 app in the App Store claims to help you find Pokémon". Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Dennis, Catrina (July 18, 2016). "New PokeRadar App Will Show You Exactly Where Pokemon Are". Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Allan, Patrick (July 18, 2016). "Poke Radar Shows You Where to Find and Catch 'Em All In Pokémon Go". Archived from the original on July 18, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Newton, Casey (July 11, 2016). "This man's Pokémon Go chat app is so successful that it's driving him bankrupt". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Duindam, Erik (July 18, 2016). "How I built an app with 500,000 users in 5 days on a $100 server". Archived from the original on July 20, 2016. Retrieved July 18, 2016. Rodionova, Zlata (July 12, 2016). "The man behind Pokémon Go chat app is so successful that it's driving him bankrupt". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Cockburn, Harry (July 17, 2016). "Fake Pokemon Go apps lock phones and access porn sites". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 18, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Smith, Chris (July 22, 2016). "Someone turned the best Pokemon Go hack into an online tool every player needs". BGR. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. Mac, Ryan (July 27, 2016). "Pokémon-Locating Apps Are Hot But How Long Will They Be Around?". Archived from the original on August 4, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. Mac, Ryan (July 31, 2016). "'Pokémon GO' Cuts Off Access To Pokévision And Other Creature-Finding Apps". Archived from the original on September 9, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016. Covid-19 Event & Feature Updates Archived November 28, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. Niantic "Support". Hern, Alex (August 3, 2021). "Pokémon no go? Players revolt as Niantic sends them back outside". The Guardian. Good, Owen (August 6, 2021). "Pokémon Go's biggest players call on Niantic to restore pandemic bonuses". Polygon. Gray, Kate (August 5, 2021). "Pokémon GO Players Are Boycotting The Game After Niantic Removes COVID Changes". NintendoLife. Fahey, Mike (August 2, 2021). "Fans Dismayed Niantic Removed Pokémon Go Safety Measures Despite Delta". Kwon, Daniel "Quest" (August 5, 2021). "The #HearUsNiantic starts trending on Twitter as the recent changes to Pokémon GO has left everyone furious". Ingen Global. Niantic responds to #HearUsNiantic that threatens to boycott Pokemon Go Moore, Jared (August 6, 2021). "Niantic Responds to Fans' Fury Over Pokemon Go Changes". IGN. O'Dwyer, Jack (October 21, 2020). "How to do AR Mapping in Pokemon GO". MSN. "A Response To Our Pokémon GO Community". Niantic. August 5, 2021. Carman, Ashley (June 1, 2017). "Niantic earns up to 50 cents per visit to sponsored Pokémon Go stops". The Verge. Constine, Josh (May 17, 2017). "Pokémon GO reveals sponsors like McDonald's pay it up to $0.50 per visitor". TechCrunch. Sponsored Locations for Business "2016, BBC Radio 1's Teen Awards - 🏆 And the winners at BBC Radio 1's Teen Awards 2016 are... - BBC Radio 1". BBC. Archived from the original on March 21, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2017. "Winners – The Game Awards 2016". The Game Awards 2016. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved March 1, 2017. "Overwatch scoops five awards, Firewatch wins Best Indie Game: Here are all the Golden Joystick 2016 winners". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on March 26, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2017. "2016 TechRaptor Awards – Best Mobile/Handheld Game – TechRaptor". TechRaptor. January 18, 2017. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2017. AIAS. "20th Annual D.I.C.E. Awards Results". interactive.org. Archived from the original on February 28, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2017. "Winners! NY Game Awards '17". January 20, 2017. Archived from the original on March 2, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2017. "Overwatch Wins Game Of The Year; Full List Of GDCA And IGFA Winners Here [UPDATE]". GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 2, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Amidi, Amid (November 27, 2017). "'Revolting Rhymes,' 'Little Prince,' 'Hey Duggee' Win BAFTA Children's Awards". Cartoon Brew. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Takahashi, Dean (March 1, 2017). "IMGA names Pokémon Go as the mobile game of the year". VentureBeat. Retrieved July 1, 2021. "Gaming Awards". SXSW Conference & Festivals. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2017. "SXSW Announces 2017 Gaming Awards Winners". GoNintendo. Archived from the original on March 20, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2017. "Pokemon GO picks up three nominations at the BAFTA Games Awards". Pocket Gamer. March 9, 2017. Archived from the original on April 7, 2017. Retrieved April 6, 2017. Hoggins, Tom (September 24, 2018). "Golden Joysticks 2018 nominees announced, voting open now". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 12, 2022. Retrieved January 4, 2019. "2018 Gamers' Choice Awards". Gamers' Choice Awards. December 9, 2018. Archived from the original on January 3, 2019. Retrieved January 4, 2019. Trent, Logan (February 11, 2019). "Here Are Your 2019 SXSW Gaming Awards Finalists!". South by Southwest. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2019. Fogel, Stefanie (March 14, 2019). "'God of War,' 'Red Dead 2' Lead BAFTA Game Awards Nominations". Variety. Retrieved March 15, 2019. "The winners of 2020". Pocket Gamer. Retrieved January 30, 2020. Stuart, Keith (March 3, 2020). "Death Stranding and Control dominate Bafta games awards nominations". The Guardian. Retrieved March 6, 2020. Calvario, Liz (March 13, 2021). "2021 Kids' Choice Awards: The Complete Winners List". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved March 15, 2021. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pokémon Go. Official website