"La det swinge" (Norwegian pronunciation: [lɑː də ˈsvɪ̂ŋːə]; "Let it swing") is a Norwegian-language song by the pop duo Bobbysocks!. It was the winner of the Eurovision Song Contest 1985 and Norway's first victory in the contest. The song is a tribute to dancing to old rock 'n' roll heard on the radio. Befitting the subject matter, the song itself is written in an old-fashioned style, with a memorable saxophone melody starting the song. The melody arrangement is in retro style, containing elements of contemporary 1980s music and throwbacks to the 1950s. Following their win, the single peaked at number one in the Norwegian and Belgian singles chart, and entered the charts in various countries, including Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland, Austria, Ireland and the United Kingdom. The song entered, and won the Norwegian final of ESC, Melodi Grand Prix, and was therefore selected to represent Norway in the Eurovision Song Contest 1985. For the performances, the two members of Bobbysocks!, Hanne Krogh and Elisabeth Andreassen, appeared in sparkling, bright purple jackets, worn over black and white outfits; Krogh sported a black-and-white striped floor-length gown. At the Eurovision Song Contest, the song was performed thirteenth on the night, following Italy's Al Bano and Romina Power with "Magic Oh Magic" and preceding the United Kingdom's Vikki Watson with "Love Is". At the close of voting, it received 123 points, placing 1st in a field of 19. "La det swinge" was succeeded as Norwegian representative at the 1986 contest by Ketil Stokkan with "Romeo". This was the second appearance for both Andreasson and Krogh in the Eurovision Song Contest: in 1982 Andreassen had represented Sweden in the duo Chips with Kikki Danielsson, singing "Dag efter dag"; and in 1971 Krogh had finished 17th (second from last) in the contest, with the song "Lykken er". Andreasson went on to appear in the contest on two more occasions – she finished sixth in 1994, performing a duet with Jan Werner Danielsen, entitled simply, "Duett" and in 1996, she appeared as a solo artist, finishing second to Ireland's Eimear Quinn. Krogh also returned to the Contest in 1991 as part of the group Just 4 Fun, finishing 17th with "Mrs. Thompson". "Let It Swing" – 2:50 "La det swinge" – 2:50 Vem e de´du vill ha entry at Svensk mediadatabas, retrieved 11 July 2010 Let it swing entry at Svensk mediadatabas, retrieved 11 July 2010 "Bobbysocks - Let It Swing" (in Dutch). Single Top 100. Retrieved 27 June 2022. "Bobbysocks! – Let It Swing" (in Dutch). Dutch Top 40. Retrieved 27 June 2022. "Let It Swing/La det swinge" at the Austrian singles chart "Let It Swing/La det swinge" at the Norwegian singles chart "Let It Swing/La det swinge" at the Swiss singles chart "La det swinge" at the Swedish singles chart