Indigenous peoples of the Northeastern Woodlands include Native American tribes and First Nation bands residing in or originating from a cultural area encompassing the northeastern and Midwest United States and southeastern Canada. It is part of a broader grouping known as the Eastern Woodlands. The Northeastern Woodlands is divided into three major areas: the Coastal, Saint Lawrence Lowlands, and Great Lakes-Riverine zones. The Coastal area includes the Atlantic Provinces in Canada, the Atlantic seaboard of the United States, south until North Carolina. The Saint Lawrence Lowlands area includes parts of Southern Ontario, upstate New York, much of the Saint Lawrence River area, and Susquehanna Valley. The Great Lakes-Riverine area includes the remaining inland areas of the northeast, home to Central Algonquian and Siouan speakers. The Great Lakes region is sometimes considered a distinct cultural region, due to the large concentration of tribes in the area. The Northeastern Woodlands region is bound by the Subarctic to the north, the Great Plains to the west, and the Southeastern Woodlands to the south. Around 200 B.C the Hopewell culture began to develop across the Midwest of what is now the United States, with its epicenter in Ohio. The Hopewell culture was defined by its extensive trading system that connected communities throughout the Eastern region, from the Great Lakes to Florida. A sophisticated artwork style developed for its goods, depicting a multitude of animals such as deer, bear, and birds. The Hopewell culture is also noted for its impressive ceremonial sites, which typically contain a burial mound and geometric earthworks. The most notable of these sites is in the Scioto River Valley (from Columbus to Portsmouth, Ohio) and adjacent Paint Creek, centered on Chillicothe, Ohio. The Hopewell culture began to decline from around 400 A.D. for reasons which remain unclear. By around 1100, the distinct Iroquoian-speaking and Algonquian-speaking cultures had developed in what would become New York State and New England. Prominent Algonquian tribes included the Abenakis, Mi'kmaq, Penobscot, Pequots, Mohegans, Narragansetts, Pocumtucks, and Wampanoag. The Mi'kmaq, Maliseet, Passamaquoddy, Abenaki, and Penobscot tribes formed the Wabanaki Confederacy in the seventeenth century. The Confederacy covered roughly most of present-day Maine in the United States, and New Brunswick, mainland Nova Scotia, Cape Breton Island, Prince Edward Island and some of Quebec south of the St. Lawrence River in Canada. The Western Abenaki live on lands in New Hampshire, Vermont, and Massachusetts of the United States. The five nations of the Iroquois League developed a powerful confederacy about the 15th century that controlled territory throughout present-day New York, into Pennsylvania and around the Great Lakes. The Iroquois confederacy or Haudenosaunee became the most powerful political grouping in the Northeastern woodlands, and still exists today. The confederacy consists of the Mohawk, Cayuga, Oneida, Onondaga, Seneca and Tuscarora tribes. The area that is now the states of New Jersey and Delaware was inhabited by the Lenni-Lenape or Delaware, who were also an Algonquian people. Most Lenape were pushed out of their homeland in the 18th century by expanding European colonies, and now the majority of them live in Oklahoma. The characteristics of the Northeastern woodlands cultural area include the use of wigwams and longhouses for shelter and of wampum as a means of exchange. Wampum consisted of small beads made from quahog shells. The birchbark canoe was first used by the Algonquin Indians and its use later spread to other tribes and to early French explorers, missionaries and fur traders. The canoes were used for carrying goods, and for hunting, fishing, and warfare, and varied in length from about 4.5 metres (15 feet) to about 30 metres (100 feet) in length for some large war canoes. The main agricultural crops of the region were the Three Sisters : winter squash, maize (corn), and climbing beans (usually tepary beans or common beans). Originating in Mesoamerica, these three crops were carried northward over centuries to many parts of North America. The three crops were normally planted together using a technique known as companion planting on flat-topped mounds of soil. The three crops were planted in this way as each benefits from the proximity of the others. The tall maize plants provide a structure for the beans to climb, while the beans provide nitrogen to the soil that benefits the other plants. Meanwhile, the squash spreads along the ground, blocking the sunlight to prevent weeds from growing and retaining moisture in the soil. Prior to contact Native groups in the Northeast generally lived in villages of a few hundred people, living close to their crops. Generally men did the planting and harvesting, while women processed the crops. However, some settlements could be much bigger, such as Hochelaga (modern-day Montreal), which had a population of several thousand people, and Cahokia, which may have housed 20,000 residents between 1050 and 1150 CE. For many tribes, the fundamental social group was a clan, which was often named after an animal such as turtle, bear, wolf or hawk. The totem animal concerned was considered sacred and had a special relationship with the members of the clan. The spiritual beliefs of the Algonquians center around the concept of Manitou (/ˈmænɪtuː/), which is the spiritual and fundamental life force that is omnipresent. Manitou also manifest itself as the Great Spirit or Gitche Manitou, who is the creator and giver of all life. The Haudenosaunee equivalent of Manitou is orenda. Abenaki (Tarrantine), Quebec, Maine, New Brunswick, historically Vermont and New Hampshire Eastern Abenaki, Quebec, Maine, and historically New Hampshire Androscoggin, formerly Androscoggin Valley in Maine and New Hampshire; later Saint-François-du-Lac, Quebec Kennebec (Caniba), Maine Passamaquoddy, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Quebec, and Maine Penobscot, Maine Pequawket ('Pigwacket), Maine and New Hampshire Wolastoqiyik, Maliseet, Maine, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Quebec Western Abenaki: Quebec, Massachusetts, historically New Hampshire and Vermont Pennacook, Massachusetts, New Hampshire Cowasuck, upper Connecticut River Valley, in Vermont Missiquoi, Missisquoi Valley, from Lake Champlain to the headwaters, in Vermont, and Massachusetts Anishinaabeg (Anishinabe, Neshnabé, Nishnaabe) (see also Subarctic, Plains) Algonquin, Quebec, Ontario Nipissing, Ontario Ojibwe (Chippewa, Ojibwa), Ontario, Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin Mississaugas, Ontario Saulteaux (Nakawē), Ontario Odawa people (Ottawa), Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Ontario, also currently Oklahoma; later Oklahoma Potawatomi, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ontario, Wisconsin; also currently Kansas and Oklahoma Assateague, formerly Maryland Attawandaron (Neutral), Ontario Beothuk, formerly Newfoundland Chowanoke, formerly North Carolina Choptank people, formerly Maryland Conoy, Virginia, Maryland Erie, formerly Pennsylvania, New York Etchemin, Maine Ho-Chunk (Winnebago), southern Wisconsin, northern Illinois, later Iowa and Nebraska Honniasont, formerly Pennsylvania, Ohio, West Virginia Hopewell tradition, formerly Ohio, Illinois, and Kentucky, and Black River region, 200 BCE—500 CE Housatonic, formerly Massachusetts, New York Illinois Confederacy (Illiniwek), Illinois, Iowa, and Missouri; descendants in Oklahoma Cahokia, Illinois, Iowa, Missouri, Arkansas, descendants in Oklahoma Kaskaskia, formerly Wisconsin, descendants in Oklahoma Miami, Illinois, Indiana, and Michigan, now Oklahoma Iroquois Confederacy (Haudenosaunee), Ontario, Quebec, and New York Cayuga, New York, Oklahoma Mohawk, New York, Ontario and Quebec Oneida, New York and Wisconsin Onondaga, New York Seneca, New York, Oklahoma Mingo, Pennsylvania, Ohio, West Virginia Tuscarora, formerly North Carolina, now New York Kickapoo, Michigan, Illinois, Missouri, now Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, Mexico Laurentian (St. Lawrence Iroquoians), formerly New York, Ontario, and Quebec, 14th century—1580 CE Lenni Lenape (Delaware), Pennsylvania, Delaware, New Jersey, now Ontario and Oklahoma Munsee-speaking subgroups, formerly Long Island and southeastern New York Canarsie (Canarsee), formerly Long Island New York Esopus, formerly New York, later Ontario and Wisconsin Hackensack, formerly New York Haverstraw (Rumachenanck), New York Kitchawank (Kichtawanks, Kichtawank), New York Minisink, formerly New York Navasink, formerly to the east along the north shore of New Jersey Raritan, formerly Westchester County, New York Sinsink (Sintsink), formerly Westchester County, New York Siwanoy, formerly Massachusetts Tappan, formerly New York Waoranecks Wappinger (Wecquaesgeek, Nochpeem), formerly New York Warranawankongs Wiechquaeskeck, formerly New York Unami-speaking subgroups Acquackanonk, formerly Passaic River in northern New Jersey Okehocking, formerly southeast Pennsylvania Unalachtigo, Delaware, New Jersey Mahican (Stockbridge Mahican) Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York, and Vermont Manahoac, Virginia Mascouten, formerly Michigan Massachusett, formerly Massachusetts Ponkapoag, formerly Massachusetts Meherrin, Virginia, North Carolina Menominee, Wisconsin Meskwaki (Fox), Michigan, now Iowa Mi'kmaq (Micmac), New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, Quebec, and Maine Mitchigamea, formerly Illinois Moingona, formerly Illinois Peoria, Illinois, now Oklahoma Tamaroa, formerly Illinois Wea, formerly Indiana, descendants in Oklahoma Mohegan, Connecticut Monacan, Virginia Montaukett (Montauk), New York Monyton (Monetons, Monekot, Moheton) (Siouan), West Virginia and Virginia Nansemond, Virginia Nanticoke, Delaware and Maryland Accohannock Narragansett, Rhode Island Niantic, coastal Connecticut Nipmuc (Nipmuck), Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island Nottaway, Virginia Occaneechi (Occaneechee), Virginia Pamplico, North Carolina Patuxent, Maryland Paugussett, Connecticut Potatuck, New York Pawtucket, Massachusetts, New Hampshire Naumkeag, Massachusetts Pequot, Connecticut Petun (Tionontate), Ontario Piscataway, Maryland Pocumtuc, western Massachusetts Podunk, New York, eastern Hartford County, Connecticut Powhatan Confederacy, Virginia Appomattoc, Virginia Arrohateck, Virginia Chesapeake, Virginia Chesepian, Virginia Chickahominy, Virginia Kiskiack, Virginia Mattaponi, Virginia Nansemond, Virginia Pamunkey, Virginia Paspahegh, Virginia Powhatan, Virginia Quinnipiac, Connecticut, eastern New York, northern New Jersey Rappahannock, Virginia Sauk (Sac), Michigan, now Iowa, Oklahoma Schaghticoke, western Connecticut Secotan Outerbanks, North Carolina Croatoan Dasamongueponke Roanoke people Shawnee, formerly Ohio, Virginia, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, Kentucky, currently Oklahoma Shinnecock, Long Island, New York Stegarake, Virginia Stuckanox (Stukanox), Virginia Conestoga (Susquehannock), Maryland, Pennsylvania, New York, West Virginia Tauxenent (Doeg), Virginia Tunxis, Connecticut Tuscarora, formerly North Carolina, Virginia, currently New York Tutelo (Nahyssan), Virginia Unquachog (Poospatuck), Long Island, New York Wabanaki, Maine, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Quebec Wampanoag, Massachusetts Nauset, Massachusetts Patuxet, Massachusetts Pokanoket, Massachusetts, Rhode Island Wangunk, Mattabeset, Connecticut Wenro, New York Wicocomico, Maryland, Virginia Wyachtonok, Connecticut, New York Wyandot (Huron), Ontario south of Georgian Bay, now Oklahoma, Kansas, Michigan, and Wendake, Quebec Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma Bad River Band of the Lake Superior Tribe of Chippewa Indians of the Bad River Reservation, Wisconsin Bay Mills Indian Community, Michigan Cayuga Nation of New York Chickahominy people, Virginia Chippewa-Cree Indians of the Rocky Boy’s Reservation, Montana Citizen Potawatomi Nation, Oklahoma Delaware Nation, Oklahoma Delaware Tribe of Indians, Oklahoma Eastern Chickahominy, Virginia Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma Forest County Potawatomi Community, Wisconsin Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians, Michigan Hannahville Indian Community, Michigan Ho-Chunk Nation of Wisconsin, Minnesota, Wisconsin Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians of Maine Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska, also considered a Great Plains tribe Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma, also considered a Great Plains tribe Keweenaw Bay Indian Community, Michigan Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas Kickapoo Tribe of Indians of the Kickapoo Reservation in Kansas Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma Lac Courte Oreilles Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of the Lac du Flambeau Reservation of Wisconsin Lac Vieux Desert Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians, Michigan Little River Band of Ottawa Indians, Michigan Little Traverse Bay Bands of Odawa Indians, Michigan Mashantucket Pequot Tribe of Connecticut Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe, Massachusetts Match-e-be-nash-she-wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians of Michigan Menominee Indian Tribe of Wisconsin Miami Tribe of Oklahoma Mi'kmaq Nation, Maine Minnesota Chippewa Tribe, Minnesota Six component reservations: Bois Forte Band (Nett Lake) Fond du Lac Band, Minnesota, Wisconsin Grand Portage Band Leech Lake Band Mille Lacs Band White Earth Band Mohegan Indian Tribe of Connecticut Monacan, Virginia Nansemond, Virginia Narragansett Indian Tribe of Rhode Island Nottawaseppi Huron Band of the Potawatomi, Michigan Oneida Nation of New York Oneida Tribe of Indians of Wisconsin Onondaga Nation of New York Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma Pamunkey, Virginia Passamaquoddy Tribe of Maine Penobscot Tribe of Maine Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma Pokagon Band of Potawatomi Indians, Michigan, Indiana Prairie Band of Potawatomi Nation, Kansas Prairie Island Indian Community in the State of Minnesota Rappahannock, Virginia Red Cliff Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians, Minnesota Sac and Fox Nation, Oklahoma Sac and Fox Nation of Missouri in Kansas and Nebraska Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan St. Croix Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin Saint Regis Mohawk Tribe, New York Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians of Michigan Seneca-Cayuga Tribe of Oklahoma Seneca Nation of New York Shawnee Tribe, Oklahoma Shinnecock Nation, New York Sokaogon Chippewa Community, Wisconsin Stockbridge Munsee Community, Wisconsin Tonawanda Band of Seneca Indians of New York Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians of North Dakota, Montana, North Dakota Tuscarora Nation of New York Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head (Aquinnah) of Massachusetts Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska Classification of indigenous peoples of the Americas Hopewell tradition Native American tribes in Massachusetts Southern New England Algonquian cuisine Three Sisters (agriculture) War of 1812 Trigger, "Introduction" 1 Mir Tamim Ansary (2001). Eastern Woodlands Indians. Capstone Classroom. p. 4. ISBN 9781588104519. Trigger, "Introduction" 2 Trigger, "Introduction" 3 "History of Pre-colonial North America." Essential Humanities. Retrieved July 13, 2013. "Hopewell Culture". Ohio History Central. Retrieved March 14, 2019. "m7/98 Encyclopedia of North American Prehistory M". Archived from the original on October 20, 2009. Retrieved September 11, 2008. Klein, Milton M. (ed.) and the New York State Historical Association, The Empire State: A History of New York, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York, 2001, ISBN 0-8014-3866-7 Bain, Angela Goebel; Manring, Lynne; and Mathews, Barbara. Native Peoples in New England. Retrieved July 21, 2010, from Pocumtuck Valley Memorial Association. Toensing, Gale Courey. "Sacred fire lights the Wabanaki Confederacy", Indian Country Today (June 27, 2008), ICT Media Network Horatio Gates Spafford, LL.D. A Gazetteer of the State of New-York, Embracing an Ample Survey and Description of Its Counties, Towns, Cities, Villages, Canals, Mountains, Lakes, Rivers, Creeks and Natural Topography. Arranged in One Series, Alphabetically: With an Appendix… (1824), at Schenectady Digital History Archives, selected extracts, accessed December 28, 2014 "Native People of New Jersey". ALHN New Jersey. Retrieved March 14, 2019. Northeast American Indian Facts Native American Indian Facts Retrieved March 7, 2019. "Canoe". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved March 26, 2019. Mount Pleasant, Jane (2006). "The science behind the Three Sisters mound system: An agronomic assessment of an indigenous agricultural system in the northeast". In Staller, John E.; Tykot, Robert H.; Benz, Bruce F. (eds.). Histories of Maize: Multidisciplinary Approaches to the Prehistory, Linguistics, Biogeography, Domestication, and Evolution of Maize. Amsterdam: Academic Press. pp. 529–537. ISBN 978-1-5987-4496-5. Hill, Christina Gish (November 20, 2020). "Returning the 'three sisters' – corn, beans and squash – to Native American farms nourishes people, land and cultures". The Conversation. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Northeast Indian Culture Khan Academy. Retrieved March 7, 2019 "Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site". UNESCO. Retrieved April 20, 2021. Northeast Indian Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved March 7, 2019 Bragdon, Kathleen J. (2001). The Columbia Guide to American Indians of the Northeast. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 18. ISBN 978-0-231-11452-3. Sturtevant and Trigger ix "Cultural Thesaurus" Archived June 24, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. National Museum of the American Indian. Accessed April 8, 2014. Sturtevant and Trigger 241 Sturtevant and Trigger 198 Goddard 72 Goddard 72 and 237 Goddard 237 Goddard 72, 237–238 Goddard 238 Goddard 72 and 238 Sturtevant and Fogelson, 290 Sturtevant and Trigger 161 Sturtevant and Fogelson, 293 Fogelson and Sturtevant 81 Sturtevant and Fogelson, 291 Sturtevant and Trigger 96 Sturtevant and Trigger 255 Trigger, Bruce C. "Introduction." William C. Sturtevant, general ed. Handbook of North American Indians. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1978. Trigger, Bruce, volume ed. Sturtevant, William C., general ed. Handbook of North American Indians. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1978.