2003 FIA Formula One World Championship Drivers' Champion: Michael Schumacher Constructors' Champion: Ferrari Previous 2002 Next 2004 Races by country Races by venue Support series: Formula 3000 Porsche Supercup The 2003 FIA Formula One World Championship was the 56th season of FIA Formula One motor racing. It featured the 2003 Formula One World Championship for Drivers and the 2003 Formula One World Championship for Constructors, which were contested concurrently over a sixteen-race series that commenced on 9 March and ended on 12 October. Defending champions Michael Schumacher and Scuderia Ferrari were again awarded the World Drivers' Championship and World Constructors' Championship, respectively. Schumacher's closest competitors were Kimi Räikkönen, driving for McLaren, and Juan Pablo Montoya, driving for Williams. It was Schumacher's sixth World Drivers' title overall, breaking Juan Manuel Fangio's 46-year-old record. The following teams and drivers competed in the 2003 FIA Formula One World Championship. † All engines were required to have ten cylinders and an engine capacity not exceeding 3000 cc, and all were of V10 configuration. Three constructors entered free-practice-only drivers over the course of the season. After failing to complete the 2002 season due to financial difficulties, the Arrows team had their application for admission to the 2003 championship rejected by the FIA prior to the season start date. No reason was publicly given by the FIA and Arrows subsequently folded after 25 years in Formula One since 1978. Jordan switched to Ford engines for 2003, after their previous suppliers, Honda, opted to focus on their partnership with BAR. Jordan's contract with the Japanese engine manufacturer was due to expire at the end of the 2003 season, but Honda were no longer willing to provide Jordan with free engines. A link-up with, and possible buy-out by, Asiatech was rumoured, although this did not prove to be the case, and, when funding was withdrawn from the company, Asiatech was wound down. Minardi, who had been using Asiatech engines in 2002, switched to Cosworth units for 2003. Fernando Alonso, the team's test driver in 2002, was promoted to a full-time drive at Renault, replacing Jenson Button. Button moved to BAR, where he took the seat vacated by the Toyota-bound Olivier Panis. Panis joined Formula One debutant, and reigning CART champion, Cristiano da Matta at the Japanese team, in an all-new lineup for 2003. Allan McNish, one of the drivers replaced at Toyota, signed with Renault as a test driver, while his teammate from 2002, Mika Salo, left Formula One altogether. Felipe Massa left his Sauber drive to assume the duties of test driver for Ferrari. His place at Sauber was taken by Heinz-Harald Frentzen, who had replaced Massa on a one-off basis for the United States Grand Prix (by which time Frentzen was already confirmed as a Sauber driver for 2003), after having driven for Arrows before the team's collapse. Takuma Sato left the Jordan team to take the place of several others (Anthony Davidson, Darren Manning, Ryo Fukuda and Patrick Lemarié) as the sole test driver for BAR, being replaced by 2002 Formula Nippon champion Ralph Firman. Jaguar replaced both Eddie Irvine and Pedro de la Rosa for 2003. Their new drivers were Mark Webber, who signed from Minardi, and debutant Antônio Pizzonia, who drove in the International Formula 3000 series in 2002 whilst also performing test driver duties for Williams. Webber's vacated seat at Minardi was filled by Justin Wilson, who had won the International Formula 3000 title in 2001. Alex Yoong's Minardi contract from 2002 was not renewed and he moved to the CART series, albeit only for a brief stint, in 2003. He was replaced at Minardi by Jos Verstappen, who had spent a season on the sidelines after losing his Arrows drive to Heinz-Harald Frentzen in 2002. Minardi's Justin Wilson joined Jaguar from the German Grand Prix onwards, filling in for the under-performing Antônio Pizzonia, who was offered a test driving role at the team but turned it down. He would later resurface as a test driver at Williams. Wilson's seat at Minardi was taken by the Danish driver Nicolas Kiesa, who joined Formula One from the International Formula 3000 series. Ralph Firman suffered injuries as a result of a crash during practice in Hungary. He was replaced by Zsolt Baumgartner for the Italian Grand Prix before returning to finish the season for Jordan. Baumgartner, another driver who had been competing in the International Formula 3000 series, was the first Hungarian driver to race in Formula One. Ralf Schumacher was unable to race in Italy, due to concussion. He was replaced at Williams by Marc Gené, the team's test driver, for that particular race, before returning for the following Grand Prix. After a string of disappointing results in 2003, Jacques Villeneuve elected to end his season one race early, and was replaced at BAR by test driver Takuma Sato for the Japanese Grand Prix. Villeneuve would later drive for Renault in 2004 as a replacement driver, and sign a multi-year contract at Sauber for 2005 (though he was replaced in 2006). The 2003 FIA Formula One World Championship was contested over the following sixteen races: The Belgian Grand Prix scheduled for 31 August was cancelled due to a row over tobacco advertising, despite multiple races taking place without such advertising. On 26 June 2002, the World Motor Sport Council (WMSC) declared that the HANS ('Head and Neck Support') device would be made compulsory in Formula 1. This was not without controversy, as many drivers voiced their complaints, including Rubens Barrichello, Jacques Villeneuve, Justin Wilson and Nick Heidfeld. On 26 February 2003, the FIA decided that no fuel could be added to or removed from the cars between qualifying and race. This was decided based on safety grounds, as it would avoid the danger that, in a search for extra performance in qualifying, teams would run their cars in a manner which might be unsuitable or even dangerous at the start of the race. The 2003 season is notable for being the third and last season that fully-automatic gearboxes and launch control were allowed to be used. Both electronic driver aids had been used since the 2001 Spanish Grand Prix, but a change in the technical regulations saw the FIA banning both systems for 2004. The ban on traction control was ultimately delayed until the 2008 season. After Ferrari's infamous decision during the 2002 Austrian Grand Prix, ordering Rubens Barrichello to let Michael Schumacher by, any team orders which interfered with a race result were prohibited from the 2003 season onwards. Only one type of wet weather tyre was allowed to be used in wet weather races. This immediately raised concerns with the tyre suppliers. And after the chaotic Brazilian Grand Prix, in which drivers tried to call off the first qualifying session and which saw six drivers crash in the same corner, this rule was scrapped. Furthermore, the 2003 season saw the introduction of new regulations intended to increase F1's excitement, to halt falling global television audiences that had occurred during the previous season, and to help alleviate the financial difficulties of the smaller teams: One-lap qualifying was introduced as a way for smaller teams to get more television exposure. In the qualifying session on Friday, drivers would go out in current championship order, to determine the running order on Saturday. A faster lap time on Friday would mean a later starting time for them on Saturday. On Saturday, drivers contested for their starting position in the race on Sunday, with the fastest driver awarded pole position. In both sessions, drivers could only do one timed lap. Optional Friday testing at Grand Prix events was introduced in exchange for fewer miles on stand-alone test days. This was intended to give smaller teams a cheaper alternative to these test days, which were to be banned in 2004. The points system for both the Constructors' and Drivers' titles was changed from 10–6–4–3–2–1 for the first six finishers at each round to 10–8–6–5–4–3–2–1 for the first eight finishers in an attempt to make the title contests closer. Going into the season, Ferrari was the team to beat, having won the previous four Constructors' Championships. There was a lot of speculation about the effect of the new regulations on their dominance and overall form. In qualifying for the first race, the Australian Grand Prix, nothing seemed to have changed at the front. Reigning Drivers' Champion Michael Schumacher started in pole position, with his teammate Rubens Barrichello beside him. Juan Pablo Montoya in the Williams started in third, but the other Williams and McLaren drivers (Ferrari's main rivals in 2002) started way further down the grid. So the new qualifying format did shake up the order somewhat. After heavy rainfall, the race started in half-wet conditions. The Ferraris started on wet tyres, while Montoya started on dries, as did Kimi Räikkönen at the last minute when he pitted on the end of the formation lap and, thus, started in last place. While Schumacher led away, Barrichello jumped the start and received a drive-through penalty. The track was drying quickly and the changeable conditions took some by surprise: Barrichello crashed on lap five, followed by rookies Ralph Firman and Cristiano da Matta. After two safety car periods, it was last-starting Räikkönen that found himself in the lead of the race, followed by Schumacher and McLaren teammate David Coulthard. During the second round of pit stops, the Ferrari retook the lead and Räikkönen fell back to third, having sped in the pit lane and being served a drive-through penalty. Soon, however, Schumacher sustained damage from a curb stone and received a black-and-orange flag, forcing him to pit for repairs. He fell down to fourth behind Räikkönen, missing out on the podium for the first time since the 2001 Italian Grand Prix. (It also ended Ferrari's podium streak since the 1999 European Grand Prix.) It was Montoya who picked up the scraps, until he spun at the first corner and saw Coulthard pass him for the win. (This would be the Scot's last race victory.) At the Malaysian Grand Prix, it was the Renault team that blocked out the first row. Fernando Alonso, being the then-youngest driver to achieve pole position, started ahead of Jarno Trulli. Michael Schumacher started in third and tried to pass Trulli into the first corner, but tapped him into a spin. The Italian rejoined in last place, but Schumacher had to pit for repairs and was given a driving-through penalty on top of that. His main rivals were just as unlucky: Montoya was rear-ended by Jaguar driver Antônio Pizzonia and lost two laps during a rear-wing replacement, while Coulthard had to retire on the second lap when his car's electronics failed. Räikkönen took the lead, ahead of Alonso and Barrichello. During the second round of pit stops, Barrichello took second place, but Räikkönen was unchallenged, scored his first career win and took the lead in the championship. Justin Wilson, driving for Minardi, had to retire when his HANS device got loose and pinched his shoulders, resulting in temporary paralysis of both his arms. (He recovered before the next race.) Practice for the Brazilian Grand Prix was held in torrential weather conditions. For qualifying, it was no different, and the majority of drivers signed a petition, mandating the FIA to cancel the session if track conditions did not improve. When the rain eased off, however, the session went ahead as planned. The second qualifying session on Saturday was held in warm and dry conditions. Rubens Barrichello achieved pole position for Ferrari. Behind him stood David Coulthard for McLaren and a surprising Mark Webber for Jaguar. On Sunday, the rain was back and even under safety car conditions, drivers struggled to keep the car on track. When the field was released, Coulthard immediately overtook Barrichello, and in the next three laps, Räikkönen passed both of them to take the lead. The track began to dry, except for turn three, where a stream of water was running across the asphalt. Over the course of the race, six drivers crashed when going through that corner, including Michael Schumacher. This led to four safety car interventions. When a lot of drivers had to pit for fuel, Kimi Räikkönen and Giancarlo Fisichella became the leading pair and the Jordan driver overtook the McLaren when he ran wide. It was expected that Coulthard would win after those two had done their stops, but then, Webber and Alonso crashed heavily and the race was stopped. Alonso sustained bruises and was kept in hospital for observation. The sporting regulations said to take the order from two laps before the race suspension as the final result, and Räikkönen was declared the winner. When the FIA found a timekeeping error, however, this was corrected and Fisichella was awarded his first-ever win in an unofficial ceremony ahead of the next race. After three eventful races, Räikkonen (McLaren) was leading the championship with 24 points, ahead of his teammate Coulthard (15 points) and Alonso (Renault, 14 points). Reigning champion Michael Schumacher was down in sixth place. For the San Marino Grand Prix, Michael Schumacher achieved pole position. His brother Ralf and his teammate Rubens Barrichello started behind him. At the start, Ralf overtook Michael but eventually fell back to fourth position. The Ferrari driver won the race, ahead of championship leader Räikkönen and Barrichello. The next race in Spain saw Ferrari debut their new car and their drivers taking up the front row in qualifying. Behind them were the Renaults of Fernando Alonso and Jarno Trulli. At the start, Alonso overtook Barrichello for second and the top three went on to finish in this order. Trulli made contact with David Coulthard and retired. Räikkönen crashed into the stalled Jaguar of Antônio Pizzonia. In Austria, Michael Schumacher started on pole and won the race. It was the third consecutive weekend that he achieved this. He did have to cope with a slow pit stop and small fire, but he was unchallenged by his rivals, as Räikkönen slowed down with engine-related performance problems and Montoya retired with a blown engine. The Finn held on to second, ahead of Barrichello in third. The twisty track of Monaco favoured the Michelin runners: Ralf Schumacher (Williams) started on pole, ahead of Kimi Räikkönen (McLaren) and Juan Pablo Montoya (Williams). The race featured no on-track overtakes, so the order was decided by the start and the pit stops. Montoya took the win, just six tenths ahead of Räikkönen, and Michael Schumacher completed the podium. Ralf finished in fourth. In Canada, Ralf Schumacher started on pole again, with his teammate beside him. Michael Schumacher started in third, but during the race, managed to get ahead of both Williams drivers. It was a race of attrition, where just nine drivers finished and Schumacher, too, had to nurse his ailing car home. But the German held on to take the win. Recovering from his start to the season, Schumacher had taken the lead in the championship (54 points) and was now three points ahead of Kimi Räikkönen (51). A group of four drivers, led by Fernando Alonso (34 points), were fighting over third place. The European Grand Prix, held at the Nürburgring, saw Kimi Räikkönen take pole position and lead the race, until his McLaren's engine broke down on lap 25. Ralf Schumacher in the Williams came through to take a victory on home soil. His teammate Juan Pablo Montoya and his brother Michael Schumacher collided on lap 43, dropping the German down to sixth. Montoya held on to take second on the podium, ahead of Ferrari's Rubens Barrichello. Williams overtook McLaren for second position in the Constructors' Championship. At the Circuit de Magny-Cours in France, Ralf Schumacher started from pole, with Montoya and Michael Schumacher behind him. This was also the order of the top three at the finish. This would be Ralf's last win in F1 and, as of 2023, Williams' last 1-2 finish. For the British Grand Prix, it was Rubens Barrichello who achieved pole position, but Jarno Trulli in the Renault who led into the first corner. There was a brief safety car intervention to clear up debris from David Coulthard's McLaren, but the race was truly disrupted when, on lap 11, Neil Horan invaded the track. Wearing a kilt and waving religious banners, he ran towards the cars, who swerved to avoid him. A track marshal tackled him and pulled him to the side. The safety car was deployed and almost everyone pitted. Among others, Michael Schumacher, Fernando Alonso and Juan Pablo Montoya fell outside the top ten. The Toyota drivers Cristiano da Matta and Olivier Panis opted not to pit and took the lead, ahead of Coulthard. It was Räikkönen, eventually, who passed Da Matta for the lead. Under pressure from Rubens Barrichello, however, the Finn made a mistake and gave up the win. A further error allowed Montoya to get by into second position. The F1 circus was back in Germany, this time for the German Grand Prix in Hockenheim. Montoya achieved pole position, just 0.018 seconds ahead of his teammate. At the start, Ralf Schumacher squeezed Räikkönen and Barrichello, who hit each other and crashed out, with Ralf retiring a lap later. He was charged with a ten-place grid penalty, but this was reversed after a successful appeal. Montoya held on to win, ahead of Coulthard and Trulli, the Renault driver scoring his only podium of the season. The last race of the summer was held on the revamped Hungaroring in Hungary. Alonso scored pole position and held on to win the race. It was his first victory and it made him the youngest winning driver in F1 history. Räikkönen and Montoya joined him on the podium, while Michael Schumacher could only manage eighth. In the Drivers' Championship, Räikkönen (70 points) and Montoya (71 points) had closed up to Schumacher (72 points), leaving no room for error with just three races to go. In the Constructors' Championship, it was now the Williams team in the lead with 129 points, over Ferrari with 121 and McLaren with 115. On home soil at Monza, with the support of the tifosi, the Scuderia Ferrari did what they had to do: Michael Schumacher qualified on pole and won. Juan Pablo Montoya for Williams and Michael's teammate Rubens Barrichello joined him on the podium. Up to the 2023 Italian Grand Prix, this was the shortest-duration (fully completed) race in F1 history, and it is still the race completed with the highest-ever average speed (247.6 km/h). Kimi Räikkönen had not given up his championship hopes and achieved pole position for the United States Grand Prix. Barrichello managed second and Olivier Panis scored Toyota's best qualifying result when he set the third-fastest time. Montoya and Schumacher started in fourth and seventh, respectively. Räikkönen made a clean start, but Barrichello was passed by Panis when his launch control failed to automatically shift up to second gear. Montoya was falling back and, on the third lap, collided with Barrichello, earning himself a drive-through penalty. Rain started falling and on lap 6, Panis was the first to switch to intermediate tyres. On the next lap, Montoya was back behind Schumacher and, on his second attempt, managed to overtake him. As the rain eased up, all drivers that had pitted, switched back to dry tyres, only for the rain to reappear on lap 18. Schumacher decided to pit and stay on dry tyres, but then came in again on lap 22 for intermediates. Mark Webber shortly led the race before crashing out, with the same happening to then-leader David Coulthard. On lap 38, Schumacher had passed all drivers in front of him and held on to take the win. Championship rival Räikkönen came home in second, followed by Heinz-Harald Frentzen in the Sauber. Montoya finished sixth, which meant he was now out of contention for the championship. Räikkönen's only hope was to win the last race of the season and Schumacher failing to finish. In the Constructors' Championship, Ferrari was leading Williams with 147 over 144 points. The Japanese Grand Prix saw Michael Schumacher qualify in 14th, his worst grid position in a Ferrari. Kimi Räikkönen started in 8th, so he faced an uphill battle to take the win that he needed. Rubens Barrichello started on pole, with Montoya beside him. The Toyota's commenced their home race in third and fourth. On the first lap, Fernando Alonso in the Renault jumped up to third and Montoya took the lead. Schumacher was careful to stay out of trouble at the start, looking to score at least one point, but when trying to overtake Takuma Sato, he hit the local driver's rear wheel and lost his front wing. This forced him to pit and he rejoined in last place. This practically handed the Constructors' Championship to Williams, until Montoya suddenly retired with a hydraulics problem. Schumacher narrowly avoided a replication of his incident at the chicane, this time with Cristiano da Matta, but it led to his brother Ralf running into the back of him. All this left Räikkönen unchallenged to climb up to second position. But in the end, Barrichello took the win and Schumacher finished eighth, so the German clinched the title. Michael Schumacher ended the season on 93 points, ahead of Kimi Räikkönen with 91 and Juan Pablo Montoya with 82. It was a record sixth Drivers' Championship and Schumacher's fourth in a row. Ferrari were Constructors' Champions for the fifth consecutive year. Points were awarded to the top eight finishing drivers and constructors as follows: Notes: † – Driver did not finish the Grand Prix but was classified, as he completed more than 90% of the race distance. Notes: † – Driver did not finish the Grand Prix but was classified, as he completed more than 90% of the race distance. Ralf Schumacher was entered into the Italian Grand Prix, but later withdrew due to illness. Ralph Firman was entered into the Hungarian Grand Prix, but later withdrew after he was injured during free practice. Minardi entered first six Grands Prix as "European Minardi Cosworth". 2003 FIA Formula One World Championship – Drivers' and Constructors' Final Standings, www.fia.com via web.archive.org Retrieved 5 July 2015 "Trust increases Minardi backing". Crash.net. 22 May 2003. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "2003 FIA Formula One World Championship". Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile. Archived from the original on 4 October 2003. Retrieved 13 June 2023. Braillon, Didier (2003). "Sporting regulations". In Domenjoz, Luc (ed.). Formula 1 Yearbook 2003–04. Bath, Somerset: Parragon. pp. 22–41. ISBN 978-1-4054-2089-1 – via Internet Archive. "Models in 2003". StatsF1. Retrieved 13 June 2023. 2003 Formula One Technical Regulations, www.fia.com via web.archive.org Retrieved 5 July 2015 2003 FIA Formula One World Championship – F1 Guide, www.fia.com via web.archive.org Retrieved 5 July 2015 "Jordan set to lose Honda deal". BBC Sport. 3 May 2002. Retrieved 17 October 2013. "2003". Chicane F1. Retrieved 3 April 2022. "Formula One Calendar 2003". Motorsport Stats. Retrieved 3 April 2022. "FIA statement on 2003 Belgian GP". Motorsport Network. 31 October 2002. Archived from the original on 16 August 2022. Retrieved 16 August 2022. Collings, Timothy (6 March 2003). "Formula One: Villeneuve hits out". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 9 June 2013. McKay, Peter (31 March 2003). "Inside Line: It's close ... but Ferrari isn't panicking". drive.com.au. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 9 June 2013. "February 2003 News". NewsOnF1. 26 February 2003. Retrieved 12 January 2024. "F1 Regulations - Formula 1 Rules and Regulations for the 2004 F1 Season". newsonf1.com. Retrieved 6 December 2020. "New F1 tyre rules raise safety concerns". autosport.com. 25 November 2002. Retrieved 12 January 2024. "Tyre troubles at Interlagos". motorsport.com. 6 April 2003. Retrieved 12 January 2024. "14 - 30 October 2002 News". NewsOnF1. 28 October 2002. Retrieved 12 January 2024. 2003 Formula One Sporting Regulations, www.jomenvisst.de via web.archive.org Retrieved 5 July 2015 "Wilson defies pain in Brazil". BBC Sport. 2 April 2003. Retrieved 18 January 2024. "Petition to scrap first qualifying". Autosport. 4 April 2003. Archived from the original on 12 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019. "Qualifying Goes Ahead Despite Drivers' Petition". Atlas F1. 4 April 2003. Archived from the original on 12 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019. Eason, Kevin (10 April 2003). "Fisichella may be granted victory on a countback; Motor racing". The Times. p. 61. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2019 – via Gale Academic OneFile. Brazil 2003: Result overturned - Fisichella gets winners trophy at Imola, archived from the original on 20 November 2020, retrieved 10 August 2019 "Ralf Schumacher penalised for GP pile-up". The Age. Agence France-Presse. 5 August 2003. "Sunday's Selected Quotes – US GP". Atlas F1. 28 September 2003. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. "Formula One Results 2003". Motorsport Stats. Retrieved 3 April 2021. Jones, Bruce (2004). "Final Tables 2003". The Official ITV Sport Guide: 2004 FIA Formula One World Championship. Carlton Books. pp. 100–101. ISBN 1-84442-811-7 – via Internet Archive. Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2003 in Formula One. Formula One portal formula1.com – 2003 drivers standings (archived) formula1.com – 2003 teams standings (archived)