Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) is a nonviolent Palestinian-led movement promoting boycotts, divestments, and economic sanctions against Israel. Its objective is to pressure Israel to meet what the BDS movement describes as Israel's obligations under international law, defined as withdrawal from the occupied territories, removal of the separation barrier in the West Bank, full equality for Arab-Palestinian citizens of Israel, and "respecting, protecting, and promoting the rights of Palestinian refugees to return to their homes and properties". The movement is organized and coordinated by the Palestinian BDS National Committee. BDS is modeled after the Anti-Apartheid Movement. Its proponents compare the Palestinians' plight to that of apartheid-era black South Africans. Protests and conferences in support of the movement have been held in several countries. Its mascot, which features on its logotype, is Handala, a symbol of Palestinian identity and "right of return". Some critics accuse the BDS movement of antisemitism, a charge the movement denies, calling it an attempt to conflate antisemitism with anti-Zionism. The Israel lobby in the United States has made opposing BDS one of its top priorities. Since 2015, the Israeli government has spent millions of dollars to promote the view that BDS is antisemitic and have it legally banned in foreign countries. BDS supporters see it as a human rights movement. Many authors trace BDS's origins to the NGO Forum at the 2001 World Conference Against Racism in South Africa (Durban I). At the forum, Palestinian activists met with anti-apartheid veterans who identified parallels between Israel and apartheid South Africa and recommended campaigns like those they had used to defeat apartheid. The forum adopted a document that contained many ideas that would later reappear in the 2005 BDS Call; Israel was proclaimed an apartheid state that engaged in human rights violations through the denial of the Palestinian refugees' right of return, the occupation of the Palestinian territories, and discrimination against Arab citizens of Israel. The declaration recommended comprehensive sanctions and embargoes against Israel as the remedy. In March 2002, while the Israeli army reoccupied all major Palestinian cities and towns and imposed curfews, a group of prominent Palestinian scholars published a letter calling for help from the "global civil society". The letter asked activists to demand that their governments suspend economic relations with Israel in order to stop its campaign of apartheid, occupation, and ethnic cleansing. In April 2002, Steven and Hilary Rose, professors at the Open University and the University of Bradford, initiated a call for a moratorium on academic collaboration with Israeli institutions. It quickly racked up over 700 signatories, among them Colin Blakemore and Richard Dawkins, who said they could no longer "in good conscience continue to cooperate with official Israeli institutions, including universities." Similar initiatives followed in the summer. In August, Palestinian organizations in the occupied territories issued a call for a comprehensive boycott of Israel. The majority of the statements recalled the declarations made at the NGO Forum the year before. In October 2003, a group of Palestinian intellectuals called for a boycott of Israeli academic institutions. Attempts to coordinate the boycotts in a more structured way led to the formation of the Palestinian Campaign for Academic and Cultural Boycott of Israel (PACBI) in April 2004. Colin Shindler argues that the Oslo peace process's failure created a political void that allowed what had been a marginal rejectionist attitude to Israel to enter the European far-left mainstream in the form of proposals for a boycott. Rafeef Ziadah also attributes BDS to the peace process's failure. She argues that BDS represents a rejection of the peace process paradigm of equalizing both sides in favor of seeing the situation as a colonial conflict between a native population and a settler-colonial state supported by Western powers. Others argue that BDS should be understood in terms of its purported roots in the Arab League's boycott of Zionist goods from Mandatory Palestine. According to the archaeologist and ancient historian Alex Joffe, BDS is merely the spearhead of a larger anti-Western juggernaut in which the dialectic between communism and Islam remains unresolved, and has antecedents in the Palestine Solidarity Campaign, the General Union of Palestinian Students and the Muslim Brotherhood. Andrew Pessin and Doron Ben-Atar believe that BDS should be viewed in a historical context of other boycotts of Israel. BDS demands that Israel end its "three forms of injustices that infringe international law and Palestinian rights" by: Ending its occupation and colonization of all Arab lands occupied in 1967 and dismantling the Wall; Recognizing the fundamental rights of the Arab-Palestinian citizens of Israel to full equality; and Respecting, protecting and promoting the rights of Palestinian refugees to return to their homes and properties as stipulated in UN Resolution 194. These demands, enshrined in a declaration named the BDS Call, are non-negotiable to BDS. Co-founder of the movement Omar Barghouti, citing South African Archbishop Desmond Tutu, has written: "I am not interested in picking up crumbs of compassion thrown from the table of someone who considers himself my master. I want the full menu of rights." Barghouti has also written: Ending the largely discernible aspects of Israeli occupation while maintaining effective control over most of the Palestinian territory occupied in 1967 "in return" for Palestinians' accepting Israel's annexation of the largest colonial blocks ... has become the basic formula for the so-called peaceful settlement endorsed by the world's hegemonic powers and acquiesced to by an unelected, unrepresentative, unprincipled, and visionless Palestinian 'leadership.' The entire spectrum of Zionist parties in Israel and their supporters in the West, with few exceptions, ostensibly accept this unjust and illegal formula as the "only offer" on the table for the Palestinians—or else the menacing Israeli bludgeon. BDS sees itself as a movement for all Palestinians, whether they live in the diaspora or in historical Palestine. BDS believes that negotiations with Israel should focus on "how Palestinian rights can be restored" and that they can only take place after Israel has recognized these rights. It frames the Israel-Palestinian conflict as between colonizer and colonized, between oppressor and oppressed, and rejects the notion that both parties are equally responsible for the conflict. For those reasons, BDS opposes some forms of dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians, which it argues are counterproductive. According to BDS, "all forms of international intervention and peace-making until now have failed" and so the international community should impose punitive measures, such as broad boycotts and divestment initiatives, against Israel, like those against South Africa during apartheid. BDS uses the framework of "freedom, justice, and equality", arguing that Palestinians are entitled to those rights like everyone else. It is therefore an antiracist movement and rejects all forms of racism, including antisemitism and Islamophobia. More generally, BDS frames itself as part of a global social movement that challenges neoliberal Western hegemony and struggles against racism, sexism, poverty and similar causes. Its struggle for Palestinian rights should be seen as a small but critical part of that struggle, BDS argues. BDS believes that Israel is an apartheid state as defined by two international treaties, the 1973 The International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid and the 1998 Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. It says that while there are differences between Israel and apartheid-era South Africa, such as Israel's lack of explicit racial segregation laws, the systems are fundamentally similar. One of the main differences between South African and Israeli apartheid, BDS argues, is that in the former a white minority dominated a black minority, but in Israel, a Jewish majority discriminates against a Palestinian minority in Israel and also keeps Palestinians under military occupation. It further contends that South African apartheid depended on black labor while Israeli apartheid is grounded in efforts to expel Palestinians from "Greater Israel". BDS sees the Israeli legal definition of itself as a "Jewish and democratic state" as contradictory. According to BDS, Israel upholds a facade of democracy but is not and cannot be a democracy because it is, in Omar Barghouti's words, "a settler-colonial state". Opponents have argued that comparing Israel to South Africa's apartheid regime "demonizes" Israel and is antisemitic. Supporters argue that there is nothing antisemitic in calling Israel an apartheid state. To support that view, they cite prominent anti-apartheid activists such as Desmond Tutu and South African politician Ronnie Kasrils, who both have said that the situation in Gaza and the West Bank is "worse" than apartheid. Eric Goldstein, acting executive director of the Middle East and North Africa Division of Human Rights Watch, which neither supports nor condemns a boycott, argues that the Biden administration will probably not counter the Trump administration's attempt to label BDS antisemitic. He considers the movement maligned. In his view, "To campaign or boycott solely on behalf of Palestinians under Israeli rule no more constitutes anti-Semitism than doing so on behalf of Tibetans in China is in itself anti-Chinese racism." BDS demands that Israel allow the Palestinian refugees displaced in the 1948 war to return to what is now Israel. According to BDS's critics, calling for their right to return is an attempt to destroy Israel. If the refugees returned, Israel would become a Palestinian-majority state and Jewish dominance of Israel would be in jeopardy. They argue that this would undermine the Jewish people's right to self-determination and thus calling for it is a form of antisemitism. Former Anti-Defamation League director Abraham Foxman has called it "the destruction of the Jewish state through demography."[citation needed] Nadia Abu el-Haj has written that, indeed, BDS supporters believe that "the Israeli state has no right to continue exist as a racial state that builds the distinction between Jew and non-Jew into its citizenship laws, its legal regimes, its education system, its economy, and its military and policing tactics." BDS supporters further note that the Palestinian liberation movement has always rejected the idea that Israel has a right to exist as a racial state. While BDS deliberately refrains from advocating any particular political outcome, such as a one-state or two-state solution, Barghouti argues that a Jewish state in historical Palestine contravenes the Palestinians' rights: A Jewish state in Palestine in any shape or form cannot but contravene the basic rights of the indigenous Palestinian population and perpetuate a system of racial discrimination that ought to be opposed categorically. Just as we would oppose a "Muslim state" or a "Christian state" or any kind of exclusionary state, definitely, most definitely, we oppose a Jewish state in any part of Palestine. No Palestinian, rational Palestinian, not a sellout Palestinian, will ever accept a Jewish state in Palestine. Accepting modern-day Jewish-Israelis as equal citizens and full partners in building and developing a new shared society, free from all colonial subjugation and discrimination, as called for in the democratic state model, is the most magnanimous, rational offer any oppressed indigenous population can present to its oppressors. So don't ask for more. Norman Finkelstein, a vocal supporter of the two-state solution, has criticized BDS on this issue. Like Foxman, Finkelstein believes that BDS seeks to end Israel through demography, something he believes Israel will never acquiesce to. He therefore considers BDS a "silly, childish, and dishonest cult" because it does not explicitly state that its goal is to end Israel and because, according to him, that goal is unrealistic and broad public support cannot be found for the return of the refugees. Still, he believes that BDS's tactics, boycotts, divestment, and sanctions, are correct. BDS criticizes liberal Zionists who oppose the occupation but also the right of return for the Palestinian refugees. According to liberal Zionists, both right-wing Zionists and BDS risk "destroying Israel", defined as turning Israel into a Palestinian-majority state, BDS by demanding equal citizenship for Arab-Palestinians and the right of return of the Palestinian refugees, and right-wing Zionists by insisting on building more settlements, eventually making a two-state solution impossible. With the two-state solution off the table, Israel would either have to grant citizenship to the Palestinians living under occupation, thus destroying Israel, or become an apartheid state. Liberal Zionists find apartheid repugnant and oppose apartheid in Israel, so they propose a boycott limited to Israeli West Bank settlements to pressure the Israeli government to stop building settlements. Peter Beinart in 2012 proposed a "Zionist BDS" that would advocate divestment from Israeli West Bank settlements but oppose divestment from Israeli companies. This, Beinart argued, would legitimize Israel and delegitimize the occupation, thus challenging both the vision of BDS and that of the Israeli government. BDS supporters contend that liberal Zionists are more concerned with preserving Israel as a "Jewish state" than with human rights. Barghouti states that by denying the Palestinian refugees right of return simply because they are not Jewish, liberal Zionists adhere to the same Zionist racist principles that treat the Palestinians as a "demographic threat" to be dealt with in order to maintain Israel's character as a colonial, ethnocentric, apartheid state. Sriram Ananth writes that the BDS Call asks people to uncompromisingly stand against oppression. In his view, liberal Zionists have failed to do so by not endorsing the BDS Call. BDS describes "normalization" as a process by which Palestinians are compelled to stop resisting and to accept their subjugation. BDS analogizes it to a "colonization of the mind", whereby the oppressed comes to believe that the oppressor's reality is the only reality and that the oppression is a fact of life. BDS opposes normalization as a means to resist oppression. Normalization, BDS says, can arise when Israelis and Palestinians in the occupied territories meet without the Israeli side acknowledging the fundamental injustices Israel inflicts on the Palestinians, corresponding to the BDS's three demands. BDS calls it "co-existence" and argues that it feeds complacency and privileges the oppressor at the expense of the oppressed. Instead, BDS encourages "co-resistance", where "anti-colonial Jewish Israelis" and Palestinians come together to fight against the injustices afflicting the Palestinians. BDS denounces dialogue projects bringing Palestinians and Israelis together without addressing the struggle for Palestinian rights. Such projects, it asserts, "serve to privilege oppressive co-existence at the cost of co-resistance" regardless of their intentions. It also denounces projects that portray the relationship between Israelis and Palestinians as symmetrical. One example of a project BDS denounces is OneVoice, a joint Palestinian-Israeli youth-oriented organization that brings Israelis and Palestinians together under the slogan of ending the occupation and establishing a Palestinian state. Since OneVoice concerns itself with neither Israeli apartheid nor Palestinian refugees' rights, BDS concludes that it serves to normalize oppression and injustice. Critics of "anti-normalization" rhetorically ask how BDS is supposed to win over the hearts and minds of unconvinced Jewish Israelis if a precondition for dialogue is that they first commit to BDS's principles. They believe that dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians can convince Jewish Israelis that BDS's demands are just. Barghouti contends that the "peace industry", the many dialogue initiatives launched in the 1990s in the aftermath of the Oslo Accords, has not helped the Palestinians at all because they are based on the idea that the conflict is between two equals, rather than about one group oppressing another. He believes that dialogue needs to be based on freedom, equality, democracy, and ending injustice, or else it is at best a form of negotiation between a stronger and weaker party. BDS was founded on 9 July 2005, on the first anniversary of the advisory opinion by the International Court of Justice in which the West Bank barrier was declared a violation of international law. 171 Palestinian non-governmental organizations (NGOs) representing every aspect of Palestinian civil society adopted the BDS Call. The Palestinian BDS National Committee (BNC) was established at the first Palestinian BDS conference in Ramallah in November 2007 and in 2008 it became BDS's coordinating body. All BNC members are Palestinian organizations. As of 2020, it has 29 members. The BNC includes a general assembly with representatives from every BNC member, and an 11-seat secretariat elected every two years that governs the BNC. The general assembly meets about every third month while the secretariat handles day-to-day decision making. Mahmoud Nawajaa serves as the BNC's General Coordinator and Alys Samson Estapé as the Europe Coordinator. A precursor to BDS is the Palestinian Campaign for the Academic and Cultural Boycott of Israel (PACBI), which was founded in April 2004 in Ramallah with Barghouti as a founding committee member. PACBI led the campaign for the academic and cultural boycotts of Israel. It has since been integrated into the larger BDS movement. The U.S. arm of PACBI, the United States Association for the Academic and Cultural Boycott of Israel (USACBI), was founded in 2009. The global BDS movement is by design highly decentralized and independent. This has allowed thousands of organizations and groups to become part of it, some of which are the BNC's main partners. In Israel, some more established radical groups, such as Women in Black, ICAHD, AIC, and New Profile, initially issued statements supporting the boycott. Boycott from Within often uses creative performances to display its support for the boycott and the research group Who Profits supplies BDS with information about companies complicit in the Israeli occupation. On campuses in the U.S., Canada and New Zealand, the student organization Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) supports BDS. According to the American coordinating body National Students for Justice in Palestine, it had about 200 chapters in the U.S. as of 2018. The left-wing activist organization Jewish Voice for Peace (JVP) advocates for BDS among American Jewry. In addition to these, political parties, trade unions and other NGOs have endorsed the BDS Call. BDS organizes campaigns for boycotts, divestment and sanctions against Israel. Boycotts are facilitated by urging the public to avoid purchasing goods made by Israeli companies, divestment by urging banks, pension funds, international companies, etc. to stop doing business in Israel, and sanctions by pressuring governments to end military trade and free-trade agreements with Israel and to suspend Israel's membership in international forums. Global targets for boycott are selected by the BNC, but supporters are free to choose targets that suit them. The BNC encourages supporters to select targets based on their complicity in Israel's human rights violations, potential for cross-movement solidarity, media appeal, and likelihood of success. It also emphasizes the importance of creating campaigns and events that connect with issues of concern in their own communities. In addition to the campaigns listed in this section, a number of local campaigns have been created by BDS-affiliated groups and endorsed by the movement, including Code Pink's Stolen Beauty campaign launched in 2009 against Israeli cosmetics manufacturer Ahava, an Australian campaign against Max Brenner, whose parent company, the Strauss Group, sent care packages to Israeli soldiers, and a campaign by the group Vermonters for Justice in Palestine (VTJP, previously known as Vermonters for a Just Peace in Israel/Palestine) against ice-cream maker Ben & Jerry over its sales of ice cream in Israeli settlements. In June 2021, VTJP called on Ben & Jerry's to "end complicity in Israel's occupation and abuses of Palestinian human rights." VTJP describes itself as "a strong supporter of the...[BDS] campaign". On 19 July 2021, Ben & Jerry's CEO announced the end of sales of ice cream in the Israeli settlements in the West Bank: "Although Ben & Jerry's will no longer be sold in the OPT [Occupied Palestinian territories], we will stay in Israel through a different arrangement". Ben & Jerry's Independent Board of Directors complained that the decision had been made by the CEO and Unilever without their approval. Israeli Foreign Minister Yair Lapid said, "Over 30 states in the United States have passed anti-BDS legislation in recent years. I plan on asking each of them to enforce these laws against Ben & Jerry's", and called the decision "a shameful capitulation to antisemitism, BDS and everything bad in the anti-Israel and anti-Jewish discourse". Derail Veolia and Alstom (2008–present) Since November 2008, BDS has campaigned against the multinational French conglomerates Veolia and Alstom for their involvement in the Jerusalem Light Rail because it runs through the Israeli-occupied parts of East Jerusalem. According to BDS, the boycott had cost Veolia an estimated $20 billion as of 2015. In 2015 Veolia sold off its final investment in Israel, a 5% stake in CityPass owned by its subsidiary Transdev. BDS attributed the sell-off to its campaign, but Richard Dujardin, a member of Transdev's executive committee, said: "I will not say that it is pleasant to be chased by people saying we are not good guys all the time but really it was a business decision." Stop G4S - Securing Israeli Apartheid (2012–present) Since 2012 BDS has campaigned against G4S, the world's biggest security company, to get it to divest from Israel. As a result, G4S has been targeted by many BDS supporting groups, including Who Profits?, Addameer, Jews for Justice in Palestine, and Tadamon!. The campaign's first victory came in October 2011, when the student council of the Edinburgh University Students' Association adopted a motion to ban G4S from campus.[citation needed] In April 2012 the European Parliament declined to renew its contract with G4S, citing G4S's involvement in violations of international law. In 2014 the Gates Foundation sold its $170 million stake in G4S, a move BDS activists attributed to their campaign. The same year activists thanked officials in Durham County, North Carolina, for terminating its contract with G4S, though it was not clear that BDS's campaign was the cause. In February 2016, the international restaurant chain Crepes & Waffles terminated its security transport contracts with G4S. G4S sold off its Israeli subsidiary G4S Israel in 2016, but BDS continues to campaign against G4S because it maintains a 50% stake in Policity, an Israeli police training center with presence inside Israeli prisons where thousands of Palestinians are detained. Woolworths (2014–2016) BDS South Africa undertook a boycott campaign against the South African retail chain Woolworths in 2014 over its trade relations with Israel. It was the first comprehensive consumer boycott of a South African retailer since 1994. The campaign used the Twitter hashtag #BoycottWoolworths which rapidly became one of the top trending hashtags on South African Twitter. The campaign attracted international media attention and was covered by The New York Times, Rolling Stone, and Al-Jazeera. The activists organized flash mobs, die-ins, and placed "Boycott Israeli Apartheid"-stickers on Woolworths' Israeli merchandise, all of which they published on social media. Consumers were encouraged to write to the company's store managers questioning the stocking of Israeli goods. The campaign ended in mid-2016 when Woolworth informed its annual general meeting that it would no longer purchase Israeli products from the occupied territories. Boycott HP (2016–present) BDS runs a boycott campaign against the multinational information technology company Hewlett-Packard's two successors, HP Inc. and Hewlett Packard Enterprise, which it says are complicit in "Israel's occupation, settler-colonialism and apartheid regime". According to the campaign, HP supplies Israel with a biometric ID card system used to restrict Palestinians' freedom of movement and provides servers for the Israel Prison Service. In April 2019, Federatie Nederlandse Vakbeweging, the Netherlands' largest trade union, dropped HP in its offer to its members. According to a spokesperson for the boycott HP campaign, the union used to offer a 15% discount on HP products and this would no longer be the case. In June 2019, Unite, the UK's second-largest trade union, joined the boycott against HP. Orange (2016–present) In January 2016, French telecom operator Orange dropped its licensing deal with its Israeli mobile operator, Partner Communications. According to BDS, the deal was the result of its six-year campaign by unions and activists in France, Egypt, Tunisia and Morocco. AXA Divest (2016–present) The French multinational insurance agent AXA has since 2016 been the target of a campaign urging it to divest from Israeli arms manufacturer Elbit Systems and five major Israeli banks. AXA has, according to BDS, a responsible investment policy that forbids it from investing in, among other things, manufacturers of cluster bombs, and Elbit Systems makes cluster bombs. According to a report by corporate responsibility watchdog SumOfUs, AXA's involvement in Israel's occupation could expose it to criminal prosecution. Red Card Israel (2016–present) Red Card Israel is BDS's campaign to get Israel expelled from FIFA due to alleged violations against Palestinian football and because several Israeli teams from the Israeli-occupied West Bank are allowed to play in its national league, the Israel Football Association. In 2018, it scored a victory as Argentina's national football team canceled an upcoming friendly game in Jerusalem. Puma (2018–present) In July 2018, sportswear manufacturer Puma signed a four-year sponsorship deal with the Israel Football Association (IFA). The IFA includes six football clubs based in Israeli settlements. BDS wrote an open letter signed by over 200 Palestinian sports clubs urging the brand to end its sponsorship of teams in the settlements. The sportswear manufacturer did not, and BDS therefore launched a boycott campaign under the slogan "Give Puma the Boot". In October 2019, activists placed unauthorized posters in the London underground urging people to boycott Puma. Transport for London said that it was flyposting and that it would immediately take action against the posters. In February 2020, Malaysia's largest university, Universiti Teknologi MARA, announced that it would end its sponsorship deal with Puma due to its involvement in Israel. Boycott Eurovision 2019 (2018–2019) BDS attempted to get artists to boycott Eurovision Song Contest 2019 because it was held in Israel. BDS accused Israel of using Eurovision to whitewash and distract attention from alleged war crimes against Palestinians. It also accused Israel of pinkwashing, due to Eurovision's popularity among LGBTQ fans. Although none of the acts scheduled to appear pulled out, activists considered the efforts successful due to the media coverage generated. American pop star Madonna was one of the artists BDS urged to cancel her appearance at Eurovision. Roger Waters of Pink Floyd also tried to get her to cancel, saying that it "normalizes the occupation, the apartheid, the ethnic cleansing, the incarceration of children, the slaughter of unarmed protesters." Madonna refused, saying that she would neither "stop playing music to suit someone's political agenda" nor "stop speaking out against violations of human rights wherever in the world they may be." In September 2018, 140 artists (including six Israelis) signed an open letter in support of a boycott of Eurovision. In response to the calls for boycott, over 100 celebrities, including English actor Stephen Fry, signed a statement against boycotting Eurovision in Israel: "We believe the cultural boycott movement is an affront to both Palestinians and Israelis who are working to advance peace through compromise, exchange, and mutual recognition". Hatari, the band representing Iceland in the contest, held up Palestinian banners in front of the cameras at the event's finals, defying the EBU's rules against political gestures. BDS was not mollified: "Artists who insist on crossing the Palestinian boycott picket line, playing in Tel Aviv in defiance of our calls, cannot offset the harm they do to our human rights struggle by 'balancing' their complicit act with some project with Palestinians. Palestinian civil society overwhelmingly rejects this fig-leafing," it said. In North America, many public and private universities have large financial holdings. Campus BDS activists have therefore organized campaigns asking universities to divest from companies complicit in the occupation. These campaigns often revolve around attempts to pass divestment resolutions in the school's student government. While few universities have heeded the call to divest, activists believe the resolutions are symbolically important. The discussions of divestment spur campuswide interest in BDS, which movement organizers use to their advantage by advocating for an unfamiliar cause. In 2009, Hampshire College became the first U.S. college to divest from companies profiting from Israel's occupation as its board of trustees voted to sell its shares in Caterpillar Inc., Terex, Motorola, ITT, General Electric, and United Technologies. Hampshire's president said that SJP's campaigning brought about the decision, but members of the board of trustees denied that. In 2010, the UC Berkeley Student Senate passed a resolution calling for the university to divest from companies that conduct business with Israel. The resolution was vetoed by the Student Body president, who said it was "a symbolic attack on a specific community." In 2013, another divestment bill passed but the university stated that it would not divest. Many divestment campaigns began in the early 2000s, years before BDS was founded. In some cases, it has taken them over a decade to get resolutions passed. For example, at the University of Michigan, a student group called Students Allied for Freedom and Equality (SAFE) began campaigning for a divestment resolution in 2002. It was brought up for the eleventh time in 2017 and passed 23–17 with five abstentions. Reportedly, the hearing on the resolution was the longest in student government history. In December, the Board of Regents at the university rejected the resolution, stating that "we strongly oppose any action involving the boycott, divestment or sanction of Israel." In 2002, students at Columbia University began promoting a divestment resolution; a non-binding[failed verification] student resolution passed in 2020. The resolution called for the university "to boycott and divest from companies that "profit from or engage in the State of Israel's acts towards Palestinians". Columbia rejected the resolution[failed verification]; explaining this decision[clarification needed], President Lee Bollinger wrote that Columbia "should not change its investment policies on the basis of particular views about a complex policy issue, especially when there is no consensus across the University community about that issue" and that divestment questions would be resolved by the university's Advisory Committee. In 2019, Brown University became the first Ivy league university whose student government passed a non-binding[failed verification] divestment resolution, with 69% of the students (representing 27.5% of the student body) voting in favor and 31% against. Brown rejected the resolution; explaining this decision, President Christina Paxson wrote: "Brown's mission is to advance knowledge and understanding through research, analysis and debate. Its role is not to take sides on contested geopolitical issues." Nevertheless, on 9 March 2020, the university Advisory Committee on Corporate Responsibility in Investment Policies confirmed an official recommendation to Paxson and the corporation, the university's highest governing body, to divest from "any company that profits from the Israeli occupation of Palestinian land" and referred to the United Nations Human Rights Council's list of possible criteria for divestment contained in a report on the List of companies operating in West Bank settlements. BDS opponents often focus on the supposed divisiveness debates about divestment resolutions cause. According to Nelson, the primary effect divestment resolutions have is the promotion of anti-Israel (and sometimes antisemitic) sentiment within student bodies, faculty, and academic departments. Some opponents argue that activists promoting divestment resolutions often cheat or operate clandestinely. They claim that resolutions are often sprung with minimal notice, giving the opposition no time to react, that activists bring outsiders to influence opinion or to vote on university resolutions even when this is unauthorized, and that activists change the text of resolutions once passed. Judea Pearl believes that to BDS supporters it is irrelevant whether a particular resolution passes or not because the real goal is to keep the debate alive and influence future policymakers to find fault with Israel. Groups affiliated with BDS hold events known as Israel Apartheid Week (IAW) in February or March each year. IAW began at the University of Toronto in 2006, but has since spread and in 2014 was held on 250 campuses worldwide. IAW aims to increase public awareness of the Palestinians' history and the racial discrimination they experience and to build support for BDS. IAW allows activists to frame the issue as one of racial oppression and discrimination rather than a "conflict" between two equal sides. According to BDS's opponents, IAW intends to link Israel to evils such as apartheid and racism. Universities have been primary targets of the BDS movement, according to English professor Cary Nelson, "because faculty and students can become passionate about justice, sometimes without adequate knowledge about the facts and consequences. ... [U]niversities also offer the potential for small numbers of BDS activists to leverage institutional status and reputation for a more significant cultural and political impact." BDS argues that there is a close connection between Israeli academic institutions and the Israeli state, including its military, and that an academic boycott is warranted. Modern weapon systems and military doctrines used by the Israeli military are developed at Israeli universities that also use a system of economic merit and scholarship to students who serve in the army. Like the BDS-led cultural boycott, the academic boycott targets Israeli institutions and not individual academics. The events and activities BDS encourages academics to avoid include academic events convened or co-sponsored by Israel, research and development activities that involve institutional cooperation agreements with Israeli universities, projects that receive funding from Israel or its lobby groups, addresses and talks by officials from Israeli academic institutions at international venues, study-abroad programmes in Israel for international students, and publishing in Israeli academic journals or serving on such journals' review boards. Thousands of scholars, including the theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking, and a large number of academic and student associations have endorsed the academic boycott against Israel. Some of the U.S. endorsers are the American Studies Association (ASA), the American Anthropological Association, the Association for Asian American Studies, the Association for Humanist Sociology, the National Association of Chicana and Chicano Studies, the Native American and Indigenous Studies Association, the Middle East Studies Association, the National Women's Studies Association along with dozens of other student associations. In 2007, the American Jewish Committee ran an ad in The Times titled "Boycott Israeli universities? Boycott ours, too!" It was initially signed by 300 university presidents and denounced the academic boycott against Israel. It argued that an academic boycott would be "utterly antithetical to the fundamental values of the academy, where we will not hold intellectual exchange hostage to the political disagreements of the moment." Phil Gasper, writing for the International Socialist Review, argued that the ad grossly misrepresented the argument proponents of the boycott make and that its characterization of it as "political disagreements of the moment" was trivializing. In December 2013, ASA joined the boycott of Israeli academic institutions. Israel is the only nation the ASA has boycotted in the 52 years since its founding. Judea Pearl lambasted the ASA's endorsement of the boycott and wrote that it had a "non-academic character". On 23 March 2022, the Middle East Studies Association (MESA) voted 768 to 167 to endorse an academic boycott of Israeli institutions for their "complicity in Israel's violations of human rights and international law through their provision of direct assistance to the military and intelligence establishments." MESA has 2,700 members and over 60 institutional members. In 2014, it voted 265 to 79 to allow its members to support BDS. After the vote, Brandeis University severed ties with MESA, citing "academic freedom". In 2018, after previously agreeing to write a letter of recommendation for a student, associate professor John Cheney-Lippold at the University of Michigan declined to write it after discovering the student was planning to study in Israel. After critics called a letter to the student antisemitic, Cheney-Lippold said he supported BDS for human rights reasons and rejected antisemitism. Guidelines from PACBI say faculty "should not accept to write recommendations for students hoping to pursue studies in Israel". 58 civil rights, religious, and education advocacy organizations called on the university to sanction Cheney-Lippold. University officials ended the controversy by disciplining him and issuing a public statement that read in part, "Withholding letters of recommendation based on personal views does not meet our university's expectations for supporting the academic aspirations of our students. Conduct that violates this expectation and harms students will not be tolerated and will be addressed with serious consequences. Such actions interfere with our students' opportunities, violate their academic freedom and betray our university's educational mission." According to PACBI, "Cultural institutions are part and parcel of the ideological and institutional scaffolding of Israel's regime of occupation, settler-colonialism and apartheid against the Palestinian people." Therefore, they argue, Israel should be subjected to a cultural boycott like the one against apartheid-era South Africa. According to BDS, most but not all Israeli cultural institutions support "the hegemonic Zionist establishment" and are thus implicated in Israel's crimes and should be boycotted. BDS distinguishes between individuals and institutions. Unlike the cultural boycott against South Africa, BDS's cultural boycott does not target individuals. BDS supports the right to freedom of expression and rejects boycotts based on identity or opinion. Thus, Israeli cultural products are not per se subject to boycott. But if a person represents Israel, aids its efforts to "rebrand" itself, or is commissioned by an official Israeli body, then their activities are subject to the institutional boycott BDS calls for. BDS also argues for a boycott of "normalization projects", which it defines as: Cultural activities, projects, events and products involving Palestinians and/or other Arabs on one side and Israelis on the other (whether bi- or multilateral) that are based on the false premise of symmetry/parity between the oppressors and the oppressed or that assume that both colonizers and colonized are equally responsible for the "conflict" are intellectually dishonest and morally reprehensible forms of normalization that ought to be boycotted. The only Israeli-Palestinian projects BDS favors are those in which the Israeli party recognizes the three rights enumerated in the "BDS Call" and that also emphasize resistance to oppression over coexistence. BDS strongly discourages "fig-leafing" by international culture workers—attempts to "compensate" for participating in Israeli events using "balancing gestures" that promote Palestinian rights. BDS argues that fig-leafing contributes to the false perception of symmetry between the colonial oppressor and the colonized.[self-published source][better source needed] The cultural boycott has been supported by thousands of artists around the world, such as musician Roger Waters and American author Alice Walker. In 2015, more than 1,000 British artists pledged their support for the boycott, drawing parallels to the one against South African apartheid: Israel's wars are fought on the cultural front too. Its army targets Palestinian cultural institutions for attack and prevents the free movement of cultural workers. Its own theatre companies perform to settler audiences on the West Bank—and those same companies tour the globe as cultural diplomats, in support of 'Brand Israel'. During South African apartheid, musicians announced they weren't going to 'play Sun City'. Now we are saying, in Tel Aviv, Netanya, Ashkelon or Ariel, we won't play music, accept awards, attend exhibitions, festivals or conferences, run masterclasses or workshops until Israel respects international law and ends its colonial oppression of the Palestinians. Many artists are not heeding BDS's call not to perform in Israel, arguing that: Performing in a country is not the same as supporting that country's government; By performing in Israel, artists have a chance to tell the Israelis what they feel about their government and that can help bring peace; By not performing in Israel, artists sever contacts with Israel's strongly pro-Palestinian cultural community, which risks hardening opposition to the Palestinian struggle among Israelis; BDS supporters like Roger Waters and Brian Eno who urge fellow artists not to perform in Israel are engaging in a form of bullying. The organizers of the weeklong Rototom Sunsplash music festival held in Spain in 2015 canceled the scheduled appearance of Jewish American rapper Matisyahu after he refused to sign a statement supporting a Palestinian state. Matisyahu said that it was "appalling and offensive" that he was singled out as the "one publicly Jewish-American artist". After criticism from Spain's daily paper El País, the Spanish government, and Jewish organizations, the organizers apologized to Matisyahu and reinvited him to perform, saying they "made a mistake, due to the boycott and the campaign of pressure, coercion and threats employed by the BDS País Valencià". In 2017, a pro-Israel organization brought charges against eight members of the BDS movement over their role in the 2015 action against Matisyahu. On 11 January 2021, the Valencia Appeals Court acquitted the BDS members of the charges. The court said that the BDS members' action was "protected by freedom of expression and that their intention was not to discriminate against Matisyahu because he is Jewish but to protest Israel's policies". In July 2019, after the Open Source Festival in Düsseldorf disinvited the American rapper Talib Kweli for refusing to denounce the BDS movement, 103 artists, including Peter Gabriel, Naomi Klein and Boots Riley, signed an open letter condemning Germany's attempts to impose restrictions on artists who support Palestinian rights. In 2019, the parliament of Germany issued a resolution that advocated against financing any project that called for a boycott of Israel on the grounds that the BDS movement was antisemitic. Twenty-five institutions, including the Goethe Institute, the Federal Cultural Foundation, the Berlin Deutsches Theater, the German Academic Exchange Service Artists Exchange, the Berliner Festspiele, and the Einstein Forum issued a joint statement in 2019, after intensive internal debates, that "accusations of antisemitism are being misused to push aside important voices and to distort critical positions". In 2022, more than 30 acts withdrew from the Sydney Festival to protest a $20,000 sponsorship agreement with the Israeli Embassy in Australia. Israel's Deputy Ambassador to Australia Ron Gerstenfeld condemned the BDS movement's "antisemitic" and "aggressive campaign" against performers. In June 2015, a RAND Corporation study estimated that a successful BDS campaign against Israel could cost the Israeli economy a cumulative $47 billion over ten years. The figure was based on a model that examined previous international boycotts; the report noted that making an assessment of BDS's economic effects is difficult because evidence of the effectiveness of sanctions is mixed. A leaked Israeli government report estimated a more modest $1.4 billion per year. Andrew Pessin and Doron Ben-Atar have argued that since Israel's gross domestic product nearly doubled between 2006 and 2015 and foreign investment in Israel tripled during the same period, BDS has not had a significant impact on Israel's economy. A 2015 Israeli Knesset report concluded that BDS had no discernible impact on Israel despite the vulnerability of its export-dependent economy to such a campaign, and that exports to Europe had doubled since the launch of the movement. Adam Reuter of the Israeli Reuter Meydan Investment House and founder of the financial risk management firm Financial Immunities has argued that boycotts of consumer goods are ineffective because 95% of Israel's exports are business-to-business. In 2018, Reuter wrote that a years-long study of the BDS movement's effects on the Israeli economy by Financial Immunities that began in 2010 calculated that the proportion of economic damage to Israel was 0.004%. As part of the study, managers of Israeli companies were questioned over how much economic damage they had sustained, with only 0.75% of companies reporting any identifiable economic damage. The rate of damage for all of them was less than 10% of their turnover, most of which took place during the 2014 Gaza War. Nevertheless, two organizations divested from Israel in 2014: Luxembourg's state pension fund, FDC, excluded eight major Israeli firms, including Bank Hapoalim, Bank Leumi, AFI Group, and the American firm Motorola Solutions as part of its socially responsible investments program, and Norway's YMCA-YWCA announced that it would support a "broad economic boycott of goods and services from Israel and Israeli settlements". According to Haaretz columnist and Brown University student Jared Samilow, BDS's most significant impact is the social cost it puts upon Jews living outside Israel. Reviewing four lists of achievements published by the BDS movement between July 2017 and December 2018, analyst Amin Prager concluded that, with some exceptions, the impact was limited but that BDS's greatest potential effect arises from its long-term aim to influence discourse about Israel's legitimacy and international standing. In November 2020, Haaretz columnist Anshel Pfeffer wrote that BDS was a total failure in economic terms and mainly served as a useful tool of the Israeli right. Citing the surge in foreign trade and relations Israel experienced since 2005, including the normalization agreements with Arab Gulf countries, Pfeffer called BDS "the most failed, overhyped and exaggerated campaign of the first two decades of the 21st century" and a "minor creed in the cultural and identity shadow wars on the Internet and a tiny handful of campuses in the west", writing that it "failed on every front with the minor exception of bullying a handful of singers and academics not to take part in concerts or conferences in Israel." He claimed that the Israeli right was eager to keep the spectre of the movement's threat alive to try to keep a siege mentality in place among the Israeli population. The Israel lobby considers BDS an "existential threat" to Israel, and has organized a counter-campaign to oppose BDS, relying on strategies of defamation, intimidation, and lawfare. Several groups have been created specifically to combat BDS. In 2010, the Jewish Federations of North America and the Jewish Council for Public Affairs set up the Israel Action Network (IAN) with a pledge of $6 million. In June 2015, pro-Israel megadonors Sheldon Adelson and Haim Saban held a meeting with representatives of 50 Jewish organizations, raising $50 million to fight BDS on U.S. campuses. The same year, the Maccabee Task Force was set up, led by David Brog, with the mission "to ensure that those who seek to delegitimize Israel and demonize the Jewish people are confronted, combatted and defeated". Creative Campaign for Peace says it supports and informs artists scheduled to play in Israel, claiming it just has to "give the facts". One tactic used to silence activists in academia is blacklisting. This can cause students and untenured faculty, who worry about reprisals and negative publicity, to refrain from activism. The best-known blacklist is the anonymous website Canary Mission, which publishes photos and personal information about students and faculty who promote BDS. The website has threatened to send students' names to prospective employees. According to the Intercept, the website has made it harder for activists to organize activities because people worry that they will end up on it. Activists listed on the site have reported receiving death threats. Another blacklist was the now defunct outlawbds.com, operated by the Israeli private intelligence agency Psy-Group. It sent threatening emails to BDS activists in New York, warning them that they had been identified as "BDS promoter[s]". Many activists have attempted to defuse blacklisting's chilling effect by treating inclusion on blacklists as a badge of honor or by attempting to get themselves blacklisted. The operators of the blacklists are often anonymous. According to The Forward's investigation, the blacklist "SJP Uncovered" was funded by the Israel on Campus Coalition. According to Haaretz, the Canary Mission was funded by the Jewish Community Federation of San Francisco and the Jewish Community Foundation of Los Angeles, and operated by the Israeli nonprofit Megamot Shalom. In response to BDS, several legislatures have passed laws designed to hinder people and organizations from boycotting Israel and goods from Israeli settlements. Proponents of such laws say that they are necessary because BDS is a form of antisemitism. After passage of these laws, Dickinson, Texas, residents found they had to certify they would not boycott Israel in order to qualify for relief for damages caused by Hurricane Harvey; a math teacher in Kansas had to pledge not to boycott Israel as a condition for being paid her state salary; and an Arkansas newspaper was asked to sign an anti-boycott pledge in order to be paid for the advertising it ran for Arkansas State University. David Kaye, the UN special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, has said that boycotts have long been regarded as a legitimate form of expression, that such legislation against BDS appears to "repress a particular political viewpoint" while failing international legal criteria for "permissible restraints on speech" insofar as these laws contradict Article 19(2) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), a covenant to which the United States is a signatory. In the U.S., anti-BDS laws have been passed. Two federal acts have been introduced, the 2017 Israel Anti-Boycott Act and the 2019 Combating BDS Act, both intended to deprive entities participating in boycotts of Israel of government contract work. In several states, these laws have been challenged on First Amendment grounds for violating citizens' freedom of speech. Supporters of anti-BDS statutes argue that boycotts are economic activity, not speech, and that laws prohibiting government contracts with groups that boycott Israel are similar to other anti-discrimination laws that have been upheld as constitutional under the Commerce Clause. Opponents, such as the ACLU, contend that the laws are not analogous to anti-discrimination legislation because they target only boycotts of Israel. Texas, Kansas, and Arizona have amended their anti-BDS laws in response to lawsuits. In a 2022 University of Maryland Critical Issues Poll, 68% of respondents said they opposed laws criminalizing boycotts of Israel. Israel has enacted two anti-BDS laws: one in 2011 that criminalizes calls to boycott Israel, and one in 2017 that prohibits foreigners who call for such boycotts from entering Israel or its settlements. In 2019, Israel caused some controversy by denying entry to two BDS-supporting U.S. Representatives, Rashida Tlaib and Ilhan Omar. From 2016 to 2019, Israel allocated over $100 million in funding to counter BDS, which it considers a strategic threat. In 2016, Israel's ambassador to the UN, Danny Danon, stated that Israel was in many countries "so that it will simply be illegal to boycott Israel." In 2020, it was revealed that an Israeli state-funded lobby group had been instrumental in pushing for anti-BDS laws in many U.S. states. In 2018, a new code of ethics was adopted for Israeli universities. The code prohibits faculty from calling for or participating in boycotts of Israel. In 2010, the Israeli think tank Reut Institute presented a paper, "The Delegitimization Challenge: Creating a Political Firewall", at the influential Herzliya Conference. It recommended enlisting intelligence agencies to attack and sabotage what it believed where international "hubs" of the movement in London, Madrid, Toronto, and other cities. In a related paper, the think tank called for pro-Israel advocates to "out, name and shame" Israel's critics and to "frame them...as anti-peace, anti-Semitic, or dishonest purveyors of double standards." In a leaked report from 2017, "The Assault On Israel's Legitimacy The Frustrating 20X Question: Why Is It Still Growing?", Reut recommended making a distinction between hardcore anti-Zionist "instigators" and the "long tail": people who are critical of Israel but do not seek its "elimination". The instigators should be "handled uncompromisingly, publicly or covertly", the report stated, but the long tail should be won over by persuasion, as a heavy-handed approach would risk driving them closer to the "anti-Israel camp". In Israel, the counter-campaign is led by the Ministry of Strategic Affairs. In 2015, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced that the ministry would receive over 100 million shekels as well as ten employees to fight BDS. Some of the funds have been used to buy space in the Israeli press to promote its anti-BDS message. In June 2016, Haaretz reported that the ministry was going to establish a "dirty tricks" unit to "establish, hire or tempt nonprofit organizations or groups not associated with Israel, in order to disseminate" negative information about BDS supporters. The news came on the heels of a report that Israel's efforts to fight BDS had been ineffectual, in part because the responsibility had been transferred to the Strategic Affairs Ministry from the Foreign Ministry. "Despite receiving expanded authority in 2013 to run the government's campaign against the delegitimization and boycott efforts against Israel, the Strategic Affairs Ministry did not make full use of its budget and had no significant achievements in this area," Haaretz quotes the report as saying. "In 2015, it still did not carry out its work plans." In 2017, the cabinet allocated 128 million shekels over three years for a front company but it spent only 13 million with little to show by way of results. On 21 March 2017, Strategic Affairs Minister Gilad Erdan announced a plan to set up a database of Israeli citizens who support BDS. The database would be compiled using open sources such as Facebook and social media posts. Attorney General Avichai Mandelblit objected, saying that only the Israeli secret police, Shin Bet, has the authority to monitor citizens in that way. Arab Israeli Knesset member Ayman Odeh slammed the idea, saying the government was afraid of a nonviolent struggle against occupation. In 2019, the ministry announced that its economic campaign against BDS had shut down 30 financial accounts of BDS-promoting groups. In October 2020, +972 Magazine reported that the Ministry of Strategic Affairs paid The Jerusalem Post over NIS 100,000 in 2019 to publish a special supplement titled Unmasking BDS in order to delegitimise the BDS movement. The ministry was closed down in 2021 by the 36th government and merged into the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Concert operated as a joint venture with the now closed Ministry for Strategic Affairs but failed in its objective to promote public diplomacy of Israel. In January 2022, it was decided to restart Concert and allocate $31 million over four years with matching contributions sourced from civil organizations. The Israeli government has threatened and harassed BDS activists. In September 2009, Mohammed Othman was detained after returning from a trip to Norway where he discussed BDS with Norwegian officials. He was released after four months, after an international campaign in which Amnesty International threatened to declare him a prisoner of conscience. BNC member Jamal Juma was also detained for several weeks in 2009. No charges were leveled against either of them. In March 2016, Israeli minister Yisrael Katz stated that Israel should employ "targeted civil eliminations" against BDS leaders. According to Amnesty International, the term alluded to the policy of targeted assassinations that Israel uses against members of Palestinian armed groups. Erdan called for BDS leaders to "pay the price" for their work. In response, Amnesty International issued a statement expressing its concern about the safety and liberty of Barghouti and other BDS activists. Barghouti has been the target of several travel bans and in 2019 the Israeli government announced that it was preparing to expel him. In July 2020, Israeli soldiers arrested Mahmoud Nawajaa, General Coordinator of BNC, in his home near Ramallah and detained him for 19 days. Academics Rhys Crilley and Ilan Manor have said that "as long as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict endures so Israel's global reputation will become poorer" and cite a number of global surveys, including the 2006 Nation Brand Index, which found that "Israel is the worst brand in the world...Israel's brand is by a considerable margin the most negative we have ever measured" due to its long-running conflict with the Palestinians, which, in combination with BDS activities, has led to its being increasingly associated with apartheid and war crimes. The Israeli government initiated "Brand Israel", a campaign to improve Israel's image by showing its "prettier face", downplaying religion, and avoiding discussing the conflict with the Palestinians. Brand Israel promotes Israeli culture abroad and also seeks to influence "opinion-formers" by inviting them on free trips to Israel. BDS attempts to counter the campaign by urging people not to participate in its activities. For example, in 2016 the Israeli government offered 26 Oscars-nominated celebrities 10-day free trips to Israel worth at least $15,000 to $18,000 per person. BDS activists took out an ad reading "#SkipTheTrip. Don't endorse Israeli apartheid" and urged the celebrities not to go. BDS considers the Israeli government's designation of the movement as a "strategic threat" proof of its success. Barghouti believes that the only effect Israel's heavy-handed measures will have is to speed the end of Israel's occupation and apartheid policies, and that its attempt to crush BDS will fail. He argues that BDS has dragged Israel into a "battlefield" over human rights, where its massive arsenal of intimidation, smears, threats, and bullying is rendered as ineffective as its nuclear weapons. Israel's extremism and its willingness to sacrifice its last masks of "democracy" will only help BDS grow, he argues. Hitchcock speculates that many counter-measures might backfire, especially if they are seen as infringing on the right to free speech. As an example, she gives Trump's 2019 order to federal agencies to use a definition of antisemitism that includes speech critical of Israel when investigating certain types of discrimination complaints. Critics contended that the intent was to crack down on pro-BDS campus activism, and their critique found its way into mainstream periodicals like The New York Times, The New Yorker, and the Los Angeles Times. A 2022 Pew Research Center poll found that 84% of Americans did not know much about BDS. Of the 15% that knew something about the movement, only a third supported it. BDS enjoys overwhelming support among Palestinians living in the occupied Palestinian territories. In a poll from 2015, 86% supported the boycott campaign and 64% believed that boycotting would help end the occupation. The number of Palestinian civil society organizations that support BDS has been rising steadily since its inception in 2005. Some of the Palestinian NGOs supporting BDS are umbrella organizations, such as the Palestinian NGOs Network, which has 135 members as of 2020. According to Melanie Meinzer, many Palestinian NGOs refrain from endorsing BDS because their dependence on donors constrain their politics. According to Finkelstein, BDS is exaggerating its level of support and many Palestinian NGOs endorsing it are small, one-person NGOs. Palestinian trade unions have been very supportive of BDS; the 290,000-member Palestine General Federation of Trade Unions was one of the original signatories of the BDS Call. In 2011, the Palestinian Trade Union Coalition for BDS was created with the objective of promoting BDS among trade unions internally. Leading voices in the Palestinian diaspora, such as Ali Abunimah, Joseph Massad, and Linda Sarsour have thrown their weight behind BDS, as have several Palestinian members of the Israeli parliament, including Haneen Zoabi, Basel Ghattas, and Jamal Zahalka. The Palestinian leadership's position on BDS is ambivalent. President Mahmoud Abbas does not support a general boycott against Israel and has said that the Palestinians do not either. Barghouti has disputed Abbas's statement, saying that "[t]here is no Palestinian political party, trade union, NGO network or mass organization that does not strongly support BDS. Abbas does, however, support a boycott of goods produced in Israeli settlements, and the Palestinian Authority has at times used boycotts to gain leverage on Israel. For example, in 2015, it imposed a boycott on six major Israeli food manufacturers to retaliate against Israel withholding Palestinian tax funds. The second-highest authority of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), the Palestinian Central Council, has meanwhile announced its intention to: Adopt the BDS movement and call on states around the world to impose sanctions on Israel to put an end to its flagrant violations of international law, its continued aggression against the Palestinian people, and to the apartheid regime [Israel has] imposed on them. A handful of Palestinian scholars have opposed the academic boycott of Israel. Examples include former Al-Quds University president Sari Nusseibeh, who acknowledges that his view is the minority viewpoint among his colleagues. Some Palestinian academics have criticized Nusseibeh's collaboration with Hebrew University, seeing it as a form of normalization. Matthew Kalman speculated in The New York Times that opposition to boycott is more widespread among Palestinian academics but that they are afraid to speak out. Palestinian-Israeli video blogger Nas Daily has expressed opposition to boycotts of Israel. BDS has in turn denounced him for engaging in normalization. BDS has received support from South African organizations and public figures that were involved in the struggle against apartheid. Such support is symbolically important for BDS as it tries to position itself as the spiritual successor of the anti-apartheid movement. The South African archbishop Desmond Tutu (1931–2021), known for his anti-apartheid and human rights activism, endorsed BDS during his lifetime. He came to this conclusion after visiting the Palestinian territories, comparing the conditions there to conditions in apartheid-era South Africa, and suggesting that Palestinian goals should be achieved by the same means used in South Africa. Foxman has criticized Tutu's statements, claiming they convey "bigotry against the Jewish homeland and the Jewish people." In 2012, the South African African National Congress (ANC) party gave BDS its blessing, stating, "the Palestinians are the victims and the oppressed in the conflict with Israel." The Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) also supports BDS, fully endorsing it in July 2011. During the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict, COSATU vowed to "intensify" its support for BDS, picketing Woolworths for stocking Israeli goods. The membership of the Green Party of Canada voted to endorse BDS in 2016, despite strong objections from the party's leader, Elizabeth May, who threatened to resign. In June 2018, the Socialist International declared its support for BDS. Some political parties have supported BDS, such as Australia's NSW Greens and Canada's Québec solidaire. On 7 February 2019, Copenhagen mayor of technical and environmental affairs Ninna Hedeager Olsen of the Danish party Enhedslisten gave three BDS activists known as the Humboldt 3 an award for their work "to reveal the Apartheid-like nature of the Israeli regime and its systematic violation of international law." In April 2014, the UK's National Union of Teachers, the EU's largest teacher's union, passed a resolution backing boycotts against Israel. In July of that year, the UK's Unite the Union voted to join BDS. In December 2014, UAW Local 2865, a local chapter of the United Auto Workers union representing over 14,000 workers at the University of California, adopted a resolution in support of BDS with 65 percent of the vote in favor. It became the first major U.S. labor union to endorse BDS. A year after the vote, the UAW International Executive Board (IEB) informed UAW Local 2865 that it had nullified the vote. The opposition to the BDS resolution came from a small pro-Israel group known as the Informed Grads, represented by the global law firm Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher. IEB said that the endorsement of the boycott would interfere with the "flow of commerce to and from earmarked companies." UAW 2865's BDS Caucus repudiated the IEB's argument, saying that the IEB cared more about the "flow of commerce" than solidarity with Palestinian labor unions. The IEB further alleged that the resolution was antisemitic; the BDS Caucus called the allegation "the same baseless accusations of anti-Semitism frequently attributed to anyone who is critical of Israel." In April 2015, the Confédération des syndicats nationaux, Quebec, Canada, representing 325,000 in nearly 2,000 unions, voted to join the campaign for BDS and support a military embargo against Israel. On 11 September 2019, the British Trades Union Congress passed a motion titled "Palestine: supporting rights to self-determination", called for the prioritization of "Palestinians' rights to justice and equality, including by applying these principles based on international law to all UK trade with Israel", and declared its opposition to "any proposed solution for Palestinians, including Trump's 'deal', not based on international law recognising their collective rights to self-determination and to return to their homes". Former Spanish Prime Minister José María Aznar said that BDS applies a double standard to Israel and that it is therefore antisemitic. In his view, BDS wants to "empty" Israel of Jews. In 2016, Israel's President Reuven Rivlin compared boycotts to violence and incitement. He asserted that boycotts only divide people, that BDS delegitimizes Israel, and that some parts of the movement seek Israel's destruction. Political parties that oppose BDS include the Liberal Party of Australia and both major U.S. political parties. A common reason given for opposing BDS is that it attacks Israel's legitimacy and fosters antisemitism. In 2017, the Munich city council barred public funding or space for BDS supporters. This position was challenged in court and a lower court's ruling was overturned on appeal in 2020. In January 2022, a German federal court denied the council's appeal, stating that German law "guarantees everyone the right to freely express and disseminate their opinion." In May 2017, the Berlin branch of the Social Democratic Party of Germany passed a resolution condemning BDS as antisemitic. In 2017, all 50 U.S. state governors and the mayor of Washington, D.C., signed on to "Governors United Against BDS", an initiative sponsored by the American Jewish Committee that condemns BDS as "antithetical to our values and the values of our respective states" and emphasizes "our support for Israel as a vital U.S. ally, important economic partner and champion of freedom." On 17 May 2017, Israeli PM Benjamin Netanyahu encouraged Danish minister of foreign affairs Anders Samuelsen to stop funding Palestinian organizations supporting the BDS movement. Two days later, the Danish ministry of foreign affairs began an investigation of the 24 organizations in Israel and Palestine that Denmark supports. On 24 May, Netanyahu called Danish PM Lars Løkke Rasmussen to complain about Denmark's funding activities in the area. In December 2017, the Danish ministry of foreign affairs announced that Denmark would fund fewer organizations and that the conditions for obtaining Danish funds needed to be "stricter and clearer". Michael Aastrup Jensen, spokesman of foreign affairs for Venstre, said, "Israel has objected emphatically. And it is a problem that Israel sees it as a problem, so now we clear up the situation and change our support". In a response to Ireland's progressing of the Control of Economic Activity (Occupied Territories) Bill 2018, Netanyahu issued a press release condemning the bill as an attempt to support BDS and to "harm the State of Israel". According to the Israeli Foreign Ministry, the Irish ambassador said that the Irish government opposes BDS. Former British Prime Ministers Tony Blair, David Cameron, Theresa May, and Boris Johnson have all opposed or condemned boycotts of Israel. Holocaust historian Deborah Lipstadt has argued that if the boycott of Israel were the main goal, then we "would all have to give up our iPhones" because a lot of technology is created in Israel. According to Lipstadt, BDS's objective is to make anything coming out of Israel seem toxic but it is not the case that "any kid who supports B.D.S. is ipso facto an anti-Semite". The Arab Council for Regional Integration, a group of 32 Arab intellectuals, repudiated BDS at a London conference in November 2019. It said that BDS has cost the Arab nations billions in trade, "undercut Palestinian efforts to build institutions for a future state, and torn at the Arab social fabric, as rival ethnic, religious and national leaders increasingly apply tactics that were first tested against Israel." At the council, Kuwaiti information minister Sami Abdul-Latif Al-Nisf spoke about the opportunity costs to Palestinians, saying that outsize focus on BDS draws money and attention away from investment in Palestinian professionals such as doctors and engineers. Noam Chomsky has argued against BDS. His principal argument is that its philosophy is intellectually indolent and designed to make the boycotters feel good more than to actually help any Palestinians. Chomsky also rejects the analogy between apartheid South Africa and the State of Israel and BDS's demand for a Palestinian right of return, which he called "a virtual guarantee of failure." In a 2022 interview, Chomsky said that calling Israeli actions toward Palestinians "apartheid" is a "gift to Israel" because "the Occupied Territories are much worse than South Africa." He said BDS "has a mixed record" and "should become "more flexible [and] more thoughtful" about the effects of its actions. He said, "The groundwork is there" and "It is necessary to think carefully about how to carry it forward." Only 10% of American Jews support the BDS movement, according to a 2020 Pew Research poll, but almost a quarter of American Jews under 40 support boycotting Israeli products, according to a 2020 J Street poll. Arnold believes that the difference signals that young progressive American Jews identify with Israel less strongly than older generations. Jewish activists have often played central roles in BDS campaigns, something Barghouti argues refutes the antisemitism allegation against the movement. Maia Hallward attributes BDS's Jewish support to two factors: the long history of social justice activism among Jews and the desire among activists to defuse allegations of antisemitism. Sina Arnold calls it a "form of strategic essentialism", where Jewish activists make themselves visible or are made visible by others. Philip Mendes distinguishes those Jews who recognize Palestinian rights and support Jewish-Arab dialogue from those "unrepresentative token Jews" whom BDS use as an alibi. David Hirsh has written, "Jews too can make anti-Semitic claims ... and play an important, if unwitting, part in preparing the ground for the future emergence of anti-Semitic movement." Noa Tishby wrote, "As Judaism always takes sides with human rights and encourages dissent, I am all for speaking against the Israeli government's policies when you don't like them. But when [Jewish university] students ... cry in support of BDS, I'm not sure what the goal really is, and I am pretty sure they don't know either." The ADL has written that Jewish Voice for Peace "uses its Jewish identity to shield the anti-Israel movement from allegations of anti-Semitism and provide a greater degree of credibility to the anti-Israel movement". JVP replies that its activism is grounded in Jewish values and traditions. Judith Butler sees her BDS activism as "affirming a different Jewishness than the one in whose name the Israeli state claims to speak." Jewish BDS activists have had their Jewish credentials questioned by other Jews and some have reported being called "self-hating Jews", "Nazis", or "traitors". The rabbi David Wolpe has said that Jewish BDS supporters should be shunned: Those Jews who support BDS, or deny the legitimacy of the State of Israel, have no place at the table. They should not be invited to speak at synagogues and churches, universities and other institutions that respect rational discourse. They should have the same intellectual status as Klansmen: purveyors of hate. According to the Israeli Institute for National Security Studies, BDS depicts Israel as a racist, fascist, totalitarian, and apartheid state, which the institute considers defamation and demonization of Israel. They state that boycotting Israeli targets, regardless of their position or connection to the Israel-Palestinian conflict is incitement. In 2007, The Economist called the boycott "flimsy" and ineffective, writing that "blaming Israel alone for the impasse in the occupied territories will continue to strike many outsiders as unfair", and noting that the Palestinian leadership did not support the boycott. By early 2014, however, it wrote that the campaign, "[o]nce derided as the scheming of crackpots", was "turning mainstream" in the eyes of many Israelis. According to Alan Dershowitz, BDS disincentivizes Palestinians from negotiating with Israel. The ADL similarly argues that BDS ignores the Israeli government's willingness to negotiate with the Palestinians and instead favors delegitimization tactics. According to Noa Tishby, BDS's official website is riddled with cherry-picked misinformation about the history of the Arab-Israeli conflict. For example, the website claims, "Israel deliberately attacked Palestinian ... civilian infrastructure", but does not contextualize the claim with Hamas's use of human shields in the Gaza Strip. According to Tishby, reticence about Hamas activities against Israel, radical ideology, and oppression of Palestinians is a pattern on the BDS website. According to Creative Community for Peace, some performers feel harassed or even physically threatened by BDS groups. BDS's opponents argue that it is good for Palestinians in the West Bank that Israeli companies operate there. They say that they offer employment with higher wages than Palestinian employers and that the employees do not feel exploited. It is therefore counterproductive to boycott companies operating in the settlements, they argue. BDS supporters say that many Palestinian workers in settlements earn less than the Israeli minimum wage, that their salaries are often withheld, their social rights denied, and that they are often exposed to danger in the workplace. To work in settlements, Palestinians must obtain work permits from the Israeli Civil Administration. The permits can be annulled at any time—for example, if the workers try to unionize or engage in any kind of political activity.[unreliable source?] BDS supporters further argue that, regardless of the economic costs, the boycott against Israel enjoys overwhelming support among Palestinians. Dershowitz and IAN point to Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas's support of a boycott specific to Israeli businesses that operate in Israeli settlements in the Palestinian Territories over a general boycott of Israel as evidence that BDS is not in the Palestinians' favor. Similarly, Cary Nelson wrote, "BDS actually offers nothing to the Palestinian people, whom it claims to champion. Perhaps that is the single most cruel and deceptive feature of the BDS movement. Its message of hate is a route to war, not peace." Some of BDS's opponents have stated that it has ties to militant organizations. Jonathan Schanzer of the Foundation for Defense of Democracies has argued that there are links between BDS and American supporters of Hamas. In a 2016 congressional hearing, he said that some leaders of organizations that had been "designated, shut down, or held civilly liable for providing material support to the terrorist organization Hamas" appeared to have "pivoted to leadership positions within the American BDS campaign." A 2018 report by the Israeli Strategic Affairs Ministry accused the EU of having given 5 million euros to organizations that "promote anti-Israel delegitimization and boycotts". The report was sharply rebuked by EU officials such as foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini, who called the accusations "vague and unsubstantiated" and said they conflated "terrorism with the boycott issue." A February 2019 report by the Ministry, Terrorists in Suits, claimed that BDS is a "complementary track to terrorism" and that Hamas and Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) members had infiltrated organizations affiliated with BDS to advance "the elimination of the State of Israel as the nation-state of the Jewish people". As examples of such infiltration the report listed Rasmea Odeh, a former member of PFLP who was involved in a bombing in Jerusalem in 1969 and had participated in meetings organized by JVP and SJP, and Leila Khaled, also a former PFLP member who hijacked a plane in 1969 and attempted to hijack one in 1970 and is a well-known figure in BDS. BDS dismissed the report as "wildly fabricated and recycled propaganda" from "the far-right Israeli government". Both the Ministry's reports were cited by an Amnesty report from 2019 as examples of Israel's efforts to delegitimize Israeli and Palestinian human rights defenders and organizations. There is no agreement on whether BDS is antisemitic. The Simon Wiesenthal Center (SWC), Israeli politicians, and others have called BDS antisemitic. In 2019, the German Parliament voted to declare that BDS is antisemitic and cut off funding to any organizations that actively support it. The measure read in part, "The argumentation patterns and methods used by the BDS movement are anti-Semitic." In passing the bill, some lawmakers said some BDS slogans were reminiscent of Nazi propaganda. The Anti-Defamation League has described many of BDS's goals and strategies as antisemitic. According to Ira M. Sheskin of the University of Miami and Ethan Felson of the Jewish Council for Public Affairs, BDS efforts have at times targeted Jewish people who have little or nothing to do with the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. They argue that BDS causes Jews to be blamed for the supposed sins of other Jews. The AMCHA Initiative stated that there is a "strong correlation" between BDS support and antisemitism on U.S. campuses. In September 2019, European Jewish Association founder Menachem Margolin asserted that BDS was "responsible for the vast majority of physical attacks and social media hatred against Jews in Europe." The Jerusalem Declaration on Antisemitism was released by a group of over 200 scholars on 25 March 2021. It states boycotting Israel is not in and of itself antisemitic. The lead drafters are antisemitism scholars in the United States, Israel, Germany and Britain. A separate statement a week earlier by a liberal group of Jewish scholars said that "double standards applied to Israel were not necessarily anti-Semitic." Some opponents argue that there are similarities between BDS and historical boycotts against Jews. For example, in May 2019, the German Bundestag passed a resolution stating that BDS was "reminiscent of the most terrible chapter in German history" and that it triggered memories of the Nazi slogan "Don't buy from Jews." Supporters argue that BDS does not target Jews because boycott targets are selected based on their complicity in Israel's human rights violations, potential for cross-movement solidarity, media appeal, and likelihood of success, not on their national origin or religious identity. According to Barghouti, the majority of companies targeted are non-Israeli foreign companies that operate in Israel and Palestine. BDS supporters frequently allege that accusations of antisemitism against them are deliberately or mistakenly conflating anti-Zionism or criticism of Israel with antisemitism. In 2018, for example, 41 left-wing Jewish groups wrote that BDS was not antisemitic and that it was important to distinguish between antisemitism and criticism of Israel. Butler argues that if BDS is antisemitic, then human rights, which she believes BDS advocates, are also antisemitic. She argues that calling BDS antisemitic is a "lamentable stereotype" about Jews since it assumes that all Jews are politically committed to Israel. Barghouti similarly argues that criticizing BDS as an attack on Jews is "a patently racist assumption" since it assumes that all Jews per se are somehow responsible for Israeli crimes. Human Rights Watch's Wenzel Michalski has said that it is indisputable that some antisemites use the term "Israel" or "Zionist" in place of "Jews", and that this needs to be "called out". At the same time, he adds that presenting boycotts of Israel as antisemitic is misplaced, a flawed way to counter antisemitism. Anti-boycott legislation is, in this view, tantamount to punishing companies that follow their international legal responsibilities by complying with the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights that required them to stop operating in settlements. Critics argue that BDS employs a "double standard" and "singles out" Israel. In their view, it is a form of antisemitism to campaign against Israeli human rights violations when other governments engage in similar or more repressive actions. Marc Greendorfer believes that BDS "applies a unique standard [to Israel] not applied to any other country." BDS supporters reply that by that logic any movement focusing on a single country's human rights violations would be racist; the Anti-Apartheid Movement singled out South Africa while ignoring human rights violations in other African countries and the U.S. sanctions against Iran affect only Iran and not other countries committing similar human rights violations. Barghouti states that BDS focuses on Israeli oppression because it affects the Palestinians and BDS is a Palestinian movement. He rhetorically asks: "If you suffer from the flu and seek medication from it, is it misguided to do so when there are worse diseases out there? Well, the flu is the disease that is afflicting you!" He and other BDS supporters argue that it is the Western world—not BDS—that has a double standard, by not holding Israel accountable for its human rights violations. Jacobs and Soske state that boycotts, divestment, and sanctions is a strategy that does not make sense against all regimes worthy of opprobrium. Pol Pot's regime, Boko Haram, and ISIS would be unlikely to respond to the strategy, but the Israeli government might, they argue. Anti-BDS laws Criticism of the Israeli government Disinvestment from Israel List of boycotts Reactions to Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions According to Hitchcock, occupied in 1967 wasn't in the original BDS Call. She writes: "It is not clear who decided to revise this phrase or exactly why, but it is likely that this phrase was added to clarify that the statement refers only to the West Bank and Gaza and not to the entirety of Palestine including Israel inside the internationally recognized 1967 Green Line... While I was unable to find any credible discussion of how this clarifying phrase came to be inserted into later versions of the BDS call, it seems fair to guess that it may have been added after criticism by those who thought it was too suggestive of a one-state solution. The fact that the original 2005 Call text and wording remains publicly available on the BDS movement website and in other locations may still elicit different readings from different audiences, though." According to Qumsiyeh, the lack of clarity was intentional on the part of the formulators to avoid creating a debate about the call's relation to either a one-state or two-state solution. Barghouti writes "[m]ore than 170", Mazen "171 Palestinian civil society organizations", and Bueckert "a group of 170 organizations". According to Morrison, IAW began in 2005. In 2015, the association’s annual meeting voted in favor of a boycott but it was narrowly overturned by a vote of the full membership in 2016. In 2023, the full membership voted for a boycott. See section Normalization for details Later renamed to Reut Group. Ananth 2013, p. 129. Thrall 2018. "Palestinian civil society calls on Egyptian authorities to immediately release activist Ramy Shaath". BDS Movement. 2 October 2019. Archived from the original on 20 September 2020. Retrieved 29 July 2020. Jackson, Llewellyn & Leonard 2020, p. 169. Barghouti 2011, p. 61. "US Supreme Court will not hear challenge to Arkansas anti-BDS law". Middle East Eye. Washington. 21 February 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2024. The Times of Israel 2019: "The Strategic Affairs Ministry said the Palestinian-led movement that promotes boycotts against Israel is behind the effort."; Holmes 2019: "The event has become a target for the Palestinian-led Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (BDS) campaign."; Trew 2019: "... by activists spearheaded by the Palestinian-led campaign Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (BDS)." Tripp 2013, p. 125: "... the BDS organized urged 'various forms of boycott against Israel until it meets its obligations under international law.'" Tripp 2013, p. 125. Bueckert 2020, p. 203. Hanssen & Ghazal 2020, p. 693: "The Palestinian boycott, divestment and sanctions campaign (BDS) modeled on the anti-apartheid movement in South Africa."; Lamarche 2019, p. 309. Barghouti 2011, p. 12; Jones 2018, p. 199: "This chapter argues that it is also true of the BDS movement's use of the South African analogy, ... ." Fayeq 2009: "On the walls of occupied Palestine, in protests and demonstrations all over the world, Handala has become a symbol of Palestinian struggle and resistance. He is a representative of the refugees and their right of return to their homeland." Goldstein 2021. Arnold 2018, p. 228: "... for example, the 'Simon Wiesenthal Center' entitled one of its information brochures 'BDS: An Anti-Semitic, Anti-Israel Pill.'"; Arnold 2018, p. 228: "Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu ... stated that '[a]ttempts to boycott, divest and sanction Israel, ... , are simply the latest chapter in the long and dark history of anti-Semitism. ... '."; Fishman 2012, p. 412: "... the meaning of the BDS message is of intransigence. ... its message combines anti-Semitism with anti-Zionism." Harawi 2020, p. 184: "Alan Dershowitz argues that the BDS movement has its roots in the Nazi boycott of Jewish establishments in the 1930s."; Nasr & Alkousaa 2019: "The motion said a BDS campaign calling for Israeli products to be labeled with 'Don't Buy' stickers was reminiscent of the Nazi-era boycott of Jewish businesses."; Mendes 2014, p. 89: "Julius (2010) argues that the boycott campaign has a nasty historical resonance given the earlier Nazi boycott of Jews in Germany." Pink 2020. White 2020. Feldman, David (2018). "Boycotts: From the American Revolution to BDS". In Feldman, David (ed.). Boycotts Past and Present: From the American Revolution to the Campaign to Boycott Israel. Springer. pp. 1–19. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-94872-0_1. ISBN 9783319948720. S2CID 158375013. Most supporters of BDS cast their movement as the latest iteration of a boycott conducted in the cause of human rights and in opposition to racialised inequalities. ... In stark contrast, several of the movement's opponents denounce it as the most recent manifestation of antisemitism. Ben-Atar & Pessin 2018, p. 8. Hickey & Marfleet 2010. Morrison 2015, pp. 81–83. Morrison 2015, p. 83. Cardaun 2015, p. 70; Wistrich 2010, p. 582: "Hilary and Steven Rose—who launched the British academic boycott of Israeli institutions in 2002 ... ." Cardaun 2015, p. 70. Morrison 2015, p. 85. Suzanne Goldberg (8 July 2002). "Israeli boycott divides academics". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 1 August 2020. Taraki 2004. Morrison 2015, p. 84. Mazen 2012, p. 81. Shindler 2017, p. xv. Ziadah 2016, p. 96. Ben-Atar & Pessin 2018, pp. 1–40. Greendorfer 2015, p. 19. The Israeli anti-boycott law: Should artists be worried? Archived 8 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine Cardozo AELJ Alex Joffe, "Palestinians and Internationalization: Means and Ends." Archived 15 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine Begin–Sadat Center for Strategic Studies. 26 November 2017. 28 November 2017. Hitchcock 2020, p. 9. Hitchcock 2020, p. 127. Qumsiyeh 2016, p. 106. Jackson, Llewellyn & Leonard 2020, p. 167. Barghouti 2011, p. 6. Barghouti 2011, p. 7. Jackson, Llewellyn & Leonard 2020, p. 168. "FAQs: BDS Movement". Archived from the original on 20 July 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. The BDS movement therefore opposes activities that create the false impression of symmetry between the colonizer and the colonized, that portray Israel as a 'normal' state like any other, or that hold Palestinians, the oppressed, and Israel, the oppressor, as both equally responsible for 'the conflict'. ... Negotiations will at some point be needed to discuss the details of how Palestinian rights can be restored. These negotiations can only take place when Palestinian rights are recognised. PACBI (27 December 2011). "What is normalization?". +972 Magazine. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Palestinian Civil Society Call for BDS". BDS Movement, 9 July 2005. Archived on 31 January 2016 Barghouti 2011, p. 49. Maira 2018, p. 11. Barghouti 2011, pp. 58–59: "BDS will unavoidably contribute to the global social movement's challenge to neoliberal Western hegemony and the tyrannical rule of multi/transnational corporations. In that sense, the Palestinian boycott against Israel and its partners in crime becomes asmall but critical part in an international struggle to counter injustice, racism, poverty, environmental devastation, and gender oppression, among other social and economic ills." Mullen & Dawson 2015, p. 3. Mullen & Dawson 2015, p. 4. Mullen & Dawson 2015, p. 6. Barghouti 2011, p. 14The facade of democracy, not democracy itself, is what is truly collapsing in Israel, as democracy has never existed in any true form - nor could have existed - in a settler-colonial state like Israel. Hitchcock 2020, p. 49: "Some supporters of Israel have even claimed that the apartheid analogy is inherently antisemitic because it 'demonizes' Israel." Jacobs & Soske 2015, p. 4. Nelson 2018. Hallward 2013, p. 34: "Opponents also mobilize fear related to the call for Palestinian refugees' 'right of return,' suggesting that BDS activists seek to wipe Israel off the map and destroy the character of Israel as a Jewish majority state."; Hitchcock 2020, p. 49: "These critics also often present the call for the right of return as merely an attempt to 'destroy' Israel."; Chotiner 2019: "But I do think that the B.D.S. movement, ... is intent on the destruction of the State of Israel. If you look at the founding documents of the groups that first proposed B.D.S., they called for a full right of return, and, essentially, in practical terms, they're calling for the destruction of the State of Israel." Estefan, Kuoni & Raicovich 2017, p. 100. Hitchcock 2020, p. 48. Readers, Our; Barghouti, Omar (13 August 2019). "Letters From the August 26-September 2, 2019". The Nation. Archived from the original on 15 August 2020. Retrieved 18 September 2020. Estefan, Kuoni & Raicovich 2017, p. 99. "Reasoned rejection of one-state position - Norman G. Finkelstein". normanfinkelstein.com. 10 December 2011. Archived from the original on 10 December 2011. Retrieved 4 October 2020. One-staters apparently believe that Israel will give up its reason for existence and at the same time expose itself not to the risk but to the certainty of being 'swamped by Arabs'. This in turn would indicate a willingness to accede to anything an 'Arab' majority might enact, including a full right of return and dispossession of Zionist usurpers. Can anyone seriously imagine this? Kiewe, Amos. "The Rhetoric of Antisemitism: From ...." Google Books. 5 January 2022. "Norman Finkelstein on the Role of BDS & Why Obama Doesn't Believe His Own Words on Israel-Palestine". Democracy Now!. 23 September 2020. Archived from the original on 29 September 2020. Retrieved 4 October 2020. "Norman Finkelstein on the Role of BDS & Why Obama Doesn't Believe His Own Words on Israel-Palestine". Democracy Now!. 23 September 2020. Archived from the original on 29 September 2020. Retrieved 4 October 2020. The problem as I see it with the BDS movement is not the tactic. Who could not support Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions? Of course you should. And most of the human rights organizations, church organizations have moved in that direction. Friedman & Gordis 2014. Salaita 2016, p. 80. Maira 2018, pp. 102–103. Beinart 2012, p. 193. Weiss 2020. Maira 2018, p. 102. Barghouti 2011, p. 145. Ananth 2013, p. 140. Barghouti 2014, p. 408. Braunold, Joel (2 July 2015). "A bigger threat than BDS: anti-normalization - Jewish World". Haaretz.com. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 10 October 2020. Barghouti 2011, p. 172. Ananth 2013, p. 129; Lim 2012, p. 221; Bueckert 2020, p. 194 Barghouti 2011, p. 5. Bueckert 2020, p. 194. Barghouti 2011, pp. 4–5: "More than 170 Palestinian civil society groups, including all major political parties, refugee rights associations, trade union federations, women's unions, NGO networks, and virtually the entire spectrum of grassroots organizations, ... ." Mazen 2012, p. 83. Morrison 2015, p. 184. Morrison 2015, pp. 184–185. Activist, Anti-Racist (13 June 2021). "Alys Samson Estapé". Truthout. Retrieved 12 February 2024. "History", PACBI website, 21 December 2008. Archived 3 December 2014. SodaStream controversy continues to bubble Archived 1 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Patrick Strickland, Al Jazeera, 11 February 2014 "Academic boycotter to study in Tel Aviv" Archived 17 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Anshel Pfeffer, The Jewish Chronicle, 23 April 2009 Gertheiss 2015, p. 145. Hancock 2016, p. 233. "Join a BDS Campaign | BDS Movement". bdsmovement.net. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2020. Giora, Rachel (18 January 2010). "Milestones in the history of the Israeli BDS movement: A brief chronology". BFW. Archived from the original on 13 August 2023. Retrieved 13 August 2023. Fleischmann 2019, p. 40. Fleischmann 2019, p. 41. "About National SJP". Archived from the original on 13 July 2020. Retrieved 9 August 2020. As of 2018, we have roughly 200 chapters nationwide! "JVP Supports the BDS Movement". Jewish Voice for Peace. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2020. "Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions | War on Want". waronwant.org. 30 June 2015. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 23 January 2021. "What is BDS?". BDS Movement. 25 April 2016. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 1 August 2020. "Wielding Antidiscrimination Law to Suppress the Movement for Palestinian Rights". Harvard Law Review. 10 February 2020. Archived from the original on 3 June 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2020. Erakat 2012, p. 90. Sparrow 2012, p. 203. Michael Arria, "This BDS win is because of our people power": Ben & Jerry's vows to stop sales in Israeli West Bank settlements Archived 20 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine Mondoweiss 19 July 2021 Nestorović 2016, p. 203. "Ben & Jerry's to stop sales in West Bank, east Jerusalem". ABC News. Archived from the original on 19 July 2021. Retrieved 19 July 2021. "LongRead – Vermonters for Justice in Palestine". Archived from the original on 19 July 2021. Retrieved 19 July 2021. "Ben & Jerry's freezes ice cream sales in Israeli settlements". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 19 July 2021. Retrieved 19 July 2021. "Ben & Jerry's to end ice-cream sales in occupied Palestinian territories". Reuters. 19 July 2021. Archived from the original on 19 July 2021. Retrieved 19 July 2021. "Ben & Jerry's to stop sales in occupied Palestinian territories". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 19 July 2021. Retrieved 19 July 2021. Barghouti 2011, p. 27. "BDS Marks Another Victory As Veolia Sells Off All Israeli Operations". BDS Movement. 1 September 2015. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Boycott Movement Claims Victory as Veolia Ends All Investment in Israel". 1 September 2015. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 9 August 2020. BDS Movement: Stop G4S. Di Stefano & Henaway 2014, p. 23. Moore 2016. Haaretz 2014: "Durham County, North Carolina, has dropped an Israeli security company under fire from the BDS movement, prompting anti-occupation activists to claim victory. However, county officials were less equivocal about their reasons for searching for a new security provider, ... ." Middle East Monitor 2016: "Crepes & Waffles, a restaurant chain with branches across South America and Spain, has decided to end a contract with G4S for securing the transit of cash and valuables." Middle East Monitor 2017. Haaretz 2016. Endong 2018, p. 87. Endong 2018, p. 88. Burton 2018, p. 137. "Boycott HP". BDS Movement. 16 July 2016. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2020. "BDS activists to launch HP consumer boycott on Black Friday". BDS Movement. 22 November 2016. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2020. "Victory for Boycott HP Campaign: Netherlands Trade Union FNV Drops HP as Partner for its Member Offers". BDS Movement. 18 April 2019. Archived from the original on 9 September 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2020. "Unite joins boycott of Hewlett Packard over company's complicity in Palestinian rights violations." Archived 15 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine Morning Star. Lamarche 2019, p. 309. "Orange to End Partnership With Israeli Company as #BDS Claims Another Scalp". Newsweek. 6 January 2016. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "AXA Divest: BDS Movement". BDS Movement. 6 October 2019. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 1 August 2020. "AXA: Financing War Crimes - The Global insurer's involvement in the illegal Israeli Occupation" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 December 2020. Retrieved 1 August 2020. "Red Card Israel". BDS Movement. 28 July 2017. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Fifa urged to give red card to Israeli settlement clubs". BBC News. 12 October 2016. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Argentina cancels match with Israel amid protests". Middle East Monitor. 6 June 2018. Archived from the original on 28 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. Editorial, Jpost (27 July 2018). "Puma new designer for Israel soccer". The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com. Archived from the original on 12 December 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2020. "More than 200 Palestinian Sports Clubs Urge Puma to End Sponsorship of Israeli Teams in Illegal Settlements". BDS Movement. 20 September 2018. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2020. "Palestinians call for international day of action against Puma". Al Jazeera. 15 June 2019. Archived from the original on 20 September 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2020. "Boycott Puma". BDS Movement. 26 March 2019. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "BDS launches global campaign to boycott Puma". 22 April 2019. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "'Boycott Puma' BDS posters removed from London trains". Middle East Monitor. 25 October 2019. Archived from the original on 28 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. English, Alresalah. "Malaysia's university boycotts Puma for supporting Israeli violations". Alresalah English. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 23 January 2021. "Largest Malaysian University Ends Contract With Puma Over Support for Illegal Israeli Settlements". BDS Movement. 25 February 2020. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Boycott Eurovision 2019". BDS Movement. 24 July 2018. Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Irish pro-Israel groups condemn BDS boycott of Eurovision song contest". Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2020. The Irish BDS groups accused Israel of 'pinkwashing,' which they said is a 'PR tactic used by Israel which cynically exploits support for LGBTQIA people to whitewash its oppression of the Palestinian people.' Winstanley 2019: "Despite the protests, the contest went ahead and, on the day, none of the acts scheduled to appear in the final pulled out. Why, then, am I claiming that the BDS campaign actually succeeded? The short answer is media coverage." Kiel 2020, p. 2: "... the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions (BDS) movement ... received a lot of media coverage for its cause." staff, T. O. I. "Roger Waters calls on Madonna not to perform at Eurovision in Tel Aviv". www.timesofisrael.com. Archived from the original on 7 November 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. Eglash, Ruth. "Israel brushes off Eurovision boycott calls with a big assist from Madonna". Archived from the original on 23 May 2019. Retrieved 22 May 2019 – via www.washingtonpost.com. "Boycott Eurovision Song Contest hosted by Israel". The Guardian. 7 September 2018. Archived from the original on 10 November 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2019. "140 artists, 6 of them Israeli, urge boycott of Eurovision if hosted by Israel". The Times of Israel. 8 September 2018. Archived from the original on 28 May 2019. Retrieved 18 May 2019. Sherwin, Adam (30 April 2019). "Eurovision 2019: Stephen Fry & Sharon Osbourne lead celebrities rejecting boycott of Israel Song Contest". inews.co.uk. Archived from the original on 30 April 2019. Retrieved 30 April 2019. "i24NEWS". i24NEWS. Archived from the original on 8 October 2020. Retrieved 7 October 2020. Hallward 2013, p. 101. Tishby 2021, p. 213. Beinin 2012, p. 66. "UC Berkeley and the Israel divestment bill". The Tufts Daily. 3 May 2010. Archived from the original on 12 May 2021. Retrieved 13 October 2020. "Landgraf announces no veto on divestment bill SB 160". The Daily Californian. 24 April 2013. Archived from the original on 23 February 2019. Retrieved 13 October 2020. Pink 2017: "The vote, which passed 23-17 with five abstentions, was the first time an Israel-related divestment resolution had passed the UM student government in 11 attempts dating back to 2002. ... All told, the hearing on the resolution lasted eight hours — reportedly the longest in student government history — and stretched until 3:00 a.m." "Statement regarding CSG vote on resolution A.R. 7-019 | U-M Public Affairs". publicaffairs.vpcomm.umich.edu. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 9 August 2020. Beinin 2012, p. 68. Dreyfus, Hannah (29 September 2020). "Columbia University Students Pass College's First-Ever BDS Referendum". jewishweek.timesofisrael.com. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. "Brown University Becomes First Ivy League School To Pass Student BDS Vote". The Forward. 22 March 2019. Archived from the original on 30 October 2020. Retrieved 13 October 2020. "Letter from President Paxson: Responding to divestment referendum vote". Brown University. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. "ACCRIP releases recommendation to divest". Archived from the original on 11 December 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. Nelson 2016, p. 48. Ben-Atar & Pessin 2018, p. 22. Pearl 2018, pp. 224–235. Ziadah 2016, p. 98. Bakan & Abu-Laban 2016, p. 165. Morrison 2015, p. 204. Bakan & Abu-Laban 2016, pp. 165–166. Hitchcock 2020, p. 49. Cary Nelson and Gabriel Brahm, The Case Against Academic Boycotts of Israel (MLA Members for Scholars Rights, 2015), 13. Qtd. in Pessin, Introduction, Anti-Zionism on Campus, 6. Isaac, Hall & Higgins-Desbiolles 2015, p. 155. "Academic Boycott". BDS Movement. 15 June 2016. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 1 August 2020. Barghouti 2012, pp. 30–31. "PACBI Guidelines for the International Academic Boycott of Israel". BDS Movement. 16 July 2014. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 1 August 2020. Jaschik, Scott. "Anthropologists Vote to Boycott Israeli Academic Institutions". Inside Higher Ed. Archived from the original on 24 July 2023. Retrieved 24 July 2023. "AAA Membership Endorses Academic Boycott Resolution". 24 July 2023. Archived from the original on 24 July 2023. Retrieved 24 July 2023. Robinson & Griffin 2017, p. 33. "UK academics boycott universities in Israel to fight for Palestinians' rights". 27 October 2015. Archived from the original on 18 September 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2020. More than 300 academics from dozens of British universities have pledged to boycott Israeli academic institutions in protest at what they call intolerable human rights violations against the Palestinian people. The declaration, by 343 professors and lecturers, is printed in a full-page advertisement carried in Tuesday's Guardian, with the title: 'A commitment by UK scholars to the rights of Palestinians.' Lee Bollinger (2007). "Boycott Israeli Universities?Boycott Ours, Too!" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 June 2010. Retrieved 1 August 2020. Gasper 2007. Redden, Elizabeth. "Backing the Israel Boycott" Archived 8 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine. Inside Higher Ed. 17 December 2013. Pearl, Judea. "Boycott Israel? Not on My Campus". Editorial. Jewish Journal. 3–9 January 2014: 9. Print. "In Win for BDS Movement, U.S. Middle East Studies Association Endorses Israel Boycott". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 29 March 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2022. "Leading Mideast Studies Group Allows Members to Support BDS". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 29 March 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2022. Anderson, Brooke (29 March 2022). "Brandeis University severs ties with MESA over BDS vote". english.alaraby.co.uk/. Archived from the original on 29 March 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2022. Michigan professor embroiled in Israel boycott row Archived 27 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine, BBC, 21 September 2018 University of Michigan professor refuses to write letter for student to study abroad in Israel Archived 27 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine, CBS, Jason Silverstein, 18 September 2018 JEWISH GROUPS WANT UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN TO SANCTION PROFESSOR Archived 27 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine, JPost, 25 September 2018 Bandler, Aaron. "U Mich Disciplines Professor Who Denied Rec Letter to Student Studying in Israel." Archived 11 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine Jewish Journal. 9 October 2018. 10 October 2018. Schlissel, Mark S. and Martin A. Philbert. "Letter: Important questions around issues of personal beliefs, our responsibilities as educators, and anti-Semitism." Archived 12 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine Office of the President. 9 October 2018. 10 October 2018. PACBI (16 July 2014). "PACBI Guidelines for the International Cultural Boycott of Israel". BDS Movement. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 1 August 2020. Sánchez & Sellick 2016, p. 87. Guardian Staff (13 February 2015). "Over 100 artists announce a cultural boycott of Israel | Letters". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 23 January 2021. "Artists for Palestine UK". Artists for Palestine UK. Archived from the original on 5 August 2020. Retrieved 1 August 2020. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (11 December 2018). "Nick Cave: cultural boycott of Israel is 'cowardly and shameful'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 July 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2019. "I do not support the current government in Israel, yet do not accept that my decision to play in the country is any kind of tacit support for that government's policies," Cave wrote Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (12 July 2017). "Radiohead's Thom Yorke responds as Ken Loach criticises Israel gig". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 15 July 2017. Retrieved 15 July 2017. Radiohead frontman argues 'we don't endorse Netanyahu any more than Trump, but we still play in America', after film director encourages them to support cultural boycott of Israel Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (11 December 2018). "Nick Cave: cultural boycott of Israel is 'cowardly and shameful'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 July 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2019. Artists opposing him should 'go to Israel and tell the press and the Israeli people how you feel about their current regime,' he said, 'then do a concert on the understanding that the purpose of your music was to speak to the Israeli people's better angels. ... Perhaps the Israelis would respond in a wholly different way than they would to just yet more age-old rejectionism.' Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (12 July 2017). "Radiohead's Thom Yorke responds as Ken Loach criticises Israel gig". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 15 July 2017. Retrieved 15 July 2017. 'We don't endorse Netanyahu any more than Trump, but we still play in America,' Yorke said. 'Music, art and academia is about crossing borders not building them, about open minds not closed ones, about shared humanity, dialogue and freedom of expression. I hope that makes it clear Ken.' "Which celebs are pro/anti Israel: The complete guide". The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com. 19 July 2014. Archived from the original on 1 October 2018. Retrieved 27 August 2018. J K Rowling, the author of the world-renowned Harry Potter books, has spoken out against the BDS movement. ... 'The Palestinian community has suffered untold injustice and brutality. I want to see the Israeli government held to account for that injustice and brutality. Boycotting Israel on every possible front has its allure... What sits uncomfortably with me is that severing contact with Israel's cultural and academic community means refusing to engage with some of the Israelis who are most pro-Palestinian, and most critical of Israel's government,' she says. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (11 December 2018). "Nick Cave: cultural boycott of Israel is 'cowardly and shameful'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 July 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2019. the boycott "risks further entrenching positions in Israel in opposition to those you support". Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (11 December 2018). "Nick Cave: cultural boycott of Israel is 'cowardly and shameful'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 July 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2019. He also said the boycott 'is partly the reason I am playing Israel – not as support for any particular political entity but as a principled stand against those who wish to bully, shame and silence musicians', and that the boycott 'risks further entrenching positions in Israel in opposition to those you support'. Matisyahu Kicked Off European Festival Over Palestinian Politics Archived 26 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Kory Grow, 17 August 2015 "Unacceptable discrimination". El País. Archived from the original on 20 July 2018. Retrieved 17 February 2016. "Spanish Official Condemn Matisyahu Cancellation". Billboard. 18 August 2015. Archived from the original on 22 January 2019. Retrieved 17 February 2016. "A Rototom Sunsplash public institutional declaration regarding Matisyahu". Rototomsunsplash.com. 19 August 2015. Archived from the original on 20 August 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2016. "Spanish Court Acquits BDS Supporters Who Called on Festival to Drop Matisyahu Gig". Haaretz. 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 15 March 2021. Retrieved 10 March 2021. "Talib Kweli's removal from festival lineup is part of anti-Palestinian censorship trend". The Guardian. 2 July 2019. Archived from the original on 2 July 2019. Retrieved 2 July 2019. Itay Mashiach, 'In Germany, a witch hunt is raging against critics of Israel. Cultural leaders have had enough,' Archived 10 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine Haaretz 10 December 2020. Algemeiner, The. "Israeli Diplomat Slams Antisemitic, 'Aggressive' BDS Campaign Against Sydney Festival". Algemeiner.com. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. Kittrie 2015, p. 278. Reed, John (12 June 2015). "Israel: A new kind of war". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 29 June 2015. Study: Peace would boost Israel's economy $123b by 2024 Archived 15 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine by Niv Elis, The Jerusalem Post, 6 June 2015. Ben-Atar & Pessin 2018, pp. 15–16. "Knesset report: BDS movement has no impact on economy". Haaretz. 9 January 2015. Archived from the original on 14 July 2015. Retrieved 8 May 2023. Finds exports to Europe have doubled since launch of BDS movement "BDS has zero impact on Israeli businesses". Globes. 10 September 2018. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Reuter, Adam (27 August 2014). "Who's afraid of the big, bad boycott?". Ynetnews. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "FDC Exclusion List" (PDF). Fonds du Compensation. 15 November 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 April 2014. Retrieved 20 February 2016. "Spring in the step of BDS, as a worried Israel plans pushback". Middle East Monitor. 29 March 2014. Archived from the original on 12 November 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2020. Norwegian YMCA embraces boycott Israel policy Archived 7 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine, Jewish Telegraphic Agency (reprinted in The Jerusalem Post), 2 March 2014. Jewish NGO wants YMCA rapped for Israel boycott Archived 29 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine, The Local, 14 March 2014. Samilow 2018, pp. 384–389. Amir Prager (April 2019). "Achievements According to the BDS Movement: Trends and Implications" (PDF). Strategic Assessment. 22 (1): 39–48. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 August 2019. Retrieved 18 August 2019. "Mike Pompeo, Messiah of the BDS Movement". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 27 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022. Maira 2018, p. 86. Lim 2012, p. 226. Nathan-Kazis 2018a. Klieman 2019, p. 142. ""To counter BDS, it's who you know (in Hollywood)"". The Times of Israel. 24 August 2014. Archived from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2021. Maira 2018, pp. 93–94. Maira 2018, p. 94. Kane 2018. Palestine Legal 2017. Maira 2018, pp. 94–95. Nathan-Kazis 2018b. Bennhold, Katrin (17 May 2019). "German Parliament Deems B.D.S. Movement Anti-Semitic". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 19 June 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2019. Nathan Thrall, 'How the Battle Over Israel and Anti-Semitism Is Fracturing American Politics,' Archived 5 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine New York Times 28 March 2019 David Kaye, 'Mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression' Archived 6 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine, 14 February 2019 pp.1–5 Shorman, Jonathan; Woodall, Hunter (30 January 2018). "Judge blocks Kansas law barring boycotts of Israel after Wichita teacher sued". The Wichita Eagle. Archived from the original on 29 December 2018. Retrieved 28 December 2018. Greendorfer 2018. Kesslen, Ben (2 March 2019). "Publisher embroiled in legal battle with Arkansas over law banning Israel boycotts". NBC News. Archived from the original on 30 May 2019. Retrieved 30 May 2019. Bandler, Aaron. "Federal Court Upholds Amended Arizona Anti-BDS Law." Archived 11 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine Jewish Journal. 10 January 2020. 10 January 2020. Kampeas, Ron. "After legal challenges, Texas moves to amend its Israel boycott law." Archived 1 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 11 April 2019. 10 January 2020. "US: More Democrat voters support BDS than oppose it, new polls show". Middle East Eye. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "The Anti-Boycott Law Israel Used to Bar Both Omar and Tlaib". The New York Times. 15 August 2019. Archived from the original on 8 June 2021. Retrieved 15 August 2019. White 2020, p. 70. Bachner, Michael (25 March 2018). "Universities urged to enforce code banning politics in lectures". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 17 October 2020. Blumenthal 2013, p. 212. Ananth 2013, p. 131. Bueckert 2020, pp. 245–246. Benzaquen 2020. Maira 2018, p. 88. Oren, Amir (20 June 2016). "Israel Setting Up 'Dirty Tricks' Unit To Find, Spread Dirt on BDS Groups". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 24 June 2016. Retrieved 29 June 2016. Ravid, Barak (24 May 2016). "Watchdog: Power Struggles Between Ministries Hindered Israel's Battle Against BDS". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 29 June 2016. Retrieved 29 June 2016. "Israel Set Up a Front Company to Boost Image and Fight BDS. This Is How It Failed". Haaretz. 29 July 2020. Archived from the original on 4 October 2020. Retrieved 4 October 2020. Bostrom, Micheletti & Oosterveer 2019, p. 709. "Minister seeks database of Israeli BDS activists". 21 March 2017. Archived from the original on 2 July 2020. Retrieved 2 August 2020. Kane 2019: "... the Ministry revealed that an 'undisclosed economic campaign' ... had resulted in the closure of 30 financial accounts belonging to organizations as varied as the BNC and Al-Haq, ... ." Benzaquen, Itamar (4 October 2020). "Jerusalem Post took government money to publish anti-BDS special". +972 Magazine. Archived from the original on 12 December 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2020. Harkov, Lahav (24 June 2021). "Has the Strategic Affairs Ministry achieved its goals?". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2021. "This anti-BDS Initiative Failed. So Israel Throws Another $30 Million at It". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. Lim 2012, p. 221. Blumenthal 2013, p. 261. Svirsky & Ben-Arie 2017, p. 51. "Israeli government must cease intimidation of human rights defenders, protect them from attacks". Amnesty International USA. 10 April 2016. Archived from the original on 13 May 2021. Retrieved 9 August 2020. "Israel government prepares to expel Palestinian BDS founder". Middle East Monitor. 7 October 2019. Archived from the original on 28 August 2020. Retrieved 17 October 2020. "Israel court releases BDS activist Mahmoud Nawajaa". Middle East Monitor. 18 August 2020. Archived from the original on 27 August 2020. Retrieved 28 August 2020. "#FreeMahmoud: Israeli occupation forces arrest BDS coordinator Mahmoud Nawajaa during night raid". 30 July 2020. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 2 August 2020. Crilley & Manor 2020, p. 143: "For instance, a survey of the Nation Brand Index from 2006 found that 'Israel is the worst brand in the world ... Israel's brand is by a considerable margin the most negative we have ever measured ... If Israel's intention is to promote itself as a desirable place to live and invest in, the challenge appears to be a steep one.' ... Similarly, a global BBC survey from 2012 found that 52% of respondents believed that Israel had a negative influence on the world while a Gallup poll among EU citizens in 2003 found that Israel was perceived as number one threat to world security." Crilley & Manor 2020, pp. 143–144: "Israel has also increasingly become associated with committing war crimes in the occupied territories and maintaining an apartheid state (Sussman 2004). This is a result of Israel's policies vis-à-vis the Palestinians, the framing of Israel in the media and Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) activities aimed at boycotting Israel." Barghouti 2012, p. 34: "The campaign, ... focused on a new plan to improve Israel's image abroad 'by downplaying religion and avoiding any discussion of the conflict with the Palestinians.' ... Arye Mekel, the deputy director general for cultural affairs in the Israeli foreign ministry, ... : 'We will send well-known novelists and writers overseas, theater companies, exhibits. This way you show Israel's prettier face, ...'" Reuters 2016: "'These are the most senior people in the film industry in Hollywood and leading opinion-formers who we are interested in hosting,' said Israeli Tourism Minister Yariv Levin." Reuters 2016: "The Israeli government earlier this month confirmed it was funding $15,000 to $18,000 of each 10-day trip as a means of offsetting news coverage of the country's troubles." Reuters 2016: "'#SkipTheTrip. Don't endorse Israeli apartheid,' said the ad, ... ." Sánchez & Sellick 2016, p. 88. Qumsiyeh 2016, p. 104. Barghouti 2014, p. 410. Abunimah 2014, p. 167. Hitchcock 2020, pp. 12–13. "Most Americans don't know about or don't support BDS - Pew poll". Jerusalem Post. 27 May 2022. "Palestinian Public Opinion Poll No (56)" (PDF). Palestinian Center for Policy and Survey Research. 25 June 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 July 2020. Retrieved 2 August 2020. Mazen 2012, pp. 81–82. Tartir & Seidel 2018, p. 186. Norman Finkelstein Interview with Frank Barat: BDS Campaign | Imperial College London [09-02-2012] on YouTube Louvet 2016, pp. 72–73. Barghouti 2011, p. iii. JTA (2 March 2016). "40 Columbia professors sign BDS petition". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 30 September 2020. Maira 2018, p. 144. Kearns, Paul. "Exclusive: Is This The Most Hated Woman in Israel?". Hotpress. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 17 October 2020. "Arab MK says BDS is only solution to stop occupation". Middle East Monitor. 15 August 2016. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 17 October 2020. Finland, ICAHD (7 September 2014). "Jamal Zahalka: Role of the BDS movement". Vimeo. Archived from the original on 26 April 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2020. Goldman, Yoel (13 December 2013). "Abbas: Don't boycott Israel". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 13 October 2020. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Kittrie 2015, p. 280. Bueckert 2020, p. 202. Kalman 2014. Toameh, Khaled Abu (29 August 2012). "Palestinian academics act against Israel ties". The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com. Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 17 October 2020. "Palestinian academic opposes Israel boycott" Archived 17 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine AP, Ynetnews 18 June 2006 Spiro, Amy (2 October 2017). "Israeli-Arab Facebook star: BDS is 'pure politics'". The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com. Archived from the original on 21 October 2020. Retrieved 17 October 2020. "BDS calls on boycotting "Nas Daily" over normalization". PNN. 23 September 2020. Archived from the original on 23 October 2021. Retrieved 17 October 2020. Barghouti 2011, p. 141. L'Etang, McKie & Snow 2015, p. 411. White 2020, p. 67. Gordin 2012. "COSATU Endorses the Palestinian Call to Impose an Immediate, Comprehensive Military Embargo on Israel". BDSmovement. 2011. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 2 January 2016. "Cosatu to intensify Israeli goods boycott". news24. 2014. Archived from the original on 2 December 2018. Retrieved 2 January 2016. Bueckert 2020, p. 206. "Declaration on the Palestinian Question" (PDF). Socialist International. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 July 2018. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "Socialist International of 140 Global Political Parties Adopts BDS, Calls for Military Embargo on Israel". Palestinian BDS National Committee. 5 July 2018. Archived from the original on 22 February 2019. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "Israel boycotts now official NSW Greens policy". The Australian Jewish News. 9 December 2010. Archived from the original on 20 July 2018. Retrieved 9 May 2011. Klassen & Albo 2013, p. 407. Lingren, Daniel (13 February 2019). "Københavnsk borgmester overrækker pris til anti-israelsk bevægelse" [Copenhagenian mayor awards anti-Israeli movement]. Berlingske (in Danish). Archived from the original on 28 August 2019. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "NUT Annual Conference 2014 final agenda" (PDF). National Union of Teachers. 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2014. Retrieved 2 January 2016. Lewis, Jerry (6 July 2014). "UK's largest union backs boycott of Israel". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 27 May 2021. Retrieved 5 July 2014. "Solidarity with UAW Local 2865". 28 January 2016. Archived from the original on 28 February 2021. Retrieved 7 August 2020. Maira 2018, p. 127. "United Auto Workers Reject Boycott of Israel". 17 December 2015. Archived from the original on 23 September 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2016. Ben Norton (25 January 2016). "With help of corporate law firm, small pro-Israel group derails historic UAW union vote endorsing boycott". Salon. Archived from the original on 10 August 2020. Retrieved 7 August 2020. Louis-Serge Houle (2015). "La CSN se joint au mouvement mondial". Confédération des syndicats nationaux. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 2 January 2016. "TUC passes motion for extensive Israel boycott at annual conference". JewishNews. 11 September 2019. Archived from the original on 6 December 2019. Retrieved 13 September 2019. Isserovitz 2015. Rivlin 2016. Higgins, Ean. "Jewish Academics Slam BDS Ban - EXCLUSIVE -." The Australian, May 29, 2013, p. 3. ProQuest. Web. 9 Aug. 2020. "Republican Platform 2016." Archived 19 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine 2016. 16 November 2016. Kornbluh, Jacob. "Hillary Clinton Reaffirms Opposition to BDS in Letter to Jewish Leaders" Archived 21 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Haaretz. 10 May 2016. Ric Willmot. "Martin Foley, Victorian Labor MP scared of Year 12 student". Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 27 October 2013. "Germany: Federal court rules anti-BDS policy to be 'unconstitutional'". Middle East Monitor. 26 January 2022. Archived from the original on 30 January 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2022. Berlin Social Democratic Party declares BDS antisemitic Archived 22 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Jerusalem Post. 22 May 2017. Cuffman 2018, p. 128. Sørensen, Allan (18 May 2017). "Netanyahu til Samuelsen: "Stop finansiering af palæstinensiske boykotgrupper"" [Netanyahu to Samuelsen: "Stop financing Palestinian boycott groups"]. Berlingske. Archived from the original on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 27 August 2019. "Medie: Løkke modtog vredt opkald fra Netanyahu" [Medium: Løkke received angry call from Netanyahu]. Berlingske. 26 May 2017. Archived from the original on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 27 August 2019. Sindberg, Mathias (2 January 2018). "Israel bankede i bordet. Og så ændrede Danmark sin støtte til ngo'er i Israel og Palæstina" [Israel objected. And then Denmark changed its support to NGOs in Israel and Palestine]. Information. Archived from the original on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 27 August 2019. https://data.oireachtas.ie/ie/oireachtas/bill/2018/6/eng/initiated/b0618s.pdf Archived 30 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine[bare URL PDF] "PM Netanyahu condemns Irish legislative initiative". Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 30 January 2018. Archived from the original on 30 June 2019. Retrieved 28 June 2019. "Irish ambassador summoned to the MFA for clarification". Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 31 January 2018. Archived from the original on 29 June 2019. Retrieved 28 June 2019. "Blair tells lecturers to call off Israeli boycott". The Guardian. 6 June 2007. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 2 August 2020. Wintour, Patrick (12 March 2014). "David Cameron says he would oppose boycott of Israel in speech to Knesset". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 29 April 2019. Retrieved 15 June 2019. Mairs, Nicholas (18 September 2018). "Theresa May mounts fresh pledge to tackle anti-Semitism while blasting 'unacceptable' Israeli boycott calls". Politics Home. Archived from the original on 18 September 2018. Retrieved 15 June 2019. Osborne, Samuel (16 December 2019). "Boris Johnson to pass law banning anti-Israel boycott, official says". The Independent. Archived from the original on 4 June 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2019. "U.K.'s Conservative Party vows to ban councils from boycotting Israeli products - Europe". Haaretz.com. 24 November 2019. Archived from the original on 11 June 2021. Retrieved 28 August 2020. Chotiner 2019. "A Groundbreaking Arab Initiative to Repudiate BDS". Jewish Journal. 20 November 2019. Archived from the original on 29 May 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. Halbfinger, David M. "Arab Thinkers Call to Abandon Boycotts and Engage With Israel." Archived 21 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine The New York Times. 20 November 2019. 21 November 2019. Frazer, Jenni. "Newly Formed Arab Council Publicly Decries BDS and Seeks Reconciliation with Israel." Archived 28 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine Jewish Journal. 26 November 2019. 26 November 2019. Chomsky, "On Israel-Palestine and BDS"; Noam Chomsky and Ilan Pappe, On Palestine (Bungay, UK: Penguin, 2015), 91. Qtd. in Linfield, p. 295. Linfield 2019, pp. 294–295. "Chomsky on Israeli apartheid, celebrity activists, BDS and the one-state solution". MEMO. 27 June 2022. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "U.S. Jews' connections with and attitudes toward Israel". Jewish Americans in 2020. Pew Research Center. 11 May 2021. Archived from the original on 7 September 2023. Retrieved 15 September 2023. Mansoor 2020: "Almost one quarter of American Jews under 40 support the boycott of products made in Israel, ... from J Street, ... ." Arnold 2018, p. 228. Qumsiyeh 2016, p. 106: "... many BDS initiatives across the world are led by Jewish or predominantly Jewish organizations."; Wistrich 2010, p. 582: "Other Jews have been in the forefront of disinvestment campaigns, calling for sanctions against the Jewish state." Barghouti 2011, p. 149: "The growing support among progressive European and American Jews for effective pressure on Israel is one counterargument [to the antisemitism charges] that is not well publicized." Hallward 2013, p. 195. Mendes 2013. Mendes, Philip. "Attempts to Exclude Pro-Israel Views from Progressive Discourse: Some Case Studies from Australia." Anti-Zionism on Campus, Pessin and Ben-Atar, Indiana UP, 2018, pp. 163-173. David Hirsh, Anti-Zionism and Antisemitism: Cosmopolitan Reflections (New Haven, CT: Yale Initiative for the Inderdisciplinary Study of Antisemitism Working Paper Series, 2007), 13. Qtd. in Mendes, "Attempts to Exclude," p. 164. Tishby 2021, p. 281. Hallward 2013, p. 46. Steinhardt Case 2020. Maira 2018, p. 105. Arnold 2018, p. 232. Hallward 2013, p. 196. Goldberg, Jeffrey (15 February 2011). "How Big Should the Big Tent Be?". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020. Meir, Yehuda Ben (31 December 2011). "The Delegitimization Threat: Roots, Manifestations, and Containment". INSS. Archived from the original on 15 May 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2020. "Boycotting Israel: New pariah on the block". The Economist. 13 September 2007. Archived from the original on 22 May 2010. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "A campaign that is gathering weight". The Economist. 8 February 2014. Archived from the original on 2 September 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. "Final score: Dershowitz 137, BDS 101". The Jerusalem Post. 3 November 2015. Archived from the original on 14 April 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2015. Anti-Defamation League 2016. Tishby 2021, pp. 201–202. Tishby 2021, pp. 200–203. ""Lorde is only the latest: How touring in Israel thrusts musicians into controversy"". 12 January 2018. Archived from the original on 18 June 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2021 – via www.washingtonpost.com. "Palestinian Workers in Settlements–Who Profits' Position Paper" Archived 29 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Who Profits, 2013 Guttman, Nathan. "Academic Backers of Boycott Israel Movement Take Aim at Bigger Targets" Archived 17 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine. The Jewish Daily Forward. 18 December 2013. 1 January 2014. Stoil 2016. Schanzer 2016: "In the case of three organizations that were designated, shut down, or held civilly liable for providing material support to the terrorist organization Hamas, a significant contingent of their former leadership appears to have pivoted to leadership positions within the American BDS campaign." Winer & Ahren 2018. Ministry of Strategic Affairs 2019. "Israel releases report on links between BDS and militants". Associated Press. 3 February 2019. Archived from the original on 12 February 2019. Retrieved 11 February 2019. "ELECTED BUT RESTRICTED: SHRINKING SPACE FOR PALESTINIAN PARLIAMENTARIANSIN ISRAEL'S KNESSET" (PDF). 3 September 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 February 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2020. They have made efforts to delegitimize Israeli and Palestinian human rights defenders and organizations in an effort to undermine the support and funding they receive from abroad. ""Germany designates BDS Israel boycott movement as anti-Semitic"". Reuters. 17 May 2019. Archived from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2021. ""German parliament condemns 'anti-Semitic' BDS movement"". Deutsche Welle. 17 May 2019. Archived from the original on 18 June 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2021. Anti-Defamation League 2016: "Many of the founding goals of the BDS movement, ... along with many of the strategies employed ... are anti-Semitic." Sheskin, Ira M.; Felson, Ethan (2016). "Is the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions Movement Tainted by Anti-Semitism?". Geographical Review. 106 (2): 270–275. Bibcode:2016GeoRv.106..270S. doi:10.1111/j.1931-0846.2016.12163.x. S2CID 159835145. We contend that the BDS movement, born of an ideology hostile to Judaism and Jewish nationalism and still immersed in that ideology rather than the language of peace, is not, as its proponents assert, a focused campaign aimed to change Israeli policies. Instead, it is a movement that often lacks integrity and quite often traffics in anti-Semitism. We have demonstrated that these anti-Semitic underpinnings are exhibited in the cultural, academic, and commercial spheres. In all three cases, persons who happen to be Jewish are blamed for the supposed sins of other Jews. Bandler. "UCI Student Senate Repeals BDS Resolution." Archived 17 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine Jewish Journal. 14 April 2020. 15 April 2020. White 2020, p. 65. "Over 200 scholars say backing Israel boycotts is not anti-Semitic". Times of Israel. 27 March 2021. Archived from the original on 4 October 2021. Retrieved 4 October 2021. "Why is the BDS movement under fire in Germany?". Middle East Monitor. 3 August 2019. Archived from the original on 30 October 2020. Retrieved 18 September 2020. The controversial motion has triggered a noisy debate in Germany and beyond which reads that the campaign to boycott Israeli goods, artists and athletes is "reminiscent of the most terrible chapter in German history" and triggers memories of the Nazi slogan "Don't buy from Jews". The resolution also imposed a ban on government support for organisations which back BDS. "First-ever: 40+ Jewish groups worldwide oppose equating antisemitism with criticism of Israel". Jewish Voice for Peace. 17 July 2018. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 19 September 2018. Judith Butler's Remarks to Brooklyn College on BDS Archived 29 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine, The Nation, 7 February 2013 Barghouti 2011, p. 149. Michalski 2019. Reut Institute 2010: "The BDS Movement singles Israel out." Greendorfer 2018, pp. 357–358. Harvard Law Review 2020: "Such logic might have required the antiapartheid movement to address not just injustice by white South Africans, but also abuses by the black African National Congress leadership or by other African countries. ... Iran, ..., self-defines based on religion, yet current U.S. refusals to buy from Iran do not give rise to anti-Shia religious discrimination claims." Barghouti, Omar (2015). "The Academic Boycott of Israel: Reaching a Tipping Point?". In Mullen, Bill; Dawson, Ashley (eds.). Against Apartheid: The Case for Boycotting Israeli Universities. Haymarket Books. p. 62. ISBN 978-1-60846-527-9. Barghouti 2011, p. 62; Jacobs & Soske 2015, p. 45; Salaita 2016, p. 79: "In fact, BDS aims to end the singling out of Israel. No nation engages in such terrible abuses of human rights ... and yet receives de facto immunity against condemnation." Jacobs & Soske 2015, p. 45. Barghouti, Omar (2011). BDS: Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions : the Global Struggle for Palestinian Rights. Haymarket Books. ISBN 978-1-60846-114-1. Estefan, Kareem; Kuoni, Carin; Raicovich, Laura (10 October 2017). Assuming Boycott: Resistance, Agency, and Cultural Production. OR Books. ISBN 978-1-68219-093-7. Fleischmann, Leonie (19 September 2019). The Israeli Peace Movement: Anti-Occupation Activism and Human Rights since the Al-Aqsa Intifada. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-83860-098-3. Gertheiss, Svenja (14 December 2015). Diasporic Activism in the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-36886-1. Isaac, Rami K.; Hall, C. Michael; Higgins-Desbiolles, Freya (14 December 2015). The Politics and Power of Tourism in Palestine. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-58028-7. Jacobs, Sean; Soske, Jon (2 November 2015). Apartheid Israel: The Politics of an Analogy. Haymarket Books. ISBN 978-1-60846-519-4. Linfield, Susie, ed. (2019). The Lions' Den: Zionism and the Left From Hannah Arendt to Noam Chomsky. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-25184-5. Mullen, Bill; Dawson, Ashley, eds. (2015). Against Apartheid: The Case for Boycotting Israeli Universities. Haymarket Books. ISBN 978-1-60846-527-9. Nelson, Cary (2016). Dreams Deferred: A Concise Guide to the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict and the Movement to Boycott Israel. Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-25-302518-0. Nelson, Cary (2019). Israel Denial: Anti-Zionism, Anti-Semitism, & the Faculty Campaign Against the Jewish State. Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-04507-2. Archived from the original on 2 July 2019. Retrieved 3 September 2019. Robinson, William I.; Griffin, Maryam S. (20 March 2017). We Will Not Be Silenced: The Academic Repression of Israel's Critics. AK Press. ISBN 978-1-84935-277-2. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 10 August 2020. Tishby, Noa (2021). Israel: A Simple Guide to the Most Misunderstood Country on Earth. Free Press. ISBN 978-1-9821-4493-7. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2021. Tripp, Charles (25 February 2013). The Power and the People: Paths of Resistance in the Middle East. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80965-8. Archived from the original on 5 December 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2016. Maira, Sunaina (2018). Boycott!: The Academy and Justice for Palestine. Univ of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-29489-9. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 9 August 2020. Hancock, Landon E. (26 August 2016). Narratives of Identity in Social Movements, Conflicts and Change. Emerald Group Publishing. ISBN 978-1-78635-077-0. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 1 October 2020. Hallward, M. (26 November 2013). Transnational Activism and the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict. Palgrave Macmillan US. ISBN 978-1-137-34986-6. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2020. Sparrow, Jeff (2012). Left Turn: Political Essays for the New Left. Melbourne Univ. Publishing. ISBN 978-0-522-86143-3. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 9 August 2020. Bostrom, Magnus; Micheletti, Michele; Oosterveer, Peter (2019). The Oxford Handbook of Political Consumerism. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-062903-8. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2020. Beinart, Peter (2012). The Crisis of Zionism. Melbourne Univ. Publishing. ISBN 978-0-522-86176-1. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2020. Nestorović, Čedomir (28 May 2016). Islamic Marketing: Understanding the Socio-Economic, Cultural, and Politico-Legal Environment. Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-32754-9. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 14 August 2020. Salaita, Steven (1 November 2016). Inter/Nationalism: Decolonizing Native America and Palestine. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-1-4529-5317-5. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 16 October 2020. Jackson, Richard; Llewellyn, Joseph; Leonard, Griffin Manawaroa (15 March 2020). Revolutionary Nonviolence: Concepts, Cases and Controversies. Zed Books. ISBN 978-1-78699-822-4. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2020. Tartir, Alaa; Seidel, Timothy (22 December 2018). Palestine and Rule of Power: Local Dissent vs. International Governance. Springer. ISBN 978-3-030-05949-1. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Mazen, Masri (26 April 2012). "Israel's Wall, Displacement, and Palestinian Resistance in the West Bank". In Coleman, Daniel; Glanville, Erin Goheen; Hasan, Wafaa; Kramer-Hamstra, Agnes (eds.). Countering Displacements: The Creativity and Resilience of Indigenous and Refugee-ed Peoples. University of Alberta. pp. 59–86. ISBN 978-0-88864-592-0. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 7 June 2013. L'Etang, Jacquie; McKie, David; Snow, Nancy (11 August 2015). The Routledge Handbook of Critical Public Relations. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-91886-8. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Mendes, P. (20 May 2014). "Anti-Semitism and support for Jewish rights". Jews and the Left: The Rise and Fall of a Political Alliance. Springer. ISBN 978-1-137-00830-5. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Kittrie, Orde F. (1 December 2015). Lawfare: Law as a Weapon of War. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-026359-1. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Blumenthal, Max (1 October 2013). Goliath: Life and Loathing in Greater Israel. PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-56858-972-5. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Bueckert, Michael (5 March 2020). Boycotts and Backlash: Canadian Opposition to Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions (BDS) Movements from South Africa to Israel. CURVE (PhD). Carleton University. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Abunimah, Ali (3 March 2014). The Battle for Justice in Palestine. Haymarket Books. pp. 165–. ISBN 978-1-60846-347-3. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Burton, Guy (26 February 2018). Rising Powers and the Arab–Israeli Conflict since 1947. Lexington Books. pp. 137–. ISBN 978-1-4985-5196-0. Cardaun, Sarah K. (19 June 2015). Countering Contemporary Antisemitism in Britain: Government and Civil Society Responses between Universalism and Particularism. BRILL. pp. 70–. ISBN 978-90-04-30089-7. Shindler, Colin (15 May 2017). The Hebrew Republic: Israel's Return to History. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4422-6597-4. Endong, Floribert Patrick C. (31 March 2018). Exploring the Role of Social Media in Transnational Advocacy. IGI Global. pp. 87–. ISBN 978-1-5225-2855-5. Svirsky, Marcelo; Ben-Arie, Ronnen (7 November 2017). From Shared Life to Co-Resistance in Historic Palestine. Rowman & Littlefield International. pp. 51–. ISBN 978-1-78348-965-7. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Klassen, Jerome; Albo, Gregory (10 January 2013). Empire's Ally: Canada and the War in Afghanistan. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 978-1-4426-1304-1. Hanssen, Jens; Ghazal, Amal N. (20 November 2020). The Oxford Handbook of Contemporary Middle-Eastern and North African History. Oxford University Press. pp. 693–. ISBN 978-0-19-967253-0. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2020. Crilley, Rhys; Manor, Ilan (11 July 2020). "Un-nation Branding: The Cities of Tel Aviv and Jerusalem in Israeli Soft Power". In Sohaela Amiri; Efe Sevin (eds.). City Diplomacy: Current Trends and Future Prospects. Springer Nature. pp. 143–. ISBN 978-3-030-45615-3. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2020. Morrison, Suzanne (2015). The boycott, divestment, and sanctions movement: activism across borders for Palestinian justice. LSE Theses Online (PhD). London School of Economics and Political Science. Archived from the original on 3 March 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2020. Hitchcock, Jennifer Megan (29 June 2020). A Rhetorical Frame Analysis of Palestinian-Led Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (BDS) Movement Discourse. ODU Digital Commons (PhD). Archived from the original on 15 August 2020. Retrieved 21 September 2020. Klieman, Aharon (21 August 2019). Carsten Schapkow; Klaus Hödl (eds.). Jewish Studies and Israel Studies in the Twenty-First Century: Intersections and Prospects. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 133–. ISBN 978-1-79360-510-8. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 26 October 2020. Louvet, Marie-Violaine (28 June 2016). "Anti-Semitism and support for Jewish rights". Civil Society, Post-Colonialism and Transnational Solidarity: The Irish and the Middle East Conflict. Palgrave Macmillan UK. ISBN 978-1-137-55109-2. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2020. Landy, David; Lentin, Ronit; McCarthy, Conor, eds. (15 May 2020). Enforcing Silence: Academic Freedom, Palestine and the Criticism of Israel. Zed Books. ISBN 978-1-78699-653-4. Harawi, Yara. The academic boycott and beyond: towards an epistemological strategy of liberation and decolonization. pp. 183–206. Handmaker, Jeff (January 2020), "Lawfare against academics and the potential of legal mobilization as counterpower", Enforcing Silence: Academic Freedom, Palestine and the Criticism of Israel (Edited by David Landy, Ronit Lentin and Conor Mccarthy), London: Zed Books: 233–260[permanent dead link] David Feldman, ed. (29 December 2018). Boycotts Past and Present: From the American Revolution to the Campaign to Boycott Israel. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-94872-0. Jones, Lee, Sanctioning Apartheid: Comparing the South African and Palestinian Campaigns for Boycotts, Disinvestment, and Sanctions: From the American Revolution to the Campaign to Boycott Israel, pp. 197–217 Arnold, Sina, A Collision of Frames: The BDS Movement and Its Opponents in the United States, pp. 219–241 Lim, Audrea, ed. (2 May 2012). The Case for Sanctions Against Israel. Verso Books. ISBN 978-1-84467-450-3. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 6 October 2020. Barghouti, Omar, The Cultural Boycott: Israel vs. South Africa, pp. 25–38 Beinin, Joel, North American Colleges and Universities and BDS, pp. 61–76 Erakat, Noura, BDS in the USA: 2001-2010, pp. 85–100 Ben-Atar, Doron S.; Pessin, Andrew, eds. (30 March 2018). Anti-Zionism on Campus: The University, Free Speech, and BDS. Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-03410-6. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2020. Nelson, Cary, Conspiracy Pedagogy on Campus: BDS Advocacy, Antisemitism, and Academic Freedom, pp. 190–211 (see esp. p. 191) Pearl, Judea, BDS and Zionophobic Racism, pp. 224–235 Samilow, Jared, Students for Justice in Palestine at Brown University, pp. 384–389 Ghada Ageel, ed. (7 January 2016). "International Solidarity and the Palestinian Freedom Struggle". Apartheid in Palestine: Hard Laws and Harder Experiences. University of Alberta. ISBN 978-1-77212-082-0. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Arraf, Huwaida, International Solidarity and the Palestinian Freedom Struggle, pp. 65–89 Ziadah, Rafeef, Palestine Calling: Notes on the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions Movement, pp. 91–106 Bakan, Abigail B.; Abu-Laban, Yasmeen, Israeli Apartheid, Canada, and Freedom of Expression, pp. 163–180 Alpaslan Özerdem; Chuck Thiessen; Mufid Qassoum, eds. (1 December 2016). Conflict Transformation and the Palestinians: The Dynamics of Peace and Justice under Occupation. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-317-21363-5. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2020. Sánchez, Ana; Sellick, Patricia, Human Rights as a Tool for Conflict Transformation: The Cases of the Boycotts, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) Movement and Local Unarmed Popular Resistance, pp. 82–97 Qumsiyeh, Mazin B., A Critical and Historical Assessment of Boycotts, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) in Palestine, pp. 98–113 Wistrich, Robert S. (5 January 2010). A Lethal Obsession: Anti-Semitism from Antiquity to the Global Jihad. Random House Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-58836-899-7. Ananth, Sriram (2013). "The Politics of the Palestinian BDS Movement". Socialism and Democracy. 27 (3). Informa UK Limited: 129–143. doi:10.1080/08854300.2013.836317. ISSN 0885-4300. S2CID 146902231. Barghouti, Omar (29 July 2014). "Opting for justice: the critical role of anti-colonial Israelis in the boycott, divestment, and sanctions movement". Settler Colonial Studies. 4 (4). Informa UK Limited: 407–412. doi:10.1080/2201473x.2014.911656. ISSN 2201-473X. S2CID 144459211. Steinhardt Case, Benjamin (27 January 2020). "Days of awe: reimagining Jewishness in solidarity with Palestinians". Ethnic and Racial Studies. 43 (13). Informa UK Limited: 2452–2454. doi:10.1080/01419870.2020.1715455. ISSN 0141-9870. S2CID 213506152. Greendorfer, Marc (2018). "Discrimination as a Business Policy: The Misuse and Abuse of Corporate Social Responsibility Programs". American University Business Law Review. 8 (3). doi:10.2139/ssrn.3279227. ISSN 1556-5068. Archived from the original on 24 January 2021. Retrieved 31 December 2020. Cuffman, Timothy (29 May 2018). "The State Power to Boycott a Boycott: The Thorny Constitutionality of State Anti-BDS Laws". papers.ssrn.com. doi:10.2139/ssrn.3186369. SSRN 3186369. Archived from the original on 25 September 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2020. White, Ben (1 February 2020). "Delegitimizing Solidarity: Israel Smears Palestine Advocacy as Anti-Semitic". Journal of Palestine Studies. 49 (2): 65–79. doi:10.1525/jps.2020.49.2.65. ISSN 0377-919X. S2CID 218853797. Archived from the original on 1 October 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2020. Greendorfer, Marc (7 January 2015). "The BDS Movement: That Which We Call a Foreign Boycott, By Any Other Name, Is Still Illegal". Roger Williams University Law Review: 19. SSRN 2531130. Archived from the original on 20 September 2020. Retrieved 22 September 2020. Greendorfer, Marc (5 September 2017). "Boycotting the Boycotters: Turnabout Is Fair Play Under the Commerce Clause and the Unconstitutional Conditions Doctrine". Search eLibrary. doi:10.2139/ssrn.3032646. SSRN 3032646. Archived from the original on 6 November 2020. Retrieved 9 November 2020. Di Stefano, Paul; Henaway, Mostafa (2014). "Boycotting Apartheid From South Africa to Palestine". Peace Review. 26 (1): 19–27. doi:10.1080/10402659.2014.876304. ISSN 1040-2659. S2CID 143704463. Akram, Susan (Spring 2008). "Myths and Realities of the Palestinian Refugee Problem: Reframing the Right of Return". The MIT Electronic Journal of Middle East Studies. 8: 183–198. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 14 November 2020. Kiel, Christina (24 July 2020). "Chicken dance (off): competing cultural diplomacy in the 2019 Eurovision Song Contest". International Journal of Cultural Policy. 26 (7). Informa UK Limited: 973–987. doi:10.1080/10286632.2020.1776269. ISSN 1028-6632. S2CID 225483576. Fishman, Joel S. (2012). "The BDS message of anti-Zionism, anti-Semitism, and incitement to discrimination". Israel Affairs. 18 (3): 412–425. doi:10.1080/13537121.2012.689521. ISSN 1353-7121. S2CID 145475095. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 23 November 2020. "Wielding Antidiscrimination Law to Suppress the Movement for Palestinian Rights". Harvard Law Review. 10 February 2020. Archived from the original on 3 June 2021. Retrieved 28 August 2020. Lamarche, Karine (2019). "The Backlash Against Israeli Human Rights NGOs: Grounds, Players, and Implications". International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society. 32 (3): 301–322. doi:10.1007/s10767-018-9312-z. ISSN 0891-4486. S2CID 149884339. "Criticism of Israeli Government's Policies Are Free Speech, Not Anti-Semitism". Amnesty International. 15 August 2019. Archived from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 7 October 2021. Barghouti, Omar (29 July 2019). "Why Americans Should Support BDS". The Nation. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Mendes, Philip (11 November 2013). "The BDS movement and the opportunistic exploitation of self-denying Jews". ABC Religion & Ethics. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2020. Barghouti, Omar (9 June 2015). "The Cultural Boycott: Israel vs. South Africa". Hyperallergic. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 1 August 2020. Hickey, Tom; Marfleet, Philip (13 October 2010). "The "South Africa moment": Palestine, Israel and the boycott". International Socialism – A quarterly journal of socialist theory. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Taraki, Lisa (19 August 2004). "Boycotting the Israeli Academy". ZNet. Archived from the original on 5 April 2016. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Weiss, Philip (7 April 2020). "Liberal Zionists couldn't end the occupation because they feared equality more than Israeli right". Mondoweiss. Archived from the original on 24 September 2020. Retrieved 16 October 2020. Massad, Joseph (17 December 2014). "Recognizing Palestine, BDS and the survival of Israel". The Electronic Intifada. Archived from the original on 28 October 2020. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Friedman, Lara; Gordis, Daniel (2 March 2014). "Is a Settlement Boycott Best for Israel?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 December 2020. Retrieved 16 October 2020. Samson Estapé, Alys (29 July 2020). "15 lessons from 15 years of BDS". The Electronic Intifada. Archived from the original on 28 October 2020. Retrieved 26 October 2020. Kalman, Matthew (19 January 2014). "Palestinians Divided Over Boycott of Israeli Universities". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 26 August 2018. "Terrorists in Suits: The Ties Between NGOs promoting BDS and Terrorist Organizations" (PDF). gov.il. Ministry of Strategic Affairs and Public Diplomacy. February 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 May 2020. Retrieved 2 August 2020. Benzaquen, Itamar (14 January 2020). "Israeli ministry paying for anti-BDS propaganda in major news outlets". +972 Magazine. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2020. Nathan-Kazis, Josh (31 December 2018). "To 'Support' Israel". The Forward. Archived from the original on 30 October 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2020. Nathan-Kazis, Josh (11 October 2018). "Jewish Charity Admits Funding Group Tied To Canary Mission Blacklist". The Forward. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2020. Kane, Alex (22 November 2018). ""It's Killing the Student Movement": Canary Mission's Blacklist of Pro-Palestine Activists Is Taking a Toll". The Intercept. Archived from the original on 9 October 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2020. "BDS Advocates Receive Bogus "Cease and Desist" Letters Citing Failed NY Anti-BDS Legislation". Palestine Legal. 6 September 2017. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2020. Pink, Aiden (15 November 2017). "BDS Campaign Wins Historic Victory At University Of Michigan On 11th Attempt". The Forward. Archived from the original on 28 September 2020. Retrieved 9 August 2020. Gasper, Phil (2007). "Boycotts and academic freedom: Hypocrisy and double standards at U.S. universities". International Socialist Review. Archived from the original on 11 August 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2020. Chotiner, Isaac (24 January 2019). "Looking at Anti-Semitism on the Left and the Right: An Interview with Deborah E. Lipstadt". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 1 October 2020. Gordin, Jeremy (21 December 2012). "South Africa's Ruling Party Endorses BDS Campaign Against Israel". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 27 August 2017. Retrieved 12 September 2018. Pink, Aiden (31 August 2020). "U.S. pro-Israel groups failed to disclose grants from Israeli government". The Forward. Archived from the original on 18 June 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2020. "G4S loses major contract in Colombia after BDS campaign". Middle East Monitor. 25 February 2016. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 13 November 2020. "BDS movement claims victory as U.S. county drops Israeli security firm". Haaretz. 26 November 2014. Archived from the original on 1 October 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020. Moore, Jack (10 March 2016). "BDS claims victory as G4S to exit from Israel". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 30 May 2020. Retrieved 13 November 2020. "G4S: Securing Israeli Apartheid". BDS Movement. 12 April 2016. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Calls for escalating G4S boycott over Al-Aqsa violations". Middle East Monitor. 27 July 2017. Archived from the original on 28 August 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020. "G4S Sells Israel Operation for $110 Million, Denies BDS Pressure". Haaretz.com. 2 December 2016. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2020. Rosenfield, Arno (25 March 2021). "Leading Jewish scholars say BDS, one-state solution are not antisemitic". The Forward. Archived from the original on 25 March 2021. Retrieved 8 October 2021. Thrall, Nathan (14 August 2018). "BDS: how a controversial non-violent movement has transformed the Israeli-Palestinian debate". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Trew, Bel (15 May 2019). "Tourists come face-to-face with Eurovision's darker side: 'No pride in apartheid'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 13 June 2019. Retrieved 16 May 2019. Holmes, Oliver (7 May 2019). "Israel says it will not allow in activists planning to 'disturb' Eurovision". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 June 2019. Retrieved 16 May 2019. "BDS-backed Twitter bot network is targeting Eurovision, Israel charges". The Times of Israel. 3 May 2019. Archived from the original on 25 May 2019. Retrieved 16 May 2019. Winstanley, Asa (31 May 2019). "The BDS campaign against Eurovision was a major success". Middle East Monitor. Archived from the original on 30 September 2020. Retrieved 22 November 2020. Fayeq, Oweis (5 July 2009). "Handala and the Cartoons of Naji al-Ali". oweis. Archived from the original on 18 June 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2020. "BDS: The Global Campaign to Delegitimize Israel" (PDF). Anti-Defamation League. 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 January 2021. Retrieved 23 November 2020. Nasr, Joseph; Alkousaa, Riham (17 May 2019). "Germany designates BDS Israel boycott movement as anti-Semitic". Reuters. Archived from the original on 4 November 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2020. "Oscar nominees urged to skip Israel swag bag trip". Reuters. 25 February 2016. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 22 November 2020. Stoil, Rebecca (20 April 2016). "Ties between Hamas-linked charities and BDS highlighted in Congressional testimony". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 29 June 2017. Schanzer, Jonathan (19 April 2016). "Israel Imperiled: Threats to the Jewish State" (PDF). U.S. House of Representatives Document Repository. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 June 2017. Retrieved 29 June 2017. Winer, Stuart; Ahren, Raphael (17 July 2018). "EU: Israel spreads 'disinformation' by alleging we fund terror-tied BDS efforts". Archived from the original on 28 May 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2020. Kane, Alex (11 November 2019). "Israel's Scheme To Defund the BDS Movement". In These Times. Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020. Goldstein, Eric (1 February 2021). "Biden Should Defend the Right to Call for a Boycott". Human Rights Watch. Archived from the original on 2 October 2021. Retrieved 7 October 2021. "The BDS Movement Promotes Delegitimization against Israel". Reut Institute. 12 June 2010. Archived from the original on 22 July 2010. Retrieved 7 October 2020. Rivlin, Reuven (28 March 2016). "Taking down BDS". ynetnews. Archived from the original on 1 June 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2020. Isserovitz, Haim (20 June 2015). "BDS movement seeks to empty Israel of Jews, former Spanish PM says". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 3 December 2020. Mansoor, Sanya (4 December 2020). "Pompeo is Cracking Down on a Movement to Boycott Israel. Here's What to Know About BDS". Time. Archived from the original on 6 December 2020. Retrieved 6 December 2020. Michalski, Wenzel (28 May 2019). "Anti-Boycott Measure Wrong Way to Combat Anti-Semitism". Human Rights Watch. Archived from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2020. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions. Wikisource has original text related to this article: Palestinian civil society calls for boycott, divestment and sanctions against Israel BDS movement, official website.