Space Patrol Luluco (Japanese: 宇宙パトロールルル子, Hepburn: Uchū Patorōru Ruruko) is a Japanese anime television series created by Hiroyuki Imaishi and produced by Studio Trigger. It aired from April to June 2016 as part of the Ultra Super Anime Time programming block. Luluco is a normal girl living in the solar system frontier space colonization zone Ogikubo. Her father works for the zone's Space Patrol division. Despite being a part of this wondrous district full of alien immigrants, Luluco often lives an ordinary life as a student. When her father is accidentally frozen by alien contraband, Luluco is forced to request help from her father's Space Patrol division. She is appointed a member of the Space Patrol by the division chief, Over Justice, in order to pay the fees required to revive her father. From then on, Luluco's previously normal life faces drastic changes as she is sent on daily missions to protect Ogikubo from space criminals. On these missions she bands together with her assigned partner and alien exchange student ΑΩ (pronounced "Alpha Omega") Nova, as well as their fairly normal mutual classmate Midori. Luluco (ルル子, Ruruko) Voiced by: M·A·O (Japanese); Brittney Karbowski (English) A second-year junior high school student living with her father in Ogikubo. Innocent, wistful, and nervous, her one true wish is to lead a normal life despite her unusual living situation. She has the ability to transform into a gun via "Judgement Gun Morphing." Alpha Omega Nova (ΑΩ・ノヴァ, Arufa Omega Nova) Voiced by: Junya Enoki (Japanese); Justin Briner (English) A Space Patrol officer and Luluco's partner. He is a recent transfer student at Space Middle School and her classmate. Luluco gains feelings for him and tries her best to get him to notice them. Midori Save-The-World (ミドリ) Voiced by: Mayumi Shintani (Japanese); Jamie Marchi (English) A fellow classmate at Luluco's school. After being caught as the publisher and distributor of a quasi-legal Blackhole App, she volunteers to join the Space Patrol in order to get out of any punishments for her crimes, as well as to spend more time at the side of ΑΩ Nova. General Manager Over Justice (オーバージャスティス本部長, Ōbā Jasutisu Honbuchō) Voiced by: Tetsu Inada (Japanese); Bob Carter (English) A flaming skeleton who is the head of the Space Patrol's Ogikubo Branch and Luluco's boss. He is completely static and only stands up from his desk when the situation calls for it. Secretary (秘書, Hisho) A temporary staff worker at the Space Patrol. She serves as Over Justice's personal secretary. Unlike the rest of the cast, she is mute and rarely expresses any form of emotion. Keiji (ケイジ) Voiced by: Mitsuo Iwata (Japanese); Brett Weaver (English) A Space Patrol officer and Luluco's father who becomes frozen after eating a strange pill. Lalaco Godspeed (ララ子・ゴッドスピード, Rarako Goddosupīdo) Voiced by: Yōko Honna (Japanese); Monica Rial (English) Luluco's mother and a space pirate. She seeks to take Ogikubo and sell to the highest bidder. Just like the members of the Space Patrol, she has a gun morphing ability, called "God Pirate's Gun Morphing". Space Patrol Galaxy Commander-in-Chief/Blackholeian (ブラックホール星人) Voiced by: Nobuyuki Hiyama (Japanese); Christopher Bevins (English) An evil alien masquerading as the leader of the Space Patrol. He manipulates the cast from behind the scenes in order to get what he wants, as his species is prone to shoplifting and other forms of petty crime. The series is written and directed by Hiroyuki Imaishi with character design by Mago and Yusuke Yoshigaki. The opening theme is "CRYmax Dohejitsu" (CRYまっくすド平日, Kuraimakkusu Dohejitsu, lit. "CRYmax Ultra Ordinary Days") by Fujirokku, while the ending theme is "Pipo Password" by TeddyLoid feat. Bonjour Suzuki. The series features cameo appearances from other Trigger animations, including Kill la Kill, Little Witch Academia, Inferno Cop, Kiznaiver, and Sex and Violence with Machspeed. Crunchyroll has licensed the series in North America and simulcasted the show in Japanese with english subtitles, while Funimation would later produce a dub on October 10, 2017. However, due to the split between both Crunchyroll and Funimation, the English dub was removed and put on Crunchyroll, as well as being taken off of digital purchasing sites. The average run time is 8 minutes for all episodes. A manga adaptation illustrated by Nanboku began serialization in Shueisha's Ultra Jump magazine in April and June 2016 and was released in English by Crunchyroll. "Watch Space Patrol Luluco Sub & Dub". Funimation. Archived from the original on March 23, 2020. Retrieved February 6, 2024. Loveridge, Lynzee (May 27, 2016). "Space Patrol Luluco Crosses Over with Animator Expo's SEX and VIOLENCE with MACHSPEED". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on January 2, 2024. Retrieved February 6, 2024. Minto, Evan (February 2, 2018). "Ranking the Best Anime from Studio Trigger". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved February 6, 2024. "Hiroyuki Imaishi's Uchū Patrol Luluco TV Anime Reveals Cast, Characters, Staff, Story". Anime News Network. February 7, 2016. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved February 12, 2016. "スタッフ&キャスト". Trigger. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved October 13, 2017. "Funimation Announces English Dub Casts for Space Patrol Luluco, Regalia: The Three Sacred Stars Anime". Anime News Network. July 20, 2017. Archived from the original on July 20, 2017. Retrieved July 20, 2017. "14th Animator Expo Short is Hiroyuki Imaishi's 'Sex and Violence with Mach Speed'". Anime News Network. March 17, 2015. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Funimation to Release Space Patrol Luluco, Super Lovers Anime on Home Video". Anime News Network. July 14, 2017. Archived from the original on July 15, 2017. Retrieved July 14, 2017. "Crunchyroll - Forum - Update to the Crunchyroll x Funimation Partnership". Archived from the original on October 18, 2018. "Space Patrol Luluco". April 8, 2016. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved May 9, 2016. "Space Patrol Luluco". April 22, 2016. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved May 9, 2016. "Space Patrol Luluco". April 29, 2016. "Crunchyroll Adds Space Patrol Luluco Manga, Live-Action Nodame Cantabile Show". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved July 15, 2017. Official website (in Japanese) Space Patrol Luluco (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia