Justin Pierre James Trudeau PC MP (/ˈtruːdoʊ, truːˈdoʊ/ TROO-doh, troo-DOH, French: [ʒystɛ̃ pjɛʁ dʒɛms tʁydo]; born December 25, 1971) is a Canadian politician who has served as the 23rd prime minister of Canada since 2015 and the leader of the Liberal Party since 2013. Trudeau was born in Ottawa, Ontario and attended Collège Jean-de-Brébeuf. He graduated from McGill University in 1994 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in literature, then in 1998 acquired a Bachelor of Education degree from the University of British Columbia. After graduating he taught at the secondary school level in Vancouver, before relocating back to Montreal in 2002 to further his studies. He was chair for the youth charity Katimavik and director of the not-for-profit Canadian Avalanche Association. In 2006, he was appointed as chair of the Liberal Party's Task Force on Youth Renewal. In the 2008 federal election, he was elected to represent the riding of Papineau in the House of Commons. He was the Liberal Party's Official Opposition critic for youth and multiculturalism in 2009, and the following year he became critic for citizenship and immigration. In 2011, he was appointed as a critic for secondary education and sport. Trudeau won the leadership of the Liberal Party in April 2013 and led his party to victory in the 2015 federal election, moving the third-placed Liberals from 36 seats to 184 seats, the largest-ever numerical increase by a party in a Canadian federal election. Trudeau is the second-youngest prime minister in Canadian history after Joe Clark; he is also the first to be the child of a previous holder of the post, as the eldest son of Pierre Trudeau. Major government initiatives he undertook during his first term as prime minister included legalizing recreational marijuana through the Cannabis Act; attempting Senate appointment reform by establishing the Independent Advisory Board for Senate Appointments and establishing the federal carbon tax. In foreign policy, Trudeau's government negotiated trade deals such as the Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement (CUSMA) and the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, and signed the Paris Agreement on climate change. He was sanctioned by Canada's ethics commissioner for violating conflict of interest rules regarding the Aga Khan affair, and later again with the SNC-Lavalin affair. Trudeau led the Liberals to a minority government victory in the 2019 federal election. During his second term, his government responded to the COVID-19 pandemic, announced an "assault-style" weapons ban in response to the 2020 Nova Scotia attacks, and launched a national child care program. He was investigated for a third time by the ethics commissioner for his part in the WE Charity scandal, but was cleared of wrongdoing. In the 2021 federal election, he led the Liberals to another minority government. During his third term, Trudeau invoked the Emergencies Act in response to the Freedom Convoy protests (the first time the act was brought into force since it was enacted in 1988) and responded to the Russian invasion of Ukraine by imposing sanctions on Russia and authorizing military aid to Ukraine. His government also entered into a confidence and supply agreement with the New Democratic Party (NDP), launching a national dental care program for low income Canadians and a framework for national Pharmacare. On June 23, 1971, the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) announced that Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau's wife of four months, Margaret Trudeau (née Sinclair), was pregnant and due in December. Justin Trudeau was born on December 25, 1971, at 9:27 pm EST at the Ottawa Civic Hospital. He is the second child in Canadian history to be born to a prime minister in office; the first was John A. Macdonald's daughter Margaret Mary Theodora Macdonald (February 8, 1869 – January 28, 1933). Trudeau's younger brothers Alexandre (Sacha) (born December 25, 1973) and Michel (October 2, 1975 – November 13, 1998) were the third and fourth. Trudeau is predominantly of Scottish and French Canadian descent. His grandfathers were businessman Charles-Émile Trudeau and Scottish-born James Sinclair, who was minister of fisheries in the cabinet of Prime Minister Louis St. Laurent. Trudeau's maternal great-grandfather Thomas Bernard was born in Makassar, Indonesia and immigrated to Penticton, British Columbia, in 1906 at age 15 with his family. Through the Bernard family, kinsmen of the Earls of Bandon, Trudeau is the fifth great-grandson of Major-General William Farquhar, a leader in the founding of modern Singapore; Trudeau also has remote ethnic Malaccan and Nias ancestry. Trudeau was baptized with his father's niece Anne Rouleau-Danis as godmother and his mother's brother-in-law Thomas Walker as godfather, at Ottawa's Notre Dame Basilica on the afternoon of January 16, 1972, which marked his first public appearance. and given the names "Justin Pierre James". On April 14, 1972, Trudeau's father and mother hosted a gala at the National Arts Centre, at which visiting U.S. president Richard Nixon said, "I'd like to toast the future prime minister of Canada, to Justin Pierre Trudeau" to which Pierre Trudeau responded that should his son ever assume the role, he hoped he would have "the grace and skill of the president". Earlier that day first lady Pat Nixon had visited him in his nursery and gifted him a stuffed toy Snoopy. Trudeau's parents announced their separation in 1977, when he was five years old; his father was given primary custody. There were repeated rumours of a reconciliation for many years afterwards. However his mother eventually filed for a no-fault divorce which the Supreme Court of Ontario granted in 1984; his father had announced his intention to retire as prime minister a month earlier. Eventually his parents came to an amicable joint-custody arrangement and learned to get along quite well. Interviewed in October 1979, his nanny Dianne Lavergne was quoted, "Justin is a mommy's boy, so it's not easy, but children's hurts mend very quickly. And they're lucky kids, anyway." Of his mother and father's marriage, Trudeau said in 2009, "They loved each other incredibly, passionately, completely. But there was 30 years between them, and my mom never was an equal partner in what encompassed my father's life, his duty, his country." Trudeau has three half-siblings, Kyle and Alicia, from his mother's remarriage to Fried Kemper, and Sarah, from his father's relationship with Deborah Coyne. Trudeau lived at 24 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, the official residence of Canada's prime minister, from his birth until his father's government was defeated in the 1979 federal election. The Trudeaus were expected to move into Stornoway, the residence of the leader of the Official Opposition, but because of flooding in the basement, Prime Minister Joe Clark offered them Harrington Lake, the prime minister's official country retreat in Gatineau Park, with the expectation they would move into Stornoway at the start of July. However, the repairs were not complete, so Pierre Trudeau took a prolonged vacation with his sons to the Nova Scotia summer home of his friend, Member of Parliament Don Johnston, and later sent his sons to stay with their maternal grandparents in North Vancouver for the rest of the summer while he slept at his friend's Ottawa apartment. Trudeau and his brothers returned to Ottawa for the start of the school year but lived only on the top floor of Stornoway while repairs continued on the bottom floor. His mother purchased and moved into a new home nearby at 95 Victoria Street in Ottawa's New Edinburgh neighbourhood in September 1979. Pierre Trudeau and his sons returned to the prime minister's official residence after the February 1980 election that returned him to the Prime Minister's Office. His father had intended Trudeau to begin his formal education at a French-language lycée, but Trudeau's mother convinced his father of the importance of sending their sons to a public school. In the end, Trudeau was enrolled in 1976 in the French immersion program at Rockcliffe Park Public School. It was the same school his mother had attended for two years while her father was a member of Parliament. He could have been dropped off by limousine, but his parents elected he take the school bus albeit with a Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) car following. This was followed by one year at the private Lycée Claudel d'Ottawa. After his father's retirement in June 1984, his mother remained at her New Edinburgh home while the rest of the family moved into his father's home at 1418 Pine Avenue, Montreal known as Cormier House, where the following autumn he began attending the private Collège Jean-de-Brébeuf, his father's alma mater. The school had begun as a Jesuit school but was non-denominational by the time Justin matriculated. In 2008, Trudeau said that of all his early family outings he enjoyed camping with his father the most, because "that was where our father got to be just our father – a dad in the woods". During the summers his father would send him and his brothers to Camp Ahmek, on Canoe Lake in Algonquin Provincial Park, where he would later work in his first paid job as a camp counsellor. Trudeau and his brothers were given shares in two numbered companies by their father: the first containing a portfolio of securities, from which they receive regular dividends, up to $20,000 per year; and the second which receives royalties from their father's autobiography and other sources, about $10,000 a year. As of August 2011, the first numbered company had assets of $1.2 million. The Trudeau brothers were also given a country estate of about 50 hectares in the Laurentians with a home designed by the esteemed Canadian architect Arthur Erickson, and the Cormier House in Montreal. The country estate land was estimated to be worth $2.7 million in 2016. Trudeau has a bachelor of arts degree in literature from McGill University and a bachelor of education degree from the University of British Columbia. In his first year at McGill, Trudeau became acquainted with his future principal secretary, Gerald Butts, through their mutual friend, Jonathan Ablett. Butts invited Trudeau to join the McGill Debating Union. They bonded while driving back to Montreal after a debate tournament at Princeton University. After graduation, Trudeau stayed in Vancouver where he became a substitute teacher at local schools such as Killarney Secondary and worked permanently as a French and math teacher at the private West Point Grey Academy. He became a roommate at the Douglas Lodge with fellow West Point Grey Academy faculty member and friend Christopher Ingvaldson. From 2002 to 2004, he studied engineering at the École Polytechnique de Montréal, affiliated with Université de Montréal, but did not graduate. He started a master's degree in environmental geography at McGill but withdrew from the program to seek public office. In August 2000, Trudeau attended the Kokanee Summit in Creston, British Columbia, to raise funds in honour of his brother Michel Trudeau and other avalanche victims. After the event, an unsigned editorial in the Creston Valley Advance (a local newspaper) accused Trudeau of having groped an unnamed female reporter while at the music festival. The editorial stated Trudeau provided a "day-late" apology to the reporter, saying, "If I had known you were reporting for a national paper, I never would have been so forward". In 2018, Trudeau was questioned about the groping incident but said he did not remember any negative incidents from that time. His apology and later statement about the event have been described as hypocritical, while responses to the story have been described as a witch hunt or non-story. In October 2000, Trudeau, then 28, emerged as a prominent figure after delivering a eulogy at his father's state funeral. The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) received numerous calls to rebroadcast the speech after its initial transmission, and leading Quebec politician Claude Ryan described it as "perhaps ... the first manifestation of a dynasty". A book issued by the CBC in 2003 included the speech in its list of significant Canadian events from the past fifty years. In 2007, Trudeau starred in the two-part CBC Television miniseries The Great War, which gave an account of Canada's participation in the First World War. He portrayed his fifth cousin, twice removed, Major Talbot Mercer Papineau, who was killed on October 30, 1917, during the Battle of Passchendaele. Trudeau is one of several children of former prime ministers who have become Canadian media personalities. The others are Ben Mulroney (son of Brian Mulroney), Catherine Clark (daughter of Joe Clark), and Trudeau's younger brother, Alexandre. Ben Mulroney was a guest at Trudeau's wedding. Trudeau and his family started the Kokanee Glacier Alpine Campaign for winter sports safety in 2000, two years after his brother Michel died in an avalanche during a ski trip. In 2002, Trudeau criticized the Government of British Columbia's decision to stop its funding for a public avalanche warning system. From 2002 to 2006, Trudeau chaired the Katimavik youth program, a project started by longtime family friend Jacques Hébert. In 2002–03, Trudeau was a panelist on CBC Radio's Canada Reads series, where he championed The Colony of Unrequited Dreams by Wayne Johnston. Trudeau and his brother Alexandre inaugurated the Trudeau Centre for Peace and Conflict Studies at the University of Toronto in April 2004; the centre later became a part of the Munk School of Global Affairs. In 2006, he hosted the presentation ceremony for the Giller Prize for literature. In 2005, Trudeau fought against a proposed $100-million zinc mine that he argued would poison the Nahanni River, a United Nations World Heritage Site located in the Northwest Territories. He was quoted as saying, "The river is an absolutely magnificent, magical place. I'm not saying mining is wrong ... but that is not the place for it. It's just the wrong thing to be doing." On September 17, 2006, Trudeau was the master of ceremonies at a Toronto rally organized by Roméo Dallaire that called for Canadian participation in resolving the Darfur crisis. Trudeau supported the Liberal Party from a young age, offering his support to party leader John Turner in the 1988 federal election. Two years later, he defended Canadian federalism at a student event at the Collège Jean-de-Brébeuf, which he attended. Following his father's death, Trudeau became more involved with the Liberal Party throughout the 2000s. Along with Olympian Charmaine Crooks, he co-hosted a tribute to outgoing prime minister Jean Chrétien at the party's 2003 leadership convention, and was appointed to chair a task force on youth renewal after the party's defeat in the 2006 federal election. In October 2006, Trudeau criticized Quebec nationalism by describing political nationalism generally as an "old idea from the 19th century", "based on a smallness of thought" and not relevant to modern Quebec. This comment was seen as a criticism of Michael Ignatieff, then a candidate in the 2006 Liberal Party leadership election, who was promoting recognition of Quebec as a nation. Trudeau later wrote a public letter on the subject, describing the idea of Quebec nationhood as "against everything my father ever believed". Trudeau announced his support for leadership candidate Gerard Kennedy shortly before the 2006 convention and introduced Kennedy during the candidates' final speeches. When Kennedy dropped off after the second ballot, Trudeau joined him in supporting the ultimate winner, Stéphane Dion. Rumours circulated in early 2007 that Trudeau would run in an upcoming by-election in the Montreal riding of Outremont. The Montreal newspaper La Presse reported despite Trudeau's keenness, Liberal leader Stéphane Dion wanted Outremont for a star candidate who could help rebuild the Liberal Party. Instead, Trudeau announced that he would seek the Liberal nomination in the nearby riding of Papineau for the next general election. The riding, which had been held for 26 years by André Ouellet, a senior minister under his father, had been in Liberal hands for 53 years before falling to the Bloc Québécois in 2006. On April 29, 2007, Trudeau won the Liberal party's nomination, picking up 690 votes to 350 for Deros and 220 for Giordano against Mary Deros, a Montreal city councillor and Basilio Giordano, the publisher of a local Italian-language newspaper. Prime Minister Stephen Harper called an election for October 14, 2008, by which time Trudeau had been campaigning for a year in Papineau. On election day, Trudeau narrowly defeated Bloc Québécois incumbent Vivian Barbot. Following his election win, Edward Greenspon, editor-in-chief of The Globe and Mail, noted that Trudeau would "be viewed as few other rookie MPs are—as a potential future Prime Minister—and scrutinized through that lens". The Conservative Party won a minority government in the 2008 election, and Trudeau entered parliament as a member of the Official Opposition. Trudeau's first legislative act was a motion that called for the creation of a "national voluntary service policy for young people". He later co-chaired the Liberal Party's April 2009 national convention in Vancouver, and in October of the same year he was appointed as the party's critic for multiculturalism and youth. In September 2010, he was reassigned as critic for youth, citizenship, and immigration. During that time, he criticized the government's legislation targeting human smuggling, which he argued would penalize the victims of smuggling. Trudeau sparked controversy when it was revealed that he earned $1.3 million in public speaking fees from charities and school boards across Canada, $277,000 of which Trudeau received after becoming an MP. He encouraged an increase of Canada's relief efforts after the 2010 Haiti earthquake, and sought more accessible immigration procedures for Haitians moving to Canada in the time of crisis. His own riding includes a significant Haitian community. Trudeau was re-elected in Papineau in the 2011 federal election, as the Liberal Party fell to third-party standing in the House of Commons with only thirty-four seats. Ignatieff resigned as party leader immediately after the election, and rumours again circulated that Trudeau could run to become his successor. On this occasion, Trudeau said, "I don't feel I should be closing off any options ... because of the history packaged into my name, a lot of people are turning to me in a way that ... to be blunt, concerns me." Weeks after the election, Toronto MP Bob Rae was selected as the interim leader until the party's leadership convention, which was later decided to be held in April 2013. Rae appointed Trudeau as the party's critic for post-secondary education, youth and amateur sport. After his re-election, he travelled the country hosting fundraisers for charities and the Liberal Party. Trudeau wanted to take part in a charity boxing match on behalf of the cancer research fundraising event Fight for the Cure, but was having difficulty finding a Conservative opponent until Conservative senator Patrick Brazeau agreed when asked on Trudeau's behalf by their mutual hairdresser Stefania Capovilla. The fight on March 31, 2012, in Ottawa at the Hampton Inn was broadcast live on Sun News with commentary by Ezra Levant and Brian Lilley and Trudeau won in the third round, the result considered an upset. After Dion's resignation as Liberal leader in 2008, Trudeau's name was mentioned as a potential candidate with polls showing him as a favourite among Canadians for the position. However, Trudeau did not enter the race and Michael Ignatieff was named leader in December 2008. After the party's poor showing in the 2011 election, Ignatieff resigned from the leadership and Trudeau was again seen as a potential candidate to lead the party. Following the election, Trudeau said he was undecided about seeking the leadership; months later on October 12 at Wilfrid Laurier University, he announced he would not seek the post because he had a young family. When interim leader Bob Rae, who was also seen as a frontrunner, announced he would not be entering the race in June 2012, Trudeau was hit with a "tsunami" of calls from supporters to reconsider his earlier decision to not seek the leadership. Opinion polling conducted by several pollsters showed that if Trudeau were to become leader the Liberal Party would surge in support, from a distant third place to either being competitive with the Conservative Party or leading them. In July 2012, Trudeau stated that he would reconsider his earlier decision to not seek the leadership and would announce his final decision at the end of the summer. On September 26, 2012, multiple media outlets started reporting that Trudeau would launch his leadership bid the following week. While Trudeau was seen as a frontrunner for the leadership of the Liberal Party, he was criticized for his perceived lack of substance. During his time as a member of Parliament, he spoke little on policy matters and it was not known where he stood on many issues such as the economy and foreign affairs. Some strategists and pundits believed the leadership would be the time for Trudeau to be tested on these issues; however, there was also fear within the party that his celebrity status and large lead might deter other strong candidates from entering the leadership race. On October 2, 2012, Trudeau held a rally in Montreal to launch his bid for the leadership of the Liberal Party. The core people on his campaign team were considered longtime friends, and all in their 30s and 40s. His senior advisor was Gerald Butts, the former president of WWF-Canada who had previously been principal secretary to former Ontario premier Dalton McGuinty. Other senior aides included campaign manager Katie Telford, and policy advisors Mike McNeir and Robert Asselin, who had all worked for recent Liberal Party leaders. His brother Alexandre also took a break from his documentary work to be a senior advisor on Trudeau's campaign. During the leadership campaign three by-elections were held on November 26, 2012. The riding Calgary Centre was expected to be a three-way race between the Conservatives, Liberals and Green Party. A week before by-election day Sun Media reported on comments Trudeau had made in a 2010 interview with Télé-Québec, in which he said, "Canada isn't doing well right now because it's Albertans who control our community and socio-democratic agenda." Trudeau's campaign advisor said that the comments were being brought up now because of the close race in Calgary Centre. The following day, Trudeau apologized, saying he was wrong to use "Alberta" as "shorthand" in referring to Stephen Harper's government. The Conservatives held onto Calgary Centre in the by-election by less than 1,200 votes. Liberal candidate Harvey Locke said he lost the by-election on his own and that comments made by Trudeau did not influence the outcome. Fellow leadership candidate Marc Garneau, seen as Trudeau's main challenger in the race, criticized Trudeau for not releasing enough substantial policy positions. Garneau called on him to release more detailed policies before members and supporters begin to vote. Garneau later challenged Trudeau to a one-on-one debate, and said that if Trudeau could not defend his ideas in a debate against him, he wouldn't be able to do so against Prime Minister Harper. Trudeau clashed in debates with challenger Joyce Murray, who was the only Liberal leadership candidate to speak out strongly in favour of electing the House of Commons with a system of proportional representation. She challenged Trudeau over his support for a preferential ballot voting system. On March 13, 2013, Garneau dropped out of the leadership race, saying that polling conducted by his campaign showed he would be unable to defeat Trudeau. With Joyce Murray, the last challenger, receiving significant press time, more Liberal politicians and public figures declared themselves for Trudeau. Trudeau was declared the winner of the leadership election on April 14, 2013, garnering 80.1 per cent of 30,800 votes. Joyce Murray finished in second place with 10.2 per cent points, ahead of Martha Hall Findlay's 5.7 per cent. Trudeau had lost only five ridings, all to Murray and all in BC. In the days following his victory in the leadership race, snapshot polls recorded a surge in support for the Liberal party. In 2013, Trudeau chose to give up his seat at the funeral of Nelson Mandela, in deference to Irwin Cotler as representative of the Liberal Party of Canada, because of Cotler's work for and with Nelson Mandela in fighting apartheid. During the leadership campaign Trudeau pledged to park all his assets, exclusive of real estate holdings, into a blind trust which is atypical for opposition MPs, including leaders. According to documents obtained by the Ottawa Citizen, he fulfilled the pledge in July 2013 when the blind trust was set up by BMO Private Banking. On January 27, 2014, Trudeau and MP Carolyn Bennett escorted Chrystia Freeland into the House of Commons, as is traditional for by-election victors. Trudeau launched an internet video the week before the 2014 Liberal party convention titled "An economy that benefits us all" in which he narrates his economic platform. He said that Canada's debt to GDP ratios have come down in recent years and now it's time for Ottawa to "step up". On October 19, 2015, after the longest official campaign in over a century, Trudeau led the Liberals to a decisive victory in the federal election. The Liberals won 184 of the 338 seats, with 39.5% of the popular vote, for a strong majority government; a gain of 150 seats compared to the 2011 federal election. This was the second-best performance in the party's history. The Liberals won mostly on the strength of a solid performance in the eastern half of the country. In addition to taking all of Atlantic Canada and Toronto, they won 40 seats in Quebec—the most that the Liberals had won in that province since Trudeau's father led them to a near-sweep of the province in 1980, and also the first time since then that the Liberals won a majority of Quebec's seats in an election. The 150-seat gain was the biggest numerical increase for a single party since Confederation and marked the first time that a party had rebounded from third place in the Commons to a majority government. In addition to the appeal of his party's platform, Trudeau's success has been credited to his performance both on the campaign trail and televised leaders' debates exceeding the lowered expectations created by Conservative advertisements and conservative media outlets. Trudeau declared victory shortly after CBC News projected that he had won a majority government. He began his speech with a reference to former Liberal prime minister Wilfrid Laurier's "sunny ways" (French: voies ensoleillées) approach to bringing Canadians together despite their differences. According to Trudeau, Laurier "knew that politics can be a positive force, and that's the message Canadians have sent today". Harper announced his resignation as the leader of the Conservative Party that night. Trudeau and the rest of the Cabinet were sworn in by Governor General David Johnston on November 4, 2015. He said that his first legislative priority was to lower taxes for middle-income Canadians and raise taxes for the top one per cent of income earners after parliament was reconvened on December 3, 2015. Trudeau also issued a statement promising to rebuild relations with Indigenous peoples in Canada and run an open, ethical and transparent government. On November 5, 2015, during the first Liberal caucus meeting since forming a majority government, the party announced that it would reinstate the mandatory long-form census that had been scrapped in 2010, effective with the 2016 census. As prime minister, Trudeau launched three major independent investigations: the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women (MMIWG), the Joint Federal/Provincial Commission into the 2020 Nova Scotia attacks (in partnership with the Government of Nova Scotia), and the Public Inquiry into Foreign Interference in Federal Electoral Processes and Democratic Institutions. The latter was called in response to allegations of Chinese government interference in the 2019 and 2021 Canadian federal elections, but also deals with interference from other states deemed hostile to Canada. The MMIWG investigation found that Canada's response to this issue amounts to genocide, a finding Trudeau said he accepted. Trudeau was criticized by opposition members in November 2016 for his fundraising tactics which they saw as "cash for access" schemes. Trudeau attended fundraisers where attendees paid an upward of $1500 for access to him and other cabinet members. In some instances, the events were attended by foreign businessmen who needed government approval for their businesses. Trudeau defended his fundraising tactics, saying that they were not in breach of any ethics rules. He also stated that he was lobbied at the fundraisers but not influenced. In 2017, Trudeau introduced legislation that would eliminate such exclusive events by requiring increased transparency for political fundraisers. In January 2017, the ethics commissioner, Mary Dawson, began an investigation into Trudeau for a vacation he and his family took to Aga Khan IV's private island in the Bahamas. The ethics commissioner's report, released in December 2017, found that Trudeau had violated four provisions of the Conflict of Interest Act. He became the first sitting prime minister to break federal conflict of interest rules. In 2022, it was reported that the Royal Canadian Mounted Police had considered bringing criminal charges against Trudeau over the affair. In February 2018, Trudeau was criticized when his government invited Khalistani nationalist Jaspal Atwal to the Canadian High Commission's dinner party in Delhi. Atwal had previously been convicted for the shooting and attempted murder of Indian Cabinet minister Malkiat Singh Sidhu in 1986, as well as the assault on former BC premier Ujjal Dosanjh in 1985. Following the dinner, the PMO rescinded the invitation, and apologized for the incident. On February 8, 2019, The Globe and Mail reported that sources close to the government said that the Prime Minister's Office had allegedly attempted to influence Attorney General Jody Wilson-Raybould concerning an ongoing prosecution of SNC-Lavalin. When asked about the allegations, Trudeau said that the story in the Globe was false and that he had never "directed" Wilson-Raybould concerning the case. Wilson-Raybould did not comment on the matter, citing solicitor-client privilege. Soon after, Trudeau voluntarily waived privilege and cabinet confidences, permitting her to speak. On February 11, the ethics commissioner announced the opening of an investigation into the allegations. Trudeau said he "welcomed the investigation". The Justice Committee of the House of Commons has conducted a series of hearings on the alleged interference. The investigation heard from several witnesses, including Jody Wilson-Raybould, who submitted as evidence a telephone call she secretly recorded between herself and Privy Council Clerk Michael Wernick, which was subsequently released to the public. On the recording, Wernick is heard asking to understand why the "DPA route" is not being used, stating that people were "talking past each other", and suggesting Trudeau obtain independent legal advice from former Supreme Court chief justice Beverly McLachlin. Wilson-Raybould is heard suggesting that Trudeau would be "breaching a constitutional principle of prosecutorial independence". On March 19, 2019, the Liberal committee members voted as a bloc to shut down the Justice Committee's investigation. Trudeau was the subject of an investigation by the ethics commissioner, pursuant to the Conflict of Interest Act, in regards to criminal charges against SNC-Lavalin in the SNC-Lavalin affair. The commission's final report, issued August 14, 2019, concluded "Mr. Trudeau contravened section 9 of the Act". On September 11, 2019, Trudeau visited Governor General Julie Payette, to request the dissolution of Parliament, and formally triggering an election. Prior to the formal start of the campaign, Trudeau announced his intention to only participate in the three leaders' debates, two organized by the Leaders' Debates Commission, and one organized by TVA. Other leader's debates were either cancelled or took place with an empty podium left on stage for Trudeau. In September 2019, controversial pictures and video were published showing Trudeau in brownface and blackface. On September 18, 2019, Time magazine published a photograph of Trudeau wearing brownface makeup in the spring of 2001, at an Arabian Nights-themed gala, while Trudeau was a teacher at West Point Grey Academy. Trudeau publicly apologized, agreeing the photo was racist and saying: "I shouldn't have done that. I should have known better and I didn't. I'm really sorry." He further went on to say "It was something that I didn't think was racist at the time, but now I recognize it was something racist to do". Trudeau also admitted to wearing blackface makeup in high school while singing "Day-O" at a talent show that was subsequently published by Global News. A third instance, a video, of Trudeau in racist dress was also published. After this video was published, Trudeau admitted he could not remember how often he had worn blackface makeup. In the days following the scandal, pollsters pointed out that many Canadians either were not bothered by the scandal or had accepted Trudeau's apology. Additionally, some minority community groups, racialized commentators and some of Trudeau's opponents came to his defence. Others were more critical, including members of his own party. While Trudeau's Liberal Party lost 20 seats in the House of Commons (lowering its total from 177 to 157) from the time of dissolution, they still won the most seats of any party—enough seats to allow Trudeau to form a minority government. For the first time since 1979, the party that garnered the largest share of the national popular vote did not win the most seats; the Liberals under Trudeau had 33.1 per cent of the popular vote, while the Conservatives under Andrew Scheer had 34.4 per cent. It was also the first time a government took power with less than 35 per cent of the national popular vote since the Conservatives of John A. Macdonald, in 1867, who had 34.8 per cent of the votes. In Alberta and Saskatchewan, the Liberal party won 14 per cent and 10 per cent of the popular vote, respectively. In Ontario, Liberals won all 25 Toronto seats and 24 of 29 seats in the surrounding suburbs of the Greater Toronto Area—reportedly due in part to the unpopularity of the Progressive Conservative party government of Premier Doug Ford. Trudeau was prime minister during the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic. His government's response to the pandemic included funds for provinces and territories to adapt to the new situation, funds for coronavirus research, travel restrictions, screening of international flights, self-isolation orders under the Quarantine Act, an industrial strategy, and a public health awareness campaign. Initially, Canada faced a shortage of personal protective equipment, as the Trudeau government had cut PPE stockpile funding in the previous years. To deal with the economic impact of the pandemic in 2020, Trudeau waived student loan payments, increased the Canada Child Benefit, doubled the annual Goods and Services Tax payment, and introduced the Canada Emergency Response Benefit (CERB) as part of a first package in March. In April 2020, Trudeau introduced the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy, the Canada Emergency Business Account, and the Canada Emergency Student Benefit. Trudeau also deployed the Canadian Forces in long-term care homes in Quebec and Ontario as part of Operation LASER. Throughout the pandemic, the federal government was also responsible for the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines. On May 12, 2020, the Trudeau government announced it had reached an exclusive deal with CanSino Biologics. However, due to deteriorating Canadian-Chinese relations, the Cansino deal fell through. On August 5, 2020, the Trudeau government created a plan to secure doses of the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines. Starting in December 2020, Trudeau oversaw the implementation of Canada's mass-vaccination program. The spread of COVID-19 in Canada continued beyond the initial outbreak, with a strong second wave in the fall of 2020 and an even more serious third wave in the spring of 2021. Throughout the crisis, Trudeau periodically extended the scope and duration of the federal aid programs. The 2021 Canadian federal budget planned to phase them out by the end of September 2021, and projected a $354.2-billion deficit in the 2020–21 fiscal year. While CERB was indeed phased out on September 26, the Canada Recovery Benefit (CBR) continued to provide support until October 23. The Canada Worker Lockdown Benefit was introduced that month to replace the CBR, and expanded during the spread of the Omicron variant in December 2021. Following complaints by opposition parties that the Trudeau family had ties to WE Charity, the ethics commissioner on July 3, 2020, announced an investigation into Trudeau's and the government's decision to have the charity administer a summer, student-grant program which could assist students financially during the COVID-19 pandemic. Trudeau responded by saying WE was the charity that had the capability to administer such a program. WE and the federal government decided to "part ways" leaving administration of the grant program to the federal government. WE Charity was criticized for its close ties to the Trudeau family; the investigation came after revelations that Trudeau's mother, brother, and wife were paid nearly $300,000 in total to speak at WE Charity events. On July 16, 2020, the ethics commissioner also announced the investigation was being expanded to include Finance Minister Bill Morneau. Trudeau was ultimately cleared of any wrongdoing by the ethics commissioner though Morneau was found to have broken the conflict of interest law. On August 15, 2021, Trudeau advised Governor General Mary Simon to dissolve parliament, scheduling an election for September 20. The election was called on the same day as the Fall of Kabul. In the first two weeks of the campaign, Trudeau received criticism for not acting fast enough in the face of the 2021 Taliban offensive to evacuate Canadian citizens and Afghans who supported Canada's military and diplomatic efforts during the War in Afghanistan. In the 2021 federal election, Trudeau secured a third mandate and his second minority government after winning 160 seats. However, the Liberals came in second in the national popular vote, behind the Conservatives. They received 32.6 percent of the popular vote, the lowest percentage of the national popular vote for a governing party in Canadian history. The Canada convoy protest, called the Freedom Convoy, was a protest in Canada against COVID-19 vaccine requirements for truckers to re-enter the country by land introduced by the Government of Canada on January 15, 2022. Originally composed of several routes traversing all of the Canadian provinces, the truck convoys converged on Ottawa. On January 29, the first day of protest at Parliament Hill, Trudeau moved to an undisclosed location. According to The Guardian, the demonstration developed to express a number of "antigovernment grievances", particularly against Trudeau. On January 31, Trudeau called the protests an "insult to truth". On February 3, he said that a military response was "not in the cards right now". On February 11, Reuters reported that Trudeau promised the US "quick action" regarding protesters who have forcefully blocked the Ambassador Bridge on the US-Canada border, the continent's busiest land border crossing." Trudeau subsequently indicated that there would be "robust police intervention" and called for all protesters to "go home." Trudeau invoked the Emergencies Act on February 14, 2022, for the first time since it was enacted in 1988, as a result of the public order emergency caused by the demonstrations in Ottawa. On February 23, 2022, Trudeau announced that the federal government would revoke the emergency declaration. Later that day, the governor general signed a proclamation revoking it. A year later, on February 17, 2023, a judicial inquiry into the use of the Emergencies Act concluded that the Trudeau government met the legal threshold required to invoke the act. In early 2024, Federal Court judge Richard Mosley ruled that the federal government's invocation of the Emergencies Act to end the 2022 convoy protest was "not justified" and infringed on Charter rights. The federal government plans to appeal the ruling. On March 22, 2022, the Liberals and the NDP announced that they had entered a confidence and supply agreement. The agreement, in which the NDP committed to supporting the Liberals in all votes of confidence for the duration of the 44th Parliament, included action towards key NDP priorities. The effect of the agreement was to avert any prospective early election, to allow the minority Trudeau government to complete it's full four year term ahead of the 2025 election. Among the policies included in the deal were the establishment of a national dental care program for low income Canadians, progress towards a national pharmacare program, labour reforms for federally regulated workers, and new taxes on financial institutions. In early 2024, the two parties reached an impasse over pharmacare, putting the deal in jeopardy. The agreement called for the development of a Canada Pharmacare Act by the end of 2023, setting out a framework for the system, however the NDP had agreed to extend the deadline to March 1 of the following year as negotiations became fraught. Major points of contention included the NDP's demand that the system be single-payer, as well as preliminary coverage for certain drugs prior to the implementation of the full system. On February 23, the parties announced they had reached an agreement, salvaging the deal. The agreement would provide coverage for diabetes and contraceptive drugs ahead of the full program's launch. The Trudeau government's economic policy initially relied on increased tax revenues to pay for increased government spending. While the government did not balance the budget in its first term, it reduced Canada's debt-to-GDP ratio every year until 2020, when the COVID-19 pandemic hit. Trudeau's self-described progressive and feminist social policy has included strong advocacy for abortion rights. His government introduced the bill that made conversion therapies illegal in Canada. In his first term, Canada set targets to welcome an increased number of immigrants and refugees. Canada introduced the right to medically-assisted dying in 2016 and legalized cannabis for recreational use in 2018. In 2021, Trudeau announced the creation of a national child care plan with the intention of reducing day care fees for parents down to $10 a day per child within five years. In November 2022, the Trudeau government announced that Canada would admit 500,000 immigrants per year by 2025. His environmental policy included introducing new commitments to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 30% before 2030, and to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050. His main tool for reaching this target is a federal carbon pricing policy. Trudeau's parliament also adopted legislation for marine conservation, banning six common single-use plastic products, and strengthening environmental impact assessments. Trudeau pledged to ban single use plastic in 2019. In the year 2022 his government announced a ban on producing and importing single use plastic from December 2022. The sale of those items will be banned from December 2023 and the export from 2025. However, Trudeau is in favour of oil and gas pipelines to bring Canadian fossil fuel resources to foreign markets. In 2015, Trudeau told the New York Times Magazine that Canada could be the "first postnational state". Trudeau enjoyed good relations with the "like-minded" United States president Barack Obama, despite Trudeau's support for the Keystone Pipeline, which was rejected by the Democratic president. Trudeau's first foreign policy challenges included follow-through on his campaign promise to withdraw Canadian air support from the Syrian civil war and to welcome 25,000 Syrian war refugees. When Donald Trump became president, Canada-US relations deteriorated. The Trump administration forced the renegotiation of NAFTA to create the CUSMA, in which Canada made significant concessions in allowing increased imports of American milk, weakening Canada's dairy supply management system. Donald Trump also implemented tariffs on Canadian steel and aluminum, to which Trudeau retaliated by imposing tariffs on American steel, aluminum and a variety of other American products. Canada's relationship with China also deteriorated during Trudeau's time as prime minister. The turmoil led to the arrest of Meng Wanzhou at the Vancouver International Airport in December 2018 at the behest of the United States, and the arrest of Michael Spavor and Michael Kovrig in China 12 days later. As these three people were released at the exact same time in September 2021, many observers speculated they were exchanged as part of a deal between the United States and China. In a similar fashion, Canada's relationship with Saudi Arabia was also put under strain, as human rights groups called on Trudeau to stop selling military equipment to that country under a deal struck by the Harper government. In 2018, Saudi Arabia recalled its Canadian ambassador and froze trade with the country in response to Canada's call for the Saudis to release opposition blogger Raif Badawi. However, in 2019, Canada doubled its weapons sales to Saudi Arabia, despite a "moratorium on export permits following the killing of the Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi and mounting civilian deaths from the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen." In September 2023, Trudeau said that the government of Canada had "credible intelligence" that the government of India was involved in the killing of a Canadian citizen, Hardeep Singh Nijjar, outside a Sikh temple in Surrey. This episode caused a rapid deterioration of Canada–India relations. In 2020, Canada lost its bid to join the United Nations Security Council. This was the second time Canada had failed an attempt to join the Security Council, the first time being in 2009 under Prime Minister Stephen Harper. In October 7, 2023, Trudeau condemned Hamas' actions during the Israel–Hamas war and expressed his support to Israel and its right to self-defence. On October 24, he rejected calls for a ceasefire but said he supported "humanitarian pauses" to deliver aid to the people of the Gaza Strip. On December 12, in a joint statement with the Prime Minister of Australia and the Prime Minister of New Zealand, Trudeau called for a "sustainable ceasefire" in the war. Trudeau first met Sophie Grégoire when they were both children growing up in Montreal; Grégoire was a classmate and childhood friend of Trudeau's youngest brother, Michel. They reconnected as adults in June 2003, when Grégoire, by then a Quebec television personality, was assigned as Trudeau's co-host for a charity ball; they began dating several months later. Trudeau and Grégoire became engaged in October 2004 and married on May 28, 2005, in a ceremony at Montreal's Sainte-Madeleine d'Outremont Church. They have three children: a boy, Xavier, born in 2007, a girl, Ella-Grace, born in 2009, and a boy, Hadrien, born in 2014. In June 2013, two months after Trudeau became the leader of the Liberal Party, the couple sold their home in the Côte-des-Neiges neighbourhood of Montreal. They began living in a rented home in Ottawa's Rockcliffe Park, the neighbourhood near where Trudeau resided as a child during his father's time as prime minister. On August 18, 2014, an intruder broke into the house while Grégoire and the couple's three children were sleeping and left a threatening note; however, nothing was stolen and there was no damage to the property. Following the incident, Trudeau, who was in Winnipeg at the time of the break-in, stated his intention to inquire with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police about his home security. After his 2015 electoral victory, Trudeau opted to live at Rideau Cottage, on the grounds of Rideau Hall. On August 2, 2023, Trudeau announced he and Grégoire had separated. On August 21, Trudeau said he was focusing on his children and the future. Trudeau's father was a devout Catholic and his mother converted from Anglicanism to Catholicism just before their wedding. Trudeau himself became a lapsed Catholic at age 18, as he felt that much of his day-to-day life was not addressed by the formality and structure of the church. Trudeau described his faith during this period as "like so many Catholics across this country, I said, 'OK, I'm Catholic, I'm of faith, but I'm just not really going to go to church. Maybe on Easter, maybe midnight Mass at Christmas.'" After the death of his brother Michel in 1998, Trudeau was persuaded by a friend to participate in an Alpha course, during which he regained his faith. In 2011, Trudeau stated, "My own personal faith is an extremely important part of who I am and the values that I try to lead with." Honorary degrees Trudeau, Justin (October 20, 2014). Common Ground. HarperCollins Canada. ISBN 9781443433372. OCLC 937860095. The Cabinet position was titled "minister of infrastructure, communities and intergovernmental affairs". LeBlanc succeeded Trudeau in the Cabinet position, but with the title "minister of intergovernmental and northern affairs and internal trade". "Indemnities, Salaries and Allowances". Library of Parliament. April 1, 2023. Archived from the original on July 12, 2018. Retrieved May 4, 2023. Zimonjic, Peter (November 14, 2022). "Canada announces additional $500M in military aid to Ukraine, adds 23 names to sanctions list". CBC. Archived from the original on November 16, 2022. Retrieved June 4, 2023. Griffin, Eugene (March 6, 1971). "Trudeau's Bride Takes All by Surprise". Chicago Tribune. Chicago Tribune Press Services. Archived from the original on March 5, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2016. "Rumors confirmed: Mrs. Trudeau expecting, due December". Montreal Gazette. The Canadian Press. June 24, 1971. Archived from the original on May 2, 2021. Retrieved May 22, 2016. "Civic doctor for Margaret". Ottawa Citizen. December 1, 1971. Archived from the original on December 18, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2017. Downie, Jim (December 28, 1971). "Justin just like dad". Ottawa Citizen. The Canadian Press. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2015. "Welcome, Justin Trudeau". St. Petersburg Times. December 31, 1971. Archived from the original on May 2, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2013. English, John (August 28, 2007). Citizen of the World: The Life of Pierre Elliott Trudeau Volume One: 1919–1968. Knopf Canada. pp. 205–. ISBN 978-0-676-97522-2. Archived from the original on July 31, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2011. "The ancestry of Justin Trudeau". perche-quebec.com. Archived from the original on September 26, 2021. Retrieved September 30, 2021. "Pierre Trudeau toughens up". CBC Digital Archives. January 9, 1994. Archived from the original on November 18, 2015. Retrieved November 13, 2015. "Colleagues, family discuss secret Trudeau wedding". CBC Digital Archives. March 5, 1971. Archived from the original on January 6, 2016. Retrieved September 3, 2016. "SINCLAIR, The Hon. James, P.C." Parliament of Canada. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2013. "Margaret Trudeau". CBC Television. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved April 24, 2017. "Passenger lists of the AORANGI arriving in Vancouver, British Columbia on 1906-06". Library and Archives Canada. February 17, 2016. Archived from the original on January 4, 2017. Retrieved April 19, 2017. Gartland, Fiona (June 4, 2017). "Rebel roots: Justin Trudeau's Irish ancestry from Co Cork revealed". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on October 7, 2017. Retrieved October 7, 2017. O'Mahony, Kieran (July 10, 2017). "Bandon claims Trudeau Just-In time". The Southern Star. Archived from the original on May 5, 2018. Retrieved May 4, 2018. "The Bernards of Palace Anne". Bandon Cork Ancestors and Genealogy Heritage Roots Ireland. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2016. Sin, Yuen (November 15, 2018). "Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau traces family links to Singapore at Fort Canning Park". The Straits Times. Archived from the original on November 21, 2018. Retrieved November 21, 2018. "Stamford Raffles was not above sneering at Farquhar's Malay wife and the children by her he had acknowledged. 'The Maya connexion', he termed them archly."Barley, Nigel (1991). The Duke of Puddle Dock: Travels in the Footsteps of Stamford Raffles. Great Britain: Viking. p. 242. ISBN 9780670836420. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Ford, D. (2005). The world of Antoinette Clement: Colonial mistress. Australia: University of Queensland. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Hedemann, Nancy Oakley (1994). A Scottish-Hawaiian story: the Purvis family in the Sandwich Islands. Book Crafters. ISBN 9780964402003. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2016. Douglas-Home, Jessica (1996). Violet: The Life and Loves of Violet Gordon Woodhouse. Harvill Press. ISBN 9781860462696. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2016. Cooper, Artemis (2011). Writing at the Kitchen Table: The Authorized Biography of Elizabeth David. Faber & Faber. ISBN 9780571279777. Archived from the original on January 15, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2016. Gillespie, Mike (January 17, 2015). "It's 'Justin Pierre James' – Trudeau baby baptized". The Ottawa Journal. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved November 12, 2015. Justin remained perfectly quiet when the prime minister and his wife took their places in the baptistry, accompanied by Mr. Trudeau's niece, Marie Anne Rouleau-Danis, and a stand-in for Thomas Walker, the PM's brother-in-law, who, along, with Mrs. Roulea-Danis, are the baby's godparents. Catling, Len (May 18, 2016). "O'Connor returns home to Ottawa, meets Prime Minister". The University of British Columbia Athletic. Archived from the original on September 16, 2017. Retrieved September 15, 2017. "My uncle played for the Lions," replied the Prime Minister. "Tom Walker played for them." The Prime Minister is referring to defensive tackle Tom Walker, who donned BC Lions colours in the early sixities. "Canada Premier's Son Christened in Ottawa". The Blade. Reuters. January 17, 1972. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2015. Grafstein, J.S. (2019). A Leader Must Be a Leader: Encounters With Eleven Prime Ministers. Mosaic Press. p. 1-PT102. ISBN 978-1-77161-409-2. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved September 24, 2022. "Nixon, Trudeau sign treaty: Great Lakes cleanup is multi-billion job". The Bryan Times. United Press International. April 15, 1972. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2015. "'Snoopy' gift from Nixon's". Daily Record. United Press International. April 15, 1972. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2015. Ruvinsky, Auren (November 10, 2015). "Parksville man discusses scene around some baby pictures he took of Justin Trudeau". Parksville Qualicum Beach News. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved November 12, 2015. "Trudeaus Separate; He Keeps Children (Published 1977)". The New York Times. May 28, 1977. Archived from the original on October 11, 2021. Retrieved January 30, 2021. Trudeau and his wife jointly announce they have separated and that Mr Trudeau will have custody of their 3 sons; ...MrsTrudeau would have "generous access" to the children, Justin, 5 years old, Sacha, 4, and Michel, 1. O'Hara, Jane (December 3, 1979). "When Pierre put his boys first". Maclean's Magazine. Archived from the original on December 4, 2015. Retrieved December 2, 2015. "Trudeaus' divorce has become final: Report". The Gazette. Montreal. April 5, 1984. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2015. Elin Woodger; David F. Burg (March 2006). The 1980s. Infobase Publishing. p. 414. ISBN 978-0-8160-5809-9. Archived from the original on July 31, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2011. Laver, Ross (October 31, 1979). "Nostalgic nanny". Ottawa Citizen. Archived from the original on December 18, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2015. Campion-Smith, Bruce (June 20, 2009). "Justin on growing up Trudeau". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on November 7, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2013. Anzalone, Charles (February 8, 2008). "Margaret Trudeau: Forgiveness, gratitude, wisdom". bpHope. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved November 10, 2015. Popplewell, Brett (November 24, 2010). "Pierre Trudeau's daughter, Sarah, lives under the radar". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved November 10, 2015. "Stornoway changes to cost $65,000". The Gazette. Montreal. June 16, 1979. Archived from the original on March 3, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2015. Janigan, Mary (September 6, 1979). "The new Trudeau: A beard holds the key". The Gazette. Montreal. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2015. "Maggie house hunting?". Ottawa Citizen. September 11, 1979. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved November 15, 2015. Strobel, Mike (September 27, 1979). "'Burgh' accepts Maggie's move". The Ottawa Journal. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved November 15, 2015. "It's all yours next week, Clark tells a victorious Trudeau". The Gazette. Montreal. February 20, 1980. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2015. Brooker, Deborah (February 9, 1983). "Margaret Trudeau today: a TV career, a new man – and her kids". Ottawa Citizen. Archived from the original on March 3, 2022. Retrieved November 30, 2015. Q: I understand you insisted that the children attend a public school. A: Pierre wanted them from the beginning to go to a French Lycée to get a very academic education. I held out, and was able to give good arguments. Pierre has certainly agreed that they've done very well in school. They are all in French immersion, and are quite bilingual. They attend a local public school, and they're just normal little kids doing all the fun things of elementary years. Coyle, Jim (October 17, 2015). "Growing up in the public eye". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved August 26, 2016. "Schreyer children to get bodyguards". The Gazette. Montreal. The Canadian Press. January 12, 1979. Archived from the original on March 3, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2015. A team of plainclothes RCMP officers spring into action the moment Trudeau's two oldest boys leave 24 Sussex Drive and hop on the school bus. The officers do not rest until their charges are returned home. Hampson, Beatrice (November 22, 1979). "Pierre-like shrug Justin's reaction". Ottawa Citizen. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2015. "Shannon McMullan was Justin Trudeau's grade school teacher". The Manitoulin Expositor. October 21, 2015. Archived from the original on November 18, 2015. Retrieved November 6, 2015. Kennedy, Mark (October 18, 2014). "Q and A: Justin Trudeau in his own words". Ottawa Citizen. Archived from the original on November 24, 2015. Retrieved November 22, 2015. MacCharles, Tonda (October 5, 2000). "Spotlight on Justin sparks talk of dynasty". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on March 17, 2016. Retrieved November 20, 2015. Grant, Hamish (January 25, 2007). "Justin Trudeau's Camp Application, 1984". Flickr. Archived from the original on January 6, 2016. Retrieved November 20, 2015. "Trudeau checks his new house". The Gazette. Montreal. December 31, 1979. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2015. Bryden, Joan (October 18, 2014). "Justin Trudeau Memoir Paints Frank Picture of Privileged But Painful Childhood". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on October 20, 2014. Retrieved October 19, 2014. Gatehouse, Jonathan (October 11, 2011). "Justin Trudeau on his own terms". Maclean's Magazine. Archived from the original on October 23, 2015. Retrieved November 1, 2015. Solway, Diane. "The Son Also Rises". Wmagazine.com. Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved April 23, 2011. "TSC History". The Taylor Statten Camps. Archived from the original on October 11, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Prime Minister Trudeau, a former Ahmek camper himself (and yes, we taught him the "Ahmek J-stroke"), sent Justin, Alexandre (Sasha) and Michel (Mike) to Ahmek. Both Justin and Mike eventually became counsellors. Milne, Brian. "Justin Trudeau (7 images)". 4iiiis Photography. Archived from the original on January 6, 2016. Retrieved November 20, 2015. "Exclusive photo: Justin Trudeau in his days as camp counsellor". The Globe & Mail. April 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Summer campers hold reunion". Ottawa Citizen. The Canadian Press. October 21, 1986. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2015. McGregor, Glen (February 14, 2013). "Justin Trudeau reveals details of his $1.2-million inheritance". Global News. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved March 26, 2023. "Justin Trudeau admits that he 'won the lottery' with $1.2 million inheritance and successful speaking business | canada.com". February 14, 2013. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019. Adams, Annmarie; Macdonell, Cameron (June 2016). "Making Himself at Home: Cormier, Trudeau, and the Architecture of Domestic Masculinity". Winterthur Portfolio. 50 (2/3): 151–189. doi:10.1086/689984. ISSN 0084-0416. S2CID 164255409. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved March 26, 2023. Joncas, Hugo; Langlois, Philippe; Sanchez, Sarah (January 30, 2016). "Justin Trudeau et son frère héritent d'un domaine de 2,7M$". TVA Nouvelles. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved March 26, 2023. Raj, Althia (March 5, 2013). "Contender: The Justin Trudeau Story". Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved October 23, 2014. McCabe, Daniel (October 22, 2015). "Portrait of the PM-designate as a young man". McGill News. Archived from the original on November 20, 2015. Retrieved November 19, 2015. Trudeau joined the McGill Debating Union at the invitation of a new acquaintance, Butts, then the debating union's vice-president. The two forged a close friendship at McGill that endures today... Smith, Charlie (November 1, 2015). "Vancouver building that used to be home to Justin Trudeau damaged after ambulance crashes into limousine". The Georgia Straight. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved November 9, 2015. "Justin Trudeau described by friends as down-to-earth and sensitive", Canadian Press, October 4, 2000, 03:25; Tonda MacCharles, "Son 'most like Pierre' relishes his privacy; While Liberals talk about dynasty, Justin looks forward to returning to teaching job", Kitchener-Waterloo Record, October 5, 2000, A06; Justin Trudeau, "Something I'm passionate about", The Globe and Mail, February 3, 2001, A11; Gloria Galloway, "Justin Trudeau delivers motivational speech to Ontario teachers", The Canadian Press, April 27, 2001, 14:50; "Students should learn to be brave, Trudeau says", Globe and Mail, April 28, 2001, A9. "Justin Trudeau tells education conference he plans return to teaching", Canadian Press, February 28, 2004. "Canada Votes 2011: Ridings: Papineau" Archived February 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Ashifa Kassam (July 2, 2018). "Justin Trudeau 'does not remember' groping reporter at festival". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 3, 2018. Retrieved July 3, 2018. Rebecca Tan (July 2, 2018). "Justin Trudeau responds to groping allegations: 'I don't remember any negative interactions'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 3, 2018. Retrieved July 3, 2018. Kingston, Anne (June 27, 2018). "Why Justin Trudeau's reported 'Kokanee Grope' really matters". McLeans. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018. Retrieved August 6, 2018. "Justin Trudeau's eulogy for his father" Archived January 6, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, CBC News; "Text of the eulogy given by Justin Trudeau at his father's funeral Tuesday", Canadian Press, October 3, 2000. Dube, Francine (October 4, 2000). "Son's eulogy moves thousands to tears: 'It's all up to us': Dignitaries, citizens pay last respects to former PM". National Post. p. A1. ProQuest 354739942. Andre Picard and Mark Mickleburgh, "'Je t'aime, papa' THE SON: The very private Justin becomes a very public figure", The Globe and Mail, October 4, 2000, p. A1; Graham Fraser, "Trudeau children lead our farewell – Justin's eulogy a towering tribute at father's funeral", Toronto Star, October 4, 2000, p. 1. Tonda MacCharles, "Spotlight on Justin sparks talk of dynasty – Trudeau's final resting place", Toronto Star, October 5, 2000, pg. 1. Willa McLean, "This just in ...; CBC broadcaster revisits momentous events of past 50 years", Kitchener-Waterloo Record, February 8, 2003, pg. G3. Nos Origines Archived February 9, 2024, at the Wayback Machine "Genealogy of Canada" IDs 475064 & 647509. "Justin Trudeau pleased to play war hero". Canwest News Service. April 6, 2007. Archived from the original on May 12, 2014. Retrieved April 17, 2013. Hopper, Tristin (October 5, 2012). "'There's so much attention on me': Fathers' legacies loom large for children of Canadian prime ministers". National Post. Archived from the original on October 8, 2012. Retrieved March 2, 2013. Newman, Peter C. (September 18, 2012). "Trudeau's big leap—like father, like son". Maclean's Magazine. Archived from the original on March 4, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2013. Stetski, Wayne (April 2001). "The Kokanee Glacier Alpine Campaign" (PDF). Visions BC Parks Newsletter. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 27, 2013. Retrieved April 18, 2013. Carol Harrington, "Trudeau takes on B.C. – Son of late PM decries cuts to public avalanche bulletins", Toronto Star, January 12, 2002, A24. "Trudeau son decries avalanche-warning cut". The Globe and Mail. January 12, 2002. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020. Retrieved February 15, 2020. Jaimet, Kate (November 3, 2002). "Trudeau retains '60s ideals: Lauds Katimavik's promotion of social causes". Calgary Herald. p. A6. ProQuest 245011416. Gerson, Jen (March 21, 2006). "Captain Katimavik; Justin Trudeau comes to town to promote youth volunteer program, look cool". Toronto Star. p. C4. ProQuest 438945155. "CBC Radio picks five books for second round of Canada Reads series". The Canadian Press. November 19, 2002. ProQuest 359657937. "Bookmark your calendar: Canada Book Week turns the page on Canada Book Day". Calgary Herald. The Canadian Press. April 22, 2003. p. B13. ProQuest 2263299823. "Peace and Conflict Studies Centre Named for Trudeau". University of Toronto Magazine. 2004. Archived from the original on July 28, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013. "Justin Trudeau to host glitzy Giller prize gala". The Record. The Canadian Press. October 27, 2006. p. D12. ProQuest 267191304. Beltrame, Julian (April 24, 2013). "Justin Trudeau says lofty expectations have always followed him". CTV News. Archived from the original on April 18, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013. Bueckert, Dennis (May 16, 2005). "Justin Trudeau denounces mine near park his father created: Vancouver company wants to build massive mine with access through Nahanni watershed". The Vancouver Sun. p. D10. Trudeau, Justin (November 7, 2005). "We hold the Nahanni in trust for the world. Let's protect it". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on February 9, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2013. "Dallaire wants to mobilize young Canadians to support Darfur intervention". The Canadian Press. September 13, 2006. "Trudeau, Dallaire to lead Darfur rally". Toronto Star. September 17, 2006. p. A06. Javed, Noor. "Dallaire says Canada should take leadership role in Darfur". CNews. Archived from the original on June 28, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Poirier, Patricia. "Trudeau's son offers his support to Turner", The Globe and Mail, September 16, 1988, pg. A8. Taber, Jane (October 4, 2000). "A teacher of drama, a riveting moment". National Post. Toronto. pp. A3. ProQuest 329715722. "Chrétien bids adieu to a lifetime in politics". CBC News. November 14, 2003. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved September 28, 2012. Juliet O'Neill, "Justin Trudeau to spearhead youth renewal of Liberal party: Task force", National Post, April 7, 2006, p. A1 Gordon, Sean (October 27, 2006). "Sounding like his father, Justin Trudeau takes aim at Michael Ignatieff's idea of Quebec as a 'nation'". Toronto Star. p. A01. Perreaux, Les (October 27, 2006). "Eldest Trudeau son takes poke at Ignatieff stand, nationalism: 'Unfortunately, some people these days are wrapped up in this idea of nation for Quebec'". The Gazette. Montreal. p. A12. Macpherson, Son (November 2, 2006). "Pass the peanut butter, it looks like Ignatieff is toast: His 'nationhood' proposal has stirred political heavies to line up against him". The Gazette. Montreal. p. A23. Thompson, Elizabeth (November 15, 2006). "Ignatieff lacks 'wisdom' to lead: Justin Trudeau: Says Gerard Kennedy deserves closer look". The Gazette. Montreal. p. A14. Coyne, Andrew (December 2, 2006). "Kennedy's message is bold, but risky". National Post. Archived from the original on June 14, 2014. Retrieved September 29, 2012. Robert Benzie, "All the right moves for Kennedy; 'Kingmaker' becomes Dion's heir apparent", Toronto Star, December 3, 2006, A07. Corrigan, Ed. "Liberals Elect Stephan Dion". The Canadian. Archived from the original on May 18, 2012. Retrieved September 29, 2012. "Quebec Liberal MP Jean Lapierre to resign". CTV News. January 11, 2007. Archived from the original on December 5, 2008. Retrieved April 23, 2011. Gordon, Sean; Susan Delacourt (January 10, 2007). "Will Justin Trudeau run for Parliament MP?". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on May 4, 2014. Retrieved April 21, 2013. Taber, Jane (February 23, 2007). "Liberals welcome Trudeau, bid adieu to Graham". The Globe and Mail. p. A1. Archived from the original on June 20, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2020. "Spotlight on Montreal ridings: Papineau". CBC News. September 25, 2015. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2015. Woods, Allan (April 30, 2007). "Trudeau wins nomination". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on May 4, 2014. Retrieved April 19, 2013. "Trudeau pledges loyalty to constituents after Papineau win". CBC News. October 15, 2008. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved April 18, 2013. Hebert, Chantal (February 27, 2007). "Trudeau looking lonely on left". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on April 26, 2014. Retrieved April 21, 2013. Jane Taber, "Vancouver to host a Liberal love-in; the knives are to be left at home", The Globe and Mail, April 25, 2009, A4; Terry Pedwell, "Liberals won't change strategy, despite polls, say MPs", October 6, 2009, 12:06. "Michael Ignatieff Announces Liberal Critic Team for Return of Parliament", States News Service, September 7, 2010. Douglas Quan and Norma Greenway, "Feds target human smugglers in legislation", Windsor Star, October 22, 2010, pg. C1. Joan Bryden (June 16, 2013). "Justin Trudeau promises to 'make it right,' pay back charities for his hefty speaking fees". The National Post. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved April 13, 2017. Silcoff, Sean (June 16, 2013). "Trudeau offers to reimburse organizations $20,000 for speeches". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on March 20, 2023. Retrieved February 15, 2020. "Liberals rally for immediate action in Haiti", State News Service, January 13, 2010; "Liberal MP wants immigration rules relaxed for Haitians", Canada AM, January 22, 2010. "Trudeau won't rule out bid for party leadership". Ottawa Citizen. May 5, 2011. p. A3. ProQuest 865122396. Delacourt, Susan (May 7, 2011). "Is the party over? Canada's 'natural governing party' faces difficult questions after Monday's shellacking". Toronto Star. p. IN1. ProQuest 865089210. "Trudeau – again?". Hamilton Spectator. June 17, 2011. Archived from the original on September 21, 2011. Retrieved June 9, 2012. "Justin Trudeau pumps up St. John's Liberal fundraiser". CBC News. May 3, 2012. Archived from the original on June 15, 2012. Retrieved June 9, 2012. "Trudeau to speak at local scholarship fundraiser". Northern Life. April 17, 2012. Archived from the original on December 25, 2014. Retrieved June 9, 2012. "Lawrence MacAulay Fundraising Dinner with Justin Trudeau". Liberal Party of Canada. Archived from the original on August 6, 2010. Retrieved June 9, 2012. "By-election fundraiser with Justin Trudeau". Liberal Calgary. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved June 9, 2012. Robert Hiltz; Michael den Tandt (April 1, 2012). "Justin Trudeau scores major upset in Fight for the Cure boxing match over Conservative Senator Patrick Brazeau". National Post. Archived from the original on April 1, 2012. Retrieved April 4, 2013. Blaze Carlson, Kathryn (May 9, 2012). "Meet Stefania Capovilla, the hairstylist behind these Parliament Hill 'dos". National Post. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved November 3, 2015. Mr. Trudeau had, while sitting in her Somerset salon, lamented his inability to find a formidable Conservative opponent. Ms. Capovilla, who is a stylist for the SunNewsNetwork, recalled the conversation as she did Mr. Brazeau's make-up before an on-camera interview about aboriginal policy. She looked down, saw "those arms," and asked if he would square off against her Liberal friend.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Size, John (April 2, 2012). "Trudeau declines Brazeau boxing rematch as debt paid". CTV News. Archived from the original on December 20, 2013. Retrieved April 4, 2013. "Canadians want Trudeau as next Liberal leader". Calgary Herald. October 29, 2008. Archived from the original on April 26, 2014. Retrieved June 9, 2012. "Canadians prefer Trudeau: Poll shows young heir is top pick to replace Dion". canada.com. October 28, 2008. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2011. "Ignatieff secures Liberal leadership as Rae bows out". The Canadian Press. December 9, 2008. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014. Retrieved June 9, 2012. "Liberals field questions about future leaders". CBC News. May 4, 2011. Archived from the original on August 25, 2011. Retrieved June 9, 2012. "Trudeau undecided on Liberal leadership bid". IFpress. May 4, 2011. Archived from the original on September 5, 2011. Retrieved June 9, 2012. Hicks, Jeff (October 12, 2013). "Trudeau rules out Liberal leadership bid in 2013". Waterloo Region Record. Archived from the original on January 6, 2016. Retrieved November 21, 2015. Bryden, Joan (June 15, 2012). "Justin Trudeau hit with 'tsunami' of calls to run for Liberals since Bob Rae's withdrawal". National Post. Archived from the original on June 18, 2012. Retrieved June 9, 2012. Goldstein, Lorrie (June 27, 2012). "We're Justin love". Toronto Sun. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014. Retrieved June 9, 2012. "Justin Trudeau at Stampede mulls Liberal leadership run". CBC News. The Canadian Press. June 7, 2012. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2015. Hébert, Chantal (May 4, 2012). "Hébert: Is Justin Trudeau the Liberals' salvation?". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2015. "Justin Trudeau to run for Liberal leadership". CBC News. September 26, 2012. Archived from the original on September 28, 2012. Retrieved September 28, 2012. "Justin Trudeau to seek Liberal leadership". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. September 26, 2012. Archived from the original on September 30, 2012. Retrieved September 28, 2012. Radia, Andy (September 26, 2012). "Justin Trudeau to run for Liberal leadership but is he all splash and no substance?". Yahoo News. Archived from the original on September 29, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2012. Caplan, Gerald (September 28, 2012). "Is Justin Trudeau really taken seriously by his own party?". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2012. Berthiaume, Lee (September 28, 2012). "Justin Trudeau's good looks expected to cover up other weaknesses". Canada.com. Archived from the original on September 30, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2012. Coyne, Andrew (September 28, 2012). "The son is not the father and the future is not buried in the past". National Post. Archived from the original on January 29, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2012. Bryden, Joan (September 26, 2012). "Reports: Trudeau leadership bid imminent". The Canadian Press. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Berthiaume, Lee (September 28, 2012). "Trudeau leadership bid stirs talk of Liberal 'coronation'". Postmedia News. Archived from the original on September 29, 2015. Retrieved October 1, 2012. MacKinnon, Leslie (October 1, 2012). "Trudeau seen by senior Liberals as a risk worth taking". CBC News. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2012. Vieira, Paul. "The Wall Street Journal – Justin Trudeau Poised to Step into Liberal Race in Canada". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved October 2, 2012. LeBlanc, Daniel (March 1, 2013). "Inside Justin Trudeau's war room". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2013. "The other brother: Sacha, the 'apolitical' one, joins Justin Trudeau's campaign team". National Post. October 22, 2012. Archived from the original on October 29, 2012. Retrieved March 2, 2013. "Sun commentary on Télé-Québec interview". CBC News. November 22, 2012. Archived from the original on January 2, 2013. Retrieved January 2, 2013. Bailey, Ian (November 23, 2012). "Globe reports on Trudeau apology". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Archived from the original on December 27, 2012. Retrieved January 2, 2013. Walton, Dawn (November 27, 2012). "Tories retain Calgary Centre as Liberals, Greens split vote". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Archived from the original on November 27, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2013. McPharland, Kelly (February 14, 2013). "Kelly McParland: Marc Garneau challenges Justin Trudeau to take a stand. Any stand". National Post. Archived from the original on April 11, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2013. Visser, Josh (February 25, 2013). "Marc Garneau challenges 'untested' Liberal frontrunner Justin Trudeau to one-on-one debate". National Post. Archived from the original on May 4, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2013. Mas, Susana (March 3, 2013). "Liberal MPs Murray and Garneau challenge frontrunner Trudeau". CBC News. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2015. Hebert, Chanatal (March 13, 2013). "Marc Garneau's withdrawal from Liberal leadership race saves himself humiliation: Hébert". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on March 15, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2013. Berthiaume, Lee (March 13, 2013). "'The game is long': Liberals still in leadership fight for votes after Marc Garneau bows out". National Post. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved March 15, 2013. Lee, Berthiaume (April 14, 2013). "Justin Trudeau elected Liberal leader in landslide victory". National Post. Archived from the original on April 16, 2013. Retrieved April 17, 2013. "Justin Trudeau elected Liberal leader in a landslide". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. April 15, 2013. Archived from the original on February 9, 2016. "Liberal leadership race – results map". Canadian Election Atlas. April 15, 2013. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved October 20, 2015. "Photo: Liberal Leader Justin Trudeau campaigns in Toronto's Trinity–Spadina riding in support of Liberal candidate Adam Vaughan". June 16, 2014. Archived from the original on January 6, 2016. "Poll shows Justin Trudeau Liberals far ahead 38". Toronto Sun. April 16, 2013. Archived from the original on May 13, 2013. Retrieved April 21, 2013. CTV News Network, "Memorial of Nelson Mandela", December 10, 2013. McGregor, Glen (August 1, 2013). "Justin Trudeau voluntarily moves personal investments into blind trust, fulfilling campaign promise". Ottawa Citizen. Archived from the original on October 26, 2015. Retrieved November 10, 2015. Delacourt, Susan (February 7, 2014). "Parliament: Speaking a language all its own". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2015. "John Ivison: Why Justin Trudeau's new guiding light could have a dramatic impact on Canadian public policy". National Post. February 21, 2014. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2015. "Federal election results 2015". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. October 20, 2015. Archived from the original on October 22, 2015. Retrieved October 23, 2015. "Election Night Results – National". Élections Canada. Archived from the original on October 23, 2015. Retrieved October 23, 2015. Campbell, Bradley (October 20, 2015). "Stephen Harper underestimated Justin Trudeau, but it was the mocking way he did it that cost him the election". PRI. Archived from the original on October 21, 2015. Retrieved October 21, 2015. Hamilton, Graeme (October 20, 2015). "Graeme Hamilton: Justin Trudeau's stunning victory for the Liberals should finally silence his doubters". National Post. Archived from the original on November 19, 2015. Retrieved October 21, 2015. Gagnon, Michelle (October 7, 2015). "Justin Trudeau's rise shows the benefits of being underestimated". CBC News. Archived from the original on October 29, 2015. Retrieved October 21, 2015. "For the record: A full transcript of Justin Trudeau's speech". Maclean's Magazine. Archived from the original on October 23, 2015. Retrieved October 23, 2015. "Stephen Harper resigns as Conservative leader". CTVNews. October 19, 2015. Archived from the original on October 20, 2015. Retrieved October 20, 2015. Blackwell, Tom (October 20, 2015). "Canadian election 2015 hands Justin Trudeau and the Liberals a majority government". National Post. Archived from the original on November 20, 2015. Retrieved October 23, 2015. "Justin Trudeau signals new style on 1st day as Canada's 23rd prime minister". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. November 4, 2015. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved November 5, 2015. "Justin Trudeau on his cabinet and its promise to Canadians". Maclean's. Archived from the original on November 10, 2015. Retrieved November 5, 2015. Lee Berthiaume; Kathryn May. "The long-form census is back – with penalties still possible if you ignore it". Ottawa Citizen. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. "Liberals can restore long-form census for 2016, if they act quickly, observers say". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. October 28, 2015. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. "Families of Nova Scotia mass shooting victims want sincere RCMP apology, lawyer says". The Globe and Mail. The Canadian Press. August 31, 2023. Archived from the original on September 8, 2023. Retrieved September 10, 2023. Major, Darren (September 7, 2023). "What we know so far about the public inquiry into foreign interference". CBC News. Archived from the original on September 9, 2023. Retrieved September 10, 2023. "Trudeau accepts finding of genocide in MMIWG inquiry". CTV. The Canadian Press. June 4, 2019. Archived from the original on October 15, 2023. Retrieved September 10, 2023. "Trudeau government faces 'cash-for-access' criticism". BBC News. November 23, 2016. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023. Retrieved August 14, 2021. "Trudeau defends cash-for-access fundraising". Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2021. Schwartz, Zane (April 27, 2017). "PM no longer under investigation for cash-for-access fundraisers, but ethics commissioner won't say why". National Post. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved August 14, 2021. "Globe editorial: Justin Trudeau didn't invent cash-for-access, but he can end it". The Globe and Mail. November 22, 2016. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2021. "Trudeau to end controversial cash-for-access fundraisers". The Globe and Mail. January 27, 2017. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2021. "Justin Trudeau's flying unicorn hits a storm". The Economist. October 12, 2017. Archived from the original on October 14, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "Canada's Trudeau faces ethics probe over Bahamas trip". Reuters. January 16, 2017. Archived from the original on January 17, 2017. Retrieved January 18, 2017. "Trudeau 'sorry' for violating conflict laws with visits to Aga Khan's island". CBC News. December 20, 2017. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 22, 2017. Press, Jordan (December 21, 2017). "Trudeau becomes first prime minister found in violation of ethics law". The Hamilton Spectator. Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. Archived from the original on January 13, 2019. Retrieved January 13, 2019. Fife, Robert (April 25, 2022). "Trudeau faces backlash in House over inquiry into Aga Khan trip". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on May 22, 2022. Retrieved May 22, 2022. Tonda MacCharles (February 26, 2018). "Who is Jaspal Atwal? Man at centre of controversy over Trudeau's India trip remains a political mystery". The Toronto Star. Archived from the original on March 4, 2018. Retrieved March 4, 2018. David Cochrane (February 22, 2018). "Trudeau's India visit marred by invite of B.C. man convicted of attempted murder". CBC News. Archived from the original on March 6, 2018. Retrieved March 4, 2018. Amanda Connolly (March 3, 2018). "Justin Trudeau would lose if an election were held tomorrow, India trip a symptom of shift in mood: Ipsos poll". Global News. Archived from the original on March 4, 2018. Retrieved March 4, 2018. Rex Murphy (March 2, 2018). "Rex Murphy: Perhaps Justin Trudeau's India trip could have been salvaged with some elephants?". The National Post. Thompson, Elizabeth. "Trudeau under fire over claim he pressured justice minister to intervene in SNC-Lavalin fraud case". CBC News. Archived from the original on February 8, 2019. Retrieved February 8, 2019. "Jody Wilson-Raybould says she's bound by 'solicitor-client privilege', won't comment on SNC-Lavalin scandal". CBC News. Archived from the original on February 8, 2019. Retrieved February 8, 2019. Aiello, Rachel (February 25, 2019). "PM waives attorney-client privilege in SNC-Lavalin affair". CTV News. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved April 25, 2019. "Trudeau 'welcomes' ethics commissioner probe of alleged PMO interference in SNC-Lavalin case". CTV News. February 11, 2019. Archived from the original on February 18, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2019. "From the comments: 'You're a model for all Canadian elected officials.' Readers react to resignation of Jody Wilson-Raybould". Archived from the original on February 18, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2019. National Post (February 21, 2019), Michael Wernick speaks to justice committee, archived from the original on December 12, 2021, retrieved February 21, 2019 Campion-Smith, Bruce; Boutilier, Alex; Ballingall, Alex (February 21, 2019). "No 'inappropriate pressure' on Jody Wilson-Raybould in SNC-Lavalin affair, top civil servant says – The Star". The Toronto Star. Archived from the original on March 7, 2019. Retrieved March 8, 2019. Tasker, John Paul (February 28, 2019). "Key moments from Jody Wilson-Raybould's SNC-Lavalin testimony". CBC News. Archived from the original on March 8, 2019. Retrieved March 8, 2019. "Read and listen to Jody Wilson-Raybould's latest SNC-Lavalin evidence". CBC News. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved April 25, 2019. Walsh, Marieke (March 19, 2019). "Liberals shut down SNC-Lavalin investigation at committee". iPolitics. Archived from the original on March 20, 2019. Retrieved March 19, 2019. "Trudeau Report". Parliament of Canada. September 16, 2019. Archived from the original on October 7, 2019. Retrieved October 5, 2019. "Contravention of section 9 of the Conflict of Interest Act found in report released by Commissioner Dion". Parliament of Canada. August 14, 2019. Archived from the original on August 30, 2019. Retrieved October 5, 2019. "Trudeau breached federal ethics rules in SNC-Lavalin affair: ethics commissioner". Mclean's. August 14, 2019. Archived from the original on October 4, 2019. Retrieved October 5, 2019. Harris, Kathleen; Kapelos, Vassy (August 16, 2019). "Wilson-Raybould now says she was contacted by RCMP over SNC-Lavalin affair". CBC News. Archived from the original on September 29, 2019. Retrieved October 5, 2019. White-Crummey, Arthur (August 14, 2019). "Scheer blasts Trudeau on day of damning SNC-Lavalin report". The National Post. Retrieved October 5, 2019. "It's official, Canadians: the 2019 federal election campaign is underway". cbc.ca. September 11, 2019. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved September 20, 2019. Tasker, John Paul (September 6, 2019). "French-language TVA debate to go ahead after Trudeau agrees to participate". CBC News. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on September 6, 2019. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Cochrane, David (September 5, 2019). "Trudeau snubs Munk, Maclean's/Citytv debates but will attend commission debates". CBC News. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on September 6, 2019. Retrieved September 5, 2019. "Munk Debates cancels foreign-policy event because Trudeau won't attend". Federal Election 2019. September 24, 2019. Archived from the original on September 24, 2019. Retrieved September 24, 2019. "Trudeau apologizes again for wearing blackface, cannot say how many times he wore racist makeup". The Globe and Mail. 2019. Archived from the original on March 19, 2023. Retrieved October 6, 2019. "Justin Trudeau Wore Brownface at 2001 'Arabian Nights' Party While He Taught at a Private School". Time. Archived from the original on October 15, 2020. Retrieved September 19, 2019. "Justin Trudeau Admits to Also Wearing Blackface 'Makeup' in High School Following TIME Report". Time. Archived from the original on September 19, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019. Dawson, Tyler; Subramaniam, Vanmala (September 19, 2019). "'I'm really sorry': Justin Trudeau admits wearing brownface at 2001 costume party | National Post". National Post. "EXCLUSIVE: Video shows Trudeau in blackface in 3rd instance of racist makeup". Global News. Archived from the original on October 15, 2020. Retrieved September 19, 2019. "EXCLUSIVE: Video shows Trudeau in blackface in 3rd instance of racist makeup". Global News. Archived from the original on October 15, 2020. Retrieved September 19, 2019. Cecco, Leyland (September 20, 2019). "Trudeau says he can't recall how many times he wore blackface makeup". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 15, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019 – via www.theguardian.com. "Justin Trudeau's incredibly forgiving base of believers – Macleans.ca". www.macleans.ca. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019. Gardiner, Aidan (September 19, 2019). "Canadians Ask if They Can Forgive Trudeau". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 19, 2019. Hébert, Chantal (September 23, 2019). "Trudeau's apology for blackface photos seems to be readily accepted in Quebec | The Star". The Toronto Star. Archived from the original on October 23, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019. Hébert, Chantal (September 24, 2019). "Opinion | Chantal Hébert: Quebec voters appear to have forgiven Trudeau for his blackface follies". The Hamilton Spectator. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019 – via www.thespec.com. Montpetit, Jonathan (September 19, 2019). "In Quebec, Trudeau's opponents and supporters shrug off blackface controversy". CBC News. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019. Feith, Jesse (September 20, 2019). "Trudeau's record on race shouldn't be overlooked, community groups say". Montreal Gazette. Archived from the original on September 27, 2019. Retrieved September 27, 2019. Nenshi, Naheed (September 21, 2019). "Perspective | I'm Calgary's Muslim mayor. We can learn from Trudeau's 'brownface' moment". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on September 24, 2019. Retrieved September 27, 2019. "Trudeau's past vs. Scheer's present | The Star". The Toronto Star. September 25, 2019. Archived from the original on September 27, 2019. Retrieved September 27, 2019. "'ABSOLUTELY DEPLORABLE': Officials react on social media to Trudeau's blackface photos | Toronto Sun". September 19, 2019. Archived from the original on November 29, 2021. Retrieved October 17, 2019. Da Silva, Chantal (October 22, 2019). "Justin Trudeau wins minority government—what does this mean for America?". Newsweek. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved November 17, 2019. "Trudeau says no plans to form a coalition, will push ahead on Trans Mountain". Global News. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved October 23, 2019. "Ontario and Quebec keep Liberals in power and Conservatives out". cbc.ca. October 22, 2019. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved October 23, 2019. Aiello, Rachel (October 22, 2019). "'Historic opportunity': Opposition leaders take stock after Liberal minority win". Federal Election 2019. Archived from the original on July 31, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2019. Brean, Joseph (October 22, 2019). "All-time low share of popular vote is enough for Liberals to win power | National Post". National Post. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2019. "Liberals take losses but win enough in Quebec and Ontario to form minority government". cbc.ca. October 21, 2019. Archived from the original on October 22, 2019. Retrieved October 23, 2019. "Doug Ford's government hurt Andrew Scheer in Ontario, Vote Compass data suggests". cbc.ca. October 21, 2019. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved October 23, 2019. "Trudeau vows Canada's PPE stockpile policies will be overhauled to prevent waste – National | Globalnews.ca". Global News. Archived from the original on August 25, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2021. Walsh, Marieke (April 22, 2020). "Canada cut number of stockpile storage locations for critical medical supplies by one third in past two years". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on August 25, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2021. "Suivi des mesures économiques gouvernementales découlant de la crise de la COVID-19: Québec et Fédéral". Chaire en Fiscalité et en Finances publiques. Université de Sherbrooke. January 20, 2020. Archived from the original on April 18, 2020. Retrieved August 28, 2021. Brewster, Murray (May 7, 2020). "Armed Forces deploys almost all of its medical capacity against pandemic in Quebec nursing homes". CBC. Archived from the original on August 28, 2021. Retrieved August 28, 2021. "Procuring vaccines for COVID-19". aem. Public Services and Procurement Canada. December 11, 2020. Archived from the original on February 17, 2021. Retrieved April 24, 2021. Walsh, Marieke; McArthur, Greg (March 4, 2021). "Canada's missed shots: How Ottawa's COVID-19 vaccine promises were out of step with reality". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on August 25, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2021. Ling, Justin (May 31, 2021). "Where did Canada's vaccine effort actually go wrong?". Macleans.ca. Archived from the original on May 31, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Hopper, Tristin (February 5, 2021). "How Ottawa utterly botched Canada's COVID vaccine acquisition". National Post. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved August 25, 2021. "Most Canadians will get COVID-19 vaccine by September: Trudeau". Al Jazeera. November 27, 2020. Archived from the original on February 17, 2021. Retrieved March 22, 2021. Newton, Paula (April 9, 2021). "Canada's third wave on track to become its worst yet as hospitalizations spike". CNN. Archived from the original on April 23, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2021. "Interactive Data Visualization of COVID-19 in Canada – Public Health Infobase | Public Health Agency of Canada". health-infobase.canada.ca. April 19, 2020. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Cardoso, Tom; Lundy, Matt (April 19, 2021). "Federal budget 2021 highlights: Child care, recovery benefits, OAS increases – everything you need to know". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Bains, Jessy (October 21, 2021). "The Canada Recovery Benefit is ending, with a new one taking its place". Yahoo Finance Canada. Archived from the original on January 22, 2022. Retrieved January 22, 2022. Messier, François (December 23, 2021). "Des milliers de Canadiens de plus admissibles à une aide de 300 $ par semaine". ici.radio-canada.ca (in Canadian French). Archived from the original on December 22, 2021. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Zimonjic, Peter (July 3, 2020). "Ethics watchdog launches probe of Trudeau over choice of WE Charity to run $900M student grant program". CBC News. Archived from the original on July 3, 2020. Retrieved July 3, 2020. Breen, Kerri (July 3, 2020). "Ethics commissioner launches investigation into Trudeau, $900M WE Charity contract". Global News. Archived from the original on July 3, 2020. Retrieved July 3, 2020. Tasker, John Paul (July 3, 2020). "Federal government, WE Charity agree to part ways on summer student grant program". CBC News. Archived from the original on July 3, 2020. Retrieved July 3, 2020. Gilmore, Rachel (July 9, 2020). "PM Trudeau's mother, brother and wife were paid to speak at WE Charity events". CTVNews. Archived from the original on July 18, 2020. Retrieved July 18, 2020. Walsh, Marieke; Curry, Bill (July 9, 2020). "Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's wife, mother and brother paid to speak at WE Charity events". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved July 18, 2020. Porter, Catherine (July 13, 2020). "Speaking on Charity Scandal, Trudeau Adopts a Now-Familiar Tone of Contrition". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Nardi, Christopher (July 16, 2020). "Ethics commissioner launches WE Charity investigation into Finance Minister Bill Morneau". National Post. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved July 18, 2020. Catherine Tunney (May 13, 2021). "Trudeau cleared in WE Charity scandal but former finance minister broke conflict law, says ethics watchdog". CBC News. Archived from the original on July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2021. Aiello, Rachel (August 15, 2021). "Trudeau calls federal election, voters to go to the polls Sept. 20". CTV News. Bell Media. Archived from the original on August 15, 2021. Retrieved August 15, 2021. "Canada 'working tirelessly' to evacuate citizens from Kabul – CityNews Toronto". toronto.citynews.ca. Archived from the original on August 25, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2021. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on March 3, 2022. Retrieved March 3, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Hopper, Tristan (September 22, 2021). "First Reading: The Least Popular Canadian Government Ever Elected". National Post. Tasker, John Paul (January 29, 2022). "Thousands opposed to COVID-19 rules converge on Parliament Hill". CBC. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved February 1, 2022. "Freedom Convoy 2022 live updates: Trudeau relocated due to security concerns". National Post. January 29, 2022. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved January 29, 2022. Cecco, Leyland (January 28, 2022). "Canada truckers' vaccine protest spirals into calls to repeal all public health rules". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. "Freedom Convoy: Trudeau calls trucker protest an 'insult to truth'". BBC News. January 31, 2022. Archived from the original on March 2, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Military response not in cards for COVID protest, Trudeau says". The Boston Globe. February 3, 2022. Archived from the original on February 6, 2022. Retrieved February 13, 2022. Osorio, Carlos; Scherer, Steve; Chiacu, Doina (February 11, 2022). "Trudeau promises Biden 'quick action' against protesters blocking U.S.-Canada bridge". Reuters. Archived from the original on February 11, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2022. Astor, Maggie; Bilefsky, Dan; Porter, Catherine (February 11, 2022). "Trudeau warns protesters of 'increasingly robust police intervention.'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 11, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2022. "Trudeau invokes Emergencies Act for 1st time to aid convoy blockade response – National | Globalnews.ca". Global News. Archived from the original on February 14, 2022. Retrieved February 14, 2022. Boisvert, Nick (February 23, 2022). "Trudeau ends use of Emergencies Act, says 'situation is no longer an emergency'". CBC News. Archived from the original on February 23, 2022. Retrieved February 23, 2022. Osman, Laura (February 23, 2022). "Trudeau says Emergencies Act powers can now be revoked as crisis calms". CP24. Archived from the original on April 12, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. "Catharine Tunney, "Federal government met the threshold to invoke Emergencies Act: Rouleau", CBC News, Feb 17, 2023". Archived from the original on February 18, 2023. Retrieved February 18, 2023. Van Dyk, Spencer. "Federal court rules Emergencies Act invocation 'not justified'". CTV. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Tunney, Catharine (January 23, 2024). "Ottawa's use of Emergencies Act against convoy protests was unreasonable, violated Charter, court rules". CBC News. Retrieved March 4, 2024. "Liberals' deal with NDP will keep Trudeau minority in power for 3 more years". CTVNews. March 22, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2024. "NDP threatens stalling tactics, end of agreement with Liberals over slow pace of pharmacare talks". February 9, 2024. Retrieved March 1, 2024. "Liberals and NDP reach deal on pharmacare". CTVNews. February 23, 2024. Retrieved March 1, 2024. Bonokoski, Mark (September 17, 2020). "BONOKOSKI: Liberals' favourite debt-to-GDP tool now totally useless". torontosun. Archived from the original on January 30, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2020. Leuprecht, Christian (December 1, 2020). "Liberal government is placing a daring fiscal bet with its massive deficit spending plan". CBC News. Archived from the original on April 14, 2023. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Saul, Heather (October 20, 2015). "Justin Trudeau: The rise of the feminist and pro-choice Canadian Prime Minister who wants to legalise marijuana 'right away'". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Keith, Morgan (January 8, 2022). "Following unanimous parliamentary approval in 2021, conversion therapy is now illegal in Canada". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2022. "Justin Trudeau's promise to take 25,000 Syrian refugees this year 'problematic'". CBC. October 28, 2015. Archived from the original on April 13, 2019. Retrieved January 31, 2019. Kathleen Harris; Chris Hall; Peter Zimonjic (November 1, 2017). "Canada to admit nearly 1 million immigrants over next 3 years". CBC News. Archived from the original on November 18, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2018. Harris, Kathleen (April 14, 2016). "Doctor-assisted dying bill restricted to adults facing 'foreseeable' death". CBC. Archived from the original on May 30, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Tasker, John Paul (June 20, 2018). "Trudeau says pot will be legal as of Oct. 17, 2018". CBC News. Archived from the original on June 21, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2018. Ljunggren, David (April 19, 2021). "Canada to put up C$30 billion for long-awaited national childcare program". Reuters. Archived from the original on April 14, 2023. Retrieved August 17, 2021. "Ottawa reveals plan to welcome 500,000 immigrants per year by 2025". CBC News. November 1, 2022. Archived from the original on December 18, 2023. Retrieved December 15, 2023. Powers, Lucas (September 25, 2019). "Trudeau's claim that Canada is 'on track' to meet 2030 climate target is misleading". CBC News. Archived from the original on May 6, 2023. Retrieved November 17, 2020. "Innovation Energy: Canada leads the way in carbon capture as more governments put a price on CO2". Financial Post, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. July 17, 2019. Archived from the original on January 27, 2023. Retrieved November 17, 2020. Lake, Holly (November 9, 2018). "Environment and economy face off in battle over marine-protection bill". iPolitics. Archived from the original on June 1, 2019. Retrieved May 31, 2019. Rodriguez, Jeremiah (June 25, 2019). "'Pile of hypocrisy': Trudeau called out for single-use plastic forks in photo". CTVNews. Archived from the original on April 18, 2023. Retrieved July 3, 2020. Josh K., Elliott (June 21, 2019). "Why critics fear Bill C-69 will be a 'pipeline killer'". Global News. Archived from the original on April 18, 2023. Retrieved November 17, 2020. Newburger, Emma (June 21, 2022). "Canada is banning single-use plastics, including grocery bags and straws". CNBC. Archived from the original on April 18, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2022. McKibben, Bill (April 17, 2017). "Stop swooning over Justin Trudeau. The man is a disaster for the planet – Bill McKibben". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 18, 2023. Retrieved January 31, 2019 – via www.theguardian.com. "The dangers of Trudeau's 'postnational' Canada". Vancouversun.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "Obama, Trudeau show like-minded values in White House visit". Associated Press. March 10, 2016. Archived from the original on June 27, 2022. Retrieved June 27, 2022. Harris, Kathleen (November 6, 2015). "Justin Trudeau 'disappointed' with U.S. rejection of Keystone XL". CBC News. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on December 18, 2022. Retrieved January 2, 2016. "End combat mission in Iraq and Syria, Trudeau orders defence minister". Toronto Star. The Canadian Press. November 13, 2015. Archived from the original on November 14, 2015. Retrieved November 13, 2015. Carbert, Michelle (February 28, 2016). "Liberals' revised goal met as 25,000th Syrian refugee arrives in Canada". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on March 3, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2020. "CUSMA: What The New Trade Deal Means For Canadians |". clearit.ca. Archived from the original on April 21, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2020. "Canadian Parliament rushes through ratification of USMCA trade pact". Reuters. March 13, 2020. Archived from the original on November 26, 2020. Retrieved December 29, 2020. Daniel Wolfe, The full list of 229 US products targeted by Canada's retaliatory tariffs, Quartz (June 29, 2018). Horowitz, Julia (December 6, 2018). "Huawei CFO Meng Wanzhou arrested in Canada, faces extradition to United States". CNN Business. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved May 27, 2020. Hernández, Javier C.; Porter, Catherine (June 19, 2020). "China Indicts 2 Canadians on Spying Charges, Escalating Dispute". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 19, 2020. Retrieved October 2, 2021. Webster, David (September 26, 2021). "Meng for the two Michaels: Lessons for the world from the China-Canada prisoner swap". The Conversation. Retrieved October 2, 2021. Cecco, Leyland (June 9, 2020). "Canada doubles weapons sales to Saudi Arabia despite moratorium". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved December 29, 2020. Tunney, Catherine (September 19, 2023). "Questions mount about security precautions for Nijjar after India's government linked to killing". CBC News. "Canada's failed UN security council bid exposes Trudeau's 'dilettante' foreign policy". The Guardian. London, United Kingdom. June 18, 2020. Retrieved June 21, 2020. Lee, Michael (October 7, 2023). "Trudeau, Poilievre condemn Hamas attack on Israel". CTV. Archived from the original on October 7, 2023. "Liberals remain divided after Trudeau's call for 'humanitarian pauses' in Israel-Hamas war". The Globe and Mail. October 25, 2023. "Joint Statement by the Prime Ministers of Australia, Canada and New Zealand". Prime Minister of Canada. Tue, 12/12/2023 - 09:32. Retrieved 2024-04-01. {{cite web}}: Check date values in: |date= (help) Annett, Evan (October 30, 2015). "JUSTIN AND SOPHIE: THE FAMILY ALBUM". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on November 22, 2015. Retrieved November 20, 2015. "Justin Trudeau weds". CBC News. May 30, 2005. Archived from the original on May 23, 2013. Retrieved August 23, 2013. "Justin Trudeau's A Dad.. Again". HuffPost Canada. February 28, 2014. McGregor, Glen (August 9, 2013). "Justin Trudeau moves family to his childhood stomping grounds in Ottawa". National Post. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved November 20, 2015.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Break-in at Justin Trudeau's home the latest in long-line of security breaches involving Canadian politicians". National Post. August 18, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2016. "Justin Trudeau and family to live in Rideau Cottage, not 24 Sussex". Ottawa Sun. The Canadian Press. October 26, 2015. Retrieved November 20, 2015. Boutilier, Alex (August 2, 2023). "Justin Trudeau and Sophie Gregoire Trudeau announce separation". Global News. Retrieved August 2, 2023. "Canada PM Trudeau says focusing on kids and future after separation from wife". Reuters. August 21, 2023. Retrieved September 29, 2023. Mas, Susana (October 20, 2014). "Justin Trudeau memoir: 7 surprising revelations from Common Ground". CBC News. Archived from the original on October 22, 2015. Retrieved October 22, 2015. Derfler, Leslie (2012). Political Resurrection in the Twentieth Century: The Fall and Rise of Political Leaders. Springer. p. 185. ISBN 9781137027863. Retrieved December 19, 2017. Longhurst, John. "PM's faith has evolved with age – Trudeau's beliefs in social justice, abortion rights attract some, alienate others". Winnipeg Free Press. Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 24, 2015. Retrieved November 23, 2015. "Justin Trudeau upset Tory MP questioned his faith". CBC News. November 3, 2011. Retrieved December 19, 2017. The Office of the Secretary to the Governor (June 11, 2018). "The Diamond Jubilee Medal awarded to Justin Trudeau, M.P." Website of the Governor General of Canada. "Profile". lop.parl.ca. "Canadian PM Justin Trudeau receives honorary degree". The University of Edinburgh. Retrieved July 6, 2018. Global News (July 5, 2017), Justin Trudeau receives honourary [sic] degree from University of Edinburgh, archived from the original on December 12, 2021, retrieved July 6, 2018 CBC News (May 16, 2018), Justin Trudeau's full commencement speech to NYU graduates, archived from the original on December 12, 2021, retrieved July 6, 2018 "2018 Honorees, Honorary Degrees & Speakers". www.nyu.edu. Biscahie, Th. "Beyond the mosaic: Justin Trudeau and the postnational chimera." London Journal of Canadian Studies 34.3 (2019): 22–42. online Bosworth, Yulia. "The 'bad' French of Justin Trudeau: When language, ideology, and politics collide." American Review of Canadian Studies 49.1 (2019): 5–24. https://doi.org/10.1080/02722011.2019.1570954 Clarke, Harold D., et al. "Like father, like son: Justin Trudeau and valence voting in Canada’s 2015 federal election." PS: Political Science & Politics 50.3 (2017): 701–707. online Coulon, Jocelyn. Canada is Not Back: How Justin Trudeau is in over his head on foreign policy (James Lorimer & Company, 2019) online. Engler, Yves. House of Mirrors: Justin Trudeau's Foreign Policy (2020) excerpt Findlay, Tammy. "Intersectionalities of Opportunism: Justin Trudeau and the Politics of 'Diversity'." International Journal of Canadian Studies 60 (2022): 40–59. online Hillmer, Norman, and Philippe Lagassé, eds. Justin Trudeau and Canadian foreign policy (Springer, 2018) online. Kasztenna, Katarzyna Kasia. "Framing the pandemic in the political discourse of Justin Trudeau and Donald Trump: A reconnaissance." Working papers in Applied Linguistics and Linguistics at York 2 (2022): 29–50. online Lalancette, Mireille, and Vincent Raynauld. "The power of political image: Justin Trudeau, Instagram, and celebrity politics." American behavioral scientist 3#7 (2019): 888–924. online Lalancette, Mireille, and Tamara A. Small. " 'Justin Trudeau—I Don’t Know Her': An Analysis of Leadership Memes of Justin Trudeau." Canadian Journal of Communication 45.2 (2020): 305–325. online Lees-Marshment, Jennifer, and Salma Malik. "Political Branding in a Crisis and the Shifting Strategies of the Trudeau 2021 Campaign." in Political Marketing in the 2021 Canadian Federal Election (Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2023) pp. 9–23. Lim, Preston. "Sino-Canadian relations in the age of Justin Trudeau." Canadian Foreign Policy Journal 26.1 (2020): 25–40. https://doi.org/10.1080/11926422.2019.1641118 Marland, Alex. "The brand image of Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau in international context." Canadian Foreign Policy Journal 24.2 (2018): 139–144. online[permanent dead link] Remillard, Chaseten, Lindsey M. Bertrand, and Alina Fisher. "The visually viral prime minister: Justin Trudeau, selfies, and Instagram." in Power Shift? Political Leadership and Social Media (Routledge, 2019) pp. 63–75. online Wherry, Aaron. Promise and Peril: Justin Trudeau in Power (HarperCollins, 2019). excerpt Young, Huguette. Justin Trudeau: The Natural Heir (Dundurn, 2016) a major biography. online Listen to this article (34 minutes) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 22 February 2016 (2016-02-22), and does not reflect subsequent edits. (Audio help · More spoken articles) Justin Trudeau at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Justin Trudeau – Parliament of Canada biography