Max Emilian Verstappen (Dutch pronunciation: [ˈmɑks vɛrˈstɑ.pə(n)]; born 30 September 1997) is a Belgian and Dutch racing driver competing in Formula One, where he is the 2021, 2022, and 2023 World Champion. He races under the Dutch flag in Formula One for Red Bull Racing. Verstappen is the son of former Formula One driver Jos Verstappen, and former go-kart racer Sophie Kumpen. He had a successful run in karting and single-seater categories – including FIA European Formula 3 – breaking several records. At the 2015 Australian Grand Prix, when he was aged 17 years, 166 days, he became the youngest driver to compete in Formula One. After spending the 2015 season with Scuderia Toro Rosso, Verstappen started his 2016 campaign with the Italian team before being promoted to parent team Red Bull Racing after four races as a replacement for Daniil Kvyat. At the age of 18, he won the 2016 Spanish Grand Prix on his debut for Red Bull Racing, becoming the youngest-ever driver and the first Dutch driver to win a Formula One Grand Prix. After winning ten Grands Prix during the 2021 season, Verstappen became Formula One World Drivers' Champion for the first time, being the first Dutch driver and the 34th driver to do so. He won the next two consecutive Formula One championships in 2022 and 2023. As of the 2024 Australian Grand Prix, Verstappen has had 56 victories, 35 pole positions and 31 fastest laps. In addition to being the youngest Grand Prix winner, he holds several Formula One records, including the most wins in a season, the highest percentage of wins in a season, and the most consecutive wins. Verstappen is set to remain at Red Bull until at least the end of the 2028 season after signing a contract extension. Max Emilian Verstappen was born on 30 September 1997 in Hasselt, Belgium to Jos Verstappen and Sophie Kumpen [nl]. Verstappen's parents separated when he was young, after which he lived with his father. His younger sister, Victoria, lived with their mother. Verstappen has three younger half-siblings from his father: a sister, Blue Jaye, from Jos's second marriage, and a brother and sister, Jason Jaxx and Mila Faye, from Jos's current marriage. His family has a long association with motor sports: his father is a Dutch former Formula One driver, his Belgian mother competed in karting, and his first cousin once removed, Anthony Kumpen, competed in endurance racing and is a two-time NASCAR Whelen Euro Series champion currently serving as the team manager for PK Carsport in Euro Series. Although Verstappen has a Belgian mother, was born in Belgium and resided in Bree, Belgium, he decided to compete with a Dutch racing licence. He stated he "feels more Dutch", having spent more time with his father than with his mother during his upbringing, and was always surrounded by Dutch people while growing up in Maaseik, a Belgian town at the Dutch border. Verstappen said in 2015: "I actually only lived in Belgium to sleep, but during the day I went to the Netherlands and had my friends there too. I was raised as a Dutch person and that's how I feel." In 2022, however, Verstappen stated that he appreciates both sides and is "half-half at the end of the day". He competed in Formula One for more than a season before obtaining a road driving licence on his 18th birthday. Verstappen moved to Monaco the day after, in October 2015, and has lived there since and has said it was not for tax reasons. In November 2020, Verstappen bought a Dassault Falcon 900EX aircraft from Virgin Galactic. The aircraft is registered PH-DTF and operated by Exxaero. In his free time, Verstappen enjoys sim racing. Having taken part in many sim racing competitions, Verstappen stated that it helps him with his real life racing keeping him "ready to go". Verstappen is a member of Team Redline; a multinational sim racing team. Verstappen is a supporter of FC Barcelona and PSV Eindhoven. Verstappen speaks three languages, Dutch, English and German, the latter of which he learned while karting with Michael Schumacher. In September 2022, he was made an Officer of the Order of Orange-Nassau in recognition of his racing achievements. Verstappen has been dating Kelly Piquet publicly since January 2021. Verstappen started racing in karts at the age of four and competing in championships at the age of seven. In 2005 he competed in the Mini Junior championship of his home province of Limburg, Belgium and won the VAS Championship in the same category. In 2006, he repeated his success. In 2007, Verstappen graduated to the Rotax Max Mini Max class and won the Rotax Max Challenge Belgium and the Dutch Championship in that category. In 2008, racing in a CRG kart entered by his father, Verstappen won the Belgian Cadet Championship, as well as the Rotax Max Challenge Belgium and Benelux Karting Series in Mini Max class. In 2009, Verstappen joined Pex Racing, a CRG customer team. That year, he defended his titles in the Mini Max championships and won the Belgian KF5 Championship. Verstappen was signed by CRG to race in their factory team and stepped up to international karting in 2010. At the KF3 World Cup, Verstappen finished second to the more experienced Alexander Albon (who would eventually become his Formula One teammate at Red Bull Racing) but beat him at the WSK Euro Series and also won the WSK World Series, beating Robert Vișoiu. He finished fifth in the European Championship and won the WSK Nations Cup as well as the final of the Bridgestone Cup where during a 28 laps' race in the rain he beat Dennis Olsen by over 11 seconds. In 2011, Verstappen won the WSK Euro Series ahead of Esteban Ocon in a Parilla-powered CRG kart. However, it was not a successful year for him, as he finished 14th in the European Championship and got taken out in the World Cup by Charles Leclerc. In the following year, Verstappen joined the Intrepid Driver Program to race in the KF2 and KZ2 classes. He won the WSK Master Series in the KF2 class, beating the CRG driver Felice Tiene. Verstappen won the South Garda Winter Cup in the KF2 class, beating Dennis Olsen and Antonio Fuoco. He finished sixth in the WSK Euro Series. He was the youngest driver taking part in the World Championship in KF1 class and finished eight. In July 2012, it was announced that Verstappen would leave Intrepid. After a short stint with CRG-built Zanardi karts, Verstappen returned to the factory CRG team. He finished second at the World Cup in the KF2 class and competed at the SKUSA SuperNationals in the KZ2 class in a CRG, finishing 21st. In 2013, Verstappen completed a record-breaking season in karting. Aged 15, Verstappen won the South Garda Winter Cup in KF2 class and WSK Euro and Master Series in KZ class. He won two European Championships and a World Championship (the European and World KF and World KZ championships); an unprecedented feat in the history of the discipline. Verstappen won the 2013 World KZ Championship at Varennes-sur-Allier, France, beating Charles Leclerc and becoming the youngest driver ever to win the KZ World Championship. Verstappen's first experience in a racing car was at the Pembrey Circuit on 11 October 2013. He drove 160 laps in a Barazi-Epsilon FR2.0–10 Formula Renault car. The car was provided by Dutch team MP Motorsport. He tested for several Formula Renault 2.0 teams in 2013. In December 2013, Verstappen tested a Dallara F311 Formula 3 car run by Motopark Academy. An additional Formula Renault test followed in December at Circuito de Jerez. Driving for Josef Kaufmann Racing, Verstappen went faster than Formula Renault regulars like Steijn Schothorst and Matt Parry. At the Circuit Ricardo Tormo near Valencia, Verstappen set a faster lap time than the more experienced driver Eddie Cheever III. On 16 January 2014, it was announced Verstappen would make his racing debut in the non-championship Florida Winter Series. On 5 February, at the second race weekend, Verstappen won the race at Palm Beach International Raceway after he started from pole. A few weeks later, Verstappen won his second race of the series at Homestead–Miami Speedway after beating Nicholas Latifi by 0.004 seconds. Following his single-seater debut in the inaugural Florida Winter Series, Verstappen drove in the FIA European Formula 3 Championship for Van Amersfoort Racing. Aged 16, Verstappen scored a record six consecutive victories in the series, and a record ten victories in total, along with eight retirements and one DNS (did not start); placing third in the overall rankings. During the first practice session at the 2014 Japanese Grand Prix, Verstappen replaced Jean-Éric Vergne as part of his preparation for a full-time seat at Toro Rosso in the 2015 season. Aged 17 years and three days, Verstappen was the youngest person in history to participate in a Formula One race weekend. In August 2014, Verstappen joined the Red Bull Junior Team after testing a Formula Renault 3.5 car. He also considered an offer from Mercedes to join their driver development programme. Verstappen became the youngest driver to start a World Championship race through joining Toro Rosso's race drivers’ line-up with Carlos Sainz as his teammate, in his Grand Prix debut as a full-time driver at the 2015 Australian Grand Prix at the age of 17 years, 166 days—breaking Jaime Alguersuari's existing record by almost two years. In this first race, Verstappen ran in points-scoring positions until he was forced to retire due to an engine failure. However, at the subsequent race in Malaysia, Verstappen qualified sixth and finished the race in seventh place, scoring his first Formula One points aged 17 years, 180 days, breaking the record of the then-youngest driver to score World Championship points. At the 2015 Monaco Grand Prix, Verstappen was involved in a high-speed collision with Romain Grosjean, after clipping the back of Grosjean's Lotus on the approach to the tight first corner, Sainte Devote, and crashed into the barriers at high speed. Verstappen was given a five-place grid penalty for causing the accident, and was branded "dangerous" by Williams driver Felipe Massa. Verstappen continued to regularly finish in the points as well as achieving his best finish of the 2015 season in Hungary by finishing fourth, and equalled this result at the United States Grand Prix. At the end of the season, Verstappen received three awards at the FIA Prize Giving Ceremony, for "Rookie of the Year", "Personality of the Year" and "Action of the Year", for his overtake on Felipe Nasr on the outside of the Blanchimont corner at the Belgian Grand Prix. Verstappen began the 2016 season at Toro Rosso, again alongside Sainz. Verstappen qualified fifth for the opening race of the season in Australia, but during the race made several radio calls to his team due to frustration at being behind Sainz on track before Verstappen's Toro Rosso came into contact with his teammate's car whilst attempting to pass him with three laps to go, and he eventually finished tenth. Verstappen enjoyed a more successful weekend at the following race in Bahrain, finishing sixth to score Toro Rosso's first-ever points at the Sakhir circuit. On 5 May 2016, following the Russian Grand Prix, Red Bull Racing announced that Verstappen would be replacing Daniil Kvyat from the Spanish Grand Prix onwards, with Kvyat returning to Toro Rosso. According to Red Bull Team Principal Christian Horner, "Max has proven to be an outstanding young talent. His performance at Toro Rosso has been impressive so far and we are pleased to give him the opportunity to drive for Red Bull Racing." After qualifying fourth for the Spanish Grand Prix, Verstappen rose to second behind teammate Daniel Ricciardo on the opening lap after Mercedes teammates Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg crashed out of the race. Verstappen took the race lead as he was placed on a two-stop rather than the same three-stop strategy as Ricciardo, and he held off Ferrari's Kimi Räikkönen in the later stages of the race to take his first Formula One victory. By doing so he displaced Sebastian Vettel as the youngest driver ever to win a Formula One Grand Prix at the age of 18 years and 228 days. In his first eight races with Red Bull, he achieved six top-five finishes, including four podiums. During the Belgian Grand Prix, Verstappen collided with Räikkönen at the first corner, pushed Vettel, Räikkönen and Pérez wide at Les Combes, and aggressively blocked Räikkönen on the Kemmel straight. Verstappen was criticised for his driving, with Räikkönen saying that he "was going to cause a huge accident sooner or later." Christian Horner noted that the driving was "on the edge", and that Verstappen will "look at it and learn for future races." In September, Formula One director Charlie Whiting called in Verstappen for a discussion, and later gave him a 'gentle warning' due to his aggressive driving. However, in October, drivers' concerns about Verstappen's defensive tactics led the FIA to disallow moving under braking. At the 2016 Brazilian Grand Prix, Verstappen qualified fourth. In a rain affected race, he almost hit the barrier after he slid on the main straight due to a loss of traction, causing oversteer. After an additional tyre change from intermediates back to rain tyres, he ran in 16th place with just 15 laps remaining. Verstappen then made several overtakes in quick succession during the closing laps to eventually finish on the podium in third place. He received considerable praise for his performance: rival team Mercedes' team principal, Toto Wolff, labelled it "The Verstappen Show", and described Verstappen's drive as "physics..being redefined". However, Verstappen came under criticism from four-time world champion Sebastian Vettel, who stated that Verstappen had pushed him off the track at the Junção corner late in the race. The race stewards did not share Vettel's view and decided that no reprimand was warranted. During the first 14 races of the 2017 season, Verstappen suffered seven retirements, four due to mechanical issues, and three due to first lap collisions in Spain, Austria and Singapore. Of the races he finished, however, he claimed a third place in China, and in another five races he finished fourth or fifth. From the Malaysian Grand Prix onward, Verstappen enjoyed a surge of success. He won his second Formula One race at the 2017 Malaysian Grand Prix, a day after his 20th birthday, passing then three-time champion Lewis Hamilton for the lead in the early stages of the race. He finished second in the following race in Japan. He then finished third at the United States Grand Prix, but was classified fourth after his final lap overtake on Kimi Räikkönen was deemed illegal. He won his third Formula One race at the Mexican Grand Prix, after passing Sebastian Vettel on the opening lap. In the first six races of the season, Verstappen had been involved in at least one incident in each race. In Australia, he qualified fourth but fell behind Kevin Magnussen at the start. In his attempts to retake the position he ran wide multiple times and damaged his car, with a spin causing him to fall further down the order. He recovered to eventually finish the race in sixth place. At the next race in Bahrain, he crashed during qualifying and started in 15th place. He had a productive first lap after which he found himself in the points while challenging Lewis Hamilton. He attempted an overtake on the reigning World Champion at the start of lap two, but collided with the Mercedes driver and suffered a puncture that ultimately led to suspension damage, forcing him out of the race. At the next race in China, Verstappen qualified fifth and had moved up to third at the end of the first lap. Both Red Bull drivers pitted for fresh tyres during a safety car which left them with a tyre advantage over the front-runners ahead. In an overtake attempt on Sebastian Vettel for third place, Verstappen collided with the championship leader, causing him to fall to eighth and receive a 10-second penalty. He recovered to fourth place, with his penalty causing him to be classified fifth. Teammate Ricciardo went on to win the race. In Azerbaijan, Verstappen was embroiled in a race-long battle with Ricciardo for fourth place. After numerous position changes between the two teammates during the race, Ricciardo ran into the back of Verstappen during an overtake attempt from which the Dutchman aggressively defended, causing the retirement of both cars. Both drivers were blamed by the team and reprimanded by the stewards. Verstappen bounced back in Spain with his first podium of the season by finishing third behind the Mercedes drivers, holding off Sebastian Vettel. However, the race was also not without incident as he had run into the back of Lance Stroll during the virtual safety car period, causing minor front wing damage. In Monaco, Verstappen made another error and crashed near the end of the third free practice session in an incident which closely resembled a crash he had at the same spot two years earlier. His team could not repair his car in time for qualifying and Verstappen had to start the race from the back of the grid. Verstappen did not compete and did not set a lap time in qualifying, therefore teammate Ricciardo pressed home Red Bull's advantage at the track by taking pole position and the race win. Verstappen managed to salvage two points by finishing ninth place, overtaking six cars on track. Team principal Christian Horner commented on Verstappen's start of the season, saying he "needed to stop making these mistakes" and that he could "learn from his teammate", while Helmut Marko, head of driver development at Red Bull, said that Verstappen was "too impatient". Verstappen now lay in sixth place in the championship with 35 points, only three points ahead of Fernando Alonso in the McLaren, and 37 points behind his teammate in third, who had taken two wins in the first six races. In Canada, Verstappen topped all three practice sessions and qualified third, two-tenths off Sebastian Vettel in pole position. He eventually finished third and set the fastest lap of the race. The following race in France brought him second place. In Austria—Red Bull's home track, he started fourth on the grid, passed Kimi Räikkönen before taking advantage of retirement from Valtteri Bottas and a botched pit-stop strategy by Lewis Hamilton, who later had to retire from fourth place, to claim the fourth race victory of his career. In Britain, Verstappen was plagued by issues, finishing the first practice session early due to a gearbox problem and crashing in the second practice session before retiring from the race due to a brake problem. He would then finish fourth in Germany after strategy errors let a recovering Hamilton get past him as he went on to win the race. Verstappen ended the first half of the season with a retirement in Hungary and was narrowly behind his teammate in the championship due to his own recent resurgence and Ricciardo's unreliability. Verstappen enjoyed a very strong second half of the season, achieving podium finishes in Belgium, Singapore, Japan and the United States, the latter of which he achieved second place having started from 18th on the grid due to a suspension failure in qualifying. Following the qualifying session at the Mexican Grand Prix, Verstappen revealed that a mechanical problem with his Red Bull under braking cost him any chance of becoming the youngest-ever Formula One pole-sitter. As a result, Ricciardo beat Verstappen to pole position by just 0.026 seconds. Verstappen had a better start than Ricciardo and took the lead of the race into the first corner, overtaking the fast-starting Mercedes of Lewis Hamilton. Verstappen earned his fifth career win in Mexico. He was poised to win the 2018 Brazilian Grand Prix, having overtaken Räikkönen, Vettel, Bottas, and Hamilton. However, he collided with Force India driver Esteban Ocon who was trying to unlap himself on faster tyres. Ocon received a 10-second stop-and-go penalty for the incident. After the collision with Ocon, Verstappen finished in second place behind Hamilton. During an argument with Ocon after the race, Verstappen pushed the Force India driver, for which he was given two days of "public service" as a penalty by the FIA. He then finished his season with another podium as he finished third in Abu Dhabi. Verstappen ended the season in fourth place in the championship with 249 points, claiming two wins, eleven podium finishes, and two fastest laps. In 2019 Red Bull switched from Renault to Honda power units. After Ricciardo moved to the Renault team for 2019, Verstappen was joined at Red Bull by Pierre Gasly. Verstappen qualified in fourth and finished third in Australia, the first podium finish for a Honda-powered driver since the 2008 British Grand Prix. Verstappen was on course for a second third-place finish in Bahrain before a late safety car prevented him from overtaking Charles Leclerc's ailing Ferrari, keeping him in fourth place. Two more fourth-place finishes followed in China and Azerbaijan, and a podium in Spain in third place. In Monaco, Verstappen qualified in third place. He was released into the path of Valtteri Bottas during the drivers' pit stops, gaining second place but receiving a 5-second penalty as a result. Verstappen crossed the line in second place but was demoted to fourth by the penalty. In Canada, Verstappen's final lap in the second qualifying session was hampered by a red flag brought out by Kevin Magnussen's crash. This caused Verstappen to qualify 11th and start the race in ninth place. He later recovered to finish fifth. In France he started and finished in fourth place. In Austria, Verstappen started third but suffered a poor start, dropping down to eighth. After a charge towards the front, he made his way up to second before controversially passing Leclerc for the lead of the race with three laps to go. This marked the first Honda-powered race victory since the 2006 Hungarian Grand Prix. In Britain, Verstappen, running in third place, was hit from behind during an overtake attempt by Sebastian Vettel and spun into the gravel. Verstappen was able to continue and crossed the line in fifth place. The wet and chaotic German Grand Prix began similarly to the race in Austria for Verstappen, as a poor start caused him to fall behind. However, he would inherit the lead midway through the race after a crash by race leader Hamilton. Verstappen would go on to extend his lead after the track began to dry, claiming his second victory of the season. In Hungary, he claimed the first pole position of his career and led most of the race before being passed in the closing laps by Hamilton, who had made another stop for fresh tyres in a gamble to catch the leader. Before the Belgian Grand Prix, Verstappen received a new teammate in Alexander Albon after Pierre Gasly was demoted back to Toro Rosso. In the race, Verstappen had a poor start and collided with Kimi Räikkönen at the first corner, resulting in suspension damage and causing Verstappen's first retirement of the season. In Italy, he did not set a time during qualifying after his car lost power in Q1, but he was already required to start from the back of the grid due to an engine component penalty. After damaging his front wing on the first lap, he recovered to finish the race in eighth place. Third and fourth-place finishes followed in Singapore and Russia respectively. After suffering damage in a first-lap collision with Charles Leclerc in Japan, Verstappen suffered his second retirement of the season. In Mexico, he qualified in first place after setting the fastest lap-time of the session, before being handed a grid penalty for ignoring yellow flags after a crash by Valtteri Bottas. Verstappen suffered a puncture early in the race after making contact with Bottas, falling to the back of the field before eventually recovering to sixth place. A third-place finish in the United States followed, before Verstappen took the second pole position of his career with a 1:07.508 pole lap time in Brazil. In a chaotic race, he passed Lewis Hamilton for the lead on two occasions before going on to claim his third victory of the season. Verstappen ended the season with a second-place finish in Abu Dhabi. Verstappen finished the 2019 season in third place in the championship with 278 points. He claimed three race victories, nine podium finishes, two pole positions, and three fastest laps. In 2020, Verstappen signed a contract extension to race for Red Bull until the end of 2023. Verstappen continued to race for Red Bull in 2020, alongside Albon. At the 2020 Austrian Grand Prix, he started second, but retired early in the race after a flywheel-related problem caused an electronic issue within the power unit. Honda introduced countermeasures in response to the retirement. At the 2020 Hungarian Grand Prix, he crashed in wet conditions during the formation lap while he was on his way to the starting grid, but he was able to drive the car back to the grid where his mechanics fixed the suspension of the car in the short time that was left before the start of the race. After the repairs, Verstappen progressed from seventh place on the grid to second place by the end of the race. Verstappen won the 70th Anniversary Grand Prix at Silverstone, having started from fourth. Verstappen clinched second place at the Spanish Grand Prix, after qualifying in third. At the 2020 Belgian Grand Prix, he scored a podium in third place, following his third place on the starting grid. He suffered from two consecutive DNFs at the Italian and Tuscan Grands Prix after which he lost second place in the Championship. At the Russian Grand Prix, Verstappen finished the race in second, his seventh podium finish of 2020. At the Eifel Grand Prix, Verstappen finished in second after qualifying in third. He also managed to get the fastest lap of the race. At the Portuguese Grand Prix, Verstappen qualified third, however a poor first lap meant that he dropped back down the order to fifth place. He recovered to third and took his 40th podium in Formula 1. At the Emilia Romagna Grand Prix, Verstappen looked set to claim second due to Valtteri Bottas' ailing Mercedes slowing down, but a sudden puncture denied him any chance of a podium finish; Verstappen spun, resulting in his fourth retirement of the 2020 season. During Free Practice for the Portuguese Grand Prix, Verstappen was criticised for comments he made on the team radio after a collision with Lance Stroll, where he used the words "retard" and "mongol" in response to the clash. Verstappen admitted following the session that the word choices he used were "not correct." The Mongolian government and the Mongol identity asked Verstappen to apologise for the comments; the Mongolian government also urged the FIA to take action on the comments he made. Verstappen finished the 2020 season in third place in the championship with 214 points. He claimed two race victories, eleven podium finishes, one pole position, and three fastest laps. At the Bahrain Grand Prix, Verstappen topped all the practice sessions and subsequently took a career fourth pole position. This was the first time he achieved back-to-back pole positions. He fought Lewis Hamilton for the race victory, and on lap 53 Verstappen overtook Hamilton, but went off track whilst doing so, resulting in him being instructed by race control to let Hamilton back into the lead and ultimately finishing second behind Hamilton. At the next race, the Emilia Romagna Grand Prix, Verstappen qualified third with teammate Sergio Pérez second, marking the first time he was out-qualified by a teammate since the 2019 Italian Grand Prix. At the race start, Verstappen was able to pass both Pérez and pole-sitter Lewis Hamilton to take the lead. He remained in the lead after the first round of pit stops as well as the restart, following the race being suspended on lap 33. Rival Hamilton finished second, reducing his championship lead over Verstappen to one point. In the following Portuguese Grand Prix, Verstappen finished second after a long battle with Lewis Hamilton. At the Spanish Grand Prix, the battle between Verstappen and Hamilton continued, with Hamilton employing a faster two-stop strategy versus Verstappen's one-stop race. This provided Hamilton the advantage of faster tyres, allowing him to overtake Verstappen with several laps remaining in the race. Hamilton took the victory, with Verstappen taking second and the fastest lap, increasing Hamilton's championship lead to 14 points. At the next race in Monaco, Verstappen qualified second behind Charles Leclerc, but Leclerc suffered a driveshaft failure on the way to the grid and was unable to start the race. Verstappen controlled the race from the front on the way to victory. Hamilton (who qualified seventh) finished seventh, though claiming an extra championship point by setting the fastest race lap. The result enabled Verstappen to take the lead in the Drivers' Championship for the first time in his career, by a margin of four points over Hamilton. At the Azerbaijan Grand Prix, Verstappen qualified third behind Leclerc and Hamilton. Verstappen and Hamilton passed Leclerc in the opening laps before Verstappen took the lead by way of a faster pitstop. Verstappen would comfortably hold the lead until lap 46 when he suffered a tyre failure causing him to crash at high-speed and retire. A mistake by Hamilton on the restart dropped him to last place, meaning Verstappen maintained his championship lead. Verstappen took pole for the French Grand Prix. Verstappen's mistake on the first lap allowed Hamilton to take the lead which Verstappen retook during the pit stop phase. Verstappen pitted for a second time from the lead and set after the Mercedes duo, overtaking Hamilton for the lead on lap 52 of 53. He also took the fastest lap point, extending his championship lead to twelve points and achieving the first hat-trick of his career. Verstappen clinched pole position again at the Styrian Grand Prix and led the race from start to finish, to give him his fourth win of the season and further extend his lead to 18 points. Verstappen took pole position at the Austrian Grand Prix, led every lap from start to finish, set the fastest lap, and won the race for his first career grand slam, being the youngest to do so. With the win, Verstappen also became the first driver to win three races in three consecutive weekends, starting at the French Grand Prix on 20 June, then the Styrian Grand Prix on 27 June and ending with the Austrian Grand Prix on 4 July. At the next race; the British Grand Prix, Verstappen was involved in a high-speed collision at the Copse corner with Hamilton on the first lap. This resulted in a 51 g impact with the barrier. He was taken to the Silverstone circuit's medical centre after the crash and was then taken to Coventry hospital for precautionary checks and further assessment, before eventually being discharged at 22:00 local time on Sunday night. Hamilton would go on to win the race, reducing Verstappen's lead in the championship to eight points. At the next race, the Hungarian Grand Prix, Verstappen's car suffered damage in a multi-car collision on lap 1, where Mercedes driver Valtteri Bottas was deemed at fault. He ended the race in tenth which was promoted to ninth after Sebastian Vettel was disqualified. The outcome of the race allowed Hamilton to take the lead of the championship. Following the summer break, Verstappen qualified on pole at the Belgian Grand Prix, ahead of Williams driver George Russell in second and Lewis Hamilton in third. The race was run for three laps, all behind the safety car, with the race official race results taken from the running order at the end of the first lap, with Hamilton and Verstappen both retaining their qualifying positions. As less than 75% of the race distance was completed, half points were awarded, resulting in Verstappen closing the gap to Hamilton to three points. At the Dutch Grand Prix Verstappen again qualified on pole, beating Hamilton by 0.038 seconds. During the race Verstappen was able to fend off attacks from both Mercedes drivers to take the win, taking the lead in the Drivers' Championship by three points. For the Russian Grand Prix, Verstappen was required to start at the back of the grid for exceeding his quota of power unit components. He made his way back up the field, and after taking an early pit stop for intermediate tyres late in the race, he finished second. At the Turkish Grand Prix, Verstappen qualified second with Bottas on pole. With the race being run in wet conditions and the drivers on intermediate tyres the whole race, Verstappen finished second behind Bottas, taking the lead in the Drivers' Championship by six points as Hamilton finished fifth. At the United States Grand Prix, Verstappen took pole position in qualifying, edging Hamilton by 0.209 seconds. Verstappen won the race and extended his lead in the Drivers' Championship to twelve points as Hamilton finished second with the fastest lap. At the 2021 Mexico City Grand Prix, Verstappen qualified third with a gap to pole-sitter Bottas of 0.350 seconds. Verstappen's main opponent Hamilton qualified second. At the race start, Verstappen took the lead from Bottas and Hamilton into turn 1 and won the race, and as a result extended his lead in the championship to 19 points. Verstappen and Hamilton were on equal points in the Drivers' Championship going into the final round, the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, with Verstappen leading on countback. Verstappen overtook Hamilton on the final lap to win the race, and his first Formula One World Drivers' Championship. Verstappen, who had qualified on pole position by nearly four-tenths of a second, had a slow start off the line at the start of the race and dropped to second place. Verstappen was trailing Hamilton by over ten seconds until a late safety car was called in due to a crash at turn 14 involving Williams driver Nicholas Latifi. The withdrawal of the safety car and the resumption of the race following the safety car period was met with controversy. Race director Michael Masi allowed only a certain number of lapped cars through, which after the race brought from the Mercedes team a protest and stated intention to appeal against the race result, arguing that all lapped cars should be allowed through, Red Bull counter argued that this was not specified by the wording of the regulations. The protest was rejected, although subsequent investigation by the FIA resulted in the wording of the rule being amended for the 2022 season to specify that "all" cars will unlap themselves (at the race director's discretion) rather than "any". Verstappen passed Hamilton at turn 5 of the final lap of the race to become the 34th Formula One World Drivers' Champion. In March 2022, Verstappen signed a five-year contract extension with Red Bull Racing for the 2023 to 2028 seasons. Verstappen retired from second place at the season-opening Bahrain Grand Prix with a fuel system issue. He won the Saudi Arabian Grand Prix, having benefited from a pit stop during safety car conditions to pass teammate and pole-sitter Pérez, but suffered another fuel-related retirement from second place at the Australian Grand Prix. This left him 46 points behind championship leader Charles Leclerc after three races. Verstappen responded by winning the next three races; he achieved sprint victory and a grand slam at the Emilia Romagna Grand Prix, won from third on the grid at the Miami Grand Prix and gained from Leclerc's retirement at the Spanish Grand Prix to lead the Drivers' Championship. Further wins came at the Azerbaijan Grand Prix, where Leclerc again retired, and from pole position at the Canadian Grand Prix. Verstappen qualified second at the British Grand Prix, but floor damage from running over debris harmed his pace and resulted in a seventh-place finish. He took pole position at the Austrian Grand Prix and won the sprint, but was overtaken by Leclerc in the race and finished second, reducing his championship lead over Leclerc to 38 points. Following this, Verstappen went on to win five races consecutively. Pole-sitter Leclerc crashed out of the French Grand Prix, allowing Verstappen to win. Power unit issues meant he qualified tenth for the Hungarian Grand Prix, but overtakes in the opening laps and pit stop undercuts meant he went on to take victory, despite briefly losing the lead after a spin. He set the fastest qualifying time at the Belgian Grand Prix but was demoted to 14th on the grid with a power unit components penalty. Despite this, he progressed to the race lead by lap 12 and went on to win. He took pole position and his 30th race victory at his home race, the Dutch Grand Prix, and then won from seventh on the grid at the Italian Grand Prix. Verstappen's winning streak was ended at the Singapore Grand Prix. He ran out of fuel in qualifying and started the race eighth. He lost places at the start and later had to make an extra pit stop due to a tyre lock up, finishing seventh. Victory from pole at the shortened Japanese Grand Prix gave him a 113-point lead in the standings with four races remaining, securing him his second World Drivers' Championship. He won the next two races, the United States and Mexico City Grands Prix, finished sixth at the São Paulo Grand Prix after a collision with Lewis Hamilton, and won the season-ending Abu Dhabi Grand Prix from pole. Abu Dhabi was his fifteenth victory of the year, breaking the record of thirteen race wins in a season shared by Michael Schumacher in 2004 and Sebastian Vettel in 2013. He won the championship with 454 points, beating Lewis Hamilton's 2019 record of 413. Verstappen remained with Red Bull alongside Sergio Pérez for the 2023 season. His season began with a win from pole at the Bahrain Grand Prix. A driveshaft failure in qualifying at the Saudi Arabian Grand Prix resulted in a 15th-place start, but he gained positions in the race to finish second behind Pérez. He again won from pole at the Australian Grand Prix despite losing positions to the Mercedes drivers during the race, but finished second to Pérez, who made a safety car pit stop, at the Azerbaijan Grand Prix. After this began Verstappen's record-breaking win streak. He started ninth at the Miami Grand Prix as red flags in qualifying aborted his lap, but passed the drivers ahead including pole-sitter Pérez to win. The next four races, the Monaco, Spanish, Canadian and Austrian Grands Prix, were won comfortably from pole position by Verstappen, including Red Bull's 100th victory in Canada and a sprint win in Austria. He took pole at the British Grand Prix but briefly lost the lead to Lando Norris at the start before regaining the position to win. He qualified 0.003 seconds behind Lewis Hamilton at the Hungarian Grand Prix, but overtook him at the first corner and went on to take victory. He claimed pole and the win in the Belgian Grand Prix sprint and set the fastest qualifying time, but started the race sixth due to an engine component penalty. He went on to overtake Pérez to win the race. He won from pole at the rain-affected Dutch Grand Prix and was victorious again at the Italian Grand Prix despite qualifying behind Carlos Sainz Jr. This victory marked his tenth consecutive win, breaking Sebastian Vettel's record of nine from 2013, and Red Bull's fifteenth consecutive win, a record previously held by McLaren with eleven in 1988. Both Red Bulls were eliminated in Q2 at the Singapore Grand Prix and were unable to make an impression in the race, with Verstappen and Pérez finishing fifth and eighth respectively, ending the winning streak. This would be the only break in Verstappen's success, as he went on to win the remaining seven races of the season. His victory from pole at the Japanese Grand Prix gave Red Bull their sixth Constructors' Championship title. He clinched his third World Drivers' Championship title at the Qatar Grand Prix sprint despite finishing second to Oscar Piastri, then won the race from pole. He won the United States Grand Prix despite having started sixth due to a lap time deletion in qualifying. He qualified behind both Ferraris at the Mexico City Grand Prix but passed both drivers to claim the win. He took pole and victory at the São Paulo Grand Prix, and won the sprint having overtook pole-sitter Lando Norris at the first turn. He started behind Charles Leclerc at the Las Vegas Grand Prix and received a penalty for forcing him off the track, but Verstappen reclaimed the lead to win. His pole and victory at the season-ending Abu Dhabi Grand Prix was his nineteenth win of the year, breaking his own record of fifteen from 2022. He scored 575 points, more than double that of second-placed Pérez and beating his own points-scoring record from 2022. Verstappen began the 2024 season with his fifth career grand slam at the Bahrain Grand Prix and followed this with another pole and victory at the Saudi Arabian Grand Prix. He took pole again at the Australian Grand Prix but was forced into retirement with a brake fire, ending his nine-race winning streak and marking his first retirement in two years. Following Verstappen's maiden pole position at the 2019 Hungarian Grand Prix, former Formula One World Champion Nico Rosberg described him as the fastest driver in Formula One. Rosberg elucidated that Verstappen did not have the fastest car during the qualifying session in Hungary, emphasising that it was Verstappen's raw speed that allowed him to secure pole position: "Mercedes still had the fastest car, and it's just Verstappen with his driving that put it up there in pole." In 2019, former Formula One World Champion Jenson Button stated that he believes Verstappen is the fastest Formula One driver ever: "I think he is the fastest driver that has ever driven an F1 car. I really do, I think he is unbelievably fast." Journalist Scott Mitchell from The Race commented: "When everything comes together, Verstappen is the quickest driver in F1 over one lap, but the odd mistake and scruffy session must be eliminated." Helmut Marko, head of Red Bull's driver development programme, stated that Verstappen is the fastest driver Red Bull have ever had. In 2021, three-time Formula One World Champion Jackie Stewart claimed that Verstappen is the fastest driver in Formula One, but he also added that Verstappen is still in the "puppy stage" of his career. Peter Windsor, an experienced Formula One journalist, expressed Verstappen's ability to change direction "quicker than anybody else" through the high-speed section Maggots and Becketts: Silverstone's fastest sequence of corners. Windsor stressed that Verstappen's lightning-quick change of direction is a result of the innate feel he has for creating the "perfect platform" to achieve what he wants with the car during a lap. He is intrinsically able to create, for "a trillionth of a second", a minuscule "flat area" between the left and the right of a change of direction ahead of him, in order to attain a stable balance with the car before applying the next steering and throttle input. Scuderia AlphaTauri's team principal, Franz Tost, declared Verstappen to be the fastest driver in Formula One; following the Dutchman's "really deserved" maiden title triumph in 2021. On the subject of sim racing, Verstappen was deemed the "fastest" driver by IndyCar racer and former Formula One driver Romain Grosjean. Former Formula One driver Eddie Irvine praised Verstappen, stating that he is "by far the most dominant team leader on the grid." Irvine highlighted that Verstappen "has had many different second drivers in the team and none of them have got close to him." During the 2020 season, Jenson Button stated that he does not "think there's been a driver that's annihilated their team-mates like he [Verstappen] has in a very long time." Motorsport columnist and former Formula One driver Jolyon Palmer, commented that Verstappen's maiden world championship triumph could usher in a "new era of dominance" in the sport. Palmer wrote: [Verstappen's] qualifying pace is frightening and has been the basis for this title-charging campaign. He's had the most pole positions of anyone with 10 – almost half of the races, and it would have been half had he completed his mesmeric Jeddah lap, which ended up being possibly Max's biggest error in a near-perfect season. For a driver who has demolished three successive team mates in three years and made only a handful of small mistakes in that time, you question what scope their [sic] even is for improvement – but if he can take his game onto another level from here, we could be about to see the start of a new era of dominance. Journalist Scott Mitchell expounded the reason why the Dutchman's teammates have fallen short "even with the data." Mitchell wrote: "Verstappen drives mainly on intuition, and that comes from years of training and preparation. He has a database in his head which he can use immediately. Even with data, Gasly and Albon could see where he was faster, but they could never grasp how he was faster there. That's because what makes Verstappen so good is mainly unconscious." According to Mitchell, those years of training and driving on his intuition has made it impossible for other drivers to measure up to Verstappen. Helmut Marko, the current advisor to the Red Bull GmbH Formula One teams, asserted that Verstappen's progress has moved him clear of his former Formula 1 team-mate Daniel Ricciardo, in both qualifying and race trim. "There is specific data," Marko told Autosport, "In qualifying the gap to Ricciardo is greater. The strange thing is Max sometimes slides more, but still manages to keep the tyres alive." Verstappen previously mentioned that he was three or four-tenths faster on average than "very fast qualifier" Daniel Ricciardo. Marko concluded that then 20-year-old Verstappen "clearly moved away" from Ricciardo since the "second half of the 2018 season." Following his maiden Formula One win, at the 2016 Spanish Grand Prix, three-time Formula One World Champion Niki Lauda described Verstappen as the "talent of the century." Red Bull Team Principal Christian Horner stated that Verstappen is the best driver Red Bull have ever seen: "I have no doubt [Verstappen is] the best we have seen on one of our cars, in terms of outright raw ability and commitment. He's the best driver we’ve seen." Former Formula One driver Gerhard Berger echoed Jenson Button's recent comments, anointing Max Verstappen as the Formula One driver of this era with the most raw talent. Speaking to Sport1, Berger ventured: “When it comes to raw talent, Max Verstappen is the most talented of all. But it’s not just about raw talent, it’s about the whole package. That means it’s not just about setting the fastest laps but also to win a race. And not just [about] one race but many and eventually a championship, and championships." Two-time Formula One World Champion Fernando Alonso commented that Verstappen is the standout driver in Formula One, declaring the Red Bull star to be "one step ahead" of everyone. Alonso noted that Verstappen deserved to win the Formula One drivers’ championship in Abu Dhabi, ahead of the title decider that saw the Dutchman and Lewis Hamilton enter level on points: “Mercedes lately have been more performing and they’ve won a couple of races now, but Max is driving – in my opinion – one step ahead of all of us. We saw the [qualifying] lap in Jeddah, until he touched the wall at the last corner, that lap was coming from Max, not the Red Bull." Former Formula One Driver Karun Chandhok likened Verstappen's ruthless and uncompromising attitude in race combat to Michael Schumacher's unyielding and iron-willed style of racing. Verstappen was ranked first in the annual Formula One team principals’ top ten drivers ranking in 2021. Following Verstappen being given a warning for his driving conduct at the 2016 Belgian Grand Prix, the 18-year-old received the backing of then three-time champion Lewis Hamilton, who commented: "firstly, give the guy a break, he is 18 years old. What the frickin' heck were any of us doing at 18?" Despite earning high praise and acclaim from Formula One drivers and experts in and out of the sport, Verstappen faced criticism in the wake of the penalties he incurred during the 2021 Saudi Arabian Grand Prix. Following this race, former Formula One driver Martin Brundle wrote: "Such is [his] car control and cunning, he's sometimes able to pull off the audacious moves and leave a margin of doubt as to whether it's hard racing or simply a professional foul outside of the regulations and it's those moments which are generating the confusion, controversies and inconsistencies. Ayrton Senna and Michael Schumacher had their faults too, and I was on the receiving end from both of them on occasions, but it's a sizeable dent on their immense reputations, not a positive." Following an impressive first half of the 2022 season, journalist David Tremayne claimed Verstappen had elevated himself to a new higher level compared to his 2021 title winning season, suggesting Verstappen's first title had made him more relaxed and "chirpy". Verstappen has accumulated a significant fanbase from around the world, but in particular from his home country of the Netherlands. Grand Prix events have dedicated Verstappen grandstands with thousands of travelling Dutch fans, boosting ticket sales particularly for European races such as Belgium, Austria and Hungary. During the 2021 Dutch Grand Prix, Honda's Formula One managing director Masashi Yamamoto praised the Verstappen supporters, saying that "in the six years I've been involved with Honda F1, I've never seen such a great turnout as at the Dutch Grand Prix. It was like being in a football stadium." He added that "when Max crossed the finish line first, the whole circuit coloured orange". In 2021, Verstappen was voted the most popular Formula One driver in an official survey. He has a fan made song, "Super Max!" performed by Pitstop Boys [nl]. The song went viral after his 2021 championship victory, reaching number two in the UK Spotify viral charts and fifth in the global one. In 2022, Verstappen was named the winner of the Laureus World Sports Award for Sportsman of the Year. * Season still in progress. (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap) (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicates fastest lap) † Did not finish, but was classified as he had completed more than 90% of the race distance. ‡ Half points awarded as less than 75% of race distance was completed. * Season still in progress. Verstappen holds the following Formula One records: Footnotes Record shared with Lewis Hamilton. Record shared with Jackie Stewart. Record shared with Fernando Alonso. Record shared with Michael Schumacher. Record shared with Michael Schumacher (2002). On 3 October 2014, Verstappen became the youngest driver to participate in a Formula One Grand Prix weekend (17 years, 3 days), driving in FP1 at the Japanese Grand Prix, deputising in place of Toro Rosso's Jean-Eric Vergne. On 3 August 2019, Verstappen became the first Dutch Formula One driver to take pole position, doing so at the Hungarian Grand Prix, while also becoming the 100th polesitter in the sport's history. On 23 May 2021, Verstappen became the first Dutch Formula One driver to lead the World Championship after winning the Monaco Grand Prix. Verstappen displayed the "number one" on his Red Bull when he began his World Championship defence in 2022. "Verstappen signs new contract to stay at Red Bull until 2028". ESPN.com. 3 March 2022. Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. Retrieved 18 June 2022. "Verstappen will use #1 for 2022 F1 title defence". Formula One. Archived from the original on 16 December 2021. Retrieved 13 December 2021. "Jos Verstappen over de nationaliteit van Max" [Jos Verstappen about the nationality of Max]. GP Today (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. Verstappen's Maiden Win | Spanish Grand Prix 2016, archived from the original on 13 October 2022, retrieved 21 January 2022 Ostlere, Lawrence (15 May 2016). "F1: Max Verstappen wins Spanish GP after Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg crash – live!". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 May 2016. Retrieved 15 May 2016. "How Verstappen joined F1's list of World Champions". 12 December 2021. Archived from the original on 13 December 2021. Retrieved 13 December 2021. "Max Verstappen signs bumper new deal with Red Bull until end of 2028". Formula One. 3 March 2022. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022. "Drivers / Max Verstappen". ESPN F1. Archived from the original on 21 March 2015. Retrieved 20 August 2014. "Max Verstappen with his sister Victoria Jane Verstappen and his father Jos Verstappen". ESPN UK. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 14 December 2020. "How Max Verstappen's hard-nosed upbringing created a driver ready for war with Lewis Hamilton". inews.co.uk. 10 December 2021. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 21 December 2021. "Jos Verstappen becomes a father for a fourth time". GPToday.net. 2 May 2019. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 21 December 2021. Bonardel, Cécile (18 August 2014). "Verstappen's son in F1 in 2015". 24h-lemans.com. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 28 May 2019. Cornelissen, Marc (17 August 2014). "Geen rijbewijs, wel in de F1" [No driver's licence, yet in F1]. Nieuwsblad.be (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 8 March 2015. Retrieved 12 December 2014. Max heeft een Belgische moeder, is geboren in Hasselt, woont in Bree en reist met een Belgisch paspoort. Genetisch en cultureel is hij Belgischer dan de gemiddelde Rode Duivel. Maar racen doet hij met een Nederlandse licentie. 'Ik heb heel mijn leven in België gewoond, maar ik voel meer Nederlander. Door al dat karten trek ik meer met mijn vader op dan met mijn moeder. Ik zit gewoon altijd tussen de Nederlanders. [Max has a Belgian mother, was born in Hasselt, lives in Bree, and travels with a Belgian passport. From a genetic and cultural perspective, he's more Belgian than the average Red Devil. Yet he competes with a Dutch racing licence. 'I have lived in Belgium my entire life, but I consider myself more Dutch. As a result of my karting activities I spend more time with my father than with my mother. I'm always surrounded by Dutch people.'] "Dit is waarom Max Verstappen niet onder de Belgische vlag rijdt". GPfans. 3 July 2019. Archived from the original on 19 September 2020. Retrieved 1 November 2020. Khyati C (3 September 2022). ""I'm half-half at the end of the day"- Max Verstappen opens up about relations with Belgium and Holland". Sportskeeda. Archived from the original on 12 June 2023. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "Road legal at last! Verstappen passes driving test on 18th birthday". Formula One. 30 September 2015. Archived from the original on 31 July 2016. Retrieved 30 September 2015. "Verstappen moves out of home for Monaco". GrandPrix.com. 28 November 2015. Archived from the original on 22 May 2016. Retrieved 17 May 2016. Noeth, Bart (20 November 2021). "Formula One racing driver Max Verstappen acquires former Virgin Galactic private jet". Aviation24. Archived from the original on 26 January 2022. Retrieved 26 January 2022. "How Verstappen uses sim racing to become a better driver". RacingNews365. 11 January 2022. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Team Redline › Max Verstappen". Team Redline. Archived from the original on 22 January 2022. Retrieved 22 January 2022. Moerman, Christian (26 November 2021). "Verstappen over favoriete club FC Barcelona: 'Ik baalde van vertrek Koeman'" [Verstappen about favorite club FC Barcelona: "I was disappointed with the departure of Koeman"]. F1Maximaal.nl (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2022. Ghorpade, Niharika (23 July 2022). "Max Verstappen reportedly learned karting with Michael Schumacher". sportskeeda.com. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2022. "Royal honor for Max Verstappen: Appointed Officer in the Order of Oranje-Nassau". NL Times. 1 September 2022. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. Bethânia Nunes; Marina Ferreira (1 January 2021). "Modelo Kelly Piquet assume romance com piloto da Fórmula 1 Max Verstappen". Metrópoles (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 13 March 2021. Retrieved 13 March 2021. "Limburgs Kart Championship – Mini-Junior 2005". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "Rotax Max Challenge Belgium Minimax 2007". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 24 August 2014. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "Dutch Championship Minimax 2007". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "Belgian Championship – Cadet 2008". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "Rotax Max Challenge Belgium Minimax 2008". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "BNL Karting Series Minimax 2008". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "VAS Championship – Rotax Max Challenge Belgium Minimax 2009". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "BNL Karting Series Mini Max 2009". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 30 May 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "Belgian Championship – KF5 2009". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "CIK-FIA World Cup – KF3 2010". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "WSK Euro Series – KF3 2010". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "WSK World Series – KF3 2010". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 30 July 2014. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "WSK Nations Cup KF3 2010". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "Bridgestone Cup Final KF3 2010" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 16 October 2023. "WSK Euro Series – KF3 2011". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 27 April 2014. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "WSK Master Series – KF2 2012". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "17° Winter Cup – KF2 2012". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "SKUSA SuperNationals XVI – KZ2 2012". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "WSK Euro Series – KF2 2012". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "World Championship– KF1 2012". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "Max rijdt rest van seizoen op CRG kart met TM motor". Verstappen Info Page. Archived from the original on 5 February 2015. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "World Cup– KF2 2012". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "South Garda Winter Cup – KF2 2013". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "WSK Euro Series – KZ1 2013". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "WSK Master Series – KZ2 2013". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Verstappen sets Karting world record". fiakarting.com. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 15 February 2022. "World Championship – KZ 2013". DriverDB.com. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Verstappen is KZ World Champion at 15!". Federation Internationale de l'Automobile. 24 February 2014. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2022. "Max Verstappen sensationeel in allereerste meters Formule Renault 2.0". RaceXpress.nl. Archived from the original on 5 February 2015. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "Verstappen: "Max al net zo snel als ervaren coureurs"". GPUpdate.net. Archived from the original on 2 September 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2017. "Max Verstappen flies in Formula 3 test debut". Autosport. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2022. "Max op haar na snelste bij laatste FR 2.0 test van 2013". Verstappen Info Page. Archived from the original on 5 February 2015. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "Max fenomenaal snel bij zijn eerste F3 test op Valencia". Verstappen Info Page. Archived from the original on 5 February 2015. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "Max maakt autosportdebuut in Florida Winter Series". Verstappen Info Page. Archived from the original on 5 February 2015. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "Verstappen wint eerste autorace na regen en rode vlag". Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 16 May 2016. Max Verstappen Onboard FWS, Homestead race 3, 19/02/2014 – Max beats Latifi by 0.004s!, archived from the original on 13 October 2022, retrieved 20 January 2022 "Formule 1 nieuws – Lees het laatste nieuws over Formule 1". nl.motorsport.com (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 18 March 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2022. "Max Verstappen new part of the Red Bull Junior Team". Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 20 August 2014. "Max Verstappen". Red Bull. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "2014 European F3 Championship". Motor Sport Magazine. Archived from the original on 22 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Max Verstappen: what I learned in F3". Red Bull. Archived from the original on 22 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Benson, Andrew (29 September 2014). "Max Verstappen: Teenager to drive in practice at Japanese Grand Prix". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 June 2016. Retrieved 23 July 2016. "Japanese Grand Prix 2014: History-maker Max Verstappen flies like the wind as typhoon zooms closer". The Independent. 24 July 2016. Archived from the original on 24 July 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2022. "Max Verstappen per direct opgenomen in opleiding Red Bull". verstappen.nl. Nu.nl. 12 August 2014. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 18 August 2014. "Max Verstappen to race with Toro Rosso F1 team in 2015". Autosport. 18 August 2014. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 18 August 2014. Barretto, Lawrence (15 March 2015). "Lewis Hamilton beats Nico Rosberg to win". Autosport. Archived from the original on 16 March 2015. Retrieved 29 March 2015. Johnson, Daniel (29 March 2015). "Sebastian Vettel picks up surprise win for Ferrari to blow world title wide open". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2015. Max Verstappen took seventh to become the youngest points scorer in F1 history, at 17 years and 180 days. 5 Crazy Onboards | Monaco Grand Prix, archived from the original on 20 January 2022, retrieved 20 January 2022 "Monaco GP: Max Verstappen penalised for crash with Romain Grosjean". Autosport. 24 May 2015. Archived from the original on 17 December 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2022. William Esler, "Max Verstappen hits back at Felipe Massa over Monaco crash criticism Archived 11 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine", Sky Sports, 2015. "9 things we learned from the Hungarian Grand Prix". Red Bull. Archived from the original on 10 March 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Hamilton seals 2015 title with thrilling Austin win". Formula One. Archived from the original on 25 December 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Galloway, James (5 December 2015). "Lewis Hamilton & Mercedes officially crowned 2015 world champions". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 5 December 2015. Retrieved 5 December 2015. Top 10 Moments of Max Verstappen Magic in F1, archived from the original on 19 January 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "Max Verstappen and Carlos Sainz to continue for Toro Rosso in 2016". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Max Verstappen: Australian GP shows moody side of Toro Rosso teenager Archived 23 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine", BBC Sport, 2016. "Verstappen scores STR's first Bahrain points Archived 11 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine", GP Update, 2016. "Red Bull replace Kvyat with Verstappen". Formula One. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "New line-up for Spain". RedBullRacing.com. 5 May 2016. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. "Hamilton takes pole in Spain". BBC Sport. 14 May 2016. Archived from the original on 20 December 2018. Retrieved 12 February 2018. "WATCH: Mercedes collision puts Hamilton and Rosberg out on lap 1". Formula One. Archived from the original on 24 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. 2016 Spanish Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 21 April 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "Max Verstappen – Grands Prix". StatsF1. Archived from the original on 13 June 2022. Retrieved 13 June 2022. "Formula 1: Max Verstappen gets under the skin of top drivers". BBC Sport. 31 August 2016. Archived from the original on 13 November 2016. Retrieved 4 November 2016. "Horner: Verstappen will learn from Belgium". ESPN. 29 August 2016. Archived from the original on 7 November 2016. Retrieved 4 November 2016. "Italian GP: Max Verstappen given 'gentle warning' by FIA". BBC Sport. 2 September 2016. Archived from the original on 6 September 2016. Retrieved 4 November 2016. "Formula 1 outlaws moving under braking after protests over Max Verstappen". BBC Sport. 22 October 2016. Archived from the original on 2 September 2017. Retrieved 12 February 2018. "Formula 1 Grande Premio do Brasil 2016 – Qualifying". Formula One. Archived from the original on 17 November 2016. Retrieved 17 November 2016. Verstappen's Amazing Save in Brazil | F1 is...Heart-in-Mouth, archived from the original on 10 March 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 Galloway, James (14 November 2016). "Max Verstappen stole the show in Brazil GP, says Mercedes' Toto Wolff". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 17 November 2016. Retrieved 17 November 2016. Gill, Pete; Esler, William (14 November 2016). "Max Verstappen's Brazilian GP drive hailed as 'one of the best ever in F1'". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 17 November 2016. Retrieved 17 November 2016. Max Verstappen's Masterclass | 2016 Brazilian Grand Prix, archived from the original on 22 January 2022, retrieved 22 January 2022 "Verstappen's Brazil drive earns Senna/Schumacher comparisons". Formula One. Archived from the original on 22 January 2022. Retrieved 22 January 2022. Edmondson, Laurence (14 November 2016). "Vettel: Verstappen move was 'not correct'". ESPN. Archived from the original on 17 November 2016. Retrieved 17 November 2016. "Max Verstappen: Red Bull's reliability unacceptable". BBC Sport. 27 August 2017. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 12 February 2018. Spanish GP: Valtteri Bottas triggers Max Verstappen-Kimi Raikkonen crash Archived 28 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine – James Galloway and Emily McNally, Sky Sports, 14 May 2017 "Max Verstappen beats Lewis Hamilton to win F1's Malaysian Grand Prix". The Guardian. 1 October 2017. Archived from the original on 15 December 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "2017 Formula 1 Japanese Grand Prix – Race Result". Formula One. Archived from the original on 7 October 2017. Retrieved 24 October 2017. "2017 Formula 1 United States Grand Prix – Race Result". Formula One. Archived from the original on 22 October 2017. Retrieved 24 October 2017. "Formula 1 Gran Premio de México 2017 – Race Result". Formula One. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. "F1 Results – 2018 Australian Grand Prix". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Mitchell, Scott; Cozens, Jack (25 March 2018). "Early damage a factor in Max Verstappen's Australian GP spin". Autosport. Motorsport Network. Archived from the original on 2 July 2020. Retrieved 30 May 2018. "Verstappen's right foot caused Bahrain crash". Eurosport UK. 13 April 2018. Archived from the original on 2 July 2020. Retrieved 30 May 2018. Gill, Pete (9 April 2018). "Bahrain GP: Sebastian Vettel holds off Valtteri Bottas for victory". Sky Sports F1. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2018. 2018 Chinese Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 19 January 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 Verstappen Runs into Vettel | 2018 Chinese Grand Prix, archived from the original on 13 October 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 Mitchell, Scott (15 April 2018). "Chinese Grand Prix: Ricciardo wins, Verstappen and Vettel collide". Autosport. Motorsport Network. Archived from the original on 16 April 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2018. All The Angles: Ricciardo and Verstappen Crash | 2018 Azerbaijan Grand Prix, archived from the original on 13 October 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 Galloway, James (30 April 2018). "Max Verstappen, Daniel Ricciardo reprimanded for all-Red Bull Azerbaijan GP crash". Sky Sports F1. Archived from the original on 11 June 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2018. "Winners and Losers – Spanish Grand Prix edition". Formula One. 14 May 2018. Archived from the original on 14 May 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2018. Mitchell, Scott (26 May 2018). "Monaco GP F1 practice: Ricciardo fastest as Verstappen crashes in FP3". Autosport. Motorsport Network. Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2018. Benson, Andrew (26 May 2018). "Monaco Grand Prix: Max Verstappen crash 'unnecessary', says Red Bull's Helmut Marko". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2018. Mitchell, Scott (27 May 2018). "Monaco Grand Prix: Daniel Ricciardo wins despite car problem". Autosport. Motorsport Network. Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2018. Woolcock, Adam (15 April 2018). "F1 2018: Daniel Ricciardo wins Chinese Grand Prix – as it happened". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "F1 REWIND: Watch Daniel Ricciardo's brilliant 2018 Monaco Grand Prix win". Formula One. Archived from the original on 10 March 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "F1 Results – 2018 Canadian Grand Prix". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Sebastian Vettel wins Canadian Grand Prix despite chequered flag mix-up". The Guardian. 10 June 2018. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "F1 Results – 2018 French Grand Prix". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. 2018 Austrian Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 19 January 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "F1: The reason Max Verstappen spun then retired from the British GP". Fox Sports. 8 July 2018. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. 2018 German Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 13 October 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "Ricciardo: 'Weird' reliability inexplicable". Motorsport.com. 26 October 2018. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "RACE: Verstappen retires early in Hungary". Formula One. Archived from the original on 10 March 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. 2018 United States Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 19 January 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "Standings". Formula 1 – The Official F1 Website. Archived from the original on 28 October 2014. Retrieved 19 January 2022. 2018 Mexican Grand Prix: Qualifying Highlights, archived from the original on 19 January 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "Max Verstappen unhappy after missing out on history-making pole position". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 12 February 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2022. 2018 Mexican Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 19 January 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "Mexican Grand Prix 2018 report – Verstappen wins in Mexico as Hamilton takes fifth title". Formula One. Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Retrieved 17 February 2022. Verstappen And Ocon Collide | 2018 Brazilian Grand Prix, archived from the original on 19 January 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 Freeman, Glenn. "FIA gives Max Verstappen 'public service' for Esteban Ocon shove". Autosport. Archived from the original on 11 November 2018. Retrieved 12 November 2018. "Formula 1 2018 Etihad Airways Abu Dhabi Grand Prix – Race Result". Formula One. 25 November 2018. Archived from the original on 13 January 2021. Retrieved 25 November 2018. "Max Verstappen in 2018". Formula 1 Statistics. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 19 December 2021. "Red Bull agree deal to run Honda engine technology until 2025". Formula One. Archived from the original on 15 February 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Pierre Gasly joins Red Bull for 2019". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 5 March 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "F1 Australian Grand Prix 2019: Max Verstappen sends ominous Red Bull message after Honda milestone". Fox Sports. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 11 October 2021. 2019 Bahrain Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 24 April 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "F1 Results – 2019 Spanish Grand Prix". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "F1 Results – 2019 Azerbaijan Grand Prix". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "F1 Results – 2019 Chinese Grand Prix". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Verstappen given penalty points for failing to avoid contact · RaceFans". RaceFans. 26 May 2019. Archived from the original on 23 October 2021. Retrieved 11 October 2021. "F1 Canadian Grand Prix 2019 qualifying results: Daniel Ricciardo stuns with best result since October as Sebastian Vettel snatches pole". Fox Sports. 8 June 2019. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Fair, Asher (9 June 2019). "Formula 1: Provisional starting grid for 2019 Canadian Grand Prix". Beyond the Flag. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Richards, Giles (9 June 2019). "Lewis Hamilton handed Canadian Grand Prix win after Vettel's penalty pain". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "Standings". Formula One. Archived from the original on 28 October 2014. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Verstappen's Stunning Fightback | 2019 Austrian Grand Prix, archived from the original on 13 October 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 McVeigh (earlier), Niall; Unwin (now), Will (30 June 2019). "F1: Verstappen's win stands after Austrian Grand Prix stewards inquiry – as it happened". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "Honda hails new beginning after first F1 win since 2006". Autoblog. 1 July 2019. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Simpson, Christopher (12 July 2019). "F1 British Grand Prix 2019 Qualifying: Results, Times from Friday's Practice". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "British Grand Prix 2019 race report: Hamilton victorious as Verstappen and Vettel collide in Silverstone thriller". Formula One. 14 July 2019. Archived from the original on 14 July 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2022. 2019 German Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 19 January 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 Richards, Giles (28 July 2019). "Max Verstappen wins thrilling German GP after Lewis Hamilton error". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Hungarian Grand Prix 2019 F1 race report: Hamilton brilliantly hunts down Verstappen to snatch Hungary victory". Formula One. 4 August 2019. Archived from the original on 29 December 2021. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Verstappen takes maiden career pole in thrilling Hungary qualifying". Formula One. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Albon to replace Gasly at Red Bull from Belgium". Formula One. Archived from the original on 24 December 2020. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Verstappen and Raikkonen bemoan first-lap clash". Formula One. Archived from the original on 3 September 2019. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Media, P. A. (4 September 2019). "Penalty shunts Max Verstappen to back of F1 grid for Italian Grand Prix". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. 2019 Italian Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 3 March 2020, retrieved 19 January 2022 "Singapore Grand Prix 2019 – F1 Race". Formula One. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "F1 Results – 2019 Russian Grand Prix". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Japanese Grand Prix 2019: Verstappen blasts 'irresponsible' Leclerc after Lap 1 contact". Formula One. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Mexican Grand Prix 2019 qualifying report: Verstappen takes sensational Mexican pole as Bottas crashes". Formula One. Archived from the original on 28 October 2019. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Mexican Grand Prix 2019 report & highlights: Hamilton closes in on title with supreme Mexico victory". Formula One. 27 October 2019. Archived from the original on 28 October 2019. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "United States Grand Prix 2019 – F1 Race". Formula One. Archived from the original on 13 September 2020. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Brazilian Grand Prix 2019 qualifying report: Brazilian Grand Prix report: Verstappen snatches sensational Interlagos pole". Formula One. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. 2019 Brazilian Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 24 April 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "Abu Dhabi Grand Prix 2019 race report and highlights: Hamilton rounds off title-winning season with dominant Abu Dhabi win". Formula One. Archived from the original on 2 December 2019. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Max Verstappen in 2019". Formula 1 Statistics. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 19 December 2021. "Max Verstappen extends contract with Aston Martin Red Bull Racing". verstappen.nl. 7 January 2020. Archived from the original on 29 February 2020. Retrieved 7 January 2020. "Albon's DNF likely caused by Hamilton clash, not Honda fault". The Race. 10 July 2020. Archived from the original on 21 July 2020. Retrieved 21 July 2020. "Red Bull, Honda have countermeasures for engine issues". The Race. 9 July 2020. Archived from the original on 21 July 2020. Retrieved 21 July 2020. Max Verstappen Crashes On Way To Grid | 2020 Hungarian Grand Prix, archived from the original on 20 January 2022, retrieved 20 January 2022 INSIDE STORY: How Red Bull Performed a Mechanical Miracle in Hungary, archived from the original on 20 January 2022, retrieved 20 January 2022 "'Second feels like a win' says Verstappen as he recovers from pre-race crash to podium". Formula One. Archived from the original on 20 July 2020. Retrieved 21 July 2020. Giles Richards (9 August 2020). "Max Verstappen roars to spectacular victory in 70th Anniversary Grand Prix". The Guardian, London. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 9 August 2020. "2020 F1 Spanish Grand Prix qualifying results & grid lineup". Motorsport.com. 15 August 2020. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2022. "Spanish Grand Prix 2020 – F1 Race". Formula One. Archived from the original on 11 January 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2022. "Belgian Grand Prix 2020 – F1 Race". Formula One. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2022. 2020 Italian Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 20 January 2022, retrieved 20 January 2022 2020 Tuscan Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 20 January 2022, retrieved 20 January 2022 "Russian Grand Prix 2020 – F1 Race". Formula One. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2022. "Eifel Grand Prix 2020 – German F1 Race". Formula One. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2022. Verstappen's Nurburgring Lap Record: Fastest Lap | 2020 Eifel Grand Prix | DHL, archived from the original on 20 January 2022, retrieved 20 January 2022 2020 Portuguese Grand Prix: Race Highlights, archived from the original on 25 December 2021, retrieved 20 January 2022 Verstappen Crashes Out of Podium Position After Right Rear Failure, archived from the original on 13 October 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 Cooper, Adam (30 October 2020). "Portimao radio comments 'not correct', says Verstappen". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 12 November 2020. Boxall-Legge, Jake (31 October 2020). "Mongolian government wants FIA to act on Verstappen comments". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 10 November 2020. Retrieved 12 November 2020. "Max Verstappen in 2020". Formula 1 Statistics. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 19 December 2021. "Max Verstappen takes pole position in F1 Bahrain Grand Prix, Daniel Ricciardo sixth". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 27 March 2021. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2021. "'It is what it is' – Verstappen philosophical about surrendering lead to Hamilton following off-track pass". Formula One. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2021. "'We're not robots' – Verstappen on 'messy' Q3 that led to being out-qualified by a team mate for first time since 2018". Formula One. Archived from the original on 20 October 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Race Highlights | 2021 Emilia Romagna Grand Prix, archived from the original on 13 October 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 Race Highlights | 2021 Portuguese Grand Prix, archived from the original on 24 April 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "2021 Spanish Grand Prix race report and highlights: Late pass secures Hamilton victory in Spain after race-long battle with Verstappen". Formula One. Archived from the original on 9 May 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2021. "2021 Monaco GP Qualifying: Verstappen rages at Leclerc crash red flags". Formula One. Archived from the original on 10 March 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Benson, Andrew (23 May 2021). "Monaco Grand Prix: Max Verstappen takes title lead from Lewis Hamilton with win". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 23 May 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2021. "Verstappen curses 'stupid' qualifying session in Baku as he loses another chance of pole to red flag". Formula One. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Verstappen Crashes Out of Lead After Left Rear Failure | 2021 Azerbaijan Grand Prix, archived from the original on 28 January 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "2021 Azerbaijan Grand Prix race report and highlights: Perez beats Vettel to Baku victory after Verstappen crashes out from lead late on". Formula One. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 29 June 2021. Max Verstappen's Onboard Pole Lap | 2021 French Grand Prix, archived from the original on 10 March 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 How Max Verstappen Fought Back To Beat Lewis Hamilton I 2021 French Grand Prix, archived from the original on 20 January 2022, retrieved 20 January 2022 "2021 French Grand Prix race report & highlights: Verstappen triumphs over Hamilton after late pass in scintillating French Grand Prix". Formula One. Archived from the original on 21 June 2021. Retrieved 29 June 2021. Kelly, Sean (20 June 2021). "French GP Facts & Stats: Verstappen's first F1 hat-trick, and a special podium for Perez". Formula One. Archived from the original on 21 June 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Max Verstappen wins Styrian GP 2021; beats Lewis Hamilton and Valtteri Bottas in Austria". SportsTiger. 27 June 2021. Archived from the original on 27 June 2021. Retrieved 27 June 2021. "Verstappen waltzes to second win in a row at Red Bull Ring, as Bottas beats Norris to P2". Formula One. 4 July 2021. Archived from the original on 30 November 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "F1 – Verstappen extends title lead with Austrian Grand Prix grand slam as Hamilton finishes fourth". Federation Internationale de l'Automobile. 4 July 2021. Archived from the original on 4 July 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2021. Aggarwal, Abhay (15 July 2021). "What Is a Grand Slam in F1?". EssentiallySports. Archived from the original on 17 July 2021. Retrieved 17 July 2021. "Verstappen has little interest in the grand slam: 'As long as we win'". gpblog.com. 2021. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2021. "Austrian GP: Post-Race reaction from Max, Perez and Horner". Bleachers News. 4 July 2021. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2021. Verstappen & Hamilton Collide at Silverstone | 2021 British Grand Prix, archived from the original on 3 July 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 "Verstappen's Silverstone crash power unit given the all-clear by Honda after Friday running in Hungary". Formula One. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "British GP: Lewis Hamilton wins dramatic home race after big Max Verstappen crash as title lead is cut". 18 July 2021. Archived from the original on 17 March 2022. Retrieved 18 July 2021. "2021 British Grand Prix race report & highlights: Hamilton overcomes first-lap collision with Verstappen to hunt down Leclerc for 8th British GP win". Formula One. Archived from the original on 18 July 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Galloway, James (2 August 2021). "Hungarian GP: Max Verstappen, Red Bull rue 'brutal' Valtteri Bottas-triggered start chaos after lost title leads". skysports.com. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 4 August 2021. Qualifying Highlights | 2021 Belgian Grand Prix, archived from the original on 19 January 2022, retrieved 19 January 2022 Benson, Andrew. "Max Verstappen declared winner of aborted rain-hit Belgian Grand Prix". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 29 August 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2021. "Verstappen says technical issues prevented Dutch GP pole lap being even faster around 'incredible' Zandvoort". Formula One. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Dutch Grand Prix 2021: race report and reaction". RedBull.com. Archived from the original on 18 December 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2021. "Verstappen set to start Russian GP from the back of the grid after engine change". Formula One. Archived from the original on 30 October 2021. Retrieved 26 September 2021. "Max Verstappen: "We made a great decision with the timing and took the right lap to pit"". 27 September 2021. Archived from the original on 27 September 2021. Retrieved 27 September 2021. "Valtteri Bottas gets Turkish F1 GP pole in boost for fastest man Lewis Hamilton". The Guardian. 9 October 2021. Archived from the original on 9 October 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Benson, Andrew (10 October 2021). "Turkish Grand Prix: Valtteri Bottas wins as Max Verstappen retakes title lead". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 22 October 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2021. "2021 United States Grand Prix qualifying report and highlights: Verstappen beats Hamilton to pole position with sensational final lap in Austin". Formula One. Archived from the original on 8 December 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Title battle heads into its climax". BBC Sport. 25 October 2021. Archived from the original on 18 December 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2021. "Mexico City qualifying: Mercedes shock Red Bull as Bottas takes pole ahead of Hamilton". Formula One. Archived from the original on 5 December 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Hamilton has vowed to 'keep on fighting'. But his F1 crown is finally starting to slip". Fox Sports. 8 November 2021. Archived from the original on 6 December 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2021. "How can Lewis Hamilton win the 2021 F1 title?". Autosport. 6 December 2021. Archived from the original on 12 February 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2022. Harris, Daniel (13 December 2021). "Abu Dhabi GP: Max Verstappen wins F1 world title after last-lap drama – live!". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 December 2021. Retrieved 13 December 2021. Verstappen Wins Title With Final Lap Overtake! | 2021 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, archived from the original on 20 January 2022, retrieved 20 January 2022 Race Highlights | 2021 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, archived from the original on 13 October 2022, retrieved 20 January 2022 "Decision – Mercedes Protest Art. 48.12" (PDF). Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile. 12 December 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 December 2021. Retrieved 19 December 2021. "2021 F1 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix – Report to the World Motor Sport Council – 19 March 2022". Federation Internationale de l'Automobile. 19 March 2022. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2022. "Max Verstappen wins title after last-lap overtake of Lewis Hamilton, Mercedes protests rejected". BBC Sport. 12 December 2021. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 14 December 2021. Kelly, Sean (24 April 2022). "Facts and Stats: A grand slam first, and Red Bull's maiden double score at Imola". Formula One. Archived from the original on 12 July 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Verstappen reveals part of floor was 'completely destroyed' by debris after lowly P7 finish at Silverstone". formula1. Retrieved 5 July 2022. "F1: Power unit fault "painful" for Verstappen after surprise pace". RaceFans. 30 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Wood, Will (31 July 2022). "Verstappen spins and wins from 10th on grid as Ferrari pair finish off the podium". RaceFans. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "Verstappen cruises to Belgian Grand Prix victory from P14 as Perez completes Red Bull 1-2". www.formula1.com. The Race Media. Retrieved 28 August 2022. "Leclerc claims pole position by 0.022s from Perez in stunning wet-dry Singapore qualifying as Verstappen takes P8". Formula1.com. 1 October 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2022. Morlidge, Matt (9 October 2022). "Max Verstappen crowned 2022 F1 world champion amid Japanese GP confusion after winning wet race". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. Bart-Williams, Nadim (25 November 2022). "MAX BY NUMBERS: The amazing stats behind Verstappen's 2022 title winning campaign". formula1.com. Retrieved 31 March 2024. Boxall-Legge, Jake (18 March 2023). "F1 Saudi Arabian GP: Perez grabs pole as Verstappen hits trouble". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 20 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. Johnston, Sam (2 April 2023). "Australian GP: Max Verstappen holds off Lewis Hamilton for victory after wild finish to chaotic race". Sky Sports F1. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2023. Boxall-Legge, Jake (30 April 2023). "F1 Azerbaijan GP: Perez leads dominant Red Bull 1-2 from Leclerc". Autosport.com. Archived from the original on 30 April 2023. Retrieved 30 April 2023. Boxall-Legge, Jake (18 June 2023). "F1 Canadian GP: Verstappen clinches Red Bull's 100th F1 win". Autosport. Archived from the original on 19 June 2023. Retrieved 19 June 2023. Richards, Giles (3 September 2023). "Max Verstappen wins record 10th straight race with Italian F1 GP victory". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 September 2023. Retrieved 4 September 2023. Formula One Management (3 September 2023). "Verstappen charges to Monza victory for record-breaking 10th successive F1 win". Formula One. Archived from the original on 3 September 2023. Retrieved 21 September 2023. "Sainz takes sensational Singapore Grand Prix victory". www.formula1.com. Archived from the original on 17 September 2023. Retrieved 18 September 2023. Richards, Giles (24 September 2023). "Max Verstappen on verge of F1 world title after winning Japanese Grand Prix". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 26 September 2023. Retrieved 25 September 2023. "Verstappen secures third F1 world title as Piastri takes Sprint victory in Qatar". Formula1.com. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 11 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Sainz storms to victory amid drama in Australia". Formula One. 24 March 2024. Retrieved 24 March 2024. 5 reasons why Verstappen is currently the fastest F1 driver | Hungarian GP Qualifying Analysis, archived from the original on 13 October 2022, retrieved 7 January 2022 "Button says Verstappen is the fastest F1 driver ever". ESPN. 17 October 2019. Archived from the original on 8 January 2022. Retrieved 7 January 2022. "Ranking Leclerc and Verstappen in the fight to topple Hamilton". The Race. 10 February 2020. Archived from the original on 8 January 2022. Retrieved 8 January 2022. "Max Verstappen looking set for F1 2020 at Red Bull". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 18 August 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2022. "Marko rates the best and worst traits of Red Bull's F1 stars". Autosport. 8 July 2022. Archived from the original on 18 August 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2022. "Verstappen now 'fastest driver in the business', Jackie Stewart claims". The Independent. 16 September 2021. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 7 January 2022. If Max is an early braker why is he so fast? By Peter Windsor, archived from the original on 11 January 2022, retrieved 13 January 2022 Woodhouse, Jamie (14 December 2021). "Franz Tost: 'Fastest driver' Max Verstappen deserved his Formula 1 world title". PlanetF1. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 25 October 2023. GPfans.com (21 December 2020). "Grosjean would like Verstappen in his sim team: He is the fastest". GPfans (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 13 January 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Sharan, Rahul (10 June 2021). "Irvine finds similarities between Verstappen and Schumacher". RacingNews365. Archived from the original on 14 June 2021. Retrieved 25 October 2023. "Button: Verstappen "annihilating" team-mates like Senna". Autosport. 25 August 2020. Archived from the original on 13 January 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "PALMER: Whatever you thought of the Abu Dhabi outcome, Verstappen was a worthy champion in 2021". Formula One. Archived from the original on 13 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022. "Verstappen 'driving style' myth is a trait of greatness". The Race. 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Delaney, Michael (3 November 2019). "No retirement in sight for the good Dr. Marko". F1i.com. Archived from the original on 19 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2022. GMM (28 September 2017). "Max Verstappen says he's considerably faster than Red Bull F1 teammate Daniel Ricciardo". Autoweek. Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 15 January 2022. "Marko: Verstappen moved clear of ex-Red Bull F1 team-mate Ricciardo". Autosport. 13 January 2019. Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 15 January 2022. "Niki Lauda calls Max Verstappen the 'talent of the century'". autoweek.com. 16 May 2016. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. "Horner on the 'rare' quality Verstappen shares with Hamilton". RacingNews365. 10 January 2022. Archived from the original on 18 August 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2022. "Berger: Verstappen probably has most raw talent of all". GRAND PRIX 247. 15 June 2021. Archived from the original on 8 January 2022. Retrieved 8 January 2022. "Alonso believes Verstappen 'driving one step ahead of everyone' as he says Dutchman 'deserves' 2021 title". Formula One. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Chandhok, Karun. "Karun Chandhok's top 10 Formula 1 drivers of the 2021 season: Who makes the cut after epic year?". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 18 December 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2021. "Verstappen tops Autosport's F1 team boss rankings for 2021". Autosport. 18 December 2021. Archived from the original on 8 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022. "REVEALED: F1's team bosses choose their Top 10 drivers of 2021". Formula One. Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022. "Verstappen Welcomes Support From Hamilton". Sky News. 6 September 2016. Archived from the original on 5 February 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Martin Brundle: Max Verstappen must stop these tactics vs Lewis Hamilton for his legacy... but what a title showdown we'll have". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 9 January 2022. Retrieved 9 January 2022. Tremayne, David. "TREMAYNE: Why 2022 Max Verstappen is an upgrade on the 2021 version". Formula One. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2022. Smith, Luke (26 August 2018). "The Max Factor: How Verstappen's fans have changed F1". Crash. Archived from the original on 9 February 2022. Retrieved 9 February 2022. "Honda impressed by Verstappen fans: 'Never seen such a great turnout'". gpblog.com. 2 January 2022. Archived from the original on 23 February 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. Galloway, James (21 October 2021). "F1 fan survey lists Max Verstappen as most-popular driver ahead of Lando Norris and Lewis Hamilton". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 23 February 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. Gamble, Andrew (15 December 2021). "Verstappen's song 'Super Max' goes viral & enters Spotify's top charts". Daily Express. Archived from the original on 26 December 2021. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Verstappen and Thompson-Herah win top Laureus awards". Reuters. 24 April 2022. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 25 April 2022. Veenstra, R., 17 December 2014, Max Verstappen blij met onderscheiding als talent Archived 27 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine van Housten, Phillip. "Verstappen handed 'Action of the Year' award by FIA". f1i.com. Archived from the original on 2 September 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. Thukral, Rachit. "Verstappen wins third FIA Personality of the Year award". Motorsport Network. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. "F1 Rookie Max Verstappen Bags Three FIA Awards". NDTV. Archived from the original on 26 July 2017. Retrieved 25 June 2022. "Max Verstappen wins 2016 Lorenzo Bandini Trophy". f1today.net. 7 June 2016. Archived from the original on 10 June 2016. Retrieved 7 June 2016. Sportman van het Jaar 2016 Archived 31 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine, NOC*NSF Max Verstappen gekozen tot Sportman van het Jaar, Sifan Hassan beste sportvrouw Archived 7 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine De Telegraaf, 22 December 2021 "Verstappen is Autosport's International Racing Driver of the Year". Grand Prix 247. 7 February 2022. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. "Verstappen scoops Laureus World Sportsman of the Year Award for 2022". Formula One. 24 April 2022. Archived from the original on 11 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. "Max Verstappen". driverdb.com. Archived from the original on 18 April 2012. Retrieved 1 December 2021. kartcom (4 February 2010). "Verstappen Max" (in French). Archived from the original on 1 December 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2021. "2021 Driver Standings". Formula One. Archived from the original on 28 March 2021. Retrieved 13 December 2021. "Max Verstappen Results". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. "Formula 3 Macau Grand Prix – 2014". Speedsport Magazine. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. "Max Verstappen – Involvement". StatsF1. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. Richards, Giles. "Max Verstappen becomes youngest man to drive a Formula 1 car". The Guardian News and Media Limited. Archived from the original on 16 March 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2016. "Statistics Drivers – Points – By age". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 17 March 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2021. Weaver, Paul. "Max Verstappen becomes youngest F1 winner in history at Spanish Grand Prix". The Guardian News and Media Limited. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 2 April 2017. "Statistics Drivers – Podiums – By age". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 10 March 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2021. "Statistics Drivers – Lead – By age". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 16 March 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2021. "Statistics Drivers – Fastest laps – By age". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 6 December 2019. Retrieved 29 March 2021. "2021 Austrian Grand Prix report and highlights: Verstappen waltzes to second win in a row at Red Bull Ring, as Bottas beats Norris to P2". Formula1.com. Archived from the original on 30 November 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2021. "Statistics Drivers – Wins – In a year". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 17 April 2010. Retrieved 19 November 2023. Saunders, Nate (3 September 2023). "Verstappen claims record 10th straight F1 win in Italy". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on 3 September 2023. Retrieved 3 September 2023. Thorn, Dan (3 August 2019). "Max Verstappen has equalled a 50-year-old record with his first pole position". "F1 records broken by Max Verstappen in 2023". Autosport.com. 26 November 2023. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. "The F1 records Verstappen and Red Bull broke in 2022". Motorsport.com. 21 November 2022. Archived from the original on 13 March 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2022. "Statistics Drivers – Wins – By different grid position". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Statistics Drivers – Wins – Sprint Wins". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 1 August 2023. Nichol, Jake (27 November 2023). "All the records Max Verstappen broke in the 2023 F1 season". Racingnews365.com. Archived from the original on 27 November 2023. Retrieved 27 November 2023. "Statistics Drivers – Podiums – In a year". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Statistics Drivers – Points – In a year". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Statistics Drivers – Wins – Points Average". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Statistics Drivers – Lead – Laps in a year". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 3 November 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Statistics Drivers - Lead - GP in a year". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 8 December 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2024. "Statistics Drivers – Hat-tricks – Verstappen Max". Stats F1. Archived from the original on 23 October 2023. Retrieved 23 October 2023. Kelly, Sean (7 October 2023). "Qatar GP Facts and Stats: Rookie Piastri claims first F1 win of any kind in Qatar Sprint as Verstappen emulates Fangio". F1. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 23 October 2023. "Max Verstappen Q&A: I was in full 'safe' mode for debut run". Formula1.com. Archived from the original on 8 September 2021. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "Max Verstappen pakt eerste pole position uit carrière" [Max Verstappen takes first career pole position] (in Dutch). nl:Hart van Nederland. 3 August 2019. Archived from the original on 3 August 2019. Retrieved 4 August 2019. Noud Bemelen and Rik Spekenbrink (23 May 2021). "Historische dubbelslag: Verstappen wint GP van Monaco en is eerste Nederlandse WK-leider ooit" [Historic double: Verstappen wins Monaco GP and is the first Dutch leader of the world championship ever] (in Dutch). nl:AD. Archived from the original on 23 May 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2021. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Max Verstappen. Formula One portal Official website Max Verstappen career summary at DriverDB.com