Alternative for Germany (German: Alternative für Deutschland, AfD; German pronunciation: [aːʔɛfˈdeː] ) is a right-wing populist political party in Germany. AfD is known for its Euroscepticism, as well as for opposing immigration to Germany. Commonly described as a party of the far-right, the AfD is commonly positioned on the radical right, a subset of the far-right within the family of European political parties that generally does not reject democracy. Established in April 2013, AfD narrowly missed the 5% electoral threshold to sit in the Bundestag during the 2013 German federal election. The party won seven seats in the 2014 European Parliament election in Germany as a member of the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR). After securing representation in 14 of the 16 German state parliaments by October 2017, AfD won 94 seats in the 2017 German federal election and became the third-largest party in the country, as well as the largest opposition party; its lead candidates were the co-vice chairman Alexander Gauland and Alice Weidel, the latter having served as the party group leader in the 19th Bundestag. In the 2021 federal election, AfD dropped to being the fifth-largest party. Since 2023 polling shows AfD as the second most popular party. AfD was founded by Gauland, Bernd Lucke, and former members of the Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) to oppose the policies of the Eurozone as a right-wing and moderately Eurosceptic alternative to the centre-right but pro-European CDU. The party presented itself as an economically liberal, Eurosceptic, and conservative movement in its early years. AfD subsequently moved further to the right, and expanded its policies under successive leaderships to include opposition to immigration, Islam, and the European Union. Since 2015, AfD's ideology has been characterised by German nationalism Völkisch nationalism and national conservatism, with policy focus on anti-Islam, anti-immigration, welfare chauvinism and Euroscepticism. The AfD is the only party represented in the Bundestag whose environmental and climate policy is based on the denial of human-caused climate change. Several state associations and other factions of AfD have been linked to or accused of harboring connections with far-right nationalist and proscribed movements, such as PEGIDA, the Neue Rechte, and the Identitarian movement, and of employing historical revisionism, as well as xenophobic rhetoric. They have been observed by various state offices for the protection of the constitution since 2018. AfD's leadership has denied that the party is racist and has been internally divided on whether to endorse such groups. In January 2022, party leader Jörg Meuthen resigned his party chairmanship with immediate effect and left the AfD, as he came to acknowledge that the party had developed very far to the right with totalitarian traits and in large parts was no longer based on the liberal democratic basic order. The party is the strongest in the areas of the former German Democratic Republic, especially the states of Saxony and Thuringia, largely due to economic and integration issues that still continue to persist post-reunification, in addition to the East German voters' perceived propensity for a strongman rule. In the 2021 federal elections, AfD fell from third to fifth place overall but made gains in the eastern states (the former East Germany). In the former East Berlin it came in second after SPD with 20.5% of the vote, while in the west it came in fifth with 8.4% of the vote. In September 2012, Alexander Gauland, Bernd Lucke, and journalist Konrad Adam founded the political group Electoral Alternative 2013 (German: Wahlalternative 2013) in Bad Nauheim, to oppose German federal policies concerning the eurozone crisis, and to confront German-supported bailouts for poorer southern European countries. Their manifesto was endorsed by several economists, journalists, and business leaders, and stated that the eurozone had proven to be "unsuitable" as a currency area and that southern European states were "sinking into poverty under the competitive pressure of the euro". Some candidates of what would become AfD sought election in Lower Saxony as part of the Electoral Alternative 2013 in alliance with the Free Voters, an association participating in local elections without specific federal or foreign policies, and received 1% of the vote. In February 2013, the group decided to found a new party to compete in the 2013 federal election; according to a leaked email from Lucke, the Free Voters leadership declined to join forces. Advocating the abolition of the euro, AfD took a more radical stance than the Free Voters. The Pirate Party Germany opposed any coalition with AfD at their 2013 spring convention. The AfD's initial supporters were the same prominent economists, business leaders, and journalists who had supported the Electoral Alternative 2013, including former members of the Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU), who had previously challenged the constitutionality of the German government's eurozone policies at the Federal Constitutional Court. AfD did not regard itself as a splinter party from the CDU, as its early membership also contained a former state leader from the Free Democratic Party and members of the Federation of Independent Voters, a pressure group of independents and small business owners. On 14 April 2013, the AfD announced its presence to the wider public when it held its first convention in Berlin, elected the party leadership, and adopted a party platform. Bernd Lucke, entrepreneur Frauke Petry and Konrad Adam were elected as speakers. AfD's federal board also chose Alexander Gauland, Roland Klaus, and Patricia Casale as its three deputy speakers. The party elected treasurer Norbert Stenzel and the three assessors Irina Smirnova, Beatrix Diefenbach, and Wolf-Joachim Schünemann. Economist Joachim Starbatty, along with Jörn Kruse, Helga Luckenbach, Dirk Meyer, and Roland Vaubel, were elected to the party's scientific advisory board. Between 31 March and 12 May 2013, AfD founded affiliates in all 16 states of Germany in order to participate in the federal elections. On 15 June 2013, the Young Alternative for Germany was founded in Darmstadt as the AfD's youth organisation. During the British prime minister David Cameron's visit to Germany in April 2013, the Conservative Party was reported to have contacted both AfD and the Free Voters to discuss possible cooperation, supported by the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR) group of the European Parliament. In June 2013, Bernd Lucke gave a question and answer session organized by the Conservative Party-allied Bruges Group think tank in Portcullis House, London. In a detailed report in the conservative Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung in April 2013, the paper's Berlin-based political correspondent Majid Sattar revealed that the SPD and CDU had conducted opposition research to blunt the growth and attraction of AfD. On 22 September 2013, AfD won 4.7% of the votes in the 2013 federal election, just missing the 5% barrier to enter the Bundestag. The party won about 2 million party list votes and 810,000 constituency votes, which was 1.9% of the total of these votes cast across Germany. AfD did not participate in the 2013 Bavaria state election held on 15 September. AfD gained its first representation in the state parliament of Hesse with the defection of Jochen Paulus from the Free Democratic Party (FDP) to AfD in early May 2013; he was not re-elected and left office in January 2014. In the 2013 Hesse state election held on 22 September, the same day as the 2013 federal election, AfD failed to gain representation in the parliament with 4.0% of the vote.[citation needed] In early 2014, the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany ruled the proposed 3% vote hurdle for representation in the European elections unconstitutional, and the 2014 European Parliament election became the first run in Germany without a barrier for representation. AfD held a party conference on 25 January 2014 at Frankenstolz Arena, Aschaffenburg, northwest Bavaria. The conference chose the slogan Mut zu Deutschland ("Courage [to stand up] for Germany") to replace the former slogan Mut zur Wahrheit (lit. "Courage [to speak] the truth", or more succinctly, "Telling it as it is"), which prompted disagreement among the federal board that the party could be seen as too anti-European. A compromise was reached by using the slogan "MUT ZU D*EU*TSCHLAND", with the "EU" in "DEUTSCHLAND" encircled by the 12 stars of the European flag. The conference elected the top six candidates for the European elections on 26 January 2014 and met again the following weekend to choose the remaining euro candidates. Candidates from 7th–28th place on the party list were selected in Berlin on 1 February. Party chairman Bernd Lucke was elected as lead candidate. In February 2014, AfD officials said they had discussed alliances with Britain's anti-EU UK Independence Party (UKIP), which Lucke and the federal board of AfD opposed, and also with the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR) group, to which Britain's Conservative Party belongs. In April 2014, Hans-Olaf Henkel, AfD's second candidate on the European election list, ruled out forming a group with the UKIP. stating that he saw the Conservatives as the preferred partner in the European Parliament. On 10 May 2014, Lucke had been in talks with the Czech and Polish member parties of the ECR group. In the 2014 European Parliament election on 25 May, AfD came in fifth place in Germany, with 7.1% of the national vote (2,065,162 votes), and seven Members of the European parliament (MEPs). On 12 June 2014, it was announced that AfD had been accepted into the ECR group in the European Parliament. The official vote result was not released to the public, but figures of 29 votes for and 26 against were reported by the membership. The inclusion of AfD in the ECR group was said to have caused mild tensions between the German chancellor Angela Merkel and the British prime minister David Cameron. On 31 August, AfD scored 9.7% of the vote in the 2014 Saxony state election, winning 14 seats in the Landtag of Saxony. On 14 September, AfD obtained 10.6% of the vote in the 2014 Thuringian and 12.2% in the Brandenburg state election, winning 11 seats in both state parliaments. On 15 February, AfD won 6.1% of the vote in the 2015 Hamburg state election, gaining the mandate for eight seats in the Hamburg Parliament, winning their first seats in a western German state. On 10 May, AfD secured in the 5.5% of the vote in the 2015 Bremen state election gaining representation in their fifth state parliament on a 50% turnout. After months of factional infighting and a cancelled party gathering in June 2015, Frauke Petry was elected on 4 July 2015 as the de facto principal speaker of the party with 60% of the member votes ahead of Bernd Lucke at a party congress in Essen. Petry was a member of the national-conservative faction of AfD. Her leadership was widely seen as heralding a shift of the party to the right to focus more on issues such as migration, Islam, and strengthening ties to Russia,[citation needed] a shift which was claimed by Lucke as turning the party into a "Pegida party". In the following week, five MEPs exited the party on 7 July, the only remaining MEPs being Beatrix von Storch and Marcus Pretzell, and Lucke announced on 8 July 2015 that he was resigning from AfD, citing the rise of xenophobic and pro-Russian sentiments in the party. At a meeting of members of the Wake-up call (Weckruf 2015) group on 19 July 2015, AfD founder Bernd Lucke and former AfD members announced they would form a new party, the Alliance for Progress and Renewal, under the founding principles of AfD. In February 2016, AfD announced a cooperation pact with the Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ). On 8 March 2016, the bureau of the ECR group began motions to exclude AfD from their group due to its links with the far-right FPÖ, inviting the two remaining AfD MEPs to leave the group by 31 March, with a motion of exclusion to be tabled on 12 April if they refuse to leave voluntarily. While MEP Beatrix von Storch left the ECR group on 8 April to join the Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy group, Marcus Pretzell let himself be expelled on 12 April 2016. With the European migrant crisis remaining the dominant national issue, elections on 13 March were held in the three states of Baden-Württemberg, Rhineland-Palatinate, and Saxony-Anhalt, and saw the AfD receiving double-digit percentages of the vote in all three states. In the 2016 Saxony-Anhalt state election, AfD reached second place in the Landtag, receiving 24.2% of the vote. In the 2016 Baden-Württemberg state election, AfD achieved third place, with 15.1% of the vote. In the 2016 Rhineland-Palatinate state election, AfD again reached third place, with 12.6% of the vote. In Angela Merkel's home state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, her CDU was beaten into third place following a strong showing of AfD, who contested at state level for the first time, to claim the second-highest polling with 20.8% of the vote in the 2016 Mecklenburg-Vorpommern state election. AfD voter support in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania appears to have come from both left-wing and right-wing parties, with support for the Social Democratic Party of Germany down 4.9%, CDU down 4.1%, The Left down 5.2%, Alliance '90/The Greens down 3.9%, and support for the National Democratic Party of Germany (NDP) halved, dropping to 3.0%. Rising support for AfD meant that The Greens and the NDP failed to reach the 5% threshold to qualify for seats in the Landtag of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, and consequently lost their seats. In the 2016 Berlin state election, which AfD also contested for the first time,[citation needed] the party achieved a vote of 14.2%, making them the fifth largest party represented in the state assembly. Their vote seems to have come equally from the SPD and CDU, whose votes declined 6.7% and 5.7%, respectively. At the party congress held on 30 April to 1 May 2016, AfD adopted a policy platform based upon opposition to Islam, calling for the ban of Islamic symbols including burqas, minarets, and adhan (call to prayer), using the slogan "Islam is not a part of Germany". At the party conference in April 2017, Frauke Petry announced that she would not run as the party's main candidate for the 2017 federal election. This announcement grew out of internal power struggle as the party's support had fallen in polls from 15% in the summer of 2016 to 7% just before the conference. Björn Höcke from the far-right wing of the party and Petry were attempting to push each other out of the party. Petry's decision was partly seen as a step to avoid a vote at the conference on the issue of her standing. The party chose Alexander Gauland, a stark conservative who worked as an editor and was a former member of the CDU, to lead the party in the elections. Gauland supported the retention of Höcke's party membership. Alice Weidel, who is perceived as more moderate and neoliberal, was elected as his running mate. The party approved a platform that, according to The Wall Street Journal, "urges Germany to close its borders to asylum applicants, end sanctions on Russia and to leave the EU if Berlin fails to retrieve national sovereignty from Brussels, as well as to amend the country's constitution to allow people born to non-German parents to have their German citizenship revoked if they commit serious crimes." In the 2017 federal election, AfD won 12.6% of the vote and received 94 seats; this was the first time it had won seats in the Bundestag. It won three constituency seats, which would have been enough to qualify for proportionally-elected seats in any event. Under a long-standing law intended to benefit regional parties, any party that wins at least three constituency seats qualifies for its share of proportionally-elected seats, regardless of vote share. The Liberal Conservative Reformers broke way in July 2015. At a press conference held by AfD the day after the 2017 federal election, Frauke Petry said that she would participate in the Bundestag as an independent; she said she did this because extremist statements by some members made it impossible for AfD to function as a constructive opposition, and to make clear to voters that there is internal dissent in the AfD. She also said that she would be leaving the party at some future date. Petry formed the Blue Party in September 2017. Four members of AfD in the Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania legislature, including Bernhard Wild, also left the party to form Citizens for Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, which folded in December 2018. On 6 November 2019, Petry announced that the Blue Party would dissolve by the end of the year In 2018, André Poggenburg, AfD's regional leader of the eastern Saxony-Anhalt state, resigned his post after making racist remarks concerning Turks and immigrants with dual citizenship. In 2019, Poggenburg started a new far-right party, Aufbruch deutscher Patrioten – Mitteldeutschland (ADPM), which he left in August 2019 after his internal call to dissolve ADPM and to support AfD in the upcoming state elections of fall 2019 was denied. Ahead of the 2021 federal election, AfD campaigned with the slogan "Germany. But Normal" and took a position of opposing further lockdowns in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in Germany. Having moved further right on economic issues and remaining strongly right on socio-cultural issues, despite attempts to normalize, AfD's manifesto for the federal election was deemed to be still too radical for the party to take part in government. In the federal election, AfD saw a dip in national vote share by getting 10.3% of the vote, compared to 12.6% in 2017; however, the party emerged as the largest in the states of Saxony and Thuringia, and saw a strong performance in eastern Germany. The party's results drew a mixed analysis from AfD members and political commentators, the latter of whom attributed the slight decline to visible infighting, whereas AfD candidates such as Alice Weidel blamed media bias against the party. Political scientist Kai Arzheimer commented that the result "wasn't any appreciable increase, but it wasn't a disaster for them." Arzheimer also posited that the result demonstrated that AfD had firmly established itself in German national politics but had not reached beyond its core support. AfD's top candidates Tino Chrupalla and Weidel praised the result as "solid", while party spokesman Jörg Meuthen stated that the party should reevaluate the result and aim on "sending strong signals towards the center" to win back new voters. Meuthen left the party in January 2022. AfD held their three seats in the 2022 Saarland state election. At the same time, they lost all their seats in the 2022 Schleswig-Holstein state election. In the 2022 Lower Saxony state election in October, the AfD won 9 more seats compared to 2017 to a total of 18. In the 2023 Berlin repeat state election, the AfD recorded a small upswing by gaining 4 seats compared to the 2021 election. In the 2023 Bremen state election, AfD did not participate and lost all their seats, as the Bremen electoral committee had barred the AfD from the election due to internal divisions that had resulted in them submitting two lists of candidates. The Citizens in Rage, another far-right party, participated instead; they have received 10 seats (after having only one seat in 2019) in Bremen's state parliament. On 25 June 2023, amid rises in polls, Thuringia's AfD won its first district election in Sonneberg. In the run-off election held on 2 July, the AfD candidate Hannes Loth [de] won against the independent politician Nils Naumann, becoming AfD's first ever mayor. On October 8 state elections, AfD significantly increased its share in Hesse where it became the second biggest party (+9 seats) and in Bavaria, where it became the third (+10 seats). Observers considered the increase of support for the AfD as not being limited to the local level. Opinion polling for the next German federal election conducted in early July 2023 showed that the AfD polled more than the SPD, achieving second place behind the CDU/CSU alliance. Amid this surge and warnings from the monitoring agency about AfD's extremism, Germans considered whether to ban the party. The German Institute for Human Rights stated that "the AfD have reached a degree of dangerousness that they can be banned according to the constitution", having warned that the party is actively and methodically trying "to implement its racist and Right-wing extremist goals" and "shifting the limits of what can be said so that people can get used to their ethno-nationalist positions". The SPD co-leader said a ban should be considered if the AfD is categorized as a group of "proven Right-wing extremists" by the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution. Friedrich Merz, the CDU leader, warned that "banning parties has never actually solved political problems". Germans are evenly split on a ban, with 47 per cent in favour and 47 per cent against; the ban is more popular in the west and among liberal Greens. In December 2023, Tim Lochner of AfD was elected mayor of Pirna (Saxony), he became the first mayor of a city with more than 20,000 inhabitants to be appointed by the party. In January 2024, Correctiv reported that members of the AfD had secretly met with figures from the German and Austrian far-right in November 2023, in which they allegedly discussed a "remigration" plan for deporting immigrants, which could include naturalised German citizens. The figures present included Identitarian activist Martin Sellner. The discussed plan was noted for its similarity to the Nazis' plan to deport all non-ethnic German people. The AfD distanced itself from the meeting, saying it was not responsible for what was discussed and that its members had attended only in a personal capacity. Alice Weidel parted ways with Roland Hartwig, an advisor who was present at the meeting. The plan was condemned by German politicians, including chancellor Olaf Scholz. The report sparked protests against the AfD across Germany, with protestors calling for a ban of the AfD. The AfD is broadly considered to be a right-wing and national-conservative movement in both socioeconomic and sociocultural terms. AfD's policy brief and mission statement seeks to define the party as both liberal and conservative, with an emphasis on protecting sovereignty, Western identity, and German culture in what it calls a "peaceful, democratic and sovereign nation-state of the German people." Political scientists and journalists have also described the AfD as synonymous with opposition to immigration, Euroscepticism, and holding a nationalist bent, with various shades of German nationalism from civic nationalism to hardline sentiments visible in the party. Other commentators have categorized it as a radical right populist party or as "a typical radical right-wing populist party", with an emphasis on nativism. Within its elected representation and grassroots membership, AfD has grown to contain interparty factions that range from more moderate conservatives to radicals. AfD was initially founded as a liberal conservative party of the middle class, with a tendency toward soft Euroscepticism, being supportive of Germany's membership in the European Union but critical of further European integration, the existence of the euro currency and the bailouts by the Eurozone for countries such as Greece. At that time, the party also advocated support for Swiss-style semi-direct democracy, major reforms to the Eurozone, opposition to immigration, and opposed same-sex marriage. During this period, the party espoused economic liberal, ordoliberal, and national liberal policy stances. Former party MEP Hans-Olaf Henkel likened AfD's early platform to the Conservative Party in Britain rather than hard Eurosceptic or nationalist parties such as the UK Independence Party or the National Front in France. AfD was also compared to the Tea Party movement by some media outlets due to its campaigns against Eurozone bailouts, although AfD's early leadership disputed this and said it was not looking to attract right-wing extremists into the party. In 2015, more moderate members, including founder and former chairman Bernd Lucke, left AfD after Frauke Petry was elected chairperson to found a new party, the Alliance for Progress and Renewal, which was renamed the Liberal Conservative Reformers in November 2016. At that time, AfD was performing poorly in opinion polls, polling at around 3 percent, and was suffering infighting; however, an influx of refugees and migrants boosted their support later in 2015, with the party turning from matters related to the Eurozone to focus on opposing migration, in particular Muslims and Muslim immigration. AfD underwent a further shift to the right after Petry left the party in 2017 and formed The Blue Party, following AfD's adoption of more hardline Islamophobic, anti-immigration positions, and historical revisionist remarks by leading AfD figures. The party now resembles other populist radical right parties in Europe but is somewhat unusual because it maintains visible ties to even more extreme groups. The party has been described by political scientists as more radical than many other European right-wing populist parties, including the Sweden Democrats, the Danish People's Party, and the Freedom Party of Austria. AfD has been described as, and accused of, containing members sympathetic to the Identitarian movement and Pegida. The AfD leadership has been split on whether to embrace these movements within the party. In March 2020, the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution (German: Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz) classified AfD's far-right nationalistic faction known as Der Flügel as "a right-wing extremist endeavor against the free democratic basic order" and as "not compatible with the Basic Law", placing it under intelligence surveillance. In early March 2021, most of Germany's major media outlets reported that the Bundesverfassungsschutz had placed the whole AfD under surveillance as a "suspected extremist group". In response to claims from AfD members that the move was intended to damage the party's chances in the 2021 German federal election, the agency stated it would not make public announcements regarding investigations into the AfD or its candidates for the foreseeable future. After the revelations, the surveillance was blocked by the courts to give equal opportunities among political parties in a key election year. In 2022, it was ruled that the BfV may classify and monitor the entire party as a suspected right-wing extremist group. A corresponding lawsuit by the AfD was dismissed because "there were sufficient factual indications of anti-constitutional efforts within the AfD". On 26 April 2023, the BfV, after four years of investigations into the Young Alternative for Germany, categorized that group as a confirmed extremist organisation. This allowed the chief of the BfV Thomas Haldenwang to place the youth wing under even more intensive surveillance than the tapping of phone and the use of undercover agents that had been the case until then. Political commentators and analysts have described the party as containing two prominent factions: subscribers to more moderate right-wing and national-conservative policies, such as parliamentarians Jörg Meuthen, Alice Weidel, and Beatrix von Storch, and the more hardline identitarian Der Flügel wing, comprising figures at state level such as Thuringia state leader Björn Höcke. Political author Jeffrey Gedmin has described the present incarnation of AfD as somewhat lacking in a consistent ideological vision and containing a broad church of members who are conservatives, social conservatives, radical-rightists, and others who do not present clear ideological narrative. He also described some of its core voter support as ranging from far-right nationalists to moderate but traditionalist and disaffected conservatives. The two most dominant factions of the AfD have been noted as the Der Flügel and the more dovish and moderate national-conservative Alternative Mitte (Alternative Midpoint) who oppose collaboration with movements or figures like PEGIDA founder Lutz Bachmann. AfD is an economic liberal party. Despite the 2015 split of economic liberals, AfD can still be broadly characterized as neoliberal on economic terms, emphasizing deregulation and much limited state intervention. Attempts of some factions to emphasize small and medium-sized enterprises, and advocate protectionism over free trade, did not have much success or changes in party policies. Over time, a focus on German nationalism, on reclaiming Germany's sovereignty and national pride, especially in repudiation of Germany's culture of shame with regard to its Nazi past, became more central in AfD's ideology and a central plank in its populist appeals. Petry, who led the moderate wing of the party, said that Germany should reclaim völkisch from its Nazi connotations, while Björn Höcke, who is an example of the more right-wing or national conservative ideology, regularly speaks of the Vaterland ("father land") and Volk ("nation" or "people", but with a strong ethnic or racial connotation). In January 2017, Höcke in a speech stated, in reference to the Berlin Holocaust Memorial, that "Germans are the only people in the world who plant a monument of shame in the heart of the capital" and criticized this "laughable policy of coming to terms with the past". Höcke continued that Germany should make a "180 degree" turn with regard to its sense of national pride. AfD supports a ban on circumcision for non-medical reasons for those under the age of majority, saying that the practice composes a "serious violations of fundamental rights". AfD describes German national identity as under threat both from European integration and from the presence and accommodation of immigrants and refugees within Germany. Former leader Petry said in March 2016: "I'm not against immigration, but ... the economic and social consequences of migration on both home and host countries are equally momentous ... The immigration of so many Muslims will change our culture. If this change is desired, it must be the product of a democratic decision supported by a broad majority. But Ms. Merkel simply opened the borders and invited everybody in, without consulting the parliament or the people." In its program, AfD wants to end what it describes as mass immigration and focus on taking in small numbers of skilled immigrants who are expected to integrate into society and speak German. It encourages German nationals to have more children, as opposed to trying to boost the German population through foreign migration. The party wants to review EU freedom of movement rules and states that immigrants must be employed and contribute to social security through paying taxes for at least four years before being allowed to receive state benefits. AfD calls for mass deportation of foreign born criminals with multiple citizenship or permanent residency. The party describes the Geneva Convention on Refugees as "outdated", calls for stricter vetting of refugees, and believes the German government should invest in special economic and safe zones in third world nations as opposed to taking in large numbers of asylum seekers without background checks. AfD is critical of multiculturalism in Germany, stating that "the concept of a multi-cultural society has failed." The party favours banning the burqa, the Islamic call to prayer in public areas and the construction of new minarets, ending foreign funding of mosques and putting imams through a state vetting procedure. The AfD began to employ anti-Muslim rhetoric during the leadership of Frauke Petry, who responded positively to comparisons between the party and Pegida. In 2016 the party adopted several anti-Muslim positions and stated in its manifesto that "Islam does not belong to Germany. Its expansion and the ever-increasing number of Muslims in the country are viewed by the AfD as a danger to our state, our society, and our values." The party has run a billboard campaign that explicitly referenced the Eurabia thesis, and the party has been seen to have been strongly influenced by, and to be a part of the counter-jihad movement. AfD is supportive of a ban on kosher slaughter within the country, as well as the "import and sale of kosher meat". According to its interim electoral manifesto, AfD opposes same-sex marriage and favours civil unions. The left-leaning newspaper Die Tageszeitung described the group as advocating "old gender roles". AfD deputy leader Beatrix von Storch has publicly opposed same-sex marriage. In an effort to overturn same-sex marriage laws, AfD filed a lawsuit over the issue in 2017. Wolfgang Gedeon, an elected AfD representative, has included feminism, along with "sexualism" and "migrationism", in an ideology he calls "green communism" that he opposes, and argues for family values as part of German identity. As AfD has campaigned for traditional roles for women, it has aligned itself with groups opposed to modern feminism. The youth wing of the party has used social media to campaign against aspects of modern feminism, with the support of party leadership. Alice Weidel, co-chairwoman of the party, is a lesbian and is in a civil union with a female Sri Lankan-born Swiss film producer. Weidel has two adopted children with her partner. AfD has a platform of climate change denial. The AfD accepts that the climate is changing, however, it denies that this change is attributable to human influences. Instead, the party argues that climate change is entirely caused by natural factors. The AfD argues that the rising carbon dioxide concentrations have been beneficial (contributed to a "greening" of our planet). Next to its climate change denial, the AfD opposes far-reaching climate policies: The party opposes energy transformation policies (Energiewende), wants to scrap the German Renewable Energy Act, the German Energy Saving Regulations, and the German Renewable Energy Heat Act. They also want to end bioenergy subsidies and restrict "uncontrolled expansion of wind energy". The party argues that the energy transition threatenes energy security, possibly leading to energy blackouts. It, therefore, views lignite as the only native energy source that can guarantee German energy security and energy self-sufficiency. Furthermore, the AfD wants to reinstate Germany's nuclear plants, arguing that closures between 2002 and 2011 were "economically damaging and not objectively justified". The party argues that the government should "allow a lifetime extension of still operating nuclear power plants on a transitional basis". The party opposes the criminalization of ecocide in the European Union with Gunnar Beck, an MEP for AfD stating that "recognizing crimes against the environment as a violation of human rights and even war crimes is yet another grotesque inflation of the human rights doctrine." AfD wants a reinstatement of conscription in Germany, starting for able-bodied men at the age of 18. AfD is historically pro-NATO and pro-United States;[needs update] it has been sharply critical of the Biden administration. It is significantly divided on whether to support Russia, and has opposed sanctions on Russia supported by NATO and the United States. It is also divided on free-trade agreements. In March 2019, party leader Alexander Gauland said in an interview with the Russian newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda that they consider the war in Donbas to be a Ukrainian internal matter, and that Germany should not get involved in the internal affairs of Ukraine or Russia. He also said the AfD is against international sanctions on Russia. AfD members have called for a more independent stance from the United States. The party has also parroted accusations that the United States was involved in the 2022 Nord Stream pipeline sabotage. The AfD has also called NATO’s anti-Russian stance overly ideological and detrimental to Germany’s interests. AfD initially held a position of soft Euroscepticism by opposing the euro currency and Eurozone bailouts, which the party saw as undermining European integration, but it was otherwise supportive of German membership of the European Union (EU). Since 2015, the party has shifted to a more purely Eurosceptic and nationalist position against the EU, calling for the withdrawal from the common European asylum and security policy, significant reform of the EU and a repatriation of powers back from Brussels with some party members endorsing a complete exit from the European Union if it these aims are not achievable. During the 2021 party conference in Dresden, a majority of AfD members voted to include more hardline policies against the European Union including German withdrawal from the bloc in the party's manifesto ahead of the 2021 German federal election. The party is pro-Israel. AfD supported the decision of US president Donald Trump to recognize Jerusalem as Israel's capital, as stated by AfD's Petr Bystron. Despite AfD's pro-Israel stance, the State of Israel has boycotted the party and refuses to hold ties with AfD. The party was divided over the 2023 Israel-Hamas war, with party leader Chrupalla condemning the 2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel but calling for diplomacy between the two sides and mourning deaths on both sides, while other MPs, such as Norbert Kleinwächter and Rüdiger Lucassen were critical of Chrupalla's position and openly defended Israeli actions during the conflict. Following the Hamas attack, the party supported cuts in German aid to Palestine via the UNRWA. The AfD is considered a key ally for the International Agency for Current Policy in an OCCRP investigation from February 2023. The report accuses Manuel Ochsenreiter [de] of having received payments for publishing pro-Russian propaganda in his Zuerst! magazine. AfD has historically been more skeptical of China, demanding the government to strip the "developing country" status for China, voicing opposition to "Chinese economic espionage" and opposing Chinese state-owned company COSCO Shipping buying of a stake in the Port of Hamburg. However, it started changing its position in 2023, with AfD's Bundestag caucus accusing foreign minister Annalena Baerbock and economic affairs minister Robert Habeck of launching an "economic war" against China. AfD has also criticized restrictions on the use of 5G material from Chinese companies Huawei and ZTE. AfD leader Tino Chrupalla has also voiced opposition against restrictions on Chinese technology and backed Chinese foreign minister Qin Gang on his peace-brokering efforts for Russia's invasion of Ukraine. In August 2023 a journalist investigation was published by The Insider, describing how money was funnelled from Moscow to AfD politicians who initiated a constitutional complaint in Germany against the supplies of weapons for Ukraine. Because the 2013 federal election was the first attempt to join by the party, AfD had not received any federal funds in the run-up to it; by receiving 2 million votes, it crossed the threshold for party funding and was expected to receive an estimated 1.3 to 1.5 million euros per year of state subsidies. After joining the parliament with more than 90 representatives in the 2017 federal election, the party received more than 70 million euros per year; this probably rose to more than 100 million euros per year from 2019 onward. The party has also established and acknowledged a foundation for political education, and other purposes, close to the party but organized separately, which may be able to claim up to 80 million euro per year. This foundation would need to be acknowledged by the federal parliament in Germany first, but it has a legal claim to these subsidies. In 2018, the Alternative for Germany donation scandal became public, as federal and European Parliament politicians Alice Weidel, Jörg Meuthen, Marcus Pretzell, and Guido Reil had profited from illegal and unnamed donations from non-EU countries. The acceptance of donations from non-EU countries is prohibited for German parties and politicians. Young Alternative for Germany (German: Junge Alternative für Deutschland, JA) was founded in 2013 as the youth organisation of AfD, while remaining legally independent from its mother party. In view of JA's independence, it has been regarded by some in AfD's hierarchy as being somewhat wayward, with JA repeatedly accused of being "too far-right", politically regressive and antifeminist by the German mainstream media. Following the 2014 European Parliament election on 12 June, AfD was accepted into the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR) group in the European Parliament. In February 2016, AfD announced a closer cooperation with the right-wing populist party Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ), which is a member of the Europe of Nations and Freedom (ENF) group. On 8 March 2016, the bureau of the ECR group began motions to exclude AfD MEPs from their group due to the party's links with the far-right FPÖ and controversial remarks by two party leader about shooting immigrants. MEP Beatrix von Storch pre-empted her imminent expulsion by leaving the ECR group to join the Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy group on 8 April, and Marcus Pretzell was expelled from the ECR group on 12 April 2016. During the party convention on 30 April 2016, Pretzell announced his intention to join the Europe of Nations and Freedom group, although he subsequently left AfD to join Petry's Blue Party. In April 2019, Jörg Meuthen appeared alongside Northern League leader Matteo Salvini, National Rally leader Marine Le Pen, and politicians from the Danish People's Party and FPÖ to announce the formation of a new European political alliance. AfD later joined this group in the European Parliament, which was ultimately named the Identity and Democracy group. In July 2023, the AfD joined the Identity and Democracy Party, the European political party affiliated with this group. Beyond Identity and Democracy, the AfD has ties to parties like Hungary's Our Homeland Movement, Slovakia's Republic party, Bulgaria's Revival, Alternative for Sweden, Serbia's Dveri and the Serbian Party Oathkeepers. At the outset, AfD presented itself as conservative and middle-class, catering to a well-educated demographic; around two-thirds of supporters listed on its website in the early days held doctorates, leading to AfD being nicknamed the "professors' party" in its early days. The party was described[who?] as professors and academics who dislike the compromises inflicted on their purist theories by German party politics. 86% of the party's initial supporters were male. Outside the Berlin hotel where the party held its inaugural meeting, it has been alleged that copies of Junge Freiheit, a weekly that is also popular with the far right, were being handed out. The Rheinische Post pointed out that some AfD members and supporters write for the conservative paper. There was also a protest outside the venue of the party's inaugural meeting by Andreas Storr, a National Democratic Party of Germany (NPD) representative in the Landtag of Saxony, as the NPD sees AfD as a rival for Eurosceptic votes. In 2013, AfD party organisers sent out the message that they are not trying to attract right-wing radicals and toned down rhetoric on their Facebook page following media allegations that it too closely evoked the language of the far right. At that time, AfD checked applicants for membership to exclude far-right and former NPD members who support the anti-euro policy. The former party chairman Bernd Lucke stated that "[t]he applause is coming from the wrong side", regarding praise his party gained from the NPD. Members of Alliance 90/Green Party have accused AfD of pandering to xenophobic and nationalistic sentiments. There have been altercations between AfD members and Green Youth members. Following the 2013 federal election, the anti-Islam German Freedom Party unilaterally pledged to support AfD in the 2014 elections and concentrate its efforts on local elections only. Bernd Lucke responded by saying that the German Freedom Party's support was unwanted and sent a letter to AfD party associations recommending a hiring freeze. Stern reported that among 396 AfD candidates for the 2017 Bundestag, 47 candidates did not distance themselves from right-wing extremism. Although a large proportion of the candidates are not openly racist, some relativize Germany's role in World War II or call for the recognition of a "Cult of Guilt". 30 candidates claimed to tolerate right-wing friends in their profile or were themselves members of groups associated with such people; others said that they mourned the German Reich or used their symbols. In 2016, AfD MEP Marcus Pretzell was expelled from the party after he said that German borders should be defended from incursion by refugees "with armed force as a measure of last resort". Later that same year, former AfD party chair and MEP Frauke Petry told a reporter from the regional newspaper Mannheimer Morgen that the German Border police must do their jobs by "hindering illegal entry of refugees" and that they may "use firearms if necessary" to "prevent illegal border crossings". Petry later stated that no policeman "wants to fire on a refugee and I don't want that either" but that border police must follow the law to maintain the integrity of European borders. Afterwards, Petry made several attempts to justify these statements. In response to the Pegida movement and demonstrations, members of AfD have expressed different opinions of it, with Lucke describing the movement as "a sign that these people do not feel their concerns are understood by politicians". In response to the CDU Interior Minister Thomas de Maizière alleging an "overlap" between Pegida rallies and AfD, Alexander Gauland stated that AfD are "natural allies of this movement". Hans-Olaf Henkel asked members of the party not to join the demonstrations, telling Der Tagesspiegel that he believed it could not be ruled out that they had "xenophobic or even racist connotations". A straw poll by The Economist found that nine out of ten Pegida protesters would back the AfD. AfD is anti-communist and engaged in red-baiting by comparing the centre-right Angela Merkel and her government to the secret police in East Germany. In May 2018, a statue of the founding father of communism Karl Marx, donated by the Chinese government, was unveiled in Marx's hometown of Trier. AfD leader Alexander Gauland said the city should not accept the statue, saying that it disrespects victims of communism. AfD staged a silent march to remember the victims of communist regimes. In January 2017, Björn Höcke, one of the founders of AfD, gave a speech in Dresden in which, referring to the Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe, he stated that "we Germans are the only people in the world who have planted a memorial of shame in the heart of their capital", and suggested that Germans "need to make a 180 degree change in their politics of commemoration". The speech was widely criticized as antisemitic, among others by Jewish leaders in Germany. Within AfD, he was described by his party chairwoman, Frauke Petry, as a "burden to the party", while other members of the party, such as Alexander Gauland, said that they found no antisemitism in the speech. In February 2017, AfD leaders asked for Höcke to be expelled from the party due to his speech. The arbitration committee of AfD in Thuringia was set to rule on the leaders' request. In May 2018 an AfD tribunal ruled that Höcke was allowed to stay in the party. Alliance for Germany List of political parties in Germany "More people become members of AfD". Borkener Zeitung (in German). 12 September 2023. Archived from the original on 28 September 2023. Retrieved 28 September 2023. Mudde, Cas (2016). "Introduction to the populist radical right". In Mudde, Cas (ed.). The Populist Radical Right: A Reader. Routledge. pp. 1–10. ISBN 978-1-315-51456-7. * Arzheimer, Kai (4 May 2015). "The AfD: Finally a Successful Right-Wing Populist Eurosceptic Party for Germany?" (PDF). West European Politics. 38 (3): 535–556. doi:10.1080/01402382.2015.1004230. S2CID 14613344. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 November 2020. Retrieved 10 May 2020. Lux, Thomas (June 2018). "Die AfD und die unteren Statuslagen. Eine Forschungsnotiz zu Holger Lengfelds Studie Die "Alternative für Deutschland": eine Partei für Modernisierungsverlierer?". KZFSS Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie. 70 (2): 255–273. doi:10.1007/s11577-018-0521-2. S2CID 149934029. Schmitt-Beck, Rüdiger (2 January 2017). "The 'Alternative für Deutschland in the Electorate': Between Single-Issue and Right-Wing Populist Party". German Politics. 26 (1): 124–148. doi:10.1080/09644008.2016.1184650. S2CID 156431715. Johannes Kiess; Oliver Decker; Elmar Brähler (2016). "Introduction | German perspectives on right-wing extremism: challenges for comparative analysis". In Johannes Kiess; Oliver Decker; Elmar Brähler (eds.). German Perspectives on Right-Wing Extremism: Challenges for Comparative Analysis. Routledge. pp. 3–4. ISBN 978-1-317-23184-4. Frank Decker (2015). "Follow-up to the Grand Coalition: The Germany Party System before and after the 2013 Federal Election". In Eric Langenbacher (ed.). The Merkel Republic: An Appraisal. Berghahn Books. pp. 34–39. ISBN 978-1-78238-896-8. Hans-Jürgen Bieling (2015). "Uneven development and 'European crisis constitutionalism', or the reasons for and conditions of a 'passive revolution in trouble'". In Johannes Jäger; Elisabeth Springler (eds.). Asymmetric Crisis in Europe and Possible Futures: Critical Political Economy and Post-Keynesian Perspectives. Routledge. p. 110. ISBN 978-1-317-65298-4. Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 17 March 2016. Egbert Jahn (2015). German Domestic and Foreign Policy: Political Issues Under Debate. Springer. p. 30. ISBN 978-3-662-47929-2. Perrone, Alessio; Loucaides, Darren (10 March 2022). "A key source for Covid-skeptic movements, the Epoch Times yearns for a global audience". Coda Media. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 13 March 2022. It was then that the German edition of Epoch Times started to enjoy a steep rise in web traffic, coinciding with its coverage of the anti-migrant group Pegida and frequent interviews with politicians from the emerging right-wing populist party Alternative for Germany, or AfD. Nordsieck, Wolfram (September 2021). "Germany". Parties and Elections in Europe. Archived from the original on 10 March 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2021. Arzheimer, Kai (January 2015). "The AfD: Finally a Successful Right-Wing Populist Eurosceptic Party for Germany?". West European Politics. 38 (3): 535–556. doi:10.1080/01402382.2015.1004230. S2CID 14613344. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2021 – via Arzheimer's personal website. Arzheimer, Kai; Berning, Carl C. (2019). "How the Alternative for Germany (AfD) and their voters veered to the radical right, 2013–2017". Electoral Studies. 60: 102040. doi:10.1016/j.electstud.2019.04.004. S2CID 181403226. Far-right: "Germany's far-right party will make the Bundestag much noisier". The Economist. 24 August 2017. Archived from the original on 15 May 2018. Retrieved 24 September 2017. Ehrhardt, Sabine (2 December 2017). "Germany's far-right AfD chooses nationalist as co-leader". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 December 2017. Retrieved 22 January 2018. "German election: How right-wing is nationalist AfD?". BBC News. 13 October 2017. Archived from the original on 17 January 2019. Retrieved 7 July 2018. Is it far-right? Yes. Eddy, Melissa (24 October 2017). "Far Right Upsets Tradition of Consensus in New German Parliament". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 January 2019. Retrieved 22 January 2018. the Alternative for Germany, the first far-right party to enter Parliament in decades Chase, Jefferson Chase (24 September 2017). "AfD: What you need to know about Germany's far-right party". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 28 December 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2018. Schuetz, Simon (10 October 2017). "The 'Very Different' Leaders of Germany's Far-Right AfD Party". NPR. Archived from the original on 7 December 2018. Retrieved 23 January 2018. Rainer, Buergin (19 November 2017). "German Far-Right AfD Is in Parliament. Now What?". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 1 January 2019. Retrieved 23 January 2018. Farand, Chloe (21 November 2017). "Germany's far-right AfD says it is 'ready' to take advantage of political stalemate". The Independent. Archived from the original on 21 November 2017. Oltermann, Philip (3 December 2017). "Germany's far-right AfD sidelines moderates as police and protesters clash". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 January 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2018. Ellyatt, Holly (25 September 2017). "Germany's far-right AfD party: 5 things you need to know". CNBC. Archived from the original on 12 May 2019. Retrieved 22 January 2018. Kamran Khan; Tim McNamara (2017). "Citizenship, immigration laws, and language". In Canagarajah, Suresh (ed.). The Routledge Handbook of Migration and Language. Taylor & Francis. p. 464. ISBN 978-1-317-62434-9. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 19 September 2017. Nixon, Jon (2017). "Introduction: Thinking Within, Against, and Beyond Austerity". In Nixon, Jon (ed.). Higher Education in Austerity Europe. Bloomsbury. p. 18. ISBN 978-1-4742-7727-3. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 29 March 2018. "Just how far to the right is AfD?". 13 October 2017. Archived from the original on 17 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2020. Heinze, Anna-Sophie (1 March 2021). "Zum schwierigen Umgang mit der AfD in den Parlamenten: Arbeitsweise, Reaktionen, Effekte". Zeitschrift für Politikwissenschaft (in German). 31 (1): 133–150. doi:10.1007/s41358-020-00245-0. ISSN 2366-2638. Der 2013 gegründeten 'Alternative für Deutschland' (AfD) gelang es – anders als früheren Rechtsaußenparteien wie der NPD, DVU oder den Republikanern ... [English: The 'Alternative for Germany' (AfD) party founded in 2013 succeeded – unlike earlier far-right parties such as the NPD, DVU or the Republicans ... Pittelkow, Sebastian; Riedel, Katja; Schmidt, Martin (28 January 2022). "Meuthen verlässt die AfD". Tagesschau (in German). Archived from the original on 4 June 2023. Retrieved 14 August 2023. "Parteichef Jörg Meuthen verlässt die AfD". Deutsche Welle (in German). 28 January 2022. Archived from the original on 13 August 2023. Retrieved 13 August 2023. Schultheis, Emily (28 September 2021). "Germany's far-right AfD loses nationally, but wins in the East". Politico. Archived from the original on 23 October 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2021. Kinkartz, Sabine (7 July 2023). "Poll: Far-right AfD is Germany's second strongest party". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 9 July 2023. Retrieved 9 July 2023. D'Ottavio; Saafeld, Thomas (2016). Germany After the 2013 Elections: Breaking the Mould of Post-Unification Politics?. Routledge. ISBN 9781317128373. Beyond economic liberalism, the AfD fosters rather more conservative core issues, such as traditional forms of morality and political authority. Muzergues, Thibault (2019). The Great Class Shift: How New Social Class Structures are Redefining Western Politics. Routledge. ISBN 9781000727432. Created in 2013, first and foremost as a libertarian and Eurosceptic party, ... . Close, Caroline (2019). Liberal Parties in Europe. Routledge. p. 157. ISBN 9781351245494. Havertz, Ralf (2021). Radical Right Populism in Germany: AfD, Pegida, and the Identitarian Movement. Routledge. ISBN 9781000368888. The founders of the AfD party were a group of economic liberal, ... . Stijn van Kessel (2015). Populist Parties in Europe: Agents of Discontent?. Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 61–62. ISBN 978-1-137-41411-3. Wayne C. Thompson (2014). Nordic, Central, and Southeastern Europe 2014. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 283. ISBN 978-1-4758-1224-4. Lee McGowan; David Phinnemore (2015). A Dictionary of the European Union. Taylor & Francis. pp. 23–24. ISBN 978-1-317-44515-9. "Germany's AfD: How right-wing is nationalist Alternative for Germany?". BBC News. 11 February 2020. Archived from the original on 17 January 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2020. As AfD moved to the right so did he, making a number of remarks condemned as racist. Zeller, Frank. "Anti-migrant, anti-Muslim and anti-Merkel, Germany's AfD set to enter parliament". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 22 January 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2018. Ellyatt, Holly (25 September 2017). "Germany's far-right AfD party: 5 things you need to know". CNBC. Archived from the original on 12 May 2019. Retrieved 22 January 2018. Nowadays, the AfD is mainly known for its anti-immigration (namely, anti-Islamic) Dancygier, Rafaela. "The anti-Muslim AfD just scored big in Germany's election. What does this mean for German Muslims?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 23 January 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2018. Schmitt-Beck, Rüdiger (2 January 2017). "The 'Alternative für Deutschland in the Electorate': Between Single-Issue and Right-Wing Populist Party". German Politics. 26 (1): 124–148. doi:10.1080/09644008.2016.1184650. S2CID 156431715. Taub, Amanda; Fisher, Max (18 January 2017). "Germany's Extreme Right Challenges Guilt Over Nazi Past". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 February 2020. Retrieved 29 April 2017. "Understanding the 'Alternative for Germany': Origins, Aims and Consequences" (PDF). University of Denver. 16 November 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 April 2017. Retrieved 29 April 2017. Beyer, Susanne; Fleischhauer, Jan (30 March 2016). "AfD Head Frauke Petry: 'The Immigration of Muslims Will Change Our Culture'". Der Spiegel. Archived from the original on 21 June 2019. Retrieved 29 April 2017. Julia Leser; Florian Spissinger (2023). "The Functionality of Affects: Conceptualising Far-Right Populists Beyond Negative Emotions (Notes)". In Dan Degerman (ed.). The Politics of Negative Emotions. Policy Press. p. 172. ISBN 9781529228816. Simon Franzmann (2015). "The Failed Struggle for Office Instead of Votes". In Gabriele D'Ottavio; Thomas Saalfeld (eds.). Germany After the 2013 Elections: Breaking the Mould of Post-Unification Politics?. Ashgate. pp. 166–167. ISBN 978-1-4724-4439-4. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 29 September 2017. Gabriele D'Ottavio; Thomas Saalfeld (2015). "Introduction: Breaking the Mould of Post-Unification German Politics?". In Gabriele D'Ottavio; Thomas Saalfeld (eds.). Germany After the 2013 Elections: Breaking the Mould of Post-Unification Politics?. Ashgate Publishing. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-4724-4439-4. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 15 September 2020. Hans-Georg Betz; Fabian Habersack (2020). "Regional Nativism in East Germany: the case of the AfD". In Reinhard Heinisch; Emanuele Massetti; Oscar Mazzoleni (eds.). The People and the Nation: Populism and Ethno-Territorial Politics in Europe. Taylor & Francis. pp. 115–116. ISBN 978-1-351-26554-6. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 15 September 2020. "Thousands rally in Hanover against anti-Islam AfD party". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2018. ... rally in Hanover against anti-Islam AfD party Pfaffenbach, Kai (24 September 2017). "German Election: Anti-Islam AfD Party That Worked With U.S. Ad Agency Predicted To Take Third Place". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 22 January 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2018. Sunday's election in Germany is expected to bring big gains for the hard-right, anti-Islam Alternative for Germany (AfD) party ... Horn, Heather (27 May 2016). "The Voters Who Want Islam Out of Germany". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 22 January 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2018. The AfD's founder Bernd Lucke, an economics professor, left the party last summer, condemning rising xenophobia. "German election: Why this vote matters". BBC News. 15 September 2017. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017. Retrieved 20 September 2017. *Lansford, Tom, ed. (2014). Political Handbook of the World 2014. SAGE. p. 532. ISBN 978-1-4833-3327-4. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 17 March 2016. Dervis, Kemal; Mistral, Jacques (2014). "Overview". In Dervis, Kemal; Mistral, Jacques (eds.). Europe's Crisis, Europe's Future. Brookings Institution Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-8157-2554-1. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 17 March 2016. Ladrech, Robert (2014). "Europeanization of National Politics: the centrality of politics parties". In Magone, José M. (ed.). Routledge Handbook of European Politics. Routledge. p. 580. ISBN 978-1-317-62836-1. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 17 March 2016. William T. Daniel (2015). Career Behaviour and the European Parliament: All Roads Lead Through Brussels?. Oxford University Press. p. 135. ISBN 978-0-19-871640-2. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 17 March 2016. "Germany has an unholy new alliance: climate denial and the far right Bernhard Pötter". theguardian.com. 18 March 2020. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. Deleja-Hotko, Vera; Müller, Ann-Katrin; Traufetter, Gerald (6 May 2019). "AfD Hopes to Win Votes by Opposing Climate Protection". Der Spiegel. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. Bennhold, Katrin (3 March 2021). "Germany Places Far-Right AfD Party Under Surveillance for Extremism". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 March 2021. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "The Utilisation of Historically Revisionist Narratives by the FPÖ and the AfD". 21 April 2021. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 8 November 2021. "AfD embraces Pegida ahead of German election". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 24 September 2018. Retrieved 20 December 2017. Meaker, Morgan. "How Two Cities Encapsulate the Battle for Germany's Identity". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 18 February 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2017. "Waving German flag, far-right and anti-Islam groups rally together before vote". Reuters. 19 September 2017. Archived from the original on 22 December 2017. Retrieved 20 December 2017. "Verfassungsschutz darf AfD als »Verdachtsfall« beobachten". Der Spiegel (in German). 8 March 2022. Archived from the original on 27 March 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. "Germany's far-right AfD party 'tearing itself apart'". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Scholz, Kay-Alexander (2 September 2019). "What drives AfD voters in eastern Germany?". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 22 July 2023. Retrieved 24 July 2023. Knight, Ben (11 June 2021). "Why young eastern German voters support the far-right AfD". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 22 July 2023. Retrieved 24 July 2023. Schultheis, Emily (7 July 2021). "East Germany is still a country of its own". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 22 July 2023. Retrieved 24 July 2023. Pfeifer, Hans (29 June 2023). "Half of eastern Germans 'want authoritarian rule'". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 23 July 2023. Retrieved 24 July 2023. "Why AFD was created". BBC World news. 4 September 2016. Archived from the original on 4 September 2016. Retrieved 4 September 2016. Lachmann, Günther (3 March 2013). "Anti-Euro-Partei geißelt die Politik der Kanzlerin" [Anti-euro party lashes out at politics of Chancellor Merkel]. Die Welt (in German). Archived from the original on 5 December 2016. Retrieved 2 May 2013. "Die Bundesrepublik Deutschland ist in der schwersten Krise ihrer Geschichte. Das Euro-Währungsgebiet hat sich als ungeeignet erwiesen. Südeuropäische Staaten verarmen unter dem Wettbewerbsdruck des Euro. Ganze Staaten stehen am Rande der Zahlungsunfähigkeit." [The Federal Republic of Germany is in the gravest crisis of its history. The euro currency area has shown itself to be unfit for purpose. Countries in southern Europe are sinking into poverty under the competitive pressure of the euro. Whole countries are on the brink of bankruptcy.] Frymark, Kamil (10 April 2013). "German Euro-sceptics to establish a political party". Centre for Eastern Studies. Archived from the original on 5 July 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2013. "Here comes ... the German Anti-Euro Party". Open Europe. 28 February 2013. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2013. Pop, Valentina (12 March 2013). "New anti-euro party forms in Germany". EUobserver. Archived from the original on 16 March 2022. Retrieved 21 May 2013. Scholz, Kay-Alexander (13 May 2013). "German Pirate Party in uncharted waters". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 27 April 2015. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Czuczka, Tony (4 March 2013). "German Euro Foes to Found Party in Merkel Election Challenge". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 28 December 2013. Retrieved 5 March 2017. Winand von Petersdorff-Campen (4 March 2013). "Die neue Anti-Euro-Partei". Frankfurter Allgemeine (in German). Archived from the original on 26 August 2013. Retrieved 2 June 2020. Boesler, Matthew (4 March 2013). "A small band of German professors is the hottest new threat to the future of the Euro". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 21 July 2023. Retrieved 11 March 2013. "Southern Europe out of euro says Alternative For Germany". BBC Daily Politics. BBC. 13 June 2013. Archived from the original on 16 June 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2013. Jahn, Joachim (14 April 2013). "Aufstand gegen Merkels 'alternativlose Politik'". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). Archived from the original on 28 October 2020. Retrieved 2 June 2020. Vasagar, Jeevan (14 April 2013). "1,000 Germans abandon Angela Merkel for Eurosceptic party". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Bernd Lucke und die wilde Jugend" (in German). N24. 13 June 2014. Archived from the original on 17 August 2014. Retrieved 2 July 2014. Tories build secret alliance with Eurosceptics behind Merkel's back Archived 16 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine, The Daily Telegraph, UK, 12 April 2013. "Germany and the euro — with Professor Bernd Lucke". The Bruges Group. Archived from the original on 13 June 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2013. Weinthal, Benjamin (3 May 2013). "The Rise of Germany's Tea Party". Foundation for Defense of Democracies. Archived from the original on 5 August 2017. Retrieved 22 May 2013. "German Euroskeptic Party AFD Could Unravel After Election". Der Spiegel. 25 September 2013. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 27 December 2013. Paulick, Jane (5 May 2013). "German Euro-Skeptic Party Gaining Ground". Der Spiegel (in German). Archived from the original on 23 July 2023. Retrieved 8 May 2013. Janz, Marcus (10 March 2014). "Ex-Abgeordneter fehlte acht Monate im Landtag – keine Sanktionen". Hessische/Niedersächsische Allgemeine (in German). Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 17 February 2015. Demuth, Norbert (26 February 2014). "Germany's top court scraps 3 percent vote threshold for EU poll". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 May 2020. Retrieved 20 September 2014. Benzow, Gregg (26 January 2014). "Germany's euroskeptic party revamps its image". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 27 April 2015. Retrieved 29 January 2014. Lachmann, Günther (26 January 2014). "Wie die AfD ihr inhaltliches Vakuum füllen will". Die Welt (in German). Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 2 February 2014. Czygan, Michael (26 January 2014). "Die Alternative für Deutschland nominiert in Aschaffenburg Kandidaten für Europa". Main Post (in German). Archived from the original on 24 September 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2014. "Unsere Kandidaten für Europa" (in German). Alternative für Deutschland. Retrieved 3 February 2014.[permanent dead link] Marsh, Sarah (13 February 2014). "German anti-euro party says won't team up with xenophobes". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 December 2015. Retrieved 21 May 2014. Waterfield, Bruno (24 April 2014). "EU elections: German Eurosceptics snub 'ridiculous' Ukip". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 21 May 2014. Barker, Alex (11 May 2014). "David Cameron's European Parliament group fights for survival". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 23 July 2014. Retrieved 26 May 2014. Der Bundeswahlleiter (n.d.). "Endgültiges Ergebnis der Europawahl 2014". Archived from the original on 5 July 2015. Nicolaou, Anna; Barker, Luke (12 June 2014). "Anti-euro German AfD joins Cameron's EU parliament group". Reuters. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 12 June 2014. "Landtagswahl 2014" (in German). Free State of Saxony. Archived from the original on 21 April 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2014. Torry, Harriet (31 August 2014). "Alternative for Germany Party Takes Its First Seats in a State Parliament". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 31 August 2014. "Anti-euro party makes big leap in Thuringia, Brandenburg state elections". Deutsche Welle. 14 September 2014. Archived from the original on 27 April 2015. Retrieved 20 September 2014. Exner, Ulrich; Sturm, Daniel Friedrich (15 February 2015). "Wer bei Scholz Führung bestellt, wird sie bekommen". Die Welt (in German). Archived from the original on 25 May 2023. Retrieved 15 February 2015. "Setback for SPD after narrow win in Bremen". Deutsche Welle. 11 May 2015. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 11 May 2015. "Germany's Far-Right Populists Have an Infighting Problem". The Atlantic. 22 September 2017. Archived from the original on 28 September 2017. Retrieved 27 September 2017. "Germany's euroskeptic AfD elects conservative leader Petry". Deutsche Welle. 4 July 2015. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 5 July 2015. Schneider, Jens (6 July 2015). "Lucke und der Auszug der Gemäßigten". Süddeutsche Zeitung (in German). Archived from the original on 23 July 2023. Retrieved 6 July 2015. "Nach "Richtungsentscheidung" AfD meldet Hunderte Austritte" (in German). N-TV. 7 July 2015. Archived from the original on 20 May 2016. Retrieved 9 July 2015. Barkin, Noah (8 July 2015). "German AfD founder leaves party decrying xenophobic shift". Reuters. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 9 July 2015. "Ousted chief of Germany's euroskeptic AfD sets up new political party". Deutsche Welle. 19 July 2015. Archived from the original on 14 March 2016. Retrieved 20 July 2015. Deutsche AfD und FPÖ beschließen Zusammenarbeit (in German). Archived 20 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine Der Standard. Retrieved 19 February 2016. Crisp, James (9 March 2016). "AfD links to Austrian far-right 'final straw' for ECR MEPs –". Euractiv.com. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2016. Peter Teffer (9 March 2016). "EU parliament group tells German AfD party to leave". EU Observer. Archived from the original on 27 March 2022. Retrieved 13 April 2016. Peter Teffer (8 April 2016). "Right-wing German MEP quits parliament group". EU Observer. Archived from the original on 1 April 2022. Retrieved 13 April 2016. "German AfD lawmaker joins eurosceptic group in European Parliament". Europe online. 8 April 2016. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 13 April 2016. "German AfD lawmaker evicted from conservative group in EU legislature". Europe online. 12 April 2016. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Oltermann, Philip (13 March 2016). "Anti-refugee AfD party makes big gains in German state elections". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 14 March 2016. "Landtagswahlen 2016: Die sechs Datenanalysen zur Wahl". Der Spiegel. 14 March 2016. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 14 March 2016. "Nationalists overtake Merkel's party in German state vote". Associated Press. 4 September 2016. Archived from the original on 27 March 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2021. The three-year-old Alternative for Germany, or AfD, won 21 to 22 percent of votes in the election for the state legislature in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, according to projections for ARD and ZDF television based on exit polls and partial counting. They put support for Merkel's Christian Democrats between 19 and 20 percent, their worst result yet in the state. "Berlin 2016". 19 September 2016. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 19 September 2016. Bender, Ruth (1 May 2016). "Germany's AfD Adopts Anti-Islam Stance at Party Conference". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 May 2019. Retrieved 5 March 2017. Shotter, James (May 2016). "Germany's AfD party adopts anti-Islamic manifesto". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 September 2016. Retrieved 1 May 2016. Bellon, Tina (1 May 2016). "Anti-immigrant AfD says Muslims are not welcome in Germany". The Independent. Archived from the original on 3 May 2016. "German fury at AfD Hoecke's Holocaust memorial remark". BBC. 18 January 2017. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2021. Huggler, Justin (21 April 2017). "German far-right leader stuns party by quitting chancellor race". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2021. Wehner, Markus (28 February 2015). "AfD-Vizechef im Porträt – Die drei Leben des Alexander Gauland". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2021. Troianovski, Anton (23 April 2017). "Head of Germany's Upstart Anti-Immigrant Party Pushed Aside". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 27 December 2021. "CDU/CSU remains strongest parliamentary group in the Bundestag despite losses". German Bundestag. 27 September 2017. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 27 September 2017. "Bundestagswahl am 24. September 2017". Wahlrecht.de (in German). Archived from the original on 26 September 2017. Retrieved 26 September 2017. "Grundmandatsklausel - Die Bundeswahlleiterin" [Basic Mandate Clause - The Federal Returning Officer]. www.bundeswahlleiterin.de (in German). Archived from the original on 12 June 2023. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "Ex-chief of German anti-euro party starts new eurosceptic group". Yahoo News. Agence France-Presse. 19 July 2015. Archived from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 12 May 2023. "Frauke Petry, co-chair of the far-right AfD, to quit the party". Deutsche Welle. 26 September 2017. Archived from the original on 31 May 2020. Retrieved 27 December 2021. Elwazer, Schams; Clarke, Hilary (25 September 2017). "German far-right party AfD in disarray". CNN. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 27 December 2021. "Germany: Frauke Petry's Blue Party dissolves after election routs". Deutsche Welle. 6 November 2019. Archived from the original on 6 January 2020. Retrieved 27 December 2021. "Warum Poggenburg zurücktreten musste". Der Spiegel. 8 March 2018. Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. Ninz, Ulrike (8 March 2018). "Wer glaubt, die AfD mäßigt sich, liegt falsch". Süddeutsche Zeitung. Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. "André Poggenburg tritt aus seiner rechtsnationalen Partei ADPM aus". RND. 12 August 2019. Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. Schwichtenberg, Leonie; Zehnter, Lisa (2 August 2021). "Das Wahlprogramm der Alternative für Deutschland zur Bundestagswahl 2021" [The election manifesto of the Alternative for Germany for the 2021 federal election]. Democracy (in German). Manifesto Project. Archived from the original on 23 October 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2021. "Germany's far-right populist AfD: No gains, small losses". Deutsche Welle. 27 September 2021. Archived from the original on 26 October 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2021. "Germany: Far-right AfD co-chair Jörg Meuthen quits party". Deutsche Welle. 28 January 2022. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. Kurmayer, Nikolaus J. (28 January 2022). "Far-right AfD chief Jörg Meuthen quits party". www.euractiv.com. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. "Germany: SPD maintains winning streak in Saarland vote". Deutsche Welle. 27 March 2022. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 10 May 2022. Martus, Theresa (9 May 2022). "AfD: Machtkämpfe in der Partei – Wird Meuthens Prophezeiung wahr?". www.morgenpost.de (in German). Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 10 May 2022. "Social Democrats win Lower Saxony election – DW – 10/09/2022". dw.com. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "Berlin: Conservatives projected to win repeated vote". Deutsche Welle. 13 February 2023. Archived from the original on 13 February 2023. Retrieved 18 May 2023. Marsh, Sarah; Rinke, Andreas; Marsh, Sarah (14 May 2023). "Scholz's Social Democrats win Bremen state vote, Greens slump". Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 May 2023. Retrieved 18 May 2023. "AfD in Bremen nicht zur Bürgerschaftswahl zugelassen". Sueddeutsche Zeitung (in German). 17 March 2023. Archived from the original on 25 June 2023. Retrieved 9 July 2023. "German far-right party wins its first county leadership post as it rises in polls". ABC News. Associated Press. 25 June 2023. Archived from the original on 27 June 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. "Germany: Far-right AfD wins first governing post". Deutsche Welle. 25 June 2023. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. "Germany's far-right AfD wins vote to lead district for first time". Reuters. 26 June 2023. Archived from the original on 25 July 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. "Muss Sesselmann gehen? Das sagen die Experten". www.fr.de (in German). 2 July 2023. Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. ""Wähler wollen diese Partei": Chef der Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung über AfD - WELT". DIE WELT (in German). 2 July 2023. Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. "Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung: AfD-Erfolg ist mehr als "Protest"". tagesschau.de (in German). Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. mdr.de. "Hannes Loth wird erster hauptamtlicher AfD-Bürgermeister in Deutschland | MDR.DE". www.mdr.de (in German). Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. "Sachsen-Anhalt: Erster AfD-Bürgermeister Deutschlands in Raguhn-Jeßnitz gewählt". Der Spiegel (in German). 2 July 2023. ISSN 2195-1349. Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. deutschlandfunk.de. "Sachsen-Anhalt - Deutschlandweit erster AfD-Bürgermeister in Raguhn-Jeßnitz". Die Nachrichten (in German). Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. Retrieved 2 July 2023. Kinkartz, Sabine (7 July 2023). "Poll: Far-right AfD is Germany's second strongest party". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 9 July 2023. Retrieved 9 July 2023. Jackson, James (13 August 2023). "Germany considers ban on far-Right AfD". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 13 August 2023. Retrieved 13 August 2023. mdr.de. "Oberbürgermeisterwahl in Pirna: Kandidat Lochner gewinnt für AfD | MDR.DE". www.mdr.de (in German). Archived from the original on 11 January 2024. Retrieved 17 December 2023. "Secret plan against Germany". Correctiv. 15 January 2024. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 21 January 2024. "Germany: AfD disputes 'remigration' investigative report". Deutsche Welle. 10 January 2024. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 21 January 2024. "German far-right party assailed over report of extremist meeting". Associated Press. 18 January 2024. Archived from the original on 18 January 2024. Retrieved 21 January 2024. Tanno, Sophie (20 January 2024). "Germany's far-right AfD face mounting protests over plan to deport migrants". CNN. Archived from the original on 20 January 2024. Retrieved 21 January 2024. "Germany's Scholz condemns alleged plot by far-right groups to deport millions if they take power". Associated Press. 11 January 2024. Archived from the original on 17 January 2024. Retrieved 21 January 2024. "Tens of thousands protest in Germany against the far-right". Al Jazeera. 20 January 2024. Archived from the original on 20 January 2024. Retrieved 21 January 2024. dta. "Partei". Alternative für Deutschland (in German). Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2021. Havertz, Ralf (2021). Radical Right Populism in Germany: AfD, Pegida, and the Identitarian Movement. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-000-36886-4. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 31 October 2021 – via Google Books. Caiani, Manuela; Císař, Ondřej (2018). Radical Right Movement Parties in Europe. Routledge. ISBN 9781351342797. Gedmin, Jeffrey (4 December 2019). "How 'populist' is the AfD?". Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 1 November 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2021. Payerhin, Mayek (2017). Nordic, Central, and Southeastern Europe 2017-2018. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 254. "German party says 'no' to the euro, 'yes' to the EU". Deutsche Welle. 11 March 2013. Archived from the original on 21 January 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2019. * Stijn van Kessel (2015). Populist Parties in Europe: Agents of Discontent?. Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 61–62. ISBN 978-1-137-41411-3. Wayne C. Thompson (2014). Nordic, Central, and Southeastern Europe 2014. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 283. ISBN 978-1-4758-1224-4. Lee McGowan; David Phinnemore (2015). A Dictionary of the European Union. Taylor & Francis. pp. 23–24. ISBN 978-1-317-44515-9. Arzheimer, Kai (2015). "The AfD: Finally a Successful Right-Wing Populist Eurosceptic Party for Germany". West European Politics. 38 (3): 535–556. doi:10.1080/01402382.2015.1004230. S2CID 14613344. Archived from the original on 3 February 2020. Retrieved 3 February 2020. Wayne C. Thompson, ed. (2015). Nordic, Central, and Southeastern Europe 2015–2016. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 246. ISBN 978-1-4758-1883-3. "AfD Grundsatzprogramm" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 November 2020. Retrieved 29 May 2020. "The rise of Germany's AfD: From ordoliberalism to new right nationalism and into the Bundestag?". LSE. 27 June 2017. Archived from the original on 17 February 2020. Retrieved 17 February 2020. Orde, Sabine am (29 June 2016). "AfD vor dem Parteitag: National-sozial vs. national-liberal". Die Tageszeitung. Archived from the original on 27 March 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2020. Ewing, Jack (19 June 2014). "A German Voice, Hans-Olaf Henkel, Calls for Euro's Abolition". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 August 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2020. "German Eurosceptic leader Lucke sets up Alfa party". BBC. 20 July 2015. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2020. Werner, Alban. "Germany's Shift to the Right". Jacobin. Archived from the original on 24 September 2017. Retrieved 2 October 2017. "Bavarian AfD wants to shut down mosques". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 24 September 2017. Retrieved 2 October 2017. "German Muslims fear more radical AfD without Petry in election race". Reuters. 20 April 2017. Archived from the original on 23 October 2021. "Germany: Former AfD leader Frauke Petry charged with perjury". BBC. 4 October 2017. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2020. "The leader of Germany's far-right party quit hours after its election success—because it's too radical". Quartz. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2020. Arzheimer, Kai (2019). "Don't mention the war! How populist right-wing radicalism became (almost) normal in Germany". Journal of Common Market Studies. 57: 90–102. doi:10.1111/jcms.12920. S2CID 211346942. Archived from the original on 3 February 2020. Retrieved 3 February 2020. "Germany's Far-Right Party Is Worse Than the Rest of Europe's". Foreign Policy. 26 January 2024. "How dangerous is the Identitarian Movement?". Deutsche Welle. 13 July 2019. Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2021. "Germany's far-right AfD set to embrace anti-Islam PEGIDA". Reuters. 22 February 2018. Archived from the original on 31 October 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2021. "Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz stuft AfD-Teilorganisation "Der Flügel" als gesichert rechtsextremistische Bestrebung ein" (in German). Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz. 12 March 2020. Archived from the original on 18 March 2020. Retrieved 31 October 2021. "Verfassungsschutz stuft "Flügel" als rechtsextrem ein - DER SPIEGEL - Politik". Der Spiegel (in German). 12 March 2020. Archived from the original on 13 March 2020. Retrieved 13 March 2020. Bennhold, Katrin (3 March 2021). "Germany Places Far-Right AfD Party Under Surveillance for Extremism". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 March 2021. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "Germany to spy on far-right AfD party, reports say". 4 March 2021. Archived from the original on 20 June 2022. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "Germany places entire far-right AfD under surveillance — reports". Deutsche Welle. 3 March 2021. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 5 March 2021. Chazan, Guy (5 March 2021). "German court bars surveillance of far-right AfD". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 29 March 2021. "German court blocks surveillance of far-right AfD". The Local Germany. 5 March 2021. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 29 March 2021. "German court suspends surveillance of far-right AfD, for now". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 25 September 2021. Retrieved 29 March 2021. Agence France-Presse (26 April 2023). "Germany labels youth wing of far-right AfD party as extremist group". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 6 June 2023. Retrieved 14 August 2023. Rinke, Andreas; Marsh, Sarah (26 April 2023). "German spy agency ranks youth group of far-right AfD 'extremist'". Reuters. Archived from the original on 25 July 2023. Retrieved 14 August 2023. "Germany's AfD: How right-wing is nationalist Alternative for Germany?". BBC News. 11 February 2020. Archived from the original on 17 January 2019. Retrieved 7 July 2018. "Can German nationalism ever be normal?". 23 July 2020. Archived from the original on 26 December 2020. Retrieved 16 December 2020. Kamann, Matthias (23 July 2017). ""Alternative Mitte": In der AfD wächst ein zartes Pflänzchen der Mäßigung". Die Welt. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2022 – via www.welt.de. Sebastian Hesse: AfD ringt um Verhältnis zu Pegida Archived 4 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine, MDR, 2 March 2018. "Die Organisation der AfD". BPB.de. 26 October 2020. Archived from the original on 4 June 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2021. "'Nazi word' revived by German AfD chief". BBC. 12 September 2016. Archived from the original on 26 April 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Chambers, Madeline (18 January 2017). "German AfD rightist triggers fury with Holocaust memorial comments". Reuters. Archived from the original on 8 March 2018. Retrieved 7 March 2018. Dearden, Lizzie (19 January 2017). "German AfD politician 'attacks Holocaust memorial' and says Germans should be more positive about Nazi past". The Independent. Archived from the original on 24 January 2017. Retrieved 7 March 2018. "Far-right Germans call to ban circumcision and minarets". Politico. 11 March 2016. Archived from the original on 1 November 2021. Retrieved 1 November 2021. "Manifesto for Germany: The Political Programme of the Alternative for Germany" (PDF). Alternative for Germany. 12 April 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 February 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2021. "Factsheet: Alternative for Germany (Alternative für Deutschland/AfD)". Bridge Initiative. Georgetown University. 7 April 2020. Archived from the original on 24 November 2022. Retrieved 24 November 2022. "The myth of Eurabia: how a far-right conspiracy theory went mainstream". The Guardian. 16 August 2019. Archived from the original on 19 April 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2022. 'Europeans, vote for AfD, so that Europe will never become 'Eurabia'!' Perwee, Ed (2020). "Donald Trump, the anti-Muslim far right and the new conservative revolution". Ethnic and Racial Studies. 43 (16): 211–230. doi:10.1080/01419870.2020.1749688. S2CID 218843237. Aked, H.; Jones, M.; Miller, D. (2019). "Islamophobia in Europe: How governments are enabling the far-right 'counter-jihad' movement" (PDF). Spinwatch Public Interest Investigations. University of Bristol: 32-33. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 March 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2022. Othen, Christopher (15 August 2018). Soldiers of a Different God: How the Counter-Jihad Movement Created Mayhem, Murder and the Trump Presidency. Amberley Publishing. pp. 19, 233, 271. ISBN 9781445678009. Archived from the original on 15 July 2023. Retrieved 22 June 2023. "Jewish supporters of far-right AfD party favor kosher ban". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 1 November 2021. Retrieved 1 November 2021. "Manifesto for Germany" (PDF). Alternative for Germany. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 February 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2021. "Entwurf für AfD-Programm: Neue Asylpolitik, alte Genderrollen". Die tageszeitung. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Retrieved 24 March 2016. Treeck, Johanna (2 July 2017). "Germany's AfD threatens law suit over gay marriage". Politico. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 31 October 2021. Heni, Clemens (1 August 2016). "Germany's Hot New Party Thinks America is 'Run by Zionists'". Tablet Magazine. Archived from the original on 12 February 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2017. Kemper, Andraes (March 2014). "Keimzelle der Nation? Familien- und geschlechter-politische Positionen der AfD – eine Expertise" [Germ cell of the nation? Family and gender political positions of the AfD – an expertise] (PDF). Friedrich Ebert Stiftung Forum Politik und Gesellschaft (in German). Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 August 2023. Retrieved 8 March 2017. "Anti-euro party turns anti-feminist". The Local Germany. Thelocal.de. 31 March 2014. Archived from the original on 31 January 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2017. "AfD-Kandidatin Alice Weidel mit Coming-out auf der Wahlkampf-Bühne: "Ich bin homosexuell"". RTL Next (in German). 21 September 2017. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017. Retrieved 27 December 2021. Steiner, Thomas (23 April 2017). "Das neue Gesicht der AfD: Wer ist eigentlich Alice Weidel?". Badische Zeitung (in German). Archived from the original on 1 May 2017. Retrieved 27 December 2021. "AfD-Frontfrau Alice Weidel hat einen Wohnsitz in der Schweiz". Die Welt (in German). 29 April 2017. Archived from the original on 27 August 2017. Retrieved 27 December 2021. Knight, Ben (7 March 2016). "What does the AfD stand for?". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 19 January 2017. It's skeptical of climate change and against Germany's energy transition. Küppers, Anne (29 March 2022). "'Climate-Soviets,' 'Alarmism,' and 'Eco-Dictatorship': The Framing of Climate Change Scepticism by the Populist Radical Right Alternative for Germany". German Politics. 33: 1–21. doi:10.1080/09644008.2022.2056596. ISSN 0964-4008. S2CID 247809772. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 1 August 2022. Alternative für Deutschland (2021). Deutschland aber normal. Programm der Alternative für Deutschland für die Wahl zum 20. Deutschen Bundestag (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 September 2021. Retrieved 1 August 2022. "The global campaign to make environmental destruction an international crime". POLITICO. 8 April 2021. Archived from the original on 10 July 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. "Alternative für Deutschland Zurück zur Wehrpflicht". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). 9 March 2016. ISSN 0174-4909. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Retrieved 24 March 2016. Die USA von Biden & Soros sind nicht unser Freund! Petr Bystron - AfD-Fraktion im Bundestag, archived from the original on 30 June 2023, retrieved 7 June 2023 Brandt, Linda (2015). "Populist Parties in Germany, France, and the UK: Growing Support for a Radical Rejection of Globalization?". International ResearchScape Journal. 3: 19. doi:10.25035/irj.03.01.04. Archived from the original on 23 June 2017. Retrieved 1 March 2018. Likewise, the AfD professes its desire to maintain an intimate security relationship with the US, stating NATO is, and remains, the bond of a transatlantic security architecture, whose crucial anchor is the alliance with the USA."38 However, it also expresses a need for a closer relationship with Russia to resolve problems in Eastern Europe. However, a resolution passed that calls for an end to European sanctions imposed on Russia, and to abstain from further measures designed to bind Ukraine and EU or Ukraine and Russia closer together, has led some to charge the party with anti-Americanism.39 The debate about a more pro-American or pro-Russian course appears to divide the AfD deeply, and opinions differ significantly among even the party leadership, as a Die Welt article reports. Chesnokov, Edvard (9 March 2019). Глава партии «Альтернатива для Германии» Александр Гауланд: Ситуация в Донбассе — это внутреннее дело России и Украины Archived 14 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine (in Russian). Komsomolskaya Pravda. Retrieved 9 March 2019. Stefan (1 September 2021). "Hampel: Die Rolle der USA als Weltpolizist ist ausgespielt". AfD-Fraktion im deutschen Bundestag (in German). Archived from the original on 15 July 2023. Retrieved 7 June 2023. Rebecca (8 February 2022). "Joachim Wundrak: Scholz gibt Richtlinienkompetenz an Biden ab". AfD-Fraktion im deutschen Bundestag (in German). Archived from the original on 7 June 2023. Retrieved 7 June 2023. "Tino Chrupalla: Vorwürfe von Seymour Hersh untersuchen". AfD-Fraktion im deutschen Bundestag (Press release) (in German). 23 March 2023. Archived from the original on 3 June 2023. Retrieved 7 June 2023. Rebecca (30 June 2022). "Tino Chrupalla: Neue Nato-Strategie treibt Keil in den Kontinent Europa". AfD-Fraktion im deutschen Bundestag (in German). Archived from the original on 15 July 2023. Retrieved 7 June 2023. "AfD chief Lucke denies plans to split the party". Deutsche Welle. 19 May 2015. Archived from the original on 10 August 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2019. "The Far Right Wants to Gut the EU, Not Kill It". The Atlantic. 7 May 2019. Archived from the original on 15 June 2019. Retrieved 8 September 2019. "AfD party congress over "Dexit"". Zeit Online. 12 January 2019. Archived from the original on 26 April 2019. Retrieved 8 September 2019. "AfD party congress: Back to a 'Europe of nations'". Euractiv. 14 January 2019. Archived from the original on 3 September 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2019. "Far-right AfD calls for 'normal' Germany at conference | DW | 11.04.2021". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 11 April 2021. "Parteitag in Dresden: AfD bläst Kandidatenkür ab". 10 April 2021. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 11 April 2021. "AfD". tagesschau.de. Archived from the original on 30 March 2020. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "German far-right MP pushes recognition of Jerusalem as Israel's capital". The Times of Israel. 17 April 2018. Archived from the original on 1 May 2019. Retrieved 8 January 2019. "AfD: A New Hurdle in the German-Israeli Relationship?". besacenter.org. Begin–Sadat Center for Strategic Studies. 28 November 2017. Archived from the original on 8 July 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2018. "AfD streitet über Israel-Unterstützung". ZDF Heute. 15 October 2023. Archived from the original on 26 December 2023. Retrieved 26 December 2023. "Where does Europe's far right stand on the Israel-Hamas war?". Deutsche Welle. 18 November 2023. Archived from the original on 26 December 2023. Retrieved 26 December 2023. Tkachenko, Martin Laine (Eesti Ekspress), Cecilia Anesi (IrpiMedia), Lorenzo Bagnoli (IrpiMedia), and Tatiana. "Kremlin-Linked Group Arranged Payments to European Politicians to Support Russia's Annexation of Crimea". OCCRP. Archived from the original on 4 February 2023. Retrieved 4 February 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Kastner, Jens (20 April 2023). "China finds unlikely allies in Germany's far right and far left". Nikkei Asia. Archived from the original on 11 May 2023. Retrieved 12 May 2023. "Exclusive: Far-right German parliamentary aide tasked by Russia with stopping Leopard tanks to Ukraine". The Insider (in Russian). 4 August 2023. Bildung, Bundeszentrale für politische. "Mitgliederentwicklung der Parteien | Infografiken | Parteien in Deutschland | bpb". bpb.de (in German). Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 21 August 2018. "Home - Alternative für Deutschland". www.afd.de (in German). Archived from the original on 26 August 2019. Retrieved 21 August 2018. "Home - Alternative für Deutschland". www.afd.de (in German). Archived from the original on 26 August 2019. Retrieved 17 October 2018. "Party members: Greens gain, AfD and SPD lose". RedaktionsNetzwerk Deutschland (in German). 14 February 2021. Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. Retrieved 12 May 2021. Petterdorff-Campen, Winand von (21 April 2013). ""Alternative für Deutschland" Haste mal 'ne Mark?" (in German). Archived from the original on 18 September 2013. Retrieved 21 September 2013. Verzählt – Nachschlag für die AfD in Frankfurt (in German, Subsidies for AfD). Archived 17 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine Die Welt. 28 September 2013 AfD erhält rund 400 Millionen Euro vom Staat Archived 11 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Lamparski, NIna (12 May 2014). "Germany's youth rebels against EU". BBC. Archived from the original on 12 May 2014. Retrieved 12 May 2014. Krass, Sebastian (31 March 2014). "Zu weit rechts". Süddeutsche Zeitung (in German). Archived from the original on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 12 May 2014. White, J. Arthur (31 March 2014). "Anti-euro party turns anti-feminist". The Local Germany. Archived from the original on 23 May 2014. Retrieved 11 May 2014. "Anti-feminist campaign targets German gender quota proposal". Al Jazeera. 1 April 2014. Archived from the original on 23 May 2014. Retrieved 12 May 2014. "EUROPE ONLINE". en.europeonline-magazine.eu. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "AfD: EU-Abgeordneter Pretzell wechselt zur Front-National-Fraktion". Die Zeit. 30 April 2016. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 30 April 2016. "Frauke Petry founded 'Blue party' ahead of national elections - reports". Deutsche Welle. 12 October 2017. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2020. "Germany's AfD joins Italy's League in new populist coalition". Deutsche Welle. 8 April 2019. Archived from the original on 30 December 2021. Retrieved 24 November 2020. "Far-right parties form new group in European Parliament". Deutsche Welle. 14 June 2019. Archived from the original on 14 June 2019. Retrieved 24 November 2020. "Germanys far-right AfD to join European far-right coalition party". @ToroczkaiLaszlo (28 July 2022). "Megmutattam a 19. Magyar Sziget fesztivál külföldi vendégeinek, szövetségeseinknek, a magyar-szerb határon a kerítést és a határvédelmet" (Tweet) – via Twitter. @MilanUhrik (26 January 2023). "Tanky proti Rusku na Ukrajine ⁉️" (Tweet) – via Twitter. ""Възраждане" води депутати от "Алтернатива за Германия" на Шипка". 3 March 2024. "Ungersk partiledare talar på valupptakten". alternativforsverige.se (in Swedish). Retrieved 1 September 2022. ""We Are Their Voice": German Far-Right Builds Balkan Alliances". 24 October 2019. Archived from the original on 4 February 2023. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "Đurđević Stamenkovski dobila podršku čelnika AFD u Bundestagu". Beta. 17 November 2023. Wittrock, Philipp (12 April 2013). "The Know-It-All Party: Anti-Euro 'Alternative for Germany' Launches". Der Spiegel. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 13 May 2013. Nicholas Kulish and Melissa Eddy, German elites drawn to anti-Euro party, spelling trouble for Merkel Archived 17 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine The New York Times (15 April 2013) Connelly, Kate (14 April 2013). "Leading German economist calls for dissolution of eurozone to save EU". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 22 May 2013. Scally, Derek (13 April 2013). "Upstart political party challenges Germany's consensus on the euro". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 16 May 2013. Barkin, Noah (14 April 2013). "Analysis: Don't underestimate Germany's new anti-euro party". Reuters. Archived from the original on 10 March 2016. Retrieved 21 May 2013. Mayntz, Gregor (24 April 2013). "AfD hat schon fast 10.000 Mitglieder". Rheinische Post (in German). Archived from the original on 15 October 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2013. Schneider, Theo. "Neo-Nazis rally against Alternative for Germany party congress". demotix.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2013. Alling, Daniel (13 March 2013). "Nytt eurokritiskt parti i Tyskland". Sveriges Radio (in Swedish). Archived from the original on 27 May 2020. Retrieved 19 May 2013. Alexander, Harriet; Jeevan Vasagar (7 April 2013). "Bernd Lucke interview: 'Why Germany has had enough of the euro'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 13 May 2013. Heine, Friederike (14 August 2013). "Hard Knocks for Anti-Euro Party". Der Spiegel. Archived from the original on 2 June 2023. Retrieved 15 August 2013. Hebel, Christina (1 October 2013). ""Die Freiheit": Anti-Islam-Partei will sich der AfD anschließen". Der Spiegel (in German). Archived from the original on 18 November 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2013. Leber, Fabian (1 October 2013). "Alternative für Deutschland und "Die Freiheit" Islamkritiker empfehlen jetzt die AfD". Der Tagesspiegel (in German). Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2013. Stern (14 September 2017). "SPD fällt in Umfrage auf 20 Prozent". Stern. Archived from the original on 14 September 2017. Retrieved 15 September 2017. Beale, Charlotte (31 January 2016). "Refugees should be shot "if necessary", says party leader in Germany". The Independent. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Mack, Steffen; Serif, Walter (30 January 2016). "Sie können es nicht lassen!". Mannheimer Morgen (in German). Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016. Huggler, Justin (10 December 2014). "German Eurosceptics embrace anti-Islam protests". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2014. Withnall, Adam (15 December 2014). "Germany sees 'visible rise' in support for far-right extremism in response to perceived 'Islamisation' of the West". The Independent. Archived from the original on 16 December 2014. Retrieved 17 December 2014. "Gone boy on the right: How an anti-foreigner, anti-establishment group is changing German politics". The Economist. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 2 November 2016. "Germany's far-right AfD: Victim or victor?". BBC. 2 September 2019. Archived from the original on 10 September 2021. Retrieved 25 October 2020. The AfD ran a politically savvy campaign. It tapped into historical grievances in former communist eastern Germany, by co-opting phrases from the dissident movement that brought down the Berlin Wall 30 years ago. The AfD posters demanded a "Wende 2.0", using the German word for the peaceful revolution that brought down East German communism, and the AfD leaders compared Mrs Merkel's government to the Stasi secret police. "Scharfe Kritik an Marx-Denkmal von der AfD". Focus.de. 5 May 2018. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 23 January 2019. "Karl Marx statue from China adds to German angst". BBC News. 5 May 2018. Archived from the original on 22 June 2019. Retrieved 23 January 2019. Polke-Majewski, Karsten (18 February 2016). "Björn Höcke: Mein Mitschüler, der rechte Agitator". Die Zeit. Archived from the original on 31 May 2019. Retrieved 19 April 2017. "Landtagswahl 2014: Welche Koalitionen sind in Thüringen möglich?"". Thüringische Landeszeitung. 16 July 2014. "AfD Vorstand Thüringen". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 19 April 2017. "Thüringen: Ausschuss hebt Immunität von AfD-Fraktionschef Höcke auf". Der Spiegel. 3 July 2015. Archived from the original on 19 April 2023. Retrieved 19 April 2017. "AfD-Mann Höcke löst mit Kritik an Holocaust-Gedenken Empörung aus". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). 18 January 2017. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 2 June 2020. Matthias Kamann (19 January 2017). "Was Höcke mit der "Denkmal der Schande"-Rede bezweckt". Die Welt (in German). Archived from the original on 23 October 2023. Retrieved 19 April 2017. "AfD-Chefin Petry: "Höcke ist eine Belastung für die Partei"". Junge Freiheit (in German). 18 January 2017. Archived from the original on 4 June 2023. Retrieved 19 April 2017. "Germany's right-wing AfD seeks to expel state leader over Holocaust remarks". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 7 June 2023. Retrieved 19 April 2017. Oltermann, Philip (16 September 2019). "AfD politician threatens journalist after Hitler comparison". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. "Bundestagswahl am 22. September 2013". Wahlrecht.de (in German). Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2017. "Wahlergebnisse – Europawahl (Europaparlament)". wahlrecht.de (in German). Archived from the original on 29 May 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2017. Arzheimer, Kai, and Carl C. Berning. "How the alternative for Germany (AfD) and their voters veered to the radical right, 2013–2017." Electoral Studies 60 (2019): 102040. Berbuir, Nicole, Marcel Lewandowsky, and Jasmin Siri. "The AfD and its sympathisers: Finally a right-wing populist movement in Germany?." German Politics 24.2 (2015): 154-178 online[permanent dead link]. Diermeier, Matthias. "The AfD’s Winning Formula—No Need for Economic Strategy Blurring in Germany." Intereconomics 55.1 (2020): 43–52. online Franz, Christian, Marcel Fratzscher, and Alexander Kritikos. "At opposite poles: How the success of the Green Party and AfD reflects the geographical and social cleavages in Germany." DIW Weekly Report 9.34 (2019): 289–300. online Pfahl-Traughber, Armin (2019). Die AfD und der Rechtsextremismus: Eine Analyse aus politikwissenschaftlicher Perspektive. Springer VS, ISBN 978-3-658-25179-6. Hansen, Michael A., and Jonathan Olsen. "Flesh of the same flesh: A study of voters for the alternative for Germany (AfD) in the 2017 federal election." German Politics 28.1 (2019): 1–19. online[permanent dead link] Havertz, Ralf. "Right-wing populism and neoliberalism in Germany: The AfD’s embrace of ordoliberalism." New Political Economy 24.3 (2019): 385–403. Küppers, Anne. "'Climate-Soviets,' 'Alarmism,' and 'Eco-Dictatorship': The Framing of Climate Change Scepticism by the Populist Radical Right Alternative for Germany." German Politics (2022) online. Rosellini, Jay. The German New Right: AfD, PEGIDA and the Re-Imagining of National Identity (Hurst, 2020) online review Spiegel Online's Guide to German Political Parties: Alternative for Germany Wikimedia Commons has media related to Alternative for Germany. Official website (in German) Manifesto for Germany: The Political Programme for the Alternative for Germany (2017, English translation)