Lian Li Industrial Co., Ltd. (Chinese: 聯力工業股份有限公司; pinyin: Lián Lì Gōngyè Gǔfènyǒuxiàngōngsī; lit. 'allied force industry') is a Taiwanese computer case and accessories manufacturer. It is one of the largest manufacturers of aluminium computer cases in Taiwan and is also a major world competitor in the premium aftermarket computer case industry. Lian Li cases are constructed with either brushed or anodised aluminium and are lightweight and offered in silver, black, grey, golden, red, blue, and green shades. In addition to their various cases, they produce aluminum desks, power supplies and accessories such as window kits, CPU coolers, Liquid CPU Coolers, fans, removable hard drive bays, bezel covers, and memory card readers. The company also provides OEM and ODM services.[citation needed] Lian Li Industrial Co., Ltd. was founded in 1983. Lian Li has its headquarters in the Liudu Industrial Park (六堵工業區, Liùdǔ Gōngyèqū) in Keelung. In 2009 Lian Li launched LanCool as a subsidiary to produce cases without their signature aluminium in an effort to bring costs down. These cases feature a tool-less architecture aimed at gamers and PC enthusiasts. With LanCool producing the non-aluminium midtower cases, Lian Li is well known as a high-end aluminium chassis manufacturer. In August 2018, after years without new product releases, Lian Li revived the LanCool branding and presented the LanCool One chassis featuring tempered glass panels and RGB lighting. List of companies of Taiwan Antec Cooler Master NZXT Razer Thermaltake Zalman Taiwan portal Companies portal Case modding "LanCool Dragon Lord PC-K62 Advanced Mid Tower Case". 23 September 2009. "About Us Archived 2011-11-17 at the Wayback Machine." Lian Li. Retrieved on 17 November 2011. "Headquarters Lian Li Industrial Co., LTD Address: No.11-1, Kong-Chien N. Rd., Liu-Tu Industrial Park, 206 Keelung, Taiwan." "關於我們 Archived 2011-11-24 at the Wayback Machine." Lian Li. Retrieved on 17 November 2011. "地址：基隆市六堵工業區工建北路11-1號" "Lian-Li LanCool PC-K62 and PC-K56 review". "Lian Li Presents LANCOOL ONE Chassis". Vortez. Retrieved 2018-10-31. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lian Li. Official homepage (in English) v t e