Connecticut (/kəˈnɛtɪkət/ kə-NET-ik-ət) is the southernmost state in the New England region of the Northeastern United States. It borders Rhode Island to its east, Massachusetts to its north, New York to its west, and Long Island Sound to its south. Its capital is Hartford, and its most populous city is Bridgeport. Historically, the state is part of New England as well as the tri-state area with New York and New Jersey. The state is named for the Connecticut River which approximately bisects the state. The word Connecticut is derived from various anglicized spellings of Quinnetuket, a Mohegan-Pequot word for "long tidal river". As of the 2020 United States census, Connecticut was home to over 3.6 million residents, its highest decennial count ever, growing every decade since 1790. Connecticut's first European settlers were Dutchmen who established a small, short-lived settlement called House of Hope in Hartford at the confluence of the Park and Connecticut Rivers. Half of Connecticut was initially claimed by the Dutch colony New Netherland, which included much of the land between the Connecticut and Delaware Rivers, although the first major settlements were established in the 1630s by the English. Thomas Hooker led a band of followers from the Massachusetts Bay Colony and founded the Connecticut Colony; other settlers from Massachusetts founded the Saybrook Colony and the New Haven Colony. The Connecticut and New Haven colonies established documents of Fundamental Orders, considered the first constitutions in America. In 1662, the three colonies were merged under a royal charter, making Connecticut a crown colony. Connecticut was one of the Thirteen Colonies which rejected British rule in the American Revolution. It was influential in the development of the federal government of the United States. Connecticut is the third-smallest state by area, the 29th most populous, and the fourth most densely populated of the fifty states. It is known as the "Constitution State", the "Nutmeg State", the "Provisions State", and the "Land of Steady Habits". The state identifies as creators, makers, innovators, and entrepreneurs who are a powerful force for good in the country. The state logo is the iconic C+T, with the T recognizable sideways making up the negative space in the C. The Connecticut River, Thames River, and ports along Long Island Sound have given Connecticut a strong maritime tradition which continues today. Connecticut is home to the nation's oldest newspaper, The Hartford Courant, founded in 1764. The state also has a long history of hosting the financial services industry, including insurance companies in Hartford County and hedge funds in Fairfield County. As of the 2010 census, it has the highest per-capita income, second-highest level of human development behind Massachusetts, and highest median household income in the United States. The name Connecticut is derived from the Mohegan-Pequot word that has been translated as "long tidal river" and "upon the long river", both referring to the Connecticut River. Evidence of human presence in the Connecticut region dates to as far back as 10,000 years ago. Stone tools were used for hunting, fishing, and woodworking. Semi-nomadic in lifestyle, these peoples moved seasonally to take advantage of various resources in the area. They shared languages based on Algonquian. The Connecticut region was inhabited by multiple Native American tribes which can be grouped into the Nipmuc, the Sequin or "River Indians" (which included the Tunxis, Schaghticoke, Podunk, Wangunk, Hammonasset, and Quinnipiac), the Mattabesec or "Wappinger Confederacy" and the Pequot-Mohegan. Some of these groups still reside in Connecticut, including the Mohegans, the Pequots, and the Paugusetts. The first European explorer in Connecticut was Dutchman Adriaen Block, who explored the region in 1614. Dutch fur traders then sailed up the Connecticut River, which they called Versche Rivier ("Fresh River"), and built a fort at Dutch Point in Hartford that they named "House of Hope" (Dutch: Huis van Hoop). The Connecticut Colony was originally a number of separate, smaller settlements at Windsor, Wethersfield, Saybrook, Hartford, and New Haven. The first English settlers came in 1633 and settled at Windsor, and then at Wethersfield the following year. John Winthrop the Younger of Massachusetts received a commission to create Saybrook Colony at the mouth of the Connecticut River in 1635. The main body of settlers came in one large group in 1636. They were Puritans from Massachusetts Bay Colony led by Thomas Hooker, who established the Connecticut Colony at Hartford. The Fundamental Orders of Connecticut were adopted in January 1639, and have been described as the first constitutional document in America. The Quinnipiack Colony was established by John Davenport, Theophilus Eaton, and others at New Haven in March 1638. The New Haven Colony had its own constitution called "The Fundamental Agreement of the New Haven Colony", signed on June 4, 1639. The settlements were established without official sanction of the English Crown, and each was an independent political entity. In 1662, Winthrop traveled to England and obtained a charter from Charles II which united the settlements of Connecticut. Historically important colonial settlements included Windsor (1633), Wethersfield (1634), Saybrook (1635), Hartford (1636), New Haven (1638), Fairfield (1639), Guilford (1639), Milford (1639), Stratford (1639), Farmington (1640), Stamford (1641), and New London (1646). The Pequot War marked the first major clash between colonists and Native Americans in New England. The Pequots reacted with increasing aggression to Colonial settlements in their territory—while simultaneously taking lands from the Narragansett and Mohegan tribes. Settlers responded to a murder in 1636 with a raid on a Pequot village on Block Island; the Pequots laid siege to Saybrook Colony's garrison that autumn, then raided Wethersfield in the spring of 1637. Colonists declared war on the Pequots, organized a band of militia and allies from the Mohegan and Narragansett tribes, and attacked a Pequot village on the Mystic River, with death toll estimates ranging between 300 and 700 Pequots. After suffering another major loss at a battle in Fairfield, the Pequots asked for a truce and peace terms. The western boundaries of Connecticut have been subject to change over time. The Hartford Treaty with the Dutch was signed on September 19, 1650, but it was never ratified by the British. According to it, the western boundary of Connecticut ran north from Greenwich Bay for a distance of 20 miles (32 km), "provided the said line come not within 10 miles [16 km] of Hudson River". This agreement was observed by both sides until war erupted between England and The Netherlands in 1652. Conflict continued concerning colonial limits until the Duke of York captured New Netherland in 1664. On the other hand, Connecticut's original Charter in 1662 granted it all the land to the "South Sea"—that is, to the Pacific Ocean. Most Colonial royal grants were for long east–west strips. Connecticut took its grant seriously and established a ninth county between the Susquehanna River and Delaware River named Westmoreland County. This resulted in the brief Pennamite-Yankee Wars with Pennsylvania. Yale College was established in 1701, providing Connecticut with an important institution to educate clergy and civil leaders. The Congregational church dominated religious life in the colony and, by extension, town affairs in many parts. With more than 600 miles (970 km) of coastline including along its navigable rivers, Connecticut developed during its colonial years the antecedents of a maritime tradition that would later produce booms in shipbuilding, marine transport, naval support, seafood production, and leisure boating. Historical records list the Tryall as the first vessel built in Connecticut Colony, in 1649 at a site on the Connecticut River in present-day Wethersfield. In the two decades leading up to 1776 and the American Revolution, Connecticut boatyards launched about 100 sloops, schooners and brigs according to a database of U.S. customs records maintained online by the Mystic Seaport Museum, the largest being the 180-ton Patient Mary launched in New Haven in 1763. Connecticut's first lighthouse was constructed in 1760 at the mouth of the Thames River with the New London Harbor Lighthouse. Connecticut designated four delegates to the Second Continental Congress who signed the Declaration of Independence: Samuel Huntington, Roger Sherman, William Williams, and Oliver Wolcott. Connecticut's legislature authorized the outfitting of six new regiments in 1775, in the wake of the clashes between British regulars and Massachusetts militia at Lexington and Concord. There were some 1,200 Connecticut troops on hand at the Battle of Bunker Hill in June 1775. In 1775, David Bushnell invented the Turtle which the following year launched the first submarine attack in history, unsuccessfully against a British warship at anchor in New York Harbor. In 1777, the British got word of Continental Army supplies in Danbury, and they landed an expeditionary force of some 2,000 troops in Westport. This force then marched to Danbury and destroyed homes and much of the depot. Continental Army troops and militia led by General David Wooster and General Benedict Arnold engaged them on their return march at Ridgefield in 1777. For the winter of 1778–79, General George Washington decided to split the Continental Army into three divisions encircling New York City, where British General Sir Henry Clinton had taken up winter quarters. Major General Israel Putnam chose Redding as the winter encampment quarters for some 3,000 regulars and militia under his command. The Redding encampment allowed Putnam's soldiers to guard the replenished supply depot in Danbury and to support any operations along Long Island Sound and the Hudson River Valley. Some of the men were veterans of the winter encampment at Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, the previous winter. Soldiers at the Redding camp endured supply shortages, cold temperatures, and significant snow, with some historians dubbing the encampment "Connecticut's Valley Forge". The state was also the launching site for a number of raids against Long Island orchestrated by Samuel Holden Parsons and Benjamin Tallmadge, and provided soldiers and material for the war effort, especially to Washington's army outside New York City. General William Tryon raided the Connecticut coast in July 1779, focusing on New Haven, Norwalk, and Fairfield. New London and Groton Heights were raided in September 1781 by Benedict Arnold, who had turned traitor to the British. At the outset of the American Revolution, the Continental Congress assigned Nathaniel Shaw Jr. of New London as its naval agent in charge of recruiting privateers to seize British vessels as opportunities presented, with nearly 50 operating out of the Thames River which eventually drew the reprisal from the British force led by Arnold. Connecticut ratified the U.S. Constitution on January 9, 1788, becoming the fifth state. The state prospered during the era following the American Revolution, as mills and textile factories were built and seaports flourished from trade and fisheries. After Congress established in 1790 the predecessor to the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service that would evolve into the U.S. Coast Guard, President Washington assigned Jonathan Maltbie as one of seven masters to enforce customs regulations, with Maltbie monitoring the southern New England coast with a 48-foot cutter sloop named Argus. In 1786, Connecticut ceded territory to the U.S. government that became part of the Northwest Territory. The state retained land extending across the northern part of present-day Ohio called the Connecticut Western Reserve. The Western Reserve section was settled largely by people from Connecticut, and they brought Connecticut place names to Ohio. Connecticut made agreements with Pennsylvania and New York which extinguished the land claims within those states' boundaries and created the Connecticut Panhandle. The state then ceded the Western Reserve in 1800 to the federal government, which brought it to its present boundaries (other than minor adjustments with Massachusetts). For the first time in 1800, Connecticut shipwrights launched more than 100 vessels in a single year. Over the following decade to the doorstep of renewed hostilities with Britain that sparked the War of 1812, Connecticut boatyards constructed close to 1,000 vessels, the most productive stretch of any decade in the 19th century. During the war, the British launched raids in Stonington and Essex and blockaded vessels in the Thames River. Derby native Isaac Hull became Connecticut's best-known naval figure to win renown during the conflict, as captain of the USS Constitution. The British blockade during the War of 1812 hurt exports and bolstered the influence of Federalists who opposed the war. The cessation of imports from Britain stimulated the construction of factories to manufacture textiles and machinery. Connecticut came to be recognized as a major center for manufacturing, due in part to the inventions of Eli Whitney and other early innovators of the Industrial Revolution. The war led to the development of fast clippers that helped extend the reach of New England merchants to the Pacific and Indian oceans. The first half of the 19th century saw as well a rapid rise in whaling, with New London emerging as one of the New England industry's three biggest home ports after Nantucket and New Bedford. The state was known for its political conservatism, typified by its Federalist party and the Yale College of Timothy Dwight. The foremost intellectuals were Dwight and Noah Webster, who compiled his great dictionary in New Haven. Religious tensions polarized the state, as the Congregational Church struggled to maintain traditional viewpoints, in alliance with the Federalists. The failure of the Hartford Convention in 1814 hurt the Federalist cause, with the Democratic-Republican Party gaining control in 1817. Connecticut had been governed under the "Fundamental Orders" since 1639, but the state adopted a new constitution in 1818. Connecticut manufacturers played a major role in supplying the Union forces with weapons and supplies during the Civil War. The state furnished 55,000 men, formed into thirty full regiments of infantry, including two in the U.S. Colored Troops, with several Connecticut men becoming generals. The Navy attracted 250 officers and 2,100 men, and Glastonbury native Gideon Welles was Secretary of the Navy. James H. Ward of Hartford was the first U.S. Naval Officer killed in the Civil War. Connecticut casualties included 2,088 killed in combat, 2,801 dying from disease, and 689 dying in Confederate prison camps. A surge of national unity in 1861 brought thousands flocking to the colors from every town and city. However, as the war became a crusade to end slavery, many Democrats (especially Irish Catholics) pulled back. The Democrats took a pro-slavery position and included many Copperheads willing to let the South secede. The intensely fought 1863 election for governor was narrowly won by the Republicans. Connecticut's extensive industry, dense population, flat terrain, and wealth encouraged the construction of railroads starting in 1839. By 1840, 102 miles (164 km) of line were in operation, growing to 402 miles (647 km) in 1850 and 601 miles (967 km) in 1860. The New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad, called the New Haven or "The Consolidated", became the dominant Connecticut railroad company after 1872. J. P. Morgan began financing the major New England railroads in the 1890s, dividing territory so that they would not compete. The New Haven purchased 50 smaller companies, including steamship lines, and built a network of light rails (electrified trolleys) that provided inter-urban transportation for all of southern New England. By 1912, the New Haven operated over 2,000 miles (3,200 km) of track with 120,000 employees. As steam-powered passenger ships proliferated after the Civil War, Noank would produce the two largest built in Connecticut during the 19th century, with the 332-foot wooden steam paddle wheeler Rhode Island launched in 1882, and the 345-foot paddle wheeler Connecticut seven years later. Connecticut shipyards would launch more than 165 steam-powered vessels in the 19th century. In 1875, the first telephone exchange in the world was established in New Haven. When World War I broke out in 1914, Connecticut became a major supplier of weaponry to the U.S. military; by 1918, 80% of the state's industries were producing goods for the war effort. Remington Arms in Bridgeport produced half the small-arms cartridges used by the U.S. Army, with other major suppliers including Winchester in New Haven and Colt in Hartford. Connecticut was also an important U.S. Navy supplier, with Electric Boat receiving orders for 85 submarines, Lake Torpedo Boat building more than 20 subs, and the Groton Iron Works building freighters. On June 21, 1916, the Navy made Groton the site for its East Coast submarine base and school. The state enthusiastically supported the American war effort in 1917 and 1918 with large purchases of war bonds, a further expansion of industry, and an emphasis on increasing food production on the farms. Thousands of state, local, and volunteer groups mobilized for the war effort and were coordinated by the Connecticut State Council of Defense. Manufacturers wrestled with manpower shortages; Waterbury's American Brass and Manufacturing Company was running at half capacity, so the federal government agreed to furlough soldiers to work there. In 1919, J. Henry Roraback started the Connecticut Light & Power Co. which became the state's dominant electric utility. In 1925, Frederick Rentschler spurred the creation of Pratt & Whitney in Hartford to develop engines for aircraft; the company became an important military supplier in World War II and one of the three major manufacturers of jet engines in the world. On September 21, 1938, the most destructive storm in New England history struck eastern Connecticut, killing hundreds of people. The eye of the "Long Island Express" passed just west of New Haven and devastated the Connecticut shoreline between Old Saybrook and Stonington from the full force of wind and waves, even though they had partial protection by Long Island. The hurricane caused extensive damage to infrastructure, homes, and businesses. In New London, a 500-foot (150 m) sailing ship was driven into a warehouse complex, causing a major fire. Heavy rainfall caused the Connecticut River to flood downtown Hartford and East Hartford. An estimated 50,000 trees fell onto roadways. The advent of lend-lease in support of Britain helped lift Connecticut from the Great Depression, with the state a major production center for weaponry and supplies used in World War II. Connecticut manufactured 4.1% of total U.S. military armaments produced during the war, ranking ninth among the 48 states, with major factories including Colt for firearms, Pratt & Whitney for aircraft engines, Chance Vought for fighter planes, Hamilton Standard for propellers, and Electric Boat for submarines and PT boats. In Bridgeport, General Electric produced a significant new weapon to combat tanks: the bazooka. On May 13, 1940, Igor Sikorsky made an untethered flight of the first practical helicopter. The helicopter saw limited use in World War II, but future military production made Sikorsky Aircraft's Stratford plant Connecticut's largest single manufacturing site by the start of the 21st century. Connecticut lost some wartime factories following the end of hostilities, but the state shared in a general post-war expansion that included the construction of highways and resulting in middle-class growth in suburban areas. Prescott Bush represented Connecticut in the U.S. Senate from 1952 to 1963; his son George H. W. Bush and grandson George W. Bush both became presidents of the United States. In 1965, Connecticut ratified its current constitution, replacing the document that had served since 1818. In 1968, commercial operation began for the Connecticut Yankee Nuclear Power Plant in Haddam; in 1970, the Millstone Nuclear Power Station began operations in Waterford. In 1974, Connecticut elected Democratic Governor Ella T. Grasso, who became the first woman in any state to be elected governor without being the wife or widow of a previous governor. Connecticut's dependence on the defense industry posed an economic challenge at the end of the Cold War. The resulting budget crisis helped elect Lowell Weicker as governor on a third-party ticket in 1990. Weicker's remedy was a state income tax which proved effective in balancing the budget, but only for the short-term. He did not run for a second term, in part because of this politically unpopular move. In 1992, initial construction was completed on Foxwoods Casino at the Mashantucket Pequots reservation in eastern Connecticut, which became the largest casino in the Western Hemisphere. Mohegan Sun followed four years later. In 2000, presidential candidate Al Gore chose Senator Joe Lieberman as his running mate, marking the first time that a major party presidential ticket included someone of the Jewish faith. Gore and Lieberman fell five votes short of George W. Bush and Dick Cheney in the Electoral College. In the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, 65 state residents were killed, mostly Fairfield County residents who were working in the World Trade Center. In 2004, Republican Governor John G. Rowland resigned during a corruption investigation, later pleading guilty to federal charges. Connecticut was hit by three major storms in just over 14 months in 2011 and 2012, with all three causing extensive property damage and electric outages. Hurricane Irene struck Connecticut August 28, and damage totaled $235 million. Two months later, the "Halloween nor'easter" dropped extensive snow onto trees, resulting in snapped branches and trunks that damaged power lines; some areas were without electricity for 11 days. Hurricane Sandy hit New Jersey and passed over Connecticut with hurricane-force winds and tides up to 12 feet above normal. Many coastal buildings were damaged or destroyed. Sandy's winds drove storm surges into streets and cut power to 98% of homes and businesses, with more than $360 million in damage. On December 14, 2012, Adam Lanza shot and killed 26 people at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, and then killed himself. The massacre spurred renewed efforts by activists for tighter laws on gun ownership nationally. In the summer and fall of 2016, Connecticut experienced a drought in many parts of the state, causing some water-use bans. As of November 15, 2016 (2016-11-15), 45% of the state was listed at Severe Drought by the U.S. Drought Monitor, including almost all of Hartford and Litchfield counties. All the rest of the state was in Moderate Drought or Severe Drought, including Middlesex, Fairfield, New London, New Haven, Windham, and Tolland counties. This affected the agricultural economy in the state. Connecticut is bordered on the south by Long Island Sound, on the west by New York, on the north by Massachusetts, and on the east by Rhode Island. The state capital and fourth largest city is Hartford, and other major cities and towns (by population) include Bridgeport, New Haven, Stamford, Waterbury, Norwalk, Danbury, New Britain, Greenwich, and Bristol. There are 169 incorporated towns in Connecticut, with cities and villages included within some towns. The highest peak in Connecticut is Bear Mountain in Salisbury in the northwest corner of the state. The highest point is just east of where Connecticut, Massachusetts, and New York meet (42°3′ N, 73°29′ W), on the southern slope of Mount Frissell, whose peak lies nearby in Massachusetts. At the opposite extreme, many of the coastal towns have areas that are less than 20 feet (6.1 m) above sea level. Connecticut has a long maritime history and a reputation based on that history—yet the state has no direct oceanfront (technically speaking). The coast of Connecticut sits on Long Island Sound, which is an estuary. The state's access to the open Atlantic Ocean is both to the west (toward New York City) and to the east (toward the "race" near Rhode Island). Due to this unique geography, Long Island Sound and the Connecticut shoreline are relatively protected from high waves from storms. The Connecticut River cuts through the center of the state, flowing into Long Island Sound. The most populous metropolitan region centered within the state lies in the Connecticut River Valley. Despite Connecticut's relatively small size, it features wide regional variations in its landscape; for example, in the northwestern Litchfield Hills, it features rolling mountains and horse farms, whereas in areas to the east of New Haven along the coast, the landscape features coastal marshes, beaches, and large scale maritime activities. Connecticut's rural areas and small towns in the northeast and northwest corners of the state contrast sharply with its industrial cities such as Stamford, Bridgeport, and New Haven, located along the coastal highways from the New York border to New London, then northward up the Connecticut River to Hartford. Many towns in northeastern and northwestern Connecticut center around a green. Near the green typically stand historical visual symbols of New England towns, such as a white church, a colonial meeting house, a colonial tavern or inn, several colonial houses, and so on, establishing a scenic historical appearance maintained for both historic preservation and tourism. Many of the areas in southern and coastal Connecticut have been built up and rebuilt over the years, and look less visually like traditional New England. The northern boundary of the state with Massachusetts is marked by the Southwick Jog or Granby Notch, an approximately 2.5 miles (4.0 km) square detour into Connecticut. The origin of this anomaly is clearly established in a long line of disputes and temporary agreements which were finally concluded in 1804, when southern Southwick's residents sought to leave Massachusetts, and the town was split in half. The southwestern border of Connecticut where it abuts New York State is marked by a panhandle in Fairfield County, containing the towns of Greenwich, Stamford, New Canaan, Darien, and parts of Norwalk and Wilton. This irregularity in the boundary is the result of territorial disputes in the late 17th century, culminating with New York giving up its claim to the area, whose residents considered themselves part of Connecticut, in exchange for an equivalent area extending northwards from Ridgefield to the Massachusetts border, as well as undisputed claim to Rye, New York. Areas maintained by the National Park Service include Appalachian National Scenic Trail, Quinebaug and Shetucket Rivers Valley National Heritage Corridor, and Weir Farm National Historic Site. Connecticut lies at the rough transition zone between the southern end of the humid continental climate, and the northern portion of the humid subtropical climate. Northern Connecticut generally experiences a climate with cold winters with moderate snowfall and hot, humid summers. Far southern and coastal Connecticut has a climate with cool winters with a mix of rain and infrequent snow, and the long hot and humid summers typical of the middle and lower East Coast. Connecticut sees a fairly even precipitation pattern with rainfall/snowfall spread throughout the 12 months. Connecticut averages 56% of possible sunshine (higher than the U.S. national average), averaging 2,400 hours of sunshine annually. On average, about one third of days in the state see some amount of precipitation each year. Occasionally, some months may see extremes in precipitation, either much higher or lower than normal, though long term droughts and floods are rare. Early spring can range from slightly cool (40s to low 50s F) to warm (65 to 70 F), while mid and late spring (late April/May) is warm. By late May, the building Bermuda High creates a southerly flow of warm and humid tropical air, bringing hot weather conditions throughout the state. Average highs are 81 °F (27 °C) in New London and 85 °F (29 °C) in Windsor Locks at the peak of summer in late July. On occasion, heat waves with highs from 90 to 100 °F (38 °C) occur across Connecticut. Connecticut's record high temperature is 106 °F (41 °C) which occurred in Danbury on July 15, 1995. Although summers are sunny in Connecticut, quick moving summer thunderstorms can bring brief downpours with thunder and lightning. Occasionally these thunderstorms can be severe, and the state usually averages one tornado per year. During hurricane season, the remains of tropical cyclones occasionally affect the region, though a direct hit is rare. Some notable hurricanes to impact the state include the 1938 New England hurricane, Hurricane Carol in 1954, Hurricane Sandy in 2012, and Hurricane Isaias in 2020. Weather commonly associated with the fall season typically begins in October and lasts to the first days of December. Daily high temperatures in October and November range from the 50s to 60s (Fahrenheit) with nights in the 40s and upper 30s. Colorful foliage begins across northern parts of the state in early October and moves south and east reaching southeast Connecticut by early November. Far southern and coastal areas, however, have more oak and hickory trees (and fewer maples) and are often less colorful than areas to the north. By December daytime highs are in the 40s °F for much of the state, and average overnight lows are below freezing. Winters (December through mid-March) are generally cold from south to north in Connecticut. The coldest month (January) has average high temperatures ranging from 38 °F (3 °C) in the coastal lowlands to 33 °F (1 °C) in the inland and northern portions on the state. The lowest temperature recorded in Connecticut is −32 °F (−36 °C) which has been observed twice: in Falls Village on February 16, 1943, and in Coventry on January 22, 1961. The average yearly snowfall ranges from about 60 inches (1,500 mm) in the higher elevations of the northern portion of the state to only 20–25 inches (510–640 mm) along the southeast coast of Connecticut (Branford to Groton). Generally, any locale north or west of Interstate 84 receives the most snow, during a storm, and throughout the season. Most of Connecticut has less than 60 days of snow cover. Snow usually falls from late November to late March in the northern part of the state, and from early December to mid-March in the southern and coastal parts of the state. During winter every few years, Connecticut can occasionally get heavy snowstorms, called nor'easters, which may produce as much as two feet of snow on rare occasions. Ice storms also occur on occasion, such as the Southern New England ice storm of 1973 and the December 2008 Northeastern United States ice storm. These storms can cause widespread power outages and damage. Forests consist of a mix of Northeastern coastal forests of oak in southern areas of the state, to the upland New England-Acadian forests in the northwestern parts of the state. Mountain Laurel (Kalmia latifolia) is the state flower and is native to low ridges in several parts of Connecticut. Rosebay rhododendron (Rhododendron maximum) is also native to eastern uplands of Connecticut and Pachaug State Forest is home to the Rhododendron Sanctuary Trail. Atlantic white cedar (Chamaecyparis thyoides), is found in wetlands in the southern parts of the state. Connecticut has one native cactus (Opuntia humifusa), found in sandy coastal areas and low hillsides. Several types of beach grasses and wildflowers are also native to Connecticut. Connecticut spans USDA Plant Hardiness Zones 5b to 7a. Coastal Connecticut is the broad transition zone where more southern and subtropical plants are cultivated. In some coastal communities, Magnolia grandiflora (southern magnolia), crape myrtles, scrub palms (Sabal minor), needle palms (Rhapidophyllum hystrix), and other broadleaved evergreens are cultivated in small numbers.[citation needed] As of the 2020 United States census, Connecticut has a population of 3,605,944, an increase of 31,847 people (0.9%) from the 2010 United States census. Among the census records, 20.4% of the population was under 18. In 1790, 97% of the population in Connecticut was classified as "rural". The first census in which less than half the population was classified as rural was 1890. In the 2000 census, only 12.3% was considered rural. Most of western and southern Connecticut (particularly the Gold Coast) is strongly associated with New York City; this area is the most affluent and populous region of the state and has high property costs and high incomes. The center of population of Connecticut is located in the town of Cheshire. According to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 2,930 homeless people in Connecticut. In common with the majority of the United States, non-Hispanic whites have remained the dominant racial and ethnic group in Connecticut. From being 98% of the population in 1940, however, they have declined to 63% of the population as of the 2020 census. These statistics have represented fewer Americans identifying as non-Hispanic white, which has given rise to the Hispanic and Latino American population and Asian American population overall. As of 2011[update], 46.1% of Connecticut's population younger than age 1 were minorities. As of 2004, 11.4% of the population (400,000) was foreign-born. In 1870, native-born Americans had accounted for 75% of the state's population, but that had dropped to 35% by 1918. Also as of 2000, 81.69% of Connecticut residents age 5 and older spoke English at home and 8.42% spoke Spanish, followed by Italian at 1.59%, French at 1.31%, and Polish at 1.20%. The largest ancestry groups since 2010 were: 19.3% Italian, 17.9% Irish, 10.7% English, 10.4% German, 8.6% Polish, 6.6% French, 3.0% French Canadian, 2.7% American, 2.0% Scottish, and 1.4% Scotch Irish. The top countries of origin for Connecticut's immigrants in 2018 were India, Jamaica, the Dominican Republic, Poland and Ecuador. Note: Births in table do not add up because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number. Since 2016, data for births of White Hispanic origin are not collected, but included in one Hispanic group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race. A Pew survey of Connecticut residents' religious self-identification showed the following distribution of affiliations in 2014: Protestant 35%, Mormonism 1%, Jewish 3%, Roman Catholic 33%, Orthodox 1%, Non-religious 28%, Jehovah's Witness 1%, Hinduism 1%, Buddhism 1% and Islam 1%. Jewish congregations had 108,280 (3.2%) members in 2000. The Jewish population is concentrated in the towns near Long Island Sound between Greenwich and New Haven, in Greater New Haven and in Greater Hartford, especially the suburb of West Hartford. According to the Association of Religion Data Archives, the largest Christian denominations, by number of adherents, in 2010 were: the Catholic Church, with 1,252,936; the United Church of Christ, with 96,506; and non-denominational Evangelical Protestants, with 72,863. Recent immigration has brought other non-Christian religions to the state, but the numbers of adherents of other religions are still low. Connecticut is also home to New England's largest Protestant church: The First Cathedral in Bloomfield, Connecticut, located in Hartford County. Hartford is seat to the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Hartford, which is sovereign over the Diocese of Bridgeport and the Diocese of Norwich. By the Public Religion Research Institute's study in 2020, 71% of the population identified as Christian. In contrast to the 2014 study by the Pew Research Center, the irreligious declined from 28% of the population to 21% at the 2020 Public Religion Research Institute's study. Connecticut's economic output in 2019 as measured by gross domestic product was $289 billion, up from $277.9 billion in 2018. Connecticut's per capita personal income in 2019 was estimated at $79,087, the highest of any state. There is, however, a great disparity in incomes throughout the state; after New York, Connecticut had the second largest gap nationwide between the average incomes of the top 1% and the average incomes of the bottom 99%. According to a 2018 study by Phoenix Marketing International, Connecticut had the third-largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States, with a ratio of 7.75%. New Canaan is the wealthiest town in Connecticut, with a per capita income of $85,459. Hartford is the poorest municipality in Connecticut, with a per capita income of $13,428 in 2000. As of December 2019, Connecticut's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 3.8%, with U.S. unemployment at 3.5% that month. Dating back to 1982, Connecticut recorded its lowest unemployment in 2000 between August and October, at 2.2%. The highest unemployment rate during that period occurred in November and December 2010 at 9.3%, but economists expected record new levels of layoffs as a result of business closures in the spring of 2020 due to the coronavirus pandemic. Tax is collected by the Connecticut Department of Revenue Services and by local municipalities. As of 2012, Connecticut residents had the second highest rate in the nation of combined state and local taxes after New York, at 12.6% of income compared to the national average of 9.9% as reported by the Tax Foundation. Before 1991, Connecticut had an investment-only income tax system. Income from employment was untaxed, but income from investments was taxed at 13%, the highest rate in the U.S., with no deductions allowed for costs of producing the investment income, such as interest on borrowing. In 1991, under Governor Lowell P. Weicker Jr., an independent, the system was changed to one in which the taxes on employment income and investment income were equalized at a maximum rate of 4%. The new tax policy drew investment firms to Connecticut; as of 2019[update], Fairfield County was home to the headquarters for 16 of the 200 largest hedge funds in the world. As of 2019[update], the income tax rates on Connecticut individuals were divided into seven tax brackets of 3% (on income up to $10,000); 5% ($10,000–$50,000); 5.5% ($50,000–$100,000); 6% ($100,000–$200,000); 6.5% ($200,000–$250,000); 6.9% ($250,000–$500,000); and 6.99% above $500,000, with additional amounts owed depending on the bracket. All wages of Connecticut residents are subject to the state's income tax, even if earned outside the state. However, in those cases, Connecticut income tax must be withheld only to the extent the Connecticut tax exceeds the amount withheld by the other jurisdiction. Since New York has higher income tax rates than Connecticut, this effectively means that Connecticut residents who work in New York have no Connecticut income tax withheld. Connecticut permits a credit for taxes paid to other jurisdictions, but since residents who work in other states are still subject to Connecticut income taxation, they may owe taxes if the jurisdictional credit does not fully offset the Connecticut tax amount. Connecticut levies a 6.35% state sales tax on the retail sale, lease, or rental of most goods. Some items and services in general are not subject to sales and use taxes unless specifically enumerated as taxable by statute. A provision excluding clothing under $50 from sales tax was repealed as of July 1, 2011[update]. There are no additional sales taxes imposed by local jurisdictions. In 2001, Connecticut instituted what became an annual sales tax "holiday" each August lasting one week, when retailers do not have to remit sales tax on certain items and quantities of clothing that has varied from year to year. State law authorizes municipalities to tax property, including real estate, vehicles and other personal property, with state statute providing varying exemptions, credits and abatements. All assessments are at 70% of fair market value. The maximum property tax credit is $200 per return and any excess may not be refunded or carried forward. According to the Tax Foundation, on a per capita basis in the 2017 fiscal year Connecticut residents paid the 3rd highest average property taxes in the nation after New Hampshire and New Jersey. As of January 1, 2020[update], gasoline taxes and fees in Connecticut were 40.13 cents per gallon, 11th highest in the United States which had a nationwide average of 36.13 cents a gallon excluding federal taxes. Diesel taxes and fees as of January 2020 in Connecticut were 46.50 cents per gallon, ninth highest nationally with the U.S. average at 37.91 cents. In 2019, sales of single-family homes in Connecticut totaled 33,146 units, a 2.1 percent decline from the 2018 transaction total. The median home sold in 2019 recorded a transaction amount of $260,000, up 0.4 percent from 2018. Connecticut had the seventh highest rate of home foreclosure activity in the country in 2019 at 0.53 percent of the total housing stock. Finance, insurance and real estate was Connecticut's largest industry in 2018 as ranked by gross domestic product, generating $75.7 billion in GDP that year. Major employers include The Hartford, Travelers, Harman International, Cigna, the Aetna subsidiary of CVS Health, Mass Mutual, People's United Financial, Bank of America, Realogy, Bridgewater Associates, GE Capital, William Raveis Real Estate, and Berkshire Hathaway through reinsurance and residential real estate subsidiaries. The combined educational, health and social services sector was the largest single industry as ranked by employment, with a combined workforce of 342,600 people at the end of 2019, ranking fourth the year before in GDP at $28.3 billion. The broad business and professional services sector had the second highest GDP total in Connecticut in 2018 at an estimated $33.7 billion. Manufacturing was the third biggest industry in 2018 with GDP of $30.8 billion, dominated by Raytheon Technologies formed in the March 2020 merger of Hartford-based United Technologies and Waltham, Mass.-based Raytheon Co. As of the merger, Raytheon Technologies employed about 19,000 people in Connecticut through subsidiaries Pratt & Whitney and Collins Aerospace. Lockheed Martin subsidiary Sikorsky Aircraft operates Connecticut's single largest manufacturing plant in Stratford, where it makes helicopters. The world's largest audio equipment manufacturing company Harman International is headquartered in Stamford, Connecticut.[citation needed] It owns many brands like JBL, Akg and Harman kardon. Other major manufacturers include the Electric Boat division of General Dynamics, which makes submarines in Groton, Boehringer Ingelheim, a pharmaceuticals manufacturer with its U.S. headquarters in Ridgefield, and ASML, which in Wilton makes precision lithography machines used to create circuitry on semiconductors and flat-screen displays. Connecticut historically was a center of gun manufacturing, and four gun-manufacturing firms continued to operate in the state as of December 2012[update], employing 2,000 people: Colt, Stag, Ruger, and Mossberg. Marlin, owned by Remington, closed in April 2011. Other large components of the Connecticut economy in 2018 included wholesale trade ($18.1 billion in GDP); information services ($13.8 billion); retail ($13.7 billion); arts, entertainment and food services ($9.1 billion); and construction ($8.3 billion). Tourists spent $9.3 billion in Connecticut in 2017 according to estimates as part of a series of studies commissioned by the state of Connecticut. Foxwoods Resort Casino and Mohegan Sun are the two biggest tourist draws and number among the state's largest employers; both are located on Native American reservations in the southeastern Connecticut. Connecticut's agricultural production totaled $580 million in 2017, with just over half of that revenue the result of nursery stock production. Milk production totaled $81 million that year, with other major product categories including eggs, vegetables and fruit, tobacco and shellfish. Connecticut's economy uses less energy to produce each dollar of GDP than all other states except California, Massachusetts, and New York. It uses less energy on a per-capita basis than all but six other states. It has no fossil-fuel resources, but does have renewable resources. Average retail electricity prices are the highest among the 48 contiguous states. While the vast majority of state's overall energy consumption is fossil fuels, nuclear power delivered over 40% of state's electricity generation in 2019. Refuse-derived fuels and other biomass provided the largest share of renewable electricity at about a 3% share. Solar and wind generation have grown in recent years. More than three-quarters of solar generation came from distributed small-scale installations such as rooftop solar in 2019, and there is planning underway to significantly increase renewable generation with the state's offshore wind resource. The Interstate highways in the state are Interstate 95 (I-95) traveling southwest to northeast along the coast, I-84 traveling southwest to northeast in the center of the state, I-91 traveling north to south in the center of the state, and I-395 traveling north to south near the eastern border of the state. The other major highways in Connecticut are the Merritt Parkway and Wilbur Cross Parkway, which together form Connecticut Route 15 (Route 15), traveling from the Hutchinson River Parkway in New York parallel to I-95 before turning north of New Haven and traveling parallel to I-91, finally becoming a surface road in Berlin. I-95 and Route 15 were originally toll roads; they relied on a system of toll plazas at which all traffic stopped and paid fixed tolls. A series of major crashes at these plazas eventually contributed to the decision to remove the tolls in 1988. Other major arteries in the state include U.S. Route 7 (US 7) in the west traveling parallel to the New York state line, Route 8 farther east near the industrial city of Waterbury and traveling north–south along the Naugatuck River Valley nearly parallel with US 7, and Route 9 in the east. Between New Haven and New York City, I-95 is one of the most congested highways in the United States. Although I-95 has been widened in several spots, some areas are only three lanes and this strains traffic capacity, resulting in frequent and lengthy rush hour delays. Frequently, the congestion spills over to clog the parallel Merritt Parkway and even US 1. The state has encouraged traffic reduction schemes, including rail use and ride-sharing. Connecticut also has a very active bicycling community, with one of the highest rates of bicycle ownership and use in the United States, particularly in New Haven. According to the U.S. Census 2006 American Community Survey, New Haven has the highest percentage of commuters who bicycle to work of any major metropolitan center on the East Coast. Rail is a popular travel mode between New Haven and New York City's Grand Central Terminal. Southwestern Connecticut is served by the Metro-North Railroad's New Haven Line, operated by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. Metro-North provides commuter service between New York City and New Haven, with branches to New Canaan, Danbury, and Waterbury. Connecticut lies along Amtrak's Northeast Corridor, which features frequent Northeast Regional and Acela Express service from New Haven south to New York City, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, DC, and Norfolk, VA, as well as north to New London, Providence and Boston. Since 1990, coastal cities and towns between New Haven and New London are also served by the Shore Line East commuter line. In June 2018, a commuter rail service called the Hartford Line began operating between New Haven and Springfield on Amtrak's New Haven-Springfield Line. Hartford Line service is provided by both Amtrak and the Connecticut Department of Transportation's CT Rail, and in addition to its termini serves New Haven State Street, Wallingford, Meriden, Berlin, Hartford, Windsor, and Windsor Locks. Several infill stations are planned to be added in the near future as of 2021. Amtrak's Vermonter runs from Washington to St. Albans, Vermont via the same line. In July 2019, Amtrak launched the Valley Flyer, which runs between New Haven and Greenfield, Massachusetts. A proposed commuter rail service, the Central Corridor Rail Line, would connect New London with Norwich, Willimantic, Storrs, and Stafford Springs, with service continuing into Massachusetts and Brattleboro, Vermont. Statewide bus service is supplied by Connecticut Transit, owned by the Connecticut Department of Transportation, with smaller municipal authorities providing local service. Bus networks are an important part of the transportation system in Connecticut, especially in urban areas like Hartford, Stamford, Norwalk, Bridgeport and New Haven. Connecticut Transit also operates CTfastrak, a bus rapid transit service between New Britain and Hartford, which opened to the public on March 28, 2015. Connecticut's largest airport is Bradley International Airport in Windsor Locks, 15 miles (24 km) north of Hartford.[citation needed] Many residents of central and southern Connecticut also make heavy use of JFK International Airport and Newark International Airports, especially for international travel. Smaller regional air service is provided at Tweed New Haven Regional Airport. Larger civil airports include Danbury Municipal Airport and Waterbury-Oxford Airport in western Connecticut, Hartford–Brainard Airport in central Connecticut, and Groton-New London Airport in eastern Connecticut. Sikorsky Memorial Airport is located in Stratford and mostly services cargo, helicopter and private aviation. Several ferry services cross Long Island Sound and connect the state to Long Island. The Bridgeport & Port Jefferson Ferry travels between Bridgeport, Connecticut, and Port Jefferson, New York. Ferry service also operates out of New London to Orient, New York; Fishers Island, New York; and Block Island, Rhode Island, which are popular tourist destinations. Two ferries cross the Connecticut River: the Rocky Hill–Glastonbury ferry and the Chester–Hadlyme ferry, the former of which is the oldest continuously operating ferry in the United States, operating since 1655. Hartford has been the sole capital of Connecticut since 1875. Before then, New Haven and Hartford alternated as dual capitals. Connecticut is known as the "Constitution State". The origin of this nickname is uncertain, but it likely comes from Connecticut's pivotal role in the federal constitutional convention of 1787, during which Roger Sherman and Oliver Ellsworth helped to orchestrate what became known as the Connecticut Compromise, or the Great Compromise. This plan combined the Virginia Plan and the New Jersey Plan to form a bicameral legislature, a form copied by almost every state constitution since the adoption of the federal constitution. Variations of the bicameral legislature had been proposed by Virginia and New Jersey, but Connecticut's plan was the one that was in effect until the early 20th century, when Senators ceased to be selected by their state legislatures and were instead directly elected. Otherwise, it is still the design of Congress. The nickname also might refer to the Fundamental Orders of 1638–39. These Fundamental Orders represent the framework for the first formal Connecticut state government written by a representative body in Connecticut. The State of Connecticut government has operated under the direction of four separate documents in the course of the state's constitutional history. After the Fundamental Orders, Connecticut was granted governmental authority by King Charles II of England through the Connecticut Charter of 1662. Separate branches of government did not exist during this period, and the General Assembly acted as the supreme authority. A constitution similar to the modern U.S. Constitution was not adopted in Connecticut until 1818. Finally, the current state constitution was implemented in 1965. The 1965 constitution absorbed a majority of its 1818 predecessor, but incorporated a handful of important modifications. The governor heads the executive branch. As of 2020[update], Ned Lamont is the Governor and Susan Bysiewicz is the Lieutenant Governor; both are Democrats. From 1639 until the adoption of the 1818 constitution, the governor presided over the General Assembly. In 1974, Ella Grasso was elected as the governor of Connecticut. This was the first time in United States history when a woman was a governor without her husband being governor first. There are several executive departments: Administrative Services, Agriculture, Banking, Children and Families, Consumer Protection, Correction, Economic and Community Development, Developmental Services, Construction Services, Education, Emergency Management and Public Protection, Energy & Environmental Protection, Higher Education, Insurance, Labor, Mental Health and Addiction Services, Military, Motor Vehicles, Public Health, Public Utility Regulatory Authority, Public Works, Revenue Services, Social Services, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs. In addition to these departments, there are other independent bureaus, offices and commissions. In addition to the governor and lieutenant governor, there are four other executive officers named in the state constitution that are elected directly by voters: secretary of the state, treasurer, comptroller, and attorney general. All executive officers are elected to four-year terms. Connecticut's legislative branch is known as the General Assembly. It is a bicameral legislature consisting of an upper body, the State Senate (36 senators); and a lower body, the House of Representatives (151 representatives). Bills must pass each house in order to become law. The governor can veto bills, but this veto can be overridden by a two-thirds majority in both houses. Per Article XV of the state constitution, Senators and Representatives must be at least 18 years of age and are elected to two-year terms in November on even-numbered years. There also must always be between 30 and 50 senators and 125 to 225 representatives. The Lieutenant Governor presides over the Senate, except when absent from the chamber, when the President pro tempore presides. The Speaker of the House presides over the House. As of 2021[update], Matthew Ritter is the Speaker of the House of Connecticut. As of 2021[update], Connecticut's United States Senators are Richard Blumenthal (Democrat) and Chris Murphy (Democrat). Connecticut has five representatives in the U.S. House, all of whom are Democrats. Locally elected representatives also develop local ordinances to govern cities and towns. The town ordinances often include noise control and zoning guidelines. However, the State of Connecticut also provides statewide ordinances for noise control as well. The highest court of Connecticut's judicial branch is the Connecticut Supreme Court, headed by the Chief Justice of Connecticut. The Supreme Court is responsible for deciding on the constitutionality of laws, or cases as they relate to the law. Its proceedings are similar to those of the United States Supreme Court: no testimony is given by witnesses, and the lawyers of the two sides each present oral arguments no longer than thirty minutes. Following a court proceeding, the court may take several months to arrive at a judgment. As of 2020[update], the Chief Justice is Richard A. Robinson. In 1818, the court became a separate entity, independent of the legislative and executive branches. The Connecticut Appellate Court is a lesser statewide court, and the Superior Courts are lower courts that resemble county courts of other states. Connecticut does not have county government, unlike all other states except Rhode Island. Connecticut county governments were mostly eliminated in 1960, with the exception of sheriffs elected in each county. In 2000, the county sheriff was abolished and replaced with the state marshal system, which has districts that follow the old county territories. The judicial system is divided into judicial districts at the trial-court level which largely follow the old county lines. The eight counties are still widely used for purely geographical and statistical purposes, such as weather reports and census reporting. The state is divided into nine regional councils of government defined by the state Office of Planning and Management, which facilitate regional planning and coordination of services between member towns. The Intragovernmental Policy Division of this Office coordinates regional planning with the administrative bodies of these regions. Each region has an administrative body made up chief executive officers of the member towns. The regions are established for the purpose of planning "coordination of regional and state planning activities; redesignation of logical planning regions and promotion of the continuation of regional planning organizations within the state; and provision for technical aid and the administration of financial assistance to regional planning organizations". By 2015, the State of Connecticut recognized COGs as county equivalents, allowing them to apply for funding and grants made available to county governments in other states. In 2019 the state recommended to the United States Census Bureau that the nine Councils of Governments replace its counties for statistical purposes. This proposal was approved by the Census Bureau in 2022, and will be fully implemented by 2024. Connecticut shares with the rest of New England a governmental institution called the New England town. The state is divided into 169 towns which serve as the fundamental political jurisdictions. There are also 21 cities, most of which simply follow the boundaries of their namesake towns and have a merged city-town government. There are two exceptions: the City of Groton, which is a subsection of the Town of Groton, and the City of Winsted in the Town of Winchester. There are also nine incorporated boroughs which may provide additional services to a section of town. Naugatuck is a consolidated town and borough. Connecticut is generally considered to be a blue state. The last Republican presidential candidate to win Connecticut's votes in the Electoral College was George H. W. Bush in 1988. Connecticut residents who register to vote may declare an affiliation to a political party, may become unaffiliated at will, and may change affiliations subject to certain waiting periods. As of 2022[update], around 58% of registered voters are enrolled in a political party. The Democratic Party of Connecticut is the largest party in the state by voter registration, with 36% of voters, followed by the Connecticut Republican Party with approximately 20%. An additional 1.6% are registered to third parties. As of 2022, 4 third parties have statewide enrollment privileges (meaning any state resident may register as a member), including the Libertarian Party of Connecticut, the Independent Party of Connecticut, the Connecticut Green Party, and the Connecticut Working Families Party. Connecticut allows electoral fusion, where the same candidate can run on the ballot of more than one political party; this is often used by the Connecticut Working Families Party to cross-endorse Democratic candidates. In July 2009, the Connecticut legislature overrode a veto by Governor M. Jodi Rell to pass SustiNet, the first significant public-option health care reform legislation in the nation. In April 2012, both houses of the Connecticut state legislature passed a bill (20 to 16 and 86 to 62) that abolished capital punishment for all future crimes, while 11 inmates who were waiting on the death row at the time could still be executed. Connecticut ranked third in the nation for educational performance, according to Education Week's Quality Counts 2018 report. It earned an overall score of 83.5 out of 100 points. On average, the country received a score of 75.2. Connecticut posted a B-plus in the Chance-for-Success category, ranking fourth on factors that contribute to a person's success both within and outside the K-12 education system. Connecticut received a mark of B-plus and finished fourth for School Finance. It ranked 12th with a grade of C on the K-12 Achievement Index. Hartford Public High School (1638) is the third-oldest secondary school in the nation after the Collegiate School (1628) in Manhattan and the Boston Latin School (1635). Today, the Connecticut State Board of Education manages the public school system for children in grades K–12. Board of Education members are appointed by the Governor of Connecticut. Connecticut has a number of private schools. Private schools may file for approval by the state Department of Education, but are not required to. Per state law, private schools must file yearly attendance reports with the state. Notable private schools include Choate Rosemary Hall, The Hotchkiss School, Loomis Chaffee School, and Taft School. Connecticut was home to the nation's first law school, Litchfield Law School, which operated from 1773 to 1833 in Litchfield. Well known universities in the state include Yale University, Wesleyan University, Trinity College, Sacred Heart University, Fairfield University, Quinnipiac University, and the University of Connecticut. The Connecticut State University System includes 4 state universities, and the state also has 12 community colleges. The United States Coast Guard Academy is located in New London. There are two Connecticut teams in the American Hockey League. The Bridgeport Islanders is a farm team for the New York Islanders which competes at the Total Mortgage Arena in Bridgeport. The Hartford Wolf Pack is an affiliate of the New York Rangers; they play in the XL Center in Hartford. The Hartford Yard Goats of the Double-A Northeast are a AA affiliate of the Colorado Rockies. Also, the Norwich Sea Unicorns play in the Futures Collegiate Baseball League. The New Britain Bees play in the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball. The Connecticut Sun of the WNBA currently play at the Mohegan Sun Arena in Uncasville. In soccer, Hartford Athletic began play in the USL Championship in 2019. The state hosts several major sporting events. Since 1952, a PGA Tour golf tournament has been played in the Hartford area. It was originally called the "Insurance City Open" and later the "Greater Hartford Open" and is now known as the Travelers Championship. Lime Rock Park in Salisbury is a 1.5-mile (2.4 km) road racing course, home to the International Motor Sports Association, SCCA, United States Auto Club, and K&N Pro Series East races. Thompson International Speedway, Stafford Motor Speedway, and Waterford Speedbowl are oval tracks holding weekly races for NASCAR Modifieds and other classes, including the NASCAR Whelen Modified Tour. The state also hosts several major mixed martial arts events for Bellator MMA and the Ultimate Fighting Championship. The Hartford Whalers of the National Hockey League played in Hartford from 1975 to 1997 at the Hartford Civic Center. They departed to Raleigh, North Carolina, after disputes with the state over the construction of a new arena, and they are now known as the Carolina Hurricanes. A baseball team known as the Hartfords (or Hartford Dark Blues) played in the National Association from 1874 to 1875, before becoming charter members of the National League in 1876. The team moved to Brooklyn, New York, and then disbanded one season later. In 1926, Hartford also had a franchise in the National Football League known as the Hartford Blues. From 2000 until 2006 the city was home to the Hartford FoxForce of World TeamTennis. The Connecticut Huskies are the team of the University of Connecticut (UConn); they play NCAA Division I sports. Both the men's basketball and women's basketball teams have won multiple national championships. In 2004, UConn became the first school in NCAA Division I history to have its men's and women's basketball programs win the national title in the same year; they repeated the feat in 2014 and are still the only Division I school to win both titles in the same year. The UConn women's basketball team holds the record for the longest consecutive winning streak in NCAA college basketball at 111 games, a streak that ended in 2017. The UConn Huskies football team has played in the Football Bowl Subdivision since 2002, and has played in four bowl games. New Haven biennially hosts "The Game" between the Yale Bulldogs and the Harvard Crimson, the country's second-oldest college football rivalry. Yale alumnus Walter Camp is deemed the "Father of American Football", and he helped develop modern football while living in New Haven. Other Connecticut universities which feature Division I sports teams are Quinnipiac University, Fairfield University, Central Connecticut State University and Sacred Heart University. The name "Connecticut" originated with the Mohegan word quonehtacut, meaning "place of long tidal river". Connecticut's official nickname is "The Constitution State", adopted in 1959 and based on its colonial constitution of 1638–1639 which was the first in America and, arguably, the world. Connecticut is also unofficially known as "The Nutmeg State", whose origin is unknown. It may have come from its sailors returning from voyages with nutmeg, which was a very valuable spice in the 18th and 19th centuries. It may have originated in the early machined sheet tin nutmeg grinders sold by early Connecticut peddlers. It is also facetiously said to come from Yankee peddlers from Connecticut who would sell small carved knobs of wood shaped to look like nutmeg to unsuspecting customers. George Washington gave Connecticut the title of "The Provisions State" because of the material aid that the state rendered to the American Revolutionary War effort. Connecticut is also known as "The Land of Steady Habits". According to Webster's New International Dictionary (1993), a person who is a native or resident of Connecticut is a "Connecticuter". There are numerous other terms coined in print but not in use, such as "Connecticotian" (Cotton Mather in 1702) and "Connecticutensian" (Samuel Peters in 1781). Linguist Allen Walker Read suggests the more playful term "Connecticutie". "Nutmegger" is sometimes used, as is "Yankee". The official state song is "Yankee Doodle". The traditional abbreviation of the state's name is "Conn."; the official postal abbreviation is CT. Commemorative stamps issued by the United States Postal Service with Connecticut themes include Nathan Hale, Eugene O'Neill, Josiah Willard Gibbs, Noah Webster, Eli Whitney, the whaling ship the Charles W. Morgan, which is docked at Mystic Seaport, and a decoy of a broadbill duck. The Charter Oak The USS Nautilus (SSN-571) Connecticut portal New England portal United States portal Index of Connecticut-related articles Outline of Connecticut List of states and territories of the United States USS Connecticut, 7 ships Elevation adjusted to North American Vertical Datum of 1988 Persons of Hispanic or Latino origin are not distinguished between total and partial ancestry. "Sites, Seals & Symbols". Secretary of the State. State of Connecticut. August 28, 2015. Archived from the original on July 31, 2008. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "General Description and Facts". State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 6, 2016. "State Area Measurements and Internal Point Coordinates". "Highest and Lowest Elevations". Elevations and Distances in the United States. United States Geological Survey. 2001. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "US Census Bureau QuickFacts". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Median Annual Household Income". The US Census Bureau. Archived from the original on January 28, 2020. Retrieved January 28, 2020. "State Resident's Names". eReference Desk. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Style Manual". U.S. Government Printing Office. §5.23. 2000. Archived from the original on August 31, 2008. "Connecticutian". Merriam-Webster Online. Archived from the original on December 31, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Connecticut". Dictionary.com. Archived from the original on November 24, 2010. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Trumbull, James Hammond (1881). Indian Names of Places, Etc., in and on the Borders of Connecticut: With Interpretations of Some of Them. Hartford, Connecticut: Press of the Case, Lockwood & Brainard Company. p. 60. Table 18, Area Measurements: 2010; and Population and Housing Unit Density: 1990 to 2010 (PDF). United States Summary: 2010, Population and Housing Unit Counts (Report). United States Census Bureau. September 2012. p. 41. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved May 16, 2014. Table 19, Population by Urban and Rural and Type of Urban Area: 2010 (PDF). United States Summary: 2010, Population and Housing Unit Counts (Report). United States Census Bureau. September 2012. p. 42. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved May 16, 2014. "Branding Guidelines". CT.gov - Connecticut's Official State Website. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "15 Fun Facts About Connecticut". bestthingsct.com. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Ohlemacher, Stephen (November 29, 2005). "Highest wages in East, lowest in South". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 25, 2010. Retrieved April 30, 2010. "Median Household Income". American FactFinder. U.S. Census Bureau. 2013. Archived from the original on October 25, 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Federal Writers' Project (1938). Connecticut: A Guide to Its Roads, Lore and People. US History Publishers. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-60354-007-0. Retrieved September 23, 2010. "Connecticut: Colonization". Britannica Academic. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Genealogy, History &. "LibGuides Home: Native American Research: List of Historical Connecticut Tribes". Libguides.ctstatelibrary.org. Archived from the original on October 26, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2021. "Connecticut Native American Tribes Archived September 27, 2013, at the Wayback Machine", Connecticut State Library. Retrieved May 16, 2014. Varekamp, Johan; Varekamp, Daphne (Spring–Summer 2006). "Adriaen Block, The Discovery of Long Island Sound and the New Netherlands Colony: What Drove the Course of History?" (PDF). Wrack Lines. 6 (1). Archived from the original (PDF) on December 31, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2014. "1614 Adriaen". The Society of Colonial Wars in the State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on May 17, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014. "Early Settlers of Connecticut". Connecticut State Library. Archived from the original on April 20, 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2010. "Brief History of Old Saybrook". Old Saybrook Historical Society. Archived from the original on May 16, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014. "1636-Hartford". The Society of Colonial Wars in Connecticut. Archived from the original on February 11, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014. Secretary of the State of Connecticut (2007). "STATE OF CONNECTICUT Sites º Seals º Symbols". the Connecticut State Register and Manual. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on September 26, 2012. Retrieved January 25, 2008. Tyler, Edward Royall; Kingsley, William Lathrop; Fisher, George Park; et al., eds. (1887). New Englander and Yale Review. Vol. 47. W.L. Kingsley. pp. 176–177. "Fundamental Agreement, or Original Constitution of the Colony of New Haven, June 4, 1639". The Avalon Project: Documents in Law, History and Diplomacy. Yale Law School. December 18, 1998. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014. "1638—New Haven—The Independent Colony". The Society of Colonial Wars in the State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on November 15, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014. "1662-Charter for Connecticut". The Society of Colonial Wars in the State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on May 16, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014. Williams, Tony (2010). America's Beginnings: The Dramatic Events that Shaped a Nation's Character. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 32–34. ISBN 978-1-4422-0487-4. Bowen, Clarence Winthrop (1882). The Boundary Disputes of Connecticut. Boston: James R. Osgood and Company. pp. 17–18. Flick, Alexander C., ed. (1933). History of the State of New York. Vol. 2. New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 50–57. "Connecticut Colony Charter of 1662". A Chronology of US Historical Documents. University of Oklahoma, College of Law. March 14, 2006. Archived from the original on July 23, 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2010. "1769—The Pennamite Wars". The Society of Colonial Wars in the State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014. "Traditions & History". Yale University. Archived from the original on October 21, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2014. Roth, David M. (1979). Connecticut: A History. New York: W.W. Norton & Co. pp. 40–41. ISBN 978-0-3933-3174-5. United States. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (1975). The Coastline of the United States. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. pp. 2–. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved April 19, 2020. "History". Wethersfield Historical Society. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "Connecticut Ship Database, 1789–1939". Mystic Seaport Museum. August 10, 2016. Archived from the original on January 23, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "The Oldest Lighthouse in Each New England State". New England Historical Society. January 20, 2018. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "Signers of the Declaration of Independence" (PDF). Charters of Freedom. National Archives. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved May 16, 2014. "Battle of Bunker's Hill Preliminary Study". Military Science, Cadet Resources. Worcester Polytechnic Institute. Archived from the original on May 18, 2014. Retrieved May 18, 2014. Roland, Alex (1977). "Bushnell's Submarine: American Original or European Import?". Technology and Culture. 18 (2): 159. doi:10.2307/3103954. JSTOR 3103954. S2CID 112333776. Case, James R. (1927). An Account of Tryon's Raid on Danbury in April, 1777. Danbury, Connecticut. Retrieved October 24, 2015.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Poirier, David A. (1976). "Camp Reading: Logistics of a Revolutionary War Winter Encampment". Northeast Historical Archaeology. 5 (1): 40–52. doi:10.22191/neha/vol5/iss1/5. "Park History". Putnam Memorial State Park. Archived from the original on January 29, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2014. O'Keefe, Thomas C. (August 1, 2013). "George Washington and the Redding Encampments". In Johnson, James M.; Pryslopski, Christopher; Villani, Andrew (eds.). Key to the Northern Country: The Hudson River Valley in the American Revolution. SUNY Press. Retrieved February 17, 2015. Hall, Charles Samuel (1905). Life and Letters of Samuel Holden Parsons: Major-General in the Continental Army and Chief Judge of the Northwestern Territory, 1737–1789. Binghamton, New York: Otseningo Publishing. p. 110. Retrieved February 17, 2015. Townshend, Charles H. (1879). British Invasion of New Haven, Connecticut. New Haven, Connecticut: Tuttle, Morehouse & Taylor, Printers. Retrieved May 17, 2014. Baker, Edward (Fall 2006). "Benedict Arnold Turns and Burns New London". Hog River Journal. 4 (4). Archived from the original on July 13, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "The Shaw Mansion". New London County Historical Society. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "General Description & Facts". Portal.CT.gov. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. La Bella, Laura (August 15, 2010). Connecticut: Past and Present. New York: Rosen Publishing. p. 17. Retrieved February 17, 2015. "The Long Blue Line: Argus—first "Heritage" Class Offshore Patrol Cutter". Coast Guard Compass. November 29, 2018. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. User Notes by Table: Table 12 (PDF). United States Summary: 2010, Population and Housing Unit Counts (Report). United States Census Bureau. September 2010. p. V-5. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved May 16, 2014. Boyland, James; Gordinier, Glenn S.; Mason Brown, Meredith; et al. (2012). The Rockets' Red Glare: The War of 1812 and Connecticut. New London County Historical Society. ISBN 978-0-9853-6240-9. Morris, Charles R. (2012). The Dawn of Innovation: The First American Industrial Revolution. PublicAffairs. p. 136. ISBN 978-1-6103-9049-1. Retrieved February 17, 2015. Surowiecki, John (March 1982). "A History of Connecticut's Coast". p. 15. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2020. Elliott, Emory (1986) [1982]. Revolutionary Writers: Literature and Authority in the New Republic, 1725–1810. Oxford University Press. p. 14. Retrieved February 17, 2015. Lyman, Theodore (1823). A Short Account of the Hartford Convention. Boston: O. Everett, publisher. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "The Constitution of Connecticut (1818)". Connecticut General Assembly. Archived from the original on May 4, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2014. "James H. Ward, First U.S. Navy Officer Killed in the Civil War". Sullivan Museum and History Center. Norwich University. August 20, 2012. Archived from the original on September 10, 2015. Retrieved October 26, 2015. Van Dusen, Albert E. (1961). Connecticut (1st ed.). Random House. pp. 224–238. Warshauer, Matthew (2011). Connecticut in the American Civil War: Slavery, Sacrifice, and Survival. Wesleyan University Press. ISBN 978-0-8195-7139-7. Croffut, William Augustus; Morris, John Moses (1869). The Military and Civil History of Connecticut During the War of 1861–65. Cowden, Joanna D. (December 1983). "The Politics of Dissent: Civil War Democrats in Connecticut". New England Quarterly. 56 (4): 538–554. doi:10.2307/365104. JSTOR 365104. Lane, Jarlath Robert (1941). A Political History of Connecticut During the Civil War. Catholic University of America Press. Kirkland, Edward Chase (1948). Men, Cities and Transportation, A Study of New England History 1820–1900. Vol. 2. Harvard University Press. pp. 72–110, 288–306. "New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad Small Format Photograph and Postcard Collection". Archives & Special Collections at the Thomas J. Dodd Research Center. University of Connecticut Libraries. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "First Commercial Telephone Exchange". Connecticut History. Archived from the original on April 25, 2014. Retrieved May 18, 2014. Breen, William J. (1997). "The Industrial Northeast: Connecticut". Labor Market Politics and the Great War: The Department of Labor, the States and the First U.S. Employment Service, 1907–1933. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press. p. 107. Retrieved May 29, 2014. "World War I". Connecticut History. May 13, 2012. Archived from the original on July 3, 2014. Retrieved May 28, 2014. Van Dusen 1961, pp. 266–268. "EB History". General Dynamics Electric Boat. Archived from the original on October 19, 2017. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "Lake Torpedo Boat Company, Bridgeport CT". Shipbuilding History. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved May 28, 2014. "Freighter Worcester Launched". Connecticut History. Archived from the original on April 25, 2014. Retrieved May 28, 2014. Breen, William J. (1979). "Mobilization and Cooperative Federalism: The Connecticut State Council of Defense, 1917-1919". Historian. 42 (1): 58–84. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6563.1979.tb00574.x. Breen 1997, p. 116. Connecticut Light and Power Co. History. Vol. 13. St. James Press. 1996. Archived from the original on September 20, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2015. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help) "Frederick Rentschler". The National Aviation Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "The Great New England Hurricane of 1938". National Weather Service. Archived from the original on February 28, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "Remembering the Great Hurricane of '38". The New York Times. September 21, 2003. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. Brandi, Anthony P. (May 2007). Lend-lease: FDR's Most Unheralded Achievement and Connecticut's Unprecedented Response to it (Masters of Arts). Central Connecticut State University. Archived from the original on May 18, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. Peck, Merton J.; Scherer, Frederic M. (1962). The Weapons Acquisition Process: An Economic Analysis. Harvard Business School. p. 111. "Colt Manufacturing: A Timeline". Hartford Courant. August 19, 2012. Archived from the original on May 17, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "World War II". Connecticut History. May 13, 2012. Archived from the original on July 3, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "EB History". General Dynamics Electric Boat. Archived from the original on October 19, 2017. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "The Bazooka Changes War". Connecticut History. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved May 28, 2014. "VS-300 Helicopter". Sikorsky Archives. Archived from the original on May 18, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "Sikorsky Aircraft Corp ~ Employer Information". Labor Market Information. Connecticut Department of Labor. March 17, 2015. Archived from the original on December 31, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2015. "Interstate Highways Given New Life by Federal Aid Highway Acts". Department of Transportation. State of Connecticut. September 9, 2003. Archived from the original on May 17, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "The Bush Family". George W. Bush Library. Southern Methodist University. Archived from the original on May 18, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "The Connecticut Constitution, 1965-2005: Legislative History of Amendments". Archived from the original on August 6, 2013. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "The Connecticut Constitution, 1965–2008: Legislative History of Amendments", Connecticut State Library. Retrieved May 16, 2014. Gammell, Ben (January 31, 2014). "Connecticut Yankee and Millstone: 46 Years of Nuclear Power". WNPR. Archived from the original on May 17, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. Purmont, Jon E. (2012). Ella Grasso: Connecticut's Pioneering Governor. Wesleyan University Press. ISBN 978-0-8195-7344-5. "Lowell Weicker, Governor of Connecticut". Archived from the original on March 24, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "Lowell Weicker Governor of Connecticut, 1991–1995", Connecticut State Library, 2008. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "Legalized Gambling". Department of Consumer Protection. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on May 18, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. Knowlton, Brian (August 8, 2000). "Gore's Choice for His Running Mate: Moderate Senator Who Scorned Clinton: Selecting Lieberman Is Seen as Bold Move; Religion May Be Issue". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 22, 2014. Retrieved May 21, 2014. "Area victims of 9/11". The Advocate. Stamford, Connecticut. September 9, 2011. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved June 6, 2016. "Connecticut Governor Announces Resignation". CNN. June 21, 2004. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "Ex-Gov. Rowland Pleads Guilty to Corruption". Fox News. Associated Press. December 23, 2004. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "Hurricane Irene one year later: Storm cost $15.8 in damage from Florida to New York to the Caribbean". Daily News. New York. Associated Press. August 27, 2012. Archived from the original on November 16, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. Report on Transmission Facility Outages During the Northeast Snowstorm of October 29–30, 2011: Causes and Recommendations (PDF) (Report). Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and North American Electric Reliability Corporation. May 12, 2012. pp. 8–16. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 24, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. "Hurricane Sandy Fast Facts". CNN. July 13, 2013. Archived from the original on May 18, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "Conn. Gov.: State's Damage From Superstorm Sandy $360M and Climbing". Insurance Journal. November 16, 2012. Archived from the original on May 18, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. Dienst, Jonathan; Prokupecz, Shimon (December 14, 2012). "27 Dead, Including 20 Children, in Conn. School Shooting: Police". NBC New York. Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 2, 2019. Retrieved June 6, 2016. "State Gun Laws Enacted in the Year Since Newtown". The New York Times. December 10, 2013. Archived from the original on May 16, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2014. "United States Drought Monitor > Home > State Drought Monitor". droughtmonitor.unl.edu. Archived from the original on October 3, 2016. Retrieved September 22, 2016. "As Connecticut's drought worsens, officials again urge water conservation". September 17, 2016. Archived from the original on September 23, 2016. Retrieved September 22, 2016. "Water Company Issues Mandatory Water Ban for Parts of CT". September 16, 2016. Archived from the original on September 23, 2016. Retrieved September 22, 2016. "List of Connecticut Towns & Counties Including Year Established". CT State Library. 2013. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved November 1, 2021. "Mount Frissell-South Slope, Connecticut/Massachusetts". Peakbagger.com. Archived from the original on October 14, 2023. "Press Release: Scientists Find Block Island Sound Protected from Great Storms". Columbia University. Retrieved November 1, 2021. Dodge, Edward R. "The Southwick Jog" (PDF). Town of Southwick, Massachusetts. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 29, 2009. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Connecticut's Southwick Jog". Connecticut State Library. Archived from the original on October 24, 2010. "Connecticut's "Panhandle"". Connecticut State Library. Archived from the original on March 14, 2011. "Connecticut". National Park Service. Archived from the original on August 21, 2009. Retrieved July 15, 2008. "OVERVIEW OF CLIMATE IN CONNECTICUT". www.canr.uconn.edu. Archived from the original on October 23, 2021. Retrieved October 19, 2021. "United States Annual Sunshine Map". HowStuffWorks. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved March 15, 2011. "All-Time Climate Extremes for CT". U.S. State Climate Extremes Committee. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on November 2, 2011. Retrieved March 18, 2011. "Annual average number of tornadoes, 1953-2004". NOAA National Climatic Data Center. Archived from the original (GIF) on October 30, 2008. Retrieved June 2, 2019. US Department of Commerce, NOAA. "NWS Boston – The Great Hurricane of 1938". National Weather Service. Retrieved October 19, 2021. "Hurricanes". Connecticut Department of Public Health. CT.gov. Retrieved October 19, 2021. Ryan, Lidia; Juliano, Frank (December 16, 2020). "A look back at historic snow storms in Connecticut". Connecticut Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 17, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2021. "Monthly Averages for Bridgeport, CT". The Weather Channel. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved September 15, 2011. "Monthly Averages for Hartford, CT". The Weather Channel. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved September 15, 2011. Olson, David M.; Dinerstein, Eric; Wikramanayake, Eric D.; et al. (2001). "Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World: A New Map of Life on Earth". BioScience. 51 (11): 933–938. doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2001)051[0933:teotwa]2.0.co;2. ISSN 0006-3568. "Cities by Population". Retrieved January 6, 2022. Population: 1790 to 1990 (PDF) (Report). United States Census Bureau. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Bureau, US Census. "Historical Population Change Data (1910–2020)". Census.gov. Archived from the original on April 29, 2021. US Census Bureau (August 25, 2021). "CONNECTICUT: 2020 Census". Census.gov. Archived from the original on August 31, 2021. Retrieved October 16, 2021. "State of Connecticut Center of Population". Center of Population Project. National Geodetic Survey. Archived from the original on September 1, 2010. Retrieved January 30, 2009. "2007-2022 PIT Counts by State". "The 2022 Annual Homelessness Assessment Report (AHAR) to Congress" (PDF). "Race and Ethnicity in the United States: 2010 Census and 2020 Census". census.gov. United States Census Bureau. August 12, 2021. Retrieved September 26, 2021. Gibson, Campbell; Jung, Kay (September 2002). Table A-1. Race and Hispanic Origin, for the United States, Regions, Divisions, and States: 1990 (PDF). Historical Census Statistics on Population Totals By Race, 1790 to 1990, and By Hispanic Origin, 1970 to 1990, For the United States, Regions, Divisions, and States (Report). U.S. Census Bureau. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 14, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Race and Hispanic or Latino: 2000". United States Census Bureau. U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on December 27, 1996. Retrieved June 7, 2017. "Race and Hispanic or Latino Origin: 2010". United States Census Bureau. U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on December 27, 1996. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Gibson, Campbell; Jung, Kay (September 2002). Table 21. Connecticut—Race and Hispanic Origin: 1790 to 1990 (PDF). Historical Census Statistics on Population Totals By Race, 1790 to 1990, and By Hispanic Origin, 1970 to 1990, For the United States, Regions, Divisions, and States (Report). U.S. Census Bureau. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 14, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Frey, William H. (August 13, 2021). "New 2020 census results show increased diversity countering decade-long declines in America's white and youth populations". Brookings. Retrieved February 17, 2022. "US census: Hispanic and Asian-American driving US population growth". BBC News. August 12, 2021. Retrieved February 17, 2022. Exner, Rich (June 3, 2012). "Americans under age 1 now mostly minorities, but not in Ohio: Statistical Snapshot". The Plain Dealer. Cleveland, Ohio. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2012. "Most spoken languages in Connecticut". Language Map. The Modern Language Association. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved January 16, 2007. "American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates". American FactFinder. U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on February 11, 2020. Retrieved July 25, 2010. "Immigrants in Connecticut" (PDF). "Births: Final Data for 2013" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved May 20, 2017. "Births: Final Data for 2014" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on February 14, 2017. Retrieved May 20, 2017. "Births: Final Data for 2015" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on August 31, 2017. Retrieved May 20, 2017. "Births: Final Data for 2016" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on June 3, 2018. Retrieved May 2, 2018. "Births: Final Data for 2017" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on February 1, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Martin, Joyce A.; Hamilton, Brady E.; Osterman, Michelle J.K.; Driscoll, Anne K. (November 27, 2019). "Births: Final Data for 2018" (PDF). National Vital Statistics Reports. 68 (13). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: 1–47. PMID 32501202. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 28, 2019. Retrieved December 2, 2019. "Data" (PDF). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 23, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2021. "Data" (PDF). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved February 20, 2022. "Data" (PDF). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved February 2, 2022. Adults in Connecticut—Religion in America: U.S. Religious Data, Demographics and Statistics (Report). Pew Research Center. Archived from the original on February 17, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2020. "Religion in America: U.S. Religious Data, Demographics and Statistics—Pew Research Center". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. May 11, 2015. Archived from the original on July 7, 2013. Retrieved November 18, 2013. "The Association of Religion Data Archives | State Membership Report". Thearda.com. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013. "PRRI – American Values Atlas". ava.prri.org. Archived from the original on April 4, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2022. "Gross Domestic Product by State, 4th Quarter and Annual 2019" (PDF). Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce. April 7, 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved April 16, 2020. "State Annual Personal Income, 2019 (Preliminary) and State Quarterly Personal Income, 4th Quarter 2019" (PDF) (Press release). Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce. March 24, 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 24, 2020. Retrieved April 16, 2020. Sommeiller, Estelle; Price, Mark (February 19, 2014). The Increasingly Unequal States of America: Income Inequality by State, 1917 to 2011 (Report). The Economic Policy Institute. "U.S. Millionaires Ranking By State & Market Growth" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on April 26, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2020. Connecticut per capita income, median household income, and median family income at State, County and Town level: Census 2000 data (XLS) (Report). State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved July 25, 2010. "State of Connecticut vs. United States Unemployment Rate—State of Connecticut". Connecticut Department of Labor. Archived from the original on May 22, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "U.S. Jobless Claims Top 20 Million Since Start of Shutdowns". Archived from the original on April 18, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "Connecticut Department of Revenue Services". Ct.gov. Archived from the original on December 12, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2021. "Statutes Governing Property Assessment and Taxation". Office of Policy and Management. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "State-Local Tax Burden Rankings FY 2012". The Tax Foundation. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 20, 2016. "Top 200 Hedge Fund Managers" (PDF). Hedge Fund Alert. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 28, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "Connecticut Income Tax Brackets". Tax-Brackets.org. 2019. Archived from the original on July 2, 2017. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "Resident Working in Another State". Department of Revenue Services. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "State Individual Income Tax Rates and Brackets for 2020". Tax Foundation. February 4, 2020. Archived from the original on April 18, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "Summary of Tax Provisions Contained in 2011 Conn. Pub. Acts 6". Department of Revenue Services. State of Connecticut. June 10, 2011. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved July 6, 2011. "2019 Sales Tax Free Week". Department of Revenue Services. State of Connecticut. August 14, 2019. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "What's New? Property Tax Credit Limitation". Department of Revenue Services. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "2014 CT-1040 Connecticut Resident Income Tax Return and Instructions" (PDF). Department of Revenue Services. State of Connecticut. p. 31. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 29, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2015. "How Much Does Your State Collect in Property Taxes per Capita?". Tax Foundation. March 11, 2020. Archived from the original on May 24, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "STATE MOTOR FUEL TAXES: NOTES SUMMARY RATES EFFECTIVE 01/01/2020" (PDF). American Petroleum Institute. January 1, 2020. Archived from the original on February 20, 2021. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "CT Median Single-Family Home Price Reaches 11-Year High in 2019". Boston: The Warren Group. January 29, 2020. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "U.S. Foreclosure Activity Drops To 15-year Low In 2019". Irvine, California: ATTOM Data Solutions. January 16, 2020. Archived from the original on March 29, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "2020 Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth Globally, Technology Changes Abound". Connecticut Economic Digest. Connecticut Department of Labor and Connecticut Department of Economic and Community Development. January 2020. Archived from the original on January 26, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "Search Results for the 100 largest employers in Connecticut". Labor Market Information. Connecticut Department of Labor. March 17, 2015. Archived from the original on May 18, 2014. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Bridgewater Associates is the world's largest hedge fund firm for the fourth straight year says Institutional Investor's Alpha". EIN News. May 16, 2014. Archived from the original on May 17, 2014. Retrieved May 28, 2014. "General Electric: 2019 a 'reset' year". Hearst Connecticut Media. March 14, 2019. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "Employer List—Search Results: Raveis". Labor Market Information. Connecticut Department of Labor. March 17, 2015. Archived from the original on September 5, 2009. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Industry Sectors Employment (CES)—State of Connecticut". Labor Market Information. Connecticut Department of Labor. April 16, 2020. Archived from the original on April 25, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. Singer, Steven (March 30, 2020). "UTC no more: Merger with Raytheon set for Friday, ending 45-year-old conglomerate headquartered in Connecticut". Hartford Courant. Retrieved April 18, 2020.[permanent dead link] "Harman International Industries". Archived from the original on August 11, 2022. Retrieved August 11, 2022. "EB History". General Dynamics Electric Boat. Archived from the original on October 19, 2017. Retrieved May 16, 2014. Soule, Alexander (January 23, 2020). "Wilton manufacturer logs another big year despite industry woes". Hearst Connecticut Media. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. Rivera, Ray; Cowan, Alison Leigh (December 23, 2012). "Gun Makers Use Home Leverage in Connecticut". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 24, 2012. Retrieved December 24, 2012. Sturdevant, Matthew (April 1, 2011). "Marlin Firearms Closes in North Haven, Ending 141 Years of Manufacturing in Connecticut". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on January 2, 2013. Retrieved December 24, 2012. "Economic Impact of Tourism in Connecticut, 2017" (PDF). Department of Economic and Community Development. State of Connecticut. May 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 17, 2020. Retrieved April 16, 2020. "Search Results for the 25 largest employers in Connecticut". Labor Market Information. Connecticut Department of Labor. March 17, 2015. Archived from the original on May 18, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014. 2017 Census of Agriculture State Profile: Connecticut (PDF) (Report). U.S. Department of Agriculture. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "Connecticut State Profile and Energy Estimates – Profile Analysis". U.S. Energy Information Administration. Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. "Connecticut Turnpike (I-95)". NYC Roads. Archived from the original on December 4, 2012. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Ways to Commute". CT rides. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on August 18, 2014. Retrieved July 25, 2010. "More Bicycling, Walking to Work; New Haven Leads the Way in Connecticut". Connecticut by the Numbers. May 22, 2014. Archived from the original on February 4, 2019. Retrieved February 4, 2019. "FAQs". shorelineeast.com. Retrieved October 16, 2021. "Hartford Line debuts with 10K passengers in first week". Connecticut Post. June 26, 2018. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved September 19, 2018. Corselli, Andrew (August 28, 2019). "Amtrak, MassDOT To Launch Valley Flyer Service". Railway Age. Archived from the original on August 28, 2019. Retrieved October 16, 2021. Bessette, Claire (October 4, 2012). "All aboard for the Central Corridor line". The Day. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved October 16, 2021. "Despite Snow, Thousands of Riders, Many First-Timers, Experience CTfastrak on First Day of Service" (Press release). Connecticut Department of Transportation. March 28, 2015. Archived from the original on September 11, 2015. "What Is CTfastrak". State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved October 18, 2013. LaPorte, Mike (November 5, 2014). "The Busway to the Future: Insider to CTfastrak before Opening to Public". The Live Wire. Manchester Community College. Archived from the original on December 11, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2014. "Ct.Gov: Ferries". CT.gov – Connecticut's Official State Website. Retrieved October 16, 2021. "Governor Malloy's Biography". Portal.CT.gov. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on September 14, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Lt. Governor's Biography". Portal.CT.gov. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on November 26, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Departments and Agencies". Portal.CT.gov. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on October 7, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Constitution of the State of Connecticut". Secretary of the State. State of Connecticut. April 21, 2009. Archived from the original on November 9, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Connecticut". States in the Senate. U.S. Senate. Archived from the original on October 15, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Connecticut". Directory of Representatives. U.S. House of Representatives. Archived from the original on October 24, 2011. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Connecticut Ordinances and Charters by Town". Judicial Branch Law Libraries. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on December 11, 2012. Retrieved June 10, 2013. "Newtown Noise Control Ordinance". Town of Newtown. August 20, 2010. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2013. "Sec. 22a-69-1 to 22a-69-7.4: Control of Noise" (PDF). Department of Environmental Protection. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 31, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "About Connecticut Courts: History of the Courts". Judicial Branch. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved February 20, 2007. "Section VI: Counties". State Register and Manual. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Judicial District Courts Staff Directory". State of Connecticut Judicial Branch. Archived from the original on August 12, 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2010. "Regional Councils of Governments (RCOGs) in Connecticut". CT.gov. Office of Policy and Management. 2015. Archived from the original on September 17, 2015. Retrieved September 15, 2015. "Proposed Change to County Equivalents in Connecticut" (PDF). US Census Bureau. "Governor Lamont Announces U.S. Census Bureau Approves Proposal for Connecticut's Planning Regions To Become County Equivalents" (Press release). The Office of Governor Ned Lamont. June 6, 2022. Retrieved March 24, 2023. "Town Elections, Boroughs in Connecticut with Date of Incorporation". Secretary of the State. State of Connecticut. June 19, 2013. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. DaRosa, Andrew (November 3, 2020). "Here's how Connecticut has voted in the past 15 presidential elections". Connecticut Post. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved October 16, 2021. "Minor Parties in Connecticut". CT.gov – Connecticut's Official State Website. Archived from the original on April 29, 2021. Retrieved October 16, 2021. Elizabeth, Anna (August 24, 2021). "Carlos Moreno Talks Working Families Party, Danbury and New Britain Races". The Connecticut Examiner. Archived from the original on August 26, 2021. Retrieved October 16, 2021. "Statistics and Data" (PDF). Portal.ct.gov. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved November 14, 2023. Keating, Christopher (July 21, 2009). "Health Reform Alive: Legislature Overrides Rell Veto Of Sustinet Care Plan, Six Other Bills". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on August 15, 2009. Retrieved September 18, 2009. "Connecticut governor signs bill to repeal death penalty". FOX News. April 25, 2012. Archived from the original on May 14, 2019. Retrieved April 25, 2012. "Connecticut Earns a B on State Report Card, Ranks Third in Nation—Quality Counts". Education Week. 37 (17). Editorial Projects in Education. September 5, 2018. Archived from the original on February 20, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2019. "Private Schools". CT.gov – Connecticut's Official State Website. Archived from the original on April 14, 2021. Retrieved October 15, 2021. "History of the New York Giants". Sports Ecyclopedia. Archived from the original on July 9, 2011. Retrieved September 12, 2006. "2000–2006 Hartford FoxForce". funwhileitlasted.net. February 16, 2014. Archived from the original on February 20, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2019. Veilleux, Richard (April 12, 2004). "Twin National Championships Are A First in Division I Basketball". UConn Advance. Archived from the original on September 14, 2015. Retrieved September 10, 2015. Scott, Nate (April 8, 2014). "Connecticut women and men make basketball history (again)". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 14, 2015. Retrieved September 10, 2015. Longman, Jeré (April 1, 2017). "Connecticut's 111-Game Winning Streak Ends With Loss to Mississippi State". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017. Walter Camp at the College Football Hall of Fame "Connecticut's Nicknames". Connecticut State Library. Archived from the original on September 5, 2011. Retrieved September 15, 2011. "In memoriam: Allen Walker Read (1906–2002)". The Free Library. 2004. Retrieved November 1, 2021. "Meet the Current Poet Laureate". Department of Economic and Community Development, Office of the Arts. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on February 20, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2020. "2018–2021 Connecticut State Troubadour – Nekita Waller". Department of Economic and Community Development, Office of the Arts. State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on February 20, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Connecticut at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Texts from Wikisource Travel information from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata Official website CTVisit.com—Official tourism website Connecticut QuickFacts—U.S. Census Bureau Connecticut at Curlie Library of Congress Connecticut: State Resource Guide 41°36′N 72°42′W﻿ / ﻿41.6°N 72.7°W﻿ / 41.6; -72.7