The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is a research and development agency of the United States Department of Defense responsible for the development of emerging technologies for use by the military. Originally known as the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), the agency was created on February 7, 1958, by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in response to the Soviet launching of Sputnik 1 in 1957. By collaborating with academia, industry, and government partners, DARPA formulates and executes research and development projects to expand the frontiers of technology and science, often beyond immediate U.S. military requirements. The Economist has called DARPA the agency "that shaped the modern world," and said that "Moderna's COVID-19 vaccine sits alongside weather satellites, GPS, drones, stealth technology, voice interfaces, the personal computer and the internet on the list of innovations for which DARPA can claim at least partial credit." Its track record of success has inspired governments around the world to launch similar research and development agencies. DARPA is independent of other military research and development and reports directly to senior Department of Defense management. DARPA comprises approximately 220 government employees in six technical offices, including nearly 100 program managers, who together oversee about 250 research and development programs. The name of the organization first changed from its founding name, ARPA, to DARPA, in March 1972, changing back to ARPA in February 1993, then reverted to DARPA in March 1996. The agency's current director, appointed in March 2021, is Stefanie Tompkins. As of 2021[update], their mission statement is "to make pivotal investments in breakthrough technologies for national security". The Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) was suggested by the President's Scientific Advisory Committee to President Dwight D. Eisenhower in a meeting called after the launch of Sputnik. ARPA was formally authorized by President Eisenhower in 1958 for the purpose of forming and executing research and development projects to expand the frontiers of technology and science, and able to reach far beyond immediate military requirements. The two relevant acts are the Supplemental Military Construction Authorization (Air Force) (Public Law 85-325) and Department of Defense Directive 5105.15, in February 1958. It was placed within the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and counted approximately 150 people. Its creation was directly attributed to the launching of Sputnik and to U.S. realization that the Soviet Union had developed the capacity to rapidly exploit military technology. Initial funding of ARPA was $520 million. ARPA's first director, Roy Johnson, left a $160,000 management job at General Electric for an $18,000 job at ARPA. Herbert York from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory was hired as his scientific assistant. Johnson and York were both keen on space projects, but when NASA was established later in 1958 all space projects and most of ARPA's funding were transferred to it. Johnson resigned and ARPA was repurposed to do "high-risk", "high-gain", "far out" basic research, a posture that was enthusiastically embraced by the nation's scientists and research universities. ARPA's second director was Brigadier General Austin W. Betts, who resigned in early 1961 and was succeeded by Jack Ruina who served until 1963. Ruina, the first scientist to administer ARPA, managed to raise its budget to $250 million. It was Ruina who hired J. C. R. Licklider as the first administrator of the Information Processing Techniques Office, which played a vital role in creation of ARPANET, the basis for the future Internet. Additionally, the political and defense communities recognized the need for a high-level Department of Defense organization to formulate and execute R&D projects that would expand the frontiers of technology beyond the immediate and specific requirements of the Military Services and their laboratories. In pursuit of this mission, DARPA has developed and transferred technology programs encompassing a wide range of scientific disciplines that address the full spectrum of national security needs. From 1958 to 1965, ARPA's emphasis centered on major national issues, including space, ballistic missile defense, and nuclear test detection. During 1960, all of its civilian space programs were transferred to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the military space programs to the individual services. This allowed ARPA to concentrate its efforts on the Project Defender (defense against ballistic missiles), Project Vela (nuclear test detection), and Project AGILE (counterinsurgency R&D) programs, and to begin work on computer processing, behavioral sciences, and materials sciences. The DEFENDER and AGILE programs formed the foundation of DARPA sensor, surveillance, and directed energy R&D, particularly in the study of radar, infrared sensing, and x-ray/gamma ray detection. ARPA at this point (1959) played an early role in Transit (also called NavSat) a predecessor to the Global Positioning System (GPS). "Fast-forward to 1959 when a joint effort between DARPA and the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory began to fine-tune the early explorers' discoveries. TRANSIT, sponsored by the Navy and developed under the leadership of Richard Kirschner at Johns Hopkins, was the first satellite positioning system." During the late 1960s, with the transfer of these mature programs to the Services, ARPA redefined its role and concentrated on a diverse set of relatively small, essentially exploratory research programs. The agency was renamed the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in 1972, and during the early 1970s, it emphasized direct energy programs, information processing, and tactical technologies.[citation needed] Concerning information processing, DARPA made great progress, initially through its support of the development of time-sharing. All modern operating systems rely on concepts invented for the Multics system, developed by a cooperation among Bell Labs, General Electric and MIT, which DARPA supported by funding Project MAC at MIT with an initial two-million-dollar grant. DARPA supported the evolution of the ARPANET (the first wide-area packet switching network), Packet Radio Network, Packet Satellite Network and ultimately, the Internet and research in the artificial intelligence fields of speech recognition and signal processing, including parts of Shakey the robot. DARPA also supported the early development of both hypertext and hypermedia. DARPA funded one of the first two hypertext systems, Douglas Engelbart's NLS computer system, as well as The Mother of All Demos. DARPA later funded the development of the Aspen Movie Map, which is generally seen as the first hypermedia system and an important precursor of virtual reality. The Mansfield Amendment of 1973 expressly limited appropriations for defense research (through ARPA/DARPA) only to projects with direct military application. The resulting "brain drain" is credited with boosting the development of the fledgling personal computer industry. Some young computer scientists left the universities to startups and private research laboratories such as Xerox PARC. Between 1976 and 1981, DARPA's major projects were dominated by air, land, sea, and space technology, tactical armor and anti-armor programs, infrared sensing for space-based surveillance, high-energy laser technology for space-based missile defense, antisubmarine warfare, advanced cruise missiles, advanced aircraft, and defense applications of advanced computing. Many of the successful programs were transitioned to the Services, such as the foundation technologies in automatic target recognition, space-based sensing, propulsion, and materials that were transferred to the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO), later known as the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO), now titled the Missile Defense Agency (MDA). During the 1980s, the attention of the Agency was centered on information processing and aircraft-related programs, including the National Aerospace Plane (NASP) or Hypersonic Research Program. The Strategic Computing Program enabled DARPA to exploit advanced processing and networking technologies and to rebuild and strengthen relationships with universities after the Vietnam War. In addition, DARPA began to pursue new concepts for small, lightweight satellites (LIGHTSAT) and directed new programs regarding defense manufacturing, submarine technology, and armor/anti-armor. In 1981, two engineers, Robert McGhee and Kenneth Waldron, started to develop the Adaptive Suspension Vehicle (ASV) nicknamed the "Walker" at the Ohio State University, under a research contract from DARPA. The vehicle was 17 feet long, 8 feet wide, and 10.5 feet high, and had six legs to support its three-ton aluminum body, in which it was designed to carry cargo over difficult terrains. However, DARPA lost interest in the ASV, after problems with cold-weather tests. On February 4, 2004, the agency shut down its so called "LifeLog Project". The project's aim would have been, "to gather in a single place just about everything an individual says, sees or does". On October 28, 2009, the agency broke ground on a new facility in Arlington County, Virginia a few miles from The Pentagon. In fall 2011, DARPA hosted the 100-Year Starship Symposium with the aim of getting the public to start thinking seriously about interstellar travel. On June 5, 2016, NASA and DARPA announced that it planned to build new X-planes with NASA's plan setting to create a whole series of X planes over the next 10 years. Between 2014 and 2016, DARPA shepherded the first machine-to-machine computer security competition, the Cyber Grand Challenge (CGC), bringing a group of top-notch computer security experts to search for security vulnerabilities, exploit them, and create fixes that patch those vulnerabilities in a fully automated fashion. It is one of DARPA prize competitions to spur innovations. In June 2018, DARPA leaders demonstrated a number of new technologies that were developed within the framework of the GXV-T program. The goal of this program is to create a lightly armored combat vehicle of not very large dimensions, which, due to maneuverability and other tricks, can successfully resist modern anti-tank weapon systems. In September 2020, DARPA and the US Air Force announced that the Hypersonic Air-breathing Weapon Concept (HAWC) are ready for free-flight tests within the next year. Victoria Coleman became the director of DARPA in November 2020. In recent years, DARPA officials have contracted out core functions to corporations. For example, during fiscal year 2020, Chenega ran physical security on DARPA's premises, System High Corp. carried out program security, and Agile Defense ran unclassified IT services. General Dynamics runs classified IT services. Strategic Analysis Inc. provided support services regarding engineering, science, mathematics, and front office and administrative work. DARPA history The formative years (1958–1975) The Cold War era (1975–1989) The Post-Soviet years (1989–present) DARPA has six technical offices that manage the agency's research portfolio, and two additional offices that manage special projects. All offices report to the DARPA director, including: The Aerospace Projects Office (APO) DARPA launched the Aerospace Projects Office (APO) in 2015 in response to a new Defense Department initiative, the Aerospace Innovation Initiative (AII), which aims to ensure that the United States can maintain air dominance in future contested environments. The AII includes a new program, AII-X, tasked with designing and demonstrating advanced aircraft technologies. The AII-X program is being led by DARPA, and the APO is its home. The Adaptive Capabilities Offices (ACO) The Adaptive Capabilities Office (ACO), works in close partnership with the military services to focus on pathways to address critical national security challenges. ACO is defining architectural solutions that combine emerging technologies with new warfighting constructs to address challenges in contested environments. These architectures will be vetted with a combination of modeling and simulation and a robust campaign of experimentation in order to realize new doctrine, concepts of operations, and technologies that will enable joint, highly integrated capability sets. The Defense Sciences Office (DSO): DSO identifies and pursues high-risk, high-payoff research initiatives across a broad spectrum of science and engineering disciplines and transforms them into important, new game-changing technologies for U.S. national security. Current DSO themes include novel materials and structures, sensing and measurement, computation and processing, enabling operations, collective intelligence, and global change. The Information Innovation Office (I2O) aims to ensure U.S. technological superiority in all areas where information can provide a decisive military advantage. Some of the program managers in I2O are Stuart Wagner (as of September 2014), Steve Jameson (as of August 2014), Angelos Keromytis (as of July 2014), David Doermann (as of April 2014), and Brian Pierce (prior to September 2018). As of August 2021, William Scherlis is currently the office director. The Microsystems Technology Office (MTO) core mission is the development of high-performance, intelligent microsystems and next-generation components to ensure U.S. dominance in Command, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR), Electronic Warfare (EW), and Directed Energy (DE). The effectiveness, survivability, and lethality of systems that relate to these applications depend critically on microsystems and components. The Strategic Technology Office (STO) mission is to focus on technologies that have a global theater-wide impact and that involve multiple Services. The Tactical Technology Office (TTO) engages in high-risk, high-payoff advanced military research, emphasizing the "system" and "subsystem" approach to the development of aeronautic, space, and land systems as well as embedded processors and control systems The Biological Technologies Office (BTO) fosters, demonstrates, and transitions breakthrough fundamental research, discoveries, and applications that integrate biology, engineering, and computer science for national security. Created in April 2014 by then director Arati Prabhakar, taking programs from the MTO and DSO offices. The Adaptive Execution Office (AEO) was created in 2009 by the DARPA Director, Regina Dugan. The office's four project areas included technology transition, assessment, rapid productivity and adaptive systems. AEO provided the agency with robust connections to the warfighter community and assisted the agency with the planning and execution of technology demonstrations and field trials to promote adoption by the warfighter, accelerating the transition of new technologies into DoD capabilities. Information Awareness Office: 2002–2003 The Advanced Technology Office (ATO) researched, demonstrated, and developed high payoff projects in maritime, communications, special operations, command and control, and information assurance and survivability mission areas. The Special Projects Office (SPO) researched, developed, demonstrated, and transitioned technologies focused on addressing present and emerging national challenges. SPO investments ranged from the development of enabling technologies to the demonstration of large prototype systems. SPO developed technologies to counter the emerging threat of underground facilities used for purposes ranging from command-and-control, to weapons storage and staging, to the manufacture of weapons of mass destruction. SPO developed significantly more cost-effective ways to counter proliferated, inexpensive cruise missiles, UAVs, and other platforms used for weapon delivery, jamming, and surveillance. SPO invested in novel space technologies across the spectrum of space control applications including rapid access, space situational awareness, counterspace, and persistent tactical grade sensing approaches including extremely large space apertures and structures. The Office of Special Development (OSD) in the 1960s developed a real-time remote sensing, monitoring, and predictive activity system on trails used by insurgents in Laos, Cambodia, and the Republic of Vietnam. This was done from an office in Bangkok, Thailand, that was ostensibly established to catalog and support the Thai fishing fleet, of which two volumes were published. This is a personal recollection without a published citation. A report on the ARPA group under which OSD operated is found here. A 1991 reorganization created several offices which existed throughout the early 1990s: The Electronic Systems Technology Office combined areas of the Defense Sciences Office and the Defense Manufacturing Office. This new office will focus on the boundary between general-purpose computers and the physical world, such as sensors, displays and the first few layers of specialized signal-processing that couple these modules to standard computer interfaces. The Software and Intelligent Systems Technology Office and the Computing Systems office will have responsibility associated with the Presidential High-Performance Computing Initiative. The Software office will also be responsible for "software systems technology, machine intelligence and software engineering." The Land Systems Office was created to develop advanced land vehicle and anti-armor systems, once the domain of the Tactical Technology Office. The Undersea Warfare Office combined areas of the Advanced Vehicle Systems and Tactical Technology offices to develop and demonstrate submarine stealth and counter-stealth and automation. A 2010 reorganization merged two offices: The Transformational Convergence Technology Office (TCTO) mission was to advance new crosscutting capabilities derived from a broad range of emerging technological and social trends, particularly in areas related to computing and computing-reliant subareas of the life sciences, social sciences, manufacturing, and commerce. The TCTO was folded into the I2O in 2010. The Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) focused on inventing the networking, computing, and software technologies vital to ensuring DOD military superiority. The IPTO was combined with TCTO in 2010 to form the I2O. A list of DARPA's active and archived projects is available on the agency's website. Because of the agency's fast pace, programs constantly start and stop based on the needs of the U.S. government. Structured information about some of the DARPA's contracts and projects is publicly available. DARPA publishes a list of current research programs, and a list of archived programs. AdvaNced airCraft Infrastructure-Less Launch And RecoverY X-Plane (ANCILLARY) (2022): The program is to develop and demonstrate a vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) plane that can launch without the supporting infrastructure, with low-weight, high-payload, and long-endurance capabilities. In June 2023, DARPA selected nine companies to produce initial operational system and demonstration system conceptual designs for an uncrewed aerial system (UAS). AI Cyber Challenge (AIxCC) (2023): It is a two-year competition to identify and fix software vulnerabilities using AI in partnership with Anthropic, Google, Microsoft, and OpenAI which will provide their expertise and their platforms for this competition. There will be a semifinal phase and the final phase. Both competitions will be held at DEF CON in Las Vegas in 2024 and 2025, respectively. Air Space Total Awareness for Rapid Tactical Execution (ASTARTE) (2020): The program is conducted in partnership with the Army and Air Force on sensors, artificial intelligence algorithms, and virtual testing environments in order to create an understandable common operating picture when troops are spread out across battlefields Atmospheric Water Extraction (AWE) program Biomanufacturing: Survival, Utility, and Reliability beyond Earth (B-SURE) (2021): This program aims to address foundational scientific questions to determine how well industrial bio-manufacturing microorganisms perform in space conditions.International Space Station (ISS) announced in April 2023 that Rhodium-DARPA Biomanufacturing 01 investigation was launched on SpaceX, and ISS crew members are carrying out this project which examines gravity's effect on production of drugs and nutrients from bacteria and yeast. Big Mechanism: Cancer research. (2015) The program aims to develop technology to read research abstracts and papers to extract pieces of causal mechanisms, assemble these pieces into more complete causal models, and reason over these models to produce explanations. The domain of the program is cancer biology with an emphasis on signaling pathways. It has a successor program called World Modelers. Binary structure inference system: extract software properties from binary code to support repository-based reverse engineering for micro-patching that minimizes lifecycle maintenance and costs (2020). Blackjack (2017): a program to develop and test military satellite constellation technologies with a variety of "military-unique sensors and payloads [attached to] commercial satellite buses. ...as an 'architecture demonstration intending to show the high military utility of global LEO constellations and mesh networks of lower size, weight, and cost spacecraft nodes.' ... The idea is to demonstrate that 'good enough' payloads in LEO can perform military missions, augment existing programs, and potentially perform 'on par or better than currently deployed exquisite space systems.'" Blue Canyon Technologies, Raytheon, and SA Photonics Inc. were working on phases 2 and 3 as of fiscal year 2020. On June 12, 2023 DARPA launched four satellites for a technology demonstration in low Earth orbit on the SpaceX Transporter-8 rideshare. broadband, electro-magnetic spectrum receiver system: prototype and demonstration BlockADE: Rapidly constructed barrier. (2014) Captive Air Amphibious Transporter (CAAT) Causal Exploration of Complex Operational Environments ("Causal Exploration") – computerized aid to military planning. (2018) Clean-Slate Design of Resilient, Adaptive, Secure Hosts (CRASH), a DARPA Transformation Convergence Technology Office (TCTO) initiative Collaborative Operations in Denied Environment (CODE): Modular software architecture for UAVs to pass information to each other in contested environments to identify and engage targets with limited operator direction. (2015) Control of Revolutionary Aircraft with Novel Effectors (CRANE) (2019): The program seeks to demonstrate an experimental aircraft design based on active flow control (AFC), which is defined as on-demand addition of energy into a boundary layer in order to maintain, recover, or improve aerodynamic performance. The aim is for CRANE to generally improve aircraft performance and reliability while reducing cost. In May 2023, DARPA designated the experimental uncrewed aircraft the X-65 which will use banks of compressed air nozzles to execute maneuvers without traditional, exterior-moving flight controls. Computational Weapon Optic (CWO) (2015): Computer rifle scope that combines various features into one optic. DARPA Triage Challenge (DTC) (2023): The DTC will use a series of challenge events to spur development of novel physiological features for medical triage. The three-year competition focuses on improving emergency medical response in military and civilian mass casualty incidents. DARPA XG (2005) : technology for Dynamic Spectrum Access for assured military communications. Demonstration Rocket for Agile Cislunar Operations (DRACO) (2021): The program is to demonstrate a nuclear thermal rocket (NTR) in orbit by 2027 in collaboration with NASA (nuclear thermal engine) and U.S. Space Force (launch). Detection system consisting of Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR)-based assays paired with reconfigurable point-of-need and massively multi-plexed devices for diagnostics and surveillance Electronics Resurgence Initiative (ERI) (2019): Started in 2019, the initiative aims at both national security capabilities and commercial economic competitiveness and sustainability. These programs emphasize forward-looking partnerships with U.S. industry, the defense industrial base, and university researchers. In 2023, DARPA expanded ERI's focus with the announcement of ERI 2.0 seeking to reinvent domestic microelectronics manufacturing. Experimental Spaceplane 1 (formerly XS-1): In 2017, Boeing was selected for Phases 2 and 3 for the fabrication and flight of a reusable unmanned space transport after it completed the initial design in Phase 1 as one of the three teams. In January 2020, Boeing ended its role in the program. Fast Lightweight Autonomy: Software algorithms that enable small UAVs to fly fast in cluttered environments without GPS or external communications. (2014) Fast Network Interface Cards (FastNICs): develop and integrate new, clean-slate network subsystems in order to speed up applications, such as the distributed training of machine learning classifiers by 100x. Perspecta Labs and Raytheon BBN were working on FastNICs as of fiscal year 2020. Force Application and Launch from Continental United States (FALCON): a research effort to develop a small satellite launch vehicle. (2008) This vehicle is under development by AirLaunch LLC. Gamma Ray Inspection Technology (GRIT) program: research and develop high-intensity, tunable, and narrow-bandwidth gamma ray production in compact, transportable form. This technology can be utilized for discovering smuggled nuclear material in cargo via new inspection techniques, and enabling new medical diagnostics and therapies. RadiaBeam Technologies LLC was working on a phase 1 of the program, Laser-Compton approach, in fiscal year 2020. Glide Breaker program: technology for an advanced interceptor capable of engaging maneuvering hypersonic vehicles or missiles in the upper atmosphere. Northrop Grumman and Aerojet Rocketdyne were working on this program as of fiscal year 2020. Gremlins (2015): Air-launched and recoverable UAVs with distributed capabilities to provide low-cost flexibility over expensive multirole platforms. In October 2021, two X-61 Gremlin air vehicles were tested at the Army's Dugway Proving Ground, Utah. Ground X-Vehicle Technology (GXV-T) (2015): This program aims to improve mobility, survivability, safety, and effectiveness of future combat vehicles without piling on armor. High Productivity Computing Systems High Operational Temperature Sensors (HOTS)(2023): The program is to develop sensor microelectronics consisting of transducers, signal conditioning microelectronics, and integration that operate with high bandwidth (>1 MHz) and dynamic range (>90 dB) at extreme temperatures (i.e., at least 800 °C). HIVE (Hierarchical Identify Verify Exploit) CPU architecture. (2017) Hypersonic Air-breathing Weapon Concept (HAWC). This program is a joint DARPA/U.S. Air Force effort that seeks to develop and demonstrate critical technologies to enable an effective and affordable air-launched hypersonic cruise missile. Hypersonic Boost Glide Systems Research Insect Allies (2017–2021) Integrated Sensor is Structure (ISIS): This was a joint DARPA and U.S. Air Force program to develop a sensor of unprecedented proportions to be fully integrated into a stratospheric airship. Intelligent Integration of Information (I3) in SISTO, 1994–2000 – supported database research and with ARPA CISTO and NASA funded the NSF Digital Library program, that led. a.o. to Google. Joint All-Domain Warfighting Software (JAWS): software suite featuring automation and predictive analytics for battle management and command & control with tactical coordination for capture ("target custody") and kill missions. Systems & Technology Research of Woburn, Massachusetts, is working on this project, with an expected completion date of March 2022. Raytheon is also working on this project, with an expected completion date of April 2022. Lasers for Universal Microscale Optical Systems (LUMOS): integrate heterogeneous materials to bring high performance lasers and amplifiers to manufacturable photonics platforms. As of fiscal year 2020, the Research Foundation for the State University of New York (SUNY) was working to enable "on-chip optical gain" to integrated photonics platforms, and enable complete photonics functionality "on a single substrate for disruptive optical microsystems." LongShot (2021): The program is to demonstrate an unmanned air-launched vehicle (UAV) capable of employing air-to-air weapons. Phase 1 design work started in early 2021. In June 2023, DARPA awarded a Phase 3 contract to General Atomics for the manufacturing and a flight demonstration in 2025 of an air-launched, flying and potentially recoverable missile carrier. Manta Ray (2020): The program is to develop a series of autonomous, large-size, unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs) capable of long-duration missions and having large payload capacities. In December 2021, DARPA awarded Phase 2 contracts to Northrop Grumman Systems Corporation and Martin Defense Group to work on subsystem testing followed by fabrication and in-water demonstrations of full-scale integrated vehicles. Media Forensics (MediFor): A project aimed at automatically spotting digital manipulation in images and videos, including Deepfakes. (2018). MediFor largely ended in 2020 and DARPA launched a follow-on program in 2021 called the semantic forensics, or SemaFor. MEMS Exchange: Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) Implementation Environment (MX) Millimeter-wave GaN Maturation (MGM) program: develop new GaN transistor technology to attain high-speed and large voltage swing at the same time. HRL Laboratories LLC, a joint venture between Boeing and General Motors, is working on phase 2 as of fiscal year 2020. Modular Optical Aperture Building Blocks (MOABB) program (2015): design free-space optical components (e.g., telescope, bulk lasers with mechanical beam-steering, detectors, electronics) in a single device. Create a wafer-scale system that is one hundred times smaller and lighter than existing systems and can steer the optical beam far faster than mechanical components. Research and design electronic-photonic unit cells that can be tiled together to form large-scale planar apertures (up to 10 centimeters in diameter) that can run at 100 watts of optical power. The overall goals of such technology are (1) rapid 3D scanning using devices smaller than a cell-phone camera; (2) high-speed laser communications without mechanical steering; (3) and foliage-penetrating perimeter sensing, remote wind sensing, and long-range 3-D mapping. As of fiscal year 2020, Analog Photonics LLC of Boston, Massachusetts, was working on phase 3 of the program and is expected to finish by May 2022. Multi- Azimuth Defense Fast Intercept Round Engagement System (MAD-FIRES) program: develop technologies that combine advantages of a missile (guidance, precision, accuracy) with advantages of a bullet (speed, rapid-fire, large ammunition capacity) to be used on a medium-caliber guided projectile in defending ships. Raytheon is currently working on MAD-FIRES phase 3 (enhance seeker performance, and develop a functional demonstration illuminator and engagement manager to engage and defeat a representative surrogate target) and is expected to be finished by November 2022. Near Zero Power RF and Sensor Operations (N-ZERO): Reducing or eliminating the standby power unattended ground sensors consume. (2015) Neural implants for soldiers. (2014) Novel, nonsurgical, bi-directional brain-computer interface with high spacio-temporal resolution and low latency for potential human use. Open, Programmable, Secure 5G (OPS-5G) (2020): The program is to address security risks of 5G networks by pursuing research leading to the development of a portable standards-compliant network stack for 5G mobile that is open source and secure by design. OPS-5G seeks to create open source software and systems that enable secure 5G and subsequent mobile networks such as 6G. Operational Fires (OpFires): developing a new mobile ground-launched booster that helps hypersonic boost glide weapons penetrate enemy air defenses. As of 17 July 2020, Lockheed Martin was working on phase 3 of the program (develop propulsion components for the missile's Stage 2 section) to be completed by January 2022. The system was successfully tested in July 2022. Persistent Close Air Support (PCAS): DARPA created the program in 2010 to seek to fundamentally increase Close Air Support effectiveness by enabling dismounted ground agents—Joint Terminal Attack Controllers—and combat aircrews to share real-time situational awareness and weapons systems data. PREventing EMerging Pathogenic Threats (PREEMPT) QuASAR: Quantum Assisted Sensing and Readout[when?] QuBE: Quantum Effects in Biological Environments[when?] QUEST: Quantum Entanglement Science and Technology Quiness: Macroscopic Quantum Communications QUIST: Quantum Information Science and Technology[when?] RADICS: Rapid Attack Detection, Isolation and Characterization Systems Rational Integrated Design of Energetics (RIDE): developing tools that speed up and facilitate energetics research. Remote-controlled insects Robotic Servicing of Geosynchronous Satellites program (RSGS): a telerobotic and autonomous robotic satellite-servicing project, conceived in 2017. In 2020, DARPA selected Northrop Grumman's SpaceLogistics as its RSGS partner. The U.S. Naval Research Laboratory designed and developed the RSGS robotic arm with DARPA funding. The RSGS system is anticipated to start servicing satellites in space in 2025. Robotic Autonomy in Complex Environments with Resiliency (RACER) (2020): This is a four-year program and aims to make sure algorithms aren't the limiting part of the system and that autonomous combat vehicles can meet or exceed soldier driving abilities. RACER conducted its third experiment to assess the performance of off-road unmanned vehicles March 12-27, 2023. SafeGenes: a synthetic biology project to program "undo" sequences into gene editing programs (2016) Sea Train (2019): The program goal is to develop and demonstrate ways to overcome range limitations in medium unmanned surface vessels by exploiting wave-making resistance reductions. Applied Physical Sciences Corp. of Groton, Connecticut, is undertaking Phase 1 of the Sea Train program, with an expected completion date of March 2022. Sea Train, NOMARS and Manta Ray are the three programs that could significantly impact naval operations by extending the range and payloads for unmanned vessels on and below the surface. Secure Advanced Framework for Simulation & Modeling (SAFE-SiM) program: build a rapid modeling and simulation environment to enable quick analysis in support of senior-level decision-making. As of fiscal year 2020, Radiance Technologies and L3Harris were working on portions of the program, with expected completion in August and September 2021, respectively. Securing Information for Encrypted Verification and Evaluation (SIEVE) program: use zero knowledge proofs to enable the verification of capabilities for the US military "without revealing the sensitive details associated with those capabilities." Galois Inc. of Portland, Oregon, and Stealth Software Technologies of Los Angeles, California, are currently working on the SIEVE program, with a projected completion date of May 2024. Semantic Forensics (SemaFor) program: develop technologies to automatically detect, attribute, and characterize falsified media (e.g., text, audio, image, video) to defend against automated disinformation. SRI International of Menlo Park, California, and Kitware Inc. of Clifton, New York, are working on the SemaFor program, with an expected completion date of July 2024. Sensor plants: DARPA "is working on a plan to use plants to gather intelligence information" through DARPA's Advanced Plant Technologies (APT) program, which aims to control the physiology of plants in order to detect chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear threats. (2017) Synthetic Hemo-technologIEs to Locate and Disinfect (SHIELD) (2023): The program aims to develop prophylaxes and prevent bloodstream infections (BSI) caused by bacterial/fungal agents, a threat to military and civilian populations. SIGMA: A network of radiological detection devices the size of smart phones that can detect small amounts of radioactive materials. The devices are paired with larger detector devices along major roads and bridges. (2016) SIGMA+ program (2018): by building on concepts theorized in the SIGMA program, develop new sensors and analytics to detect small traces of explosives and chemical and biological weaponry throughout any given large metropolitan area. In October 2021, SIGMA+ program, in collaboration with the Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department (IMPD), concluded a three-month-long pilot study with new sensors to support early detection and interdictions of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) threats. SoSITE: System of Systems Integration Technology and Experimentation: Combinations of aircraft, weapons, sensors, and mission systems that distribute air warfare capabilities across a large number of interoperable manned and unmanned platforms. (2015) SSITH: System Security Integrated Through Hardware and Firmware - secure hardware platform (2017); basis for open-source, hack-proof voting system project and 2019 system prototype contract SXCT: Squad X Core Technologies: Digitized, integrated technologies that improve infantry squads' awareness, precision, and influence. (2015) SyNAPSE: Systems of Neuromorphic Adaptive Plastic Scalable Electronics Tactical Boost Glide (TBG): Air-launched hypersonic boost glide missile. (2016) Tactically Exploited Reconnaissance Node (Tern)(2014): The program seeks to develop ship based UAS systems and technologies to enable a future air vehicle that could provide persistent ISR and strike capabilities beyond the limited range and endurance provided by existing helicopter platforms. TransApps (Transformative Applications), rapid development and fielding of secure mobile apps in the battlefield ULTRA-Vis (Urban Leader Tactical Response, Awareness and Visualization): Heads-up display for individual soldiers. (2014) underwater network, heterogeneous: develop concepts and reconfigurable architecture, leveraging advancement in undersea communications and autonomous ocean systems, to demonstrate utility at sea. Raytheon BBN is currently working on this program, with work expected through 4 May 2021, though if the government exercises all options on the contract then work will continue through 4 February 2024. Upward Falling Payloads: Payloads stored on the ocean floor that can be activated and retrieved when needed. (2014) Urban Reconnaissance through Supervised Autonomy (URSA) program: develop technology for use in cities to enable autonomous systems that U.S. infantry and ground forces operate to detect and identify enemies before U.S. troops come across them. Program will factor in algorithms, multiple sensors, and scientific knowledge about human behavior to determine subtle differences between hostiles and innocent civilians. Soar Technology Inc. of Ann Arbor, Michigan, is currently working on pertinent vehicle autonomy technology, with work expected completed by March 2022. Warrior Web: Soft exosuit to alleviate musculoskeletal stress on soldiers when carrying heavy loads. (2014) Waste Upcycling for Defense (WUD) (2023): to turn scrap wood, cardboard, paper, and other cellulose-derived matter into sustainable materials such as building materials for re-use. 4MM (4-minute mile): Wearable jetpack to enable soldiers to run at increased speed. Air Dominance Initiative: a 2015 program to develop technologies to be used in sixth-generation jet fighters. The Air Dominance Initiative study led to the U.S. Air Force's sixth-generation air superiority initiative, the Next Generation Air Dominance. Anti-submarine warfare (ASW) Continuous Trail Unmanned Vessel (ACTUV) (2010): A project to build an unmanned anti-submarine warfare vessel. AGM-158C LRASM: Anti-ship cruise missile. Adaptive Vehicle Make: Revolutionary approaches to the design, verification, and manufacturing of complex defense systems and vehicles. ARPA Midcourse Optical Station (AMOS), a research facility that now forms part of the Haleakala Observatory. ArcLight: Ship-based weapon system capable of striking targets nearly anywhere on the globe, based on the Standard Missile 3. ARPANET, earliest predecessor of the Internet. Assault Breaker: technology integration to defeat armored attacks ASTOVL, precursor of the Joint Strike Fighter program The Aspen Movie Map allowed one to virtually tour the streets of Aspen, Colorado. Developed in 1978, it is the earliest predecessor to products like Google Street View.: 244 : 149 : 93  Atlas: A humanoid robot. Battlefield Illusion BigDog/Legged Squad Support System (2012): legged robots. Boeing Pelican Boeing X-37 (2004): The X-37 program was transferred from NASA to DARPA in September 2004. The Boeing X-45 unmanned combat aerial vehicle refers to a mid-2000s concept demonstrator for autonomous military aircraft. Boomerang (mobile shooter detection system): an acoustic gunfire locator developed by BBN Technologies for detecting snipers on military combat vehicles. CALO or "Cognitive Assistant that Learns and Organizes": software Combat Zones That See (CTS): "track everything that moves" in a city by linking up a massive network of surveillance cameras Cognitive Technology Threat Warning System (CT2WS) (2011) Consortium for Execution of Rendezvous and Servicing Operations (CONFERS) (2017). CPOF: the command post of the future—networked information system for Command control. DAML ALASA: (Airborne Launch Assist Space Access): A rocket capable of launching a 100-pound satellite into low Earth orbit for less than $1 million. FALCON DARPA Grand Challenge: driverless car competitions DARPA GXV-T: Ground X Vehicle [when?] Hydra: Undersea network of mobile unmanned sensors. (2013) DARPA Network Challenge (before 2010) DARPA Shredder Challenge 2011 – Reconstruction of shredded documents DARPA Silent Talk: A planned program attempting to identify EEG patterns for words and transmit these for covert communications. DARPA Spectrum Challenge (2014) DEFENDER Defense Simulation Internet, a wide-area network supporting Distributed Interactive Simulation Discoverer II radar satellite constellation EATR EXACTO: Sniper rifle firing guided smart bullets. GALE: Global Autonomous Language Exploitation High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP): An ionospheric research program jointly funded by DARPA, the U.S. Air Force's AFRL and the U.S. Navy's NRL. The most prominent area during this research was the high-power radio frequency transmitter facility, which tested the use of the Ionospheric Research Instrument (IRI). High Energy Liquid Laser Area Defense System (HELLADS) The goal of the HELLADS program was to develop a 150 kilowatt (kW) laser weapon system. In 2015, DARPA's contractor, General Atomics, successfully demonstrated a prototype.[citation needed] In 2020, General Atomics and Boeing announced to develop a 100 kW liquid laser system, with plans to scale it up to 250 kW. High Performance Knowledge Bases HISSS Human Universal Load Carrier: battery-powered human exoskeleton. Hypersonic Research Program Luke Arm, a DEKA creation produced under the Revolutionizing Prosthetics program. MAHEM: Molten penetrating munition. MEMEX (2014-2017): an online search tool to fight human trafficking crimes on the dark web. In 2016, DARPA Memex program received the 2016 Presidential Award for Extraordinary Efforts to Combat Trafficking in Persons for the development of the anti-trafficking technology tool. The program was named and inspired by the Vannevar Bush's hypothetical device described in his 1945 article. MeshWorm: an earthworm-like robot. Mind's Eye: A visual intelligence system capable of detecting and analyzing activity from video feeds. MOSIS MQ-1 Predator Multics Next Generation Tactical Wearable Night Vision: Smaller and lighter sunglass-sized night vision devices that can switch between different viewing bands. NLS/Augment: the origin of the canonical contemporary computer user interface Northrop Grumman Switchblade: an unmanned oblique-wing flying aircraft for high speed, long range and long endurance flight One Shot: Sniper scope that automatically measures crosswind and range to ensure accuracy in field conditions. Onion routing, a technique developed in the mid-1990s and later employed by Tor to anonymize communications over a computer network. Passive radar[citation needed] Phoenix: A 2012–early-2015 satellite project with the aim to recycle retired satellite parts into new on-orbit assets. The project was initiated in July 2012 with plans for system launches no earlier than 2016. At the time, Satlet tests in low Earth orbit were projected to occur as early as 2015.[needs update] Policy Analysis Market, evaluating the trading of information futures contracts based on possible political developments in several Middle Eastern countries. An application of prediction markets. POSSE Project AGILE, a Vietnam War-era investigation into methods of remote, asymmetric warfare for use in conflicts with Communist insurgents. Project MAC Proto 2: a thought-controlled prosthetic arm Rapid Knowledge Formation[citation needed] Sea Shadow SIMNET: Wide area network with vehicle simulators and displays for real-time distributed combat simulation: tanks, helicopters and airplanes in a virtual battlefield. System F6—Future, Fast, Flexible, Fractionated Free-flying Spacecraft United by Information Exchange—technology demonstrator: a 2006–2012 I3 (Intelligent Integration of Information), supported the Digital Library research effort through NSF Strategic Computing Program Synthetic Aperture Ladar for Tactical Applications (SALTI) XOS: powered military exoskeleton $226 million technology development program. Cancelled in 2013 before the notionally planned 2015 launch date. SURAN (1983–87) Project Vela (1963) UAVForge (2011) Vertical Take-Off and Landing Experimental Aircraft (VTOL X-Plane) (2013) Viet Cong Motivation and Morale Project (1964-1968) Vulture: Long endurance, high-altitude unmanned aerial vehicle. VLSI Project (1978) – Its offspring include BSD Unix, the RISC processor concept, many CAD tools still in use today.[citation needed] Walrus HULA: high-capacity, long range cargo airship. Wireless Network after Next (WNaN), advanced tactical mobile ad hoc network WolfPack (2010) XDATA: Processing and analyzing vast amounts of information. (2012) Rockwell-MBB X-31 Grumman X-29 DARPA is well known as a high-tech government agency, and as such has many appearances in popular fiction. Some realistic references to DARPA in fiction are as "ARPA" in Tom Swift and the Visitor from Planet X (DARPA consults on a technical threat), in episodes of television program The West Wing (the ARPA-DARPA distinction), the television program Numb3rs, and the Netflix film Spectral. United States portal Virginia portal Air Force Nuclear Weapons Center (NWC) Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy (ARPA-E) Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health (ARPA-H) Advanced Research Projects Agency–Infrastructure (ARPA-I) Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC) Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects Agency (HSARPA) Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) Joint European Disruptive Initiative (JEDI) Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL or LBL) Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) Marine Corps Combat Development Command (MCCDC) Naval Air Weapons Station China Lake (NAWS) Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) Office of Naval Research (ONR) Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) Sandia National Laboratories (SNL) United States Army Armament Research, Development and Engineering Center (ARDEC) United States Army Research, Development and Engineering Command (RDECOM) United States Army Research Laboratory (ARL) United States Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory (MCWL) "About Us". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. n.d. Retrieved September 29, 2019. "Budget". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. n.d. Retrieved May 2, 2023. Dennis, Michael Aaron (December 23, 2022). "Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency | United States government". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved January 5, 2023. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. "About DARPA". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. Retrieved June 26, 2021. Dwight D. Eisenhower and Science & Technology, (2008). Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Commission, Source. "A growing number of governments hope to clone America's DARPA". The Economist. Vol. 439, no. 9248. June 5, 2021. pp. 67–68. Retrieved June 20, 2021. "About DARPA". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. Retrieved February 11, 2018. "ARPA, DARPA, and Jason". Military Embedded Systems. Retrieved April 17, 2018. "Stefanie Tompkins Appointed 23rd DARPA Director". DARPA. March 15, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021. "DARPA Mission". darpa.mil. Archived from the original on April 30, 2017. Retrieved June 28, 2021. Bethe, Hans. "Interview with Hans Bethe" (PDF). Eisenhower Library. Retrieved February 18, 2024. Subcommittee On Military Construction, United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Armed Services (1958). Fiscal Year 1958 Supplemental Military Construction Authorization (Air Force): Hearings, Eighty-fifth Congress, Second Session, on H.R. 9739. Steve Crocker (March 15, 2022). "[Internet Policy] Why the World Must Resist Calls to Undermine the Internet". IETF-Discussion (Mailing list). I was at (D)ARPA from mid 1971 to mid 1974 "$ 520 million appropriation and a $ 2 billion budget plan." Lyon, Matthew; Hafner, Katie (1999-08-19). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins Of The Internet (p. 20). Simon & Schuster. Kindle Edition. "Roy Johnson, ARPA's first director, was, like his boss, a businessman. At age fifty-two, he had been personally recruited by McElroy, who convinced him to leave a $160,000 job with General Electric and take an $18,000 job in Washington." Lyon, Matthew; Hafner, Katie (1999-08-19). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins Of The Internet (p. 21). Simon & Schuster. Kindle Edition. "Herbert York, whom Killian had been keen on, was given the job and moved to ARPA from the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory." Lyon, Matthew; Hafner, Katie (1999-08-19). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins Of The Internet (p. 21). Simon & Schuster. Kindle Edition. "The staff of ARPA saw an opportunity to redefine the agency as a group that would take on the really advanced "far-out" research....The scientific community, predictably, rallied to the call for a reinvention of ARPA as a "high-risk high-gain" research sponsor— the kind of R& D shop they had dreamed of all along" Lyon, Matthew; Hafner, Katie (1999-08-19). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins Of The Internet (pp. 21,22). Simon & Schuster. Kindle Edition. "In early 1961 ARPA's second director, Brigadier General Austin W. Betts, resigned" Lyon, Matthew; Hafner, Katie (1999-08-19). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins Of The Internet (pp. 23,24) Simon & Schuster. Kindle Edition. "Ruina raised ARPA's annual budget to $ 250 million." Lyon, Matthew; Hafner, Katie (1999-08-19). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins Of The Internet (p. 23). Simon & Schuster. Kindle Edition. "J. C. R. Licklider." Lyon, Matthew; Hafner, Katie (1999-08-19). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins Of The Internet (pp. 27–39). Simon & Schuster. Kindle Edition. projects in ballistic missile defense and nuclear test detection, couched in terms of basic research, were the top priorities." Lyon, Matthew; Hafner, Katie (1999-08-19). Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins of the Internet (p. 23). Simon & Schuster. Kindle edition. "Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency | United States government". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Helen E. Worth; Mame Warren (2009). Transit to Tomorrow. Fifty Years of Space Research at The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on December 26, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2013. Catherine Alexandrow (April 2008). "The Story of GPS". Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. DARPA: 50 Years of Bridging the Gap. April 2008. Archived from the original on May 6, 2011. Stefanie Chiou; Craig Music; Kara Sprague; Rebekah Wahba (December 5, 2001). "A Marriage of Convenience: The Founding of the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on May 14, 2011. "Oral History: Bertram Raphael". IEEE Global History Network. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Archived from the original on May 16, 2013. Retrieved February 25, 2012. Kenneth J. Waldron; Vincent J. Vohnout; Arrie Pery; Robert B. McGhee (June 1, 1984). "Configuration Design of the Adaptive Suspension Vehicle". The International Journal of Robotics Research. 3 (2): 37–48. doi:10.1177/027836498400300204. S2CID 110409452. "Not so long ago, in an OSU engineering lab nearby…". The Ohio State University. November 30, 2012. Staff, Wired (February 4, 2004). "Pentagon Kills LifeLog Project". Wired. Retrieved March 6, 2019. The Washington Times, "Pentagon Agency Breaks Ground", October 29, 2009. Casey, Tina (January 28, 2012). "Forget the Moon Colony, Newt: DARPA Aims for 100 Year Starship". CleanTechnica. Retrieved August 25, 2012. Grady, Mary (June 5, 2016). "NASA and DARPA plan to release new X-Planes". Yahoo Tech. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016. Retrieved June 8, 2016. Howley, Daniel (July 17, 2016). "Darpa to create Cyber Grand Challenge to fight security vulnerabilities". Archived from the original on July 18, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2016. "Cyber Grand Challenge (CGC)". DARPA. Archived from the original on June 10, 2019. Retrieved April 26, 2020. "DARPA demonstrates 6 new technologies behind the agile combat vehicles of tomorrow" New Atlas, June 26, 2018 David Szondy (September 8, 2020). "DARPA/US Air Force hypersonic air-breathing weapon ready for free flight". New Atlas. Cohen, Rachel S. (November 20, 2020). "Meet New DARPA Director Victoria Coleman". Air Force Magazine. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Contracts for September 30, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 6, 2021. "Contracts for March 10, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 6, 2021. "Contracts for June 2, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 6, 2021. "Contracts for October 22, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 6, 2021. "Contracts for September 17, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 6, 2021. "DARPA Offices". DARPA.mil. Retrieved May 6, 2023. "Special Projects and Technology Transition". DARPA.mil. Retrieved May 6, 2023. Aerospace Projects Office DARPA.mil Retrieved May 5, 2023 Adaptive Capabilities Office DARPA.mil Retrieved May 5, 2023 "Defense Sciences Office (DSO)". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 21, 2023. "DARPA/DSO Home Page". December 2, 1998. Archived from the original on December 2, 1998. Retrieved June 6, 2017. "Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency". www.darpa.mil. Archived from the original on December 5, 2019. Retrieved August 16, 2021. "Microsystems Technology Office (MTO)". DARPA.mil. Retrieved May 6, 2023. "DARPA | Offices". Archived from the original on October 15, 2009. Retrieved November 8, 2009. DARPA Offices. Retrieved 2009-11-08. "DARPA Launches Biological Technologies Office". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. April 1, 2014. DARPA looks to ultra-wideband technology for advanced tactical networking militaryaerospace.com. May 1, 2003 Joanne, Sandstrom. "The United States and Thailand" (PDF). digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/. Berkeley.edu. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 22, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2021. "DARPA restructures/creates new offices". Defense Daily. 1991. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. "Embedded Clouds: A Look Back at HPEC 2010". HPCwire. September 22, 2010. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved July 7, 2015. "Schedule – sxsw.com". SXSW Schedule 2014. Archived from the original on September 9, 2015. Retrieved July 7, 2015. Klabukov, Ilya; Alekhin, Maksim; Yakovets, Andrey (2017). "DARPA SETA Support FY2010 / FY2015 Database". Figshare. doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.4759186.v2. "Our Research". DARPA.mil. Retrieved May 6, 2023. "DARPA Seeks Leap-Ahead Capabilities for Vertical Takeoff and Landing X-Plane". darpa.mil. Retrieved June 25, 2023. Hill, John (June 23, 2023). "DARPA selects teams to propose VTOL UAS designs with no infrastructure". Airforce Technology. Retrieved June 25, 2023. "White House Press Release: Biden-⁠Harris Administration Launches Artificial Intelligence Cyber Challenge to Protect America's Critical Software". The White House. August 9, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "DARPA competition will use AI to find, fix software vulnerabilities". Federal News Network. August 9, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. OpenSSF. "OpenSSF to Support DARPA on New AI Cyber Challenge (AIxCC)". www.prnewswire.com (Press release). Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Contracts for December 29, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved January 28, 2021. "Real-time Airspace Awareness and De-confliction for Future Battles". darpa.mil. April 7, 2020. Retrieved May 14, 2023. "Contracts for November 18, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved January 25, 2021. "B-SURE Teams Ready to Blast Off!". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 10, 2023. "Rhodium Scientific to Test the Concept of Biomanufacturing in Space". ISS National Laboratory. April 6, 2023. Retrieved May 10, 2023. You, J. (2015). "DARPA sets out to automate research". Science. 347 (6221): 465. Bibcode:2015Sci...347..465Y. doi:10.1126/science.347.6221.465. PMID 25635066. "DARPA 1958-2018" (PDF). darpa.mil. Retrieved May 13, 2023. "Big Mechanism". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 13, 2023. "World Modelers". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 13, 2023. "Contracts for July 1, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. DARPA to begin new effort to build military constellations in low Earth orbit, SpaceNews, 31 May 2018, accessed 22 August 2018. "Contracts for June 10, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for June 12, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for June 9, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Erwin, Sandra (June 14, 2023). "DARPA downsizes Blackjack space experiment". SpaceNews. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "Contracts for August 26, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. DARPA calls on industry to develop compact, push-button wall – MarineCorpstimes.com, 5 July 2014 "DARPA's Captive Air Amphibious Transporter can drive on water, help during disaster relief (video)". Engadget. August 11, 2012. Retrieved June 5, 2020. Fein, Geoff (July 6, 2018). "DARPA seeks to model conflicts for military planners". Jane's Information Group. "HR001117S0012 Causal Exploration of Complex Operational Environments (Causal Exploration) Frequently Asked Questions" (PDF). DARPA. January 17, 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 10, 2018. Retrieved July 9, 2018. "Clean-slate design of Resilient, Adaptive, Secure Hosts (CRASH)" (PDF). DARPA. June 1, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 24, 2014. Retrieved September 4, 2014. DARPA invites industry to explore collaborative UAV technology Archived 2015-02-03 at the Wayback Machine – Flightglobal.com, 23 January 2015 Pentagon issues call for drones that hunt like a pack of wolves Archived 2015-02-03 at the Wayback Machine – Defensesystems.com, 22 January 2015 "Contracts for June 19, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Control of Revolutionary Aircraft with Novel Effecters (CRANE) Proposers Day (Archived)". darpa.mil. August 26, 2019. Retrieved May 14, 2023. "Meet the X-65: DARPA's New Plane Has No External Control Surfaces". airandspaceforces.com. May 16, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. What It Feels Like to Shoot With the Military's Experimental Smart Scope Archived 2015-05-06 at the Wayback Machine – Gizmodo.com, 28 April 2015 "DARPA Triage Challenge". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 13, 2023. "DARPA Triage Challenge to Promote Tech Use in Medical Response to Mass Casualty Incidents". executivegov.com. November 18, 2022. Retrieved May 13, 2023. "DARPA neXt Generation Communications Program - SSC". Archived from the original on January 1, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019. Hitchens, Theresa (July 26, 2023). "DARPA, NASA tap Lockheed Martin to design, build DRACO nuclear rocket for deep space missions". Breaking Defense. Retrieved July 28, 2023. "Contracts for October 27, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved January 25, 2021. "DARPA's ERI Summit 2023: microelectronics innovation". TurtleTimeline.com. May 17, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. "ERI Overview and Structure". darpa.mil. March 6, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. "Experimental Spaceplane". www.darpa.mil. Retrieved February 25, 2019. Foust, Jeff (January 22, 2020). "Boeing drops out of DARPA Experimental Spaceplane program". SpaceNews. Retrieved July 1, 2023. DARPA solicits tender for UAV urban operation algorithms Archived 2015-02-03 at the Wayback Machine – Flightglobal.com, 23 December 2014 Smith, Dr. Jonathan M. "Fast Network Interface Cards (FastNICs)". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for May 5, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for June 11, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Falcon". DARPA. 2008. Archived from the original on August 22, 2008. "Airlaunchllc News". Airlaunch. Archived from the original on May 14, 2008. Wrobel, Dr. Mark. "Gamma Ray Inspection Technology (GRIT)". www.darpa.mil. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for March 20, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for January 24, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for February 10, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. The Military Wants Swarm Bots It Can Retrieve in Midair Archived 2015-09-01 at the Wayback Machine – Defenseone.com, 28 August 2015 "DARPA's latest 'Gremlins' test shows how the US military's biggest planes could be motherships in future wars". businessinsider.com. December 9, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2023. "GXV-T Advances Radical Technology for Future Combat Vehicles". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 10, 2023. "Ground X-Vehicle Technologies (GXV-T)". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 10, 2023. "DARPA Selects IBM for Supercomputing Grand Challenge". www-03.ibm.com. November 21, 2006. Retrieved November 21, 2018. "High Operational Temperature Sensors (HOTS) Proposers Day". SAM.gov. "American military backs an entirely new kind of processor". Engadget.com. June 11, 2017. Retrieved January 14, 2018. "Hypersonic Air-breathing Weapon Concept (HAWC)". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 10, 2023. "Contracts for July 10, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "DARPA Enlists Insects to Protect Agricultural Food Supply and Commodity Crops". www.darpa.mil. Retrieved June 10, 2019. "Broad Agency Announcement Insect Allies, Biological Technologies Office, HR001117S0002 November 1, 2016". FedBizOpps.gov. 2016. "Insect Allies". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 13, 2023. "Integrated Sensor is Structure (ISIS) (Archived)". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 10, 2023. Wiederhold, Gio (June 1993). "Intelligent integration of information". ACM SIGMOD Record. 22 (2): 434–437. doi:10.1145/170036.170118. S2CID 215916846. "Contracts for December 21, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved January 26, 2021. "Contracts for December 21, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 11, 2021. "Contracts for January 15, 2021". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Keeler, Dr. Gordon. "Lasers for Universal Microscale Optical Systems (LUMOS)". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for September 14, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "LongShot". darpa.mil. Retrieved July 16, 2023. "DARPA LongShot Cleared To Move Into Flight Demonstration Phase | Aviation Week Network". aviationweek.com. Retrieved July 16, 2023. "Contracts for February 21, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. DARPA Manta Ray Developing New Class of UUVs Capable of Carrying Large Payloads and Long Endurance Missions to Support Persistent Operations Archived 2023-05-05 at the Wayback Machine idstch.com April 21, 2022 Staff, Naval News (December 20, 2021). "DARPA Selects Two Teams to Build, Test Innovative Manta Ray UUV". Naval News. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "Media Forensics (MediFor)". DARPA. Retrieved June 25, 2018. Hsu, Jeremy (June 22, 2018). "Experts Bet on First Deepfakes Political Scandal". IEEE Spectrum. The threat is real enough that the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) has funded a Media Forensics project aimed at finding ways to automatically screen for Deepfake videos and similarly deceptive examples of digital media. "DARPA Launches New Programs to Detect Falsified Media". governmentciomedia.com. September 16, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2023. mems-exchange.org DARPA.mil Hancock, Dr. Timothy. "Millimeter-wave GaN Maturation (MGM)". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for September 8, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Keeler, Gordon. "Modular Optical Aperture Building Blocks (MOABB)". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for September 10, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Raytheon tests motor for DARPA's MAD-FIRES self-defense interceptor". UPI. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for August 31, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. DARPA N-ZERO program seeks to reduce or eliminate need for standby power on unattended sensors Archived 2015-02-15 at the Wayback Machine – Militaryaerospace.com, 9 February 2015 "Pentagon Rolls Out DARPA Plan To Implant Chips In Soldiers' Brains – The Rundown Live". therundownlive.com. February 15, 2014. Archived from the original on June 3, 2017. Retrieved June 6, 2017. "Pentagon wants to fit soldiers with a little black box brain implant - Geek.com". geek.com. February 10, 2014. Archived from the original on March 30, 2017. Retrieved June 6, 2017. "Contracts for October 30, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved January 25, 2021. "Improving 5G Network Security". darpa.mil. February 5, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2023. "DARPA and the Linux Foundation Create Open Software Initiative to Accelerate US R&D Innovation, 5G End to End Stack". US GOV OPS. February 17, 2021. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. Stults, Lt. Col. Joshua. "Operational Fires (OpFires)". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. Retrieved January 31, 2021. "Contracts for July 17, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Operational Fires Program Successfully Completes First Flight Test". DARPA.mil. Retrieved May 6, 2023. "Persistent Close Air Support (PCAS) (Archived)". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 10, 2023. "PREventing EMerging Pathogenic Threats". www.darpa.mil. Archived from the original on April 6, 2020. Retrieved April 6, 2020. "Quantum-Assisted Sensing and Readout (QuASAR)". www.darpa.mil. Retrieved January 12, 2018. "Quantum effects in Biological Environments (QuBE)". www.darpa.mil. Retrieved January 12, 2018. "Quantum Entanglement Science and Technology (QuEST) – DARPA-BAA-08-24-PDF". open-grants.insidegov.com. Retrieved January 11, 2018.[permanent dead link] "Quiness". www.darpa.mil. Retrieved January 11, 2018. "The Race to Bring Quantum Teleportation to Your World". WIRED. Retrieved January 11, 2018. "Quantum Key Distribution Network". www.darpa.mil. Retrieved January 11, 2018. "Status of the DARPA/BBN Quantum Network" (PDF). "DARPA announces QuIST Program BAA". www.govcon.com. Retrieved January 11, 2018. Weiss, Walter. "Rapid Attack Detection, Isolation and Characterization Systems (RADICS)". Retrieved March 1, 2021. "Technologies to rapidly restore the electrical grid after cyberattack come online". Tech Xplore. March 1, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021. "Contracts for December 10, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved January 26, 2021. Ewen Callaway (October 1, 2009). "Free-flying cyborg insects steered from a distance". New Scientist. Archived from the original on April 13, 2010. Retrieved April 4, 2010. Roesler, Gordon; Jaffe, Paul; Henshaw, Glen; Pagano, Alyssa (July 29, 2017). "Robot Mechanic Could Prevent Satellites From Becoming Space Junk". IEEE Spectrum: Technology, Engineering, and Science News. Sharma, Soumya (November 9, 2022). "US DARPA completes component-level tests for RSGS programme". Airforce Technology. Retrieved June 18, 2023. "Robotic Autonomy in Complex Environments with Resiliency (RACER)". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 13, 2023. "DARPA Project Strives for Off-Road Unmanned Vehicles that React Like Humans". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 13, 2023. "RACER's Off-Road Autonomous Vehicles Teams Navigate Third Test". darpa.mil. April 11, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2023. U.S. Military Preps for Gene Drives Run Amok Archived 2016-12-21 at the Wayback Machine – ScientificAmerican.com, 18 November 2016 "Sea Train". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 20, 2023. "DARPA Lays Course for Unmanned Maritime Future". afcea.org. February 1, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. "Contracts for August 25, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for September 11, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Baron, Dr. Joshua. "Securing Information for Encrypted Verification and Evaluation (SIEVE)". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for April 17, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for April 30, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for July 23, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for July 29, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Williams, Terri (December 11, 2017). "Department of Defense develops plant biotechnology program as latest surveillance tool against CBRN threats". Homeland Preparedness News. Retrieved December 27, 2017. "Synthetic Hemo-technologIEs to Locate and Disinfect (SHIELD)". darpa.mil. Retrieved July 16, 2023. Murtha, Alex. "DARPA develops pocket-sized, affordable, networked radiation sensor". Homeland Preparedness News. No. 26 August 2016. Archived from the original on March 30, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2016. Wrobel, Dr. Mark. "SIGMA+". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "CHIPS Articles: WMD Threat Sensors Integrated, Tested in Police Vehicles". www.doncio.navy.mil. Retrieved June 26, 2023. DARPA unveils new SoSITE program for maintaining air superiority Archived 2016-03-05 at the Wayback Machine – Airrecognition.com, 1 April 2015 Zetter, Kim; Maiberg, Emanuel (March 14, 2019). "DARPA Is Building a $10 Million, Open Source, Secure Voting System". Vice. Retrieved June 1, 2019. DARPA's Squad X Core Technologies program looks to create smarter, more aware infantry squads Archived 2015-02-14 at the Wayback Machine – Gizmag.com, 10 February 2015 Srinivasa, N.; Cruz-Albrecht, J. M. (January 2012). "Neuromorphic Adaptive Plastic Scalable Electronics: Analog Learning Systems". IEEE Pulse. 3 (1): 51–56. doi:10.1109/mpul.2011.2175639. ISSN 2154-2287. PMID 22344953. S2CID 20042976. "DARPA gives Lockheed $147.3 million to research Hypersonic Tactical Boost Glide Missiles - NextBigFuture.com". nextbigfuture.com. September 20, 2016. Archived from the original on March 30, 2017. Retrieved June 6, 2017. Raytheon wins DARPA TBG contract modification Archived 2015-05-18 at the Wayback Machine – Shephardmedia.com, 4 May 2015 "Dr. Peter Erbland, Lt. Col. Joshua Stults: Tactical Boost Glide (TBG)". DARPA, Navy want long-range ISR drones for smaller ships Archived 2014-11-12 at the Wayback Machine – Defensesystems.com, 13 June 2014 "Tern (Archived)". darpa.mil. Retrieved May 14, 2023. "Tern Moves Closer to Full-Scale Demonstration of Unmanned VTOL Aircraft Designed for Small Ships". darpa.mil. December 28, 2015. Retrieved May 14, 2023. DARPA's ULTRA-Vis Augments Reality For Foot Troops Archived 2014-12-21 at the Wayback Machine – Breakingdefense.com, 21 May 2014 "Contracts for March 5, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Pentagon plans to seed ocean floor with payloads waiting to be activated Archived 2014-11-11 at the Wayback Machine – Defensesystems.com, 27 March 2014 Russell, Dr. Bartlett. "Urban Reconnaissance through Supervised Autonomy (URSA)". Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Contracts for September 30, 2020". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved February 5, 2021. DARPA's Warrior Web project may provide super-human enhancements Archived 2014-12-04 at the Wayback Machine – Army.mil, 5 May 2014 Hu, Charlotte (July 24, 2023). "DARPA would like to make scrap wood stronger with WUD". Popular Science. Retrieved August 6, 2023. Jetpacks Help Soldiers Run At The Speed Of Olympic Athletes Archived 2015-05-01 at the Wayback Machine – Businessinsider.com, 12 September 2014 New Budget Will Feature 6th Gen Fighter – Defensenews.com, 28 January 2015 "ACTUV "Sea Hunter" Prototype Transitions to Office of Naval Research for Further Development". www.darpa.mil. Retrieved June 5, 2020. he Modern Weaponry of the World's Armed Forces. Notion Press. April 24, 2017. ISBN 9781946983794. A history of the Joint Strike Fighter Program, Martin-Baker. Retrieved 4 August 2010 Marcus, Foth (December 31, 2008). Handbook of Research on Urban Informatics: The Practice and Promise of the Real-Time City: The Practice and Promise of the Real-Time City. IGI Global. ISBN 978-1-60566-153-7. The very first interactive street view is 'Aspen Movie Map' Duarte, Fabio; Alvarez, Ricardo (August 3, 2021). Urban Play: Make-Believe, Technology, and Space. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-36226-9. the first virtual travel system, in what could be considered an early precursor of Google's Street View Eede, Yoni Van Den; Irwin, Stacey O'Neal; Wellner, Galit (June 23, 2017). Postphenomenology and Media: Essays on Human–Media–World Relations. Lexington Books. ISBN 978-1-4985-5015-4. the first detailed VR simulation of an actual town Shachtman, Noah (February 14, 2012). "Darpa's Magic Plan: 'Battlefield Illusions' to Mess With Enemy Minds". Wired. Archived from the original on March 29, 2014. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on March 15, 2012. Retrieved May 2, 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Clark, Stephen. "U.S. military's X-37B spaceplane lands in Florida – Spaceflight Now". Retrieved June 5, 2020. DARPA Solicitation Number SN03-13: Pre-Solicitation Notice: COMBAT ZONES THAT SEE (CTS). Wikisource. DARPA Announces Success of Cognitive Technology Threat Warning System (CT2WS) Archived 2012-11-12 at the Wayback Machine HRL.com September 18, 2011 "Ground X Vehicles (GXV-T) (Archived)". Retrieved April 19, 2020. DARPA's Plan to Flood the Sea With Drones, Carrying More Drones Archived 2016-12-21 at the Wayback Machine – Wired.com, 13 September 2013 "DARPA Network Challenge". Darpa.mil. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved April 4, 2010. "DARPA Shredder Challenge". DARPA. Archived from the original on October 28, 2011. Retrieved October 27, 2011. Warwick, Graham (May 22, 2009). "Darpa Plans Triple-Target Missile Demo". Aviation Week. Archived from the original on November 28, 2011. "DARPA Spectrum Challenge". Darpa.mil. Archived from the original on June 11, 2014. Retrieved June 10, 2014. "ENERGETICALLY AUTONOMOUS TACTICAL ROBOT (EATR) PROJECT". Retrieved March 30, 2023. "HAARP Fact Sheet". HAARP. June 15, 2007. Archived from the original on October 7, 2009. Retrieved July 3, 2018. "DARPA Unveils Drone-Slaying War Laser". Fast Company. March 8, 2012. Retrieved November 21, 2018. "High Energy Liquid Laser Area Defense System (HELLADS)". March 22, 2006. Archived from the original on March 22, 2006. Retrieved November 21, 2018. Hambling, David. "General Atomics And Boeing's New Liquid Laser Could Win High-Energy Weapon Race". Forbes. Retrieved July 16, 2023. Walker, Steven; Sherk, Jeffrey; Shell, Dale; Schena, Ronald; Bergmann, John; Gladbach, Jonathan (2008). "The DARPA/AF Falcon Program: The Hypersonic Technology Vehicle #2 (HTV-2) Flight Demonstration Phase". 15th AIAA International Space Planes and Hypersonic Systems and Technologies Conference. doi:10.2514/6.2008-2539. ISBN 978-1-60086-985-3. "Memex". Retrieved July 8, 2023. "Combating Trafficking in Persons". October 25, 2016. Retrieved July 8, 2023. "Meshworm: DARPA, MIT robot a sluggish breakthrough in soft robotics". Slate Magazine. August 13, 2012. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved July 7, 2015. "DARPA Kicks Off Mind's Eye program" (PDF). Darpa.mil. January 4, 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 24, 2011. Retrieved January 12, 2010. Military Wants Next Generation Night Vision Goggles Archived 2014-11-03 at the Wayback Machine – Kitup.Military.com, 30 September 2014 Next-gen night vision would enable troops to see farther, clearer Archived 2014-11-26 at archive.today – Armytimes.com, 12 October 2014 DARPA Develops Mountable One Shot Sniper System Archived 2014-12-20 at the Wayback Machine – Kitup.Military.com, 8 February 2014 Ferster, Warren (May 17, 2013). "DARPA Cancels Formation-flying Satellite Demo". Space News. Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved November 1, 2013. Graham Warwick (January 23, 2013). "Darpa Touts Progress On GEO Satellite Recycling Concept". Aviation Week. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved January 25, 2013. Gruss, Mike (March 21, 2014). "DARPA Space Budget Increase Includes M for Spaceplane". Space News. Archived from the original on March 24, 2014. Retrieved March 24, 2014. Hulse, Carl (July 29, 2003). "THREATS AND RESPONSES: PLANS AND CRITICISMS; Pentagon Prepares A Futures Market On Terror Attacks". The New York Times. Lundin, Leigh (July 7, 2013). "Pam, Prism, and Poindexter". Spying. Washington: SleuthSayers. Retrieved January 4, 2014. "Policy Analysis Market and the Political Yuck". www.sirc.org. "I3 Initiative Home Page". Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved July 7, 2015. "CAN YOU DESIGN, BUILD AND FLY THE NEXT-GENERATION UAV?". Darpa.mil. May 25, 2011. Archived from the original on May 29, 2011. Retrieved July 14, 2011. Ackerman, Spencer (February 25, 2013). "Darpa Wants to Rethink the Helicopter to Make It Go Way Faster". Wired. Archived from the original on February 26, 2013. Retrieved February 26, 2013. "STO: WolfPack". Darpa.mil. Strategic Technology Office. Archived from the original on March 4, 2010. Retrieved April 4, 2010. "XDATA". May 8, 2012. Archived from the original on May 8, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2017. Victor Appleton II, 1961. Tom Swift and the Visitor from Planet X Archived 2007-09-26 at the Wayback Machine, originally published by Grosset & Dunlap of New York, now re-published by Project Gutenberg. ARPA is referred to on page 68 published 1961 Numb3ers, Season 1, Episode 5 Archived 2010-03-25 at the Wayback Machine, and Season 5, Episode 17 Archived 2010-05-13 at the Wayback Machine Robinson, Tasha (December 9, 2016). "Spectral review: Netflix's new movie is Gears of War meets Aliens, on the cheap". The Verge. Retrieved September 14, 2020. The Advanced Research Projects Agency, 1958-1974 Archived 2019-08-22 at the Wayback Machine, Barber Associates, December 1975. DARPA Technical Accomplishments: 1958-1990 Archived 2019-08-22 at the Wayback Machine, Volumes 1–3, Richard H. Van Atta, Sidney G. Reed, Seymour J. Deitchman, et al., Institute for Defense Analyses, January 1990 - March 1991. Belfiore, Michael (2009). The Department of Mad Scientists: How DARPA Is Remaking Our World, from the Internet to Artificial Limbs. Harper. ISBN 9780061577932. OCLC 310399265. William Saletan writes of Belfiore's book that "His tone is reverential and at times breathless, but he captures the agency's essential virtues: boldness, creativity, agility, practicality and speed." (Saletan, William (December 24, 2009). "The Body Electric". The New York Times.) Castell, Manuel, The Network Society: A Cross-cultural Perspective, Edward Elgar Publishing Limited, Cheltenham, UK, 2004. Jacobsen, Annie, The Pentagon's Brain: An Uncensored History of DARPA, America's Top-Secret Military Research Agency. Little, Brown and Company. 2015. ISBN 978-0316371766. OCLC 900012161. Norberg, Arthur Lawrence; O'Neill, Judy Elizabeth; Freedman, Kerry J. (1996). Transforming Computer Technology: Information Processing for the Pentagon, 1962-1986. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-5152-0. Sargent, John F. Jr. (February 21, 2018). Defense Science and Technology Funding (PDF). Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 5, 2018. Retrieved March 26, 2018. Sedgwick, John (August 1991). "The Men from DARPA". Playboy. Vol. 3, no. 8. pp. 108–109, 122, 154–156. Weinberger, Sharon, The Imagineers of War: The Untold Story of DARPA, the Pentagon Agency that Changed the World, New York, Alfred A. Knopf, 2017, ISBN 9780385351799. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. DARPA Home Page www.darpa.org, 8 May 1999 Ongoing Research Programs Declassified DARPA documents, OSD & Joint Staff FOIA Service DARPA FY2015 Research Program Archived 2020-11-23 at the Wayback Machine Breakthrough Technologies for National Security DARPA March 2015 (approved for public release, distribution unlimited)