The 2017 Giro d'Italia was the 100th edition of the Giro d'Italia, one of cycling's Grand Tour races. The race started on 5 May in Alghero on the island of Sardinia, and ended on 28 May in Milan. The race was won by Tom Dumoulin, who became the first Dutch male winner of the Giro. All 18 UCI WorldTeams were automatically invited and were obliged to attend the race. Four wildcard UCI Professional Continental teams were also selected. Each team is expected to start with nine riders apart from Astana, with eight riders, due to the death of 2011 winner Michele Scarponi, who died while training days before the start of the race. The teams entering the race were: UCI WorldTeams AG2R La Mondiale Astana Bahrain–Merida BMC Racing Team Bora–Hansgrohe Cannondale–Drapac Team Dimension Data FDJ Team Katusha–Alpecin LottoNL–Jumbo Lotto–Soudal Movistar Team Orica–Scott Quick-Step Floors Team Sky Team Sunweb Trek–Segafredo UAE Team Emirates UCI Professional Continental teams Bardiani–CSF CCC–Sprandi–Polkowice Gazprom–RusVelo Wilier Triestina–Selle Italia The main pre-race favorites were Nairo Quintana (Movistar Team) and Vincenzo Nibali (Bahrain–Merida). Other general classification contenders were Geraint Thomas and Mikel Landa (Team Sky), Steven Kruijswijk (LottoNL–Jumbo), Thibaut Pinot (FDJ), Tom Dumoulin (Team Sunweb), Adam Yates (Orica–Scott), Bauke Mollema (Trek–Segafredo), Ilnur Zakarin (Team Katusha–Alpecin), Tejay van Garderen (BMC Racing Team), Bob Jungels (Quick-Step Floors) and Domenico Pozzovivo (AG2R La Mondiale). Sprinters at the Giro include Fernando Gaviria, Caleb Ewan, André Greipel, Jasper Stuyven, Sacha Modolo, Giacomo Nizzolo, Sam Bennett and Ryan Gibbons. Details about the first three stages of the race were unveiled at a press conference on 14 September 2016. The remainder of the route was unveiled by race director Mauro Vegni on 25 October 2016. However, organizers RCS Sport leaked the route on their website the day before the official presentation. There were 21 stages in the race, covering a total distance of 3,609.1 km (2,243 mi), 142 km (88.2 mi) longer than the 2016 Giro. The longest race stage was stage 12 at 229 km (142 mi), and stage 14 the shortest at 131 km (81 mi). The race featured a total of 69.1 km (43 mi) in individual time trials, and five summit finishes: stage 4, to Mount Etna; stage 9, to Blockhaus; stage 14, to Oropa; stage 18, to Ortisei/St. Ulrich; and stage 19, to Piancavallo. The Cima Coppi (the race's highest elevation) was the Stelvio Pass, summited during stage 16. The stages were categorised in four ways by race organisers; time trials, low, medium and high difficulty. Lukas Pöstlberger won the first stage, André Greipel claimed the second and Fernando Gaviria the third. From there Bob Jungels would wear the Pink jersey as Gaviria went on to win three more stages and lock up the points classification. As the race entered the mountains the leader's jersey swapped between Nairo Quintana and Tom Dumoulin going into the penultimate time trial where Quintana was in 1st and Dumoulin in 4th. Domenico Pozzovivo, Ilnur Zakarin, Vincenzo Nibali and Thibaut Pinot, who had just won the final mountain stage, were all within 90 seconds of Quintana. During the final time trial Dumoulin finished 2nd to fellow Dutchman Jos van Emden, but beat all of the GC contenders handily claiming the Giro victory thirty seconds ahead of Quintana as Nibali finalized the podium. This was the first grand tour victory by a Dutch rider in nearly four decades. On the eve of the Giro d'Italia, the UCI announced that two Bardiani–CSF riders, Stefano Pirazzi and Nicola Ruffoni, had tested positive for GH-Releasing Peptides (GHRPs) – defined as peptide hormones, growth factors, or mimetics – in samples collected during out-of-competition doping tests conducted on 25 and 26 April 2017. With the team incurring first and second AAFs within a twelve-month period, the UCI aimed to enforce article 7.12.1 of the UCI Anti-Doping Rules, allowing for suspension of the team from 15 to 45 days – casting doubt on their Giro appearance. In the Giro d'Italia, four different jerseys are awarded: The first and most important is the general classification, calculated by adding each rider's finishing times on each stage. Riders receive time bonuses (10, 6 and 4 seconds respectively) for finishing in the first three places on each stage, excluding the two individual time trial stages. The rider with the lowest cumulative time is awarded the pink jersey (Italian: maglia rosa), and is considered the winner of the Giro d'Italia. Additionally, there is a points classification. Riders win points for finishing in the top placings on each stage, except the time trials. Flat stages award more points than mountainous stages, meaning that this classification tends to favour sprinters. In addition, points can be won in intermediate sprints. The leader of the points classification wore the cyclamen jersey, awarded for the first time since 2009. There is also a mountains classification, for which points were awarded for reaching the top of a climb before other riders. Each climb was categorised as either first, second, third or fourth-category, with more points available for the more difficult, higher-categorised climbs. For first-category climbs, the top eight riders earned points; on second-category climbs, six riders won points; on third-category climbs, only the top four riders earned points with three on fourth-category climbs. The leadership of the mountains classification was marked by a blue jersey. The Cima Coppi, the race's highest point of elevation, awards more points than the other first-category climbs, with nine riders scoring points. At 2,757 metres (9,045 ft), the Cima Coppi for the 2017 Giro d'Italia is the Stelvio Pass. The fourth jersey represents the young rider classification. This is decided the same way as the general classification, but only riders born after 1 January 1992 are eligible. The winner of the classification is awarded a white jersey. There are also two classifications for teams. In the Trofeo Fast Team classification, the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage are added up; the leading team is one with the lowest total time. The Trofeo Super Team is a team points classification, with the top 20 riders of each stage earning points for their team. Several other minor classifications are awarded: The first is the intermediate sprint classification. Each road stage has two sprints – the Traguardi Volanti. The first riders across the intermediate sprint lines are awarded points; the rider with the most points at the end of the race wins the classification. This classification was won by Daniel Teklehaimanot (Team Dimension Data). Another classification – the combativity prize (Italian: Premio Combattività) – involves points awarded to the first riders at the stage finishes, at intermediate sprints, and at the summits of categorised climbs. This classification was won by Mikel Landa (Team Sky). There is also a breakaway award (Italian: Premio della Fuga). For this, points are awarded to each rider in any breakaway smaller than 10 riders that escapes for at least 5 kilometres (3.1 mi). Each rider is awarded a point for each kilometre that the rider was away from the peloton. The rider with the most points at the end of the Giro wins the award. This classification was won by Pavel Brutt (Gazprom–RusVelo). The final classification is a "fair play" ranking for each team. Teams are given penalty points for infringing various rules. These range from half-point penalties, for offences that merit warnings from race officials, to a 2000-point penalty, for a positive doping test. The team that has the lowest points total at the end of the Giro wins the classification. The winner was Bora–Hansgrohe, with 20 penalty points to their name. In stage 2, Caleb Ewan, who was second in the points and young rider classifications, wore the cyclamen points jersey, because Lukas Pöstlberger (in first place) wore the pink jersey as leader of the general classification during that stage. Jasper Stuyven, who was third in the young rider classification, wore the white jersey as a result of this. In stage 3, Caleb Ewan, who was fourth in the points classification, wore the cyclamen jersey, because André Greipel (in first place) wore the pink jersey as leader of the general classification, Daniel Teklehaimanot (in second place) wore the blue jersey as leader of the mountains classification, and Lukas Pöstlberger (in third place) wore the white jersey as leader of the young rider classification during that stage. In stage 4, Lukas Pöstlberger, who was second in the young rider classification, wore the white jersey, because Fernando Gaviria (in first place) wore the pink jersey as leader of the general classification during that stage. In stages 5 to 9, Adam Yates, who was second in the young rider classification, wore the white jersey, because Bob Jungels (in first place) wore the pink jersey as leader of the general classification during that stage. In stages 15 and 16, Omar Fraile, who was second in the mountains classification, wore the blue jersey, because Tom Dumoulin (in first place) wore the pink jersey as leader of the general classification during that stage. "Giro d'Italia 2017 route: Sardinia start for 100th edition". cyclingweekly.co.uk. 14 September 2016. Archived from the original on 19 September 2016. Retrieved 14 September 2016. "Tom Dumoulin overhauls Nairo Quintana to win Giro d'Italia in nail-biting final time trial – Cycling Weekly". Cycling Weekly. 28 May 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2017. "Tom Dumoulin wins 100th Giro d'Italia after pulsating time-trial finish". The Guardian. 28 May 2017. Retrieved 31 May 2017. "Giro d'Italia 100 team presentation – Gallery". Cyclingnews.com. 5 May 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2017. Garibaldi 2017, p. 12. "Astana decide not to replace Michele Scarponi in Giro d'Italia line-up". cyclingweekly.com. 30 April 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017. "Endura – Nairo and the Giro". Exposure. Archived from the original on 30 April 2018. Retrieved 7 May 2017. "Why Steven Kruijswijk could be the rider to upset the big Giro d'Italia favourites – Cycling Weekly". 4 May 2017. "GCN's 2017 Giro d'Italia Preview Show". redazione, La (24 October 2016). "In anteprima le altimetrie di tutte le tappe del Giro d'Italia 2017!". cicloweb.it. Retrieved 2 May 2017. Garibaldi 2017, p. 8. "Giro d'Italia 2017: The essential guide". Cycling News. 5 May 2017. Archived from the original on 10 September 2015. Retrieved 5 May 2017. "Two riders fail dope test on eve of 100th Giro d'Italia – Cycling Weekly". 4 May 2017. "Two Bardiani CSF riders positive in out-of-competition control". Cycling News. 4 May 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017. "UCI statement on Nicola Ruffoni, Stefano Pirazzi and UCI Professional Continental Team Bardiani CSF". www.uci.ch. "Provisional suspension" (PDF). UCI. Garibaldi 2017, p. 11. Weislo, Laura (13 May 2008). "Giro d'Italia classifications demystified". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 27 August 2009. "Giro revamps time bonus and points systems for 2014 edition". VeloNews. 8 April 2014. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 16 October 2015. Il Garibaldi (PDF) (in Italian). RCS MediaGroup. 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Giro d'Italia 2017. Official website