Michael Richard Pence (born June 7, 1959) is an American politician who served as the 48th vice president of the United States from 2017 to 2021 under President Donald Trump. A member of the Republican Party, he previously served as the 50th governor of Indiana from 2013 to 2017, and a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from 2001 to 2013. Born and raised in Columbus, Indiana, Pence graduated from Hanover College and then from the Indiana University Robert H. McKinney School of Law before entering private practice. He lost two House bids in 1988 and 1990 and was a conservative radio and television talk show host from 1994 to 1999. After being elected to the House in 2000, Pence represented Indiana's 2nd district from 2001 to 2003 and 6th district from 2003 to 2013. He chaired the Republican Study Committee from 2005 to 2007 and House Republican Conference from 2009 to 2011. He was elected governor of Indiana in 2012. As governor, Pence initiated the largest tax cut in Indiana's history and pushed for more funding for private education initiatives. He signed bills intended to restrict abortions, including one that prohibited abortions if the reason for the procedure was the fetus's race, gender, or disability, and required funerary services for terminated fetuses, including those resulting from miscarriage; this law was ruled unconstitutional by a federal judge and prevented from going into effect. After Pence signed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, he encountered resistance from moderate members of his party, the business community, and LGBT advocates. The backlash against the bill led Pence to approve changes to the law to prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity, and other criteria. He later became the running mate of Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump, who went on to win the 2016 presidential election. As vice president, Pence chaired the National Space Council following its reestablishment in 2017 and the White House Coronavirus Task Force, which was established in early 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Pence and Trump lost their bid for re-election in the 2020 presidential election to Joe Biden and Kamala Harris, although Trump's campaign refused to concede, made false or unproven allegations of election fraud and filed many unsuccessful lawsuits in multiple states. Despite Trump's urging to overturn the election results and the attack on the U.S. Capitol on January 6, 2021, Pence oversaw the certification of Biden–Harris as the winner of the election. He has since distanced himself from Trump, endorsing candidates in primary elections in opposition to those supported by Trump and criticizing the latter's conduct on the day of the attack. In June 2023, he launched a bid for the 2024 Republican presidential nomination, but withdrew by the end of October. He chose not to endorse Trump for the general election. Pence was born on June 7, 1959, in Columbus, Indiana, one of six children of Ann Jane "Nancy" Cawley and Edward Joseph Pence Jr., who ran a group of gas stations. His father served in the U.S. Army during the Korean War and received the Bronze Star in 1953, which Pence displays in his office along with its commendation letter and a reception photograph. His father was of German and Irish descent and his mother is of Irish ancestry. His paternal grandfather, Edward Joseph Pence Sr., worked in the Chicago stockyards. He was named after his maternal grandfather, Richard Michael Cawley, who emigrated from Doocastle, County Mayo, Ireland, to the United States through Ellis Island and who became a bus driver in Chicago, Illinois. His maternal grandmother's parents were from Doonbeg, County Clare, Ireland. Pence graduated from Columbus North High School in 1977. He earned a Bachelor of Arts in history from Hanover College in 1981, and a Juris Doctor from the Robert H. McKinney School of Law at Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis in Indianapolis in 1986. While at Hanover, he joined the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity, where he became the chapter president. After graduating from Hanover, he was an admissions counselor at the college from 1981 to 1983. During his time at Hanover, Pence was a friend of future actor Woody Harrelson, whom he helped prepare to deliver a sermon as part of Harrelson's ministry studies. Harrelson later told late-night talk show host Jimmy Kimmel that he "'quite liked [Pence]' at the time". In his childhood and early adulthood, Pence was a Roman Catholic and a Democrat, as was the rest of his family. He volunteered for the Bartholomew County Democratic Party in 1976 and voted for Jimmy Carter in the 1980 presidential election, and has said he was originally inspired to get involved in politics by people such as John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. While in college, Pence left the Catholic Church and became an evangelical, born-again Christian, to the disappointment of his mother. His political views also started shifting to the right during this time in his life, something which Pence attributes to the "common-sense conservatism of Ronald Reagan" with which he began to identify. After graduating from law school in 1986, Pence was an attorney in private practice. In 1988, Pence ran for Congress against Democratic incumbent Philip Sharp, but lost. He ran against Sharp again in 1990, quitting his job in order to work full-time in the campaign, but once again was unsuccessful. During the race, Pence used "political donations to pay the mortgage on his house, his personal credit card bill, groceries, golf tournament fees and car payments for his wife". While the spending was not illegal at the time, it reportedly undermined his campaign. During the 1990 campaign, Pence ran a television advertisement in which an actor, dressed in a robe and headdress and speaking in a thick Middle Eastern accent, thanked his opponent, Sharp, for doing nothing to wean the United States off imported oil as chairman of a House subcommittee on energy and power. In response to criticism, Pence's campaign responded that the advertisement was not about Arabs; rather, it concerned Sharp's lack of leadership. In 1991, Pence wrote an essay, "Confessions of a Negative Campaigner", published in the Indiana Policy Review, in which he apologized for running negative ads against Sharp. Pence vowed to refrain from using insulting speech or running ads that belittle his adversaries. Also taking place in 1991, he became the president of the Indiana Policy Review Foundation, a self-described free-market think tank and a member of the State Policy Network, a position he held until 1993. Shortly after his first congressional campaign in 1988, radio station WRCR-FM in Rushville, Indiana, hired Pence to host a weekly half-hour radio show, Washington Update with Mike Pence. In 1992, Pence began hosting a daily talk show on WRCR, The Mike Pence Show, in addition to a Saturday show on WNDE in Indianapolis. Pence called himself "Rush Limbaugh on decaf" since he considered himself politically conservative while not as bombastic as Limbaugh. Beginning on April 11, 1994, Network Indiana syndicated The Mike Pence Show statewide. With a 9:00 a.m. to noon (ET) time slot, the program reached as many as 18 radio stations in Indiana, including WIBC in Indianapolis. From 1995, Pence also hosted a weekend public affairs TV show likewise titled The Mike Pence Show on Indianapolis TV station WNDY. Pence ended his radio and television shows in 1999 to focus on his 2000 campaign for Congress, which he eventually won. Running for the U.S. House of Representatives again in 2000, he won the seat in Indiana's 2nd congressional district after six-year incumbent David M. McIntosh opted to run for governor of Indiana. The 2nd district (renumbered the 6th in 2002) comprised all or portions of 19 counties in eastern Indiana. As a new congressman, Pence adopted the slogan he had used on the radio, describing himself as "a Christian, a conservative and a Republican, in that order". In 2016, House speaker Paul Ryan described Pence as a "principled conservative". While in Congress, Pence belonged to the Tea Party Caucus. In his first year in office, Pence opposed President George W. Bush's No Child Left Behind Act in 2001, as well as President Bush's Medicare prescription drug expansion in 2003. Pence was re-elected four more times by comfortable margins. In the 2006, 2008, and 2010 House elections, he defeated Democrat Barry Welsh. Pence began to climb the party leadership structure and from 2005 to 2007 was chairman of the Republican Study Committee, a group of conservative House Republicans. In November 2006, Pence announced his candidacy for leader of the Republican Party (minority leader) in the United States House of Representatives. Pence's release announcing his run for minority leader focused on a "return to the values" of the Newt Gingrich-headed 1994 Republican Revolution. However, he lost the bid to Representative John Boehner of Ohio by a vote of 168 for Boehner, 27 for Pence, and one for Representative Joe Barton of Texas. In January 2009, Pence was elected as the Republican Conference chairman, the third-highest-ranking Republican leadership position at the time behind Minority Leader John Boehner and Republican Whip Eric Cantor. He ran unopposed and was elected unanimously. He was the first representative from Indiana to hold a House leadership position since 1981. During Pence's twelve years in the House, he introduced 90 bills and resolutions; none became law. His committee assignments in the House were the following: 107th Congress (2001–2003): Agriculture, Judiciary, Small Business 108th Congress (2003–2005): Agriculture, International Relations, Judiciary 109th Congress (2005–2007): Agriculture, International Relations, Judiciary 110th Congress (2007–2009): Foreign Affairs, Judiciary, Select Committee to Investigate the Voting Irregularities of August 2, 2007 (Ranking Member) 111th Congress (2009–2011): Foreign Affairs 112th Congress (2011–2013): Foreign Affairs, Judiciary In 2008, Esquire magazine listed Pence as one of the ten best members of Congress, writing that Pence's "unalloyed traditional conservatism has repeatedly pitted him against his party elders." Pence was mentioned as a possible Republican candidate for president in 2008 and 2012. In September 2010, he was the top choice for president in a straw poll conducted by the Values Voter Summit. That same year, he was encouraged to run against incumbent Democratic senator Evan Bayh, but opted not to enter the race, even after Bayh unexpectedly announced that he would retire. In May 2011, Pence announced that he would be seeking the Republican nomination for governor of Indiana in 2012. Incumbent Republican Governor Mitch Daniels was term-limited. Pence ran on a platform that touted the successes of his predecessor and promised to continue educational reform and business deregulation of Daniels. The Democratic nominee was former Indiana Speaker of the House John R. Gregg. Despite strong name recognition and a popular outgoing governor of the same party, Pence found himself in a heated race, eventually pulling out a close win with just under 50 percent of the vote, and less than 3% ahead of Gregg, with Libertarian nominee Rupert Boneham receiving most of the remaining votes. It was the closest race in 50 years. Pence was sworn in as the 50th governor of Indiana on January 14, 2013. Pence "inherited a $2 billion budget reserve from his predecessor, Mitch Daniels, and the state ... added to that reserve under his watch, though not before requiring state agencies, including public universities, to reduce funding in years in which revenue fell below projections." The state finished fiscal year 2014 with a reserve of $2 billion; budget cuts ordered by Pence for the $14 billion annual state budget include $24 million cut from colleges and universities; $27 million cut from the Family and Social Services Administration (FSSA); and $12 million cut from the Department of Correction. During Pence's term as governor, the unemployment rate reflected the national average. Indiana's job growth lagged slightly behind the national trend. In 2014, Indiana's economy was among the slowest-growing in the United States, with 0.4 percent GDP growth, compared to the national average of 2.2 percent; this was attributed in part to a sluggish manufacturing sector. Carrier Corp. and United Technologies Electronic Controls (UTEC) announced in 2016 that they would be closing two facilities in Indiana, sending 2,100 jobs to Mexico; the Trump campaign criticized the moves and Pence expressed "deep disappointment". Pence was unsuccessful in his efforts to persuade the companies to stay in the state, although the companies agreed to reimburse local and state governments for certain tax incentives they had received. The Indiana Economic Development Corporation led by Pence had approved $24 million in incentives to ten companies who sent jobs abroad. $8.7 million had been paid out by August 2016. In 2013, Pence signed a law blocking local governments in Indiana from requiring businesses to offer higher wages or benefits beyond those required by federal law. In 2015, Pence also signed the repeal an Indiana law that required construction companies working on publicly funded projects to pay a prevailing wage. Indiana had enacted right-to-work legislation under Pence's predecessor, Republican governor Mitch Daniels. Under Pence, the state successfully defended this legislation against a labor challenge. In 2013, Pence also announced the formation of the Indiana Biosciences Research Institute, a life sciences research facility supported with $25 million in startup funds from the state. Pence made tax reform, namely a ten percent income-tax rate cut, a priority for 2013. While he did not get the ten percent cut he advocated, Pence did accomplish his goal of cutting state taxes. Legislators cut the income tax by five percent and also killed the inheritance tax. Speaker of the House Brian Bosma said the legislative package was the "largest tax cut in our state's history, about $1.1 billion dollars". By signing Senate Bill 1, the state corporate income tax would be dropped from 6.5 percent to 4.9 percent by 2021, which would be the second-lowest corporate income tax in the nation. The law also permitted Indiana counties to eliminate the business personal property tax on new equipment and let them exempt small businesses with less than $20,000 worth of equipment from paying personal property taxes. On June 12, 2013, the Indiana Legislature overrode Pence's veto of a bill to retroactively authorize a local tax. Lawmakers overrode his veto by a 68–23 vote in the House and a 34–12 one in the Senate. Republican legislators overwhelmingly voted against Pence, while most Democrats supported his veto. The Jackson–Pulaski tax fix, one of three bills vetoed by Pence during the session, addressed a 15-year-old county income tax that had been imposed to fund the construction of jail facilities with the stipulation that the tax be lowered by one percent after the first several years. The reduction had not been implemented and thus county residents had been paying an additional one percent tax that they were legally not required to pay. The bill, which was passed by a huge majority of legislators and subsequently vetoed by Pence, allowed money to be kept and not returned to the taxpayers as would have otherwise been necessary. As governor, Pence pressed for a balanced budget amendment to the state's constitution. He initially proposed the initiative in his State of the State address in January 2015. The legislation passed the state Senate. Indiana has had AAA credit ratings with the three major credit-rating agencies since 2010, before Pence took office; these ratings were maintained throughout Pence's tenure. In 2014, Pence supported the Indiana Gateway project, a $71.4 million passenger and freight rail improvement initiative paid for by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (the federal stimulus package), which Pence had voted against while a congressman. In October 2015, Pence "announced plans to pay off a $250 million federal loan" to cover unemployment insurance payments which had spiked during the recession. In March 2016, Pence signed legislation to fund a $230 million two-year road-funding package. During his tenure as governor, Pence supported significant increases in education funding to pre-schools, voucher programs, and charter schools, but frequently clashed with supporters of traditional public schools. In 2014, a little over one year after taking office, Pence helped establish a $10-million state preschool pilot program in Indiana and testified personally before the state Senate Education Committee in favor of the program to convince fellow Republicans (several of whom opposed the proposal) to approve the plan. Although the plan was initially defeated, Pence successfully managed to revive it, "getting Indiana off the list of just 10 states that spent no direct funds to help poor children attend preschool". Demand for enrollment in the program "far outstripped" capacity, and Pence at first refused to apply for up to $80 million in federal Health and Human Services Preschool Development Grant program funding, arguing that "Indiana must develop our own pre-K program without federal intrusion." After coming under sustained criticism for this position, Pence reversed course and sought to apply for the funds. In 2015, Pence secured significant increases in charter-school funding from the legislation, although he did not get everything he had proposed. Legislation signed into law by Pence in 2013 greatly increased the number of students in Indiana who qualify for school vouchers, making it one of the largest voucher programs in the United States. The annual cost of the program was estimated to be $53 million for the 2015–2016 school year. Pence opposed the Common Core State Standards Initiative, calling for the repeal of the standards in his 2014 State of the State address. The Indiana General Assembly then passed a bill to repeal the standards, becoming the first state to do so. In a televised interview appearance with Chris Matthews, Pence advocated eroding the teaching of science in public schools by putting religious creationism on a par with established science, accepting "creationist beliefs" as factual, and thus "teaching the controversy" over evolution and natural selection, and regarding the age of the Earth, and letting children decide for themselves what to believe. Despite successful advocacy for more funding for pre-schools, voucher programs, and charter schools, Pence has frequently clashed with teachers unions and supporters of public schooling. In one of his first acts as governor, Pence removed control of the Educational Employment Relations Board, which was in charge of handling conflicts between unions and school boards, from Glenda Ritz, a Democrat who was the Indiana superintendent of public instruction (a separately elected position in the state). Pence created a new "Center for Education and Career Innovation" (CECI) to coordinate efforts between schools and the private sector; Ritz opposed the center, viewing it as a "power grab" and encroachment on her own duties. Pence eventually disestablished the center in order to help defuse the conflict. In May 2015, Pence signed a bill stripping Ritz of much of her authority over standardized testing and other education issues, and reconstituting the State Board of Education dominated by Pence appointees. The bill also allowed the board to appoint a chairman other than the Superintendent of Public Instruction starting in 2017, and added the State Board of Education (controlled by Pence) as a "state educational authority" along with the Department of Education (controlled by Ritz) for purposes of accessing sensitive student data. Pence and Ritz also clashed over non-binding federal guidelines that advised Indiana public schools must treat transgender students in a way that corresponds to their gender identity, even if their education files indicate a different gender. During Pence's term in office, the Republican-controlled Indiana General Assembly "repeatedly tried to roll back renewable energy standards and successfully ended Indiana's energy efficiency efforts". Pence has been an outspoken supporter of the coal industry, declaring in his 2015 State of the State address that "Indiana is a pro-coal state," expressing support for an "all-of-the-above energy strategy", and stating: "we must continue to oppose the overreaching schemes of the EPA until we bring their war on coal to an end." In 2015, Pence sent a letter to President Obama denouncing the EPA's Clean Power Plan (which would regulate carbon emissions from existing power plants) and stating that Indiana would refuse to comply with the plan. Indiana joined other states in a lawsuit seeking to invalidate the plan. In 2016, Pence said that even if legal challenges failed, Indiana would continue to defy the rule and would not come up with its own plan to reduce emissions. In 2014, over the opposition of Indiana school organizations, Pence signed a bill which allows firearms to be kept in vehicles on school property. In 2015, following a shooting in Chattanooga, Pence recruited the National Rifle Association to train the Indiana National Guard on concealed carry. Some National Guard officials from other states questioned why a civilian organization would be involved in a military issue. In May 2015, Pence signed into law Senate Bill 98, which limited lawsuits against gun and ammunition manufacturers and sellers and retroactively terminated the City of Gary's still-pending 1999 lawsuit against gun manufacturers and retailers that allegedly made illegal sales of handguns. The bill was supported by Republicans such as state senator Jim Tomes, who hoped the measure would attract more gun-related businesses to Indiana, but opposed by Gary mayor and former Indiana attorney general Karen Freeman-Wilson, who viewed the measure as "an unprecedented violation of the separation of powers between the legislative and judicial branches of state government". In 2016, Pence signed Senate Bill 109 into law, legalizing the captive hunting of farm-raised deer in Indiana. In 2009, parts of East Chicago were discovered to have toxic lead and arsenic contamination, and were designated a Superfund site. Governor Pence declined to declare the Superfund site a state emergency; his successor Governor Eric Holcomb issued Executive Order 17–13, declaring a disaster emergency in East Chicago. The site of several former lead smelting plants was first identified as a health concern by the EPA in 1997. Beginning in December 2014, there was an HIV outbreak in Southern Indiana. In 2011, Planned Parenthood (PP) operated five rural clinics in Indiana. They tested for HIV and offered prevention, intervention and counseling to improve public health outcomes. The PP clinic in Scott County performed no abortions. The Republican-controlled legislature and Pence defunded Planned Parenthood. Scott County has been without an HIV testing center since 2013. Pence had long been a vocal opponent of needle exchange programs, which allow drug users to trade in used syringes for sterile ones in order to stop the spread of diseases, despite solid scientific evidence that such programs prevent the spread of AIDS, Hepatitis B (HBV), and Hepatitis C (HCV), and do not increase drug abuse. In March 2015, well after the outbreak began, Pence finally allowed at least five counties to open needle exchanges, but did not move to lift the state ban on funding for needle exchanges. Critics say Pence's compromise had been ineffective because counties had no way to pay for needle exchanges themselves. Anesthesiologist Jerome Adams, then the Pence-appointed Indiana state health commissioner and later surgeon general of the United States during the Trump administration, defended Pence, arguing that publicly funded needle exchange programs are controversial in many conservative communities. During his time as Indiana State Health Commissioner, Adams—along with Governor Pence—delayed Indiana's efforts to deal with the largest HIV outbreak related to injection drug use in the history of the United States by stalling adoption of a needle exchange program. Adams said, "There are people who have real moral and ethical concerns about passing out needles to people with substance abuse problems. To be honest, I shared that sentiment." When President Trump appointed Pence in 2020 to head the country's response to coronavirus, he touted his ostensible experience with quelling an epidemic of HIV in Indiana, in which Pence deliberately delayed his state government's response to the disease despite the recommendations of the Centers for Disease Control that needle exchange was an efficacious approach to reining in the spread of diseases. Pence had told lawmakers he would veto any bill they might pass that provided for such exchanges. In 2015, Pence and the Obama administration agreed to expand Medicaid in Indiana, in accordance with the Affordable Care Act. As part of the expansion, called the Healthy Indiana Plan 2.0, Pence negotiated modifications to the program for Indiana that included co-payments by participants. The co-payments are linked to healthy behaviors on the part of the participants so that, for example, a participant who quit smoking would receive a lower co-payment. Participants can lose benefits for failing to make the payments. The required contribution would be about 2% of income. Critics say those who already struggle to buy food and housing will have even more difficulty paying their 2%. One critic expressed concern that lower-income people may stay out of the program or avoid pursuing health care. A service provider said the program "wins the award for bureaucratic complexity and red tape". In early 2017, Indiana submitted its application to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to renew Healthy Indiana, to show that the program was meeting its targets, as required for renewal. National Public Radio/Side Effects Public Media said the application used "misleading and inaccurate information". On March 26, 2015, Pence signed Indiana Senate Bill 101, also known as the Indiana "religious objections" bill or Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), into law. The move was praised by religious conservatives, but criticized by people and groups who felt the law was carefully worded in a way that would permit discrimination against LGBT persons. Such organizations as the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), the gamer convention Gen Con, and the Disciples of Christ spoke out against the law. Apple CEO Tim Cook and Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff condemned the law, with the latter's company saying it would halt its plans to expand in the state. Angie's List announced that they would cancel a $40 million expansion of their Indianapolis-based headquarters over concerns with the law. The expansion would have moved 1,000 jobs into the state. Thousands protested against the policy. Five Republican state representatives voted against the bill, and Greg Ballard, the Republican mayor of Indianapolis, criticized it as sending the "wrong signal" about the state. Pence defended the law, saying it was not about discrimination. In an appearance on the ABC News program This Week with George Stephanopoulos, he said, "We are not going to change this law," while refusing to answer whether examples of discrimination against LGBT people given by Eric Miller of anti-LGBT group Advance America would be legal under the law. Pence denied the law permitted discrimination and wrote in a March 31, 2015 Wall Street Journal op-ed, "If I saw a restaurant owner refuse to serve a gay couple, I wouldn't eat there anymore. As governor of Indiana, if I were presented a bill that legalized discrimination against any person or group, I would veto it." In the wake of the backlash against the RFRA, on April 2, 2015, Pence signed legislation revising the law to protect against potential discrimination. Pence received heavy criticism from liberals at the time of signing the religious freedom law, who labeled him as anti-gay. In 2018, emails released to the Associated Press showed that conservatives had similarly opposed his support of the subsequent changes to the law. In March 2016, as Indiana governor, Pence signed into law H.B. 1337, a bill that both banned certain abortion procedures and placed new restrictions on abortion providers. The bill banned abortion if the reason for the procedure given by the woman was the fetus' race or gender or a fetal abnormality. In addition, the bill required that all fetal remains from abortions or miscarriages at any stage of pregnancy be buried or cremated, which according to the Guttmacher Institute was not required in any other state. The law was described as "exceptional for its breadth"; if implemented, it would have made Indiana "the first state to have a blanket ban on abortions based solely on race, sex or suspected disabilities, including evidence of Down syndrome". Days after the U.S. Supreme Court issued its decision in Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt, a federal court issued a preliminary injunction blocking the bill from taking effect, with U.S. district judge Tanya Walton Pratt determining that the bill was likely to be unconstitutional and that the State of Indiana would be unlikely to prevail at trial. The abortion bill was subsequently ruled unconstitutional in April 2018 by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. In June 2013, Pence was criticized for deleting comments of others posted on his official government Facebook page; he subsequently apologized. On January 26, 2015, it was widely reported that Pence had planned to launch a state-run, taxpayer-funded news service for Indiana. The service, called "JustIN", was to be overseen by a former reporter for The Indianapolis Star, and would feature breaking news, stories written by press secretaries, and light features. At the time, it was reported that the two employees who would run the news service would be paid a combined $100,000 yearly salary. The target audience was small newspapers which had limited staff, but the site would also serve to communicate directly with the public. The publisher of the Commercial Review of Portland, Indiana, said, "I think it's a ludicrous idea ... the notion of elected officials presenting material that will inevitably have a pro-administration point of view is antithetical to the idea of an independent press." There was speculation that the news service would publish pro-administration stories that would make Pence look good in the event of a presidential run. According to the Associated Press, the idea "of stories prewritten for the media set off a wave of criticism from journalists around the country, who likened the Indiana endeavor to state-run media in Russia and China. Headlines like 'Pravda in the Plains' accompanied calls for Pence to scrap the idea." David A. Graham of The Atlantic regarded the announcement of JustIN as evidence of a disturbing changing trend in how the public gets news. After a week or so of controversy about the idea, Pence scrapped the idea saying, "However well-intentioned, after thorough review of the preliminary planning and careful consideration of the concerns expressed, I am writing you to inform you that I have made a decision to terminate development of the JustIN website immediately." As governor, Pence attempted unsuccessfully to prevent Syrian refugees from being resettled in Indiana. In February 2016, a federal judge ruled that Pence's order to cut off federal funds for a local non-profit refugee resettlement agency was unconstitutional; Pence has appealed. In December 2015, Pence said that "calls to ban Muslims from entering the U.S. are offensive and unconstitutional". Pence "repeatedly stonewalled public records requests as governor, often withholding documents or delaying their release if not denying them outright". As governor, Pence routinely used a personal AOL email account to conduct official business, according to public records. In 2016, hackers compromised the account and used it to send fraudulent emails in an attempt to obtain money from Pence's contacts. While Pence's use of a private email account for state business is not prohibited by Indiana law, some of the emails discussed sensitive matters and homeland security issues. In March 2017, after Pence had become vice president, the State of Indiana released 29 emails to media outlets that had made public records requests, but withheld an undisclosed number of other emails, saying they were deliberative or advisory and thus exempt from public disclosure. Cybersecurity experts and government transparency advocates were surprised by Pence's use of a personal email account to conduct public business, given Pence's past attacks on Hillary Clinton's use of a private email server while U.S. secretary of state. In 2017, Indiana hired a private law firm for $100,000 to handle a backlog of public-records requests for Pence's personal AOL account email correspondence. Pence ran for a second term as governor and was unopposed in the Republican primary on May 3, 2016. He was to face Democrat John R. Gregg in a rematch of the 2012 race. However, Pence filed paperwork ending his campaign on July 15, 2016, as Trump announced his selection of Pence as his vice presidential running mate. Lieutenant Governor Eric Holcomb was nominated in Pence's place, and selected Suzanne Crouch as his running mate. Holcomb went on to defeat Gregg in the general election. Shortly before the 2016 Indiana Republican presidential primary, Pence endorsed Texas U.S. Senator Ted Cruz, who would lose the primary to Trump. Pence then endorsed Trump after the latter became the party's presumptive nominee for president of the United States. Donald Trump considered naming Pence as his vice presidential running mate along with other finalists including New Jersey governor Chris Christie and former House speaker Newt Gingrich. Pence had stronger connections at the time to the politically influential big donors, the Kochs, than Trump did. It was widely reported on July 14 that Pence planned to end his re-election campaign and accept the Republican vice presidential nomination instead. The following day, Trump officially announced on Twitter that Pence would be his running mate. Immediately after the announcement, Pence said he was "very supportive of Donald Trump's call to temporarily suspend immigration from countries where terrorist influence and impact represents a threat to the United States". Pence said he was "absolutely" in sync with Trump's Mexican wall proposal, saying Mexico was "absolutely" going to pay for it. According to a FiveThirtyEight rating of candidates' ideology, Pence was the most conservative vice-presidential candidate in the last 40 years. Pence called Dick Cheney his role model for vice president. During Pence's preparations for the vice presidential debate in October 2016, Wisconsin governor Scott Walker played the role of Democratic vice presidential nominee Tim Kaine. In Kaine's own debate prep, lawyer Robert Barnett was selected to play Pence. Following the debate, experts concluded Pence won against Kaine, with a CNN poll showing 48 percent of viewers thought Pence won and 42 percent believing Kaine won. Pence's "cooler" temperament was seen as an advantage compared to Kaine, who was perceived as more hotheaded. On October 7, 2016, lewd comments made by Donald Trump in 2005 surfaced and gained heavy media attention. That day, Pence said to reporters, "I do not condone his remarks and cannot defend them," but made clear that he was standing by Trump. In response to the revelation, Paul Ryan "uninvited" Trump from what would have been a joint campaign event. The Trump campaign attempted to substitute Pence for Trump at the event, but according to The New York Times, Pence called Trump on October 8 and told him that he (Pence) would not appear at the event, and that Trump would need to handle the next 48 hours on his own, as Pence did not think he would be an effective surrogate for Trump. According to Bob Woodward's 2018 book Fear: Trump in the White House, in the midst of the scandal, then-Republican National Committee chairman Reince Priebus told Trump he should drop out of the race for the good of the party, and that Pence had agreed to replace Trump on the top of the ticket as the Republican presidential nominee, with former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice agreeing to be Pence's running mate. On October 10, 2016, Pence appeared on CNN and said, in response to rumors that he was leaving the ticket, that it was "absolutely false to suggest that at any point in time we considered dropping off this ticket" and that it is the "greatest honor of my life" to be nominated as Trump's running mate. On November 8, 2016, Pence was elected vice president of the United States as Trump's running mate. Soon after the election, he was appointed chairman of President-elect Trump's transition team. During the transition phase of the Trump administration, Pence was reported as holding a large degree of influence in the administration due to his roles as a mediator between Trump and congressional Republicans, for reassuring conservatives about Trump's conservative credentials, and his influence in determining Donald Trump's cabinet. On January 20, 2017, at noon, Pence became the 48th vice president of the United States, sworn into the office by justice Clarence Thomas, using Reagan's Bible, opened to 2 Chronicles 7:14, "If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land," which is the same verse Reagan used for his swearing-ins as governor and president. Pence also used his personal Bible which he opens every morning. Chief of staff: Marc Short National security advisor: Keith Kellogg Legal counsel: Gregory Jacob Chief of staff to Mrs. Karen Pence: Jana Toner Deputy national security advisor: Stephen Pinkos Director of advance: Aaron Chang Director of policy: John Gray Director of public liaison and intergovernmental affairs: Paul Teller Deputy director of public liaison and intergovernmental affairs: Andeliz Castillo Press secretary: Katie Waldman Director of legislative affairs: Christopher Hodgson Deputy director of legislative affairs: Benjamin Cantrell Director of administration and finance: Katherine Purucker Director of scheduling: Bethany Scully Special assistant: Zach Bauer On the first day in office (January 20), Pence performed various ceremonial duties, including swearing in Jim Mattis as United States secretary of defense and John Kelly as secretary of homeland security. He also administered the oath of office to the White House senior staff on January 22, 2017. Pence also sat in on calls made by President Trump to foreign heads of government and state such as Russian president Vladimir Putin and Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull. In January, Pence appointed Josh Pitcock as his chief of staff, whom he had known from his gubernatorial and congressional days. The following month, Jarrod Agen was tapped as deputy assistant to the president and director of communications to the vice president; his previous job being chief of staff for governor of Michigan Rick Snyder through the time of the Flint water crisis. In July, Pitcock stepped down as chief of staff, and was succeeded in the position by Nick Ayers, another longtime Pence advisor. On February 5, 2017, Pence warned Iran "not to test the resolve" of the new Trump administration following their ballistic missile tests. On February 7, 2017, Pence, in his dual constitutional role as president of the United States Senate made the first ever tie-breaking vote to confirm a Cabinet member. He cast the deciding vote to break a fifty-fifty tie to confirm Betsy DeVos as the secretary of education. Pence cast his second tie-breaking vote on March 30, voting to advance a bill to defund Planned Parenthood. In 2018, Pence broke a tie to confirm Jonathan A. Kobes for the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. This was the first ever tie-breaking vote to confirm a judicial nominee in U.S. history. In total, Pence had cast 13 tie-breaking votes, seventh-most in history and more than his previous four predecessors (Joe Biden, Dick Cheney, Al Gore and Dan Quayle) cast combined (Cheney broke eight ties, Gore broke four ties, and Quayle and Biden did not cast a tie-breaking vote). In April, Pence made a tour of the Asia-Pacific region. In South Korea, he met acting president Hwang Kyo-ahn and condemned North Korea's latest missile launch. In Japan, Pence met Prime Minister Shinzō Abe and pledged to work with Japan, South Korea, and China "to achieve a peaceable resolution and the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula," adding "The era of strategic patience is over and while all options are on the table." Pence subsequently traveled to Jakarta, Indonesia, where he met with president Joko Widodo, toured the largest mosque in the region (the Istiqlal Mosque), and praised moderate Islam. Pence ended his trip with stops in Sydney, Australia (where, after meeting with Malcolm Turnbull, he said the U.S. "intends to honor" a U.S.–Australia refugee resettlement agreement), and Oahu, Hawaii and American Samoa. On May 21, 2017, Pence delivered the commencement address at the University of Notre Dame. Traditionally, the president delivers the address at Notre Dame in his inaugural year, but in 2017 Pence was invited instead when Trump decided to speak at Liberty University. On June 30, 2017, Pence was appointed chair of the National Space Council after Trump signed an executive order reestablishing the council. As chair, Pence held eight meetings from 2017 to 2020. On October 8, 2017, Pence walked out of a game between the NFL's Indianapolis Colts and San Francisco 49ers after members of the 49ers knelt during the national anthem. Shortly afterwards, Pence commented via Twitter, "President Trump and I will not dignify any event that disrespects our soldiers, our Flag, or our National Anthem," adding, "While everyone is entitled to their own opinion, I don't think it's too much to ask NFL players to respect the flag and our national anthem." Pence was widely criticized by various people for what was considered a publicity stunt. Democratic representative Adam Schiff (CA-28) questioned how much taxpayer's money was used to fund Pence's actions, and CNN later estimated that the total cost of his eight hours of travel on Air Force Two to attend the game was about $242,500, not including ground transportation and security. 49ers safety Eric Reid (the second NFL player after Colin Kaepernick to participate in the protests) told reporters it was predictable that Pence would walk out, knowing that most of the team were protesting. Reid also expressed doubt over the regularity Pence is in terms of attending Colts matches, and referenced a photograph of the vice president and his wife in Colts uniform that had been tweeted before the match, although the official photograph (right) proved otherwise. The photograph in question was first published in 2014. Sportswriter Peter King wrote that the furor surrounding Pence had overshadowed Peyton Manning, who was being honored by the Colts, saying, "Pence trumped a day that belonged to the greatest football hero the state of Indiana has ever seen, and he did it for political purposes ... he stole Manning's last great day as a Colt. [He] will have to live with himself for that." The following year, Pence reacted positively on Twitter, after NFL owners unanimously decided to approve a new policy requiring all players to stand (or, given the option to stay in the locker room) during the national anthem, despite not consulting the NFL Players Association. On February 1, 2018, it was announced that Pence would lead the presidential delegation to the 2018 Winter Olympics, alongside his wife. Much of Pence's time at Pyeongchang was affected by the ongoing North Korean crisis. Prior to the opening ceremony, on February 9, Pence skipped on a dinner held by South Korean president Moon Jae-in, as he would have shared a table with North Korea's ceremonial head of state Kim Yong-nam. Instead, he met with four North Korean defectors in Pyeongtaek, alongside his special guest, Fred Warmbier (the father of Otto Warmbier, who was arrested in North Korea for attempted theft, and sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment, before returning to the U.S. in a comatose state). At the ceremony, the Pences were seated in front of the North Korean delegates, and when North and South Korean athletes entered during the Parade of Athletes, they chose to stay seated, which prompted critics to accuse Pence of hypocrisy in regards to the NFL protests. Pence was supposed to meet with the North Koreans on February 10, but they pulled out at the last day. Over the next few months, the North Koreans started communicating more with their neighbors, as Supreme Leader Kim Jong-un secretly met with Chinese paramount leader Xi Jinping in March and then Moon Jae-in in an historic inter-Korean summit in April, and around the same time, a meeting between Trump and Kim was also proposed. On May 10, Pence accompanied Trump to Andrews Air Force Base as three American citizens were released by North Korea, and in an early morning interview with ABC's Jonathan Karl, he said seeing the men back on American soil "was really one of the greatest joys of my life". Talks broke down later that month following comments made by Pence and Trump, comparing the situation to events in Libya seven years previous, despite their voluntary disarmament of nuclear weapons in 2003. North Korean vice foreign minister Choe Son-hui called Pence's remarks "ignorant and stupid". On May 24, Trump abruptly called off the summit with Pence in attendance, only for him to change his mind a day later, later announcing that it would still be scheduled to take place on June 12 in Singapore. In September 2019, Pence attended official meetings with Irish prime minister Leo Varadkar in Dublin, Ireland but stayed at President Trump's resort in Doonbeg, 180 miles (290 km) away. Pence's schedule included four hours spent in transit in one day, and two flights on Air Force Two before the end of the next day. Costs for the limousine service alone totaled $599,000 according to State Department receipts, compared to President Obama's three-day trip to Dublin with the same limousine company totaling $114,000. In February 2020, Pence defended debt- and deficit-spending as a measure to stimulate economic growth. In May 2017, Pence filed Federal Election Commission paperwork to form Great America Committee, a political action committee (PAC) that would be headed by his former campaign staffers Nick Ayers and Marty Obst. Pence is the only vice president to have started his own PAC while still in office. Pence denied a New York Times article's allegations that he would run for president in 2020, calling them "laughable and absurd", and said the article was "disgraceful and offensive". Pence was a key player in the Trump-Ukraine scandal and the Trump impeachment inquiry. Pence had at least two phone conversations and an in-person meeting with Volodymyr Zelensky, President of Ukraine. Pence met with Zelensky in Poland on September 1, 2019, during an unexpected delay in U.S. military aid to Ukraine. Pence later told the press that he did not mention 2020 presidential candidate and former vice president Joe Biden to Zelensky, but raised issues regarding Ukrainian corruption. After the inquiry was opened, Pence publicly stated his support of Trump's call for foreign investigation into Joe Biden and his son Hunter, saying, "I think the American people have a right to know if the vice president of the United States or his family profited from his position." On October 3, Pence stated, "My predecessor had a son who was paid $50,000 a month to be on a Ukrainian board at the time that Vice President Biden was leading the Obama administration's efforts in Ukraine, I think [that] is worth looking into." Pence defended Trump's decision in January 2020 to assassinate the Iranian major general in the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) Qasem Soleimani, promoting conspiracy theories that supposedly linked the al-Qaeda attacks on the United States to Iran. In a series of tweets, the vice president termed Soleimani "an evil man who was responsible for killing thousands of Americans". Pence insisted Soleimani had "assisted in the clandestine travel to Afghanistan of 10 of the 12 terrorists who carried out the September 11 terrorist attacks", which critics said was his confusing the number of 9/11 hijackers (actually 19) and insinuating (without evidence) that the general was involved. Many experts responded that Pence's claims were unsubstantiated. Pence's spokeswoman Katie Waldman said that the dozen terrorists Pence referred to were those who had traveled through Afghanistan, ten of whom "were assisted by Soleimani". On February 26, 2020, President Trump named Pence as the leader of the White House Coronavirus Task Force to combat the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S. Various public health officials and members of Congress had suggested the selection of a "Coronavirus Czar", though Trump said that would not be the title's name. As the leader of the task force, Pence coordinated efforts with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, Department of Homeland Security, and White House Office. In April 2020, Pence exempted himself from the Mayo Clinic's policy of wearing a face mask in the hospital during a visit. Pence defended his action, saying he needed to look staff "in the eye". The next day, the vice president's opponents criticized him for promoting "completely irresponsible public health messaging". Later, Pence acknowledged he should have worn a mask during the hospital visit, and did so two days later when visiting a ventilator production facility. In late June 2020, as coronavirus cases were spiking, Pence gave an optimistic press briefing where he made several misleading and false claims about the state of the coronavirus pandemic. He misleadingly argued that surges in cases were the result of increased testing, telling reporters that increases in new cases were "a reflection of a great success in expanding testing across the country". However, health experts noted that case growth outpaced the number of tests, and that the share of positive tests was increasing. Pence also falsely claimed that coronavirus fatalities were declining all across the country (Statistics here), that the curve had been flattened, and that all 50 states were opening up. In private meetings with Republican senators, Pence urged them to focus on "encouraging signs". Pence told the senators that cases were increasing in only 3% of counties and 12 states; however, data at the time showed that cases were increasing in at least 5% of counties and in at least 20 states. On December 18, the Pences received the Pfizer/BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for SARS-CoV-2, in front of a live audience at a televised event to show Americans that the vaccine is safe and effective. Ahead of his presidential campaign on February 28, 2019, Joe Biden referred to Pence as a "decent guy" in a speech in Omaha, Nebraska, when making an anecdote about an audience falling silent after Pence mentioned Trump's name. Biden later faced criticism for his complimentary remarks due to Pence's alleged anti-LGBT positions, which Biden would later apologize for and clarify by saying, "I was making a point in a foreign policy context, that under normal circumstances a Vice President wouldn't be given a silent reaction on the world stage." Biden had previously referred to Pence as a "decent guy" in 2018, and Pence and Biden exchanged conversations via phone before Pence's 2017 transition into the vice presidency. In June 2019, the Democratic former New York City Council president Andrew Stein opined that Trump could improve his re-election chances by replacing Pence as his running mate with former South Carolina governor and former United States ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley. Despite that, Trump said Pence will be his running mate. He declined to endorse Pence should his running mate seek in 2024 to succeed him, but said he would give it "very strong consideration". In remarks about law enforcement during the 2020 Republican convention, Pence said a federal security officer, Dave Underwood, "was shot and killed during the riots in Oakland", implying he was killed by rioters, when instead a man linked to the far-right Boogaloo movement had exploited the unrest as a cover for murder. On October 7, 2020, Pence participated in a debate with Kamala Harris that was held by USA Today in Salt Lake City, Utah, and moderated by Susan Page, the Washington bureau chief of the newspaper. The debate was held with adaptations designed to avoid contagion of the COVID-19 virus given that the vice president had been in close contact with people who had been infected at a recent event at the White House. Plexiglas partitions separated the candidates and masks were required for all attending except the candidates and moderator. By some estimates, Pence interrupted Harris twice as much as she interrupted him. Media outlets noted that near the end of the debate, a fly landed on Pence's head for almost two minutes. A CNN poll found that 59% of registered voters felt that Harris had won the debate, while 38% felt that Pence had. On November 7, 2020, after several days of vote counting, Biden and Harris were declared by most major news networks to be the winners of the election. On December 14 the Electoral College confirmed the win, giving the Biden-Harris campaign 306 votes compared to 232 for the Trump–Pence campaign, however, Trump refused to concede and insisted that he had actually won. Throughout November and December Trump and his campaign filed more than 50 lawsuits alleging election fraud and other irregularities; all of them were eventually rejected by judges. Trump also pressured Republican officials, lawmakers and even the Justice Department to take actions to overturn the election. In late December 2020, a federal lawsuit was filed against Pence by Republican congressman Louie Gohmert and 11 Arizona Republicans who would have become presidential electors had Trump actually won Arizona. The plaintiffs sought to give the vice president the power to reject state certified presidential electors in favour of "competing slates of electors" so that Biden's victory over Trump could be overturned. The United States Department of Justice represented Pence in this case, and argued for its dismissal, stating that the lawsuit was a "walking legal contradiction" because it sought to grant power to the vice president, while suing the vice president. Within a week, the lawsuit was dismissed in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Texas, and the appeal was rejected by a United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit panel, both due to the plaintiffs' lack of standing. Gohmert then appealed to the Supreme Court, which on January 7 tersely "denied" his petition. In January 2021, Trump began to pressure Pence to take action to overturn the election. As vice president, Pence presided over the January 6, 2021, congressional joint session to count the electoral votes—normally a non-controversial, ceremonial event. For days beforehand, Trump declared both in public and in private that Pence should use that position to overturn the election results in swing states and declare Trump–Pence the winners of the election. Pence demurred that the United States Constitution did not give him that power, but Trump falsely insisted that "The Vice President and I are in total agreement that the Vice President has the power to act." According to The New York Times, multiple sources claim that Trump called Pence before he departed to certify the results urging him again one last time ultimately telling him, "You can either go down in history as a patriot, or you can go down in history as a pussy." Before the start of the Joint Session, Pence stated in a "Dear Colleague" letter that the Constitution prevented him from deciding which electoral votes counted and which did not. On January 6, 2021, the day on which a joint session of Congress met to count and certify the results of the electoral college for the 2020 presidential election, Trump held a rally at which he urged listeners to go to the Capitol and repeatedly expressed the hope that Pence would "do the right thing". Many listeners then marched to the Capitol and stormed it. A Reuters photographer overheard three rioters saying they wanted to seize Pence and hang him, while many others chanted their desire to hang Pence. On January 15, The Washington Post reported that Pence came "dangerously close" to the rioters during their occupation of the Capitol. Pence was not evacuated from the Senate chambers until 14 minutes after the initial breach of the Capitol was reported. He and his family were eventually ushered from the Senate chambers into a second-floor hideaway. One minute later, the mob rushed onto a stair landing only 100 feet away, from which they could have seen him enter the room if they had arrived a minute earlier. After his evacuation from the Senate chambers, his Secret Service detail wanted to move him away from the Capitol building but he refused to get in the car. Pence later approved the deployment of the National Guard, which raised questions as the vice president is not the commander-in-chief. After the Capitol was cleared, Congress resumed its joint session, and officially certified the election results with Pence declaring Biden and Harris the winners. During the siege, Trump criticized Pence as lacking "courage". Earlier L. Lin Wood, a lawyer associated with Trump, had called for Pence to be "executed" by "firing squad". In spite of the threats against Pence, Trump never reached out to Pence or inquired about his safety during the attack on the Capitol, according to sources close to the vice president. Aides believed that Pence was being set up as a scapegoat for Trump's failure to overturn the results of the election. Pence was described as very angry with Trump. The two did not speak for several days, until January 11 when they met at the White House to discuss the prior week's Capitol siege and the final days of their administration. On January 20, Pence attended the inauguration of Joe Biden as president of the United States, unlike Trump. Afterwards, he left the Capitol with his successor, Kamala Harris. Pence did not have a permanent place of residence in Indiana when he left the vice presidency. Official records indicated that Pence had not owned a residence in Indiana since 2013, having lived in the governor's mansion and then the vice president's residence in Washington. As a result, for several months after leaving office, he and his wife stayed at residences owned by various Indiana Republican politicians. It is believed that he was at one time staying in a cabin owned by his former lieutenant governor, Indiana Governor Eric Holcomb. In May 2021, the Pences bought a home in Carmel, Indiana. In February 2021, it was announced that Pence would join The Heritage Foundation as a distinguished visiting fellow. He also joined the Young America's Foundation conservative youth organization, with plans to launch a new podcast with the group in the coming months. At speaking engagements in the months after the end of the Trump administration, Pence spoke with reverence of the former president. Pence narrated a four-part television series on the career of right-wing radio host Rush Limbaugh titled Age of Rush, which debuted on Fox Nation in March 2021. Pence had previously cited Limbaugh as an inspiration for his career in talk radio and then in politics. In April 2021, it was reported that Pence signed a deal with publisher Simon & Schuster for two books, including an autobiography that is set to be published in 2023. The day the Supreme Court overturned Roe in June 2022, Pence told Breitbart News: "Roe v. Wade has been consigned to the ash heap of history...Having been given this second chance for life, we must not rest and must not relent until the sanctity of life is restored to the center of American law in every state in the land." Pence appeared in the July 2022 documentary Unprecedented. In October 2022, Pence condemned "unprincipled populism" and "Putin apologists" in the Republican Party. Since leaving the vice presidency, Pence has distanced himself from Trump's attempts to cast doubt on the 2020 presidential election and made high-profile speeches in early nominating states. Pence has also separated himself from Trump by endorsing candidates in several Republican primary elections in opposition to the candidate endorsed by Trump. In the primary for governor of Georgia, Pence endorsed incumbent governor Brian Kemp over the Trump-backed candidate, former senator David Perdue. This was described as "a proxy battle" between Pence and Trump, with Pence's candidate Kemp winning the nomination easily. In the 2022 Arizona gubernatorial election, Pence endorsed Karrin Taylor Robson while Trump endorsed Kari Lake. In the 2022 Wisconsin gubernatorial election Pence endorsed former Lieutenant Governor Rebecca Kleefisch; Trump supported businessman Tim Michels. On February 9, 2023, it was reported that Pence had been subpoenaed by special counsel Jack Smith regarding the attack on the Capitol, following months of negotiation between Pence's attorneys and the special counsel. After several unsuccessful challenges to the subpoena by Pence's lawyers and by Trump himself, Pence testified before the grand jury on April 27, 2023, saying "We'll obey the law, we'll tell the truth." The same day as the subpoena was reported, Pence released a statement expressing support for "parental rights", especially regarding how teachers treat children who express different gender identities, which he described as left-wing efforts "to indoctrinate our children behind parents' backs." The statement was released through Advancing American Freedom, a communications group he founded in 2021 with political donations. In January 2023, after classified documents were found at the home of President Joe Biden, Pence asked his lawyer to search his home "out of an abundance of caution". The attorney found around a dozen documents marked as classified in Pence's Indiana home and turned over the documents to the FBI. The discovery came after Pence had repeatedly said that he did not have classified documents. Pence has taken responsibility for the documents and said that he was unaware of his possession of them. The FBI and the Justice Department's National Security Division reviewed the incident. Pence indicated he would "fully cooperate". On February 10, the FBI searched his home. In June, the Department of Justice notified Pence that its investigation had ended and that no charges would be brought forward. Polls of Republicans in 2021 regarding their preferred presidential candidate in 2024 implied that Pence could begin a campaign as a top-tier candidate if former President Trump were to forgo a run. At the same time, said polling also foretold a precipitous decline in Pence's polling numbers if Trump were to seek the presidency again. In light of this, there was a widespread view among both Republican leaders and grassroots Republicans that "Pence is dead in the early waters of 2024." In May 2022, The New York Times reported that Pence was considering a presidential run regardless of whether Trump decided to run for a second term. In 2023, Pence criticized former President Donald Trump, especially regarding the events that took place on January 6, 2021. While speaking at a Gridiron dinner, an event attended by politicians and journalists, Pence said that Trump was wrong to suggest that Pence had a right to overturn the election results. Pence went further, saying that Trump's words not only endangered him, but his family and everyone at the Capitol. Much of the rhetoric was believed to be a lead-up to Pence's potential run for the Republican nomination heading into the 2024 presidential election. On June 5, 2023, Pence filed paperwork and officially launched his bid for the presidency. In July, Pence became the first 2024 Republican presidential candidate to visit Ukraine, where he met President Volodymyr Zelenskyy. On October 28, Pence, who had weak fundraising and poll numbers, withdrew from the race. Much of his campaigning had taken place in Iowa. On March 15, 2024, Pence announced that he would not endorse Trump, nor would he support Biden in the 2024 presidential election. Pence and his wife, Karen (née Batten), met while he was in law school at Indiana University. They were married in 1985. Pence's father died in 1988, leaving his mother a widow with four grown children and two teenagers. Mike and Karen Pence have three children: Michael, Charlotte, and Audrey. Michael Pence is a first lieutenant and pilot in the United States Marine Corps. During Pence's service in the House, his family lived in Arlington, Virginia when Congress was in session and in Columbus, Indiana, during recesses. During an interview in 2002, Pence told a reporter that he would not have dinner alone with a woman other than his wife. On May 1, 2004, Pence's mother remarried – this time to Basil Coolidge Fritsch, a widower since 2001. In 2018, Pence's oldest brother, Greg, entered and won the political race to represent Indiana's 6th congressional district in Congress (the seat previously held by Mike). Greg and Mike are similar enough in appearance that Greg once successfully acted as a decoy to lure the press away from his brother when Mike Pence was being touted as a potential running mate to Donald Trump. In 2016 he was diagnosed with asymptomatic left bundle branch block. In April 2021, Pence underwent surgery for a pacemaker implant due to a slow heartbeat. The family's pet rabbit, Marlon Bundo, was the subject of a children's book authored by Pence's daughter, Charlotte. Pence was raised in a Catholic family, was an altar server, and attended parochial school. He became a born-again Christian in college, while a member of a nondenominational Christian student group, and identified his first year—and specifically "a Christian music festival in Asbury, Kentucky, in the spring of 1978" referring to the Ichthus Music Festival at then Asbury College in Wilmore, Kentucky—as the moment he made a "commitment to Christ". After that point, Pence continued to attend Mass (where he met his wife) and was a Catholic youth minister. Pence called himself Catholic in a 1994 news piece, although by 1995, he and his family had joined an evangelical megachurch, the Grace Evangelical Church. In 2013, Pence said his family was "kind of looking for a church". In 2016, Pence and his wife regularly worshiped at College Park Church, a nondenominational church in Indianapolis. He has described himself as "a Christian, a conservative and a Republican, in that order", and as "a born-again, Evangelical Catholic". As one commentator put it, "Pence doesn't simply wear his faith on his sleeve—he wears the entire Jesus jersey." In a 2002 statement on the floor of the House of Representatives (reported in the Congressional Record), Pence told his colleagues "... I also believe that someday scientists will come to see that only the theory of intelligent design provides even a remotely rational explanation for the known universe." When asked by Chris Matthews in 2009 if he believed in evolution, Pence said "I believe with all my heart that God created the heavens and the earth, the seas and all that is in them. How he did that, I'll ask him about some day." Pence, Mike (2022). So Help Me God. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1982190330. Pence, Mike; Pence Bond, Charlotte (2023). Go Home for Dinner: Advice on How Faith Makes a Family and Family Makes a Life. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1982190361. Political positions of Mike Pence Electoral history of Mike Pence At the end of the debate, Second Lady Karen Pence was seen onstage without a mask, which her spokesperson said was on the basis of an agreement with Harris's husband, Douglas Emhoff, who ended up wearing his mask onstage. Crockett, Emily (March 26, 2016). "Indiana crammed as many anti-abortion bills as it could into this horrifying new law". Vox. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Crockett, Emily (July 14, 2016). "Indiana Gov. Mike Pence signed a law this year that mandated funerals for fetuses". Vox. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Wang, Stephanie (June 30, 2016). "Judge halts Indiana's new abortion law". IndyStar. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Groppe, Maureen (September 2, 2019). "Mike Pence has a deep affection for Ireland. It's not completely reciprocated". USA Today. Retrieved July 9, 2020. "The Republic from Columbus, Indiana · Page 1". April 14, 1988. Retrieved November 17, 2016. "Wedding Bells Ring Out For 3 S. Side Couples". Chicago Daily Tribune. April 5, 1956. p. 90. de la Cuetara, Ines (July 14, 2016). "Mike Pence: Everything You Need to Know". ABC News. Retrieved July 15, 2016. Thomas, Ken (April 15, 2017). "5 things to know about US Vice President Mike Pence". National. Star Tribune. Associated Press. Archived from the original on April 18, 2017. Retrieved April 17, 2017. Neal, Andrea (July 11, 2018). Pence: The Path to Power. Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-1-68435-038-4. Retrieved August 5, 2020. Mayer, Jane (October 23, 2017). "The Danger of President Pence; Trump's critics yearn for his exit. But Mike Pence, the corporate right's inside man, poses his own risks". Newyorker.com. Retrieved October 26, 2017. Deparle, Jason (August 29, 2006). "Star of the Right Loses His Base at the Border". The New York Times. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Doyle, Kevin (March 16, 2017). "Mike Pence tried with extraordinary speech about Irish heritage—but Hillary Clinton wins the biggest cheer of the night". Irish Independent. Retrieved March 16, 2017. Mahler, Jonathan; Johnson, Dirk (July 20, 2016). "Mike Pence's Journey: Catholic Democrat to Evangelical Republican". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 22, 2017. Bump, Philip (January 9, 2018). "How 'chain migration' brought us the Trump White House". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 14, 2018. Carswell, Simon (March 21, 2013). "Mike Pence and Donald Trump's Irish connection: Doonbeg". The Irish Times. Retrieved July 15, 2016. McMahon, Páraic (July 15, 2016). "Doonbeg links aplenty in US Presidential race". ClareHerald.com. Retrieved October 1, 2016. "Biography". Office of U.S. Representative Mike Pence. Archived from the original on March 6, 2012. Retrieved July 2, 2017. Kelly, Niki (February 10, 2016). "Pence pegs Holcomb for state's No. 2 post". The Journal Gazette. Archived from the original on October 27, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2016. Cook, Tony (May 31, 2014). "Is Gov. Mike Pence moving to the center amid talk of presidential run?". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved April 21, 2020. "Well, Mike Pence Used to Help Woody Harrelson with Sermon Prep". Relevant. November 6, 2019. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Burton, Danielle (November 15, 2006). "What You Didn't Know About Rep. Mike Pence of Indiana". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on February 17, 2010. Retrieved March 31, 2015. Eason, Rrian (November 9, 2016). "Next VP: 10 things to know about Indiana Gov. Mike Pence". IndyStar. Retrieved December 4, 2016. Graham, Jordan (September 9, 2016). "Mike Pence Explains How Ronald Reagan Made Him a Republican". The Orange County Register. Archived from the original on September 10, 2016. Retrieved December 4, 2016. "Here's what you should know about Mike Pence". HuffPost. Sager, R. (2006). The Elephant in the Room: Evangelicals, Libertarians, and the Battle to Control the Republican Party. Wiley. p. 82. ISBN 978-0-471-79332-8. Helderman, Rosalind S.; Hamburger, Tom; Crites, Alice (June 15, 2016). "Mike Pence used campaign funds to pay his mortgage—and it cost him an election". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 16, 2016. "Arab Group Says Pence TV Ad Is Offensive". Post-Tribune. Associated Press. October 12, 1990. "Mike Pence Fast Facts—CNN Politics". CNN. July 14, 2016. Retrieved March 7, 2021. Montanaro, Domenica (July 14, 2016). "5 Things To Know About Mike Pence". NPR. Pence, Mike (Summer 1991). "Confessions of a negative campaigner". Indiana Policy Review. pp. 5–6. Archived from the original on March 5, 2001. "Mike Pence Congressional Papers". Indiana University. 2014. Moll, Karly (November 7, 2012). "Profile: Indiana Gov.-elect Mike Pence". USA Today. Retrieved May 17, 2017. In a 1992 article for the monthly Indiana Policy Review, Pence likened Bayh's and Coats's attempt at blocking out-of-state trash from landing in Hoosier landfills to Nazis seizing Jewish assets.Samuelsohn, Daniel (July 20, 2016). "Mike Pence once compared Evan Bayh and Dan Coats to Nazis". Politico. Retrieved May 17, 2017. Hall, Steve (September 11, 1995). "The kind conservative". The Indianapolis Star. pp. C1, C2. Congress (June 4, 2014). Congressional Record: Proceedings and debates of the 147th Congress, First Session. Vol. 147. U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 19950. ISBN 9780160924286. "Mike Pence and His Family". Mike Pence for Congress. Archived from the original on January 19, 2001. "Hear Mike Here!". WIBC. Archived from the original on June 11, 2000. "Pence to syndicate". The Indianapolis Star. February 24, 1994. p. B7. Retrieved April 24, 2018. "Arena Profile: Mike Pence". Politico. 2010. Archived from the original on October 12, 2010. Retrieved November 28, 2014. Trares, Ryan (January 17, 2017). "Pence used radio show to build name". The Republic. Columbus, Indiana. Retrieved April 24, 2018. Miller, Emily McFarlan; Kimberly, Winston (July 15, 2016). "5 faith facts on "Mike Pence: A 'born-again, evangelical Catholic". Religion News Service. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Also published the same date in the National Catholic Reporter. Hulse, Carl (November 11, 2016). "Mike Pence Emerging as a Commanding Figure in Trump Administration". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved January 14, 2018. Lorber, Janie (July 21, 2010). "Tea Party Caucus Tackles Racism Charge". The New York Times. Retrieved May 17, 2017. "At first official event, Pence, Trump set sights on Clinton, vow to restore prosperity, safety to America". Republican Convention. Fox News. July 16, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Barbaro, Michael; Davey, Monica (July 15, 2016). "Mike Pence: A Conservative Proudly Out of Sync With His Times". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 16, 2016. "2006 Indiana Election Report" (PDF). Indiana Election Division. March 28, 2007. pp. 10, 62, 69–70, 110. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 25, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2017. "2008 Indiana Election Report" (PDF). Indiana Election Division. May 24, 2009. pp. 14, 56, 66–67, 104. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 24, 2017. "2010 Indiana Election Report" (PDF). Indiana Election Division. pp. 15, 61, 69, 111. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 23, 2017. Retrieved March 11, 2017. Harris, Shane (July 15, 2016). "Donald Trump and Mike Pence: Two Newbies, One Dangerous World". The Daily Beast. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Pence, Mike (November 8, 2006). "Pence Announces Candidacy for Republican Leader" (Press release). Office of U.S. Representative Mike Pence. Archived from the original on November 14, 2006. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Boehner elected as Republican leader: Succeeds Hastert in top GOP role in Democratic-controlled House". Politics. NBC News. Associated Press. November 17, 2006. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Groppe, Maureen (November 19, 2008). "U.S. Rep. Mike Pence of Indiana to get House GOP's No. 3 leadership job". The Indianapolis Star. Archived from the original on January 29, 2015. Retrieved November 20, 2008. Barbaro, Michael; Davey, Monica (July 15, 2016). "Mike Pence: A Conservative Proudly Out of Sync With His Times". The New York Times. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Official Alphabetical List of Members with Committee Assignments for the 107th Congress". Clerk of the House of Representatives. p. 27. Archived from the original on September 22, 2018. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Official Alphabetical List of Members with Committee Assignments for the 108th Congress". Clerk of the House of Representatives. October 14, 2004. p. 57. Archived from the original on September 22, 2018. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Official Alphabetical List of Members with Committee Assignments for the 109th Congress (final ed.)". Clerk of the House of Representatives. p. 27. Archived from the original on December 30, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Official Alphabetical List of Members with Committee Assignments for the 110th Congress (final ed.)". Clerk of the House of Representatives. p. 27. Archived from the original on September 22, 2018. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Official Alphabetical List of Members with Committee Assignments for the 111th Congress (final ed.)". Clerk of the House of Representatives. p. 27. Archived from the original on December 29, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Official Alphabetical List of Members with Committee Assignments for the 112th Congress (final ed.)". Clerk of the House of Representatives. December 27, 2012. p. 13. Archived from the original on December 29, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "The 10 Best Members of Congress". Esquire. October 15, 2008. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Phillips, Amber (July 14, 2016). "Who is Mike Pence?". The Fix. The Washington Post. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Montenaro, Domenico (July 13, 2016). "Curse of the 2012 GOP candidate?". MSN. Archived from the original on June 27, 2009. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Memoli, Michael A. (September 19, 2010). "GOP Rep. Mike Pence gets nod for 2012 presidential run". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 3, 2015. O'Donnell, Kelly (July 12, 2016). "Team Trump Plans Public Event Friday With VP Pick". NBC News. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Kristol, William (December 21, 2009). "Kristol: Draft Pence!". The Weekly Standard. Retrieved January 31, 2010. Kraushaar, Josh (January 20, 2010). "Is Pence inspired?". Politico. Retrieved January 31, 2010. Cox, Norman (January 20, 2010). "Bayh Criticizes 'Ultraliberal' Leanings After GOP Upset WRTV Indianapolis". WRTV 6. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2010. Hamby, Peter (February 15, 2010). "Pence will not seek Bayh seat". CNN. Archived from the original on October 28, 2017. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Sherman, Jake (February 15, 2010). "Pence declines again on Bayh seat". Politico. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Montopoli, Brian (January 27, 2011). "Mike Pence Says he Won't Run for President". CBS News. Retrieved December 15, 2011. Smith, Brandon (June 27, 2012). "Pence Vows No New Business Regulation If Elected Governor". Indiana Public Media. Archived from the original on May 12, 2018. Retrieved May 11, 2018. Smith, Brandon (November 7, 2012). "Daniels And Pence Vow To Continue Education Reform". Indiana Public Media. Archived from the original on March 1, 2013. Retrieved May 11, 2018. "Pence in as governor of Indiana; Hassan wins N.H." NBC News. November 6, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. Stidman, Eric (April 20, 2015). "John Gregg eyes governor's seat for 2016". WTHITV.com. Archived from the original on June 13, 2015. Retrieved June 13, 2015. Carden, Dan (January 14, 2013). "Pence sworn in as Indiana's 50th governor". The Times of Northwest Indiana. Timiraos, Nick (July 17, 2016). "Mike Pence Brings Conservative Bona Fides to Donald Trump Ticket". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved July 18, 2016. "FSSA Mission and Vision". in.gov. State of Indiana. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Hayden, Maureen (July 14, 2014). "State reports budget surplus, $2 billion in reserves". Tribune Star. Community Newspaper Holdings Indiana Statehouse Bureau. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "Fact-Checking Trump's First Appearance With Running Mate Mike Pence". Politics: 2016 Election. NBC News. July 16, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Jackson, Brooks (July 21, 2016). "Pence on Employment Record". The Wire. FactCheck.org. Annenberg Public Policy Center. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Groppe, Maureen (June 10, 2015). "Indiana's Economy Growing More Slowly Than U.S. Average". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Cook, Tony (August 28, 2016). "Under Mike Pence, Indiana gave incentives to companies that offshored jobs". The Indianapolis Star. Archived from the original on September 5, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2016. List of Incentives and offshoring under Gov. Mike Pence Turner, Kris (February 15, 2016). "Sen. Joe Donnelly, Gov. Mike Pence react to Carrier, UTEC sending 2,100 Hoosier jobs to Mexico". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Adams, Matt; Smith, Matt (March 2, 2016). "Gov. Pence meets with Carrier executives about move to Mexico". WXIN. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Turner, Kris (March 3, 2016). "Carrier, UTEC agree to reimburse incentives after meeting with Gov. Pence". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Levine, Sam (July 16, 2016). "Mike Pence Once Thought A $7.25 Minimum Wage Was Too High". HuffPost. Retrieved July 17, 2016. Mahoney, Brian (July 15, 2016). "Pence on labor". Morning Shift. Politico. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Carden, Dan. "Indiana unlikely to boost minimum wage despite widespread support". The Times of Northwest Indiana. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Carden, Dan. "Pence signs repeal of common construction wage". The Times of Northwest Indiana. Retrieved July 17, 2016. Nather, David (July 16, 2016). "With Pence pick, Trump just made women's health a top-tier election issue". PBS. Retrieved June 22, 2017. Rucker, Philip (December 12, 2014). "Mike Pence Lays Out Vision for a Presidential Campaign. But Will He Be a Candidate?". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 1, 2015. "Review & Outlook: The State Tax Reformers: More Governors look to repeal their income taxes". The Wall Street Journal. January 31, 2013. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Trinko, Katrina (May 7, 2013). "Governor Pence's Indiana-Tax Win". National Review. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. Retrieved January 1, 2015. Cook, Tony (March 14, 2015). "Gov. Mike Pence Signs Off on Business Tax Cuts". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved July 22, 2016. "Indiana Lawmakers Override Pence on Local Tax Measure". The Herald Bulletin. Associated Press. June 12, 2013. Retrieved January 1, 2015. Schneider, Mary Beth (June 12, 2013). "Indiana Lawmakers Override Gov. Mike Pence's Veto, Resolve County Tax Mixup". The Indianapolis Star. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. Retrieved January 1, 2015. "Legislature Overrides Pence Veto of Jackson-Pulaski Tax Fix". WIBC-FM 93.1. June 12, 2013. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. Retrieved January 1, 2015. Davies, Tom (March 8, 2015). "Pence's balanced budget amendment advancing in Legislature". WISH-TV. Associated Press. Retrieved July 14, 2016. "S&P affirms Indiana bond rating". Journal Gazette. April 1, 2016. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved July 18, 2016. "Indiana Gateway Project". INDOT. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Carden, Dan (June 1, 2014). "Pence sweetens on stimulus as state benefits". The Times of Northwest Indiana. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Klein, Alyson (July 15, 2016). "Indiana's Pence, Trump VP Pick: Pro-School Choice, Anti-Common Core". EducationWeek. Elliott, Scott (July 13, 2015). "The basics of Mike Pence on education: A battle for control". Chalkbeat. Howey, Brian (October 26, 2014). "Pence takes heat over pre-K federal funds". Times of Northwest Indiana. Cook, Tony; Schneider, Chelsea (June 2, 2016). "In an about-face, Pence expresses interest in federal pre-K grant". The Indianapolis Star. "Pence signs Indiana voucher expansion bill". Associated Press. May 9, 2013. Carden, Dan (May 9, 2013). "Pence signs law expanding school voucher eligibility". Times of Northwest Indiana. Weddle, Eric; McInerny, Claire (July 20, 2016). "What Did Mike Pence Do For Indiana Schools As Governor? Here's a Look". NPR. Schneider, Chelsea; Cook, Tony (July 18, 2016). "Are vouchers costing or saving taxpayer dollars?". The Indianapolis Star. Boyle, Rebecca (July 15, 2016). "Trump VP Choice Mike Pence Doesn't Agree With Science: Smoking doesn't kill, teach the controversy, and more quotes from the candidate". Popular Science. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Gross, Allie (January 30, 2015). "Republican-backed bill would shift power from Indiana ed chief". educationdive.com. LoBianco, Tom (May 7, 2015). "Pence signs bill stripping Ritz of education authority". Associated Press. "Bathroom guidelines for transgender students leave Pence, Ritz at odds". Indianapolis Business Journal. Associated Press. May 14, 2016. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2021. Hirji, Zahra (July 15, 2016). "Trump's Choice of Pence Adds a Conservative Fossil Fuel Backer to GOP Ticket". InsideClimate News. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "Governor Pence: 2015 State of the State". www.in.gov. January 13, 2015. Archived from the original on December 1, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Groppe, Maureen (June 24, 2015). "Pence: EPA must change emissions rules or Indiana won't comply". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Groppe, Maureen (February 20, 2016). "Pence to defy coal plant rules". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Wang, Stephanie (March 26, 2014). "Gov. Mike Pence signs bill to allow guns in school parking lots". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Slodysko, Brian (August 21, 2015). "Indiana enlists NRA to train National Guard on concealed guns". Portland Press Herald. Associated Press. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Rund, Jacob (May 9, 2015). "What bills has Gov. Pence signed into law?". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Carden, Dan (April 21, 2015). "Fate of Gary gun lawsuit in Pence's hands". The Times of Northwest Indiana. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Kelly, Niki (March 22, 2016). "Pence signs captive hunting bill". Journal Gazette. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Erbentraut, Joseph (February 16, 2017). "Mike Pence Ignored A Lead Contamination Crisis In His Backyard". HuffPost. Retrieved February 23, 2017. "Governor Holcomb: Executive Orders". www.in.gov. Retrieved February 23, 2017. "East Chicago Lead Crisis Declared Emergency by Indiana Governor". Patch. Chicago. February 10, 2017. Retrieved February 23, 2017. Reese, Sarah (September 4, 2016). "Old East Chicago lead smelter site went unaddressed for years". Indiana Economic Digest. Archived from the original on July 30, 2018. Retrieved July 30, 2018. Barry-Jester, Anna Maria (July 15, 2016). "Two Times Mike Pence Brushed Off Science". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Rutter, David (June 6, 2015). "Little Indiana town paid for war on Planned Parenthood". chicagotribune.com. Retrieved October 1, 2016. Bassett, Laura (March 31, 2015). "Indiana Shut Down Its Rural Planned Parenthood Clinics And Got An HIV Outbreak". HuffPost. Retrieved October 1, 2016. Gonsalves, Gregg; Crawford, Forrest (March 2, 2020). "How Mike Pence Made Indiana's HIV Outbreak Worse". Politico. Retrieved March 12, 2020. Demko, Paul (August 7, 2016). "How Mike Pence's slow walk on needle exchange helped propel Indiana's health crisis; The GOP vice presidential nominee's response to Indiana's opioid scourge offers a window into his approach to handling a crisis". Politico. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Mike Pence's Response to H.I.V. Outbreak: Prayer, Then a Change of Heart, New York Times, Megan Twohey, August 8, 2016. Retrieved March 12, 2020. "Mike Pence was criticized for his handling of Indiana's HIV outbreak. He will lead the U.S. coronavirus response". The Washington Post. February 27, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2020. Rudavsky, Shari; Groppe, Maureen (January 27, 2017). "Gov. Pence gets federal OK for Medicaid alternative". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved July 15, 2016. Ehrenfreund, Max (July 15, 2016). "Republicans hate Obamacare. But Mike Pence expanded it in Indiana". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 15, 2016. Henderson, Nia-Malika (January 29, 2015). "Will Mike Pence tip the GOP scales on Medicaid expansion?". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 15, 2016. Rudavsky, Shari; Groppe, Maureen (January 27, 2015). "Gov. Pence gets federal OK for Medicaid alternative". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved November 25, 2017. Harper, Jake (February 24, 2017). "Indiana's Claims About Its Medicaid Experiment Don't All Check Out". NPR. Retrieved January 10, 2018. "Indiana Gov. Pence defends religious objections law: 'This bill is not about discrimination'". Chicago Tribune. Associated Press. March 26, 2015. Archived from the original on May 29, 2017. Retrieved April 22, 2017. Adams, Dwight (May 3, 2018). "RFRA: Why the 'religious freedom law' signed by Mike Pence was so controversial". The Indianapolis Star. "Thousands march in Indiana to protest law seen targeting gays". Reuters. March 29, 2015. Archived from the original on March 29, 2015. "These Religious Groups Want Nothing To Do With Indiana's New Law". The Huffington Post. April 4, 2015. Conkle, Daniel O. (March 7, 2015). "Law professor: Why Indiana needs 'religious freedom' legislation". The Indianapolis Star. Epps, Garrett (March 30, 2015). "What Makes Indiana's Religious-Freedom Law Different?". The Atlantic. Retrieved April 1, 2015. "NCAA 'concerned' over Indiana law that allows biz to reject gays". CNN. March 26, 2015. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Davies, Tom (March 27, 2015). "Indiana officials look to stem religious objections fallout". Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 28, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2015. Evans, Tim (March 28, 2015). "Angie's List canceling Eastside expansion over RFRA". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved June 28, 2013. Sabalow, Ryan; Eason, Brian (March 26, 2015). "Ballard: 'Religious freedom' bill sends 'wrong signal'". Indy Star. "ABC News 'This Week with George Stephanopoulos'". March 29, 2015. "Indiana 'Not Going to Change' Anti-LGBT Law, Gov. Mike Pence Says". KTLA 5. March 29, 2015. Pence, Mike (March 31, 2015). "Ensuring Religious Freedom in Indiana". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved April 1, 2015. "Indiana, Arkansas pass revised religious objection proposals". The Times-Picayune. New Orleans. Associated Press. April 2, 2015. "Conservatives Slammed Pence in 2015 For Changing Law". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on April 3, 2018. Crockett, Emily (March 26, 2016). "Indiana crammed as many anti-abortion bills as it could into this horrifying new law". Vox. Smith, Mitch; Eckholm, Erik (June 30, 2016). "Federal Judge Blocks Indiana Abortion Law". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Green, Emma (May 14, 2016). "State-Mandated Mourning for Aborted Fetuses". The Atlantic. Hays, Holly. "Indiana abortion law signed by former Gov. Mike Pence is ruled unconstitutional". IndyStar. Retrieved May 11, 2018. Murray, Jon (June 28, 2013). "Governor apologizes for deleted Facebook comments". USA Today. The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved June 28, 2013. LoBianco, Tom (January 26, 2015). "Indiana state-run news outlet will compete with media". USA Today. Retrieved April 14, 2015. Mataconis, Doug (January 28, 2015). "A state-run news agency for 'small government' Indiana: Huh?". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved April 14, 2015. "Indiana Gov. Mike Pence's state-run news service stirs controversy". Associated Press. January 28, 2015. Graham, David A. "Pravda on the Plains: Indiana's New Propaganda Machine". The Atlantic. Retrieved April 14, 2015. LoBianco, Tom. "Just in: Indiana governor kills state-run news outlet". USA Today. Retrieved April 14, 2015. "Exodus, continued: Indiana's governor is losing his fight to keep Syrian refugees away: Most other governors seem to have quietly dropped the matter". The Economist. March 14, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016. "That's the ticket: Trump said to pick Pence". The Guardian. July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. "Indiana to pay out $100,000 to deal with requests for Mike Pence emails". The Guardian. Associated Press. June 17, 2017. Slodysko, Brian (January 10, 2017). "Indiana court: Public records requirements applied to Pence". Associated Press. Pence, whose gubernatorial administration ended Monday, has also resisted the public release of emails and other documents that could shed light on his tenure as governor. In some cases, his office has withheld documents, delayed responses or denied public records requests filed by The Associated Press and other news organizations. Slodysko, Brian (March 3, 2017). "Pence fought against releasing records, including emails, as Indiana governor". Associated Press. Slodysko, Brian (October 10, 2017). "Indiana Officials Vague About Reasons for Withholding Pence Emails". Bloomberg News. Retrieved October 10, 2017. Cook, Tony (March 2, 2017). "Pence used personal email for state business—and was hacked". The Indianapolis Star. "Mike Pence officially withdraws from Indiana governor's race". Associated Press. July 15, 2016. Archived from the original on November 10, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Eason, Brian; Tony, Cook; Briggs, James (July 26, 2016). "Indiana GOP panel nominates Eric Holcomb for governor". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved July 26, 2016. "Holcomb introduces Crouch as his running mate in governor's race". Fox 59. August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016. "Indiana Secretary of State Election Results". Archived from the original on August 10, 2020. Retrieved April 21, 2020. Gass, Nick (May 6, 2016). "Indiana Gov. Mike Pence endorses Donald Trump". Politico. Nussbalm, Matthew, Trump flirts with unpopular Pence, Politico, July 12, 2016 Gross, Terry; Mayer, Jane (October 18, 2017). "Understanding Mike Pence And His Relationship To Trump: 'His Public Role Is Fawning'". NPR.org. Fresh Air. Retrieved October 22, 2017. Mascaro, Lisa (August 15, 2017). "They snubbed Trump. But the Koch network has still exerted a surprising influence over the White House". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 26, 2017. Mascaro, Lisa (September 29, 2017). "Pence to headline Koch network's strategy session for the midterm elections". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 26, 2017. The network, founded by billionaire industrialist Koch brothers Charles G. and David H. Koch, has close ties to Pence, which has helped enable it to exert influence in the White House despite not endorsing President Trump in 2016.[permanent dead link] Shelbourne, Mallory (October 16, 2017). "Bannon: Kochs 'would own' Pence if he became president". The Hill. Retrieved October 26, 2017. Briggs, James; Cook, Tony (July 14, 2016). "Pence is Trump's VP pick". The Indianapolis Star. Jamieson, Amber (July 15, 2016). "Donald Trump announces Mike Pence as VP pick". The Guardian. Retrieved July 15, 2016. O'Donnell, Kelly (July 15, 2016). "Its Official: Trump Announces Mike Pence as VP Pick". NBC News. Bradner, Eric; Bash, Dana; Lee, MJ (July 16, 2016). "Donald Trump selects Mike Pence as VP". CNN. Schleifer, Theodore; Beavers, Olivia (July 16, 2016). "Pence 'very supportive' of latest version of Trump Muslim ban". CNN. Abramson, Alana; de la Cuetara, Ines (July 16, 2016). "Pence Walks Back Positions on Muslims, TPP to Stand With Trump". ABC News. Enten, Harry (July 15, 2016). "Mike Pence Is A Really Conservative And Mostly Unknown VP Pick". FiveThirtyEight. de la Cuertara, Ines (September 18, 2016). "Mike Pence Says His Role Model for Vice President Is Dick Cheney". ABC News. Allen, Mike (September 17, 2016). "Exclusive: Here's who's playing Tim Kaine in GOP debate prep". Politico. Karni, Annie (September 17, 2016). "Exclusive: Robert Barnett to play Mike Pence in Tim Kaine debate prep". Politico. Agiesta, Jennifer (October 5, 2016). "Pence edges Kaine in VP debate instant poll". CNN. Retrieved July 4, 2020. Zurcher, Anthony (October 5, 2016). "Pence v Kaine: Who won the vice-presidential debate?". BBC News. Retrieved July 4, 2020. "Who won the vice presidential debate?". CNN. October 5, 2016. Retrieved July 4, 2020. Cassidy, John (October 8, 2016). "A Sexual Predator in the Republican Party's Midst". The New Yorker. Quinn, Dave (October 8, 2016). "Mike Pence 'Offended' and Praying for Donald Trump's Family Amid Crisis Over His 2005 Lewd Comments". Politics. People. Fahrenthold, David A. (October 8, 2016). "Trump recorded having extremely lewd conversation about women in 2005". The Washington Post. "Lewd Donald Trump Tape Is a Breaking Point for Many in the G.O.P.". The New York Times. October 9, 2016. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. "Here are the top takeaways from Bob Woodward's new book on Donald Trump". ABC News. September 5, 2018. Retrieved October 14, 2018. LoBianco, Tom (October 10, 2016). "Pence: I never considered leaving Trump ticket". CNN. Tumulty, Karen; Rucker, Philip; Gearan, Anne (November 9, 2016). "Donald Trump wins the presidency in stunning upset over Clinton". The Washington Post. Shear, Michael D.; Haberman, Maggie; Schmidt, Michael S. (November 11, 2016). "Vice President-Elect Pence to Take Over Trump Transition Effort". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 11, 2016. Retrieved December 4, 2016. Johnson, Eliana; Restuccia, Andrew (December 4, 2016). "Pence's Power Play". Politico. Retrieved December 4, 2016. LoBianco, Tom; Bradner, Eric (December 1, 2016). "Mike Pence's Key Role in Building Team Trump". CNN. Retrieved December 4, 2016. Groppe, Maureen (January 19, 2017). "Mike Pence's swearing-in is full of symbolism". USA Today. Retrieved January 21, 2017. "CDIR-2020-07-22-DEPARTMENTS-2" (PDF). Retrieved January 1, 2023. Caldwell, Leigh Ann (January 20, 2017). "Trump's Defense and Homeland Security Picks Sworn-in". NBC News. Retrieved February 7, 2017. Nakamura, David; Wagner, John (January 22, 2017). "Trump, Pence preside over East Room ceremony to swear in senior staff". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 7, 2017. Wagner, Meg (January 28, 2017). "President Trump calls Russia's Vladimir Putin for first time since taking office". New York Daily News. Retrieved February 7, 2017. "'This deal will make me look terrible': Full transcripts of Trump's calls with Mexico and Australia". The Washington Post. "'This was the worst call by far': Trump badgered, bragged and abruptly ended phone call with Australian leader". Washington Post. Groppe, Maureen (January 25, 2017). "Pence tapping former aides, and some lobbyists, for VP office staff". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved February 7, 2017. "Vice President Mike Pence Announces Jarrod Agen as Director of Communications". whitehouse.gov. February 1, 2017. Retrieved February 7, 2017 – via National Archives. Groppe, Maureen (June 29, 2017). "Mike Pence's first major staff shakeup: Josh Pitcock out, Nick Ayers in as chief of staff". USA Today. Retrieved May 25, 2018. "White House Warns Iran To 'Think Twice' Before Testing U.S. Resolve". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. February 5, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2020. "DeVos confirmed as education secretary, Pence casts historic tie-breaking vote". Fox News. Associated Press. February 7, 2017. Bycoffe, Aaron (February 7, 2012). "Pence Has Already Done Something Biden Never Did: Break A Senate Tie". FiveThirtyEight. Vice presidents have broken ties on presidential nominees before, but Tuesday was the first time it's happened for a Cabinet nominee ... according to the Senate Historical Office Stratford, Michael; Hefling, Kimberly; Emma, Caitlin; Wermund, Benjamin (February 7, 2017). "Senate confirms DeVos as secretary of education". Politico. Kim, Seung Min; Ehley, Brianna (March 30, 2017). "Pence breaks tie in Senate vote on Planned Parenthood funding". Politico. Caplan, David (April 16, 2017). "Mike Pence arrives in South Korea, attends wreath-laying ceremony and Easter Sunday services". ABC News. Retrieved April 17, 2017. Thomas, Ken (April 16, 2017). "Pence warns NKorea 'era of strategic patience is over'". ABC News. Associated Press. Retrieved April 17, 2017. Thomas, Ken; Colvin, Jill (April 17, 2017). "Trump's message to North Korea: 'Gotta behave'". Chicago Tribune. Associated Press. Retrieved April 18, 2017. Rampton, Roberta (April 19, 2017). "Pence reassures Japan of U.S. resolve on North Korea, to work with China". Reuters. Retrieved April 22, 2017. Cahill, Petra (April 19, 2017). "VP Mike Pence Warns North Korea: 'We Will Defeat Any Attack'". NBC News. Retrieved April 22, 2017. Rampton, Roberta (April 20, 2017). "Pence tours Southeast Asia's biggest mosque, talks trade in Indonesia". Reuters. Retrieved April 22, 2017. Liptak, Kevin (April 20, 2017). "Pence praises moderate Islam in Indonesia". CNN. Retrieved April 22, 2017. Smith-Spark, Laura (April 22, 2017). "Pence says US will honor refugee deal with Australia". Politics. CNN. Retrieved April 24, 2017. "Mike Pence cuts short his stop in Hawaii to deal with domestic issues". CBS News. April 24, 2017. Retrieved April 24, 2017. Stack, Liam (May 21, 2017). "Notre Dame Students Walk Out of Mike Pence Commencement Address". The New York Times. Rosa Flores; Eric Levenson; Susannah Cullinane (May 22, 2017). "Some Notre Dame graduates walk out at Pence speech". CNN. Lange, Kaitlin; Cook, Tony (September 15, 2017). "Pence spokesman to leave post". USA Today. Retrieved October 3, 2017. Borchers, Callum (May 13, 2017). "Trump at Liberty University commencement: 'In America, we don't worship government; we worship God'". The Washington Post. Kaplan, Sarah (June 30, 2017). "President Trump relaunches the National Space Council". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 31, 2023. Wall, Mike (December 1, 2021). "National Space Council meeting today: Watch live here at 1:30 pm ET". Space.com. Retrieved July 31, 2023. Abramson, Alana (October 8, 2017). "Vice President Mike Pence Leaves Football Game After Players Kneel During National Anthem". Time. Retrieved January 11, 2018. Griffiths, Brent D. (October 8, 2017). "Pence leaves NFL game after players kneel during anthem". Politico. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Marsh, Rene (October 8, 2017). "The price tag for Pence's trip to Indianapolis". CNN. Archived from the original on May 6, 2020. Retrieved June 10, 2018. VanTryon, Matthew (October 8, 2017). "Mike Pence tweets same picture from Colts game that he tweeted in 2014". CNN. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Delk, Josh (May 23, 2018). "Pence celebrates NFL requiring players to stand for anthem: 'Winning'". The Hill. Retrieved June 10, 2018. "Presidential Delegation to Attend Winter Olympics". whitehouse.gov. February 1, 2018. Retrieved June 10, 2018 – via National Archives. "Winter Olympics 2018: Pence skips dinner with N Koreans". BBC News. February 9, 2018. Retrieved June 10, 2018. "Otto Warmbier's father to attend Olympics in South Korea". BBC News. February 5, 2018. Retrieved June 10, 2018. "Mike Pence, accompanied by Otto Warmbier's father, meets with North Korean defectors". Cincinnati.com. February 9, 2018. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Graef, Aileen (February 5, 2018). "Father of Otto Warmbier will attend Olympic Opening Ceremony with Pence". CNN. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Banks, Paul M. (February 9, 2018). "Winter Olympics Verify Mike Pence Hypocrisy on NFL National Anthem Protests". ChicagoNow. Retrieved February 13, 2018. Meeks, David (February 12, 2018). "By not standing for Korea at the 2018 Winter Olympics, VP Mike Pence embarrassed America". USA Today. Retrieved February 13, 2018. "N Korea cancelled Pence Olympic meeting in S Korea, says US". BBC News. February 21, 2018. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Kate O'Keeffe and Katy Stech Ferek (November 14, 2019). "Stop Calling China's Xi Jinping 'President,' U.S. Panel Says". The Wall Street Journal. Wolfgang, Ben (November 28, 2019). "Momentum grows for dropping 'President' from title of China's leader; Remove 'veneer' of legitimacy". The Washington Times. Haas, Benjamin (May 10, 2018). "Trump welcomes home three Americans released by North Korea". The Guardian. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Wiersema, Alisa; Karl, Jonathan; Doom, Justin (May 10, 2018). "Seeing released prisoners from North Korea 'one of the greatest joys of my life,' Pence says". ABC News. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Borger, Julian; Haas, Benjamin (May 24, 2018). "Donald Trump cancels North Korea nuclear summit". The Guardian. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Noack, Rick. "How Kim-Trump tensions escalated: The more the U.S. said 'Libya', the angrier North Korea got". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 25, 2018. Siddiqui, Sabrina; Haas, Benjamin; McCurry, Justin (May 25, 2018). "Donald Trump says North Korea summit could be back on". The Guardian. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Haas, Benjamin; McCarthy, Tom; Pengelly, martin (May 27, 2018). "Trump confirms US negotiators in North Korea for summit talks". The Guardian. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Smith, Allan (September 11, 2019). "Pence's Doonbeg detour cost nearly $600K in ground transportation fees". NBC News. Archived from the original on February 14, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2020. Honl-Stuenkel, Linnaea (September 10, 2019). "Mike Pence's Doonbeg Detour to Cost Nearly $600k—CREW". Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington. Archived from the original on June 15, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2020. Breuninger, Kevin (February 7, 2020). "Vice President Pence defends deficit expansion under Trump as necessary for economic growth". CNBC. Retrieved March 15, 2020. Hillyard, Vaughn (May 18, 2017). "Pence Creates PAC Ahead of 2018, 2020 Elections". NBC News. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "FILING FEC-1162693". docquery.fec.gov. Federal Election Commission. May 17, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Zorthian, Julia (May 18, 2017). "Vice President Mike Pence Just Created His Own PAC". Time. Retrieved August 8, 2017. Shugerman, Emily (August 6, 2017). "Vice President Mike Pence calls claims he will run in 2020 'disgraceful and offensive'". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2017. "Trump and Ukraine: A Guide to the Key Players". The Wall Street Journal. October 8, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2019. Lejeune, Tristan (October 3, 2019). "Pence defends Trump's calls for Ukraine to investigate Biden". The Hill. Retrieved January 1, 2020. "Pence says Biden, son should be investigated for Ukraine dealings". Reuters. October 3, 2019. Singh, Maanvi (January 3, 2020). "Mike Pence pushes 9/11 conspiracy theories to justify Suleimani killing". The Guardian. Retrieved January 4, 2020. "Pence's linkage of Soleimani to 9/11 hijackers is challenged". Times of Israel. AFP. January 4, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2020. Cancryn, Adam; Forgey, Quint; Diamond, Dan (February 27, 2020). "After fumbled messaging, Trump gets a coronavirus czar by another name". Politico. Retrieved March 1, 2020. Welna, David (February 26, 2020). "Trump White House Resists Calls To Appoint A Coronavirus Czar". NPR.org. Retrieved February 27, 2020. Choi, Matthew (February 26, 2020). "Trump puts Pence in charge of coronavirus response". Politico. Retrieved February 27, 2020. Holpuch, Amanda (February 27, 2020). "Donald Trump puts Mike Pence in charge of US coronavirus response". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved February 27, 2020. Wise, Alana (April 28, 2020). "Leaving Off Mask At Mayo Clinic, Pence Said He Wanted To Look Workers 'In The Eye'". NPR.org. Retrieved May 16, 2020. "Pence forgoes a face mask at Mayo Clinic, appearing to violate policy". www.cbsnews.com. April 29, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020. Collins, Michael (May 3, 2020). "Vice President Mike Pence on Mayo Clinic visit: 'I should have worn a mask'". USA Today. Retrieved May 16, 2020. Dale, Analysis by Daniel (June 26, 2020). "Fact check: As pandemic situation worsens, Pence paints a deceptively rosy picture". CNN. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Qiu, Linda (June 26, 2020). "As Cases Surge, Pence Misleads on Coronavirus Pandemic". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 26, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Oprysko, Caitlin (June 26, 2020). "Texas, Florida governors order bars closed, impose new restrictions as cases surge". Politico. Retrieved July 14, 2020. "Pence tries to assure GOP senators as coronavirus cases spike". The Washington Post. 2020. Vazquez, Maegan; Klein, Betsy (December 18, 2020). "Pence receives coronavirus vaccine Friday morning". CNN. Retrieved December 18, 2020. "'I Didn't Feel A Thing:' Pence Gets Coronavirus Vaccine In Public Event". NPR.org. December 18, 2020. Retrieved December 18, 2020. Vice President Pence, Karen Pence, and Surgeon General Jerome Adams received a coronavirus vaccine on Friday at the White House in a televised event aimed at showing the vaccine is safe and effective. Pence receives Pfizer-BioNTech coronavirus vaccine. Washington Post on YouTube (Video). December 18, 2020. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Saenz, Arlette (March 1, 2019). "Joe Biden responds to criticism after calling Pence a 'decent guy'". CNN. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. Stein, Andrew (June 23, 2019). "Trump-Haley in 2020". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved July 12, 2019. Cummings, William (June 26, 2019). "Trump says Mike Pence is his 2020 running mate '100%,' dismisses idea of running with Nikki Haley". USA Today. Retrieved July 12, 2019. "The Buffalo News". buffalonews.com. August 31, 2020. Kreutz, Liz; Woodrow, Melanie (August 27, 2020). "RNC 2020: Mike Pence's comments on killing of Oakland federal officer David Patrick Underwood are misleading". ABC7 San Francisco. "Pence blurs details about killing of Oakland federal officer by alleged right-wing extremist". KTVU FOX 2. August 27, 2020. Moniuszko, Sara M. (October 8, 2020). "Following backlash, Karen Pence's team says 'both sides agreed' spouses would remove masks". USA Today. Retrieved October 11, 2020. Cheung, Helier (October 8, 2020). "VP debate: Did gender play a role in the interruptions?". BBC News. Retrieved October 11, 2020. Stieb, Matt (October 7, 2020). "Mike Pence Had a Fly on His Head for Almost Two Minutes During the VP Debate". New York Intelligencer. Retrieved October 11, 2020. O'Kane, Caitlin (October 8, 2020). "A fly landed on Mike Pence's head during the debate and rested there for nearly two minutes". CBS News. Retrieved October 11, 2020. "Biden defeats Trump to win White House, NBC News projects". NBC News. November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. "Electoral College Makes It Official: Biden Won, Trump Lost". U.S. News & World Report. Associated Press. December 14, 2020. Retrieved January 6, 2021. Richer, Alanna Durkin (December 4, 2020). "Trump loves to win but keeps losing election lawsuits". AP News. Retrieved January 6, 2021. Kumar, Anita; Orr, Gabby; McGraw, Meridith (December 21, 2020). "Inside Trump's pressure campaign to overturn the election". Politico. Retrieved December 22, 2020. Larson, Erik (December 28, 2020). "Pence Sued by GOP Congressman Over Competing Electors". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on December 30, 2020. Retrieved January 3, 2021. Berman, Dan (January 1, 2021). "Pence asks judge to reject Gohmert lawsuit asking the VP to interfere in the Electoral College count". CNN. Retrieved January 2, 2021. Cheney, Kyle; Gerstein, Josh (December 31, 2020). "Pence: Gohmert's fight to overturn the 2020 election results is with Congress, not me". Politico. Retrieved January 2, 2021. Gerstein, Josh; Cheney, Kyle (January 2, 2021). "Judge throws out Gohmert suit aimed at empowering Pence to overturn 2020 election results". Politico. Retrieved January 3, 2021. Smith, Stewart (January 7, 2021). "SCOTUS rejects Gohmert's last-minute appeal". KLTV. Retrieved January 9, 2021. Schmidt, Michael S. (January 5, 2020). "Trump Says Pence Can Overturn His Loss in Congress. That's Not How It Works". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved January 6, 2021. Haberman, Maggie; Karni, Annie (January 5, 2020). "Pence Said to Have Told Trump He Lacks Power to Change Election Result". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved January 6, 2021. Baker, Peter; Haberman, Maggie; Karni, Annie (January 13, 2021). "Pence Reached His Limit With Trump. It Wasn't Pretty". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. Rummler, Orion (January 6, 2020). "Pence says he lacks authority to throw out Electoral College votes". Axios. Retrieved January 6, 2021. Savage, Charlie (January 10, 2021). "Incitement to Riot? What Trump Told Supporters Before Mob Stormed Capitol". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Haltiwanger, John (January 7, 2021). "Trump attacks Pence for not having the 'courage' to overturn the election as the president's supporters storm the Capitol". Business Insider Australia. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Cannon, Jay. "Watch VP Pence confirm 2020 election win for Joe Biden hours after mob breaches Capitol". USA Today. Retrieved January 8, 2021. "A Reuters photographer says he overheard pro-Trump insurrectionists saying they wanted to hang Mike Pence at the Capitol". Business Insider. Retrieved January 10, 2021. "Must-See New Video Shows Capitol Riot Was Way Worse Than We Thought | All In | MSNBC—YouTube". www.youtube.com. Retrieved January 10, 2021. Parker, Ashley; Leonnig, Carol D.; Kane, Paul; Brown, Emma (January 15, 2021). "How the rioters who stormed the Capitol came dangerously close to Pence". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Blake, Aaron (April 26, 2022). "Analysis - A top Democrat ties Pence's 'I'm not getting in the car' to Jan. 6 'coup'". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 16, 2022. Cooper, Helene; Barnes, Julian E.; Schmitt, Eric; Martin, Jonathan; Haberman, Maggie; Ives, Mike (January 6, 2021). "As the D.C. police clear the Capitol grounds, the mayor extends a public emergency". The New York Times. Retrieved January 7, 2021. Abbot, Steve; Chiarelli, Peter; Jumper, John; Loy, James; Nathman, John; Owens, William; Wilson, Johnnie (July 21, 2022). "Opinion | We Are Retired Generals and Admirals. Trump's Actions on Jan 6 Were a Dereliction of Duty". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 23, 2022. Samuels, Brett (January 6, 2021). "Trump attacks Pence as protesters force their way into Capitol". The Hill. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Rawnsley, Adam (January 1, 2021). "Trump Team Backs Away From Lin Wood After Pence Tweets". The Daily Beast. Retrieved January 2, 2021. Brewster, Jack (January 7, 2021). "Lin Wood—Lawyer Closely Tied To Trump—Permanently Banned From Twitter After Claiming Capitol Siege Was 'Staged'". Forbes. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Welker, Kristin; O'Donnell, Kelly; Alba, Monica (January 9, 2021). "Pence to attend Biden inauguration; Trump never called him in the Capitol bunker, sources say". NBC News. Retrieved January 10, 2021. Frenkel, Sheera (January 6, 2021). "The storming of Capitol Hill was organized on social media". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2021. Acosta, JIm (January 7, 2021). "Trump pressured Pence to engineer a coup, then put the VP in danger, source says". CNN. Retrieved January 10, 2021. Acosta, Jim; Brown, Pamela (January 7, 2021). "Trump pressured Pence to engineer a coup, then put the VP in danger, source says". CNN. Retrieved January 10, 2021. Colvin, Jill; Miller, Zeke (January 11, 2021). "After frosty few days, Pence, Trump appear to reach détente". WTMJ. Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2021. Gold, Michael (January 20, 2021). "Harris escorted Pence to his motorcade, a symbol of a peaceful transfer of power". The New York Times. ISSN 1553-8095. OCLC 1645522. Archived from the original on February 1, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Singh, Namita (January 27, 2021). "Mike Pence is homeless after leaving office and 'couch-surfing' with Indiana politicians, report says". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved January 28, 2021. LoBianco, Tom (January 27, 2021). "Mike and Karen Pence are homeless and appear to be couch surfing their way through Indiana". Business Insider. Retrieved January 28, 2021. Lange, Kaitlin (June 9, 2021). "Former Vice President Mike Pence purchases $1.93 million, 7-bedroom mansion in Carmel". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved January 29, 2023. Lippman, Daniel; Orr, Gabby (February 4, 2021). "Pence reveals his post-White House plans". Politico. Retrieved February 4, 2021. Orr, Gabby (February 5, 2021). "Mike Pence is starting a podcast". Politico. Retrieved February 9, 2021. Dawsey, Josh. "As he reemerges onto the public stage, Pence sticks to the same strategy he used by Trump's side: Total fealty". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on October 24, 2021. Retrieved April 30, 2021. Weprin, Alex (March 5, 2021). "Former VP Mike Pence to Narrate Rush Limbaugh Series for Fox Nation Streaming Service". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 7, 2021. Rutz, David (February 17, 2021). "Pence: Rush Limbaugh was a 'giant,' inspired me to enter talk radio". Fox News. Retrieved March 7, 2021. "Mike Pence signs 2-book deal with Simon & Schuster; memoir to come out in 2023". MarketWatch. Associated Press. April 7, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2021. Berg, Matt (June 24, 2022). "Pence: 'We must not rest' until abortion is outlawed in every state". Politico. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Buncombe, Andrew (July 6, 2022). "Alex Holder: How a little known British filmmaker came to be at the centre of the case against Trump". The Independent. Retrieved July 22, 2022. "Pence warns of 'unprincipled populists,' 'Putin apologists'". AP News. October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 19, 2022. Martin, Jonathan (May 23, 2022). "Pence, Tiptoeing Away From Trump, Lays Groundwork for '24 Run". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 23, 2022. Reimann, Nicholas (August 9, 2022). "Trump Vs. Pence: All The Endorsement Battles They're Waging". Forbes. Retrieved December 4, 2022. Reimann, Nicholas (July 30, 2022). "Trump Vs. Pence: All The Endorsement Battles They're Waging". Forbes. Retrieved August 1, 2022. Faulders, Katherine; Santucci, John (February 9, 2023). "Mike Pence subpoenaed by special counsel overseeing Trump probes: Sources". ABC News. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Dawsey, Josh; Stein, Perry (February 9, 2023). "Pence receives subpoena from prosecutors examining Trump's Jan. 6 role". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 10, 2023. The Pence subpoena is related to Jan. 6, according to the person familiar with the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss it publicly. Evans, Gareth (April 28, 2023). "Mike Pence testifies in criminal probe of Trump and Capitol riot". BBC News. Retrieved April 28, 2023. Beaumont, Thomas (February 10, 2023). "Mike Pence Group To Run Ads Attacking School Trans Policies". HuffPost. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Gangel, Jamie; Herb, Jeremy; Perez, Evan (January 24, 2023). "First on CNN: Classified documents found at Pence's Indiana home". CNN. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Stracqualursi, Veronica (January 27, 2023). "Former Vice President Pence on classified docs found at his home: 'Mistakes were made' | CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved February 1, 2023. "FBI Searching Pence's Indiana Home As Part Of Classified Docs Probe". HuffPost. February 10, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Polantz, Katelyn; Herb, Jeremy (June 2, 2023). "Justice Department will not seek criminal charges in Pence classified document probe | CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved June 22, 2023. Baker, Brian (September 22, 2021). "Harvard Poll: Pence Strongly Favored Over DeSantis For 2024". WIBC (FM). Retrieved October 12, 2021. Axelrod, Tal (March 5, 2021). "DeSantis, Pence tied in 2024 Republican poll". The Hill. Retrieved October 12, 2021. Halaschack, Zachary (March 5, 2021). "Without Trump, Pence shoots to top of 2024 poll of Republican voters". Washington Examiner. Retrieved October 12, 2021. Siders, David (July 19, 2021). "Pence flatlines as 2024 field takes shape". Politico. Retrieved July 19, 2021. Miller, Zeke; Megerian, Chris (March 13, 2023). "Pence says Trump 'endangered my family' on Jan. 6". AP News. Retrieved March 13, 2023. Jill Colvin (June 5, 2023). "Former Vice President Pence files paperwork launching 2024 presidential bid in challenge to Trump". Associated Press. Retrieved June 5, 2023. LeVine, Marianne (June 29, 2023). "Mike Pence makes surprise trip to Ukraine". Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Holmes, Kristen (October 28, 2023). "Pence suspends campaign for president". CNN. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Isenstadt, Alex; Ward, Myah (October 28, 2023). "Pence suspends presidential campaign". Politico. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Svitek, Patrick; LeVine, Marianne (March 15, 2024). "Mike Pence says he will not endorse Donald Trump for president in 2024". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved March 22, 2024 – via www.washingtonpost.com. Wilkie, Christina (March 15, 2024). "Former Vice President Mike Pence will not endorse Trump in 2024". CNBC. Retrieved March 22, 2024. "Who Is Mike Pence?". The Indianapolis Star. July 14, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Moffitt, Julia (January 14, 2013). "Pence family comes home to Indiana". WTHR. Archived from the original on July 5, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Indiana Gov. Pence attends son's commissioning as Marine Corps officer". Marine Corps Times. March 20, 2015. Retrieved October 1, 2016. Tomlinson, Lucas (April 4, 2017). "Navy instructor pilots refusing to fly over safety concerns; Pence's son affected". Fox News. Retrieved April 4, 2017. Dwilson, Stephanie Dube (October 7, 2020). "Mike Pence's Son, Michael Pence: 5 Fast Facts You Need to Know". Heavy. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Filipovic, Jill (March 30, 2017). "Mike Pence's Dining 'Standard' Reveals So Much About What He Thinks of Women. The vice president won't eat alone with a woman who's not his wife". Cosmopolitan. "Mary Jean Fritsch". Chicago Tribune. April 8, 2001. Retrieved September 1, 2018 – via Legacy.com. "Mike Pence Family Group | Ann Jane Cawley | Ahnentafel No: 3 (62191)". famouskin.com. Retrieved September 1, 2018. Tackett, Michael (April 22, 2018). "As Another Pence Runs for Congress, His Business Record Raises Questions". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 22, 2018. Retrieved April 22, 2018. "Indiana Election Results". Indiana Secretary of State. Retrieved November 25, 2018. Claeson, Hanna (August 24, 2020). "The Truth About Mike Pence's Brother, Greg Pence". The List. Static Media. Retrieved June 12, 2022. LoBianco, Tom (September 11, 2019). "How Pence's Camp Persuaded Trump to Pick Their Guy as VP". PoliticoMagazine. Retrieved June 12, 2022. "Former Vice President Mike Pence Has Pacemaker Implanted". DAIC. April 19, 2021. Retrieved December 24, 2021. Thrush, Glenn (April 15, 2021). "Pence, suffering from a sluggish heartbeat, undergoes surgery for a pacemaker implant". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2021. Samuels, Brett (April 15, 2021). "Pence undergoes surgery to receive pacemaker". The Hill. Retrieved April 17, 2021. Thrush, Glenn (April 15, 2021). "Pence, suffering from a sluggish heartbeat, undergoes surgery for a pacemaker implant". The New York Times. Retrieved April 17, 2021. Klein, Betsy (September 15, 2017). "Vice president's pet rabbit hops into book deal". CNN. Archived from the original on January 23, 2018. Retrieved February 15, 2018. Boorstein, Michelle (July 15, 2016). "What it means that Mike Pence called himself an 'evangelical Catholic". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Gryboski, Michael (July 14, 2016). "5 Things to Know About Mike Pence". Christian Post. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Theory of the Origins of Man" (PDF). Congressional Record. July 11, 2002. Retrieved May 19, 2017. (statement of Rep. Pence). Feld, Lowell (October 6, 2016). "Mike Pence Denies Evolution Because It's 'Just a Theory'". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 28, 2016. "Donald Trump's Running Mate Has Some Truly Strange Views on Modern Science". Fortune. July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Pence, Mike (May 5, 2009). "Mike Pence Interview". Hardball with Chris Matthews. MSNBC. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2016. Coppins, McKay (2018). "God's Plan for Mike Pence". The Atlantic. Washington, D.C.: Atlantic Media. LoBianco, Tom (2019). Piety & Power: Mike Pence and the Taking of the White House. New York: Dey Street Books. ISBN 978-0-06-286878-7. Mike Pence at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Governor Mike Pence official government website Mike Pence at Curlie Appearances on C-SPAN Profile at Ballotpedia Mike Pence's statements at PolitiFact "Piety & Power" author gives CBSN an inside look into Mike Pence's rise to the top of politics on YouTube, published September 30, 2019 CBS News Collected news and commentary at The Indianapolis Star Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission Profile at SourceWatch Portals:  Biography  Conservatism  Evangelical Christianity  Indiana  Politics  Radio  United States