Hellendoorn (Dutch pronunciation: [ˌɦɛlə(n)ˈdoːr(ə)n] ; Tweants: Heldern or Healndoorn) is a municipality and town in the middle of the Dutch province of Overijssel. As of 2019, the municipality had a population of 35,808. There is an amusement park near the town of Hellendoorn called Avonturenpark Hellendoorn [nl]. At the outskirts of the town there is an ice cream factory from Unilever, where Ben & Jerry's is produced for the European market. The municipality comprises: Towns: Nijverdal (where the town hall is located) Hellendoorn [nl] Hamlets: Daarle Daarlerveen Eelen en Rhaan [nl] Egede Haarle, Hellendoorn [nl] Hancate [nl] Hulsen (Overijssel) [nl] Marle, Hellendoorn [nl] Noetsele [nl] (former hamlet, now an integrated part of Nijverdal) Dutch topographic map of the municipality of Hellendoorn, June 2015 The central part of the municipality consists of a hilly and sparsely populated area that extends south into the municipality of Rijssen-Holten, called the Sallandse Heuvelrug (Salland Ridge). The highest point lies at about 70 metres (230 ft) above sea level and is part of the Noetselerberg. A large chunk of the area is covered by forest, but there are also heathlands. This scenery is now part of the Sallandse Heuvelrug National Park. Originally part of the region of Salland, Hellendoorn is now administratively considered part of Twente; a fact reflected in the inclusion of Hellendoorn in the city region of Twente (Kaderwetgebied Regio Twente) as defined by the Dutch government. The municipality of Hellendoorn is the only place in the Netherlands where gold mining took place. The Germans operated a V-2 launching platform near the town of Hellendoorn during World War II, harassing the city of Antwerp. On March, 22nd 1945, Nijverdal was severely bombed by allied bombers who were targeting the German Reichskommissar of Austrian origin Arthur Seyss-Inquart. Seyss-Inquart was fleeing the advancing Allied forces and had set up his temporary headquarters in the Reformed School in Nijverdal, but had already left town at the time of the bombing. Over 70 people were killed, mainly at the Grotestraat. A small part of the film A Bridge Too Far was filmed near Hellendoorn. In 1955, part of the municipality of Wierden was annexed (Eversberg, Konijnenbelt, Slettenhaar and Lochter) which is the only part of the municipality located on originally Twente soil. In the late-1970s the quarter of 'het Lochter' arose here. Ernst Bakker (1946 in Hellendoorn – 2014) a Dutch politician Douwe Draaisma (born 1953 in Nijverdal) a Dutch psychologist and academic Herman Ponsteen (born 1953 in Hellendoorn) Dutch track cyclist who won silver at the 1976 Summer Olympics Derk van Egmond (born 1956 in Hellendoorn) a Dutch track cyclist, competed in the 1984 Summer Olympics Wim Woudsma (1957 in Nijverdal – 2019) a Dutch footballer with 395 club caps Hellendoorn, windmill: korenmolen de Hoop Hellendoorn, church: de Dorpskerk Hellendoorn, church: de Sint Sebastianuskerk Hellendoorn, windmill: de Wippe (ook wel de Molen van Fakkert) Hellendoorn, Rollercoaster Tornado Between Hellendoorn and Daarle, river: de Regge Daarle, reformed church Nijverdal, church: de Antonius van Paduakerk "Burgemeester en wethouders" [Mayor and aldermen] (in Dutch). Gemeente Hellendoorn. Archived from the original on 8 April 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "Kerncijfers wijken en buurten 2020" [Key figures for neighbourhoods 2020]. StatLine (in Dutch). CBS. 24 July 2020. Retrieved 19 September 2020. "Postcodetool for 7442MA". Actueel Hoogtebestand Nederland (in Dutch). Het Waterschapshuis. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "Bevolkingsontwikkeling; regio per maand" [Population growth; regions per month]. CBS Statline (in Dutch). CBS. 1 January 2021. Retrieved 2 January 2022. SS Werfer Abteilung 500 in Hellendoorn / Dalfsen, Holland Rudi Velthuis - Tracy Dungan - Ed Straten - Cor Lulof (From V2Rocket.com A-4 V-2 Resource site) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hellendoorn. Official website