The House of Tyszkiewicz (Polish: Tyszkiewiczowie, singular: Tyszkiewicz, Belarusian: Тышкевічы, singular: Тышкевіч, Lithuanian: Tiškevičiai, singular: Tiškevičius, Ukrainian: Тишкевичі, singular: Тишкевич, Russian: Тышкевичи, singular: Тышкевич) was a wealthy and influential Polish-Lithuanian magnate family of Ruthenian origin, with roots traced to the times of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. They held the Polish coat of arms Leliwa. Their nobility was reaffirmed in Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and the Russian Empire. The family traces its roots to a 15th-century Ruthenian boyar Kalenik Mishkovich and derives from the name of his grandson, Tysha with the addition of the patronymic, resulting in Tyszkiewicz-Kalenicki. A branch of the family Germanised the name to Tischkowitz and a few members of this branch are still to be found in Germany and the UK. Places named Tyszkiewicz Palace, "former Tyszkiewicz Palace", Tiškevičiai Palace, and other historical properties of the family are located in Warsaw, Kraków and Vilnius, as well as in numerous towns of modern Poland, Belarus, Lithuania and Ukraine (in Palanga, Kretinga, Lahojsk, Raudondvaris, Berdychiv, Biržai, Kavarskas, Deltuva, Trakai, Lentvaris, Seredžius, etc.) Count Eustachy Tyszkiewicz (1814–1874), nobleman and archaeologist Janusz Skumin Tyszkiewicz (1570–1642), Polish–Lithuanian nobleman and politician who was a sponsor of Baroque music Janusz Tyszkiewicz Łohojski (1590–1649), Polish–Lithuanian magnate and politician Katarzyna Eugenia Skumin Tyszkiewicz (c. 1610–1648), Polish noblewoman (daughter of Janusz Skumin Tyszkiewicz) Count Konstanty Tyszkiewicz (1806–1868), Polish-Lithuanian noble, archaeologist and ethnographer Ludwik Skumin Tyszkiewicz, Field Lithuanian Hetman (Grand Treasurer) of Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Count Michal Tyszkiewicz (1828–1897), collector and amateur Egyptologist Count Michał Zygmunt Tyszkiewicz (1903–1974), diplomat and songwriter Samuel Tyszkiewicz (1889–1954) was a Polish typographer Stefan Tyszkiewicz (1894–1976), engineer and inventor, soldier and political activist married into the extended Russian imperial family Tadeusz Tyszkiewicz, (1774–1852), a general Teodor Skumin Tyszkiewicz, Grand Treasurer of Lithuania of Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Count Mykhaylo Tyshkevych [uk] (1857—1930) - Ukrainian politician, patron of Prosvita Society, ambassador of Ukrainian State to Vatican. Makhnivka, Koziatyn Raion Palaces connected with the Tyszkiewicz family Tyszkiewicz palace in Warsaw Tyszkiewicz palace in Kraków Palace in Przecław The 'Red Manor', Raudondvaris Castle with Basilica of St Teresa Tiškevičiai palace in Kretinga Tiškevičiai palace in Trakų Vokė Tiškevičiai Palace in Lentvaris Arnionys Manor Nemėžis Manor Tiškevičiai palace in Vilnius The Palace in Valozhyn Leonpolis Manor The mansion in Ziezmariai Tyszkiewicz palace in Łahojsk (in ruins) Former manorial buildings in Balbieriškis, (destroyed) Stable buildings at Kojrany Manor, Vilnius. (destroyed) The palace in Dunilavichy (destroyed) Jerzy Jan Lerski; Piotr Wróbel; Richard J. Kozicki (1996). Historical Dictionary of Poland, 966-1945. Greenwood Publishing. p. 616. Walerian Kalinka, Dzieła, chapter "Żywot Tadeusza Tyskiewicza", 1900, Google Print, p.195-198 (public domain) Potocka-Wąsowiczowa, Anna z Tyszkiewiczów. Wspomnienia naocznego świadka. Warszawa: Państwowy Instytut Wydawniczy, 1965.