PEGI (/ˈpɛɡi/ PEG-ee), short for Pan-European Game Information, is a European video game content rating system established to help European consumers make informed decisions when buying video games or apps through the use of age recommendations and content descriptors. It was developed by the Interactive Software Federation of Europe (ISFE) and came into use in April 2003, replacing many national age rating systems with a single European system. The PEGI system is now used in 41 countries and is based on a code of conduct, a set of rules to which every publisher using the PEGI system is contractually committed. PEGI self-regulation is composed by five age categories and nine content descriptors that advise the suitability of a game for a certain age range based on the game's content. The age rating is not intended to indicate the difficulty of the game or the skill required to play it. PEGI has five age categories. In addition to the above ratings, PEGI also uses eight content descriptors: In Portugal, the PEGI 3 & 7 categories were originally aligned with the age ratings of the film classification system - 4 & 6, respectively - to avoid confusion. Finland also used a modified scale, where 12 became 11 and 16 became 15. Finland fully adopted PEGI on 1 January 2007, and the standard ratings were fully enforced as well. Portugal fully adopted PEGI on 14 January 2021, and the standard ratings were also fully enforced. To obtain the ratings for any piece of interactive software, the applicant submits the game with other supporting materials and completes a content declaration, all of which is evaluated by an independent administrator called the Netherlands Institute for the Classification of Audiovisual Media (NICAM). It is based on the Dutch Kijkwijzer system as well. Following the evaluation the applicant will receive a license to use the rating logos. If the applicant disagrees with the rating, they can ask for an explanation or make a complaint to the complaints board. Consumers may also make complaints to this board. Although PEGI was established by an industry body (ISFE) the ratings are given by a body independent of the industry and the whole system is overseen by a number of different Boards and Committees. There is the PEGI Council, composed mainly by national representatives for PEGI, that recommends adjustments to the code in light of social, legal and technological developments. Members of the PEGI Council are recruited for their skill and experience from among parent/consumer body representatives, child psychologists, media specialists, civil servants, academics and legal advisers versed in the protection of minors in Europe. There is also a Complaints Board with experts from various European countries. They deal with complaints related to breaches of requirements of the code of conduct or to age rating recommendations. Should a complaint be received from a consumer or publisher regarding a rating given to a game and no satisfactory settlement can be reached by the PEGI administrator through discussion, explanation or negotiation the complainant may formally request the Complaints Board to mediate. Three board members will then convene, hear the complaint and decide on a ruling. Publishers using the PEGI system are bound by the decision of the Complaints Board. Consequently, they are obliged to carry out any corrective actions required and, in cases of non-compliance, are subject to sanctions as laid out by the code. In 2013, PEGI co-founded the International Age Rating Coalition with USK and the ESRB. IARC aims to streamline the rating of digitally distributed games and apps by providing a single online system that produces age ratings for all participating regions. By filling out one questionnaire, a publisher instantaneously receives ratings from PEGI, USK, ESRB, ACB and others. There are a number of committees to ensure the system keeps functioning properly. Experts Group: The PEGI Experts Group is made up of academics working in the fields of psychology and sociology, and representatives from NICAM, VSC, and the games industry. It works on adapting and modifying the PEGI questionnaire and the underlying criteria to take account of technological and content developments and recommendations made by the PEGI Council or circumstances brought to light by the complaints procedure. Legal Committee: Since PEGI is a voluntary system it runs in conjunction with, and is subordinate to, existing national laws, whether they prohibit certain content or establish mandatory rating systems. The Legal Committee's role is to advise PEGI s.a. of any changes to national legislation within participating countries that could affect the voluntary age rating system. Enforcement Committee: The Enforcement Committee is charged with implementing the recommendations of the PEGI Council and, more generally, of ensuring the enforcement of the provisions of the PEGI Code of Conduct, including conclusion of the Complaints Board. In 2007, the PEGI Online division of PEGI was formed as an addition to the PEGI system for online games. Goals include giving young people in Europe improved protection against unsuitable online gaming content and educating parents on how to ensure safe online play. This project is supported directly by the European Commission: PEGI On-line, which was launched in June 2007 and co-funded by the Safer Internet Programme, is the logical development of the PEGI system, designed to better protect young people against unsuitable gaming content and to help parents to understand the risks and potential for harm within this environment. PEGI Online is based on four principles: The PEGI Online Safety Code and Framework Contract which is signed by all participants The PEGI Online Logo which will be displayed by holders of a licence The website for applicants and for the general public An independent administration, advice, and dispute settlement process The licence to display the PEGI Online Logo is granted by the PEGI Online Administrator to any online gameplay service provider that meets the requirements set out in the PEGI Online Safety Code (POSC). PEGI is the standard age rating system for video games in 40 European countries alongside Israel, but products with PEGI labels can be found across the globe alongside other rating systems as a result of import for linguistic reasons (e.g.: English versions in India, South Africa and the United Arab Emirates, Spanish or Portuguese versions in Latin America). The official status of PEGI ratings varies from country to country, depending on the way national legislation deals with age classification and the protection of minors. In some countries, PEGI is the de facto standard without specific regulation, other countries have officially acknowledged PEGI as the sole system for age ratings, while yet another number of countries have incorporated the PEGI rating system into laws governing the age classification of media, making the labels enforceable in retail. Games containing minigames resembling casino games and gambling may be subject to heightened ratings due to "12" being the minimum for the "Gambling" descriptor. A 2016 re-release of Pokémon Red and Blue for Nintendo 3DS received a "12" rating (despite receiving the "E" rating from the U.S.-based ESRB) due to its "Game Corner" feature, which includes slot machines that can be played with in-game cash to earn coins redeemable for items. The European release of Pokémon Platinum (2009) was modified to remove the slot machines and replace them with non-interactive "game machines". As of 2020, PEGI's policies regarding content that resemble casino games and gambling have gotten stricter, with new games featuring the "Simulated Gambling" content descriptor automatically receiving an "18" rating from that point forward. In 2019, the basketball video game NBA 2K20 received criticism for a trailer, focused on its "MyTeam" mode, which depicted chance-based minigames styled after casino games such as roulette, slots and pachinko. The visuals were considered to be sensitive due to increasing controversy over use of "loot box" mechanics in video games. After receiving an e-mail expressing concern over the trailer, PEGI clarified in response that the "Gambling" descriptor applies only to games that "teach" and "encourage" gambling, although admitting that the trailer's imagery may have been "too close for comfort" for some viewers, and that PEGI did not base its ratings decisions on singular trailers. Balatro, a roguelike deck-building game, had its PEGI rating changed from 3+ to 18+ shortly after its February 2024 release due to perceived gambling imagery, and was pulled from some online stores. Playstack, the game's publisher, argued that while the game was based on poker and features poker hands, it does not feature or encourage gambling. Balatro was restored to the Nintendo eShop in Europe, Australia and New Zealand on 8 March with the higher 18+ rating. In a Reddit AMA, Balatro developer Localthunk criticised PEGI for re-rating the game after its release, writing "I still believe that the rating is unwarranted, but there is some gray area for interpretation from PEGI and at this point it is what it is. I think the one thing I am most disappointed by is the fact that other games with actual gambling mechanics aren't rated the same way because of their appearance/theme." Australian Classification Board (ACB) Brazilian advisory rating system Computer Entertainment Rating Organization (CERO) Entertainment Software Rating Board (ESRB) Game Rating and Administration Committee (GRAC) Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle (USK) "The PEGI organisation". pegi.info. Retrieved 1 June 2022. "PEGI Pan European Game Information – What do the labels mean?". Pegi.info. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011. Retrieved 29 June 2011. "What do the labels mean?". PEGI. Retrieved 26 May 2019. "Search | Pegi Public Site". pegi.info. Retrieved 8 May 2019. "PEGI 12 games with Fear descriptor". PEGI. Retrieved 30 October 2022. ""ABE VR"". PEGI. Retrieved 30 October 2022. Good, Owen S. (31 August 2019). "PEGI rating board explains why it didn't flag NBA 2K20 as gambling". Polygon. Retrieved 25 October 2019. "PEGI announces new content descriptor: in-game purchases | Pegi Public Site". pegi.info. Retrieved 5 June 2019. "Uk video game boxes will soon warn of in game purchases". "PEGI – Classificação de videojogos em Portugal". "Myös videot mukana - Digitoday - Ilta-Sanomat". 7 May 2003. Archived from the original on 9 July 2022. "New Finnish law recognises PEGI". Archived from the original on 19 February 2007. "Portaria 15/2021". 14 January 2021. "PEGI Assessment Form" (PDF). Pegi.info. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 December 2011. Retrieved 6 November 2011. NICAM website Archived 21 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine "Website PEGI". Pegi.info. Retrieved 29 June 2011. "Getting Digitally-Distributed Games Classified in Australia to Be Cost-Free - IGN". au.ign.com. Retrieved 25 March 2016. "New International Age Ratings System Launching Worldwide Next Year | Video Game Deals & UK News | Dealspwn.com". dealspwn.com. Archived from the original on 22 March 2016. Retrieved 25 March 2016. "PEGI Online Website". Pegionline.info. Retrieved 29 June 2011. Communication from the commission of the European parliament, the council, the European economic and social committee and the committee of the regions, on the protection of consumers, in particular minors, in respect of the use of video games, Brussels, 2008, p.3. "PEGI Online Safety Code". Pegionline.info. "The PEGI organisation". "Austrian government page explaining PEGI and its legal status in the regions". 13 November 2018. "Article explaining plans for legal change in France". 20 May 2015. "Text of the amendment proposing the change". "Icelandic Media Act (2006)". "Article detailing legal requirement to use PEGI in Israel". Library of Congress. "Legislative text specifying PEGI as the labelling system for video games in Lithuania". "Penal code text specifying enforcement of sales restriction of certain media content to minors". Government document outlining the role of PEGI in legal context: "Betere bescherming van jongeren tegen mogelijk schadelijk beeldmateriaal" [Better protection of youth against potentially harmful imagery] (PDF) (in Dutch). Rijksoverheid. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 June 2016. "MCV: PEGI ratings come into force today". MCV. 15 May 2019. "BBC News: UK enforces PEGI video game ratings system". BBC News. 30 July 2012. "Statutes of the USK system" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2012. "О защите детей от информации, причиняющей вред их здоровью и развитию" [On Protecting Children from Information Harmful to Their Health and Development]. Article No. 11 of 23 December 2010 (in Russian). Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation. "Swiss federal government announcement". Foreign video games published for sale in Turkey are almost all published under European (And EU) licenses, including Turkish-published video games, and almost all are imported from Europe or the European Union, and thus having the PEGI labels on them though it is not officially supported by law. Those released under European licenses can be Turkish branches of the European publishers,(e.g Under a EU or other European based parent company.) -or just European publishers on their own which have the valid and certified (licensed) European licenses that are published with the sold items in Turkey, thus making it verified & certified. (And in case of warranty, all have it covered by a warranty as well.)The classification was semi-officially brought to Turkey in 2014 with a deal between private-owned TOGED (Game Developers Association of Turkey) and PEGI. Second-hand sold items in shops can have different labels, mostly such as the German USK. PEGI is also used while advertising video-games, and in the commercials. GoodGamers.biz (6 November 2017). "Turkish gamer youth to be informed by PEGI classification". GoodGamers.biz. Retrieved 27 June 2022. See video games in Turkey for more information. In some provinces of the country the Russian and Belarusian RARS rating-system is used. Yin-Poole, Wesley (31 August 2019). "PEGI responds to complaint about NBA 2K20's age-rating following casino trailer backlash". Eurogamer. Retrieved 25 October 2019. Towell, Justin (9 June 2009). "European Pokemon Platinum's missing Game Corner explained". GamesRadar. Retrieved 25 October 2019. Robertson, Andrew (2 August 2021). "PEGI Rating For Gambling Descriptor Is Now Always 18+". Retrieved 10 October 2023. Wakeling, Richard. "NBA 2K20 Trailer Is Very Happy To Showcase Its Loot Boxes And Gambling Mechanics". GameSpot. "PEGI aware that NBA 2K20 gambling imagery may be "too close for comfort"". GamesIndustry.biz. Retrieved 25 October 2019. Good, Owen S. (31 August 2019). "PEGI rating board explains why it didn't flag NBA 2K20 as gambling". Polygon. Archived from the original on 1 September 2019. Retrieved 10 October 2019. Livingston, Christopher (1 March 2024). "Poker-themed deckbuilder Balatro gets delisted from some stores after its PEGI rating absurdly jumps from 3 to 18+ over 'gambling imagery'". PC Gamer. Retrieved 16 March 2024. Wales, Matt (1 March 2024). "Rogue-like poker hit Balatro pulled from sale in some countries due to unexpected ratings change". Eurogamer. Retrieved 1 March 2024. Hagues, Alana (8 March 2024). "Balatro Back On Switch eShop In Europe With New Age Rating". Nintendo Life. Retrieved 16 March 2024. Lewis, Catherine (15 March 2024). "Balatro dev "disappointed" actual gambling games "aren't rated the same way" after ratings boards grilled the roguelike for gambling mechanics that don't exist". gamesradar. Retrieved 16 March 2024. Official website ISFE website