Jill Ellen Stein (born May 14, 1950) is an American physician, activist, and political candidate. She was the Green Party's nominee for president of the United States in the 2012 and 2016 elections and the Green-Rainbow Party's candidate for governor of Massachusetts in 2002 and 2010. Her campaigns for president have focused heavily on the proposal of a Green New Deal, which includes a number of reforms to address climate change and income inequality, as well as civil and political rights reform. In 2012, Stein received 469,015 votes, which accounted for .36% of the popular vote; in 2016, she received 1.45 million votes or 1.07% of the popular vote. In 2023, it was announced that Stein would help run Cornel West's 2024 Green Party campaign for president. After West withdrew from the Green Party to continue his campaign as an independent, Stein launched her campaign for the Green Party's 2024 presidential nomination. Stein was born in Chicago, Illinois, the daughter of Gladys (née Wool) and Joseph Stein. She was raised in Highland Park, Illinois. Her parents were descended from Russian Jews, and Stein was raised in a Reform Jewish household, attending Chicago's North Shore Congregation Israel. In 1973, Stein graduated magna cum laude from Harvard College, where she studied psychology, sociology, and anthropology. She then attended Harvard Medical School and graduated in 1979. Stein then practiced internal medicine for 25 years at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Simmons College Health Center, and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, which are all located in the Boston area. She also served as an instructor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. As a physician, Stein became increasingly concerned about the connection between people's health and the quality of their local environment. She subsequently turned to activism. In 1998, she began protesting the "Filthy Five" coal plants in Massachusetts. Since 1998, she has served on the board of the Greater Boston chapter of Physicians for Social Responsibility. She received Clean Water Action's "Not in Anyone's Backyard Award" in 1998 and its "Children's Health Hero Award" in 2000, Toxic Action Center's "Citizen Award" in 1999, and Salem State College's "Friend of the Earth Award" in 2004. Stein coauthored two reports by the Greater Boston Physicians for Social Responsibility, In Harm's Way: Toxic Threats to Child Development (2000), and Environmental Threats to Healthy Aging (2009). In Harm's Way report republished in the peer-reviewed Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics in 2002. Stein has said that she left the Democratic Party and joined the Green Party when "the Democratic Party killed campaign finance reform in my state". Stein began her political career by running as the Green-Rainbow Party candidate for governor of Massachusetts in 2002. Her running mate was Tony Lorenzen, a high school theology teacher. She finished third in a field of five candidates, with 76,530 votes (3.5%), far behind the winner, Republican Mitt Romney. In 2004, Stein ran for state representative for the 9th Middlesex District, which included portions of Waltham and Lexington. She received 3,911 votes (21.3%) in a three-way race, ahead of the Republican candidate but far behind Democratic incumbent Thomas M. Stanley. In 2005, Stein set her sights locally, running for the Lexington Town Meeting, a representative town meeting, the local legislative body in Lexington, Massachusetts. Stein was elected to one of seven seats in Precinct 2. She finished first of 16 candidates, receiving 539 votes (20.6%). Stein was reelected in 2008, finishing second of 13 vying for eight seats. Stein resigned during her second term to again run for governor. At the Green-Rainbow Party state convention on March 4, 2006, Stein was nominated for Secretary of the Commonwealth. In a two-way race with the three-term incumbent, Democrat Bill Galvin, she received 353,551 votes (17.7%). On February 8, 2010, Stein announced her second candidacy for governor. Her running mate was Richard P. Purcell, a surgery clerk and ergonomics assessor. In the November 2 general election, Stein finished fourth, receiving 32,895 votes (1.4%), again far behind the incumbent, Democrat Deval Patrick. In August 2011, Stein indicated that she was considering running for President of the United States with the Green Party in the 2012 general election. In a published questionnaire she said that a number of Green activists had asked her to run and called the U.S. debt-ceiling crisis "the President's astounding attack on Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid—a betrayal of the public interest." Stein launched her campaign in October 2011. In December 2011, Ben Manski, a Wisconsin Green Party leader, was announced as Stein's campaign manager. Her major primary opponents were actress Roseanne Barr and activist Kent Mesplay. Stein's signature issue during the primary was a Green New Deal, a government spending plan intended to put 25 million people to work. Mesplay called that unrealistic, saying, "This will take time to implement, and lacks legislative support." Stein became the presumptive Green Party nominee after winning two-thirds of California's delegates in June 2012. Stein was endorsed for president in 2012 by the Pulitzer Prize–winning journalist and war correspondent Chris Hedges, among others. Linguist Noam Chomsky said he would vote for her, but urged those in swing states to vote for Barack Obama. On July 1, 2012, the Stein campaign reported it had received enough contributions to qualify for primary season federal matching funds. This made Stein the first Green Party presidential candidate ever to have qualified for federal matching funds. On July 11, Stein selected Cheri Honkala, an anti-poverty activist, as her vice-presidential running mate. On July 14, she officially received the Green Party's nomination at its convention in Baltimore. On August 1, Stein, Honkala and three others were arrested during a sit-in at a Philadelphia bank to protest housing foreclosures on behalf of several city residents struggling to keep their homes. On October 16, Stein and Honkala were arrested after they tried to enter the site of the presidential debate at Hofstra University while protesting the exclusion of smaller political parties, such as the Green Party, from the debates. Stein likened her arrest to the persecution of dissident Sergei Udaltsov in Russia. On October 31, Stein was arrested in Texas for criminal trespass, after trying to deliver food and supplies to environmental activists of Tar Sands Blockade camped out in trees protesting the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline. The Free & Equal Elections Foundation hosted a third-party debate with Stein and three other candidates on October 19, followed by a debate between Stein and Gary Johnson held on November 5. During the campaign, Stein repeatedly said that there were no significant differences between Mitt Romney and Barack Obama.[better source needed] She said, "Romney is a wolf in a wolf's clothing, Obama is a wolf in a sheep's clothing, but they both essentially have the same agenda." She called both of them "Wall Street candidates" asking for "a mandate for four more years of corporate rule". Stein received 469,015 votes (0.36%). She received 1% or more of the vote in three states: Maine (1.1%), Oregon (1.1%), and Alaska (1.0%). On February 6, 2015, Stein announced the formation of an exploratory committee in preparation for a potential campaign for the Green Party's presidential nomination in 2016. On June 22, she formally announced her candidacy in a live interview with Amy Goodman on Democracy Now! After former Ohio state senator Nina Turner reportedly declined to be her running mate, Stein chose human rights activist Ajamu Baraka on August 1, 2016. Stein stated during the 2016 campaign that the Democratic and Republican parties are "two corporate parties" that have converged into one. Concerned by the rise of neofascism internationally and the rise of neoliberalism within the Democratic Party, she has said, "The answer to neofascism is stopping neoliberalism. Putting another Clinton in the White House will fan the flames of this right-wing extremism. We have known that for a long time, ever since Nazi Germany." In August 2016, Stein released the first two pages of her 2015 tax return on her website. Stein's financial disclosure, filed in March 2016, indicated that she maintained investments of as much as $8.5 million, including mutual or index funds that included holdings in industries that she had previously criticized, such as energy, financial, pharmaceutical, tobacco, and defense contractors. In response to questions about her finances, Stein said in part: "Sadly, most of these broad investments are as compromised as the American economy—degraded as it is by the fossil fuel, defense and finance industries", and later characterized the article as a "smear attack" against her. On September 7, 2016, a North Dakota judge issued a warrant for Stein's arrest for spray-painting a bulldozer during a protest of the Dakota Access Pipeline. Stein was charged in Morton County with misdemeanor counts of criminal trespass and criminal mischief. Her running mate, Ajamu Baraka, received the same charges. After the warrant was issued, Stein said that she would cooperate with the North Dakota authorities and arrange a court date. She defended her actions, saying that it would have been "inappropriate for me not to have done my small part" to support the Standing Rock Sioux. In August 2017, she pleaded guilty to misdemeanor criminal mischief and was placed on probation for six months. Stein said in an interview with Politico that: "Donald Trump, I think, will have a lot of trouble moving things through Congress. Hillary Clinton, on the other hand, won't ... Hillary has the potential to do a whole lot more damage, get us into more wars, faster to pass her fracking disastrous climate program, much more easily than Donald Trump could do his." In the same interview, Stein said regarding Trump's business dealings and refusal to release his tax returns: "At least with Clinton, you know, there was some degree of transparency, but what's going on with Trump, you can't even get at, and what he said was that even to clarify 15 out of these 500 deals, these are just like the most frightening mafiosos around the world. He's like—he's a magnet for crime and extortion." On Mother's Day Stein tweeted "I agree with Hillary, it's time to elect a woman for President. But I want that President to reflect the values of being a mother. #MothersDay." When this was criticized by a pseudonymous activist on Medium and on Twitter, Stein said she "was criticizing her record as a war monger." Stein's highest polling average in four candidate polls was in late June 2016, when she polled at 4.8% nationally. Her polling numbers gradually slipped throughout the campaign, consistent with historical trends for minor party candidates; on the eve of Election Day, Stein was at 1.8% in a polling average. Stein ultimately received 1% of the national popular vote in the election. She finished in 4th with over 1,457,216 votes (more than the previous three Green tickets combined) and 1.07% of the popular vote. Stein played a significant role in several crucial battleground states, drawing a vote total in three of them—Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania—that exceeded the margin between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton. In November 2016, a group of computer scientists and election lawyers including J. Alex Halderman and John Bonifaz (founder of the National Voting Rights Institute) expressed concerns about the integrity of the presidential election results. They wanted a full audit or recount of the presidential election votes in three states key to Donald Trump's electoral college win—Michigan, Wisconsin, and Pennsylvania—but needed a candidate on the presidential ballot to file the petition to state authorities. After unsuccessfully lobbying Hillary Clinton and her team, the group approached Stein and she agreed to spearhead the recount effort. A crowdfunding campaign launched on November 24, 2016, to support the costs of the recount, raised more than $2.5 million in under 24 hours, and $6.7 million in nearly a week. On November 25, 2016, with 90 minutes remaining on the deadline to petition for a recount to Wisconsin's electoral body, Stein filed for a recount of its presidential election results. She signaled she intended to file for similar recounts in the subsequent days in Michigan and Pennsylvania. President-elect Donald Trump issued a statement denouncing the recount request saying, "The people have spoken and the election is over." Trump further commented that the recount "is a scam by the Green Party for an election that has already been conceded." On December 2, 2016, Michigan Attorney General Bill Schuette filed a lawsuit to stop Stein's recount. On the same day in Wisconsin a U.S. District Judge denied an emergency halt to the recount, allowing it to continue until a December 9, 2016, hearing. On December 3, 2016, Stein dropped the state recount case in Pennsylvania, citing "the barriers to verifying the vote in Pennsylvania are so pervasive and that the state court system is so ill-equipped to address this problem that we must seek federal court intervention." Shortly after midnight on December 5, 2016, U.S. District Judge Mark A. Goldsmith ordered Michigan election officials to hand-recount 4.8 million ballots, rejecting all concerns for the cost of the recount. Goldsmith wrote in his order: "As emphasized earlier, budgetary concerns are not sufficiently significant to risk the disenfranchisement of Michigan's nearly 5 million voters". Meanwhile, however, the Michigan Court of Appeals ruled that Stein, who placed fourth, had no chance of winning and was not an "aggrieved candidate" and ordered the Michigan election board to reject her petition for a recount. On December 7, 2016, Judge Goldsmith halted the Michigan recount. Stein filed an appeal with the Michigan Supreme Court, losing her appeal in a 3–2 decision on December 9, 2016. On December 12, 2016, U.S. District Judge Paul S. Diamond rejected Stein's request for a Pennsylvania recount. In May 2018, The Daily Beast reported that approximately $1 million of the original $7.3 million had yet to be spent and that there remained uncertainty about what precisely the money had been spent on. On December 18, 2017, The Washington Post reported that the Senate Intelligence Committee was looking at Stein's presidential campaign for potential "collusion with the Russians." The Stein campaign released a statement stating it would work with investigators. In December 2018, two reports commissioned by the US Senate found that the Internet Research Agency boosted Stein's candidacy through social media posts, targeting African-American voters in particular. After consulting the two reports, NBC News reporter Robert Windrem said that nothing suggested Stein knew about the operation, but added that "the Massachusetts physician ha[d] long been criticized for her support of international policies that mirror Russian foreign policy goals." Windrem reported that his publisher (NBC News) had found that in 2015 and 2016 there had been over 100 favorable stories about Stein on Russian state-owned media networks RT and Sputnik. In 2015, Stein was photographed dining at the same table as Russian president Vladimir Putin at the RT 10th anniversary gala in Moscow, leading to controversy. Stein contended that she had no contact with Putin at the dinner and described the situation as a "non-event". In an official statement, Stein called one of the reports, the one authored by New Knowledge, "dangerous new McCarthyism" and asked the Senate Committee to retract it, saying the firm was "sponsored by partisan Democratic funders" and had itself been shown to have been "directly involved in election interference" in the 2017 US Senate election in Alabama. By July 31, 2018, Stein had spent slightly under $100,000 of the recount money on legal representation linked to the Senate probe into election interference. In March 2019, Stein's spokesman David Cobb said she had "fully cooperated with the Senate inquiry." In October 2019, Hillary Clinton said that Russia's ongoing efforts to influence U.S. elections included a plot to support a third-party candidate in 2020, which could either be Jill Stein, whom she described as a "Russian asset," or Tulsi Gabbard. A few days later, Clinton's comments were clarified to indicate that she thought that it was, in fact, Republicans who were behind the plot. Stein denounced Clinton's comments on both herself and Gabbard, describing them as "slanderous". Stein originally supported activist and scholar Cornel West's 2024 presidential campaign under the Green Party and became his campaign manager. After West withdrew his bid for the Green presidential nomination in order to instead continue his run for the presidency as an independent, Stein retracted her endorsement for West and said the Green Party would find a nominee elsewhere. She also hinted at a possible bid of her own. On November 9, 2023, Stein announced her third bid for president on X (formerly Twitter), citing her main priorities as being anti-war, paving the way for a Green New Deal, Universal Healthcare, and ending what she characterized as "genocide in Gaza". Stein's campaign reportedly has the potential to erode Joe Biden's core support in the general election. In her various political campaigns, Stein supported industry nationalization and guaranteed employment. In 2015, Stein was critical of official employment numbers, saying that unemployment figures were "designed to essentially cover up unemployment," and that the real unemployment rate for that year was around 12–13%. In February 2016, she said that "real unemployment is nearly 10%, 2x as high as the official rate." Referring to President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal approach to the Great Depression, Stein advocated a Green New Deal in her 2012 and 2016 campaigns, in which renewable energy jobs would be created to address climate change and environmental issues; the objective would be to employ "every American willing and able to work". Stein said this plan would end unemployment and poverty. Asked how the funds of the Green New Deal would be distributed, Stein said that it would be "through a community decision-making process" but that the details remained to be worked out. Stein supports the creation of sustainable infrastructure based on clean renewable-energy generation and sustainable-community principles to stop what her party sees as a growing convergence of environmental crises in water, soil, fisheries, and forests. Her vision includes increasing intra-city mass transit and inter-city railroads, creating complete streets that safely encourage bike and pedestrian traffic, and regional food systems based on sustainable organic agriculture. Stein said she would fund the start-up costs of the plan with a 30% reduction in the U.S. military budget, returning U.S. troops home, and increasing taxes on stock-market speculation, offshore tax havens, and multimillion-dollar real estate, among other things. In 2012 and 2016 she cited a 2012 study in the Review of Black Political Economy by Rutgers professor Phillip Harvey showing that the multiplier economic effects of this "Green New Deal" would recoup most of the start-up costs of her plan. In September 2016, Stein said she would consider using quantitative easing to establish a universal basic income or a Medicare for all package. Stein called the Wall Street bailout an unconscionable waste. In 2012, Stein opposed the raising of the debt ceiling, saying that the U.S. should instead raise taxes on the wealthy and make military spending cuts to offset the debt. In 2016, Stein said that she supported a new 0.5% financial transactions tax on the sale of stocks, bonds, and derivatives, and an increase in the estate tax to "at least" 55% on inheritances over $3 million. During her 2012 and 2016 presidential runs, Stein called for "nationalizing" and "democratiz[ing]" the Federal Reserve, placing it under a Federal Monetary Authority in the Treasury Department and ending its independence. She supported the creation of nonprofit publicly owned banks, pledging to create such entities at the federal and state levels. In a 2016 interview Stein said she believed in having "the government as the employer of last resort". When asked what this entailed, she said that the idea was not yet fully developed but that a position paper was forthcoming. Stein's 2016 platform pledged to guarantee housing but did not offer specifics. Stein has argued for "free higher public education". Stein opposes charter schools and has been critical of the Common Core, saying that teachers rather than "corporate contractors" should be responsible for education. Stein feels that the move towards computerized education in kindergarten was bad for young children's cognitive and social development, saying, "We should be moving away from screens at all levels of education." She argues that increasing computerization benefits only device manufacturers, not teachers, children, or communities. In a question-and-answer session, Stein voiced concern about wireless internet (Wi-Fi) in schools, saying, "We should not be subjecting kids' brains especially to that ... and we don't follow this issue in our country, but in Europe, where they do, you know, they have good precautions about wireless. Maybe not good enough, you know. It's very hard to study this stuff. You know, we make guinea pigs out of whole populations and then we discover how many die." Stein later said, "take precautions about how much we expose young children to WiFi and cellphones until we know more about the long-term health effects of this type of low-level radiation." According to the World Health Organization (WHO), "no adverse health effects are expected from exposure to [Wi-Fi]". In an interview with the Los Angeles Times editorial board, Stein clarified that her statements on Wi-Fi were "not a policy statement" and that attention to her statement on Wi-Fi was "a sign of a gotcha political system". Stein favors canceling all student loan debt, saying that it could be done using quantitative easing and without raising taxes. She has described quantitative easing as a "digital hat-trick" or "magic trick that basically people don't need to understand any more about than that it is a magic trick". According to Stein, the Federal Reserve could buy up student loans and agree not to collect the debt, thereby effectively canceling it. Stein has drawn parallels between her student loan proposal and the Wall Street bailout, saying that the US government bought up Wall Street debt and then canceled it. When asked why her plan includes canceling upper-income individuals' debt, Stein responded that higher education "pays for itself" and that education is not a "gift," but a "right," and a "necessity." Jordan Weissmann of Slate argues that Stein's Wall Street bailout comparison is "flat wrong": the Federal Reserve did not buy and cancel debt owed by the banks but bought and held onto debt owned by the banks. Tom DiChristopher of CNBC argues that Stein's plan is basically impossible because the Federal Reserve is an independent government agency. The president lacks the authority to implement such a plan. Stein is critical of the two-party system, and argues for ranked-choice voting as a favorable alternative to "lesser evilism". Calling for "more voices and more choices", the Stein campaign launched a petition demanding that all candidates appearing on a sufficient number of state ballots to be theoretically electable should be invited to participate in the presidential debates. In September 2016, Stein announced support for lowering the voting age to 16, in line with many other Green parties worldwide.[citation needed] Stein says that climate change is a "national emergency" and calling it "a threat greater than World War II." Stein has written: "We need climate mobilization comparable to what the US did after WWII." She has described the Paris Climate Agreement as inadequate, saying it will not stop climate change. She has said that she would "basically override" the agreement and create a more effective one. Stein wants to "treat energy as a human right". Stein proposes that the United States shift to 100% renewable energy by 2030. Stein supports a national ban on fracking on the grounds that "cutting-edge science now suggests fracking is every bit as bad as coal". Stein has spoken against nuclear energy, saying it "is dirty, dangerous and expensive, and should be precluded on all of those counts." In March 2016, she tweeted, "Nuclear power plants = weapons of mass destruction waiting to be detonated." In 2012, Stein said, "three times more jobs are created per dollar invested in conservation and renewables. Nuclear is currently the most expensive per unit of energy created." Stein says that she will "ensure that any worker displaced by the shift away from fossil fuels will receive full income and benefits as they transition to alternative work." She has further argued that moving away from fossil fuels will produce substantial savings in healthcare costs. Stein has argued that the cost of transitioning to 100% renewable energy by 2030 would in part be recouped by healthcare savings, citing studies that predict 200,000 fewer premature deaths as well as less illness. She has noted that when Cuba lost Soviet oil subsidies it experienced plummeting diabetes (down 50%), CVD (down 30%) and all-cause (down 18%) death rates. Stein takes a non-interventionist approach to foreign policy. She has also been critical of America's "expanding wars" and accused the United States of currently "bombing seven countries," which Politifact rated as a true statement. In 2012, Stein favored maintaining current levels of international aid spending. Stein wishes to cut U.S. military spending by at least 50%. and would close US overseas military bases. She has said that they "are turning our republic into a bankrupt empire". She wants to replace the lost military jobs "with jobs in renewable energy, transportation and green infrastructure development" and to "restore the National Guard as the centerpiece of our defense". According to Stein, the United States should use force only when there is "good evidence that we are under imminent threat of actual attack". When asked by the Los Angeles Times editorial board whether that standard would have prevented US involvement in World War II, Stein answered, "I don't want to revisit history or try to reinterpret it, you know, but starting from where we are now, given the experience that we've had in the last, you know, since 2001, which has been an utter disaster, I don't think it's benefited us." Stein criticized the 2003 invasion of Iraq, U.S.-led War in Afghanistan and U.S. involvement in the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen, stating: "We are party to the war crimes that are being committed by Saudi Arabia, who’s using cluster bombs made by us. And we’ve supplied $100 billion worth of weapons to the Saudis in the last decade...It’s against our own laws. The Leahy bill requires that we not sell weapons to human rights abusers." Stein wants to remove U.S. nuclear weapons from foreign countries. Stein has been sharply critical of the use of drones, calling them a human rights violation and an "illegal assassination program" saying that they are "off target nine times out of ten." When asked whether US should withdraw from all of its mutual defense treaties, Stein answered that the treaties need to "be looked at one by one", mentioning NATO in particular. On the subject of NATO, Stein has said that NATO has violated international law in Libya, and that it is part of "a foreign policy that has been based on economic and military domination". When asked whether she agreed with Ajamu Baraka's description of NATO as "gangster states", Stein answered that she would not use Baraka's language but that "he means the same thing I'm saying". When asked by The Washington Post about NATO's role in protecting the Baltic states against Russia, Stein responded: "At this point, I'm not prepared to speak to that in detail" but said that NATO has not followed its stated policy after the fall of the Berlin Wall not to move "one inch to the East". She further argued that there has been provocation on both sides and that a diplomatic approach is necessary. Stein has said that NATO fights invented enemies in order to provide work for the weapons industry. Stein accused NATO member Turkey of supporting Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, saying that "we need to convince Turkey, our ally in theory, to close its border to the movement of jihadi militias across its border to reinforce ISIS." Stein criticized NATO's eastward expansion. She has said that NATO "pursued a policy of basically encircling Russia—including the threat of nukes and drones and so on." According to Stein, "now we got the Cuban Missile Crisis in reverse going on, where we have now surrounded Russia with missiles and nuclear weapons and NATO troops". When asked in a Vox interview about Russian military policy in Crimea and Ukraine, Stein answered, "These are highly questionable situations. Why are we—Russia used to own Ukraine. Ukraine was historically a part of Russia for quite some period of time, and we all know there was this conversation with Victoria Nuland about planning the coup and who was going to take over ... Let's just stop pretending there are good guys here and bad guys here. These are complicated situations. Yeah, Russia is doing lots of human rights abuse, but you know what? So are we." When asked by Politico if she thought that Putin was an "incipient despot", Stein answered, "To some extent, yes, but there could be a whole lot worse ... when we needlessly provoke him and endanger him and surround him with war games—you know, this is sort of the Cuban Missile Crisis on steroids, what we are doing to Russia right now, and I don't think this is a good idea." Stein has claimed that the United States "helped foment" a "coup in Ukraine" (known in Ukraine as the Revolution of Dignity), maintaining that Ukraine should be neutral and that the United States should not arm it. She was critical of the Ukrainian government formed after the Revolution of Dignity, claiming that "ultra-nationalists and ex-Nazis came to power." She attended a banquet also attended by President Vladimir Putin in Moscow in December 2015 which celebrated the 10th anniversary of the Russian state-run television network RT. While in Russia, Stein criticized U.S. foreign policy (saying that the U.S. had a "policy of domination" instead of "international law, human rights and diplomacy") and human rights in the U.S. Stein condemned Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine, but claimed that Russia was provoked by NATO's eastward expansion. On the eve of the 15-year anniversary of the September 11 attacks, Stein called for "a comprehensive and independent inquiry into the attacks," saying that the 9/11 Commission Report contained many "omissions and distortions." The next day, she said: "I think I would not have assassinated Osama bin Laden but would have captured him and brought him to trial." Stein told CNN that she attended the conference to advocate for a ceasefire in the Middle East and to tell Russia to stop its military incursion in Syria. She has said that her approach to the Syrian Civil War would be to put in place a weapons embargo, freeze funds going to ISIL and other terrorist groups, and push for a peace process leading to a ceasefire. Stein is also in favor of taking "far more" than the 10,000 Syrian refugees Obama pledged to take in. Stein is against the construction of Israeli settlements in the Jordan Valley and wants to end the occupation of the West Bank. Stein has accused the Israeli government of "apartheid, assassination, illegal settlements, blockades, building of nuclear bombs, indefinite detention, collective punishment, and defiance of international law." She supports the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) campaign against Israel and regards Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu as a "war criminal".[better source needed] Upon the death of Nobel Peace Laureate Elie Wiesel, Stein praised him in a tribute on her Facebook page, but deleted the post when commenters criticized Wiesel's Zionism. When asked in September 2016 whether she had a "position on whether a two-state solution is a better solution than a one-state solution", Stein answered, "I feel like I am not as informed as I need to be to really weigh in on that". In November 2023, Stein released a statement denouncing Israel's invasion of the Gaza Strip and U.S. military funding of Israel. She condemned Israeli war crimes in Gaza, as well as the Biden administration's role in facilitating them. Stein said that President Joe Biden and the Democratic and Republican leaders are full partners in Benjamin Netanyahu's crimes. She demanded a ceasefire, an end to the Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, humanitarian and medical aid, the release of hostages and political prisoners, and an end to the "occupation" and "apartheid". Stein does not think the U.S. should become involved in territorial disputes in the South China Sea. Immediately after the UK voted to leave the European Union in June 2016, Stein came out in support of Brexit. Stein posted a celebratory statement on her website, saying the vote was "a victory for those who believe in the right of self-determination and who reject the pro-corporate, austerity policies of the political elites in the EU ... [and] a rejection of the European political elite and their contempt for ordinary people." She later changed the statement (without indicating so), removing words like "victory" and adding the line, "Before the Brexit vote I agreed with Jeremy Corbyn, Caroline Lucas and the UK Greens who supported staying in the EU but working to fix it." After the death of Cuban former communist leader Fidel Castro, Stein tweeted that "Fidel Castro was a symbol of the struggle for justice in the shadow of empire." Jill Stein advocates "a welcoming path to citizenship for immigrants." Stein is in favor of replacing the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) with a "Medicare-for-All" healthcare system and has said that it is an "illusion" that Obamacare is a "step in the right direction" toward single-payer healthcare. Stein has been critical of subsidizing unhealthy food products and of "agri-business" for its advertisements encouraging unhealthy eating. She has said that due to agri-business, Greeks no longer have the healthy diets they once did. Stein supports GMO labeling, a moratorium on new GMOs, and the phasing out of existing GMO foods, unless independent research "shows decisively that GMOs are not harmful to human health or ecosystems". Speaking of the health effects of foods derived from GM crops, she has said: "And I can tell you as a physician with special interest and long history in environmental health, the quality of studies that we have are not what you need. We should have a moratorium until they are proven safe, and they have not been proven safe in the way that they are used." Commentators have criticized Stein's statements about GMOs, writing that they contradict the scientific consensus, which is that existing GM foods are no less safe than foods made from conventional crops. Among the critics was Jordan Weissmann, Slate's business and economics editor, who wrote in July 2016: "Never mind that scientists have studied GMOs extensively and found no signs of danger to human health—Stein would like medical researchers to prove a negative." In Environmental Threats to Healthy Aging (2008), Stein concludes her section on pesticides by saying: "[M]any but not all studies find that acute high-dose and chronic lower-dose occupational exposures to some neurotoxic pesticides are linked to an increased risk of cognitive decline, dementia or Alzheimer's disease." In 2000, Stein and her coauthors wrote, "Twenty million American children five and under eat an average of eight pesticides every day through food consumption. Thirty-seven pesticides registered for use on foods are neurotoxic organophosphate insecticides, chemically related to more toxic nerve warfare agent developed earlier this century." They further noted the ubiquity of these pesticides in the home and at schools, citing Schettler et al. for the claim that "the trend is toward increasingly common exposures to organophosphates. For example, chlorpyrifos detections in urine increased more than tenfold from 1980 to 1990." Emily Willingham, scientist and contributor at Forbes, describes Stein's statements on vaccines as "using dog whistle terms and equivocations bound to appeal to the 'antivaccine' constituency". When asked about vaccines by Jacobin editor Bhaskar Sunkara, Stein responded: "One of the issues I used to work on was reducing mercury exposure. That was an issue at one point in vaccines. That's been rectified," adding, "there are issues about mercury in the fish supply that many low-income people and immigrant communities rely on, and in indigenous communities especially. This is a huge issue and the FDA has refused for decades to regulate and to warn people." In an interview with The Washington Post, Stein stated that "vaccines have been absolutely critical in ridding us of the scourge of many diseases," and said that "[t]here were concerns among physicians about what the vaccination schedule meant, the toxic substances like mercury which used to be rampant in vaccines. There were real questions that needed to be addressed. I think some of them at least have been addressed. I don't know if all of them have been addressed." In response to a Twitter question about whether vaccines cause autism, Stein first answered, "there is no evidence that autism is caused by vaccines," then revised her tweet to "I'm not aware of evidence linking autism with vaccines." In a later interview at the Green party convention, Stein answered "no" to the question "do you think vaccines cause autism?" She called this a "nonsense issue, meant to distract people" and likened it to smear campaigns used in previous presidential elections, citing the "Swiftboat issue" or the "birther issue," pointing out that in her previous published work on autism and child development issues, no mention was made of vaccines. In July 2018 Washington Post interview, Stein said that vaccines should be approved by a board that people can trust, and "people do not trust a Food and Drug Administration," or Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "where corporate influence and the pharmaceutical industry has a lot of influence." According to The Guardian, eleven members of the Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee are medical doctors who work at hospitals and universities, and two work at pharmaceutical companies, GlaxoSmithKline and Sanofi Pasteur US. In response, Stein said that "Monsanto lobbyists help run the day in those agencies and are in charge of approving what food isn't safe". In an October 21, 2016, interview, producer Bec Gill with the ScIQ YouTube channel asked Stein: "You talk extensively on your concern about corporate influence over U.S. vaccine regulations. My question is, what evidence do you have that corporate influence has caused either the FDA or the CDC to make decisions that endanger American children's health?" Stein offered as evidence Vioxx and Monsanto. The Guardian says that "research has shown schedule-related concerns about vaccines to be unfounded, and that delays to vaccines actually put children at greater risk. Anti-vaxx campaigners often claim that there are dangerous compounds in vaccines, though decades of safe vaccinations contradict the claim and no evidence shows that trace amounts that remain in some approved vaccines cause any harm to the body." Dan Kahan, a professor at Yale who has studied public perception of science, says that it is dangerous for candidates to equivocate on vaccines, "Because the attitudes about vaccines are pretty much uniform across the political spectrum, it doesn't seem like a great idea for any candidate to be anti-vaccine. The modal view is leave the freaking system alone." Stein has deplored what she and others identify as the structural racism of the U.S. judicial and prison system. On Juneteenth in 2016, Stein called for reparations for slavery. Stein has promised that "the Green New Deal prioritizes job creation in the areas of greatest need: communities of color" and said that the war on drugs had disproportionately affected communities of color. In accepting the nomination of the Green party, she reiterated this support, calling for a Truth and Reconciliation Commission "to provide reparations to acknowledge the enormous debt owed to the African American community." Asked by The Washington Post whether she agreed with Ajamu Baraka's characterization of President Obama as an "Uncle Tom", Stein replied that it would be better to ask Baraka about his choice of words, but added that he "was speaking to a demographic that feels pretty locked out of the American power structure." Stein supports the Great Sioux Nation's opposition to the Dakota Access Pipeline, and in September 2016 joined protesters in North Dakota. Both Stein and her running mate, Ajamu Baraka, are facing misdemeanor criminal charges for spray-painting bulldozers at the construction site of the pipeline with "I approve this message" and "decolonization" respectively. In 2012, Vote Smart reported that Stein wanted to "slightly decrease" spending on space exploration. She favored maintaining current levels of spending on scientific and medical research. In 2016, Stein said NASA funding should be increased, arguing that by halving the military budget, more money could be directed towards "exploring space instead of destroying planet Earth." In her 2016 acceptance speech for the Green Party nomination, she called for "end[ing] the war on whistleblowers, and free[ing] the political prisoners ... Leonard Peltier, Mumia Abu Jamal, Chelsea Manning, Julian Assange, Edward Snowden, Jeffrey Sterling, and Edward Pinkney". She said that she would have Snowden in her Cabinet if elected. In an op-ed on the subject of WikiLeaks, Stein argued that Assange was doing what other journalists should be doing but are not, and added that whistleblowers have been increasingly subject to "character assassination" and prosecution during the Obama administration. Stein is married to Richard Rohrer, who is also a physician. They live in Lexington, Massachusetts, and have two sons. Korte, Gregory (June 22, 2023). "Jill Stein, 2016 Green Candidate, Now Running Cornel West's Bid". Bloomberg.com. Nieto, Phillip (June 22, 2023). "Jill Stein Is Back: Failed 2016 Green Party Candidate Running Cornel West's 2024 Campaign". Mediaite. McKend, Eva; Krieg, Gregory (June 22, 2023). "Jill Stein enlisted to help build Cornel West's third-party presidential campaign". CNN. Trudo, Hannah (November 9, 2023). "Jill Stein launches 2024 bid as Green Party candidate". The Hill. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "Going Green". The Forward. Archived from the original on March 29, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2012. "Stein, a physician and internal medicine instructor, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard College in 1973, and from Harvard Medical School in 1979". Retrieved June 20, 2016. "Jill Stein (G-R) Candidate for Governor". Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Jill was trained as a clinical doctor and served for decades as an instructor in internal medicine at Harvard Medical School". Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved June 20, 2016. "Meet Jill Stein, the Green Party Candidate for President". NBC News. March 26, 2016. Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Harvard Grad Jill Stein Faces Uphill Battle for Presidency". Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Jill Stein Biography". Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Jill Stein for President at Sonoma State University". Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Earth Days at Salem State College – Past Friend of the Earth Award Recipients" (PDF). Retrieved May 31, 2016. Jill Stein; et al. "Environmental Threats to Healthy Aging". Retrieved October 26, 2012. Greater Boston Physicians for Social Responsibility (January 2000). "In Harm's Way: Toxic Threats to Child Development". Retrieved August 24, 2016. Jill Stein, Ted Schettler, David Wallinga, Maria Valenti, In Harm’s Way: Toxic Threats to Child Development, Journal of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics, Vol. 23 (February 2002), pp. S13-S22. "2002 Governor General Election". Secretary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Retrieved February 2, 2019. "2004 State Representative General Election: 9th Middlesex District". Secretary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Retrieved February 2, 2019. "Jill E. Stein's Biography Candidate Details". votesmart.org. Retrieved July 16, 2012. "Green Party of the United States | Candidate Details". GP.org. March 3, 2008. Archived from the original on September 19, 2012. Retrieved July 16, 2012. "Candidate: Jill Stein Green Party nominee". USA Today. Retrieved August 29, 2016. "2006 Secretary of the Commonwealth General Election". Secretary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Retrieved February 2, 2019. Stein denounces Beacon Hill "corruption tax" as she announces run for governor Boston.com, February 8, 2010 Gubernatorial candidate Jill Stein of Green-Rainbow Party, introduces lieutenant governor candidate Richard P. Purcell, of Holyoke The Republican (Springfield), April 3, 2010 "2010 Governor General Election". Secretary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Retrieved February 2, 2019. Reply by Jill Stein, to the GPUS Outreach and exploratory questionnaire for the 2012 GPUS presidential nomination Archived September 18, 2011, at the Wayback Machine GP.org Winger, Richard. "Ben Manski Will be Campaign Manager for Jill Stein Presidential Run". Ballot Access News. Retrieved December 3, 2011. Friedersdorf, Conor (May 21, 2012). "The 3 Green Party Candidates and Their Disappointing Platforms". The Atlantic. Retrieved July 28, 2016. "Jill Stein says she has delegates for Green Party nod for president". Boston Herald. Boston.com. Retrieved June 26, 2012. "Mitt Romney won't be the only Massachusetts resident on the presidential ballot". The Boston Globe. Retrieved June 26, 2012. "National peace leaders urge support for Stein". jillstein.org. June 26, 2012. Archived from the original on November 24, 2012. Retrieved September 17, 2012. Filipowicz, Matthew (September 28, 2012). "Noam Chomsky on How Progressives Should Approach Election 2012". AlterNet. Retrieved July 28, 2016. Stapleton, Christine (July 12, 2012). "Green Party presidential candidate Jill Stein qualifies for matching funds". The Palm Beach Post. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Turner, Maureen (July 12, 2012). "Stein Qualifies for Public Campaign Funds". The Valley Advocate. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Caldwell, Leigh Ann (July 11, 2012) "Running mate revealed: Green Party running mate, that is", CBS News. Retrieved July 11, 2012. Steinmetz, Katy (July 11, 2012) "The Green Team: Jill Stein's Third-Party Bid to Shake Up 2012", TIME Swampland (election blog). Retrieved July 11, 2012. "Mass. doctor Jill Stein wins Green Party's presidential nod". USA Today. Associated Press. July 14, 2012. Retrieved July 15, 2012. Kilar, Steve (July 14, 2012). "Green Party nominates Jill Stein for president at Baltimore convention". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved July 15, 2012. "Green Party nominee Jill Stein arrested in Philly bank sit-in". Boston Herald. Associated Press. August 1, 2012. Archived from the original on August 6, 2012. Retrieved August 1, 2012. Cirilli, Kevin. "Green Party ticket arrested at debate". POLITICO. @DrJillStein (October 18, 2012). "#Putin persecutes #Left opposition leader #Udaltsov. #U.S. gov arrests #Green prez candidates. Is #Russia approaching U.S. or vice-versa?" (Tweet). Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via Twitter. James B. Kelleher (October 31, 2012). "Green Party presidential hopeful arrested in pipeline protest". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved November 1, 2012. Mufson, Steven (October 31, 2012). "Green Party presidential candidate Jill Stein charged with trespassing in Keystone XL protest". Washington Post. Retrieved November 1, 2012. Calderone, Michael (October 19, 2012). "Third-Party Debate To Be Broadcast By Al Jazeera English, RT America, But Not Major Cable News Networks". Huffington Post. Retrieved August 31, 2016. "Open Debates". Free and Equal. Archived from the original on September 14, 2016. Retrieved August 31, 2016. @DrJillStein (September 20, 2012). ""Voting for either Wall Street candidate – Romney or Obama – just gives a mandate for four more years of corporate rule." PLS RT" (Tweet). Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via Twitter. @DrJillStein (August 14, 2012). "Romney is a wolf in a wolf's clothing, Obama is a wolf in a sheep's clothing, but they both essentially have the same agenda. @jillstein2012" (Tweet). Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via Twitter. @DrJillStein (July 21, 2012). "Thanks! RT @chris_r_byrnes: Obama v. Romney = Coke v. Pepsi. Jill Stein = fresh glass of water. Be healthy! Vote @jillstein2012 #GreenParty!" (Tweet). Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via Twitter. 2012 Presidential General Election Results, Dave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections accessed November 19, 2012 Pindell, James (February 6, 2015) "Jill Stein, Green Party candidate, considers a second run for president", The Boston Globe. Retrieved February 6, 2015 "Exclusive: Green Party’s Jill Stein Announces She Is Running for President on Democracy Now!", Democracynow.org. June 22, 2015, Retrieved June 23, 2015. "Nina Turner turns down offer to be the Green Party's candidate for vice president". August 2, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016. Iyengar, Rishi (August 2, 2016). "Green Party's Jill Stein Picks Ajamu Baraka as Running Mate". Time. Retrieved August 2, 2016. "I am Jill Stein, Green Party candidate for President, AMA! • /r/IAmA". reddit. May 11, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. "Watch //Jill Stein: To stop Trump's neofascism, we must stop Clinton's neoliberalism". Haaretz. July 31, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "Left Forum 2016, Is Sanders the Answer to Building Left and Black Power?". youtube. Open University of the Left. Archived from the original on December 13, 2021. Retrieved August 17, 2016. "Tax Returns". Retrieved August 11, 2016. Reilly, Peter J. "Jill Stein Releases 2015 Federal Tax Return". Forbes. Retrieved August 12, 2016. Ali, Yashar (October 26, 2016). "Jill Stein's Ideology Says One Thing—Her Investment Portfolio Says Another". The Daily Beast. Retrieved October 26, 2016. Schroeder, Robert (October 28, 2016). "Green Party's Jill Stein defends Big Oil fund investments after 'smear attack'". MarketWatch. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Green Party's Jill Stein charged with trespassing, mischief". Yahoo. September 7, 2016. Archived from the original on September 21, 2016. Retrieved September 8, 2016. "Green Party presidential candidate Jill Stein to speak on arrest warrant". ABC. September 9, 2016. Retrieved September 9, 2016. "Stein says arranging court date on protest-related charges". The Journal Times. September 9, 2016. Retrieved September 9, 2016.[permanent dead link] "The Latest: Jill Stein pleads guilty in pipeline protest". ABC News. Archived from the original on January 29, 2018. Burris, Sarah (September 19, 2016). "Jill Stein insists Trump is less dangerous than Clinton – and attacks Bernie Sanders as a DC insider". Raw Story. Reilly, Adam (July 27, 2016). "Jill Stein Crashes The DNC With Fox News". WGBH News. Thrush, Glenn (September 19, 2016). "Jill Stein: Trump may have 'memory problem'". Politico. Dem-inist, Smart Ass (July 15, 2016). "How Backing Jill Stein Creates a Win for Sexism". www.medium.com. Medium. Retrieved July 30, 2017. Stuary, Tessa (September 1, 2016). "The Case Against Jill Stein". rollingstone.com. Rolling Stone Magazine. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved July 30, 2017. General Election: Trump vs. Clinton vs. Johnnson vs. Stein, Real Clear Politics, August 30, 2016. Retrieved August 31, 2016. Katz, Josh (August 4, 2016). "Can Gary Johnson, the Libertarian Nominee, Swing the Election?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Since 1968, all of the major third-party candidates have seen their polling averages decline closer to the election. ... Jill Stein, the Green Party's presumptive nominee ... is polling in the low-single digits and is a long shot to make the debates. Aaron Blake (August 5, 2016). "A new poll has Trump in fourth — behind Gary Johnson AND Jill Stein — with young people". Washington Post. Third-party candidates tend to poll better before Election Day than they actually perform on Election Day. ... If history is any guide (and it has not always been one this election cycle), support for Johnson and Stein will ebb over the next three months. Larry J. Sabato; Kyle Kondik; Geoffrey Skelley (November 17, 2016). "16 For '16: Bite-sized observations on a wild election". Larry J. Sabato's Crystal Ball. University of Virginia Center for Politics. Retrieved November 17, 2016. Haberman, Maggie et al (September 22, 2020) "How Republicans Are Trying to Use the Green Party to Their Advantage." New York Times. (Retrieved September 24, 2020.) Swaine, John; Chalabi, Mona (November 28, 2016). "US election recount: how it began – and what effect it could have". The Guardian. Retrieved December 2, 2016. McBride, Jessica (November 24, 2016). "Jill Stein Crowdfunding: Green Party Nominee Raises $5.4 Million to Fund Recounts". Heavy.com. Retrieved December 2, 2016. Schultheis, Emily (December 1, 2016). "Jill Stein's recount fundraising: What happens to leftover money?". CBS News. Retrieved December 2, 2016. "Election recount process to begin in Wisconsin after Green Party petition". nbcnews.com. November 26, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016. "READ: Trump Slams Jill Stein Over 'Ridiculous' Vote Recount Effort". Fox News. November 26, 2016. Archived from the original on November 27, 2016. Retrieved November 27, 2016. Wright, David (December 4, 2016). "Michigan attorney general files lawsuit to stop recount". CNN. Retrieved December 4, 2016. Marley, Patrick (December 2, 2016). "Federal judge denies quick halt to Wisconsin recount". USA Today. Retrieved December 4, 2016. Solis, Steph (December 4, 2016). "Jill Stein to take Pennsylvania recount to federal courts". USA Today. Retrieved December 4, 2016. Snell, Robert (December 5, 2016). "Judge orders Michigan presidential recount to begin at noon Monday". The Detroit News. Retrieved December 5, 2016. "The Latest: Federal Judge Sets Hearing on Michigan Recount". ABC News. December 7, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2016. Blau, Max (December 8, 2016). "Michigan Recounted Halted". CNN News. Retrieved December 10, 2016. Helsel, Phil (November 9, 2016). "Michigan Supreme Court Denies Jill Stein Recount Appeal". NBC News. Retrieved December 10, 2016. Weiss, Debra (December 13, 2016). "Federal judge rejects Jill Stein's Pennsylvania recount bid, says it was 'later than last minute'". ABA Journal. Retrieved December 21, 2016. Davis, Charles (May 30, 2018). "What Happened to Jill Stein's Recount Millions?". The Daily Beast. Retrieved May 30, 2018. Demirjian, Karoun (December 18, 2017). "Senate intel committee investigating Jill Stein campaign for 'collusion with the Russians'". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved December 19, 2017. "Complying with Senate Committee request, Stein urges safeguarding elections from interference – while cautioning against the targeting of political opposition". Jill Stein 2016. Robert Windrem (December 22, 2018). "Russians launched pro-Jill Stein social media blitz to help Trump, reports say". NBC News. Retrieved December 30, 2018. "Russians launched pro-Jill Stein social media blitz to help Trump, reports say". NBC News. December 22, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Windrem, Robert (April 18, 2017). "Guess who came to dinner with Flynn and Putin". NBC News. Retrieved November 26, 2023. Bowden, John (December 22, 2017). "Jill Stein: 2015 Russia dinner with Putin was a 'non-event'". The Hill. Jill Stein (December 26, 2017). "Stein calls on Senate Committee to retract election interference report by cybersecurity firm caught interfering in US election". Davis, Charles (July 13, 2018). "Jill Stein's Recount Cash Pays for Her Russia Legal Defense". Retrieved August 5, 2019. Stein, Sam; Woodruff, Betsy (March 29, 2019). "Jill Stein Cooperated With Congressional Russia Investigators". The Daily Beast. Retrieved July 17, 2019. James Crowley (October 18, 2019). "Hillary Clinton suggests Russia is grooming current Democratic candidate to run as a third party nominee". Newsweek. Retrieved October 18, 2019. Wu, Nicholas (October 24, 2019). "What's the dispute between Hillary Clinton and Tulsi Gabbard about?". USA Today. Retrieved October 25, 2019. "Stein says Clinton promoting 'unhinged conspiracy theory'". CNN on youtube. October 19, 2019. Archived from the original on December 13, 2021. Krieg, Eva McKend,Gregory (June 22, 2023). "Jill Stein enlisted to help build Cornel West's third-party presidential campaign". CNN. Retrieved November 9, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) @DrJillStein (October 5, 2023). "Breaking – Stein & Baraka wish Dr. West well, affirm support for a strong Green campaign Boston – Jill Stein and Ajamu Baraka, previously advisors to the West campaign, today wished Cornel West well in his upcoming independent presidential campaign, in the following joint statement: "As colleagues who helped persuade Dr. West to pursue the Green nomination, we appreciate the good faith effort he has made over the past four months. Running solo, however, may better suit his long standing role as a fiercely independent voice of moral authority. While we share Dr. West's formidable commitment to peace and justice, we are respectfully parting ways at this juncture, as we are committed to building a±n independent people-powered party as an indispensable vehicle for challenging empire and oligarchy for the long haul. "In light of Dr. West's decision to run independently, we are in discussion with several former candidates about potentially entering the race to carry the Green Party's anti-war, pro-worker, climate emergency agenda into this critical election. "With the Democratic Party now leading the charge for war and censorship, betraying workers on the rail strike and dropping the $15 dollar minimum wage, outdoing Trump in new fossil fuel projects on public lands, and voluntarily resuming crushing student debt payments when people are barely scraping by paycheck to paycheck – for all these reasons and more, we need an independent, corporate-free people's party more than ever. "In deciding to run as an independent, the West campaign leaves behind the ballot lines they would have had access to, as well as the guidance of experienced ballot access staff and Green volunteers familiar with the process in most of the 50 states. We expect this will be a formidable obstacle in the coming months. "Though Dr. West won't be running with our team, he is offering an inspired, courageous example to voters and candidates alike. We believe he is making an immeasurable contribution to the 2024 election, and for that we are deeply grateful. Given our similar visions and agendas, we will continue to look for synergy on the road ahead."" (Tweet). Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via Twitter. Astor, Maggie (November 9, 2023). "Jill Stein Announces Third-Party Bid for President". The New York Times. "clone_home1". Jill Stein 2024. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Principles". Jill Stein 2024. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Pledge to Stop Genocide". Jill Stein 2024. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Tait, Robert (November 22, 2023). "Jill Stein formally launches 2024 White House bid as Green party candidate". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Trudo, Hanna (November 12, 2023). "Jill Stein adds to Biden's 2024 problems". The Hill. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Jobs for All with a Green New Deal". Green-Rainbow.org. September 5, 2011. Archived from the original on October 19, 2014. "Jill Stein on Budget & Economy". On The Issues. March 24, 2016. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Weissmann, Jordan (July 27, 2016). "Jill Stein's Ideas Are Terrible. She Is Not the Savior the Left Is Looking For". Slate. @DrJillStein (February 12, 2016). "Wages are stagnant or declining, real unemployment is nearly 10%, 2x as high as the official rate. Let's #RaisetheWage! #15Now #PeoplesSOTU" (Tweet). Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via Twitter. "Power to the People Plan". Retrieved July 14, 2016. "Jill Stein tells The Times editorial board why she thinks voting Democrat or Republican makes little difference". Los Angeles Times. September 6, 2016. Harvey, Philip (January 20, 2012). "Learning from the New Deal". The Review of Black Political Economy. 39 (1): 87–105. doi:10.1007/s12114-011-9127-x. ISSN 0034-6446. S2CID 154810535. Stein, Jeff (September 14, 2016). "A conversation with Jill Stein: what the Green Party candidate believes". Vox. Retrieved September 14, 2016. "Jill Stein Interview With Fox Business News Panel". YouTube. Archived from the original on July 9, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Reilly, Peter J. "Not Your Average Jill Stein Interview". Forbes. Retrieved August 1, 2016. "Jill Stein on Budget & Economy". www.ontheissues.org. Retrieved July 27, 2016. Eugene Scott, Where the Green Party's Jill Stein stands on jobs, taxes and more, CNN Money (August 17, 2016). Olear, Greg (October 26, 2012). "If only it made sense to vote for a third party". Salon. Retrieved July 27, 2016. "Jan. 2012 Jill Stein A Green New Deal for America". www.p2012.org. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved July 27, 2016. Scott, Eugene (August 17, 2016). "Where the Green Party's Jill Stein stands on jobs, taxes and more". CNN Money. The candidate also wants to nationalize the Federal Reserve banks and place them under a Federal Monetary Authority within the Treasury Department. Staff, Post Opinions (August 25, 2016). "A transcript of Jill Stein's meeting with The Washington Post editorial board". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved August 26, 2016. "Jill Stein on Education". www.ontheissues.org. Retrieved June 9, 2016. ""We Should Not Be Subjecting Children's Brains To Wi-Fi [&] Screens In Schools. It's Not OK" Jill Stein". Safe Teach for Schools. August 8, 2016. Retrieved August 13, 2016. Eli Watkins (August 16, 2016). "Anti-science claims dog Green Party's Jill Stein". CNN. Retrieved October 25, 2016. Stilgoe, Jack (August 17, 2016). "How to think about the risks of mobile phones and Wi-Fi". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved October 25, 2016. Milbank, Dana (August 23, 2016). "From Jill Stein, disturbing echoes of Ralph Nader". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved October 25, 2016. Assange, Julian; WikiLeaks; Trump, when asked to choose between Clinton or (August 7, 2016). "Jill Stein Wins Green Party Nomination, Courting Disaffected Sanders Supporters". NPR. Retrieved October 25, 2016. "Friends Don't Let Friends Vote for Jill Stein". Tablet Magazine. Retrieved October 25, 2016. "Jill Stein answers science questions". Jill Stein 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2016. Spielberg, Ben. "The media — and many Democrats — need to stop attacking Jill Stein unfairly". Vox. Retrieved October 25, 2016. Times, Los Angeles (September 6, 2016). "Jill Stein tells The Times editorial board why she thinks voting Democrat or Republican makes little difference". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 25, 2016. The Young Turks (June 8, 2016), How Dr. Jill Stein Will ERASE Student Loan Debt, archived from the original on December 13, 2021, retrieved July 26, 2016 "Jill Stein on the Issues: Education". The Politics and Elections Portal. July 10, 2016. Archived from the original on November 1, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2016. DiChristopher, Tom (August 10, 2016). "Green Party candidate Jill Stein says we need a jobs program like the 'New Deal'". CNBC. Retrieved August 30, 2016. Kolhatkar, Sonali (March 21, 2016). "The Green Party's Dr. Jill Stein on Democracy & Ranked Choice Voting". Lumpenproletariat. Retrieved August 16, 2016. Speri, Alice (July 29, 2016). "The Two-Party System is the Worst Case Scenario: An Interview with the Green Party's Jill Stein/". The Intercept. Retrieved August 16, 2016. "Open the Debates Petition". Jill Stein for President. Retrieved August 22, 2016. "Open Up the Debates: Green Party's Jill Stein Accuses Democrats & GOP of Rigging Debate Rules". Democracy Now!. Retrieved August 22, 2016. @drjillstein (September 19, 2016). "The voting age should be lowered from 18 to 16. 16 and 17 year olds should have the right to help determine our future. #GreenPartyForum" (Tweet). Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via Twitter. "Climate change, erasing student debt top policies for Stein". Yahoo News. Archived from the original on November 7, 2016. Retrieved November 6, 2016. Jill Stein [@drjillstein] (June 5, 2016). "We need climate mobilization comparable to what the US did after WWII, not incremental steps being promoted Gov. Brown and @HillaryClinton" (Tweet). Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via Twitter. "Jill Stein 2016 Platform". Retrieved July 14, 2016. "Jill Stein on Energy & Oil". www.ontheissues.org. Retrieved June 9, 2016. Jill Stein [@drjillstein] (March 30, 2016). "Nuclear power plants = weapons of mass destruction waiting to be detonated" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "I am Jill Stein, Green Party presidential candidate, ask me anything. • /r/IAmA". reddit. September 12, 2012. Retrieved July 19, 2016. "Transcript: Jill Stein Accepts the Green Party Nomination". Jill 2016. August 6, 2016. "The Jill Stein Defense Plan: We're Our Own Biggest Threat". GenFKD. September 20, 2016. Archived from the original on December 3, 2017. Retrieved June 30, 2017. Jill Stein, Green Party candidate, correct about U.S. bombing seven countries. PolitiFact. October 21, 2016. "The Voter's Self Defense System". Project Vote Smart. Retrieved July 27, 2016. "Jill Stein on Homeland Security". www.ontheissues.org. Retrieved June 9, 2016. "We Are on the Verge of a Nuclear War". Slate. October 19, 2019. "For Stein, climate change and erasing student debt are high-priority". PBS. October 30, 2019. Gersh Kuntzman. "Green Party Presidential candidate Jill Stein slams the system, law-breaking Obama, 'Frankenstein' Trump and 'corporate' Hillary Clinton". New York Daily News. Retrieved July 29, 2016. @DrJillStein (April 15, 2016). "Who exactly is NATO fighting? ...Other than enemies we invent to give the weapons industry a reason to sell more stuff. #DemDebate" (Tweet). Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via Twitter. "Jill Stein on Foreign Policy". www.ontheissues.org. Retrieved June 9, 2016. "Full transcript: Jill Stein". Politico. September 19, 2016. Retrieved September 20, 2016. "Jill Stein on Foreign Policy". www.ontheissues.org. Retrieved August 7, 2016. Hawkins, Howie. "Cornel West, Jill Stein, and the Green Party". New Politics. Neidig, Harper (September 10, 2016). "Jill Stein calls for new 9/11 investigation". The Hill. Kathie Obradovich (September 12, 2016). "Jill Stein in Iowa: I would not have assassinated Osama bin Laden". Des Moines Register. "Jill Stein slams Clinton's accusations". CNN. October 19, 2019. "U.S. Green Party Presidential Candidate Backs Israel Boycott Movement". Haaretz. June 6, 2016. "Dr. Jill Stein on Israel, Palestine and The Middle East". The Peace Resource. August 30, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2016. "Statement on US Foreign Policy, Palestine-Israel, and BDS". Retrieved July 27, 2016. Martin, Patrick (June 27, 2015). "Green Party candidate launches US presidential campaign – World Socialist Web Site". www.wsws.org. Retrieved July 29, 2016. "Friends Don't Let Friends Vote for Jill Stein". August 10, 2016. Retrieved August 12, 2016. Stein, Jill (November 2023). "I want to speak on the massacre now taking place before our eyes in Gaza". ww.instagram.com. Retrieved December 15, 2023. "New US presidential candidate demands probe into Netanyahu's 'war crimes' in Gaza". Anadolu Agency. November 10, 2023. "As a Jew,' Gr een Party candidate Jill Stein accuses Israel of genocide". Jewish News Syndicate. December 29, 2023. "The Case Against Jill Stein". Rolling Stone. September 2016. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved September 2, 2016. "Friends Don't Let Friends Vote for Jill Stein". August 10, 2016. Retrieved August 15, 2016. "Green Party Hero Jill Stein Busted Trying to Cover Up Her Praise of Bigotry-Driven Brexit". June 27, 2016. Retrieved June 30, 2016. "Stein calls Britain Vote a Wake-up Call". Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved June 25, 2016. Meyer, Ken (November 27, 2016). "Jill Stein Gets Predictable Backlash After Calling Castro a 'Symbol of the Struggle for Justice'". Mediaite. "Jill Stein on Health Care". www.ontheissues.org. Retrieved June 9, 2016. Eli Watkins (August 16, 2016). "Anti-science claims dog Green Party's Jill Stein". CNN. Retrieved August 20, 2016. "Jill Stein answers science questions". Jill Stein 2016. Retrieved October 20, 2016. * Sosa, Chris (August 9, 2016). "Jill Stein's Dangerous Anti-Science Campaign". The Huffington Post. Retrieved August 23, 2016. Ehrenfreund, Max. "What Jill Stein, the Green presidential candidate, wants to do to America". Washington Post. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Corneliussen, Steven T. (August 18, 2016). "Media coverage thin for presidential candidates' science awareness and views". Physics Today. doi:10.1063/PT.5.8185. Uscinski, Joseph (August 22, 2016). "The 5 Most Dangerous Conspiracy Theories of 2016". Politico. Retrieved August 31, 2016. Stilgoe, Jack (August 17, 2016). "How to think about the risks of mobile phones and Wi-Fi". The Guardian. Retrieved August 31, 2016. McGuire, Kim (August 5, 2016). "Tough sell in Texas: climate change, GMOs top Green Party platform". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved August 31, 2016. D'Ammassa, Algernon (August 7, 2016). "Greens, Libertarians need to be ready for media glare". USA Today/Las Cruces Sun-News. Retrieved August 31, 2016. Gardiner, Bo (July 27, 2016). "Dr. Jill Stein Is Anti-Science, Bad for the Environment, and Deserves Her Anti-Vax Label". Patheos. She also calls for the imprisonment of GMO producers using debunked claims about environmental and health effects, and the supposed suicides of hundreds of thousands of Indian farmers ... Perhaps the most obvious point anti-GMO activists leave out is that banning GMOs would mean the conversion of thousands more square miles of land to agriculture, creating more pesticides, more waterway-killing fertilizers, and more carbon emissions. And, of course, the story of the mass farmer suicides in India due to GMOs has been thoroughly debunked. In other words, Stein is willing to sacrifice biodiversity on the altar of bourgeois, pseudoscientific food purity. But see also: Eagle, Sandra (August 21, 2016). "We have more than 2 choices for president". Stamford Advocate. Retrieved August 28, 2016. Jill Stein; et al. "Environmental Factors in the Development of Dementia: Focus on Alzheimer's Disease and Cognitive Decline" (PDF). Environmental Threats to Healthy Aging. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 23, 2013. Retrieved October 26, 2012. Schettler; et al. (2000). Generations at Risk: Reproductive Health and the Environment. MIT Press. p. 225. ISBN 9780262692472. Greater Boston Physicians for Social Responsibility. "Chapter 7: Chemicals, Regulations & the Environment" (PDF). In Harm's Way: Toxic Threats to Child Development. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 15, 2017. Retrieved August 24, 2016. Willingham, Emily. "Jill Stein Sort Of Answers The Autism-Vaccine Question And No One Is Happy". Forbes. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Stein, Jill; Sunkara, Bhaskar (August 25, 2016). ""The Spoiler" Speaks Green Party presidential candidate Jill Stein on her campaign and building an alternative to the two corporate parties". Jacobin Magazine. Retrieved August 30, 2016. "Jill Stein on vaccines: People have 'real questions'". Washington Post. Retrieved July 29, 2016. Yuhas, Alan (July 30, 2016). "Green party candidate Jill Stein accused of 'anti-vaxxer' sympathies". The Guardian. Retrieved July 30, 2016. Peyser, Eve (August 2016). "Jill Stein Deletes Tweet That Says "There's No Evidence That Autism Is Caused By Vaccines"". Retrieved August 1, 2016. The Young Turks (August 8, 2016), Green Candidate Jill Stein Isn't Anti-Vaccine, archived from the original on December 13, 2021, retrieved August 15, 2016 "I am Jill Stein, Green Party candidate for President, AMA! • /r/IAmA". reddit. May 11, 2016. Retrieved June 9, 2016. "Jill Stein | The Young Turks Town Hall (FULL)". YouTube. October 21, 2016. Archived from the original on December 13, 2021. Meyer, Robinson (August 2016). "An Anti-Vaxer in the White House?". The Atlantic. Retrieved August 2, 2016. Foran, Clare (July 28, 2016). "Can Jill Stein Lead a Revolution?". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on July 29, 2016. Royden, Derek (November 11, 2015). "The Green Alternative: Prez Candidate Jill Stein On What It Will Take To Win In 2016". Occupy.com. Retrieved August 28, 2016. Regina Garcia Cano, Green Party's Jill Stein charged with trespassing, mischief Archived September 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Associated Press (September 8, 2016). Jonah Bromwich, Jill Stein, Green Party Candidate, Is Charged Over Role in Pipeline Protest. The New York Times, September 7, 2016. Stein, Jill (May 11, 2016). "I am Jill Stein, Green Party candidate for President, AMA!". Reddit. Retrieved August 30, 2016. "Jill Stein says Edward Snowden would be in her cabinet if she becomes president – WMNF". WMNF. July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Rehkopf, Bill (August 23, 2016). "EXCLUSIVE Jill Stein op-ed: In praise of WikiLeaks". Retrieved August 27, 2016. Hirsch, David S. (October 2, 2002). "Governor Candidates Bicker in Debate". The Harvard Crimson. Archived from the original on December 10, 2012. Retrieved July 14, 2012. Saulny, Susan (July 12, 2012). "Party Strains to Be Heard Now That Its Voice Isn't Nader's". The New York Times. p. A10. Retrieved July 14, 2012. Jill Stein at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Library resources about Jill Stein Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Jill Stein Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Appearances on C-SPAN Jill Stein at IMDb