Lysianka Raion (Ukrainian: Лисянський район, Lysyans'kyi Raion) was a raion (administrative district) of Cherkasy Oblast. Its area was 746 square kilometres, and the administrative center was the urban-type settlement of Lysianka. The raion was abolished on 18 July 2020 as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Cherkasy Oblast to four. The area of Lysianka Raion was merged into Zvenyhorodka Raion. The last estimate of the raion population was 22,202 (2020 est.) At the time of disestablishment, the raion consisted of three hromadas: Buzhanka rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Buzhanka; Lysianka settlement hromada with the administration in Lysianka; Vynohrad rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Vynohrad. The population of the Lysianka Raion (as of 2001) was 28,721. The Lysianka Raion consisted of 1 town (Lysianka) and 38 villages. The villages of the Lysianka Raion included: Bosivka Boyarka Budysche Buzhanka Vereschaky Vynohrad Votylivka Ganzhalivka Dashukivka Dibrivka Dubyna Zhabyanka Zhurzhyntsi Kamyanyi Brid Kuchkivka Maryanivka Mykhailivka Orly, Ukraine Petrivka-Popivka Petrivska-Huta Pysarivka Pohyblyak Pochapyntsi Ripky Rozkoshivka Rubanyi Mist Semenivka Smilchyntsi Tyhonivka Tovsti Rohy Fedyukivka Huzhyntsi Chaplynka Chesnivka Shesteryntsi Shubyni Stavy Shushkivka Yablunivka Subdivisions of Ukraine "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 2020-07-18. Retrieved 2020-10-03. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2020 року / Population of Ukraine Number of Existing as of January 1, 2020 (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2023. "Лисянська районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. (in Ukrainian) lysyanka.by.ru at the Wayback Machine (archived March 11, 2007) - Everything about Lysianka and Lysianskyi Raion (in Ukrainian) Verkhovna Rada website - Administrative divisions of the Lysianskyi Raion