The 2017 Dwars door Vlaanderen is a road cycling one-day race that took place on 22 March. It was the 72nd edition of the Dwars door Vlaanderen, and the first since it was promoted to World Tour level – as the tenth event of the 2017 UCI World Tour. The race was won by local rider Yves Lampaert – riding for the Quick-Step Floors team – who soloed away to the victory after making the race-defining split along with teammate Philippe Gilbert, Alexey Lutsenko from the Astana team, and Orica–Scott's Luke Durbridge. Lampaert attacked with 7.5 kilometres (4.7 miles) remaining and ultimately won the race by 39 seconds ahead of Gilbert, who led home Lutsenko and Durbridge in a sprint for second place. As a new event to the UCI World Tour, all UCI WorldTeams were invited to the race, but not obligated to compete in the race. As such, sixteen of the eighteen WorldTeams – all except Team Dimension Data and Team Sky – competed in the race. Nine UCI Professional Continental teams competed, completing the 25-team peloton. UCI WorldTeams AG2R La Mondiale Astana Bahrain–Merida BMC Racing Team Bora–Hansgrohe Cannondale–Drapac FDJ Team Katusha–Alpecin LottoNL–Jumbo Lotto–Soudal Movistar Team Orica–Scott Quick-Step Floors Team Sunweb Trek–Segafredo UAE Team Emirates UCI Professional Continental teams Cofidis Direct Énergie Gazprom–RusVelo Israel Cycling Academy Roompot–Nederlandse Loterij Sport Vlaanderen–Baloise Vérandas Willems–Crelan Wanty–Groupe Gobert WB Veranclassic Aqua Protect The race started in Roeselare and followed a 203.4-kilometre (126.4 mi) course to finish in Waregem. It began with a long flat section that took the riders generally east from Roeselare and into Waregem; it then left the town and went south. At Avelgem, the course turned back east again to cross the first climb, the Nieuwe Kwaremont, after 92 kilometres (57 mi). This was followed by the climb of the Kattenberg, then the cobbled flat sectors of the Holleweg and the Haaghoek, then the climbs of the Leberg and the Berendries. After the next climb, the Valkenberg, the course turned back west towards the finish, with 70 kilometres (43 mi) remaining. The Eikenberg and the Taaienberg followed soon after, then the combination of the Oude Kwaremont and the Paterberg. After the final flat cobbled sector, the Varentstraat, the course turned north for the final three climbs: the Vossenhol (Tiegemberg), Holstraat and Nokereberg. From the summit of Nokereberg, there were around 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) to the finish in Waregem. "Uitslag - Résultat - Result" (PDF). KBWB-RVLB.com. Royal Belgian Cycling League. 22 March 2017. Retrieved 22 March 2017. "UCI expands WorldTour to 37 events". Cycling News. Retrieved 2 October 2016. "The UCI reveals expanded UCI WorldTour calendar for 2017". UCI. Retrieved 2 October 2016. Decaluwé, Brecht (22 March 2017). "Exuberant victory for local boy Lampaert in Dwars door Vlaanderen". Cyclingnews.com. Immediate Media Company. Retrieved 22 March 2017. Decaluwé, Brecht; O'Shea, Sadhbh (22 March 2017). "Dwars door Vlaanderen: Lampaert parlays Quick-Step tactics to victory". Cyclingnews.com. Immediate Media Company. Retrieved 22 March 2017. "Topsport-Vlaanderen en Wanty krijgen wildcard voor Dwars door Vlaanderen" [Topsport-Vlaanderen and Wanty get wildcard for Dwars door Vlaanderen]. Het Laatste Nieuws (in Dutch). De Persgroep. Belga. 4 February 2017. Retrieved 19 March 2017. Sky en Dimension Data zijn er niet bij. [Sky and Dimension Data are not there.] "Dwars door Vlaanderen / A travers la Flandre: List of participants" (PDF). Dwars door Vlaanderen. Flanders Classics. 12 March 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2017. Retrieved 19 March 2017. Official website