The Manhattan Bridge is a suspension bridge that crosses the East River in New York City, connecting Lower Manhattan at Canal Street with Downtown Brooklyn at the Flatbush Avenue Extension. Designed by Leon Moisseiff and built by the Phoenix Bridge Company, the bridge has a total length of 6,855 ft (2,089 m). It is one of four toll-free vehicular bridges connecting Manhattan Island to Long Island; the nearby Brooklyn Bridge is just slightly farther west, while the Queensboro and Williamsburg bridges are to the north. The bridge was proposed in 1898 and was originally called "Bridge No. 3" before being renamed the Manhattan Bridge in 1902. Foundations for the bridge's suspension towers were completed in 1904, followed by the anchorages in 1907 and the towers in 1908. The Manhattan Bridge opened to traffic on December 31, 1909, and began carrying streetcars in 1912 and New York City Subway trains in 1915. The eastern upper-deck roadway was installed in 1922. After streetcars stopped running in 1929, the western upper roadway was finished two years later. The uneven weight of subway trains crossing the Manhattan Bridge caused it to tilt to one side, necessitating an extensive reconstruction between 1982 and 2004. The Manhattan Bridge was the first suspension bridge to use a Warren truss in its design. It has a main span of 1,480 ft (451 m) between two 350-foot (110 m) suspension towers. The deck carries seven vehicular lanes, four on an upper level and three on a lower level, as well as four subway tracks, two each flanking the lower-level roadway. The span is carried by four main cables, which travel between masonry anchorages at either side of the bridge, and 1,400 vertical suspender cables. Carrère and Hastings designed ornamental plazas at both ends of the bridge, including an arch and colonnade in Manhattan that is a New York City designated landmark. The bridge's use of light trusses influenced the design of other long suspension bridges in the early 20th century. The bridge was the last of the three suspension spans built across the lower East River, following the Brooklyn and Williamsburg bridges. After the City of Greater New York was formed in 1898, the administration of mayor Robert Anderson Van Wyck formed a plan for what became the Manhattan Bridge; these plans were repeatedly revised and were not finalized until after George B. McClellan Jr. became mayor in 1901. From the outset, the bridge was planned to have a central roadway, streetcar tracks, elevated tracks, and sidewalks, and it was to run straight onto an extension of Flatbush Avenue in Brooklyn. In the earliest plans it was to have been called "Bridge No. 3", but was given the name Manhattan Bridge in 1902. When the name was confirmed in 1904, The New York Times criticized it as "meaningless", lobbied for one after Brooklyn's Wallabout Bay, and railed that the span "would have geographical and historical significance if it were known as the Wallabout Bridge". In 1905, the Times renewed its campaign, stating, "All bridges across the East River are Manhattan bridges. When there was only one, it was well enough to call it the Brooklyn Bridge, or the East River Bridge". The earliest plans for what became the Manhattan Bridge were designed by R. S. Buck.: 548  These plans called for a suspension bridge with carbon steel wire cables and a suspended stiffening truss, supported by a pair of towers with eight braced legs. This design would have consisted of a main span of 1,470 feet (450 m) and approaches of 725 feet (221 m) each. In early 1901, the city government approved a motion to acquire land for a suspension tower in Brooklyn; the city shortly began soliciting bids for the tower's foundations. The contract for the Brooklyn suspension tower was awarded in May 1901. The caisson under the tower on the Brooklyn side was installed in March 1902; workers excavated dirt for the foundations from within the caisson, a process that was completed in December 1902. Three workers had died while working on the Brooklyn-side tower's caisson. A plan for the bridge was announced in early 1903. Elevated and trolley routes would use the Manhattan Bridge, and there would be large balconies and enormous spaces within the towers' anchorages. Work on the Manhattan caisson had commenced in January 1903; it was towed to position in July, and the caisson work was completed by January 1904. The foundations were completed in March 1904. A $10 million grant for the bridge's construction was granted in May 1904 with the expectation that work on the bridge would start later that year. The Municipal Art Commission raised objections to one of the bridge's plans in June 1904, which delayed the start of construction. Another set of plans was unveiled that month by New York City Bridge Commissioner Gustav Lindenthal, in conjunction with Henry Hornbostel. The proposal also called for each of the suspension towers to be made of four columns, to be braced transversely and hinged to the bottom of the abutments longitudinally. The same span dimensions from Buck's plan were used because work on the masonry pier foundations had already begun. Additionally, the towers would have contained Modern French detail, while the anchorages would have been used for functions such as meeting halls. Lindenthal's plan was also rejected due to a dispute over whether his plan, which used eyebars, was better than the more established practice of using wire cables. The Municipal Art Commission voted in September 1904 to use wire cables on the bridge. Lindenthal was ultimately dismissed and a new design was commissioned from Leon Moisseiff. George Best replaced Lindenthal as the city's bridge commissioner and discarded the eyebar plans in favor of the wire cables. Hornbostel was replaced by Carrère and Hastings as architectural consultants. By late 1904, the disputes over the types of cables had delayed the contract for the bridge's superstructure (composed of its towers and deck). The bridge's completion had been delayed by two years, and its cost had increased by $2 million. The cable dispute was not fully resolved until 1906, when Best's successor James W. Stevenson announced that the bridge would use wire cables. Best reviewed bids for the construction of the anchorages in December 1904. The Williams Engineering Company received the $2 million contract for the anchorages' construction. Construction commenced on the Brooklyn anchorage in February 1905 and on the Manhattan anchorage that April. The foundation subcontractors excavated the foundations of each anchorage using sheet pilings. Barges were used to transport material from the East River to the anchorages' sites. Mixers constructed the masonry for the anchorages at a rate of up to 550 cubic yards (420 m3) per day. During mid-1905, officials condemned land in Manhattan and Brooklyn for the bridge's approaches; the land acquisition was partially delayed because the contractors rented out houses that were supposed to be demolished. By the end of the year, the city's bridge department was planning to erect streetcar terminal buildings at either end of the bridge. To avoid the delays that had occurred during the Williamsburg Bridge's construction, Best planned to award a single large contract for the towers and the deck, rather than splitting the work into multiple contracts. He began soliciting bids for the metalwork in July 1905, at which point the bridge was to use 44,000 short tons (39,000 long tons; 40,000 t) of metal. The Pennsylvania Steel Company received the contract in August 1905 after submitting a low bid of $7.248 million, and a competing bidder sued to prevent the contract from being awarded to Pennsylvania Steel. In November, a New York Supreme Court judge ruled that the contract with Pennsylvania Steel was illegal, as the bidding process had been designed to shut out other bidders. Although Best tried to appeal the Supreme Court's decision, the contract was re-advertised anyway; Pennsylvania Steel refused to submit another bid. When Stevenson became the bridge commissioner at the beginning of 1906, he ordered that new bridge specifications be created. Stevenson received bids for the steelwork in May 1906, and the Ryan-Parker Construction Company received the contract the next month, following delays caused by an injunction and threats of lawsuits. The Ryan-Parker Company hired the Phoenix Bridge Company in September 1906 to fabricate the steelwork. The Phoenix Bridge Company's 2,000 workers began making beams, girders, eyebars, and other parts of the bridge at the firm's factory in Phoenixville, Pennsylvania. The anchorages were less than half complete, in part because of inclement weather and material shortages. That November, the Board of Estimate and Apportionment approved $4 million for land acquisition in Manhattan and $300,000 for land acquisition in Brooklyn. By early 1907, the city had spent over $6 million on the bridge; the bridge's total cost was estimated at $20 million. To speed up the bridge's completion, Manhattan borough president Bird Sim Coler considered implementing night shifts. By February 1907, the Phoenix Bridge Company was manufacturing steel faster than it could be installed, and the steel for the anchorages was done. The company had also begun fabricating beams for the towers. Land acquisition for an extension of Flatbush Avenue to the bridge began in March, and the first steel girders of the towers were lifted in place the next month. The first steel pedestals for the towers were installed on June 26, 1907. The anchorages were nearly done by late 1907; they could not be completed until the cables were finished. The city government acquired land for the approaches in October 1907; this required the relocation of several hundred families in Brooklyn and nearly 1,000 families in Manhattan. In total, about 145 lots in Brooklyn and 173 lots in Manhattan were obtained for the bridge's approaches and plazas. Some Brooklyn residents requested additional time to relocate. Residents in the path of the Manhattan approach also protested efforts to evict them, though they were relocated at the beginning of December 1907. Later that month, four companies submitted bids for the construction of the bridge's Manhattan and Brooklyn approach spans. John C. Rodgers submitted a low bid of $2.17 million for the viaducts, and Stevenson requested that amount from the Board of Estimate. By the beginning of 1908, most of the land had been cleared, and the suspension towers had been built to above the height of the deck. The Manhattan tower was finished that March, followed by the Brooklyn tower the next month. Land acquisition was nearly done by the middle of that year. Andrew McC. Parker of the Ryan-Parker Company had predicted in January 1908 that the cables would be strung within two months. The Roebling & Sons Company started manufacturing the wires for the cables before the towers were finished, while the Glyndon Contracting Company was hired to lay the wires. Around 8,500 short tons (7,600 long tons; 7,700 t) of nickel steel wires were manufactured at the Carbon Steel Works in Pittsburgh. Workers began stringing temporary cables on June 15, 1908; the first wire broke loose while it was being strung, injuring two people. By this time, the construction cost had increased to $22 million. The temporary cables supported temporary footbridges between each tower, which were completed in mid-July. When the footbridges were finished, workers installed guide wires, which were laid as continuous loops. Two guide wheels, one at either end of each guide wire, carried the main cables' wires across the river between each anchorage. These wheels were powered by a motor atop the Brooklyn anchorage. In addition, reels of wire were stored at both ends of the bridge. The guide wheels laid up to 100 short tons (89 long tons; 91 t) of wire every day. The last wires for the main cables were strung in December 1908. That month, the Board of Estimate and Apportionment hired engineer Ralph Modjeski to review the engineering drawings for the Manhattan Bridge, after the City Club of New York expressed concerns over the bridge's safety. Afterward, the Glyndon Construction Company installed the vertical suspender cables, which were hung from the main cables. By the beginning of 1909, the bridge was planned to open at the end of the year, but the subway tracks, streetcar tracks, and Flatbush Avenue Extension were not complete. Around 60 million pounds (27,000 long tons; 27,000 t) of red steel girders and floor panels for the bridge's deck had been delivered to a yard in Bayonne, New Jersey. The girders and panels were delivered to the bridge's site starting in February 1909, and the first floor panel in the main span was installed the same month. Each of the girders was hung from a pair of suspender cables, and floor panels were hung between the girders at a rate of four panels a day. It took workers three weeks to install the floor panels; and the last panel was installed on April 7, 1909. The bridge commissioner received $1 million from the Board of Estimate and Apportionment for the completion of the roadway, subway tracks, and other design details. The trusses and side spans were built after the floor of the main span was completed. Carbon Steel began wrapping the main cables together in May 1909; the wrapping process required 140 short tons (120 long tons; 130 t) of wire, and the company was able to wrap five to seven segments of cables per day. All work on the cables was finished in August 1909, almost exactly a year after the first strand of the first main cable was strung. Workers then installed ornamentation on the tops of the towers and bronze collars on each of the main cables. Modjeski reported that September that the bridge was safe. At the time, the plazas were incomplete, and Flatbush Avenue Extension was unpaved; the bridge commissioner was razing buildings near the Manhattan plaza by that November. The Brooklyn Daily Eagle reported that there was widespread discontent over the fact that streetcar and subway service would not be ready for the bridge's opening. Stevenson announced at the end of November 1909 that the bridge's roadways would likely open by December 24, although the transit lines and pedestrian walkways were not complete. One hundred prominent Brooklyn citizens walked over the bridge on December 4, 1909; at the time, the subway tracks were unfinished, and there was uncertainty over which company would use the streetcar tracks. Outgoing mayor George B. McClellan Jr. toured the bridge on December 24. The span officially opened on December 31, 1909, at a final cost of $26 million, although work was still incomplete. Initially, motorists had to pay a ten-cent toll, the same as the toll on the Brooklyn Bridge. Empty commercial vehicles tended to use the Manhattan Bridge, while trucks with full loads used the Brooklyn Bridge, since the Manhattan Bridge's wood-block pavement was less sturdy than the Brooklyn Bridge's plank pavement. A fire on the Brooklyn side damaged the bridge in early 1910, necessitating the replacement of some cables and steel. Though both of the Manhattan Bridge's footpaths were initially closed to the public, the northern footpath opened in July 1910; the southern footpath was scheduled to be opened the next month. Shortly after the Manhattan Bridge opened, the city government conducted a study and found that it had no authority to charge tolls on the Manhattan and Queensboro bridges. Tolls on the Manhattan Bridge, as well as the Queensboro, Williamsburg, and Brooklyn bridges, were abolished in July 1911 as part of a populist policy initiative headed by New York City mayor William Jay Gaynor. Streetcars began running across the bridge in September 1912, and the bridge's subway tracks opened in June 1915. By the mid-1910s, a food market operated under the bridge. Meanwhile, C. J. Sullivan sued the Ryan-Parker Construction Company, claiming that he had helped the company secure the general contract for the bridge. He was awarded just over $300,000 in 1912, an amount that was increased to over $380,000 in 1916. After the bridge opened, Carrère and Hastings drew up preliminary plans for a Beaux Arts-style entrance to the bridge in Manhattan and a smaller approach on the Brooklyn side. The city's Municipal Art Commission approved a $700,000 plan for the bridge's Manhattan approach in April 1910. The final plans were approved in 1912, and construction began the same year. The city allocated $675,000 for a plaza at the Brooklyn end in March 1913, including a subway tunnel under the plaza, and the Northeastern Construction Company submitted the low bid for the plaza's construction. The arch and colonnade were completed in 1915, while the pylons on the Brooklyn side were installed in November 1916. The bridge approaches cost just over $1.53 million to construct. In an attempt to speed up automotive traffic, in 1918, the New York City Police Department banned horse-drawn vehicles from crossing the bridge toward Brooklyn during the morning rush hour and toward Manhattan during the evening rush hour. One of the two streetcar lines across the bridge was discontinued in 1919. During late 1920, the bridge's roadway was used as a reversible lane between 7 am and 7 pm each day; this restriction caused heavy congestion. Grover Whalen, the commissioner of Plant and Structures, announced that September that he would request funding to repaint the bridge. The span was repainted during the next year at a cost of $240,000. Meanwhile, the bridge was carrying 27,000 daily vehicles by the early 1920s, and one traffic judge said the lower deck was too narrow to accommodate the increasing traffic levels on the bridge. In March 1922, the city government started constructing the eastern upper-deck roadway at a cost of $300,000. The roadway opened that June. The next month, Whalen banned horse-drawn vehicles from the Manhattan Bridge and motor vehicles from the Brooklyn Bridge. The upper roadway of the Manhattan Bridge was converted to a reversible lane, while the lower roadway carried two-way traffic at all times. Whalen said the restriction would allow both levels to be used to their full capacity; the decision ended up placing additional loads on the bridge. To reduce congestion at the Manhattan end, left-hand traffic was implemented on the lower level during the 1920s, as most vehicles heading into Manhattan turned left at the end of the bridge. Motorists continued to use the Manhattan Bridge even after the Brooklyn Bridge reopened to motorists in 1925, contributing to heavy congestion during rush hours. At the time, the Brooklyn Bridge carried 10,000 vehicles a day (in part due to its low speed limit), while the Manhattan Bridge carried 60,000 vehicles daily. When the lower level was repaved in early 1927, Manhattan-bound traffic was temporarily banned from the lower level at night. That October, Brooklyn borough president James J. Byrne proposed replacing the Three Cent Line's trolley tracks with a roadway; he estimated that it would cost $9 million to construct a brand-new roadway, while converting the trolley tracks would cost only $600,000. The comptroller approved the plan in September 1928, and the city formally voted to buy the Three Cent Line for just over $200,000 the following month. The Three Cent Line was discontinued in November 1929. The Three Cent Line tracks were replaced by the western upper-deck roadway. Initially scheduled to be completed by July 1930, the roadway ultimately opened in June 1931 and carried Brooklyn-bound traffic. The eastern upper-deck roadway was converted to carry Manhattan-bound traffic, and the center roadway was turned into a lane for buses and trucks. At the time, nearly 65,000 vehicles used the bridge every day, of which nearly a quarter were buses and trucks. A set of 119 streetlights were installed on the upper level the following year. To increase traffic flow, both upper roadways were temporarily converted to reversible lanes during rush hours in 1934; the lower roadway was repaired, and the bridge was repainted the same year. The city's commissioner of plant and structures also requested $725,000 in federal funds for various repairs. During 1937, the city awarded a contract to repair the bridge's steelwork and raised the railings on the upper roadways. The city government announced in 1938 that it would replace the lower deck's wooden pavement with a steel-and-concrete pavement; the repaving was completed that December. Simultaneously, the railings on the upper roadways were raised again. As part of a Works Progress Administration project, a ramp at the Brooklyn end of the bridge was widened in 1941, replacing a dangerous reverse curve. By then, 90,000 vehicles a day used the span. An air raid siren was also installed on the bridge during World War II. By the mid-1940s, the Brooklyn approach to the bridge was one of the most congested areas in New York City. The upper roadways were repaired during 1950. Similar repairs to the lower roadway were postponed until the Brooklyn–Battery Tunnel opened, as the Brooklyn Bridge was also being rebuilt around the same time. To ease congestion, the Manhattan Bridge's western upper roadway began carrying Manhattan-bound traffic during the morning in March 1950. Floodlights and barbed-wire fences were installed at the bases of the bridge's anchorages in 1951, during the Cold War, and the anchorages themselves were sealed to protect against sabotage. Manhattan-bound traffic stopped using the western upper roadway during the morning in August 1952. Instead, two of the three lower-level lanes began carrying Manhattan-bound traffic during the morning; previously, Manhattan-bound vehicles could use only one of the lower-level lanes at all times. By the mid-1950s, there were frequent car accidents on the Manhattan Bridge, which injured 411 people and killed nine people between 1953 and 1955 alone. In addition, the bridge carried nearly 79,000 cars, 18,000 trucks, and 200 buses on an average day. The city's public works commissioner, Frederick H. Zurmuhlen, requested in early 1952 that the Board of Estimate hire David B. Steinman to thoroughly examine the Manhattan Bridge, saying its maintenance costs were disproportionately higher than those of the other East River bridges. A beam on the eastern side of the bridge cracked in April 1953 and was fixed within a month. Following the cracked-beam incident, Zurmuhlen asked the city to allocate $2.69 million to repair the bridge, as trains disproportionately used one side of the bridge, causing it to tilt. Two proposals were put forth for the bridge's subway tracks; one plan called for them to be moved to the center of the deck, while another plan called for the construction of an entirely new tunnel for subway trains. The administration of mayor Robert F. Wagner tentatively approved a $30 million renovation of the bridge in July 1954, and a committee of engineers was hired to review alternate proposals for the bridge. Zurmuhlen said the bridge's safety would be compromised within the next decade if subway trains continued to use the bridge. By February 1955, the city had hired a contractor to repair the Manhattan Bridge's cable bands and hangers for $2.2 million. Before these repairs could begin, engineers surveyed the bridge. When work on the cables began in June, access to the western upper roadway was severely reduced. That September, the eastern upper roadway was closed for repairs; the western upper roadway was used by Manhattan-bound traffic during weekday mornings and carried two-way traffic at other times. The bridge was temporarily closed to all traffic in November 1955. The eastern upper roadway was again closed during the midday in early 1956 for suspender cable repairs, and the whole span was closed during nights in June 1956. All lanes were again open by that August. The city had still not decided whether to move the subway tracks to a double-deck structure in the middle of the bridge, even though that plan would have reduced strain on the cables. For unknown reasons, the tracks were never moved. Plans for the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway in Brooklyn, which was constructed in the 1950s, included ramps to the Manhattan Bridge. Lane control lights were installed above the bridge's reversible lower-level lanes in early 1958, and fixed red and green lights were installed on the upper-level roadways. The same year, the city spent $50,000 on repairs after two boats collided on the East River, causing an explosion that scorched the bridge. The city announced in 1959 that it would rebuild the upper roadways to accommodate trucks. The Karl Koch Engineering Company received a contract to rebuild the upper roadways; the project was planned to cost $6.377 million. The eastern upper roadway was closed for repairs in September 1960; the project also included fixing the lower deck and building ramps from the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway. After the eastern upper roadway reopened in November 1961, the western upper roadway was closed, and the eastern upper roadway was temporarily used as a reversible lane. Work proceeded several months ahead of schedule. In conjunction with the upgrades to the upper roadways, in June 1961, New York City parks commissioner Robert Moses proposed demolishing the plazas on both sides and connecting the bridge to new expressways. The bridge would have linked the Lower Manhattan Expressway with the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, though the former was never built. The city's art commission delayed the demolition of the plazas before ruling that the pylons in the Brooklyn plaza be relocated to the Brooklyn Museum or another suitable location. Wagner said in late 1962 that he would request $2.9 million to rebuild the approaches at both ends of the bridge; the work included a widening of an approach road at the bridge's Manhattan end. The pylons flanking the Brooklyn approach were moved to the Brooklyn Museum in 1963. The western upper roadway was closed for repairs for a year beginning in August 1969. Two of the lower roadway's lanes were closed for four months starting in November 1970 so workers could replace faulty joints. In 1970, the federal government enacted the Clean Air Act, a series of federal air pollution regulations. As part of a plan by mayor John Lindsay and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, the city government considered implementing tolls on the four free East River bridges, including the Manhattan Bridge, in the early 1970s. The plan would have raised money for New York City's transit system and allowed the city to meet the Clean Air Act. Abraham Beame, who became mayor in 1974, refused to implement the tolls, and the United States Congress subsequently moved to forbid tolls on the free East River bridges. The United States Department of Transportation determined that the eastern upper roadway of the Manhattan Bridge was partially built with federal funds and, under federal law, could not be tolled. The weight of the subway trains had caused deep and widespread cracks to form in the bridge's floor beams, prompting the city government to replace 300 deteriorated beams during the late 1970s. The deck twisted up to 8 feet (2.4 m) every time a train passed by, and trains had to slow down on the bridge. A New York Times reporter wrote that diagonal cable stays might eventually need to be installed; the city government also contemplated installing support towers under the side spans. The bridge's condition was blamed on the imbalance in the number of trains crossing the bridge, as well as deferred maintenance during the New York City fiscal crisis of the 1970s. In 1979, the New York state government took over control of the Manhattan Bridge and the three other toll-free bridges across the East River. One engineer estimated in 1988 that the bridge would cost $162.6 million to repair. The state government started inspecting the Manhattan Bridge and five others in 1978. The same year, the United States Congress voted to allocate money to repair the bridge, as well as several others in New York City. After the presidential administration of Ronald Reagan questioned whether the congressional funding should cover the subway tracks' restoration, the U.S. government agreed in 1981 to fund restoration both of the roadways and of the subway tracks. By the early 1980s, the New York City Department of Transportation (NYCDOT) planned to spend $100 million on bridge repairs. The New York City government allocated $10.1 million for preliminary work on the bridge in March 1982, and minor repair work started that year. Workers planned to install brackets and supports under the deck, and they drilled small holes into the lower-level floor beams unsuccessful attempt to prevent the beams from cracking further. An overhaul of the bridge began in April 1985, and the city received $60 million in federal funds for the renovations of the Queensboro, Manhattan, and Brooklyn bridges the same year. The north tracks were closed that August, reopening that November after an $8.1 million repair. The eastern upper roadway was temporarily closed starting in April 1986, and all northbound traffic was shifted to the lower level, as part of a $45 million project to replace the roadway and its steel supports. The north tracks underneath were closed that month. The roadway was originally supposed to reopen within 15 months, but contractors found that one of the anchors for the main cables was far more corroded than anticipated, delaying the eastern roadway's reopening by another 18 months. The renovation of the Manhattan Bridge was behind schedule by the end of 1986, in part because of the corrosion. Legal issues, traffic reroutes, and concerns about the capabilities of the main contractor were also cited as causes for the delays in the renovation. Inspectors subsequently found that twenty of the girders below the lower deck had cracks as much as 15 inches (380 mm) wide. Due to the cracks on the lower level, in December 1987, inspectors shut one lane of the lower level and banned buses and trucks from the two remaining lower-level lanes. The city government agreed to pay $750,000 to fix the cracks. In 1988, the NYCDOT published a list of 17 structurally deficient bridges in the city, including the Manhattan Bridge. That year, inspectors identified 73 "flags" or potentially serious defects, compared to the five defects identified in a 1978 inspection. As a result, the general contractor was ousted in August 1988, and the New York State Department of Transportation had to hire another contractor, increasing the project's cost. The eastern roadway of the Manhattan Bridge reopened in December 1988; the north tracks also reopened at that time, and the south tracks were closed. Although the NYCDOT had planned to halt work for 16 months, the western roadway was closed for emergency repairs in February 1989 after two corroded beams sagged. Newsday reported that the western roadway had urgently required repair for almost three years but had remained open to avoid shutting down all four of the bridge's subway tracks at once. The cables, trusses, and subway frame on the eastern half of the bridge had to be repaired, and the lower roadway needed complete replacement. After seven columns supporting the Brooklyn approach were found to be cracked or corroded, these columns were repaired in late 1989. By the end of 1990, engineers found that the bridge's support beams had thousands of cracks. Service on the south tracks resumed in December 1990, despite warnings the structure was unsafe; they had to be closed again after the discovery of corroded support beams and missing steel plates. The north-side tracks also had to be closed periodically to repair cracks. In the aftermath of the dispute, two city officials were fired, and the New York City Council's Transportation committee held inquiries on the reopening of the south tracks and the safety of all New York City bridges. They found that the NYCDOT and MTA's lack of cooperation contributed significantly to the deteriorating conditions. There were also allegations that the NYCDOT's transportation commissioner was not properly addressing concerns about the bridge's safety. Starting in January 1991, trucks and buses were banned from the lower roadway, which was also closed for repairs during nights and weekends. Meanwhile, the weight of heavy trucks created holes in the upper roadbed, so a three-ton weight limit was imposed. The NYCDOT selected the Yonkers Contracting Company as the bridge's main contractor in early 1992, and the firm was awarded a $97.8 million contract that August. City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman originally denied the contract to the company because of concerns about corruption, but she was overridden by Mayor David Dinkins, who wanted to complete repairs quickly. The NYCDOT began conducting more frequent inspections of the bridge after inspectors found holes in beams that had been deemed structurally sound during previous inspections. A shantytown at the Manhattan end of the bridge became one of the city's largest homeless encampments before it was razed in 1993. The western upper roadway was closed for reconstruction that year. As part of an experiment, researchers from Mount Sinai Hospital monitored lead levels in Manhattan Bridge workers' blood while the reconstruction took place. The bridge repairs were repeatedly delayed as the renovation process uncovered more serious structural problems underlying the bridge. The original plans had been to complete the renovations by 1995 for $150 million, but by 1996, the renovation was slated to be complete in 2003 at a cost of $452 million. The western upper roadway did not reopen until 1996. By 2001, it was estimated that the renovations had cost $500 million to date, including $260 million for the west side and another $175 million for the east side. At the time, the NYCDOT had set a January 2004 deadline for the renovation. The eastern upper roadway was closed for a renovation starting in 2002. The original pedestrian walkway on the west side of the bridge was reopened in June 2001, having been closed for 20 years. It was shared with bicycles until late summer 2004, when a dedicated bicycle path was opened on the east side of the bridge. The bike path was poorly signed, leading to cyclist and pedestrian conflicts. By the time work on the bridge was completed in 2004, the final cost of the renovation totaled $800 million. The lower-level roadway was then renovated between 2004 and 2008. The arch and colonnade had also become deteriorated, having become covered with graffiti and dirt. The enclosed plaza within the colonnade had been used as a parking lot by the New York City Police Department, while the only remaining portion of the large park surrounding the arch and colonnade, at Canal and Forsyth Streets, had accumulated trees. The arch and colonnade themselves had open joints in the stonework, as well as weeds, bushes, and small trees growing at their top. The arch and colonnade were restored starting in the late 1990s, with the restoration being completed in April 2001 for $11 million. The project entailed cleaning the structures and installing 258 floodlights. To celebrate the bridge's centennial, a series of events and exhibits were organized by the New York City Bridge Centennial Commission in October 2009. These included a ceremonial parade across the Manhattan Bridge on the morning of October 4 and a fireworks display in the evening. In 2009, the bridge was designated as a National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark by the American Society of Civil Engineers. An $834 million project to replace the Manhattan Bridge's suspension cables was announced in 2010. The work was scheduled to take two years. The lower roadway was permanently reconfigured in July 2015 to carry traffic toward Manhattan only; prior to this change, the lower roadway carried traffic toward Brooklyn for six hours every afternoon. The same year, the NYCDOT began allowing Brooklyn-bound drivers to exit onto Concord Street in Brooklyn at all times; previously, drivers could only exit onto Concord Street during the afternoon rush hours. The Concord Street exit was again closed outside the afternoon rush hour in early 2016. After rubble was found in Brooklyn Bridge Park under the Brooklyn approach in 2018, Skanska was given a contract to repair parts of the bridge at a cost of $75.9 million. The renovation was scheduled to finish in early 2021. The work entailed replacing some fencing, installing some new steel beams on the spans, and refurbishing ornamental elements on the towers. For instance, the spherical finials atop the suspension towers were replaced with cast-iron copies. The bridge, including approaches but excluding plazas, is about 6,855 feet (2,089 m) long. The bridge reaches a maximum height of 134 ft (40.8 m) above mean high water at the middle of the river. The main span between the two suspension towers is 1,470 feet (450 m) long. The side spans, between the anchorages and the suspension towers on either side, are 725 feet (221 m) long. When the bridge was built, the Manhattan approach and plaza were quoted as being 2,510 feet (770 m) long, while the Brooklyn approach and plaza were quoted as measuring 2,370 feet (720 m) long. The bridge's dead load is 25,000 pounds per square foot (120,000 kg/m2), and its live load is 16,000 pounds per square foot (78,000 kg/m2). The bridge was designed by Leon Moisseiff. The plans for Manhattan Bridge are sometimes mistakenly attributed to Gustav Lindenthal, who was the city's bridge commissioner before he was fired in 1904. The steel was fabricated by the Phoenix Bridge Company. The Manhattan Bridge has four vehicle lanes on the upper level, split between two roadways carrying opposite directions of traffic. The southbound roadway to Brooklyn is on the west side of the bridge, while the northbound roadway to Manhattan is on the east side. The lower level has three Manhattan-bound vehicle lanes (formerly reversible) and four rapid transit/subway tracks, two under each of the upper roadways. Also on the lower level are a walkway on the south (geographically facing west) and a bikeway on the north side (geographically facing east). Originally, there were four streetcar tracks above the four rapid transit tracks. Although both levels could theoretically have accommodated either streetcars or elevated rapid transit, subways could use only the lower level because subway trains would have needed to climb an excessively steep slope to reach the upper level. The deck is 120 feet (37 m) wide. As designed, the lower-level roadway was 34 feet (10 m) or 35 feet (11 m) wide. The walkway and bikeway were each 10 feet (3.0 m) or 12 feet (3.7 m) wide. The Manhattan-bound (eastern) upper-level roadway is 24 feet (7.3 m) wide, while the Brooklyn-bound (western) roadway is 22.5 feet (6.9 m) wide; both roadways narrow to 19 feet (5.8 m) at the anchorages. At the Brooklyn end of the south pathway, a staircase leads to the intersection of Jay and High streets. Because the subway trains are on the outer edges of the deck, this causes torsional stresses every time a train crossed the bridge. As built, the bridge sagged by as much as 3 feet (0.91 m) when a train crossed it, and it took about 30 seconds for the deck to return to its normal position after a train had passed. The floor beams under the lower level are 37 inches (940 mm) thick. The Manhattan Bridge was the first suspension bridge to employ Josef Melan's deflection theory for deck stiffening. The theory posited that the weight of a suspension bridge's deck, and the downward forces created by vehicles on the bridge, provided stability to the bridge's deck; thus, such a bridge could use lighter trusses. As such, the Manhattan Bridge was the first suspension bridge in the world to use a lightly-webbed weight-saving Warren truss. There are four stiffening trusses, two each flanking the tracks on the north and south sides of the bridge; these trusses measure 24 feet (7.3 m) or 26 feet (7.9 m) deep. Each of the trusses is directly beneath one of the main cables. The centerlines of the inner trusses are 40 feet (12 m) apart from each other, while the centerline of each of the outer trusses is spaced 28 feet (8.5 m) from the centerlines of the inner trusses. The bottom of each truss is connected to the steel beams under the lower level, while the top of each truss supports the upper-level roadways. The trusses distribute the bridge's weight between each vertical suspender cable. The Manhattan Bridge's suspension towers measure 330 feet (100 m) from the mean high water mark to the tops of the cables; the ornamental finials atop each tower are 350 feet (110 m) above high water. Each tower sits on a masonry pier that measures 68 by 134 feet (21 by 41 m) across and projects 23 feet (7.0 m) above mean high water. The tops of each pier taper to a steel pedestal measuring 18 by 43 feet (5.5 by 13.1 m), from which rise the columns of each tower. The foundations of each tower, consisting of the underwater section of each pier and a caisson below it, descend 92 feet (28 m) below mean high water. The caissons measure 78 by 144 feet (24 by 44 m) across. They have concrete walls and contained a working chamber divided into three compartments. Each tower is made of 6,500 short tons (5,800 long tons; 5,900 t) of steel, much heavier than the towers of similar suspension bridges. The towers are composed of four columns oriented transversely (perpendicularly) to the deck, one each flanking the north and south roadways. The columns measure 5 feet (1.5 m) wide, as measured transversely. The length of each column, as measured laterally, tapers from 32 feet (9.8 m) at the pedestal to 10 feet (3.0 m) at the top. The columns are braced by diagonal steel beams. A publication from 1904 wrote that the central parts of each tower were designed like a "great open arch", making it possible to rebuild either the western or eastern halves of the bridge without affecting the structural integrity of the other half. The towers contain little decorative detail, except for spherical finials. Each suspension tower contains an iron and copper hood over the pedestrian or bike path on either side, as well as iron cornices just below the tops of the towers. Saddles carry the main cables above the tops of each suspension tower. Each saddle weighs 15 short tons (13 long tons; 14 t). In contrast to the Williamsburg and Brooklyn bridges (where the saddles are placed on movable rollers), the saddles are fixed in place, as the towers themselves were intended to flex slightly to accommodate the strains placed on each cable. If the bridge was loaded to full capacity, the tops of the towers could bend up to 25 inches (640 mm) toward the center of the river. The steel beams also expanded by up to 0.75 inches (19 mm) just sitting in the sun. The Manhattan Bridge contains four main cables, which measure 3,224 ft (983 m) long. They descend from the tops of the suspension towers and help support the deck. The cables weigh a combined 6,000 short tons (5,400 long tons; 5,400 t) and can carry 110,000 short tons (98,000 long tons; 100,000 t) including the weight of the cables themselves. The cables measure either 20.75 inches (527 mm), 21 inches (533 mm), or 21.25 inches (540 mm) in diameter. Unlike the Williamsburg Bridge (but like other suspension bridges), the wires on the Manhattan Bridge's cables are galvanized to prevent rusting. Each cable consists of 9,472 parallel wires, which are grouped into 37 strands of 256 wires. The wires measure 3⁄16 inch (4.8 mm) across. The cables themselves are capable of resisting loads of up to 30,000 short tons (27,000 long tons; 27,000 t). There are 1,400 vertical suspender cables, which hang from the main cables and hold up the deck. They measure about 5 inches (130 mm) in diameter and weigh a total of 8,000 short tons (7,100 long tons; 7,300 t). Each suspender can withstand up to 100 short tons per square inch (14 t/cm2) of pressure. There are cable bands at the top of each suspender cable (where they attach to the main cable); the suspenders are attached to the main cables using clamps. The lower parts of the suspender cables pass through the trusses. To reduce chafing on the lower parts of the suspender cables, workers installed wooden buffers between the suspender cables and the trusses after the bridge was completed. The cables are attached to stone anchorages on each side, measuring 237 feet (72 m) long, 182 feet (55 m) wide, and 135 feet (41 m) tall. Each anchorage weighs 233,000 short tons (208,000 long tons; 211,000 t) and is filled with 115,000 cubic feet (3,300 m3) of concrete and rubble masonry. Inside the anchorages are 36 anchor bars, nine for each cable. The ends of each strand are attached to the anchor bars, which in turn are attached to eyebars measuring 110 feet (34 m) long. There are 37 eyebars connecting each cable to the anchor bars, distributing the loads on the cables across a larger area. The anchorages were intentionally wider than the deck, providing space for pedestrians to rest; these pedestrian areas are 120 feet (37 m) above the ground. The facade of each anchorage is made of concrete and is topped by a colonnade measuring 40 feet (12 m) long. Each colonnade is divided vertically into five bays. The arches and colonnades are the only decorative elements of each anchorage. Early proposals for the anchorages called for them to include auditoriums, but this proposal was never executed. In a 1909 article for the Architectural Record, architectural critic Montgomery Schuyler described the anchorages as having "an aspect of Egyptian immobility", and another author in 2006 similarly compared the anchorages to "vast, battered, Egyptian masses". At the base of the Manhattan anchorage is an arch measuring 46 feet (14 m) wide and 46 feet tall, through which Cherry Street passes. Water Street passes through a similar arch in Brooklyn. The intersection of Adams and Water streets had to be relocated to make way for the Brooklyn anchorage. The archway under the Brooklyn anchorage contains a 7,000-square-foot (650 m2) public plaza. The sides of the anchorages have large buttresses that slope upward. Carrère and Hastings designed approach plazas on both ends of the bridge. At the time of the bridge's opening, these plazas were meant to conceal views of the Manhattan Bridge from the streets on either end. The Manhattan plaza connects directly with Canal Street and the Bowery, while the Brooklyn end of the bridge continues as Flatbush Avenue (which in turn intersects several other roads at Prospect Park). The city paid Carl Augustus Heber, Charles Cary Rumsey, and Daniel Chester French a combined $41,000 (equivalent to $1,148,000 in 2023) to design sculptures around the approach plazas. In Manhattan, the bridge terminates at a plaza originally bounded by the Bowery and Bayard, Division, Forsyth, and Canal streets. This plot covered 400 by 750 feet (120 by 230 m). The arch and colonnade were completed within this plaza in 1915; they surround an elliptical plaza facing northwest toward the Bowery. The arch and colonnade are made of white, fine-grained Hallowell granite. They are decorated with two groups of allegorical sculptures by Heber and a frieze called "Buffalo Hunt" by Rumsey. The design of the arch and colonnade reference the fact that the Manhattan Bridge continues into Brooklyn as Flatbush Avenue, which runs south to the Atlantic Ocean. The arch thus signified the Manhattan Bridge's role as an ocean "gateway". The plaza was influenced by the New York Improvement Plan of 1907, which sought to create plazas and other open spaces at large intersections; a massive circular plaza, connecting the Brooklyn and Manhattan bridges, was never built. The arch was based on Paris's Porte Saint-Denis. It is one of the city's three remaining triumphal arches, the others being the Washington Square Arch and the Soldiers' and Sailors' Arch. The arch's opening measures 36 feet (11 m) high and 40 feet (12 m) wide. On the northern side of the arch, the opening is flanked by carvings of classical ships, masks, shields, and oak leaves. The western pier contains the sculptural group Spirit of Commerce, depicting a winged woman flanked by two figures. The eastern pier contains Spirit of Industry, depicting the god Mercury flanked by two figures. The arch's keystone contains a depiction of a bison. Above is the "Buffalo Hunt" frieze, which depicts Native Americans hunting animals while on horseback. The relief is topped by dentils and egg-and-dart ornamentation. The cornice of the arch contains modillions as well as six lion heads. The interior of the arch contains a coffered ceiling. There are rosettes on the arch's soffit. The southern side of the arch, facing Brooklyn, is less ornately decorated but has rusticated stone blocks indicative of a Parisian or Florentine bank. On the southern side, there are decorations of carved lions at the bases of each pier. The colonnade and plaza was modeled after the one surrounding St. Peter's Square in Vatican City. The colonnade is elliptical and rises to 38 feet (12 m). It is supported by six pairs of 31-foot (9.4 m) Tuscan columns on either side, with each pair of columns flanking rusticated piers inside the colonnade. Above each column is a stone with a classical motif, such as a boat or a cuirass. There is an entablature above the columns, as well as a cornice and balustrade at the top of the colonnade. The entablature contains roundels with floral motifs. The arch and colonnade were initially surrounded by granite retaining walls that contained decorative balustrades surrounding parkland on either side of the arch and colonnade. Only a small segment of parkland remains at Canal and Forsyth streets, while the south side of the park became Confucius Plaza. American Architect and Architecture described the arch and colonnade in 1912 as "worthy of one of the principal gateways of a great modern city". The arch and colonnade were described as a "complete, dignified and monumental ensemble, worthy of one of the principal gateways of a great modern city" in a New York Times article. The Brooklyn Daily Eagle wrote: "The Manhattan Bridge will he not only something to get across the East River upon, but the sight of it will be a joy even to those who have no occasion to cross it." According to The Christian Science Monitor, the plaza's presence "has turned a section of the East Side, in one of its most squalid parts, into a veritable park where children can find on summer evenings a clean open place amid surroundings that will be in many ways the equal of any in New York". From the bridge's completion, the arch was heavily used by vehicular traffic. When the second Madison Square Garden was being demolished in 1925, there was a proposal to relocate the arena's statue of Diana to the arch, but this dd not happen. Part of the colonnade's eastern arm was removed and replaced in the 1970s for the construction of the incomplete Second Avenue Subway. The arch and colonnade were designated a New York City landmark on November 25, 1975. After many years of neglect and several attempts by traffic engineers to remove the structure (including a proposal for the unbuilt Lower Manhattan Expressway that would have required removing the arch), the arch and colonnade were repaired and restored in 2000. The Brooklyn approach to the Manhattan Bridge also contained a terraced plaza with balustrades. The Brooklyn plaza was originally bounded by Sands, Bridge, Nassau, and Jay streets. French designed a pair of 20-short-ton (18-long-ton; 18 t) pylons named Brooklyn and Manhattan on the Brooklyn side of the Manhattan Bridge. These were installed in November 1916. Each pylon measured 12 feet (3.7 m) high and rested on a base 15 feet (4.6 m) off the ground. The statues on each pylon represented French's impressions of life in each borough. The Brooklyn pylon depicted a young woman with a child and symbols of art and progress, while the Manhattan pylon depicted a seated, upright woman with symbols of art and prosperity. There were granite railings and walkways at the base of either pylon. A bas-relief memorializing former mayor William Jay Gaynor was dedicated at the bridge's Brooklyn plaza in 1927; it was relocated in 1939 to the nearby Brooklyn Bridge Plaza. The pylons were relocated to the Brooklyn Museum in 1963. The pylons never constituted a true portal, even when they were in place. Following their removal, the Brooklyn approach did not contain a formal entrance. Access to the Manhattan Bridge is provided by a series of ramps on both the Manhattan and Brooklyn sides of the river. As early as the 1940s, there had been plans for an expressway running across Manhattan, connecting with the bridge. As part of the Interstate Highway System, the I-478 route number was proposed in 1958 for a branch of the Lower Manhattan Expressway running along the Manhattan Bridge. This highway would have run between I-78 (which would have split to another branch that used the Williamsburg Bridge) and I-278. The state government solicited bids for a ramp connecting the expressway to the bridge's Manhattan end in 1965. The Lower Manhattan Expressway project was canceled in March 1971, and the I-478 designation was applied to the Brooklyn–Battery Tunnel. A fragment of the never-built expressway's onramp still exists above the Manhattan side of the bridge's center roadway. The bridge was originally intended to carry four Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company (BRT; later Brooklyn–Manhattan Transit Corporation or BMT) subway tracks on the lower level, as well as four trolley tracks on the upper level. The trolley tracks were carried around the Manhattan side's colonnade, while the subway tracks did not emerge from street level until south of the colonnade. Before the bridge opened, the BRT and the Coney Island and Brooklyn Rail Road (CI&B) both submitted bids to run streetcar service on the bridge, as did the Triborough Railroad Company. The Manhattan Bridge Three Cent Line received a permit to operate across the bridge in July 1910, despite opposition from the BRT and CI&B. The Three Cent Line still had not begun operating by 1911, when another firm, the Manhattan Bridge Service Company, applied for a franchise to operate streetcars across the bridge. After a subcommittee of the Board of Estimate recommended that the Brooklyn and North River Line receive a franchise, both the Three Cent Line and the Brooklyn and North River Line received franchises to operate across the bridge in mid-1912. Due to disputes over the franchises, the Three Cent Line did not run across the bridge until September 1912; it carried passengers between either of the bridge's terminals. The Brooklyn and North River Line began operating in December 1915, and a bus route started running across the bridge after the Brooklyn and North River Railroad Company stopped operating streetcars across the bridge in October 1919. The Three Cent Line trolley was discontinued in November 1929 and replaced by a bus. A tour bus service, Culture Bus Loop II, began running across the bridge in 1973 and was discontinued in 1982. The B51 bus began running across the bridge in 1985 as part of an pilot program; the route was discontinued in 2010. As of 2024[update], no MTA Regional Bus Operations routes use the bridge. Four subway tracks are located on the lower deck of the bridge, two on each side of the lower roadway. The two tracks on the west side of the bridge (known as the south tracks) are used by the Q train at all times and the N train at all times except late nights, when it uses the Montague Street Tunnel. The tracks on the east side (known as the north tracks) are used by the D train at all times and the B train on weekdays. On the Manhattan side, the south tracks connect to Canal Street and become the express tracks of the BMT Broadway Line, while the north tracks connect to the Chrystie Street Connection through Grand Street and become the express tracks on the IND Sixth Avenue Line. On the Brooklyn side, the two pairs merge under Flatbush Avenue to a large junction with the BMT Fourth Avenue Line and BMT Brighton Line at DeKalb Avenue. In Brooklyn, the tracks have always connected to the BMT Fourth Avenue Line and the BMT Brighton Line; the junction between the lines was reconstructed in the 1950s. On the Manhattan side, the two north tracks originally connected to the BMT Broadway Line (where the south tracks now connect) while the two south tracks curved south to join the BMT Nassau Street Line towards Chambers Street. As a result of the Chrystie Street Connection, which linked the north tracks to the Sixth Avenue Line upon completion in 1967, the Nassau Street connection was severed. There were also unbuilt plans in the 1960s to have Long Island Rail Road trains use the subway tracks. The New York City Rapid Transit Commission recommended the construction of a subway line across the Manhattan Bridge in 1905, and this line was approved in 1907 as part of the Nassau Street Loop. Unsuccessful proposals for rapid transit across the bridge included a two-track line for the Interborough Rapid Transit Company and a two-track extension of a four-track BRT elevated line. The New York City Public Service Commission requested permission to start constructing the subway tracks in March 1909. Amid financial difficulties, and uncertainty over what subway lines would connect to the bridge in Brooklyn, the subway tracks were approved in May 1909. The subway tracks on the Manhattan Bridge opened on June 22, 1915, along with the Fourth Avenue Line and the Sea Beach Line. Initially, the north tracks carried trains to Midtown Manhattan via the Broadway Line, while the south tracks carried Sea Beach trains that terminated at Chambers Street. When the Nassau Street Loop was completed on May 29, 1931, service on the south tracks declined, and traffic disproportionately used the north tracks. Trains from the Sea Beach, Brighton, and West End lines used the north tracks, while the south tracks were used only by short-turning trains from the West End and Culver lines. Approximately three times as many trains were using the north tracks than the south tracks by 1953, and 92 percent of subway trains used the north tracks by 1956. The Chrystie Street Connection opened on November 26, 1967, with a connection to the north tracks; the south tracks were rerouted to the Broadway Line, while the Nassau Line was disconnected from the bridge. Repairs to the tracks commenced in August 1983, requiring closures of some subway tracks for three months. Further repairs occurred in 1985. The north tracks were closed for a longer-term repair in April 1986. The north tracks were reopened and the south tracks were closed simultaneously in December 1988. A projection for a reopening date was initially made for 1995. That year, the north tracks were closed during off-peak hours for six months. The south tracks finally reopened on July 22, 2001, whereby the north tracks were again closed. The south tracks was closed on weekends from April to November 2003. On February 22, 2004, the north tracks were reopened. When the Manhattan Bridge was being developed, the Brooklyn Standard Union described it as "of greater capacity than either the Williamsburg or Brooklyn bridges, yet lighter and more artistic". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle predicted that the bridge's completion would spur the redevelopment of residential areas in Downtown Brooklyn, and the New-York Tribune said that warehouses would be developed in Lower Manhattan when the Manhattan Bridge opened. The bridge's opening significantly reduced patronage on several ferry lines that had traveled between Lower Manhattan and Downtown Brooklyn. One local civic group predicted that large numbers of Jewish residents would move from Manhattan's Lower East Side to Brooklyn as a result of the bridge's opening. These included numerous Jewish families displaced by the bridge's construction. In addition, numerous industrial and factory buildings were built around the bridge's Brooklyn approach in the 1910s. Some of the land under the bridge's approaches was leased out; for example, a Chinese theater was built under the Manhattan approach in the 1940s, and a shopping mall was built there in the 1980s. The area under the Brooklyn approach became known as Dumbo, short for "Down Under the Manhattan Bridge Overpass", in the late 20th century and became an upscale residential neighborhood by the 2010s. In the two decades following the Manhattan Bridge's completion, few bridges with longer spans were constructed. Nonetheless, the use of the deflection theory enabled the construction of longer suspension bridges in the early 20th century. Two of the world's largest suspension bridge spans built in the 1930s, the Golden Gate Bridge and the George Washington Bridge, incorporated deflection theory into their designs. The bridge was the subject of American artist Edward Hopper's 1928 painting Manhattan Bridge Loop. Cross section of the bridge Manhattan-bound lower level One of the pedestrian walkways Bikeway in Manhattan Portals:  Engineering  National Register of Historic Places  New York (state)  New York City  Transport List of bridges and tunnels in New York City List of New York City Designated Landmarks in Manhattan below 14th Street National Register of Historic Places listings in Brooklyn National Register of Historic Places listings in Manhattan below 14th Street One source gives an alternate measurement of 1,480 feet (450 m). The Brooklyn Daily Eagle wrote in 1908 that the tops of the towers were 322.5 feet (98.3 m) high and that the finials were 340 feet (100 m) high. The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission gives a height of 336 feet (102 m). One source gives a figure as low as 321 feet (98 m). This is incorrectly cited in one New-York Tribune article as 4,972 wires. Another article from the same newspaper gives a calculation of 37 strands, each with 256 wires, for a total of 9,472 wires. Other sources corroborate the 9,472-wire figure. "NYC DOT Bridges & Tunnels Annual Condition Report 2015" (PDF). City of New York. Manhattan Bridge at Structurae Jackson, Donald C. (1988). Great American Bridges and Dams. Wiley. p. 136. ISBN 0-471-14385-5. "Manhattan Bridge Opened to Traffic – Mayor McClellan's Last Act in Public Was to Lead a Procession on Wheels Across – Brooklyn Men Celebrate – New Structure Has the Largest Carrying Capacity of Any Crossing the River – The Span Is 1,470 Feet" (PDF). The New York Times. January 1, 1910. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "NYC DOT – Data feeds". New York City Department of Transportation. 2019. NYC Bridge & Screenline Traffic Volumes Dashboard. Retrieved May 21, 2022. "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. November 2, 2013. "Cultural Resource Information System (CRIS)". New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation. November 7, 2014. Retrieved July 20, 2023. "Aldermen's Lively War – New East River Bridges Named by the Board – Commissioner Woodbury Attacked and His Resolution for a Brooklyn Deputy Lost – The Chairman Denounced" (PDF). The New York Times. March 19, 1902. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 23, 2017. "Manhattan Bridge Ready by January; Builders Rushing Work on Fourth River Span Between Manhattan and Long Island". The New York Times. June 6, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "New Bridge Terminals: Buildings on Manhattan Side Will Cost More Than $1,000,000 Proposed Terminals of the New Manhattan Bridge". New-York Tribune. November 29, 1905. p. 4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571667503; "Terminals of the Manhattan Bridge". Railroad Gazette. Vol. 39, no. 22. December 1, 1905. p. 510. ProQuest 571667503. "Manhattan Bridge" (PDF). The New York Times. June 19, 1904. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 23, 2017. "Manhattan Bridge" (PDF). The New York Times. December 9, 1905. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 23, 2017. Stern, Gilmartin & Massengale 1983, p. 51. "The New Manhattan Bridge; A Bridge Beautiful As Well As Useful". Architects' and Builder's Magazine. Vol. 36, no. 12. September 1904. pp. 547–554. Architects' and Builders' Magazine 1904, p. 548. "Mayor Chafes at Delay on Bridge". The Standard Union. January 18, 1901. p. 2. Retrieved December 18, 2023. "Bids On Bridge No. 3. – All the Propositions for Building Tower Foundations Will Be Rejected" (PDF). The New York Times. March 26, 1901. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 23, 2017. "Bridge Contract Awarded". The Standard Union. May 6, 1901. p. 1. Retrieved January 10, 2024. Engineering Record, Building Record and Sanitary Engineer 1904, p. 334. "Work in the Caisson of Third East River Bridge – Death of Three Laborers Employed in Making Foundations for the Brooklyn Tower Causes Contractors to Desist from Their Attempt to Reach the Actual Rock Bottom" (PDF). The New York Times. February 22, 1903. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "Plans for Third Bridge – The Manhattan to be Ornamental as Well as Useful – Halls in Anchorages to be Larger Than Cooper Union Auditorium – Globular Lights on High Pinnacles" (PDF). The New York Times. February 4, 1903. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "Grants $10,000,000 for World's Biggest Bridge – Board of Estimate Authorizes Expenditure for Manhattan Span – Aldermen Will Act Next Week – Work on Superstructure Will Begin July 1 – Will Be Finished in 1909 – Most Capacious Bridge on Earth" (PDF). The New York Times. May 7, 1904. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "Manhattan Bridge" (PDF). The New York Times. June 25, 1904. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 23, 2017. "Manhattan Bridge Plans – Lindenthal Design Promises Structure of Lasting Credit to City (letter)" (PDF). The New York Times. June 30, 1904. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 23, 2017. "Manhattan Bridge Plans" (PDF). The New York Times. July 14, 1904. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 23, 2017. "Lindenthal Objects to Wire Gable Plan – Should Not Be Used on Manhattan Bridge – Warns Art Commission – Says New Plan Would Cost More, Would Make Bridge Less Rigid, and Be Inferior in Many Ways" (PDF). The New York Times. July 14, 1904. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 23, 2017. "Wire Cables Approved: for the New Bridge Only One Vote of Art Commission Against Best's Plan". New-York Tribune. September 16, 1904. p. 4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571602354; "Adopts Wire Cables for Manhattan Bridge – Art Commission Sustains Commissioner Best – Turns Down Eye-Bar Plan – John De Witt Warner Protests Against Action – Bids to be Advertised For at Once" (PDF). The New York Times. September 16, 1904. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 23, 2017. National Park Service 1983, p. 3. "Roeblings Win Again: Big Hole in Contract Contractors May Take Their Own Time—City Helpless". New-York Tribune. September 15, 1905. p. 2. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Stern, Gilmartin & Massengale 1983, pp. 51–52. "Manhattan Bridge Delay". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 8, 1904. p. 3. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Eye-bar Advocates Fail to Appear: Manhattan Bridge Cables to Be of Wire. Says Commissioner Stevenson". New-York Tribune. March 24, 1906. p. 4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571786490; "Biggest of River Bridges Should Be Open in 1910". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. April 10, 1906. p. 5. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Bridge Anchorage Bids". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 25, 1904. p. 42. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Tammany Firm's Big Plum". The New York Times. February 16, 1905. p. 6. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Is Seen as Monument to M'Clellan Former Mayor of New York". The Standard Union. June 18, 1931. p. 15. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Pushing Work on Anchorage". The Standard Union. July 9, 1906. p. 3. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Ripley 1907, p. 204. Ripley 1907, p. 205. "Making Good Progress in Condemnation of Land". The Brooklyn Citizen. May 6, 1905. p. 2. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Why New Bridge Waits". The New York Times. March 30, 1905. p. 7. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 12, 2024; "On Bridge 3 Approaches Some Houses Are Rented". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. March 29, 1905. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "The Manhattan Bridge Terminals" (PDF). The New York Times. December 20, 1905. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 23, 2017. "To Advertise by May 1 Plans for Bridge No. 3". The Brooklyn Citizen. February 20, 1905. p. 2. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Bids for Manhattan Bridge". New-York Tribune. July 23, 1905. p. 5. Retrieved January 11, 2024; "New Bridge Plans Ready". The New York Times. July 23, 1905. p. 12. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Steel for Manhattan Bridge.: Greater New York Wants Nearly 44,000 Tons". The Wall Street Journal. July 21, 1905. p. 5. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 129000387. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Prison Commission Named; To Consider New Sites and Plans to Abolish Sing Sing and Auburn". The New York Times. August 16, 1905. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 11, 2024; "Contract for $7,284,000". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 16, 1905. p. 16. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Suit to Enjoin Mr. Best Will Be Heard on Sept. 6". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 17, 1905. p. 3. Retrieved January 11, 2024; "More Trouble for Bridge Department". The Standard Union. August 18, 1905. p. 5. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Court Holds Up Work on Manhattan Bridge; Contract with Pennsylvania Steel Company Declared Illegal". The New York Times. November 22, 1905. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 11, 2024; "Manhattan Bridge Contract Enjoined". The Evening World. November 21, 1905. p. 2. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Appeals Bridge Contract; City Hopes to Give the Work to the Pennsylvania Steel Company". The New York Times. December 8, 1905. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 11, 2024; "Best to Appeal Contract". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 7, 1905. p. 1. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Topics in New York: Lassoed Would-be Suicide Who Leaped From a Boat Steel for the New Bridge Pennsylvania Steel Co. Refuses to Enter Competition for the Manhattan Span's Superstructure". The Sun. May 8, 1906. p. 5. ProQuest 537167327. "Will Include Eye-bars in Bridge Specifications". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. January 3, 1906. p. 10. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Contract.: Lowest Bid on Big New York Structure Was $6,493,223". The Washington Post. May 8, 1906. p. 9. ISSN 0190-8286. ProQuest 144643797; "Bridge Bids Opened: Ryan-Parker Company Offers Lowest Figures for Steel Work". New-York Tribune. May 8, 1906. p. 12. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571832220. "Manhattan Bridge Contract Awarded". The Standard Union. June 16, 1906. p. 1. Retrieved January 11, 2024; "Manhattan Bridge Work Begun". New-York Tribune. June 17, 1906. p. 5. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge". The Wall Street Journal. September 1, 1906. p. 5. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Work Pushed by Phoenixville Steel Mills". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. February 17, 1907. p. 50. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Millions for New Bridge Approaches". The Wall Street Journal. November 24, 1906. p. 7. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 129105464; "To Acquire Approaches". The Brooklyn Citizen. November 23, 1906. p. 2. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Cost of the Third Bridge". The Brooklyn Citizen. February 6, 1907. p. 12. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Panama Outdone in New York". The Sun. April 7, 1907. p. 38. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "To Hurry Bridge Work: Coler Wants to Know if Night Shifts Can Be Used on Manhattan". New-York Tribune. February 2, 1907. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571947857; "Favors Union Square Site for Court House; Board of Estimate Likely to Accept Commission's Report". The New York Times. February 2, 1907. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Steel". Times Union. February 21, 1907. p. 10. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Extra Shifts Required on Manhattan Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. February 14, 1907. p. 3. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "First Completed Section of Manhattan Bridge Tower". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. February 19, 1907. p. 23. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "To Cut a Wide Swath in Brooklyn's Heart". The Brooklyn Citizen. March 3, 1907. p. 13. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Setting Up the Towers for the Manhattan Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. April 5, 1907. p. 25. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Real Work Begins on New Bridge To-day". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. June 26, 1907. p. 20. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Work". Times Union. June 26, 1907. p. 12. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "New Bridge Approach: Changes in Brooklyn in Preparation for Manhattan Structure". New-York Tribune. September 8, 1907. p. B6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571995180. "City's Tenants to Beg for Extension of Time". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. November 13, 1907. p. 5. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "1,000 Families Must Move". The Sun. October 29, 1907. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge: Clearing Ground for the Approaches Almost Completed". New-York Tribune. August 2, 1908. p. C7. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572045467. "Put Off Moving Day: Tenants in Condemned Buildings Oppose Wreckers". New-York Tribune. November 25, 1907. p. 4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571981215; "Tenants Won't Move". The New York Times. November 25, 1907. p. 16. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Tenements Give Way to New Bridge; Last Moving Day for Tenants Along the Line of the Manhattan's Approach". The New York Times. December 3, 1907. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "New Bridge Approaches". The Wall Street Journal. December 10, 1907. p. 7. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 129028537; "Opens Bids for Steel on Manhattan Bridge". The Standard Union. December 12, 1907. p. 10. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Approaches for New Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 17, 1907. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "To Finish 3d Bridge by 1910 Is the Plan". The Brooklyn Citizen. December 17, 1907. p. 10. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "The Manhattan Bridge May Be Ready in Two Years". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. January 9, 1908. p. 28. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Towers Quickly Built for Manhattan Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. March 21, 1908. p. 2. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Last Saddle in Place on New Bridge Tower". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. April 28, 1908. p. 3. Retrieved January 12, 2024; "New Bridge Towers Practically Completed". The Standard Union. April 28, 1908. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "About to String Cables". New-York Tribune. January 22, 1908. p. 5. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572009250; "To String Cables March 1". The Brooklyn Citizen. January 23, 1908. p. 7. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Cable Hauling on the New Manhattan Bridge". Railroad Age Gazette. Vol. 45, no. 16. September 18, 1908. pp. 946–947. ProQuest 882958340. "Manhattan Bridge Steel a High Grade Product". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 27, 1908. p. 11. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Pushing Work on Manhattan Bridge". The Standard Union. October 17, 1908. p. 10. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "First New Bridge Link: Temporary Cable Strung Between Manhattan Structure's Towers". New-York Tribune. June 16, 1908. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572056742; "Another Aerial Link Across the East River". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. June 15, 1908. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Bridge Cable Falls, Injuring Two Men – Lashing End Strikes Them as Heavy Wire Spins Over Top of Tower – Runaway Hits a Horse, Too – Workmen Capture It Just in Time to Save It from Slipping Full Length Into the River" (PDF). The New York Times. June 17, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "New Bridge Towers Joined – First Rope of Temporary Cable for Manhattan Structure Hits a Schooner" (PDF). The New York Times. June 16, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. During the next fortnight sixteen steel wire ropes will be stretched across the East River. They will be passed over the towers and, after being bound together in four cables, will be cleated to the anchorages. From the four cables temporary foot bridges will be suspended. Then the record-breaking 21½ inch permanent cables will be strung. "Preparing to Lay Cables on Manhattan Bridge". The Standard Union. July 8, 1908. p. 3. Retrieved January 12, 2024; "Footpath Building Rapid". New-York Tribune. July 9, 1908. p. 5. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Workmen Now May Walk From Manhattan to Brooklyn Across New Manhattan Bridge". Detroit Free Press. July 19, 1908. p. 2. ProQuest 564190408. "To Stretch Guide Wires for New Bridge Cables". The Brooklyn Citizen. July 31, 1908. p. 2. Retrieved January 12, 2024; "Manhattan Bridge Work". Times Union. July 31, 1908. p. 10. Retrieved January 12, 2024; "To Spin First Cable Within a Few Days". The Standard Union. July 31, 1908. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Working at a Dizzy Height". The Sun. August 2, 1908. p. 28. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Last Wire Over River: Record on New Bridge Mayor Presides at Ceremony on Manhattan Structure". New-York Tribune. December 11, 1908. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572203060; "Last Wire Is Strung for Our Biggest Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 10, 1908. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024; "Mayor Completes Last Bridge Strand – Pulls a Lever Which Spins It on Its Journey on the Great Manhattan Structure – Workmen Make a Record – When Completed, It Will Be the Largest Bridge of Its Kind in the World" (PDF). The New York Times. December 11, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "Bridge Expert Hired: for Manhattan Span Ralph Modjeski, Rebuilder of the Quebec Bridge, Coming Here". New-York Tribune. December 12, 1908. p. 14. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572215430. "Mayor Answers Folks". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 11, 1908. p. 2. Retrieved January 12, 2024; "New Manhattan Bridge Test for Strength Ordered". The Evening World. December 11, 1908. p. 6. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Cables About Finished; Rushing New Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. January 31, 1909. p. 11. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "New Manhattan Bridge, Showing Suspender Cables Outlining Bridge Structure". New-York Tribune. February 5, 1909. p. 3. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "No Vehicles May Cross New Manhattan Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. January 27, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Steel for Manhattan Bridge; 60,000,000 Pounds Now Stored in Bayonne". The New York Times. February 28, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "Steel for Bridge at New York". The Christian Science Monitor. February 16, 1909. p. 5. ISSN 0882-7729. ProQuest 507919377; "Fast Work on New Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. February 11, 1909. p. 2. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "Engineers Assured Lock Plan Will Fail; H.G. Granger Attacks President's Board and the Report in Favor of Lock Canal". The New York Times. February 25, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 10, 2024; "Flooring of New Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. February 25, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024; "Manhattan Bridge Done for New Year". The Evening World. February 25, 1909. p. 6. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "Laying Bridge Floor: Girders Are Being Buttoned to Manhattan Structure's Suspenders". New-York Tribune. March 21, 1909. p. A8. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572236963. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "To Join Manhattan Bridge Arms". New-York Tribune. April 3, 1909. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572139521; "Big Bridge Spans Near Completion – Engineers Expect to Close the Gaps on Manhattan Bridge This Week – Record Job in 22 Days – Perfect Scale Balance Maintained in Extending the Steel Structure from Each Side of the Towers" (PDF). The New York Times. April 4, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "Only 36 Feet to Go". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. April 5, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Manhattan Span Steel Floor Laid". The Christian Science Monitor. April 8, 1909. p. 4. ISSN 0882-7729. ProQuest 507935457; "River Spanned Again: Last Floor Section of New Manhattan Bridge in Place Putting the First Connecting Girder of the Manhattan Bridge in Place Yesterday". New-York Tribune. April 8, 1909. p. 8. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572272082; "Manhattan Bridge Linked". The New York Times. April 8, 1909. p. 4. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "Big Items Approved: Appropriation of $1,000,000 for Manhattan Bridge". New-York Tribune. April 3, 1909. p. 3. Retrieved January 10, 2024; "$1,000,000 to Finish New Manhattan Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. April 2, 1909. p. 3. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Cables". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. May 13, 1909. p. 18. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Cables Completed on First Anniversary of Stringing of Wires". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 10, 1909. p. 15. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Bridge Cables Strung: Important Part of the New Structure Completed in Record Time". New-York Tribune. August 15, 1909. p. C6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572294694; "Cable Work Nearly Done". The Brooklyn Citizen. August 10, 1909. p. 7. Retrieved January 11, 2024; "Weave Final Strands of Big Bridge Cables". The Standard Union. August 10, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Says Bridge is Safe: Manhattan Span O.K'd. Consulting Engineer Finds Structure is Right in All Important Parts". New-York Tribune. September 19, 1909. p. 5. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572268958. "Manhattan Bridge Ready by Dec. 15". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 19, 1909. pp. 1, 7. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "New Manhattan Bridge to Be Open". The Christian Science Monitor. November 23, 1909. p. 5. ISSN 0882-7729. ProQuest 508018831. "Brooklynites Enraged at New Bridge Fiasco". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. October 18, 1909. p. 11. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge to Be Opened Dec. 24". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. November 29, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved January 13, 2024; "Manhattan Bridge to Be Christmas Present to the Greater City". The Brooklyn Citizen. November 29, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "One Hundred Cross Manhattan Bridge – Brooklyn Inspection Party Walks Over the New Twenty-Million-Dollar Link – A Remarkable Structure – Official Opening Set for Three Weeks Hence – Interesting Facts About Its Building" (PDF). The New York Times. December 5, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017; "New Manhattan Bridge Pronounced a Success". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 5, 1909. p. 51. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "B'klyn Leaguers See New Bridge". The Brooklyn Citizen. December 5, 1909. pp. 1, 3. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "Inspect Manhattan Bridge; Mayor and His Party Believe It Will Be Opened Within Ten Days". The New York Times. December 25, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 10, 2024; "Over New Bridge in Auto". The Sun. December 25, 1909. p. 10. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Opened to Traffic – Mayor McClellan's Last Act in Public Was to Lead a Procession on Wheels Across – Brooklyn Men Celebrate – New Structure Has the Largest Carrying Capacity of Any Crossing the River – The Span Is 1,470 Feet" (PDF). The New York Times. January 1, 1910. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017; "Manhattan Bridge Is Declared Open". Times Union. December 31, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Open New Bridge". New-York Tribune. January 1, 1910. p. 3. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Proves Vast Help". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. January 2, 1910. p. 8. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Asks a Million for Bridge Department". Times Union. August 17, 1910. p. 2. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Spectacular Midair Fire.: Firemen Have Difficulty in Quelling Flames on Manhattan Bridge". The Washington Post. March 26, 1910. p. 5. ISSN 0190-8286. ProQuest 145031390; "Fire Weakens New Manhattan Bridge – Steel Work and Cables, Warped and Twisted, May Have to Be Replaced – Damage $50,000" (PDF). The New York Times. March 26, 1910. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "To Open Two Bridges; Footway of the Manhattan and a New Harlem River Span Ready". The New York Times. July 15, 1910. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 11, 2024; "Manhattan Bridge Opening". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 14, 1910. p. 3. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Slowly Completing Span". Times Union. July 15, 1910. p. 10. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "To Abolish Tolls On City Bridges; Mayor Gaynor Believes There Is No Legal Warrant for Taxing Vehicle Traffic". The New York Times. July 7, 1911. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 28, 2019. "Prize Fund for Atwood; Talk of One After Washington Commerce Chamber Refuses to Help". The New York Times. July 19, 1911. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 1, 2019; "Aldermen Abolish Tolls for Wagons on Bridges". Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 18, 1911. p. 1. Retrieved July 1, 2019. "Manhattan Bridge Operation.: Court Upholds the Three-cent Fare Line and Cars Are Rushed Across". The Wall Street Journal. September 6, 1912. p. 8. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 129312013; "New Bridge Line's Big Day; Carries 3,500 Riders Over Manhattan Span – Rivals Give Up Fight". The New York Times. September 6, 1912. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Through Tube to Coney, 48 Minutes: First Train on Fourth Avenue Route Beats West End Line Eleven Minutes". Brooklyn Daily Eagle. June 22, 1915. Retrieved June 29, 2015. "Site of the New East Harlem Market". The New York Times. August 30, 1914. p. X9. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 97561411. Retrieved January 11, 2024; "New Public Food Markets Doing a Brisk Business: One at Fort Lee Ferry Selling Vegetables and Groceries at Greatly Reduced Prices". The Wall Street Journal. September 2, 1914. p. 3. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 129441670. "Gets $301,719 Verdict". New-York Tribune. April 11, 1912. p. 14. Retrieved January 11, 2024; "C. J. Sullivan Gets Verdict". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. April 11, 1912. p. 5. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "C. J. Sullivan Wins Suit". New-York Tribune. January 14, 1916. p. 7. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Landmarks Preservation Commission 1975, p. 1. "New York Bridge Plans Approved: Municipal Art Commission Passes on Drawings of Proposed Approaches to Manhattan Structure". The Christian Science Monitor. April 23, 1910. p. 9. ISSN 0882-7729. ProQuest 508094628; "Bridge Approach Drawings Approved". The Standard Union. April 14, 1910. p. 8. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Bridge Approach Design Approved". Times Union. August 14, 1912. p. 6. Retrieved May 25, 2022; "Approaches Approved: Art Commission O. K.'s Design for Manhattan Bridge Cost Will Be $800,000 Structure Opened January 1, 1910, Now Represents an Outlay of $26,000,000". New-York Tribune. August 14, 1912. p. 5. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 574948699. Gray, Christopher (June 23, 1996). "Streetscapes/Manhattan Bridge Plaza;Noble Monument to the City Is in Ignoble Condition". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 5, 2020. "$675,000 for Bridge Plaza.: Money Available for Brooklyn End of Manhattan Bridge". The New York Times. March 30, 1913. p. XX1. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 97394049. Retrieved January 11, 2024; "Spend $675,000 on Manhattan Bridge". Times Union. March 27, 1913. p. 16. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "4th Ave. Subway Ready in 5 Months". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. May 23, 1913. p. 20. Retrieved January 11, 2024. New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission; Dolkart, Andrew S.; Postal, Matthew A. (2009). Postal, Matthew A. (ed.). Guide to New York City Landmarks (4th ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons. pp. 45–46. ISBN 978-0-470-28963-1. "Bridge Traffic Was Too Much, So the Ladies Moved to a Museum". The New York Times. April 8, 1964. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 5, 2020. "New York Bridge Approaches Draw Near Completion: Entrances of Manhattan Structure Are Constructed With View to Artistic Effect". The Christian Science Monitor. October 20, 1915. p. 11. ISSN 0882-7729. ProQuest 509557732. "Horse Traffic Off Manhattan Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 20, 1918. p. 16. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "City Busses Begin Manhattan Bridge Operation Today". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. October 5, 1919. p. 5. Retrieved January 13, 2024; "Manhattan Bridge to Have Bus Service". The Brooklyn Citizen. October 2, 1919. p. 10. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "City Bus Service Stops Tonight; New Rules for Bridges". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 7, 1920. p. 1. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "One-Way Traffic Will Continue on Bridges Despite Jam". New-York Tribune. September 8, 1920. p. 4. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Brooklyn Bridge Badly Overloaded, Engineer Asserts". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 22, 1920. p. 2. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Quite a Job to Paint Manhattan Bridge Like New". New York Daily News. November 6, 1921. p. 11. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Hurley, William I. (June 18, 1922). "Keeping Up With the Town". Times Union. p. 15. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Fish, Lawrence C. (March 6, 1921). "Brooklyn Traffic Court Magistrate Starting a 'Safety First' Campaign". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. p. 61. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Hylan Opens New Bridge Roadway". Times Union. June 16, 1922. p. 6. Retrieved January 13, 2024; "$300,000 Roadway on Manhattan Bridge Put in Operation". The Brooklyn Citizen. June 16, 1922. p. 2. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "New Roadway Opened on Manhattan Bridge – Mayor and Other City Officials Attend Event—Only Passenger Cars Allowed" (PDF). The New York Times. June 16, 1922. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "Brooklyn Bridge Closed to Motor Traffic, Manhattan Bridge to Horse-Drawn Vehicles". The New York Times. July 7, 1922. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 13, 2024; Peck, Robert B. (July 7, 1922). "Autos Banished, Brooklyn Bridge Made Horse Haven". New-York Tribune. p. 1. Retrieved January 13, 2024; "Part of Load Lifted from Old Bridge—Is Span in Its Dotage?". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 9, 1922. p. 24. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Bars Mail Motors on Brooklyn Bridge; Postmaster Burton's Plea for an Exception to New Rule is Denied". The New York Times. July 9, 1922. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Carrying Too Much Weight, Is Report; Need for Quick Relief Seen". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 21, 1924. p. 9. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Some Questions Answered by the Eagle". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. January 7, 1923. p. 39. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Police Calling for Autoists To Utilize Brooklyn Bridge: Traffic Congestion Is Terrific at Manhattan Span, While Other Structure Is Deserted; Signs To Be Posted as Guides to Travel". The New York Herald, New York Tribune. June 14, 1925. p. G11. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1113175935; "Motorists Urged to Use Old Bridge". The Standard Union. June 16, 1925. p. 8. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Says Low-speed Law Clogs Bridge Traffic; Mills Wants Limit on Brooklyn Span Raised From Eight to Fifteen Miles an Hour". The New York Times. October 27, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "One Way Traffic on Bridge; New York Bound Cars Barred From Manhattan Span Pending Paving". The New York Times. January 11, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "Can't Drive at Night Over Manhattan Bridge". The Standard Union. January 11, 1927. p. 1. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Favors Buying Trolley; Byrne Urges Acceptance of Manhattan Bridge Line's Offer". The New York Times. October 25, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "Byrne Wants City to Buy 3-Cent Line". Times Union. October 18, 1927. p. 31. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Bridge Trolley Line Scrapping Urged by Berry: Comptroller Urges Purchase by City to Clear Traffic Jam on Manhattan Span". New York Herald Tribune. September 15, 1928. p. 21. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1113578973; "Boro Victory Seen in Berry Bridge Plan". The Brooklyn Citizen. September 15, 1928. p. 3. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "Berry Approves New Bridge Lanes". Times Union. September 14, 1928. p. 1. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Approves Purchase of Bridge Trolley; City Will Raze Manhattan Span Line to Make Room for More Traffic Lanes". The New York Times. March 12, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "3-Cent Bridge Line Is Bought by City". Times Union. March 12, 1929. p. 50. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Line Runs". New York Herald Tribune. November 14, 1929. p. 25. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1111747012; "Three-Cent Trolleys Make Last Manhattan Bridge Trip". The New York Times. November 14, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Walker Opens Traffic Lane on Manhattan Span: New Roadway to Brooklyn Expected to Carry 30,000 Automobiles Daily Parade First to Cross Kings County Hails Link at Luncheon of 1,500". New York Herald Tribune. June 19, 1931. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1114109302; "New Bridge LInk Affords Much-Needed Traffic Relief". The Standard Union. June 18, 1931. p. 12. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Roadway Will Be Ready by Summer". Times Union. February 17, 1930. p. 20. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Upper Deck Opened on Manhattan Span; the Mayor Opening a New Roadway to Brooklyn". The New York Times. June 19, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Roadway For Light Cars Completed: Goldman Announces Opening of New $800,000 Lane Thursday New Traffic Lane to Brooklyn Is Ready". New York Herald Tribune. June 15, 1931. p. 19. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1114107738. "New Bridge Lights On; Illumination Doubled In Roadways of Manhattan Span". The New York Times. June 21, 1932. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Traffic Speeded by New Rules". The New York Times. September 25, 1934. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "Traffic Speeded by One-Third on Manhattan Bridge". New York Daily News. September 25, 1934. p. 89. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Warped Pavement Cuts Manhattan Bridge Traffic: Rains Buckle Wooden Blocks Alons Entire Main Roadway". New York Herald Tribune. September 10, 1934. p. 17. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1242981411; "Manhattan Bridge Repairs Speeded". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 10, 1934. p. 4. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Manhattan Span Perfectly Safe, Kracke Reports". New York Daily News. August 11, 1934. p. 241. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge 25 Years Old Today; Mayor to Mark Anniversary by Speeches at Span, Which Is the City's Busiest". The New York Times. December 31, 1934. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "Manhattan Bridge 25 Years Old". New York Daily News. December 30, 1934. p. 53. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Bridge Bids Submitted; $279,700 Figure Is Low One for Altering Manhattan Span". The New York Times. April 7, 1937. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Bridge is Made Safer; 21-Inch Curbing Is Installed on Manhattan Structure". The New York Times. April 22, 1937. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "New Manhattan Bridge Curb Expected to Cut Accidents". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. April 22, 1937. p. 7. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "Raise Parapet on Manhattan Bridge". New York Daily News. April 22, 1937. p. 344. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge to Get New Lane; Steel and Concrete Structure on Lower Deck of Span Will Cost $750,000 Work on Supports to Continue Special Appropriation to Be Ready". The New York Times. March 27, 1938. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "BridgeRoadwayFinished; Traffic Not Interrupted". The New York Times. December 5, 1938. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "Non-Skid Road Laid on Manhattan Bridge Without Hindering Traffic". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 5, 1938. p. 8. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Speed Repair of Manhattan Bridge Span". New York Daily News. August 14, 1938. p. 126. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "To Eliminate Bridge Bottleneck; WPA Will Improve East End of Manhattan Span – Other Street Work". The New York Times. August 17, 1941. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "Start of Traffic Improvement on Manhattan Bridge". New York Herald Tribune. July 31, 1941. p. 32. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1320057002. "Manhattan Bridge Exit to Be Wider". New York Daily News. October 2, 1941. p. 610. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "New Air Raid Siren Does Best Job Yet; Experimental Device, Sounded From Manhattan Bridge, Is Heard Below Canal St". The New York Times. March 5, 1942. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "City's Newest Siren Loud Enough But Some Think It Boat or Shop". New York Herald Tribune. March 5, 1942. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1264963711. "Use Brooklyn Bridge, Autoists Are Urged". The New York Times. April 5, 1946. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Repairs Are Postponed On Manhattan Bridge". New York Herald Tribune. April 18, 1950. p. 25. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 448817053. "Begin Work Soon on B'klyn Bridge". New York Daily News. February 22, 1950. p. 770. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 15, 2024; "Action on Needed Improvements in Interborough Traffic Links". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. March 1, 1950. p. 16. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Brooklyn Bridge Traffic Will Undergo Changes". The New York Times. March 3, 1950. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Gray, Christopher (January 18, 2004). "Streetscapes/The Giant Granite Anchorages of the Manhattan Bridge; A Moody, Craggy Majesty, Like That of Lost Ruins". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. Eckenberg, William C. (April 11, 1951). "War Barricades Set Up on Bridges – Floodlights Are Also Being Installed There to Thwart Possible Sabotage – Barbed Wire for Cables – Chief Attention Given Vital Manhattan-Brooklyn Spans, Close to Naval Ship Yard" (PDF). The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "City Will Realign Traffic on Bridge; Brooklyn-Bound Vehicles to Get Extra Lane During Morning Rush on Manhattan Span". The New York Times. August 12, 1952. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024; "Traffic Change Aids Manhattan Bridge in Rush: Cars to Brooklyn Get Extra A. M. Lane; Grand Army Plaza Plan Starts Today". New York Herald Tribune. August 14, 1952. p. 19. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1322331111. "Manhattan Bridge 3-Yr. Accident Toll: 9 Killed, 411 Injured". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. January 24, 1955. p. 22. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Edelsburg & Cane 1956, pp. 278, 280. "Manhattan Bridge May Be Repaired; Board of Estimate Is Asked to Approve $80,000 Pact to Study East River Span". The New York Times. April 27, 1952. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "B. M. T. Traffic Slowed; Subway Trains Affected After Manhattan Bridge Cracks". The New York Times. April 10, 1953. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Crack in Manhattan Bridge Reshuffles B. M. T. Trains". New York Herald Tribune. April 10, 1953. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1322303107. "Manhattan Bridge Break Fixed". The New York Times. May 18, 1953. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Repair of Manhattan Bridge And City Hall Termed Urgent". The New York Times. August 18, 1953. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024 "City Seeks to Ease Strain On Manhattan Bridge". New York Herald Tribune. August 18, 1953. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1322339872; "Manhattan Bridge, City Hall Repair Funds Requested". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 18, 1953. p. 3. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Creaking at Joints". New York Daily News. August 23, 1953. p. 146. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "City Set to Refit Manhattan Span; Mayor and Aides Tentatively Approve $30,000,000 Plan for 45-Year-Old Bridge". The New York Times. July 29, 1954. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Manhattan Span Stirs City Dispute; Transit Body Would Continue Subway Runs, Zurmuhlen Favors New River Tunnel". The New York Times. November 24, 1954. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Priority Given to Manhattan Bridge Work". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 14, 1954. p. 10. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Use of Manhattan Span Into City Extended Hour". The New York Times. October 14, 1955. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024; "Subways Peril Manhattan Bridge". New York Daily News. February 17, 1955. p. 59. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Tests of Span Slated; Survey of Manhattan Bridge Due to Begin March 14". The New York Times. February 27, 1955. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024; "Manhattan Bridge Survey Delayed". New York Herald Tribune. February 26, 1955. p. 4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1327679917. "Manhattan Span Repairs Speeded". New York Herald Tribune. August 12, 1955. p. 13. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1328071519; "Work Starts on Manhattan Bridge Today". New York Daily News. June 15, 1955. p. 740. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Bridge Repairs to Slow Traffic; Restrictions on Manhattan and Harlem Ship Canal Spans Start Tomorrow". The New York Times. September 25, 1955. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Use of Manhattan Span Into City Extended Hour". The New York Times. October 14, 1955. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Span Closing Delayed; Manhattan Bridge Renovation to Start Tomorrow". The New York Times. November 22, 1955. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Repairs to Curb Manhattan Span; 2 Eastbound Lanes Will Be Closed Daily for 2 Months Beginning on March 12". The New York Times. March 4, 1956. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge to Close". The New York Times. June 2, 1956. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024; "Manhattan Span Closings Slated". New York Daily News. June 2, 1956. p. 253. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge to Reopen". The New York Times. August 24, 1956. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Edelsburg & Cane 1956, p. 282. Seaton, Charles (September 24, 1989). "AIs bridge a leap of faith?". Daily News. pp. 287, 289. Retrieved February 22, 2024. "Start Work on Queens Link". Brooklyn Daily. January 29, 1957. p. 4. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Span Gets New Lights; Manhattan Bridge Controls to Be in Use Next Month". The New York Times. February 9, 1958. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Traffic Operates on Damaged Span; BMT Slowed on Manhattan Bridge – Cost of Repairs Is Put at $56,000". The New York Times. June 26, 1958. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024; Neugebauer, William; Lee, Henry (June 26, 1958). "2 Lost, 36 Hurt in Ship Collision, Fire". New York Daily News. pp. 44. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Manhattan Span to Be Revamped; Two Upper Roadways to Be Rebuilt to Carry Trucks – Cost Is $7,005,980". The New York Times. October 25, 1959. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. "Low Bid for Bridge Job; $6,377,000 Offer Sent to City for Road on Manhattan Span". The New York Times. January 7, 1960. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "Postpone Bridge Repair to April". The Williamsburg News. December 22, 1961. p. 6. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "Bridge Facelift Starts Sept. 6". New York Daily News. August 3, 1960. p. 454. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "New Bridge Schedule; Traffic on Manhattan Span Moves to Brooklyn Lanes". The New York Times. November 10, 1961. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Ingraham, Joseph C. (June 1, 1961). "Progress Taking a Sledge to Bridge Art Here; Moses Applies for Demolition of Ornamental Masonry Statuary Must Yield to Make Way for Reconstruction". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "Museum Head Moves to Rescue Art Works at Manhattan Bridge". Brooklyn Heights Press. June 8, 1961. p. 1. Retrieved January 16, 2024. Vines, Francis X. (March 25, 1971). "Lower Manhattan Road Killed Under State Plan". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "Manhattan Bridge Is Given Reprieve For Its Ornaments". The New York Times. June 13, 1961. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "City Art Board Orders Transfer Of Bridge Sculpture to Museum". The New York Times. July 7, 1961. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "Mayor to Ask $41 Million for Sewage Plant". New York Daily News. November 21, 1962. p. 25. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "Highways Unit Accepting Bids for Bridge Access". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. May 17, 1963. p. 3. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "Repair Work Will Curtail Manhattan Bridge Traffic". The New York Times. August 2, 1969. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 22, 2024. "Repairs for 2 City Bridges". The New York Times. November 24, 1970. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 22, 2024; "One Way on Bridge". Daily News. November 24, 1970. p. 36. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Within, Richard (April 15, 1973). "Shift on Emission May Cost Drivers". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. Dembart, Lee (June 16, 1977). "Broad Parking Ban in Manhattan Begins as Mayor Yields to Ruling". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017. Witkin, Richard (March 13, 1971). "City Bridge-Toll Plans". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 29, 2022. "Bridge Toll Study". Newsday. April 22, 1970. p. 13. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 916064041. "He Calls Toll on Bridges a Benefit to Straphangers". New York Daily News. May 24, 1971. p. 314. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Weisman, Steven R. (August 6, 1977). "Beame, U.S. Reach an 'Understanding' on a Parking Ban". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017. "2 Federal Agencies Clash on a Toll Plan For River Bridges". The New York Times. June 12, 1976. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Morehouse, Ward III (September 22, 1981). "Historic New York bridges in need of major repair: State seeks federal assistance, new technology for structural rehabilitation". The Christian Science Monitor. p. 9. ISSN 0882-7729. ProQuest 512217520; Steele, Ned (June 30, 1981). "Troubled waters for bridges". New York Daily News. pp. 5, 55. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Lichtenstein, Grace (March 27, 1978). "New York Bridges Aren't Falling, but Some Are Crumbling". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Steele, Ned; Rosenthal, Sharon (July 5, 1981). "New York's troubled bridges over water". Daily News. p. 100. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Browne, Arthur (March 14, 1978). "Finds 4 E. River Spans Need Fix Fast". Daily News. p. 194. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Goldman, Ari L. (June 30, 1981). "Brooklyn Bridge to Get New Set of Steel Cables". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Sims, Calvin (March 1, 1991). "Bridge Troubles Are Linked To a Lack of Coordination". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. Gordy, Margaret (December 18, 1987). "Manhattan Bridge Cracks Force Bus, Truck Limits. Weary Landmark Nearly in Its 80s". Newsday. p. 3. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 277898669. Dallas, Gus (April 12, 1987). "Bridge men were hung up on quality". Daily News. pp. 748, 749. Retrieved February 22, 2024. "Extensive Inspection of 6 New York City Bridges Scheduled by State". The New York Times. March 26, 1978. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023; "City Bridges To Be Repaired, Governor Says". Newsday. March 26, 1978. p. 19Q. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 964216095. Goldman, Ari L. (November 1, 1981). "U.S. Picks up a Repair Bill for 2 Bridges". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. Seaton, Charles (November 17, 1983). "Replacing bridge not ruled out". Daily News. p. 140. Retrieved January 25, 2024. Lieberman, Mark (March 31, 1982). "5.7M okayed for bridge job". Daily News. p. 92. Retrieved January 25, 2024. Pierre-Pierre, Garry (April 10, 1996). "Neglect of Manhattan Bridge Takes Toll in Time and Money". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "Riders' service has been abridged". Daily News. May 26, 1982. pp. 2, 24. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Milligan, Susan; Sisk, Richard (December 18, 1987). "Manhattan Bridge is cracking up". Daily News. p. 343. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Boorstin, Robert O. (November 8, 1986). "Manhattan Bridge's Problems Drag on". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 21, 2024. "The City; $60 Million Given For Bridge Repairs". The New York Times. October 7, 1985. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Sisk, Richard (August 3, 1985). "Subway Delays Due". Daily News. p. 5. Retrieved February 21, 2024; "Repairs to Divert 2 IND Runs". The New York Times. August 4, 1985. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 21, 2024. "Repair of the Subway Tracks On Manhattan Bridge Is Done". The New York Times. The Associated Press. November 2, 1985. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 21, 2024. "Repairs to Close Part Of Manhattan Bridge". The New York Times. April 14, 1986. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. Gordy, Margaret (March 18, 1987). "City In Bridge Battle". Newsday. p. 9. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 285418415. Seaton, Charles (April 16, 1986). "Bridge work a road block". Daily News. p. 171. Retrieved February 21, 2024. "Subway Track Work To Divert BMT Lines". The New York Times. April 26, 1986. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017; Sisk, Richard (April 11, 1986). "In the alphabet soup". Daily News. p. 8. Retrieved February 21, 2024. Dallas, Gus (April 12, 1987). "Why gridlock will span city; Bridge-fix project will be a true traffic-stopper". Daily News. pp. 579, 580, 581. Retrieved January 4, 2024; Brooke, James (July 29, 1986). "Subway Delays Expected to Last Until Early '88". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 21, 2024. Gordy, Margaret (November 9, 1986). "Manhattan Bridge Work Worries TA". Newsday. p. 21. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 285419460. "A Lane on the Manhattan Bridge Is Closed". The New York Times. December 18, 1987. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "17 Key Bridges With Structural Problems". The New York Times. April 18, 1988. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. Gordy, Molly (August 17, 1988). "Work to Stop Halfway On Bridge Rehab". Newsday. p. 3. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 277966538. Johnson, Kirk (August 18, 1988). "Halt Is Planned In Bridge Work Over East River". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Gordy, Molly (December 9, 1988). "All Lanes Open Today On Manhattan Bridge". Newsday. p. 2. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278082782. Retrieved February 21, 2024. Gordy, Molly (December 7, 1988). "Big Subway Changes Start Sunday 640,000 will be affected". Newsday. p. 4. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278125858; Johnson, Kirk (December 9, 1988). "Big Changes For Subways Are to Begin". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Gordy, Molly (February 1, 1989). "Manhattan Bridge Shut for Repairs". Newsday. p. 3. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278097472; "Another Headache". The New York Times. February 2, 1989. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 110195148. Gordy, Molly (February 2, 1989). "Officials Delayed Repairs To Bridge Two Years Ago". Newsday. p. 6. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278121052. "Crossing 'em off before they fall". Daily News. March 19, 1989. p. 155. Retrieved February 22, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge work due to start". Daily News. September 1, 1989. p. 18. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Sims, Calvin (December 17, 1990). "Corrosion's Rise Imperils Bridges Over East River". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Hartocullis, Anemona (February 11, 1991). "Bridges, Flags and Politics". Newsday. pp. 3, 20, 21. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Sims, Calvin (January 8, 1991). "New York Reopened Bridge Subway Line In Spite of Warnings". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 18, 2010. Hevesi, Dennis (December 28, 1990). "Hazards Halt Manhattan Bridge Subway Line". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 22, 2024; Oestreicher, David J. (December 28, 1990). "More bridge problems? Rust assured, new York". Daily News. p. 4. Retrieved February 22, 2024; Moss, Michael (December 28, 1990). "Mishaps, Structure Trouble Reroute Trains". Newsday. p. 37. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Sims, Calvin (February 15, 1991). "Bridge Section To Close Again To Fix Supports". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Henneberger, Melinda (January 26, 1991). "DOT Stalled Probe, Council Aide Says". Newsday. p. 9. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278341466; Sims, Calvin (January 11, 1991). "New York Dismisses Official Who Attacked Bridge Cuts". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 18, 2010; Sims, Calvin (January 12, 1991). "2d Official In Bridge Unit Is Discharged". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 22, 2010. Stanley, Alessandra; Sims, Calvin (January 14, 1991). "Bridge Battle: Clashes and Flurry of Memos". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 22, 2010. Lee, Felicia R. (January 30, 1991). "Council Given Data It Sought, Deputy Mayor Says". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 18, 2010; Sims, Calvin (January 31, 1991). "Memos Not Released by Dinkins Are Said to Call Bridges Unsafe". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 18, 2010. Henneberger, Melinda (March 1, 1991). "Panel Hears Bridge Safety Dispute". Newsday. p. 8. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278339673. "City Posts Further Closings For Lower Manhattan Bridge". Newsday. January 10, 1991. p. 29. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278316498; Sims, Calvin (January 4, 1991). "Truck Ban Is Announced For a Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. Moss, Michael (April 14, 1992). "1 Pothole, River View Gap snarls E. River span". Newsday. p. 23. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278466759. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Bunch, William (January 18, 1992). "3 Years to Fix Manhattan Bridge". Newsday. p. 11. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278473672; "Repairs Planned for the Manhattan Bridge". The New York Times. January 19, 1992. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Weber, Bruce (August 1, 1992). "City Prepares Closer Watch On a Bridge". The New York Times. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Henneberger, Melinda (May 13, 1992). "No Bridge Work? Holtzman seeks to ax bid". Newsday. p. 6. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278514453; Sims, Calvin (May 13, 1992). "Contractor Is Labeled As Corrupt". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. Fritsch, Jane (August 3, 1992). "Company In Bid-Rig Suit To Fix Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. Stanley, Bruce; Moss, Michael (July 31, 1992). "1 Pothole, River View Gap snarls E. River span". Newsday. p. 3. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278531409; Weber, Bruce (August 1, 1992). "City Prepares Closer Watch On a Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. Fisher, Ian (August 18, 1993). "For Homeless, A Last Haven Is Demolished". The New York Times. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Pierre-Pierre, Garry (August 30, 1996). "After 3 Years Of Repairs, Deck of Bridge Set to Reopen". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. Schatz, Robin (April 26, 1993). "3 Years to Fix Manhattan Bridge". Newsday. p. 35. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278624192; Jaffe, Susan (April 19, 1993). "Lead protection: Bridge rehab becomes health lab". Engineering News-Record. Vol. 230, no. 16. p. 31. ProQuest 235655321. Kennedy, Randy (December 3, 2001). "On the East River, A Big Fixer-Upper; Repair Work Is Monumental On an Oddly Designed Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "New York: Part Of Manhattan Bridge To Close". The New York Times. August 1, 2002. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Newman, Andy (June 26, 2001). "Cyclists and Walkers Regain a Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 24, 2010. Robbins, Christopher (June 4, 2014). "Even The DOT Is Confused About Where To Walk On The Manhattan Bridge". Gothamist. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved January 30, 2016. "Manhattan Bridge Rehabilitation of the Lower Roadway – Contract 11". www.usa.skanska.com. Retrieved April 12, 2021. Lee, Denny (May 13, 2001). "Neighborhood Report: Lower East Side; For This Arch, the Triumph Was to Hide the Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 5, 2020. "Manhattan Bridge Centennial Celebration Events and Exhibits". NYC Bridge Centennial Commission. Archived from the original on February 28, 2012. Retrieved February 21, 2010. American Society of Civil Engineers Metropolitan Section (2016). "Manhattan Bridge". Historic Landmarks. New York City: American Society of Civil Engineers Metropolitan Section. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Campbell, Andy (July 20, 2010). "Bridge Two Far! Manhattan, Like Brooklyn, Span to Undergo Long Renovation". Brooklyn Paper. Retrieved April 12, 2021. "Roadway Reversals Officially Over on Manhattan Bridge". Spectrum News NY1. August 3, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Leon, Alexandra (December 16, 2015). "It Was Mistake to Allow 24-Hour Left Turns at Manhattan Bridge, CB2 Says". DNAinfo New York. Retrieved January 13, 2024; Gill, Lauren (December 17, 2015). "Con-dis-cord Street: New Manhattan Bridge exit plagues residential road". Brooklyn Paper. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Gill, Lauren (March 21, 2016). "City puts brakes on Manhattan Bridge exit that is so bad a family moved to Jersey to get away from it". Brooklyn Paper. Retrieved January 13, 2024; Santore, John V. (March 22, 2016). "No More Left Turns Onto Concord From Manhattan Bridge (Except at Rush Hour)". Fort Greene-Clinton Hill, NY Patch. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Gannon, Devin (October 5, 2018). "$80M in additional repairs planned for 109-year-old Manhattan Bridge". 6sqft. Retrieved April 12, 2021. "New York awards Manhattan Bridge refurb to Skanska". www.theconstructionindex.co.uk. October 4, 2018. Retrieved April 12, 2021. Young, Michelle (November 18, 2019). "The Manhattan Bridge Globes Have Begun to Reappear". Untapped New York. Retrieved April 12, 2021. National Park Service 1983, p. 2. "NOAA National Ocean Service Coast Survey Navigational Chart #12335: Hudson and East Rivers, Governors Island to 67th Street" (PDF). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. October 1, 2019. Retrieved January 24, 2020. Landmarks Preservation Commission 2007, p. 87. Scientific American 1908a, p. 77. "Distinctive Features of New York's New Bridge". Improvement Bulletin. No. v. 30. Chapin Publishing Company. February 25, 1905. p. 13. "Pushing Work on Brooklyn and Manhattan Anchorages of the Manhattan Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 14, 1906. p. 23. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Jackson, Kenneth T., ed. (2010). The Encyclopedia of New York City (2nd ed.). New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 791. ISBN 978-0-300-11465-2. Winpenny, Thomas R. (1996). Without fitting, filing, or chipping: an illustrated history of the Phoenix Bridge Company. Easton, PA: Canal History and Technology Press. pp. 82–83. ISBN 0-930973-15-1. Yanve, Bojidar; Gill, Brian (2016). Alampalli, Sreenivas; Moreau, William J. (eds.). Inspection, evaluation and maintenance of suspension bridges: case studies. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group. p. 10. ISBN 978-1-4665-9689-4. Edelsburg & Cane 1956, p. 278. "NYC DOT – Manhattan Bridge". www1.nyc.gov. Retrieved August 5, 2020. "Report on Traffic Plan for Bridge". Times Union. July 12, 1907. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024; "Utilities Board Goes to 4th Av. Route To-day". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 12, 1907. p. 3. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Contracts for Manhattan Bridge to Be Awarded Next Month". The Standard Union. July 14, 1905. p. 12. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Scientific American 1908a, p. 78. Reier 2012, p. 55. Edelsburg & Cane 1956, p. 127. Edelsburg & Cane 1956, p. 129. Gimsing, N.J.; Georgakis, C.T. (2011). Cable Supported Bridges: Concept and Design. Wiley. pp. 12–13. ISBN 978-1-119-95187-2. Xu, You Lin; Xia, Yong (2011). Structural Health Monitoring of Long-Span Suspension Bridges. Taylor & Francis. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-415-59793-7. Richman, S.M. (2005). The Bridges of New Jersey: Portraits of Garden State Crossings. Rutgers University Press. p. 116. ISBN 978-0-8135-3782-5. Engineering Record, Building Record and Sanitary Engineer 1904, p. 332. "The Manhattan Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 6, 1908. p. 4. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Architects' and Builders' Magazine 1904, p. 553. "Gossip of the Borough: Work of Weaving Strands on Manhattan Bridge Soon to Begin". New-York Tribune. July 12, 1908. p. C6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572129360. "Bridge Cables Strung: Important Part of the New Structure Completed in Record Time". New-York Tribune. August 15, 1909. p. C6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572294694. Edelsburg & Cane 1956, p. 130. "How the New Bridge Will Be Constructed". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. June 18, 1906. p. 3. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Architects' and Builders' Magazine 1904, p. 550. Reier 2012, p. 54. Landmarks Preservation Commission 2007, p. 86. Architects' and Builders' Magazine 1904, p. 551. Schuyler, Montgomery (1909). "Our Four Big Bridges" (PDF). Architectural Record. Vol. XXV, no. 3. p. 160. "The Archway Manhattan Bridge Anchorage". Marvel. Retrieved January 21, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Approaches Done: Touring Bureau of the Three a's Says This Now Forms Best Route to Brooklyn". The New York Times. November 15, 1914. p. XX5. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 97527021. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "The Borough of Manhattan Approach to Manhattan Bridge No. 3, New York; Messrs. Carrere & Hastings, Architects". American Architect and Architecture. Vol. 102, no. 1. July 1912. pp. 61–62. Macaulay-Lewis 2021, p. 18. Landmarks Preservation Commission 1975, p. 2. Macaulay-Lewis 2021, pp. 19–20. Macaulay-Lewis 2021, pp. 18–19. Macaulay-Lewis 2021, p. 19. Macaulay-Lewis 2021, p. 23. Landmarks Preservation Commission 1975, p. 3. "To Beautify Manhattan Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 7, 1912. p. 12. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Stern, Gilmartin & Massengale 1983, p. 52. "Diana May Crown Manhattan Bridge; Commissioner Mills Proposes Arch at New York End of the Span as a Suitable Site". The New York Times. March 18, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024; "Diana May Adorn Arch of Manhattan Bridge". Times Union. March 18, 1925. p. 33. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Subway Excavation Weakens Project". The New York Times. May 22, 1975. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 5, 2020. "Landmark Status Voted For 5 Places in City". The New York Times. November 26, 1975. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 5, 2020. White, Norval & Willensky, Elliot (2000). AIA Guide to New York City (4th ed.). New York: Three Rivers Press. p. 82. ISBN 978-0-8129-3107-5. "Proud and Militant Manhattan To Patronize Domestic Brooklyn: Heroic Size Statues. Typifying Characteristics of Both Boroughs, at Across River Approach to Manhattan Bridge Will Aid in Making Plaza Beautiful". New-York Tribune. April 11, 1915. p. 5. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 575405714. "To Place Bridge Statues.: Figures by D. C. French Are Almost Ready for Manhattan Structure". The New York Times. April 11, 1915. p. 13. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 97806010. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Walker Praises Gaynor at Unveiling Of Memorial to Him: Mayor Extols Predecessor's "Philosophical Mind" When Bust Is Dedicated at the Manhattan Bridge". The New York Herald, New York Tribune. May 13, 1926. p. 12. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1112926396; "Gaynor Memorial Presented to City; Bronze Bust of Late Mayor Is Unveiled at Brooklyn End of Manhattan Bridge". The New York Times. May 13, 1926. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Monument to Gaynor Dedicated at New Site: Daughter Unveils Bust of Former Mayor". New York Herald Tribune. February 24, 1939. p. 19A. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1247806077; "Tablet to Gaynor Moved to Plaza". New York Daily News. February 22, 1939. p. 324. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Google (June 25, 2018). "Manhattan Bridge" (Map). Google Maps. Google. Retrieved June 25, 2018. "Nathan Proposes Crosstown Road; Wants Two-Decked Structure From West Side Highway to Manhattan Bridge". The New York Times. May 16, 1944. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Wright, George Cable (September 19, 1958). "New Roads With New Numbers Will Parallel Old U.S. Routes". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 26, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. New York State Department of Transportation (January 1, 1970). Description of Touring Routes in New York State for the Interstate (I), Federal (U.S.) and State (N.Y.) Route Number Systems (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved March 26, 2009. "Build X-way Now, Moses Urges". Daily News. November 15, 1965. p. 85. Retrieved January 22, 2024. New York State Department of Transportation (January 2017). Official Description of Highway Touring Routes, Bicycling Touring Routes, Scenic Byways, & Commemorative/Memorial Designations in New York State (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on January 10, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2017. "MANHATTAN BRIDGE WALKWAY". forgotten-ny.com. July 6, 2001. Retrieved August 31, 2020. "Wants to Use Manhattan Bridge". New-York Tribune. March 6, 1909. p. 4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572167278. "Rival Traction Line: Triborough in Field Wants Manhattan Bridge Franchise as Beginning". New-York Tribune. May 1, 1909. p. 14. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572276748. "Manhattan Bridge 3-cent Line Granted a Certificate: Application Still Before Board of Estimate—other Lines in Brooklyn Did Not Offer to Run Cars to the Hudson at 5-cent Fare". The Wall Street Journal. July 13, 1910. p. 6. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 129198462; "Subway Extension Soon: Broadway-lexington Route Bids to Be Ready in September". New-York Tribune. July 13, 1910. p. 14. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572378687. "Three-Cent-Fare Line Takes Step Forward". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 29, 1911. p. 2. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Two 3-Cent Bridge Lines – Brooklyn & North River Railroad Also to Cross Manhattan Bridge" (PDF). The New York Times. April 3, 1912. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "Brooklyn & North River Road: Permission Given to Operate Across the Manhattan Bridge From Flatbush Avenue". The Wall Street Journal. August 15, 1912. p. 6. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 129331396; "Two Lines to Brooklyn: Permission Granted to Run Cars on Manhattan Bridge". The New York Times. August 15, 1912. p. 7. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 97317725. "3-cent Line Wins in Bridge Fight: Hayward Bids North River Co. Not to Engage in "Undue Competition."". New-York Tribune. June 4, 1916. p. 14. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 575588903. "Trolley Line on Manhattan Bridge Going". The Brooklyn Citizen. November 9, 1929. p. 2. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Calta, Louis (October 17, 1973). "A Second Culture Bus to Loop Brooklyn and Lower Manhattan". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 22, 2024. "Culture Bus a Victim of Too Few Riders; Culture Buses Dropped For Lack of Ridership". The New York Times. March 13, 1982. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Anderson, Susan Heller; Dunlap, David W. (April 4, 1986). "New York Day by Day; Busing From Brooklyn". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Mann, Ted (July 19, 2012). "MTA Readies Bus Revival; Two Years After Major Service Cuts, Commuters See More Buses and New Routes". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved January 22, 2024. "Manhattan Bus Map" (PDF). Metropolitan Transportation Authority. July 2019. Retrieved December 1, 2020.; "Brooklyn Bus Map" (PDF). Metropolitan Transportation Authority. October 2020. Retrieved December 1, 2020. "Subway Service Guide" (PDF). Metropolitan Transportation Authority. September 2019. Retrieved September 22, 2019. Dougherty, Peter (2006) [2002]. Tracks of the New York City Subway 2006 (3rd ed.). Dougherty. OCLC 49777633 – via Google Books. "Brooklyn Tie-up to Last Till 1961; Flatbush Avenue Extension Is Bane for Drivers but Boon for BMT Riders". The New York Times. July 4, 1959. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 25, 2020. Perlmutter, Emanuel (November 16, 1967). "Subway Changes to Speed Service: Major Alterations in Maps, Routes and Signs Will Take Effect Nov. 26" (PDF). The New York Times. p. 1. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 7, 2015. Zinman, David (June 20, 1993). "Approve Survey of LIRR-Subway Link". Newsday. p. 7. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 915541855; Patterson, Neal (November 16, 1965). "LIRR Would Roll to Wall St. Area in a BMT Linkup". Daily News. p. 330. Retrieved January 22, 2024. "$250,000,000 Subway Plans Recommended – Committee to Report General Scheme to Rapid Transit Board – For Baxter Street Loop – Alternative Plans for Bridge Relief Submitted – Three Routes Proposed for East Side Subway" (PDF). The New York Times. March 1, 1905. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 23, 2017. "Subway Loop Approved; Will Have Four Tracks" (PDF). The New York Times. 1907. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "Interborough Has New Railroad Plan; Offers to Build and Equip a Line Between Flatbush Avenue and Canal Street, Manhattan". The New York Times. May 27, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on May 7, 2023. Retrieved May 16, 2023; "May Rival B. R. T.: Interborough's Offer Willing to Build Subway in Brooklyn and Give Five-cent Fare Advantage to Brooklynites Metz Opposed to Monopoly B. R. T. Won't Make Proposal". New-York Tribune. May 27, 1908. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572083800. "Would Four-Track Flatbush Extension". Times Union. September 20, 1907. p. 1. Retrieved January 12, 2024; "BRT Wants L Tracks to Manhattan Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 20, 1907. p. 5. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Asks to Start Work on Bridge Subway – Service Board Says Metz's Figures Show City Able to Build All of Fourth Ave. Route – Bridge Loop for the City – Board Would Retain Control Owing to Its Strategic Advantages – $1,500,000 More Would Add Greatly to Its Capacity" (PDF). The New York Times. March 1, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. "City's Finances Make Subways Impossible". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. January 25, 1909. p. 18. Retrieved January 10, 2024; "Bassett Suggests Two Other Routes". The Standard Union. February 17, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "Now Ready to Build Tri-Borough Subway – Bradley-Gaffney-Steers Syndicate Incorporates to Join Brooklyn and Bronx – Canal Street Link First – Thence to Flatbush Over Manhattan Bridge – Broadway and Lexington Avenue Line to Come Later" (PDF). The New York Times. May 1, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 24, 2017. The Bankers' and Investors' Manual. Commercial Newspaper Company. 1924. p. 839. Cunningham, Joseph; DeHart, Leonard O. (January 1, 1993). A History of the New York City Subway System. J. Schmidt, R. Giglio, and K. Lang. Edelsburg & Cane 1956, p. 280. Perlmutter, Emanuel (November 27, 1967). "BMT-IND Changes Bewilder Many; Transit Authority Swamped With Calls From Riders as New System Starts". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2015. Goldman, Ari L. (August 4, 1983). "Brooklyn Trains Will Be Delayed in Bridge Repair". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 25, 2024; Seaton, Charles (August 8, 1983). "Subway bridge delays start". Daily News. p. 72. Retrieved January 25, 2024. "The City; Manhattan Bridge Reopens for IND". The New York Times. November 15, 1983. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 25, 2024; "What Else Is News". Daily News. November 14, 1983. p. 201. Retrieved January 25, 2024. The Associated Press (November 2, 1985). "Repair of the Subway Tracks On Manhattan Bridge Is Done". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 25, 2024. "Update: Those Weeklong Repairs May Be Done by '95". The New York Times. May 17, 1992. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 18, 2010. Lemire, Jonathan; Donohue, Pete (July 25, 2001). "Big Crush at Subway Station With Reroutings". New York Daily News. p. 3. ISSN 2692-1251. ProQuest 305613525; Dewan, Shaila K. (July 23, 2001). "For Riders, Many Riddles, Written in Q's, D's and W's". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 16, 2023. Luo, Michael (February 20, 2004). "A Subway Map Remade, in Hopes of Matching Routes and Riders". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 5, 2016. McGeehan, Patrick (September 12, 2014). "Subway Tunnel to Open, Storm Repairs Finished". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved September 13, 2014. "Real Estate Situation Is Being Revolutionized". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. March 1, 1908. p. 36. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "In the Big Warehouse Zone". New-York Tribune. January 24, 1909. p. 12. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "More Ferries Lose Traffic; Manhattan Bridge Opening Compels Union Co. to Lay Off Three Crews". The New York Times. March 31, 1910. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Big Jewish Colony for South Brooklyn". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 31, 1909. p. 5. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Real Estate Market Normal for August". Times Union. August 8, 1908. p. 3. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Manufacturing Centre Created at Manhattan Bridge Plaza in Brooklyn". The New York Times. December 23, 1917. p. 31. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 99864517. Retrieved January 11, 2024. See, for example: "City Land Leased for Big Project; Square Block Under Manhattan Bridge Is Taken for a 20-Year Term". The New York Times. August 27, 1920. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 13, 2024; "Says Paper Trucks Got City Space Free; Area Under Manhattan Bridge Reported Used by Truckmen Whom Hearst Employs". The New York Times. June 3, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Ferris, John (May 24, 1942). "Odd Chinese Theater Thrives In New York: Hawkers Cry Their Wares, Audiences Seemingly Indifferent Drift In and Out, Children Play Gleefully in the Aisles as Oriental Actors Go Through Their Age-Old Roles". The Hartford Courant. p. A1. ISSN 1047-4153. ProQuest 559635986; "Theatre in Chinatown; Under Manhattan Bridge Flourishes the City's One Chinese Theatre". The New York Times. February 15, 1942. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Kennedy, Shawn G. (July 31, 1983). "Under Manhattan Bridge, a Mall". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Barnard, Anne (December 25, 2007). "District Trying to Forge a New Identity". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Hughes, C. J. (January 16, 2019). "Dumbo, Brooklyn: Preserved in Amber. Sort Of". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Berman, Avis (March 27, 2005). "Unblinking Witness to a Moody Town". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 7, 2020. The Arch and Colonnade of the Manhattan Bridge Approach (PDF) (Report). New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission. November 25, 1975. Dumbo Historic District (PDF) (Report). New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission. December 18, 2007. Edelsburg, Edward; Cane, Philip (February 1956). "First Aid for an Ailing bridge". Popular Mechanics. Hearst Magazines. ISSN 0032-4558. "Erection of the Manhattan Bridge Across the East River". Scientific American. Vol. XCVIII, no. 5. February 1, 1908. ProQuest 126797944. Manhattan Bridge (PDF) (Report). National Register of Historic Places, National Park Service. July 13, 1981. Retrieved April 12, 2021. Macaulay-Lewis, Elizabeth (2021). Antiquity in Gotham: The Ancient Architecture of New York City. Fordham University Press. ISBN 978-0-8232-9384-1. OCLC 1176326519. "The New Manhattan Bridge; A Bridge Beautiful As Well As Useful". Architects' and Builders' Magazine. Vol. 36, no. 12. September 1904. pp. 547–554. Reier, Sharon (2012). The Bridges of New York. New York City. Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-13705-6. Ripley, Charles M. (May 1, 1907). "Anchorage for Brooklyn Bridge No. 3: the Pyramids of Egypt Versus the Manhattan Anchorage the Contractor's Plant". Concrete Engineering. ProQuest 128384678. Stern, Robert A. M.; Gilmartin, Gregory; Massengale, John Montague (1983). New York 1900: Metropolitan Architecture and Urbanism, 1890–1915. New York: Rizzoli. ISBN 0-8478-0511-5. OCLC 9829395. "Tower Foundations of the Manhattan Bridge Across the East River, New York City". Engineering Record, Building Record and Sanitary Engineer. Vol. 49, no. 11. McGraw Publishing Company. 1904. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Manhattan Bridge. Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) No. NY-127, "Manhattan Bridge" Manhattan Bridge at New York City DOT Manhattan Bridge Archived June 15, 2010, at the Wayback Machine at NYCsubway.org