The Baltic Assembly Prize for Literature, the Arts and Science is an award given annually by the Baltic Assembly for achievements in three categories: literature, art and science. The prize is an annual award given to a citizen of Estonia, Latvia or Lithuania "for outstanding achievements" in three categories: literature, art and science. It was awarded for the first time in 1994 and consists of a statuette, a diploma and a sum of money, presently (2016) 5,000 euro. It is awarded during the formal session of the assembly. A joint jury consisting of three persons per prize make the decision on whom to award the prize. The purpose of the award is according to the Baltic Assembly to "demonstrate the common interests of the countries in this region in upholding of their national identity and self-esteem; create an opportunity to learn about the achievements of the neighbouring countries; maintain a continuous interest among the people in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania about developments in the Baltic States; strengthen cooperation among the Baltic States in the fields of literature, the arts and science; encourage more and more people to become interested in the intellectual values and languages of the Baltic nations; and raise the level of literature, the arts and science in the Baltic States." The following list is based on the official webpage of the Baltic Assembly. The following list is based on the official webpage of the Baltic Assembly. The following list is based on the official webpage of the Baltic Assembly. List of European art awards "Baltic Assembly Prize for Literature, the Arts and Science". Baltic Assembly. Retrieved 5 November 2016. "Prize winners of the Baltic Assembly Prizes for Literature, the Arts and Science 2015". Baltic Assembly. Archived from the original on 5 November 2016. Retrieved 5 November 2016. "The Baltic Assembly". Riigikogu. Retrieved 5 November 2016. "Baltic Assembly Prize for Literature awarded to Māris Bērziņš". Saeima. Retrieved 5 November 2016. "Prize winners, 1994 – 2016". Baltic Assembly. Retrieved 5 November 2016.