The Queensboro Bridge, officially named the Ed Koch Queensboro Bridge, is a cantilever bridge over the East River in New York City. Completed in 1909, it connects the Long Island City neighborhood in the borough of Queens with the East Midtown and Upper East Side neighborhoods in Manhattan, passing over Roosevelt Island. The bridge is also known as the 59th Street Bridge. It consists of five steel spans measuring 3,725 ft (1,135 m) long; including approaches, its total length is 7,449 ft (2,270 m). The Queensboro Bridge carries New York State Route 25 (NY 25), which terminates at the bridge's western end in Manhattan. The bridge has two levels: an upper level with a pair of two-lane roadways, and a lower level with five vehicular lanes and a walkway/bike lane. The western leg of the Queensboro Bridge is flanked on its northern side by the Roosevelt Island Tramway. The Queensboro Bridge is the northernmost of four toll-free vehicular bridges connecting Manhattan Island to Long Island, along with the Williamsburg, Manhattan, and Brooklyn bridges to the south. It lies along the courses of the New York City Marathon and the Five Boro Bike Tour. Serious proposals for a bridge linking Manhattan to Long Island City were first made as early as 1838, but various 19th-century plans to erect such a bridge, including two proposals by Queens doctor Thomas Rainey, never came to fruition. After the creation of the City of Greater New York in 1898, plans for a city-operated bridge were finalized in 1901. The bridge opened for public use on March 30, 1909, and was initially used by pedestrians, motor vehicles, elevated trains, and trolleys. Elevated service ceased in 1942, followed by trolley service in 1957. The upper-level roadways were built in the early 1930s and the late 1950s. Designated as a New York City landmark in 1973, the bridge was renovated extensively from the late 1970s to the 1990s. The bridge was officially renamed in 2011 in honor of former New York City mayor Ed Koch, and another renovation occurred in the early 2020s. The Queensboro Bridge was originally named for the borough of Queens and was the third bridge across the East River to be named after a New York City borough, after the Brooklyn Bridge and the Manhattan Bridge. By the late 20th century, the Queensboro Bridge was also known as the 59th Street Bridge because its Manhattan end is located between 59th and 60th streets. This name caused controversy among Queens residents who felt that the 59th Street Bridge name did not honor the borough of Queens. In December 2010, mayor Michael Bloomberg announced that the bridge would be renamed in honor of former mayor Ed Koch; the bridge had been renovated extensively in the 1980s, when he was mayor. The Ed Koch Queensboro Bridge name was formalized on March 23, 2011. The renaming was unpopular among Queens residents and business leaders; The Los Angeles Times wrote that Queens residents found the renaming disrespectful to their borough. The general public continued to call it the Queensboro Bridge years after the renaming. New York City Council member Peter Vallone Jr. of Queens proposed removing Koch's name from the bridge in 2013. The Queensboro Bridge is a two-level double cantilever bridge, with separate cantilevered spans over channels on each side of Roosevelt Island joined by a fixed central truss. In all, it has five steel truss spans, as well as approach viaducts on either side. The total length of the five spans, between the anchorages on the Manhattan and Queens sides, are approximately 3,725 ft (1,135 m), of which 2,166 feet (660 m) are above water. In addition, there is a 1,052-foot-long (321 m) approach viaduct in Manhattan and a 2,588-foot-long (789 m) approach viaduct in Queens, connecting the anchorages on either side to street level. This brings the bridge's total length to 7,449 ft (2,270 m). The bridge carries New York State Route 25, which ends at the span's western terminus. The lengths of the steel spans are as follows, from the westernmost span to the easternmost: Manhattan anchorage to Manhattan pier: 469.5 ft (143.1 m) Manhattan pier to Roosevelt Island western pier (cantilever above the East River's west channel): 1,182 ft (360 m) Roosevelt Island western pier to Roosevelt Island eastern pier: 630 ft (190 m) Roosevelt Island eastern pier to Queens pier (cantilever above the East River's east channel): 984 ft (300 m) Queens pier to Queens anchorage: 459 ft (140 m) The bridge was intended to carry a dead load of 32,200 pounds per foot (47,900 kg/m). Each span includes two parallel lines of trusses, one each on the north and south sides of the bridge; the centers of these trusses are spaced 60 feet (18 m) apart. The bottom chord of each set of trusses is composed of box girders, while the top chord is composed of eyebars measuring 8 to 12 inches (200 to 300 mm) deep. The trusses range in height from 45 to 118 feet (14 to 36 m) between the bottom and top chords; the steel towers atop each pier measure 185 feet (56 m) tall. Unlike other large bridges, the trusses are not suspended; instead, the spans are directly connected to each other. In addition, there are transverse floor beams, which protrude 13 feet (4.0 m) from the trusses on either side of the deck. Atop the bridge's topmost chords were originally galvanized steel ropes, which acted as handrails for bridge painters. Five hand-operated scaffolds were also placed on the bridge. The spans are cantilevered from steel towers that rise above four central piers. Each cantilevered section measures 808 to 1,061 feet (246 to 323 m) long. The two spans above the East River's channels are composed of cantilever arms, which extend outward from the towers on either side of the channel. Each pair of cantilever arms meets at a set of bents above the middle of each channel. The bents allowed the cantilever arms to move horizontally due to temperature changes, and it allowed structural loads to be distributed between the two arms. The bridge uses nickel-steel bars that were intended to be 40 to 50 percent stronger than regular structural-steel bars of the same weight. The beams could withstand loads of up to 56,000 pounds (25,000 kg) each, while the nickel-steel eyebars were intended to withstand loads of up to 85,000 pounds (39,000 kg). The decks themselves were designed to carry as much as 16,000 pounds per foot (24,000 kg/m). The steel spans between the anchorages weigh a total of 52,000 short tons (46,000 long tons; 47,000 t) and have a maximum grade of 3.41 percent. The spans were intended to be at least 118 feet (36 m) above mean high water; the bridge reaches a maximum height of 135 feet (41 m) or 140 feet (43 m) above high mean water. Until it was surpassed by the Quebec Bridge in 1917, the span between Manhattan and Roosevelt Island was the longest cantilever in North America; it was also the second-longest worldwide, after the Forth Bridge in Scotland. The upper level is 67 feet (20 m) wide. The upper level originally contained two pedestrian walkways and two elevated railway tracks, which connected a spur of the IRT Second Avenue elevated line in Manhattan to the Queensboro Plaza station in Queens. There were also provisions for two additional tracks between the trusses (taking up the space occupied by the walkways), as well as 13-foot-wide (4.0 m) walkways cantilevered outside the trusses. As of 2023[update], the upper level has four lanes of automobile traffic, consisting of a pair of two-lane roadways. Although both roadways end at Thomson Avenue in Queens, they diverge in Manhattan. The two northern lanes, normally used by westbound traffic, lead to 62nd and 63rd Streets. The two southern lanes, normally used by eastbound traffic, lead to 57th and 58th Streets. The southern roadway is used as a westbound high-occupancy vehicle lane during morning rush hours, when all eastbound traffic uses the lower level. The lower level is 86 feet (26 m) wide and is divided into three sections: a northern, central, and southern roadway. The center roadway is 56 feet (17 m) wide and was originally composed of a 36-foot-wide (11 m) general-purpose road in the middle, flanked by a pair of trolley tracks. The northern and southern lower-level roadways each had one additional trolley track, for a total of four trolley tracks. The central roadwal originally had a wood block pavement. As of 2023[update], the lower level has five vehicular lanes: two in each direction within the center roadway and one eastbound lane on the southern roadway. The northern lower-level roadway was converted into a permanent pedestrian walk and bicycle path in September 2000. The five spans are supported by six piers; the westernmost and easternmost piers act as anchorages. Each of the piers consists of two columns supported by an elliptical arch measuring 50 feet (15 m) wide. The piers each measure 130 by 40 feet (40 by 12 m) across at their bases (including the arched openings). They range from 100 to 125 feet (30 to 38 m) tall, with the piers on Roosevelt Island being the tallest. The foundations of the Roosevelt Island piers are shallow, since there is bedrock just below the surface of the island. By comparison, the piers in Manhattan and Queens extend over 50 feet (15 m) deep. The piers are faced with Maine granite and are attached to a backing made of concrete and Mohawk Valley limestone. In total, workers used 14,000 cubic yards (11,000 m3) of limestone, 17,000 cubic yards (13,000 m3) of concrete, and 22,800 cubic yards (17,400 m3) of granite to build the bridges. Above the piers rise the bridge's towers, which contain domed decorations and Art Nouveau-inspired spires. The towers extend 185 feet (56 m) above the bridge's lower chords. The tops of the towers are made of 225 granite blocks, which were part of the original design but not added until 1937. The spires were removed at some point in the 20th century after deteriorating. The two anchorages, one each at the Manhattan and Queens ends, are about 500 feet (150 m) inland of the shore. Each anchorage was built with spiral staircases and elevators. The anchorage in Manhattan is between First Avenue and York Avenue, while the Queens anchorage is near Vernon Boulevard. The anchorages are topped by small rooms with arched openings. The approaches on both sides of the bridge are composed of stiffened steel frames, but the Manhattan approach is the only one that is ornately decorated. The Queens approach consists of a series of elevated concrete-and-steel ramps, which were never formally decorated. The Manhattan approach to the bridge is supported on a series of Guastavino tile vaults. The vaults are composed of three layers of tiles, which support themselves and measure 4 inches (100 mm) thick in total. A layer of glazing and small lights were installed in 1918. The space under the Manhattan approach measures 120 by 270 feet (37 by 82 m) across. It is divided into a series of tiled vaults measuring 30 by 30 feet (9.1 by 9.1 m) across. As the bridge ascends to the east, the floor slopes down and the ceiling slopes up; as such, the ceiling measures 60 feet (18 m) high at its highest point. The Guastavino tiles cover the steel superstructure of the approach ramp. Originally, the vaults were intended as storage space. From the bridge's 1909 opening, the space under the Manhattan approach was used as a food market. The food market was renovated in 1933 and was later converted to a sign shop and garage. By the 1970s, the space under the Manhattan approach was used by the Department of Highways. New York City Center's Cinematheque leased space under the Queensboro Bridge in 1973, although the Cinematheque never opened due to a lack of money. A developer proposed the open-air Bridgemarket under the bridge in 1976, which local residents significantly opposed, and Bridgemarket was not approved until 1996. Bridgemarket, covering 98,000 square feet (9,100 m2), opened in 1999 at a cost of $24 million. The store operated until the end of 2015. In February 2020, it was announced that Trader Joe's was planning to open a supermarket in this space, which opened in December 2021. There is a massive bronze lamppost at the end of the Manhattan approach, near the intersection of Second Avenue and 59th Street. Formerly, there was a second lamppost near 60th Street. Both lampposts consisted of thick piers, which were topped by four stanchions (each with a globe-shaped lamp) and a larger spherical lamp in the center. Each lamppost had five tiers of decorations, and the sides of each lamppost were inscribed with the names of four of the city's five boroughs. The lampposts were both removed in 1974 when the Roosevelt Island Tramway was developed, but the 59th Street lamppost was restored two years later. Parts of the other lamppost were found in a Queens warehouse in 2012 and rededicated on Roosevelt Island in 2015. Looking east from Manhattan toward Queens Bridgemarket on Manhattan side The Queensboro Bridge has been part of the New York City Marathon course since 1976, when the marathon course traversed all five boroughs for the first time. During the marathon, which happens every November, runners cross the Queensboro Bridge westbound toward Manhattan, then pass under the bridge at First Avenue. The bridge is approximately 15 miles (24 km) from the beginning of the course on the Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge. The deck of the bridge was initially covered with carpeting for the 1976 marathon; the carpeting was not used after 1977, when the bridge was repaved. The bridge is also part of the course of the Five Boro Bike Tour, which occurs every April; contestants traverse the bridge eastbound toward Queens. As of 2022[update], the Five Boro Bike Tour uses the northern upper-level roadway. Prior to the construction of the Queensboro Bridge, two ferries connected modern-day Manhattan and Queens, neither of which were near the modern-day bridge. One such ferry connected Borden Avenue in Hunters Point, Queens, to 34th Street in Kips Bay, Manhattan, while the other ferry connected Astoria Boulevard in Astoria, Queens, with 92nd Street on Manhattan's Upper East Side. Benjamin Henry Latrobe first proposed a masonry bridge between Manhattan and Queens in 1804. The Family Magazine published an article in 1833, suggesting a bridge between Manhattan and Queens over Roosevelt Island (which then was known as Blackwell's Island). An architect named R. Graves proposed a three-span suspension bridge linking Manhattan to Long Island City. Queens, in the late 1830s. John A. Roebling, who would later design the Brooklyn Bridge, proposed suspension bridges at the site in 1847 and 1856. An attempt to finance a fixed East River crossing was made in 1867 by wealthy Long Island City residents, who established the New-York and Long Island Bridge Company to erect the crossing. This group was led by Thomas Rainey, a doctor from Astoria. They hired William P. Trowbridge to design a cantilever bridge; he published the design in 1868 and modified it in 1873. The crossing would have connected 77th Street in Manhattan and 34th Avenue in Queens, passing over the center of Blackwell's Island. The New-York and Long Island Bridge Company appointed commissioners for the proposed bridge in 1875 and hosted an architectural design competition for the bridge in 1876. Eleven architects submitted designs. A cantilever design by Charles Macdonald and the Delaware Bridge Company was selected in early 1877. The Blackwell's Island Bridge, as it was known, would have carried railroad tracks and vehicular traffic on two levels. Despite assurances that the bridge could be completed in two years, no action had been taken by 1878, a year after the plans were approved. After half of the Blackwell's Island Bridge's $5 million cost had been raised, media sources reported in May 1881 that work was to commence shortly; a cofferdam for one of the bridge's piers was installed that month. By the next year, the cost had increased to $6.3 million. The United States Congress approved plans for the bridge in 1887. By then, Rainey's bridge had been relocated southward so its western terminus was near Lexington Avenue between 64th and 65th Streets. The city's dock commissioners voted in September 1888 to not let the New-York and Long Island Bridge Company construct an underwater pier for the bridge. The following year, Rainey sought to have the bridge relocated further north. A state justice found in 1890 that the bridge's charter was invalid. Nonetheless, Rainey's efforts to build the bridge made his name "a household word in western Long Island". By the 1890s, Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) president Austin Corbin had merged Rainey's plan and a competing plan. Rainey resubmitted plans for the bridge in early 1890. Although the proposal was supported by the New York State Legislature, the state's governor vetoed the plan. Rainey persisted, and the state legislature passed a bill in May 1892, mandating that construction commence by the following year The state legislature also gave Rainey a charter for the Blackwell's Island Bridge in mid-1892. Rainey requested the city's permission to purchase land on either side of Blackwell's Island in early 1893; at the time, he predicted that the span could be finished within three years. Rainey's group paid the city $15,000 for the right to use some land in Manhattan and on Blackwell's Island for piers. Corbin received an option to buy out Rainey's charter. A groundbreaking ceremony for the bridge was held at 64th Street in Manhattan on August 19, 1894. The span was planned as a cantilever bridge carrying four LIRR tracks, as well as roadways and footpaths. Real-estate developers predicted that the bridge would spur development on Long Island, and local media predicted that the bridge would increase real-estate values in Queens. By that November, two cofferdams were being sunk for the bridge's piers. Laborers began constructing foundations for another pier on the eastern shore of Blackwell Island in April 1895. Stone and steel contracts had been awarded by the following year, and two of the piers had been built above the water line. Construction was halted after the piers were built, first due to lawsuits, then because of Corbin's death. In 1897, the U.S. House of Representatives extended the timeline for the first bridge's completion to 1900 or 1902. Manhattan and Queens were merged into the City of Greater New York in 1898, spurring alternate plans for a bridge between Manhattan and Queens. New York Assembly members proposed separate bills in early 1898 to revoke Rainey's franchise for the bridge and to have the city purchase Rainey's franchise. Rainey vowed not to sell his franchise, but the state legislature passed a bill in March 1900 allowing the city to take over Rainey's franchise. Although Rainey himself eventually consented to the city's takeover of his franchise, mayor Robert Anderson Van Wyck wanted to build a new bridge in a slightly different location. A New York state senator introduced legislation in early 1897 to permit the development of a bridge between Manhattan and Queens; the city government was to pay for the bridge. At a meeting in Long Island City in February 1898, a group of men from both boroughs were appointed to consider plans for the bridge. The plan received endorsements from Queens' borough president, civic groups in the borough, and the Democratic Senatorial Convention. Several businessmen from Brooklyn wanted another bridge between their borough and Manhattan to be built first, as did city comptroller Bird S. Coler, who said Brooklyn was densely populated while Queens was still largely rural. By late 1898, Queens residents were threatening to not vote for the Democratic Party (of which Van Wyck was part) if the construction of the bridge did not begin shortly. The city allocated $100,000 for preliminary surveys and borings for the Blackwell's Island Bridge, as well as the Williamsburg Bridge between Manhattan and Brooklyn, at the end of 1898. In early 1899, R. S. Buck published plans for an asymmetrical cantilever bridge connecting Queens with Manhattan; the early plans called for a utilitarian design. The New York City Bridge Department's chief engineer finalized plans for the bridge in October 1899. Coler drew up a plan for a tunnel between Queens and Manhattan via Blackwell's Island; he claimed that the tunnel would cost $1.9 million, while the bridge would cost $13 million. The Board of Aldermen appropriated $1 million for the bridge at the end of 1899. State assemblyman Edward C. Brennan proposed a bill in January 1900 to appoint commissioners for a bridge or tunnel between Manhattan and Queens. The city's Municipal Assembly initially failed to authorize the bridge's construction due to opposition from Tammany Hall politicians. The bridge was approved that November; the bridge was relocated southward so its Manhattan end was near 60th Street. The United States Department of War, which had to certify the plans for the bridge before any work could begin, approved the span's construction in February 1901. Initially, the crossing was referred to as East River Bridge No. 4; the Board of Aldermen voted to officially rename it the Blackwell's Island Bridge in March 1902. R. S. Buck and his assistants were directed to prepare plans for the sites of the bridge's piers, anchorages, and foundations. The Department of Bridges received bids for the foundations in June 1901, with Ryan & Parker as the low bidder. Groundbreaking took place that September. After Seth Low was elected as the city's mayor in late 1901, he promised that work would continue, even though the city's new bridge commissioner, Gustav Lindenthal, wanted to temporarily halt construction. Lindenthal narrowed the bridge from 120 to 80 feet (37 to 24 m). The modifications would allow the city to save $850,000 while allowing the city to build toll booths, as well as stairs and elevators to Blackwell's Island, within these piers. To compensate for the reduced width, a 45-foot-wide (14 m) upper deck would be built. By January 1902, only $42,000 had been spent on the project. In June 1902, a subcommittee of the New York City Board of Estimate requested another $5 million for construction. The same month, Lindenthal ordered Ryan & Parker to stop working on the bridge, but the firm refused to comply with his order, saying they would lose large amounts of money if work were halted. Lindenthal submitted the modified plans to the Municipal Art Society for approval but withdrew them that July, and he also allowed Ryan & Parker to continue constructing the piers. Lindenthal decided to significantly modify his plans. Queens residents strongly protested any design changes, and Lindenthal finally agreed not to change the bridge's width. By mid-1902, Lindenthal was requesting an additional $3.78 million for the bridge's completion. In October, a special committee recommended that Lindenthal's plans be rejected, saying that it would cost the city more if construction were halted and that two other East River bridges were also about 120 feet wide. City comptroller Edward M. Grout, meanwhile, wanted workers to divert their efforts to the Manhattan Bridge. Low appointed a group of engineering experts that November to review Lindenthal's revised plans. The experts concluded that neither the original proposal nor Lindenthal's revision were sufficient and suggested that the bridge instead be 91 feet (28 m) wide. The approaches retained their original 120-foot width, as did the piers themselves. Henry Hornbostel was directed in early 1903 to prepare drawings of the bridge's towers and roadway, though no architectural contract had been awarded yet. By mid-1903, the piers were two-thirds completed. The bedrock under the Queens side of the bridge was very close to the ground, so work on the piers in Queens was able to proceed more rapidly than work on the other piers. The Board of Estimate appropriated an additional $3.86 million for the bridge's construction in July 1903. Low rejected a plan for widening 59th Street to serve as the bridge's Manhattan approach, and Queens residents disagreed over plans for the Queens approach. The final plans called for the Queens approach to end at Crescent Street; a new boulevard, Queens Plaza, would connect the approach to Jackson Avenue and Queens Boulevard. All of the piers were finished by May 1904, and city officials inspected the bridge's piers that July. The Pennsylvania Steel Company submitted a bid to construct the bridge's superstructure for $5.3 million in September 1903; Lindenthal rejected the bid, suspecting that the company was engaging in collusion. The city requested further bids for the superstructure the next month, but an injunction prevented Lindenthal from awarding a steel contract. The Pennsylvania Steel Company received the steel contract that November, and the Art Commission approved plans for the bridge's spires the same month. Just before Lindenthal left office, the city received bids for four elevator towers and two powerhouses for the bridge at the end of 1903; the powerhouses were to supply the elevators. These elevators were to be positioned within the ends of the piers, which would make it impossible to widen the piers at a later date. City corrections commissioner Francis J. Lantry opposed the elevators because they would allow prisoners on Blackwell's Island to escape. In early 1904, Lindenthal's successor George Best canceled plans for ornamentation on the bridge. The Pennsylvania Steel Company was obligated to complete the superstructure by the beginning of 1907, and it submitted drawings for the construction of the superstructure in mid-1904. Later that year, Best postponed construction of the bridge's elevators and power houses, and the city authorized another $400,000 for the bridge's construction. Local merchants protested the postponement of the elevators, saying it would not save money. Before work on the superstructure began, workers erected seventeen temporary 135-foot-tall (41 m) bents between the two piers on Blackwell's Island. When the bents were almost complete, ironworkers organized a sympathetic strike in June 1905, in solidarity with striking workers at the Pennsylvania Steel Company's Harrisburg factory. The work stoppage lasted a month, during which workers were not allowed to complete steel castings for the bridge. By that August, over 6,000 short tons (5,400 long tons; 5,400 t) of steel castings had been completed, and another 20,000 short tons (18,000 long tons; 18,000 t) of castings were being fabricated. There was not enough material to begin constructing the superstructure. There were so few workers on site, a local group estimated that the bridge would not be completed for fifty years. Work on the superstructure began later in 1905. By that November, workers had erected part of a steel tower atop the pier on the western side of Blackwell's Island; at the time, the media anticipated that 3,000 short tons (2,700 long tons; 2,700 t) of steel would be erected every month. The first steel span, that above Blackwell's Island, was completed at the beginning of 1906. After the Blackwell's Island span was finished, the falsework was moved to Manhattan and Queens, and the westernmost and easternmost spans were built atop the falsework. At that point, the city government had acquired much of the land for the approaches. The bridge's construction was delayed when the Housesmiths' Union went on strike that January. Unions representing other trades refused to join the strike, and the Pennsylvania Steel Company had replaced the striking workers by that May. The strike delayed construction by four months. City officials condemned a 250-foot-wide (76 m) strip of land for the Queens approach viaduct in October 1906. The city's Bridge Commission received bids for the construction of a steel approach viaduct in Queens in December 1906, and the Buckley Realty Construction Company submitted a low bid of $798,000. Work on the Queens approach began in February 1907. By then, about 45,000 short tons (40,000 long tons; 41,000 t) of steel for the bridge, representing nine-tenths of the steel contract, had been manufactured. Workers erected 512 tons of steel each day. To erect the two spans across the East River's west and east channels, they first built steel towers above each pier, then constructed the cantilever arms from each tower toward the center of the river. As such, the bridge was essentially built in three sections in Manhattan, Blackwell's Island, and Queens. By early 1907, the cost of acquiring land for the approaches had increased to $6 million, double the original estimate, and the cost of the entire bridge had increased to as much as $18 million. Snare & Triest submitted a low bid of $1.577 million for the construction of the Manhattan approach that May, and work on that approach began that July. After the collapse of the similarly-designed Quebec Bridge in mid-1907, engineers said they had no concerns about the Blackwell's Island Bridge. The steel towers above both of the Blackwell's Island piers had been completed and were being painted. That September, some beams at the eastern end of the bridge were blown into the river during a heavy windstorm. The same month, Maryland Steel Company submitted a low bid of $758,000 for a steel-and-masonry approach in Queens. Several buildings in Long Island City, including rowhouses and an old homestead, were demolished for the Queens approach. The easternmost steel span was well underway by the end of 1907, and work on the steel towers on the Manhattan and Queens waterfronts began that December. At the time, the bridge was more than 70 percent complete. Although Manhattan residents supported widening 59th Street to serve as the bridge's Manhattan approach, the city's controller was opposed. The project continued to experience labor disputes, such as in early 1908, when disgruntled workers tried to destroy the Blackwell's Island span with dynamite. The Manhattan and Blackwell's Island sections of the bridge were riveted together on March 13, 1908, and the Blackwell's Island and Queens sections were linked on March 18. The Board of Aldermen appropriated another $1.2 million for the bridge's completion shortly afterward; the project had cost $6.2 million up to that point. The New York City Department of Finance's chief engineer began investigating the bridge in May 1908 in response to concerns over its structural integrity, as the bridge was similar to the collapsed Quebec Bridge, and the plans had been modified after the contract for the superstructure had been awarded. That June, the Board of Estimate authorized $30,000 for two investigations into the bridge's safety. The Pennsylvania Steel Company formally completed the superstructure on June 16, 1908, eighteen months behind schedule. The Department of Bridges began receiving bids that July for paving and electrical equipment, and the approach viaducts were completed on August 17. The city refused to pay Pennsylvania Steel until 1912, when a judge forced them to do so. Businessmen proposed renaming the crossing as the Queensboro Bridge in September 1908, saying the Blackwell Island name was too closely associated with the island's hospitals and asylums. Despite several Irish-American groups' objections that the Queensboro name resembled a British name, it stuck. The structural engineers tasked with studying the bridge concluded that it was structurally sound, although the bridge was altered to carry two elevated tracks rather than four. There was still skepticism over the bridge's structural integrity, and the Bridge Department planned to remove some heavy stringers from the upper deck to reduce the bridge's dead load. Paving of the bridge's decks was completed in January 1909. In total, the crossing had cost about $20 million, including $12.6 million for spans and over $5 million for land acquisition. One newspaper had estimated that 55 workers had been killed during construction. In February 1909, the Celebration Committee set June 12 as the bridge's official opening date, and two grand parades were planned for the bridge's official opening. The lights on the bridge were first turned on March 28, and the bridge opened to the public two days later on March 30, 1909. The upper deck's tracks were not in service because engineers had deemed them unsafe for use. The Queensboro Bridge formally opened as scheduled on June 12, 1909; at the time, it was the fourth-longest bridge in the world. The grand opening included a fireworks display, a parade lasting several hours, a "Queen of the Queensboro Bridge" beauty pageant in a local newspaper, and a week of carnivals. During late 1909, the Williams Engineering and Contracting Company sued the city for damages relating to the unbuilt elevators on Blackwell's Island, and there was another lawsuit over its safety. There was a ten-cent toll to drive over the bridge, although pedestrians walked across for free. Shortly after the Queensboro Bridge opened, the city government conducted a study and found that it had no authority to charge tolls on the Queensboro and Manhattan bridges. Tolls on the Queensboro Bridge, as well as the Williamsburg, Manhattan, and Brooklyn bridges to the south, were abolished in July 1911 as part of a populist policy initiative headed by New York City mayor William Jay Gaynor. A bridge approach between Second and Third avenues in Manhattan was proposed in 1913, and plans for elevated rapid transit on the upper level were approved at the same time. By that year, the bridge carried 29 million people a year (compared to 3.6 million during 1909). Horse-drawn vehicles made up almost 30 percent of the bridge's total vehicular traffic in the early 1910s, although this proportion dropped to less than 2 percent within a decade. In mid-1914, engineers devised plans to add two subway tracks to the lower level and replace the existing roadway with a pair of 26-foot-wide (7.9 m) roadways on the upper and lower levels. The upper roadway would have connected to Van Alst Avenue (21st Street) in Queens; one company proposed constructing the deck in 18 months. The subway plans were ultimately dropped in favor of the 60th Street Tunnel. In early 1916, the New York City government allocated $144,000 for repairs to the roadway, as it had never been repaved and was full of holes and ruts. A new foundation was installed to slow down the decay of the wooden pavement. Simultaneously, the city's Public Service Commission had approved the construction of connections between the bridge's upper-level tracks and the elevated lines at either end. Elevated service across the bridge commenced in July 1917, and the entire repaving project was nearly done later that year. By the early 1920s, one hundred thousand people a day used the span, and the Queensboro Bridge and the other East River bridges were rapidly reaching their vehicular capacity. One count in 1920 found that an estimated 18,000 motor vehicles used the bridge daily, while another count in 1925 found that 45,000 vehicles used the span in 24 hours. Proposals to relieve traffic on the bridge included a ferry from Manhattan to Queens; larger signs pointing to existing ferries; a parallel bridge; and a parallel tunnel (later the Queens–Midtown Tunnel). Traffic on the bridge more than doubled from 1924 to 1932, though the opening of new vehicular crossings caused congestion to increase less rapidly after 1932. By the mid-1930s, the bridge handled an average of 110,000 vehicles daily. When the Queens–Midtown Tunnel opened in 1940, The New York Times predicted it would relieve congestion on the Queensboro Bridge. The Manhattan approach viaduct was repaired in 1920. Manhattan's borough president Julius Miller proposed a plaza and a new approach road at the Manhattan end in 1924, and he submitted plans to acquire property for the plaza and road later the same year. Miller revised his plans in 1925, calling for a tunnel under Second Avenue and a new street east of the avenue between 57th and 63rd streets. To alleviate congestion, one of the bridge's lanes was used as a reversible lane during peak hours. City officials began adding a concrete pavement to the bridge in mid-1924, but engineers determined at the time that a hard-surfaced roadway would be too heavy for the bridge. Queens borough president Maurice E. Connolly said the weight of trucks had caused the steel buckle plates under the pavement to break, though the commissioner of the city's Plant and Structure Department said the bridge was still safe and that stronger plates were being installed. In late 1926, Plant and Structure commissioner Albert Goldman proposed adding three vehicular lanes and removing the bridge's footpaths; the proposal also called for new approaches at either end and relocation of the elevated tracks. The Merchants Association and the Fifth Avenue Association endorsed this plan. The Board of Estimate allocated $150,000 for improvements to the bridge in April 1927, and the board approved the $3 million plan that June. The project was delayed due to difficulties in acquiring property, and the city controller's office contemplated abandoning plans for the new approaches. In late 1928, the Board of Estimate allowed construction to commence on both the new lanes and the approach viaducts at either end. To reduce congestion, the Manhattan ends of the upper and lower roadways were 700 feet (210 m) apart, while the Queens ends of these roadways were about 0.5 miles (0.80 km) apart. Real-estate developers supported the project because it would encourage real-estate and business activity in Queens. Fire extinguishers and chemical carts, for fighting small fires, were also installed on the bridge in 1928. Goldman publicized his plans for the southern upper roadway in April 1929, and the T. H. Reynolds Company had been hired to move the elevated tracks by the next month. The Bersin Construction Company received a contract for the new roadway in August 1929 and started construction the same month. A contract for the Queens approach viaduct was awarded to Bersin-Ronn Engineering Corporation in April 1930. The upper roadway was substantially completed by early 1931; it opened that June and carried only eastbound cars. By then, the bridge was carrying almost 100,000 vehicles a day. A new footpath was also constructed on the south side of the upper level but was not opened with the upper roadway. Initially, the upper deck had a wood, granite, and asphalt pavement. It contained grooves for motorists' tires, preventing them from changing lanes; after drivers complained about damaged tires, the grooves were first widened, then infilled by September. To reduce congestion, one civic group suggested a plaza at the bridge's Manhattan end in the early 1930s, while Manhattan's borough president Samuel Levy proposed building an underpass to carry traffic on Second Avenue beneath the Manhattan end of the bridge. Precipitation had begun to corrode the bridge's steel supports, as the masonry work had never been completed; this prompted a grand jury investigation into the bridge's safety in 1934. There were also proposals to charge tolls on the bridge in the 1930s, though local groups widely opposed these plans. In 1934, westbound motorists began using the upper southern roadway during weekday mornings, Sundays, and holiday evenings; the upper roadway continued to carry eastbound traffic at all other times. To reduce congestion, traffic agents began controlling traffic at each end of the bridge in July 1935, and lane control lights for the lower level's reversible lanes were installed later the same year. The bridge's wooden pavement also posed a hazard during rainy weather and made the bridge one of the city's most dangerous roadways by the mid-1930s. This prompted local groups to call for the installation of a non-skid pavement. Workers repaved the upper level in early 1935 and began installing an experimental concrete-and-steel pavement on the lower level that April. City officials also contemplated adding an asphalt-plank pavement to the bridge. Works Progress Administration (WPA) laborers began repaving the lower level in March 1936; The city government also planned to add lane markings to the lower roadway and convert the upper roadway permanently into a one-way road. After delays caused by material and labor shortages, the repaving of the lower level was completed in June 1937. WPA laborers also completed the tops of the bridge's towers. WPA workers began rebuilding the upper level pavement in July 1938, and the upper roadway closed that October, reopening two months later. By 1942, the city government was planning to shutter and dismantle the Second Avenue Elevated tracks across the Queensboro Bridge; the line closed in June 1942, and it was demolished by the end of the year. There were also plans in the mid-1940s to connect the bridge's Queens terminal with an expressway running to the John F. Kennedy International Airport. The City Planning Commission proposed rebuilding the Manhattan end of the bridge in late 1946 and adding an eight-story parking garage above the approach viaduct. This proposal was postponed due to a lack of money. The bridge was repainted in 1948, and a $12 million renovation of the bridge was announced the next year. The plan included two extra lanes on the upper level, new pavement, a bus terminal in Manhattan, and cloverleaf ramps at the Manhattan approach. The city government was concurrently planning the Welfare Island Bridge, which would allow people to access Welfare Island without needing to use the Queensboro Bridge's elevator. Officials installed fences in 1951 to prevent jaywalking at the Manhattan approach, and the city's parking authority contemplated erecting a parking garage west of the bridge's Manhattan terminus the same year. Another proposal to toll the bridge was contemplated but was rejected as overly expensive. Public Works commissioner Frederick H. Zurmuhlen announced that October that his office was preparing plans for the northern upper roadway, and he petitioned the city government for $6.5 million for the new roadway. By the next year, plans for the roadway and its Manhattan approach were complete, and workers were demolishing buildings to make way for the roadway's Manhattan approach. Zurmuhlen requested $8.2 million from the city in 1953 for the construction of the roadway; in exchange, he dropped plans for a bus terminal at the Manhattan end of the bridge. The bridge's approaches were repaved in 1954. The Board of Estimate allocated $7.70 million in June 1955 for the construction of the northern upper roadway and approach ramps. With the opening of the Welfare Island Bridge that year, the city shuttered the trolley lanes, mid-bridge station, and stairs to Roosevelt Island, and it also planned to close down the bridge's elevators. The last trolley traversed the bridge in April 1957, and the elevators and stairs on the Queens side of the bridge were closed the same month, although the elevator in Roosevelt Island would not be demolished for 13 years. The Queens approach ramps were also rebuilt, accounting for over two-thirds of the project's $7.71 million cost. The Thomson Avenue ramp was completed first, followed by the ramp to 21st Street in late 1957. The northern upper roadway opened in September 1958, and the bridge was formally rededicated in April 1959 for its 50th anniversary. In 1958, Consolidated Edison proposed converting the lower-level trolley tracks into vehicular lanes in exchange for permission to install power cables under the bridge. Consolidated Edison spent $4 million in 1960 to install power cables, convert the trolley tracks, and construct slip roads between the lower-level roadways. The new lanes, on the northern and southern sides of the bridge, opened on September 15, 1960. The same year, Manhattan borough president Louis A. Cioffi proposed a $2.06 million ramp at the Manhattan end of the bridge. Also during the early 1960s, the city's Department of Public Works requested funding for a feasibility study of additional roadways, and the city's traffic commissioner Henry Barnes studied the feasibility of a computer-controlled traffic monitoring system for the bridge. In 1964, mayor Robert F. Wagner Jr. approved the demolition of several buildings for a proposed underpass connecting the bridge's westbound lanes with Second Avenue in Manhattan. Had the underpass been built, a bus terminal and landscaped plaza would also have been erected at the Manhattan end of the bridge. These plans were scrapped due to a lack of funding. City planner Robert Moses proposed a 1,000-space parking garage at the bridge's Manhattan end in 1965, though Barnes objected to the plan. Instead, Barnes proposed a 1,100-spot garage on the Queens side, which was approved in June 1966. The bridge was repainted for seven months starting in November 1966 at a cost of $240,000. Between 1968 and 1970, officials commissioned five studies of Queensboro Bridge traffic, but no changes were made as a result. In 1970, the federal government enacted the Clean Air Act, a series of federal air pollution regulations. As part of a plan by mayor John Lindsay and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, the city government considered implementing tolls on the four free East River bridges, including the Queensboro, in the early 1970s. The plan would have raised money for New York City's transit system and allowed the city to meet the Clean Air Act. Had the tolls been implemented, a tollbooth would have been installed on the bridge's Manhattan approach. A small terminal for express buses was also proposed for the Manhattan end of the bridge, but it was not built. On November 23, 1973, the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission (LPC) designated the Queensboro Bridge as a city landmark, preventing any modifications without the LPC's approval. It was the second East River bridge to be so designated, after the Brooklyn Bridge. While there were concerns that the landmark status could prevent tollbooths from being installed, planners said the tollbooths could just be installed on the bridge's approaches. The Board of Estimate delayed ratification of the landmark designation because some space under the bridge's approaches was used for commercial purposes. The tolling proposal was opposed by figures such as Queens borough president Donald Manes, who encouraged the state government to take over the bridge so tolls could not be charged. According to Manes, the tolls would merely increase pollution around Queens Plaza. Abraham Beame, who became mayor in 1974, refused to implement the tolls, and the U.S. Congress subsequently moved to forbid tolls on the free East River bridges. The northern lower-level roadway was closed in 1976 while the wires underneath the deck were being replaced. By the mid-1970s, as the city government considered an open-air market under the bridge, a city engineer described the bridge as severely deteriorated. Among the issues cited were extensive rusting, faulty expansion joints, clogged drains, potholes, and dirt. New York State Department of Transportation (NYSDOT) engineering director George Zaimes described the bridge's frame as being rusty, with some holes that were as large as a person's head. According to Zaimes, the upper roadway was only attached to the bridge "by its own weight and memory". The state government started inspecting the Queensboro Bridge and five others in 1978, allocating $1.1 million for a study. That year, the city government also repainted the bridge in a brown and tan color scheme. To reduce congestion, a contraflow lane for express buses was installed at the Manhattan end of the bridge in 1979. That year, the lower deck's outer lanes were closed to vehicles; parts of the outer roadways had weakened to the point that they could barely carry the weight of a passenger car. Repairs to the outer lanes were expected to last for three years and cost $50 million. The southern outer roadway was converted into a pedestrian and bicycle path, which opened in July 1979. The city received $18.6 million in federal funds for the Queensboro Bridge's restoration in 1980. By then, an estimated 175,000 vehicles daily used the bridge. An extensive renovation commenced on February 25, 1981, and was completed in six phases. That December, the United States Department of Transportation gave $28.8 million for the bridge's renovation. The pedestrian and bike path closed in May 1983. The NYSDOT announced that July that the southern upper roadway, which carried eastbound traffic, would be closed for repairs, which were expected to take 18 months. The northern upper roadway, normally used by westbound traffic. was converted to eastbound-only operation, except during weekday mornings when it carried westbound traffic. The ramp leading from 57th and 58th streets to the southern upper roadway was temporarily closed for reconstruction in early 1984. By the beginning of 1985, the southern upper roadway had reopened after being rebuilt for $31 million. The outer lanes of the lower level had also reopened, but state officials estimated that the project would not be complete until 1992. The Queensboro Bridge's pedestrian path reopened in July 1985; the same year, the city received another $60 million in federal funds for the renovations of the Queensboro, Manhattan, and Brooklyn bridges. In February 1987, the New York City Department of Transportation (NYCDOT) announced that parts of the northern upper roadway would be closed for two years. As part of the $42 million project, a new concrete deck would be installed, and the steel structure would be restored. The ramps to 62nd and 63rd streets closed in October 1987 and reopened twelve months later. This closure coincided with the renovations of other East River bridges. The lower-level bike path was opened to vehicular traffic at peak times, and flatbed trucks carried bicycles across the bridge. The lower deck's southern outer roadway was closed for emergency repairs in 1988 after workers discovered severe corrosion. The reconstruction of the upper deck was completed in 1989 for $100 million. The bridge was still in poor condition: during a tour of the bridge in 1988, transportation engineer Sam Schwartz peeled off part of one of the bridge's beams with one hand. The Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) proposed a rail link to LaGuardia and JFK airports in 1990; the line, which would have used the Queensboro Bridge, was canceled in 1995. A renovation of the Queensboro Bridge's lower level began in June 1990, when two Manhattan-bound lanes were closed. This phase of construction was supposed to cost $120 million. The lower deck's partial closure caused severe congestion in Queens, since part of the nearby Long Island Expressway was also closed for renovation. By 1993, the renovation was slated to be completed the next year. At that time, officials announced plans for a Manhattan-bound high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lane on the bridge during morning rush hours. A Queens-bound HOV lane during the afternoon was deemed infeasible due to heavy congestion in Manhattan. The Manhattan-bound HOV lane opened in April 1994, and all lower-level lanes had reopened by that October. The NYCDOT announced in 1995 that it would spend another $161 million to renovate the outer lower-level roadways starting the following year. Two lanes were again closed for maintenance from April to September 1996, causing severe congestion. Following complaints from residents near 57th Street, starting in October 1996, traffic on the upper level traveled on the left during rush hours to reduce noise pollution and traffic congestion. Vehicles headed for Queens had to enter at 62nd and 63rd Streets, which caused widespread confusion. After protests from Upper East Side residents, the original right-hand traffic pattern was reinstated on the upper level, and the southern lower roadway (used by pedestrians) was converted to an eastbound vehicular lane during the afternoon rush hour. Some pedestrians and bikers opposed the conversion of the southern lower roadway, as they would have to wait for a van to take them across the bridge during weekday afternoons, but the new traffic pattern was implemented anyway. In the late 1990s, the NYCDOT hired architect Walter Melvin to renovate the vaults under the Manhattan approach. During the renovation of the main span, a scaffold collapsed in 1997, killing a worker. The renovation of the northern lower roadway was completed in mid-1998. That August, the NYCDOT implemented a new traffic pattern during evening rush hours, where the northern upper roadway carried eastbound traffic, giving the bridge six eastbound and three westbound lanes during that time. The northern lower roadway, which carried pedestrians and cyclists during mornings and off-peak hours, was converted into a westbound lane during the evening rush hour. The NYCDOT's commissioner called the changes an "interim fix for nine to 14 months". By then, about 184,000 vehicles used the bridge daily, with slightly more eastbound than westbound vehicles using the bridge. Following the completion of additional renovations in September 2000, the northern upper roadway was converted back to a westbound road at all times. The northern lower roadway was converted into a bike and pedestrian path, while the southern lower roadway became an eastbound lane. After the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center in 2001, drivers without passengers were temporarily banned from using the bridge during rush hours. The city announced plans in 2002 to restore six masonry piers supporting the bridge. The same year, mayor Michael Bloomberg again proposed tolling the four free East River bridges, including the Queensboro Bridge; many local residents opposed his plan, and Bloomberg postponed the tolling plan in 2003. As part of a $168 million project that began in 2004,: 56  workers repainted the bridge. They also added fences and lighting, restored a trolley kiosk on the Manhattan end of the bridge, and restored the Manhattan approach in a separate project between 2003 and 2006.: 53–55  The renovation was temporarily halted in October 2005 after a small fire. A group of Roosevelt Island residents requested in 2007 that the city government install an elevator or stairway from the bridge, but city officials expressed multiple concerns with the proposal, including security vulnerabilities, the need to close a lane of traffic, and the bridge's landmark designation. In March 2009, the New York City Bridge Centennial Commission sponsored events marking the centennial of the bridge's opening. The American Society of Civil Engineers designated the bridge as a National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark the same year. The bridge was renamed after Ed Koch in 2011. After a series of fatal crashes in 2013, officials closed the southern lower roadway at night. By the middle of the decade, the bridge carried 175,000 daily vehicles, making it the East River's busiest bridge. Mayor Bill de Blasio announced plans in April 2016 to allocate $244 million for repairs to the Queensboro Bridge's upper deck. Concurrently, elected officials proposed adding tolls to the bridge yet again. In January 2021, the city decided to install a two-way protected bike path on the northern lower roadway and convert the southern lower roadway to a pedestrian path; the conversion was delayed because of a renovation of the upper deck. The renovation commenced in February 2022. A plan for congestion pricing in New York City was approved in mid-2023, allowing the MTA to toll drivers who use the Queensboro Bridge and then travel south of 60th Street. The bridge was built with two elevated railway tracks on its upper level and had provisions for two more. A connection from the Interborough Rapid Transit Company's Second Avenue Elevated to the bridge was first proposed in 1910; early plans called for a line extending to Malba. The elevated tracks were approved in 1913, and the connection opened in 1917, allowing Second Avenue trains to access the Astoria and Flushing lines. The tracks carried elevated trains until service was discontinued in 1942. There were also plans to run a New York City Subway line across the bridge in September 1909; in a report submitted to the New York City Board of Estimate in June 1911, the Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company was to extend its Broadway Line onto the bridge. By December 1914, the Board of Estimate had abandoned the proposal, which would have required $2.6 million in modifications to the bridge and would have caused serious congestion. Instead, the board proposed the double-tracked 60th Street Tunnel under the East River, which would allow the city to save $500,000. The New York Public Service Commission approved the tunnel in July 1915. In 1990, the MTA proposed an airport rail link running via the bridge to JFK and LaGuardia airports. This plan was scaled down in 1995, becoming the AirTrain JFK, which serves a small part of Queens. The bridge had streetcar tracks occupying the northern and southern lower roadways. On the Manhattan side, there were two ramps from each of the outer lower-level roadways to a set of platforms under Second Avenue. On the Queens side, the tracks split into multiple branches. Six streetcar companies had applied for franchises to use the bridge by late 1908, before its official opening. The first trolleys traveled on the bridge in September 1909, and passenger service began the next month. In the bridge's first decade, the tracks were used by the New York and Queens County Railway, Manhattan and Queens Traction Company, Steinway Lines, and Third Avenue Bridge Company. When the Third Avenue Railway started using the bridge in 1913, it built power infrastructure under the roadway, as its streetcars received power from underground. The South Shore Traction Company also applied for permission to use the bridge but was denied. A streetcar stop was constructed at the middle of the bridge in 1919 to serve the elevator to Roosevelt Island. The tracks connecting the Third Avenue Railway with the Queensboro Bridge were removed in 1922, after the company stopped using the bridge. Although almost all streetcar service had been withdrawn by 1939, the Queensboro Bridge Local route ran across the bridge until April 7, 1957; it was the last trolley route in New York state. On the Manhattan end of the Queensboro Bridge were originally five trolley kiosks, which contained stairs leading to a trolley terminal underground. Lindenthal and Hornbostel designed the structures, which had terracotta-paneled facades, cast-iron columns, and a copper roof with cast-iron fascias. There were arched, glazed-tile ceilings inside each of the kiosks. The kiosks also had Greek key motifs; shields with garlands; and ornamental brackets. The locations of three kiosks are unknown. Another kiosk was sent to the Brooklyn Children's Museum in 1974, then was relocated to Roosevelt Island and renovated into a visitor center. The Roosevelt Island kiosk, which reopened in July 2007, measures 210 square feet (20 m2) across and weighs 86,000 pounds (43 ST; 38 LT; 39 t). Yet another kiosk remains in place in Manhattan but is used as storage space. The remaining kiosk in Manhattan was planned to be removed in 2002 but was instead restored. The bridge carries three local bus routes operated by MTA Regional Bus Operations: the Q32, Q60, and Q101. The bridge also carries 20 express bus routes in the eastbound direction only: the QM1, QM2, QM3, QM4, QM5, QM6, QM10, QM15, QM16, QM17, QM18, QM20, QM21, QM24, QM31, QM32, QM34, QM35, QM36, QM40, QM42, QM44, X63, X64, and X68, which all use the Queens-Midtown Tunnel for westbound travel. An elevator from the bridge to Roosevelt Island (then known as Blackwell's Island) was proposed in October 1912. Although various groups opposed an elevator in the middle of the bridge's deck because it would block traffic, an elevator next to the deck was tested the next month. The Board of Estimate provided $366,000 in 1916 for an elevator building connecting the bridge to Roosevelt Island. The building, on the bridge's north side, was finished in 1918 or 1919. The building was nine or ten stories tall and had two passenger and three freight elevators. The structure was set back from the bridge to reduce damage in a fire. The top floor was connected to the bridge by a roadway measuring 56 feet (17 m) wide; there was also a stair and a guard's booth. The other nine floors contained various food storage rooms. After the trolley lines across the bridge were largely replaced by buses in the 1930s, Steinway Transit retained one of the bridge's trolley tracks and established the Queensboro Bridge Railway, a shuttle streetcar route connecting with the elevator to Roosevelt Island. The elevator was demolished in 1970, having been replaced by the Roosevelt Island Bridge. A separate passenger elevator ran during weekdays to Welfare Island, via a storehouse described as "clean but gloomy", until mid-1973. When plans for the bridge were being finalized in 1901, there was commentary on its cantilevered design; all of the other bridges across the East River at the time were suspension bridges. The city's bridge commissioner at the time, John L. Shea, said that the Queensboro Bridge would not be as "picturesque" compared to a suspension bridge but that it could look as attractive as either the Williamsburg or Brooklyn bridges. Buck said that the U.S. had some "homely" cantilever bridges but hoped the Queensboro Bridge was not ugly. The chief engineer of the city's Bridge Department said in 1904 that he believed the cantilever design was "a mistake" and that a suspension bridge on the same site, supported by three towers, would have been a novelty. When the bridge was finished in 1908, The Christian Science Monitor wrote that the Queensboro was "one of the greatest bridges in the world, and one of the most beautiful of its type", despite having received relatively little media attention during construction. Two decades after the bridge opened, The New York Times said the "Brooklyn Bridge has the reputation but Queensboro Bridge has the traffic". The New York Daily News wrote in 1981 that the Queensboro Bridge "reminds people of the bridges they built with erector sets as children". Nonetheless, the bridge was not as widely appreciated as the Brooklyn Bridge further south, especially in the late 20th century, and The Los Angeles Times wrote in 2010 that "the Queensboro appears far grittier than the romantic Brooklyn Bridge or the soaring Verrazano-Narrows Bridge to the south". The New-York Tribune wrote in 1904 that the Queensboro Bridge's construction would cause Blackwell's Island to "lose at least a share of its sinister reputation". Even before the bridge was completed, real-estate values in Queens had been increasing several times over, and its construction also spurred the sale of property along 59th Street in Manhattan. Its development allowed various parts of Queens to be served by direct train and streetcar lines to Manhattan. The Brooklyn Daily Eagle predicted in 1908 that the bridge's completion would draw investors toward Long Island and away from New Jersey to the west. The same newspaper predicted that the bridge, along with the Steinway Tunnel and East River Tunnels, would change Long Island from a sparsely populated rural outpost to a densely packed suburb of New York City. A New York Times article from 1923 wrote that the bridge's opening "marked the first step in eliminating the East River as a barrier to the spread of population eastward". The opening of the bridge encouraged development of vacant land in Queens, where tracts were resold for residential and commercial use. Many industrial firms began operating in western Queens, including vehicle-manufacturing plants in Long Island City. By the early 1910s, numerous industrial structures and loft buildings had been built around the bridge's Queens end, particularly on Queens Plaza. Further east, neighborhoods such as Jackson Heights were built on former farmland. The Queensboro Chamber of Commerce's spokesperson said in 1924 that real estate values in Queens had tripled within 15 years of the bridge's opening, while the population grew from 284,000 to 736,000. At the bridge's 50th anniversary, The New York Times credited the bridge with encouraging industrial and residential development in Queens. Newsday wrote in the 1990s: "More than any other development, the Queensboro Bridge created the modern urban borough of Queens." The completion of the Queensboro Bridge inspired what became Queens Boulevard, although the thoroughfare was not finished until 1936. Because of its design and location, the Queensboro Bridge has appeared in numerous media works, including films and TV shows, set in New York City. For example, the title of Simon & Garfunkel's 1966 song "The 59th Street Bridge Song (Feelin' Groovy)" refers to the Queensboro Bridge, and it has been mentioned in media such as F. Scott Fitzgerald's 1925 novel The Great Gatsby. The bridge has been the setting or filming location for several movies, such as Manhattan (1979), Spider-Man (2002) and The Dark Knight Rises (2012). List of bridges and tunnels in New York City List of bridges documented by the Historic American Engineering Record in New York List of bridges and tunnels on the National Register of Historic Places in New York List of New York City Designated Landmarks in Manhattan from 59th to 110th Streets List of New York City Designated Landmarks in Queens National Register of Historic Places listings in Manhattan from 59th to 110th Streets National Register of Historic Places listings in Queens, New York Various sources from 1907 and 1908, before the bridge's completion, cited the Queens approach as 3,455 feet (1,053 m) and the whole bridge as 8,231 feet (2,509 m) long. They described the Manhattan approach as being 1,051 feet. A Scientific American article from 1908 gives a figure of 7,408 feet (2,258 m) for the whole bridge. "NYC DOT – Data feeds". New York City Department of Transportation. 2019. NYC Bridge & Screenline Traffic Volumes Dashboard. Retrieved May 21, 2022. "National Register Information System – (#78001879)". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. July 9, 2010. "A Bridge by Any Other Name". New York Daily News. December 8, 1980. p. 277. ISSN 2692-1251. Archived from the original on October 19, 2023. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Colford, Paul D. (March 27, 1984). "Celebrating Bridge's 75th Year". Newsday. p. 9. ISSN 2574-5298. Archived from the original on October 19, 2023. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Bultman, Matthew; Fanelli, James (December 9, 2010). "Just call 59th Street Bridge the Ed Koch Bridge; former mayor gets honored with span in his name". New York Daily News. ISSN 2692-1251. Archived from the original on December 10, 2010. Retrieved January 18, 2024; "New York Public Radio, Podcasts, Live Streaming Radio, News". WNYC. December 8, 2010. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Grynbaum, Michael M.; Kaplan, Thomas (December 8, 2010). "In City, a Bridge for Koch and a Tunnel for Carey". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Hernandez, Javier C. (March 23, 2011). "Council Votes to Rename Queensboro Bridge for Koch". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 29, 2011. Retrieved March 23, 2011; "City Council Approves Renaming Queensboro Bridge For Koch". CBS New York. March 23, 2011. Retrieved January 18, 2024; Einhorn, Erin (March 23, 2011). "Queensborough renamed in honor of Koch". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on August 23, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2018. Lisberg, Adam (February 28, 2011). "Queensboro Bridge should not be renamed after former Mayor Ed Koch, 70% of Queens biz leaders say". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on June 12, 2012. Retrieved February 28, 2011. Susman, Tina (March 2, 2011). "New name gifted upon New York's Queensboro Bridge". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Dawsey, Josh; Gay, Mara (February 3, 2013). "His Bridge—but Still Called Another Name". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved January 17, 2024. "Vallone introduces legislation to remove Ed Koch from Queensboro Bridge name". QNS.com. November 27, 2013. Retrieved January 18, 2024; "Councilman Introduces Bill To Pull Mayor Koch's Name From Queensboro Bridge". CBS New York. November 26, 2013. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Project Page:2000 Biennial Bridge Inspection of the Queensboro Bridge over the East River". HAKS Corporation. Archived from the original on June 25, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2008. Engineering Record 1913, p. 98. Scientific American 1907, p. 100. "The Construction of a Giant Cantilever; In Weight and Carrying Capacity, Greatest of Its Kind in the World, the Building of the Blackwell's Island Bridge Involves Problems and Figures of Unparalleled Magnitude". The New York Times. March 15, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 16, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "Queens Portrait of Grace in Steel Lace". Newsday. June 30, 1991. p. 8. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278370206. "Blackwell's Island Bridge". Railroad Gazette. Vol. 44, no. 12. March 20, 1908. p. 423. ProQuest 895736043. "Joining of Last Span of Blackwell's Island Bridge". Scientific American. Vol. XCVIII, no. 13. March 28, 1908. p. 223. ProQuest 126851307. "A Single Road With Many Names, Traversing Many Worlds". The New York Times. August 26, 2018. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Greater Astoria Historical Society & Roosevelt Island Historical Society 2008, p. 68. "The New Blackwell's Island Bridge". Scientific American. Vol. XCII, no. 13. April 1, 1905. p. 265. ProQuest 126873067. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. National Park Service 1978, p. 2. Scientific American 1907, p. 101. Engineering Record 1913, p. 99. "$20,000,000 Bridge Open: Mayor and Newsboys First to Cross From Manhattan to Queens Greatest of Four Structures Spanning East River Is, With Approaches, 7,424 Feet Long". The Washington Post. March 31, 1909. p. 5. ISSN 0190-8286. ProQuest 144906008. "The Queensboro Open: Thousands Fight to Be First Over Bridge Real Celebration to Be Held in June--Cost Almost Double the First Estimate". New-York Tribune. March 31, 1909. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572216360. "Masonry for the Blackwell's Island Bridge". Railroad Gazette. Vol. 36, no. 18. April 29, 1904. pp. 319–320. ProQuest 899683487. "Great Bridge Finished; Another to Be Begun". The Christian Science Monitor. March 30, 1909. p. 12. ProQuest 507939040. "Queensboro Bridge". ASCE Metropolitan Section. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "Commissioner Best's Party at the Tower on Blackwell's Island". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 14, 1904. p. 17. Archived from the original on November 10, 2023. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Queensboro Bridge Opens to Traffic" (PDF). The New York Times. March 31, 1909. p. 2. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 20, 2010. National Park Service 1978, p. 3. "HOV Lanes". www.nyc.gov. Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved December 18, 2017. "Closing of footpath provides a footnote". New York Daily News. June 19, 1983. p. 409. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Queensboro Bridge Rehabilitation Program". New York City Department of Transportation. Archived from the original on March 30, 2008. Retrieved March 13, 2010. Gray, Christopher (November 24, 2002). "Streetscapes/The Queensboro Bridge; Spanning the East River, With a Sense of Drama". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "Structural Work to Begin Soon: Six Stone Piers of Blackwell's Island Bridge Completed". New-York Tribune. April 20, 1904. p. 6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571537619. "Completing Piers for East River Bridge No. 4". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. May 27, 1904. p. 9. Archived from the original on November 10, 2023. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Work Finished On Queensboro Bridge at Last: Opened in 1909, It Took W.P.A. to Complete Job Stopped 27 Years Ago Money Never Available Granite Attics Put, On and Girders Installed". New York Herald Tribune. August 8, 1937. p. 17. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1250464082. "The 8 Million". New York Daily News. December 25, 1960. p. 2. ISSN 2692-1251. Archived from the original on October 17, 2023. Retrieved October 11, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge's Progress". Times Union. May 23, 1903. p. 19. Archived from the original on November 10, 2023. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Natural Bridge Foundations". Times Union. April 21, 1903. p. 11. Archived from the original on November 10, 2023. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Dunlap, David W. (March 7, 1999). "Bridgemarket Emerging, After 22 Years". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 12, 2010. Retrieved February 20, 2010. National Park Service 1978, pp. 2–3. Sax, Irene (May 27, 1987). "Waiting for Bridgemarket Construction is about to start under the Queensborough Bridge". Newsday. p. 3. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 277896828. "Design Notebook". The New York Times. August 4, 1977. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 19, 2023. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Gray, Christopher (May 12, 1996). "Streetscapes/Rafael Guastavino;An Architect Who Achieved a Vaulting Success". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "59th St. Market Reopens To Praises of O'Brien: Asparagus in Hand Mayor Bids Ryan 'God-Speed'". New York Herald Tribune. June 17, 1933. p. 12. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1336985953; "Spruced-up Market Reopened by Mayor; Stalls Under Queens Bridge to Bring City $17,500 a Year Instead of $3,250". The New York Times. June 17, 1933. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Cinematheque Gets Queensboro Site". The New York Times. November 2, 1973. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023; Oster, Jerry (November 26, 1973). "City Provides Fine Site for Film History". New York Daily News. p. 56. ISSN 2692-1251. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Prial, Frank J. (May 16, 1987). "Construction Date is Set at Stalled Bridgemarket". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023; "Film festival from Paris". Newsday. January 16, 1977. p. 107. ISSN 2574-5298. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Residents Battling a Shopping Complex At Queensboro Bridge as Problem-Prone". The New York Times. January 19, 1976. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Jacobs, Andrew (October 13, 1996). "Bridgemarket Finally Gets Its Yes". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Rowan, Victoria C. (August 1999). "Under the Bridge" (PDF). Architectural Record. Vol. 187, no. 8. p. 57. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2023. Levitt, David M (November 20, 2015). "Manhattan's Most Beautiful Supermarket Is Closing". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Cohen, Michelle (February 26, 2020). "See the approved plans for Trader Joe's new Upper East Side store under the Queensboro Bridge". 6sqft. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Rahmanan, Anna (December 1, 2021). "The first Trader Joe's on the Upper East Side is officially opening tomorrow!". Time Out New York. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Saraiva, Augusta (December 2, 2021). "Manhattan's Most Beautiful Supermarket Reopens as a Trader Joe's". Bloomberg. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Zimmer, Amy (April 11, 2012). "Base of Historic Queensboro Bridge Lamp Rediscovered After Nearly 40 Years". DNAinfo New York. Archived from the original on March 21, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "Base Of Missing 59th Street Bridge Lamppost Found In Queens". CBS New York. April 18, 2012. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Lippincott, E. E. (July 8, 2001). "Neighborhood Report: Queensboro Bridge – Neighborhood Mystery; A Historic Lamp Is Lost. Fingers Are Pointed Everywhere". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Weaver, Shaye (June 24, 2015). "Historic Queensboro Bridge Lamppost Base on Display After Years in Storage". DNAinfo New York. Archived from the original on November 19, 2023. Retrieved November 19, 2023. Jamerson, Joshua (June 23, 2015). "The Mystery of a Long-Missing Relic Is Solved and Returned to the Public". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 19, 2023. Retrieved November 19, 2023. Amdur, Neil (October 25, 1976). "New York's First Citywide Marathon Draws Some of World's Top Runners". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Monti, David (October 2008). "Sublime Climbs". Runner's World. Rodale, Inc. p. 77. ISSN 0897-1706. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Greater Astoria Historical Society & Roosevelt Island Historical Society 2008, p. 121. "April". New York Magazine. New York Media, LLC. October 4, 1982. p. 78. ISSN 0028-7369. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Bocanegra, Michelle (May 6, 2023). "Five Boro Bike Tour returns: What you need to know about street closures". Gothamist. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023; Konig, Joseph (April 30, 2022). "Street closures Sunday as Five Boro Bike Tour returns". Spectrum News NY1. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Dallas, Gus (September 27, 1981). "Bridge Spans Time, Sentiment". New York Daily News. p. 254. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Griggs, Frank Jr (October 11, 2015). "Queensboro Cantilever Bridge". Structure. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "An Old Plan for a Bridge at Blackwell's Island". The Standard Union. March 1, 1903. p. 20. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Greater Astoria Historical Society & Roosevelt Island Historical Society 2008, p. 13. "Queens History; How a Bridge Shaped a City Queensboro span key to population explosion". Newsday. March 27, 1994. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278774250. "The Blackwell Island's Bridge". New-York Tribune. March 3, 1887. p. 2. Retrieved October 19, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "The Second East River Bridge.; Election of Directors of the New-york and Long Island Bridge Company Description of the Enterprise". The New York Times. July 1, 1875. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "Another Proposed East River Bridge: Election of a Board of Directors—site and ... Of the Structure". New-York Tribune. July 1, 1875. p. 5. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572585390. Gentilviso, Richard (March 25, 2009). "AIA Celebrates Queensboro Bridge Centennial". Queens Gazette -. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "Spanning the East River: the Blackwell's Island Bridge Adoption of the Delaware Bridge Company's Plan—its Characteristics—features of the Whole Structure—its Probable Completion in Two Years Asserted Diagram of the Plan Adopted". New-York Tribune. April 5, 1877. p. 2. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572675015. "Blackwell's Island Bridge". Times Union. March 29, 1877. p. 4. Retrieved October 19, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "The Blackwell's Island Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 27, 1878. p. 4. Retrieved October 19, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Iron Piers to Support It; the Big Bridge Over the East River From Ravenswood". The New York Times. July 23, 1880. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 21, 2023. "The Blackwell Island's Bridge". Times Union. January 10, 1877. p. 4. Retrieved October 19, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Spanning the River". New York Daily Herald. January 14, 1877. p. 14. Retrieved October 19, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "The Blackwell's Island Bridge". The Buffalo Commercial. May 3, 1881. p. 1. Retrieved October 21, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "New York News". The Hartford Courant. May 2, 1881. p. 3. ISSN 1047-4153. ProQuest 554167211. "Blackwell's Island Bridge". The Brooklyn Union. May 24, 1881. p. 1. Retrieved October 21, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "The Second Bridge Between New York and Brooklyn". Scientific American. Vol. XLIV, no. 22. May 28, 1881. p. 335. ProQuest 126602806. "Blackwell's Island Bridge.; a Meeting at Jamaica to Further the Project—Estimated Cost". The New York Times. March 16, 1882. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 21, 2023. "Arguments for His Bridge: Thomas Rainey Issues a Circular About the Proposed Structure From Black Well's Island". New-York Tribune. June 16, 1889. p. 14. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 573536126. "The New East River Bridge.; Property Which the Company Wants for Its Approaches". The New York Times. April 23, 1887. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 22, 2023. "The Application Denied". The New York Times. September 21, 1888. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 22, 2023. "Another Wide Span". The Brooklyn Citizen. January 11, 1889. p. 2. Retrieved October 22, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Dr. Ranney's Scheme". Times Union. January 11, 1889. p. 4. Retrieved October 22, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "No Blackwell's Island Bridge". The New York Times. November 8, 1889. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "It Is Invalid". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. November 8, 1889. p. 6. Retrieved October 22, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "East River Bridge No. 4 Nearing Completion". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. April 13, 1907. p. 30. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Long Island Territory; Property That Will Be a Part of Greater New-york. More than One-Half of the Consolidated City Will Be Across the East River – Developments That Are Now Under Way in Brooklyn and in the Cities and Towns That Adjoin It – Advantages That May Be Obtained There". The New York Times. May 24, 1896. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "Debating High License; a Brief Hearing Before the Senate Committee. Naive Mr. Cornell Gets a Little Setback – Another Excise Bill – a Home-rule Discussion". The New York Times. March 7, 1890. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 22, 2023. "Over Blackwell's Island". Times Union. March 15, 1890. p. 8. Retrieved October 22, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Dr. Rainey's Bill". Times Union. May 8, 1890. p. 2. Retrieved October 22, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bills Signed and Vetoed: the Governor Does Not Approve the Cable Railway Scheme the Aqueduct Contractors' Bill is Not a Law—no Bridge to Blackwell's Island—the Annexed District to Have a Street Commissioner—action on Bills Affecting New- York and Brooklyn". New-York Tribune. June 9, 1890. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 573582870. "They Went to the Wrong Governor". The Standard Union. June 9, 1890. p. 2. Retrieved October 22, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Laws Signed Yesterday; the Joint Work of Gov. Flower and Senator Hill. Some More Plums Foe the Tammany Braves to Gather – a Number of Statutes Affecting New-york City and Brooklyn". The New York Times. May 3, 1892. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 8, 2023. "After Years of Labor". Times Union. May 5, 1892. p. 5. Retrieved November 8, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "The Blackwell's Island Bridge". New-York Tribune. August 1, 1892. p. 6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 573750645. "A Spirited Conference: Dr. Rainey and City Officials Talk About the Rainey Bridge". The New York Times. February 3, 1893. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 8, 2023. "The Sinking Fund Board Meets: Considering an Application of an East River Bridge Company". New-York Tribune. February 1, 1893. p. 11. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 573842893. "Rapid Transit to Long Island; The Blackwell's Island Bridge Can Be Built in Three Years". The New York Times. December 17, 1893. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 8, 2023. "Dr. Rainey on His Bridge Charter". New-York Tribune. December 27, 1899. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 574687307. "The Blackwell's Island Bridge". The Sun. September 9, 1894. p. 20. Retrieved November 8, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge: Ground Broken on the Great Long Island Railway Structure". St. Louis Post – Dispatch. August 21, 1894. p. 5. ProQuest 579162706. "The New East River Bridge Begun; Rapid Development on Long Island Expected to Follow Its Completion". The New York Times. May 8, 1895. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "The New Bridge". The Standard Union. May 8, 1895. p. 3. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Corbin's Great Bridge; Work on a Pier on Blackwell's Soon to be Begun". The New York Times. November 25, 1894. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 8, 2023. "To Build The Bridge: It is to Connect the Long Island Railroad With This City the Structure to Pass Over Blackwell's Island to Be Finished in 1897". New-York Tribune. November 25, 1894. p. 8. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 573993107. "At Work on the New East River Bridge; Laborers Laying the Foundation on the Easterly Shore of Blackwell's". The New York Times. April 25, 1895. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "East River Bridge No. 2: That at Blackwell's Island is in Part a Fact". New-York Tribune. April 5, 1896. p. B8. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 574172215. "Inter-urban Transit". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. March 2, 1897. p. 7. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Crossing the East River". Times Union. March 4, 1897. p. 10. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "In Search of a Cabinet". Times Union. January 8, 1897. p. 2. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge". The Standard Union. January 8, 1897. p. 1. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Eldredge & Horenstein 2014, p. 125. "Bridge Building". Railroad Gazette. No. 1. February 12, 1897. p. 120. ProQuest 879753651. "Blackwell's Island Grant". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. March 6, 1898. p. 30. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge Over Blackwell's Island". New-York Tribune. March 16, 1898. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 574423687. "Won't Sell Franchise, Declares Dr. Rainey". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. November 25, 1898. p. 1. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge: the Charter Granted by the State May Be Bought by the City". New-York Tribune. March 30, 1900. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 570800173. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "To Buy Raines' Franchise". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. March 30, 1900. p. 17. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Hearing on the Rainey Bridge". The Brooklyn Citizen. April 16, 1900. p. 9. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Rainey Veto Expected". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. April 20, 1900. p. 20. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge Scheme". New-York Tribune. February 26, 1897. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 574273400. "For Public Improvements; The Borough of Queens Wants a Bridge Across the East River at Blackwell's Island". The New York Times. January 22, 1898. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "Long Island City's Business". Times Union. July 12, 1898. p. 7. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "A Hard Kick". Times Union. October 10, 1898. p. 7. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "All Railroad Bridge Must be Built First". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. November 29, 1898. p. 3. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Tunnels or Bridges Between Manhattan and Long Islands". Street Railway Journal. Vol. 1, no. 29. December 30, 1899. p. 248. ProQuest 740156956. "Horak Rebuked by the Mayor". The Brooklyn Citizen. October 20, 1898. p. 10. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Van Wyck Voters Turned Down". Times Union. October 20, 1898. p. 1. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Van Wyck's Bridge Schemes: Money for Preliminary Surveys for Two Given by the Board of Estimate". New-York Tribune. December 2, 1898. p. 8. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 574549109. "Shea Will Get Money to Begin Third Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 1, 1898. pp. 1, 2. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Plans for a New Bridge: Details of the Cantilever Across Blackwell's Island Prepared". New-York Tribune. October 18, 1899. p. 5. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 574669841. "Bridge and Tunnel Talk; Hearing on the Question Before an Aldermanic Committee". The New York Times. December 19, 1899. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "Coler's Tunnels Attacked: J. Rufus Terry Sends Circular Letters to the Board of Aldermen Opposing the Scheme". New-York Tribune. December 20, 1899. p. 10. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 574690070. "Bridge and Tunnel Cost; Controller Tells Aldermen the Difference in Initial Outlay on Blackwell's Island Projects Is $11,100,000". The New York Times. December 30, 1899. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "Aldermen's Last Meeting; New Bridge from Pike Street to Brooklyn Provided For". The New York Times. December 31, 1899. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 8, 2023. "Brooklyn Now Assured of Another E. R. Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 30, 1899. p. 1. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "New Routes to Brooklyn: Bill in Legislature Providing for Tunnels and Bridges". The New York Times. January 19, 1900. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "Bond Issues Authorized; The Municipal Assembly Spurred On by Mandamus Proceedings". The New York Times. September 26, 1900. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "City Council in Deadlock". The Standard Union. September 26, 1900. p. 3. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge". The Brooklyn Citizen. November 19, 1900. p. 9. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge Approved". New-York Tribune. November 20, 1900. p. 14. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge: the Federal Government Responsible for the Delay in Building It, Mr. York Says". New-York Tribune. January 29, 1901. p. 5. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 570905934. "Bridge Plans Approved; Secretary of War Sanctions the Blackwell's Island Structure". The New York Times. February 24, 1901. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "Bridges". The Construction News. Vol. 12, no. 9. March 2, 1901. p. 136. ProQuest 128395528. "Shea Is Pushing Work on New Bridge No. 4". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. February 26, 1901. p. 6. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "East River Bridge, No. 4, New York". Railroad Gazette. Vol. 33, no. 13. March 29, 1901. p. 223. ProQuest 910589327. "Aldermen's Lively War; New East River Bridges Named by the Board. Commissioner Woodbury Attacked and His Resolution for a Brooklyn Deputy Lost – The Chairman Denounced". The New York Times. March 19, 1902. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 10, 2023. "Bids for Piers of Bridge No. 4". The Standard Union. June 20, 1901. p. 5. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Dady Was a Bidder". The Brooklyn Citizen. June 20, 1901. p. 1. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Work on Bridge No. 4 Must Not Be Stopped". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 27, 1901. p. 9. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Builders Defy Lindenthal: Refuse to Suspend Work on Blackwell's Island Bridge Pending Adoption of New Plans". New-York Tribune. July 1, 1902. p. 4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571246864. "Width of Blackwell's Island Bridge Altered; Mr. Ladenthal Announces Reduction from 120 to 80 Feet. Refises to Discuss Changes in Plans for New Structure – Pier Contractors Decline to Suspend Work". The New York Times. July 1, 1902. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "Blackwell's Island Bridge Changes; Details Explained to Delegation from Queens County". The New York Times. August 23, 1902. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "Lindenthal Satisfied". Times Union. August 12, 1902. p. 2. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "To Oust Horgan & Slattery: Controller Advises This Course-- Money for Interior Baths". New-York Tribune. June 14, 1902. p. 6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571204384. "Defies Lindenthal's Order to Stop Work". Times Union. June 28, 1902. p. 1. Retrieved November 9, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Contractors Disobey Lindenthal: the Commissioner Wants to Changed Plans of Blackwell's Island Bridge, It is Said". New-York Tribune. June 29, 1902. p. 9. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571102043. "Lindenthal Withdraws Plans: Those of Blackwell's Island Bridge Taken Away From Municipal Art Commission, Which Wants a New Set". New-York Tribune. July 3, 1902. p. 4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571137129. "Compromise on Pier Work: Lindenthal Permits the Contractors to Go Ahead Under Contract". New-York Tribune. July 4, 1902. p. 4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571152204. "No Change on Bridge No. 4". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 22, 1902. p. 6. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. ""No Delay on Bridge 4" Cry Queens Co. People". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 19, 1902. p. 2. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com; "Mayor Rebukes a Committee of Five". The Standard Union. July 21, 1902. p. 1. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Mayor Low Stops Lindenthal's Plan". The Standard Union. July 22, 1902. p. 1. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com; "Withdrawn by Lindenthal". Times Union. July 22, 1902. p. 2. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Lindenthal Requests $6,700,000 for Bridges". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 18, 1902. p. 3. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "The Blackwell's Island Bridge Plans". Railroad Gazette. Vol. 34, no. 40. October 3, 1902. p. 755. ProQuest 910600723. "Is After Lindenthal". Times Union. October 23, 1902. p. 4. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Experts for Blackwell's Island Bridge". The New York Times. November 4, 1902. p. 11. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 1013638329. "Bridge Experts' Plan; Changes Proposed for Blackwell's Island Structure. Original Plan and Commissioner Lindenthal's Plan Not Considered Satisfactory – Mayor Low's Approval". The New York Times. December 14, 1902. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 10, 2023. "Blackwell's Island Bridge Plan: Mayor Recommends That of Commission of Experts Appointed by Him". New-York Tribune. December 14, 1902. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571262824. "Engineers Talk With Committee of Forty". Times Union. August 11, 1904. p. 7. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Something Doing Now on Blackwell's Island Bridge". Times Union. April 15, 1905. p. 11. Retrieved November 15, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge Experts Named; Mayor Low Appoints Commission for Manhattan Structure. Lieut. Col. Raymond, George S. Morison, C.C. Schneider, H.W. Hodge, and Prof. Merriman to Pass on the Plans – The BlackWell's Island Bridge". The New York Times. February 12, 1903. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 10, 2023. "Grout Will Hold Up Hornbostel's Bills". Times Union. February 9, 1903. p. 1. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Salary List Increases in Bridge Department". The Brooklyn Citizen. May 14, 1903. p. 6. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Board of Estimate Votes $8,000,000; City Appropriations for Many Purposes Passed. Blackweil's Island Bridge Gets $3,860,000 and Williamsburg Bridge $1,550,000 – Croton Dam Track Change Approved". The New York Times. July 2, 1903. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 10, 2023. "Too Costly, Says Mayor: Would Veto Present Fifty-ninth-st. Widening Plan". New-York Tribune. July 23, 1903. p. 14. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571301684; "Blocks Street Widening; Mayor Low Defeats Plan to Improve Fifty-ninth Street. Threatens Before Board of Estimate to Use Veto Power – Says Plan Would Be Too Costly". The New York Times. July 23, 1903. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 10, 2023. "Blackwell's Island Bridge". Times Union. September 22, 1903. p. 4. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "What Blackwell's Island Bridge Will Do for Queens". Times Union. March 12, 1906. p. 23. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Lindenthal Objects to Wire Gable Plan; Should Not Be Used on Manhattan Bridge". The New York Times. July 14, 1904. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 10, 2023. "Hornbostel Rejects Steel Company's Bid". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 24, 1903. p. 22. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com; "Collusion in the Bidding Charged by Lindenthal". The Standard Union. September 24, 1903. p. 1. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge". Times Union. October 22, 1903. p. 3. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Lindenthal Tied Up". Times Union. November 7, 1903. p. 5. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com; "Tiger Holdup Suspected in the Bridge Injunction". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. November 7, 1903. p. 20. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "The Blackwell's Island Bridge". Railroad Age Gazette. Vol. 47, no. 11. September 10, 1909. p. 441. ProQuest 886559212. "Big Contract Awarded". The Brooklyn Citizen. November 10, 1903. p. 1. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com; "Bridge Contract". The Wall Street Journal. November 11, 1903. p. 2. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 128840770. "Art Commission Turns Down Hornbostel's Plan". Times Union. November 11, 1903. p. 3. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Lindenthal Opens Bridge Bids". New-York Tribune. December 22, 1903. p. 5. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571369907; "Bids for Blackwell's Island Work". The New York Times. December 22, 1903. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 10, 2023. "Bridge Towers: Different Styles for East River Viaducts". New-York Tribune. October 18, 1903. p. A1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571327490. "Out Goes Hornbostel, a Lindenthal Legacy". Times Union. March 28, 1904. p. 1. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Best Throws Out All the Old Bridge Plans". The Standard Union. February 15, 1904. p. 12. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Change in Bridge Contract Will Accelerate Work". The Standard Union. September 29, 1904. p. 4. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "To Improve Court House". The Brooklyn Citizen. September 12, 1904. p. 10. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Merchants Get After Mr. Best". The Standard Union. November 16, 1904. p. 12. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Rearing Skeleton Work for $10,000,000 Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. March 19, 1905. p. 56. Retrieved November 15, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Strike on New Bridge: Work on Blackwell's Island Structure Tied Up by Order". New-York Tribune. June 24, 1905. p. 5. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571579706. "Blackwell's Island Bridge Men on Strike". The Standard Union. June 24, 1905. p. 9. Retrieved November 15, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Housesmith' Strike Ends; Work on Blackwell's Island Bridge Will Now Be Rushed". The New York Times. July 29, 1905. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 15, 2023. "Violate Strike Agreement; Blackwell's Island Bridge Builders Say Union is to Blame". The New York Times. July 23, 1905. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 15, 2023. "Two Big Castings on Pier". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 18, 1905. p. 14. Retrieved November 15, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Further Delay on Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 27, 1905. p. 48. Retrieved November 15, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge Work Slow; Committee Fears Blackwell's Island Structure Is 50 Years Off Completion". The New York Times. August 26, 1905. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 15, 2023. "Report of the Commissioner of Bridges of New York City: Bridges Over the East River". Railroad Gazette. Vol. 39, no. 10. September 8, 1905. p. 232. ProQuest 873938980. "Rapid Work on Blackwell's Bridge". New-York Tribune. November 11, 1905. p. 12. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571634648. "Building New York's Third Bridge". The Buffalo News. November 8, 1905. p. 12. Retrieved November 15, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge Work: Steel Work of One Span Nearly Done—the Committee of Forty's Hopes". New-York Tribune. January 1, 1906. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571785964. Retrieved November 15, 2023 – via newspapers.com; "Bridge Work Advancing; Eastern Section of Blackwell's Island Structure Nearing Completion". The New York Times. January 1, 1906. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "Blackwell's Island Bridge". Times Union. January 19, 1906. p. 8. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge Work Held Up By a Hundred Strikers". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. January 24, 1906. p. 10. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Strike Holds Up Bridge". The Sun. April 6, 1906. p. 6. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Building Trades Refuse to Join in the Strike; Housesmiths Will Not Have Aid of Other Workmen". The New York Times. May 14, 1906. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "Engineers On Strike". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. June 20, 1906. p. 1. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Brooklyn Carpenters Establish a Wage of $4.50". The Standard Union. May 20, 1906. p. 9. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Mayor's Message Has "L" Loop Quite Dead". Times Union. January 7, 1907. p. 2. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge". Times Union. October 18, 1906. p. 8. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge Approach Bids; Viaduct from Queens to Blackwell's Island Structure Lowest, $797,804". The New York Times. December 14, 1906. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023; "Blackwell's Island Bridge". The Wall Street Journal. December 15, 1906. p. 3. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 129129899. Retrieved November 15, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Say Blackwell's Island Bridge Will Be Completed Within a Year". The Standard Union. September 29, 1907. p. 15. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Join Island Bridge Spans; Workmen Rivet Together the $20,000,000 Structure". The New York Times. March 13, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023; "Bridge Cantilevers Joined". The Sun. March 13, 1908. p. 2. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge Cost Grows: Approach Values Jump Blackwell's Island Structure Estimate Increased $8,000,000". New-York Tribune. April 28, 1907. p. 2. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571989972; "A Few Millions More Added to Bridge Cost". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. April 28, 1907. p. 5. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bids for Bridge Approach; Snare & Triest Company Lowest for Blackwell's Island Work". The New York Times. May 14, 1907. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023; "Blackwell's Island Bridge.: Snare & Triest Get the Contract on a Basis of $1,576,770—Steel Tonnage 6,000". The Wall Street Journal. May 20, 1907. p. 8. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 129171281; "Blackwell's Island Approach Bids: Snare & Triest Company, With Offer of $1,576,760, Quotes Lowest Price". New-York Tribune. May 14, 1907. p. 10. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571807951. "No New Methods Tried: Engineers Here Refuse to Express Opinions on Bridge's Collapse". New-York Tribune. August 31, 1907. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571854668. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com; "Manhattan Bridge All Right". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 30, 1907. p. 1. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge Construction Advancing Rapidly". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 2, 1907. p. 13. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Storm Wrecks Part of the New Bridge; Lightning Bolt Hits Section of Blackwell's Island Span and Wind Brings It Down". The New York Times. September 22, 1907. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023; "Equinox Strikes Hard". New-York Tribune. September 22, 1907. pp. 1, 2. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge Bids Opened". The New York Times. September 7, 1907. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023; "Blackwell's Island Bridge Bids". New-York Tribune. September 7, 1907. p. 9. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571987827. "Hunter Homestead to Go; One of Many Landmarks Removed for New Bridge Approach". The New York Times. October 20, 1907. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "Erecting Towers of the Manhattan and Blackwell's Island Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 13, 1907. p. 21. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Hurrying New Bridge". The Brooklyn Citizen. December 9, 1907. p. 4. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "To Demand Bridge Approach; Property Owners Fight Metz's Plan to Cheapen Blackwell's Island Plans". The New York Times. January 9, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "Dynamite Under New Bridge; Foreman Scents a Plot to Blow Up Blackwell's Island Structure". The New York Times. March 9, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "Island Bridge Now Joins Us to Queens; Last Link in Blackwell's Structure Is Placed to a Shrill Salvo of Whistles". The New York Times. March 19, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023; "River Spanned Again: New Bridge Connected "Little Tim" Smashes Bottle of Wine on Blackwell Island Cantilever". New-York Tribune. March 19, 1908. p. 4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572024919; "Connecting Girder Put in: New York Now Joined to Long Island. Blackwell's Island Bridge Crossed for First Time. Begun in 1901, and Cost Nearly $25,000,000". Boston Daily Globe. March 19, 1908. p. 11. ProQuest 501000486. "Blackwell's Island Bridge Overloaded: Need of Inquiry Into New Weights Imposed". New-York Tribune. May 12, 1908. pp. 1, 4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572022996. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge Probe Started: Ordered by Mr. Metz Chandler Withington Begins Inquiry—creuzbaur Favors Test". New-York Tribune. May 16, 1908. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572056316. "Island Bridge Scare Scouted by Experts; While Plan Is Similar to Wrecked Quebec Structure, More and Stronger Steel Used Here". The New York Times. May 26, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023; "Still Mum Over Bridge". New-York Tribune. May 19, 1908. p. 3. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge Tests Ordered: Estimate Board Acts Authorizes $30,000 for Blackwell's Structure Examination". New-York Tribune. June 6, 1908. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572034032; "No Action is Taken To-day on Appropriation for Subway". The Standard Union. June 5, 1908. p. 1. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Finishing a Big Bridge". The New York Times. June 17, 1908. p. 16. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com; "Finish Superstructure". New-York Tribune. June 17, 1908. p. 5. Retrieved November 16, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Final Work on New Bridge; Letting Contracts In Improvement Work on Long Island City Approach. Long Branch Property at Auction. Buying In and Near Jamaica". The New York Times. July 12, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 29, 2023. "Last Span in New Bridge; One Can Walk Now from Manhattan to Long Island City". The New York Times. August 18, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 29, 2023; "Queens Now Connected: Blackwell's Island Bridge Continuous Structure From Manhattan". New-York Tribune. August 18, 1908. p. 6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572128907. "Pennsylvania Steel Wins Suit.: Decree Signed Awarding $227,893 Against the City of New York for Queensboro Bridge Work". The Wall Street Journal. October 19, 1912. p. 8. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 129361597; "Queensboro Bridge Suit Lost by City; Pennsylvania Steel Co. Gets a Judgment for $227,893 in U.S. District Court". The New York Times. October 19, 1912. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 6, 2024. "Want Bridge Name Changed.; Petition to Adopt "Queensboro" Instead of "Blackwell's Island."". The New York Times. September 6, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 29, 2023; "Petition to Aldermen for Queensboro Bridge". The Brooklyn Citizen. September 6, 1908. p. 8. Retrieved November 29, 2023 – via newspapers.com; "New Bridge Name Causes Trouble: May Be Known as Blackwell's Island, Queens or Queensboro". New-York Tribune. September 24, 1908. p. 8. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572182996. Retrieved November 29, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge to Retain Name; Irish Societies Object to "Queensboro" Instead of Blackwell's Island". The New York Times. September 26, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 29, 2023; "Change of Bridge Name Opposed by Irishmen". The Brooklyn Citizen. September 27, 1908. p. 8. Retrieved November 29, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Everything Right for Bridge Opening". Times Union. October 29, 1908. p. 8. Retrieved November 29, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Queensboro Bridge Safe, Says Burr; Expert Engineer Finds That the Structure Conforms to the Specifications". The New York Times. November 6, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 29, 2023. "Blackwell's Island Bridge Overloaded: Experts' Sustain the Tribune's Charge Removal of All Elevated Tracks Suggested to Reduce Overstrain --Report Made Yesterday". New-York Tribune. October 29, 1908. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572163377. "Queensboro Bridge Construction: an Engineering Journal Contrasts What the City Contracted for and What It Got". New-York Tribune. November 26, 1908. p. 7. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572158785; "Queensboro Error Cost Ten Millions: Wasted by Faulty Changes of Plan No Gain in Bridge Capacity, in Spite of Added Weight and Vastly Increased Outlay". New-York Tribune. December 2, 1908. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572188214. "Big Weight on Bridge: Stringers Still Stand No Attempt Yet to Lighten Queensboro by Their Removal". New-York Tribune. January 2, 1909. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572126938. "Mayor Inspects Bridge: With Experts He Finds Queensboro Structure Almost Completed". New-York Tribune. January 21, 1909. p. 12. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572201339. "New Queensboro Bridge is Already in Use; Will Be "Opened" June 12". Detroit Free Press. April 11, 1909. p. 11. ProQuest 564592161. "Lack: of Proper Precautions Said to Have Cost the Lives of Fifty-five Workmen Employed on Blackwell's Island Bridge". Cincinnati Enquirer. September 12, 1908. p. 4. ProQuest 897441475. "Cantilever Opens in June". The Chat. February 6, 1909. p. 17. Retrieved November 30, 2023 – via newspapers.com; "How They Will Open Queensboro Bridge: Free Auto Rides for Every One June 12". The Hartford Courant. February 11, 1909. p. 10. ISSN 1047-4153. ProQuest 555608223. "Great Jubilee Over Queensboro Bridge; Celebration Committee Plans for a Big Civic and Military Pageant". The New York Times. June 6, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 30, 2023; "Plan Two Big Parades: Striking Features Will Be in Line on Land and Water Celebrations Over the Formal Opening of the Queensboro Bridge Across the East River, at Blackwell". New-York Tribune. June 6, 1909. p. A4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572242581. "New Bridge Aglow; Queensboro Structure Ready for Traffic – Cost $12,000,000". The New York Times. March 29, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 29, 2023. "300,000 See Queens Linked to Old City; New Bridge Ablaze with Red Fire and Electricity in the Evening". The New York Times. June 13, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 30, 2023; "All Queens Rejoices: Manhattan Greets Her Across New Bridge Governor Hughes Reviews 30,000 Marchers in Historic Pageant Under Blazing Skies". New-York Tribune. June 13, 1909. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572230589; "The Queensboro Bridge Dedicated to a New Era for Long Island". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. June 12, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved November 30, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge Celebration Ends; Miss Elizabeth Augente of Long Island City Chosen Queen of the Carnival". The New York Times. June 20, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 30, 2023. "That Bridge Again: Suit for $400,000 Because Plans Were Changed". New-York Tribune. December 8, 1909. p. 12. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572260933. "Bridge Argument: is Structure Safe? Main Question in Suit Over Queensboro Structure". New-York Tribune. December 22, 1909. p. 5. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572287046. "White Maps New Bridge; Issues Bulletin of Instructions for Reaching Structure". The New York Times. April 4, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Barron, James (March 29, 2009). "To Fans, Queensboro Bridge Is a Steel Swan, Not an 'Ugly Duckling'". The New York Times. p. A22. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 29, 2009. "To Abolish Tolls On City Bridges; Mayor Gaynor Believes There Is No Legal Warrant for Taxing Vehicle Traffic". The New York Times. July 7, 1911. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 28, 2019. "Prize Fund for Atwood; Talk of One After Washington Commerce Chamber Refuses to Help". The New York Times. July 19, 1911. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 1, 2019; "Aldermen Abolish Tolls for Wagons on Bridges". Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 18, 1911. p. 1. Retrieved July 1, 2019. "New Terminal Plan; Manhattan Approach to Queensboro Bridge to Occupy Four Blocks". The New York Times. November 9, 1913. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 6, 2024. "Plan Six Tracks on Queensboro Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. November 10, 1913. p. 4. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com; "To Have Six Tracks". New-York Tribune. November 9, 1913. p. 34. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Traffic Rules for Bridge Plaza; Queens Chamber of Commerce Wants City Policemen Stationed There". The New York Times. February 1, 1914. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 6, 2024; "Urge Mitchel to Recommend Traffic Rules". Times Union. January 29, 1914. p. 8. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Queensboro Bridge Has Been in Use 15 Years To-day: Aerial Highway of Steel Has Brought Wealth and Population to Queens; Assessed at $1,000,000,000". The New York Herald, New York Tribune. March 30, 1924. p. B1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1113078518. "New Bridge Plan; Queensboro Bridge to Have Two Twenty-six-Foot Roadways". The New York Times. September 27, 1914. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 6, 2024; "Queens Bridge Transit to be Improved Now". Times Union. July 25, 1914. p. 1. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Queensboro Bridge Traffic Changes". The New York Times. September 6, 1914. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Queensboro Bridge Work; Contracting Firm Offers to Do Rebuilding in Four Months". The New York Times. February 7, 1915. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Favor Tunnel Under East River Rather than Bridge Subway". The Evening World. December 23, 1914. p. 3. Retrieved May 30, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Queens Bridge To Be Repaved". New-York Tribune. January 31, 1916. p. 2. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 575525973; "Mayor Urges Haste on Bridge Roadway; Approves Kracke's Repavement Plan and Asks $144,000 for Queensboro Span". The New York Times. January 31, 1916. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Queensboro Bridge a Menace to Autos; Roadway to Long Island a Continuous Series of Ruts and Hummocks". The New York Times. January 19, 1916. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. Scharps, C. E. T. (October 8, 1916). "Fine Pavement for Queensboro Bridge: City Labor Laying Surface That Will Stand Traffic". New-York Tribune. p. B8. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 575628936. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "To Extend 2d Av. Tracks Over Bridge: "L" Trains May Run to Queensborough in November". New-York Tribune. May 7, 1916. p. A5. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 575579461; "New Transit Lines; Nov. 1 Set for Completion of Elevated Lines to Astoria and Corona". The New York Times. May 14, 1916. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "New Rapid Transit Line for Queens". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 22, 1917. p. 51. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com; "Second Ave. 'L' Trains Running to Queensboro". Times Union. July 23, 1917. p. 6. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Queens Bridge Wood-Block Road Is Rapidly Nearing Completion". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 4, 1917. p. 8. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Queensboro Bridge Great Aerial Highway of Traffic: 108,652 Persons and Thousands of Motors and Cars Cross It in 24 Hours". New-York Tribune. April 23, 1922. p. E8. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 576588296. Young, James C. (September 6, 1925). "Four New Bridges Proposed for East River; With Traffic on Existing Structures Approaching Peak, Commissioner Mills Suggests Additional Spans to Link Manhattan, the Bronx and Queens". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "154,700 Cars And Trucks Link New York With Mainland". The Sun. November 7, 1920. p. P9P10. ProQuest 534500572. "Check Shows Jam in Bridge Traffic". Times Union. September 1, 1925. p. 4. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Queens Makes Appeal for Ferry to Relieve Crucial Vehicular Transportation Problem Between That Borough and Manhattan". The Brooklyn Citizen. August 9, 1925. p. 13. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com; "Ferry to Manhattan Urged to Relieve Traffic Menace Crossing Queensboro Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 9, 1925. p. 4. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "New Queens Bridge Asked by Connolly; Requests Action by Board of Estimate on $50,000 Appropriation for Boring". The New York Times. August 21, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024; "Queensboro Jam Makes Connolly Ask New Bridge". Times Union. July 29, 1925. p. 9. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "'Sign Up' Roads Is Queens Plans to Aid Traffic". Times Union. September 13, 1925. p. 9. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Tunnel Advocated for Queens Borough". The Christian Science Monitor. May 23, 1927. p. 14. ISSN 0882-7729. ProQuest 512200887; "Borough Heads Ask Vehicular Tunnel, 38th St. To Queens; Miller and Connolly Submit Plan for Twin Tube to Estimate Board". The New York Times. February 1, 1926. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Traffic Gains Below 61st St. Moving Slower: Regional Plan Report on Conditions and Stabilizing of Volume Seen". New York Herald Tribune. May 25, 1941. p. A8. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1265927736; "Rate of Increase in Traffic Drops; Number of Autos Entering City Below 61st St. Not Rising So Rapidly, Survey Shows". The New York Times. May 25, 1941. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 17, 2024. Pierce, Bert (May 10, 1936). "Rail Removal and Resurfacing Streets Transforming New York Into City of Broad Boulevards". New York Herald Tribune. p. B3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1330786511. Markland, John (November 10, 1940). "Queens Midtown Tube to Open; Vehicular Tunnel, Ready for Public on Friday, Links Manhattan To Long Island and Will Relieve Traffic on City's Bridges". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 17, 2024. "Manhattan Bridge Road Being Repaired: Motorists From Long Island Instructed to Follow Car Tracks to Right Motorists Light Lamps". New-York Tribune. September 28, 1920. p. 7. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 576280384. "New Street Planned To Abate Crush at Queensboro Bridge: Project Submitted to Board of Estimate Calls for Expenditure of $1,080,000 for Property Acquisition". The New York Herald, New York Tribune. May 19, 1924. p. 20. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1112973057; "Wants New Street for Bridge Traffic; Miller Offers Plan to Relieve Congestion at the Manhattan End of Queensboro". The New York Times. May 19, 1924. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Asks City to Help Queensboro Bridge; Commissioner Mills Submits Plan to Acquire $528,000 in Property for New Approach". The New York Times. October 9, 1924. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024; "Mills Has Plan to End Congestion on Queensboro Bridge". The Standard Union. October 8, 1924. p. 1. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Miller Plan for Tube to Bridge Plaza Wins; Estimate Board Committee Authorizes Tunnel Under Second Av. to Queensboro Span". The New York Times. October 29, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024; "Queensboro Bridge Relief Seen by May". New York Daily News. November 1, 1925. p. 77. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "New York Tries Four Lane Plan on Its Bridges: Three-quarter Idea for Rush Hours". Chicago Daily Tribune. March 15, 1927. p. 15. ISSN 1085-6706. ProQuest 180843509. "Avoid Queensboro Bridge To Relieve Congestion: Resurfacing of Structure Will Take From Four to Six Months". The New York Herald, New York Tribune. April 27, 1924. p. A14. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1113028349; "Resurfacing Queensboro Bridge Under Way". The Standard Union. April 27, 1924. p. 17. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Stretch of Safety Pavement Will Be Installed This Week On Queensboro Bridge Roadway". New York Herald Tribune. April 21, 1935. p. A6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1221584948. "Trucks Weakened Queensboro Bridge; Connolly Declares Congestion Is Due to Replacing of Supports Crushed by Heavy Loads". The New York Times. October 8, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024; "Heavy Traffic Wrecks Bridge Buckle Plates". The Standard Union. October 8, 1925. p. 24. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com; "Queens Bridge, Bent Under Heavy Loads, Unsafe for Traffic". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. October 8, 1925. p. 23. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Queens Bridge Is Safe—Mills". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. October 10, 1925. p. 24. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Has Plan to Ease Queens Bridge Jam; Goldman Proposes to Do Away With Footpaths and to Add Three Vehicular Lanes". The New York Times. December 3, 1926. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024; "Three New Lanes Urged to Ease Bridge Jams". New York Daily News. December 12, 1926. p. 102. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Plans to Revise Queensboro Span". Times Union. December 2, 1926. p. 44. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Added Traffic Lanes on Bridge Proposed". The Christian Science Monitor. February 7, 1927. p. 5A. ISSN 0882-7729. ProQuest 512104318. "Urges Adding Lanes on Queensboro Bridge: Fifth Avenue Association Also Wants More Approaches as Proposed by Goldman". The New York Times. April 5, 1927. p. 46. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 104224701. "Queens Bridge Alteration Work Gets $150,000: Estimate Board Appropriates Sum to Finish Plans and Pay for Other Preliminary Work on Traffic Aid Plan May Cost $10,000,000 Appeal for East River Vehicle Tunnel Made by Fifth Ave. Association at Meeting". New York Herald Tribune. April 26, 1927. p. 23. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1113699095; "City Acts to Ease Queens Bridge Jam; Votes $150,000 to Finish Plans and to Reconstruct Roads and Entrances". The New York Times. April 26, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024; "City to Enlarge Queensboro Bridge". Times Union. April 25, 1927. p. 48. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "New Bridge Roadways Approved by Board; $3,000,000 Improvement Plan Means Three More Lanes on Queensboro Span". The New York Times. June 15, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024; "Queens Bridge Enlargement Is Given Approval". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. June 15, 1927. p. 20. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com; "New Roadways for Queensboro Bridge". The Herald Statesman. June 15, 1927. p. 2. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Queensboro Bridge Approaches Again Delayed". New York Herald Tribune. September 28, 1928. p. 19. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1113496872; "Asks City to Halt Queens Bridge Plan; Berry Charges Property Owners Demand Excessive Prices for Site of Approaches". The New York Times. May 4, 1928. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Protests Dropping Queens Bridge Plan; Commerce Chamber Says Loss of Plants Would Be Costly to the City". The New York Times. May 7, 1928. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "$6,000,000 to Rebuild Bridge to Queens; Board of Estimate Approves Plan to Increase Traffic Capacity 50 Per Cent". The New York Times. November 2, 1928. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024; "City Pushes Work on Upper Deck of Queens Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. November 11, 1928. p. 20. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com; "Work to Start Upon New Lanes on Queens Span". The Brooklyn Citizen. November 1, 1928. p. 1. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Queens Bridge Road to Open Thursday; Approaches to New Queensboro Bridge Roadway". The New York Times. June 22, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Bridge Remodeling Will Benefit Queens; Will Stimulate Business Growth and Create Realty Demand". The New York Times. November 11, 1928. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Queensboro Bridge to Have Fire Guard". New York Daily News. April 15, 1928. p. 103. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "City Prepares To Reconstruct Queens Bridge: Plans for East River Span Call for New Ramp Approaches and Exits on Each End Wide Lane for Motor Cars Road To Be Built at Once at Cost of $2,750,000". New York Herald Tribune. April 28, 1929. p. 2. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1111968616; "Queens Bridge Road to Ease Auto Jam; Goldman Reports Progress on Building of New Motorway Is Satisfactory". The New York Times. April 28, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Queensboro Bridge Roadway Project: Contract for Upper Deck to Be Let This Month—acquiring Land for Approaches". The New York Times. May 12, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 18, 2023. "Building Road on Bridge To Be Started This Month: Contracts Let for Queensboro Bridge Improvement". New York Herald Tribune. August 11, 1929. p. D2. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1111998616; "New Drive is Begun Over Queens Bridge; Work Starts on Foundations for Three-Lane Roadway at East End of Structure". The New York Times. August 16, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024; "New Driveway Started Over Queens Bridge". The Standard Union. August 16, 1929. p. 5. Retrieved January 8, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Work at Bridge Starts.: Contract Let on New Roadway of Queensboro Span". The New York Times. September 1, 1929. p. RE6. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 104718872; "Commence New Drive in Queens Bridge Project". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. August 16, 1929. p. 8. Retrieved January 8, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Viaduct Contract Let.; Work to Start at Once on Two-Way Queensboro Bridge Project". The New York Times. April 15, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 8, 2024; "Low Bid on Queens Bridge Viaduct". New York Daily News. April 12, 1930. p. 208. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 8, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "New Roadway to Increase Capacity of Queensboro Bridge". The New York Times. February 22, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "New Upper Lane Of Queensboro Bridge Opened: Mayor Walker, Harvey and Other Officials Participate in Double Ceremony 2d Improvement in Week Police Announce Rules for Use of Approaches". New York Herald Tribune. June 26, 1931. p. 40. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1114173151; "Mayor Opens Deck on Queens Bridge; the Mayor Opens Another Bridge Remodeled for Traffic Needs" (PDF). The New York Times. June 26, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 18, 2017. "Bridge Roadway To Long Island Opens Thursday: Passenger Car Lane on Queensboro Link to Add 50 Per Cent to Facilities New Vehicular Lane to Queens Opens Thursday". New York Herald Tribune. June 22, 1931. p. 13. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1114185333; "Queens Bridge Road to Open Thursday; Approaches to New Queensboro Bridge Roadway". The New York Times. June 22, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Police Bar Use Of Queensboro Bridge Footpath: New Upper Deck Opened to Motorists for Month hut Police Block Pedestrians". New York Herald Tribune. July 27, 1931. p. 15. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1114249340. "Upper Roadway Of Queensboro Bridge Ready: Traffic Starts Tomorrow, 5 Months Ahead of Time With LaGuardia to Lead Cavalcade Across Span". New York Herald Tribune. December 18, 1938. p. 28. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1243107063. "City Eliminates Danger to Tires On Queens Span: Workmen Busy All Night Widening Traffic Lanes, Bevel Off Edges of Guides Motorists Are Still Wary Mulrooney Issues Assurance Widest Cars Are Safe Now". New York Herald Tribune. June 28, 1931. p. 6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1114134437; "New Bridge Lanes Widened for Autos; Edges of Two Safety Grooves That Ruined Tires on Queens Span, Are Beveled Down". The New York Times. June 28, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Upper Deck Reopened on Queensboro Bridge; Repaved With Asphalt to Fill Safety Groves That Were Source of Constant Complaint". The New York Times. September 12, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 8, 2024; "Tar Blocks Trumps on This Bridge". New York Daily News. September 5, 1931. p. 177. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 8, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "West End Plaza On Queensboro Bridge Advised: First Av, Association Head Suggests Means of Ending Congestion in Manhattan Tunnel Also Is Proposed Depressed Railway Tracks North and South Favored". New York Herald Tribune. August 30, 1931. p. E12. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1114281184; "Traffic Problem at Queens Bridge; Plaza at Manhattan Entrance of Span Urged by First Avenue Association". The New York Times. August 30, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Levy Plans Tunnel for 2d Av. Traffic: Proposes 10-block Underpass Near the Queensboro Bridge to Ease Congestion". The New York Times. August 6, 1936. p. 21. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 101778533. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Busy City Span Still Unfinished After 25 Years: Huge Piles of Hewn Granite Found Lying Unused Under Queensboro Bridge Seepage Damaging Piers Retired Contractor Tells of Vain Pleas to Mayors". New York Herald Tribune. May 7, 1933. p. 16. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1221799640. "Bridge Held Unfinished.: Grand Jury Found Peril in Granite on Queensborough Span". The New York Times. June 9, 1934. p. 16. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 100931933. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Board to Hear City Bridge Toll Protests Today: Brooklyn and Queens to Send Delegations Opposing Untermyer Proposal Call Idea Discriminatory Mayor Still Optimistic, on the Financial Outlook In Race for Mayor". New York Herald Tribune. May 31, 1933. p. 6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1222137199; "Bridge Tolls Seen as Blow to Realty; Rentals of 15 Modern Houses on 57th St. Are Endangered by Plan, Says Hackett". The New York Times. June 12, 1933. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "O'Ryan Changes Rules For Queensboro Bridge: West-Bound Cars Use Upper Road 5 to 11 A. M. Weekdays". New York Herald Tribune. June 7, 1934. p. 21. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1114832420; "Schedule Revised on Queens Bridge: Upper Level Will Be Used for Manhattan-bound Cars Only Between 5 and 11 a.m." The New York Times. June 7, 1934. p. 25. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 100941811. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "New Rule Speeds Traffic On Queensboro Bridge". The New York Times. July 29, 1935. p. 3. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 101400626. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "New Lights to Control Queens Bridge Traffic". The New York Times. October 9, 1935. p. 20. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 101345904. Retrieved January 8, 2024; "New Traffic Light System to End Queensboro Bridge Congestion to Be Tested". The Brooklyn Citizen. September 27, 1935. p. 3. Retrieved January 8, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Auto Injuries On Queensboro Bridge Up 45: Motorists Demand the City Replace Wooden Paving With Skid-Proof Surface Kracke Promises Relief Says 'Solution Is Near,' Laying Blame on 'Chiselers'". New York Herald Tribune. August 30, 1934. p. 17. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1329262709. "Failure to End Queensboro Span Skidding Scored". Times Union. January 30, 1935. p. 8. Retrieved January 8, 2024 – via newspapers.com; "Harvey Would Prevent Queensboro Bridge Skids". New York Daily News. February 6, 1934. p. 225. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 8, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Paving Finished in May On Queensboro Bridge". New York Herald Tribune. March 24, 1935. p. 26C. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1221576310. "Paving Queensboro Bridge: Non-Skid Surface Being Laid at East End". New York Herald Tribune. April 23, 1935. p. 20. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1221958840; "Queensboro Bridge Skids Combatted". New York Daily News. April 22, 1935. p. 320. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 8, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Debate Pavement for Queens Span". New York Daily News. July 19, 1935. p. 302. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 8, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Delays in Repairing Project On Queensboro Bridge Bring Demand to End Car Congestion". New York Herald Tribune. June 21, 1936. p. B6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1330813117. "Begin Repaving Bridge Lane". The New York Times. March 3, 1936. p. 29. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 101904771. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Speeds Queens Span Job: Kracke Orders Double Shift to Work on Repairing". The New York Times. July 21, 1936. p. 19. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 101765799. Retrieved January 8, 2024; "Repaying Work On Queensboro Bridge Speeded: Third Lane Finished, Other 2 To Be Ready by Labor Day, Kracke Announces 2 Labor Shifts Assigned One-Direction Traffic Is Urged on Upper Roadway Speeds Bridge Repaving". New York Herald Tribune. July 21, 1936. p. 16. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1237408577. "Queens Bridge Paving Faces a New Delay: Materials Running Short, but Kracke Says Job Can Be Done Before Cold Weather". The New York Times. October 8, 1936. p. 25. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 101595413. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Delays in Repairing Project On Queensboro Bridge Bring Demand to End Car Congestion". New York Herald Tribune. June 18, 1937. p. 11. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1249370882; "Mayor Dedicates New Bridge Road: $1,000,000 Five-lane Way on Queensboro Span is Termed Monument to WPA". The New York Times. June 18, 1937. p. 23. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 101998681. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Bridge Repaving Begins: 100 Men Start on Ten-month Job on Queensboro Span". The New York Times. July 9, 1938. p. 15. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 102548891. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Queens Bridge Repairs Snarl Traffic 5 Hours: Queensboro Span's Upper Level Is Shut and Cars Jam Up 31 Blocks, Westward to Madison Avenue". New York Herald Tribune. October 4, 1938. p. 21. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1258501728; "Queensboro Bridge Deck to Be Repaved". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. October 1, 1938. p. 2. Retrieved January 8, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Mayor Reopens Queens Bridge Upper Highway: Assails His and W. P. A.'s Critics in Ceremonies on Repaved 'Bellyache Lane'". New York Herald Tribune. December 20, 1938. p. 3A. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1244785081; "Mayor Reopens Queensboro Lane: Further Projects Promised to Borough as Traffic Resumes on Resurfaced Deck". The New York Times. December 20, 1938. p. 52. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 102469900. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "City Preparing To Raze Rest Of 2d Ave. 'El': Will Discontinue Service Between Chatham Square and Queensboro Bridge". New York Herald Tribune. April 23, 1942. p. 1A. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1265933708; "Move to Raze 'El' on 2d Avenue Gains; Assembly Committee Reports Bill After WPB Pleas That Scrap Is Vital to War". The New York Times. April 22, 1942. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 17, 2024. "LaGuardia Draws First Spike Starting 2d Ave. El Demolition". New York Herald Tribune. July 8, 1942. p. 17. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1266856712. "2d Ave. 'El' Now Just 27,100 Tons of Scrap; Razing of 54th St. Pillar Ends an Eyesore". The New York Times. October 1, 1942. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 17, 2024. Irwin, Don (August 8, 1944). "Moses Planning Highway Link With Idlewild: $7,100,000 Project to Cover 11 Miles in Queens May Get Under Way in Year Route of Proposed Road Linking Manhattan and Idlewild". New York Herald Tribune. p. 26A. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1282951205. "Chances in Budget Adopted by Board; $239,911,239 Total Exceeds by $282,035 the Program of Planning Commission". The New York Times. December 5, 1946. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 17, 2024; "Board to Drop Traffic Plans for Schools". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. December 2, 1946. p. 2. Retrieved January 17, 2024 – via newspapers.com. Bennett, Charles G. (May 18, 1949). "Bridge Plaza Plan Drops Big Garage; New Designs for Queensboro's Manhattan Approaches Omit $3,210,000 Structure". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 17, 2024. "Queensboro Bridge Gets New Paint Job--First in 8 Years". New York Daily News. July 11, 1948. p. 78. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 17, 2024 – via newspapers.com. Price, Ben (July 4, 1949). "Queensboro Bridge Scheduled For $11,995,000 Improvements: Two New Lanes for Upper Deck, a Bus Terminal and Better Approaches Included in Plans". New York Herald Tribune. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1327492208. "Work Begins Soon on Bridge Plazas; First to Have Its Approaches Widened and Improved Will Be Williamsburg Span". The New York Times. May 1, 1949. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 17, 2024. "City Urges Bridge to Welfare Island; $3,000,000 Project Advanced as Best Aid to Traffic on Queensboro Span". The New York Times. February 11, 1949. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024; "Welfare I. Builds Aged Sick Haven". New York Daily News. June 15, 1950. p. 326. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 18, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "A Barrier to Prevent Jaywalking; Jaywalkers at Queensboro Bridge Curbed by New Fences on 2d Ave". The New York Times. September 8, 1951. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024; "Bridge Fences Bar Jaywalks". New York Daily News. September 8, 1951. p. 246. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 18, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "$3,500,000 Garage at Queensboro Bridge Awaits Financing From City Parking Meters". The New York Times. March 15, 1951. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Noonan, Dan (August 22, 1954). "Bridge Toll Impractical Now as in 1951--Moses". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. p. 1. Retrieved January 18, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "New Viaducts, To Queensboro Bridge Planned: More Queens Approaches to Upper Level To Be Step Toward 4 Lanes There". New York Herald Tribune. October 2, 1951. p. 21. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1318539646; "Queensboro Span to Be Renovated; $6,964,000 Program Includes Another Two-Lane Roadway, Ending One-Way System". The New York Times. October 2, 1951. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Urges Prompt Face-Lifting for City Hall". New York Daily News. August 19, 1952. p. 281. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 18, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Harlem Bridge Job Will Take 4 Years; Third Ave. Span to Be Closed for Repairs After Willis Link Is Reopened This Year". The New York Times. May 12, 1952. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "City's Plan Ready to Rebuild Bridge; Four Tenements at Manhattan End of Queensboro Span to Come Down This Fall". The New York Times. September 14, 1952. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "85 Million Sought for City Projects; $8,221,531 Would Be Used to Start Work on New Roadway for the Queensboro Bridge". The New York Times. August 14, 1953. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Queensboro Repaying to Start". New York Herald Tribune. August 30, 1954. p. 8. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1322551658; "Repaving to Start on Queensboro Span". The New York Times. August 30, 1954. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "$7,697,650 Voted Queensboro Span; Contracts to Be Let at Once for Upper-Deck Roadway and Two Approaches". The New York Times. June 11, 1955. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Welfare Island Gets Own Bridge; $6,500,000 Link With Long Island City Is Opened by Jack and Lundy". The New York Times. May 19, 1955. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Eldredge & Horenstein 2014, p. 126. "$6,502,900 Approved for East River Span". The New York Times. February 8, 1952. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024; "Welfare Island Span Put Safely in Place". New York Daily News. September 28, 1954. p. 63. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 18, 2024 – via newspapers.com. Phillips, McCandlish (April 7, 1957). "City's Last Trolley at End of Line; Buses Will Replace 49-Year Route on Queensboro Span" (PDF). The New York Times. p. 1. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 17, 2008; "Trolley Ends New York Run". Star-Gazette. April 7, 1957. p. 4. Retrieved January 18, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Bridge Elevators Shut". The New York Times. April 14, 1957. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024; "Bridge Lifts Go Out With Trolley". New York Daily News. April 9, 1957. p. 19. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 18, 2024 – via newspapers.com. Governors Island: Options for Reuse After Federal Government Departure : Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Government Management, Information, and Technology of the Committee on Government Reform and Oversight, House of Representatives, One Hundred Fifth Congress, First Session, July 14, 1997. U.S. Government Printing Office. 1998. p. 95. ISBN 978-0-16-056314-0. Feron, James (January 22, 1958). "Queens Span Job Near Completion; 2 Lanes and New Ramps on Queensboro Bridge Due to Be Finished in May" (PDF). The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 18, 2017. "Detours Set On Queens Bridges". New York Herald Tribune. October 18, 1957. p. 13. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1327627229; "Traffic Rerouting Set; Three Changes in Queens Take Effect Tomorrow". The New York Times. October 20, 1957. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "New Queensboro Bridge Roadways Opening Today". New York Herald Tribune. September 11, 1958. p. 1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1327019243; Stengren, Bernard (September 11, 1958). "New Roads Ready on 2 Bridges Here; Queensboro and Brooklyn Spans' Facilities to Open Today and Monday". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Queensboro Bridge Marks 50th Year". New York Herald Tribune. April 7, 1959. p. 13. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1323960299; "Queensboro Bridge is Dedicated Anew". The New York Times. April 7, 1959. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Bridge Power Deal Would Add 2 Lanes". The New York Times. June 25, 1958. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Queensboro Bridge Used by Con Ed for New Cables". New York Herald Tribune. August 10, 1960. p. 8. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1327212169. Ingraham, Joseph C. (August 10, 1960). "Con Ed Giving City Two Bridge Roads; Utility, in Paying $4,000,000 for Queensboro Lanes, Gets Route for Power Lines". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "2 Bridge Lanes Added; Opened on Queensborough Span for Autos Only". The New York Times. September 16, 1960. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Bennett, Charles G. (May 19, 1960). "25 Million in Roads Approved for City". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Illson, Murray (August 23, 1961). "City Builds Colleges Too Slowly, Dr. Everett Tells Plan Board; Delay and Inefficiency Block Much-Needed Construction, Chancellor Declares". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Stengren, Bernard (February 9, 1962). "Bridge Computer for Cars Studied; Plan to Cut Queensboro Jam Is Costly, Barnes Says". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Mayor Approves Razing on 2d Ave.; 11 Buildings Face Demolition for Bridge Underpass". The New York Times. November 8, 1964. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 11, 2023. O'Kane, Lawrence (March 13, 1965). "City Benefactor to Improve Plaza; Plans to Landscape Area off Queensboro Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Kihss, Peter (March 8, 1965). "Moses Asks Garage At 59th St. Bridge; Plan Angers Barnes; Moses Proposes a Garage at Queensboro Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 10, 2023. "Moses Asks Garage & Barnes Burns Up". New York Daily News. March 8, 1965. p. 5. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 11, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Devlin, John C. (January 25, 1966). "Barnes Urges Queens Garage To Relieve Traffic in Manhattan". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Parking Garage in Queens Voted; 1,100-Car Facility Scheduled for Long Island City". The New York Times. June 25, 1966. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Painting Job Is Started On Queensboro Bridge". The New York Times. November 22, 1966. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 15, 2022. Tolchin, Martin (July 14, 1970). "Consultants Did 10 Bridge Studies: and None Was Implemented on Queensboro Since '48". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Within, Richard (April 15, 1973). "Shift on Emission May Cost Drivers". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. Dembart, Lee (June 16, 1977). "Broad Parking Ban in Manhattan Begins as Mayor Yields to Ruling". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017. Witkin, Richard (March 13, 1971). "City Bridge-Toll Plans". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 29, 2022. "Bridge Toll Study". Newsday. April 22, 1970. p. 13. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 916064041. "He Calls Toll on Bridges a Benefit to Straphangers". New York Daily News. May 24, 1971. p. 314. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Study Says New Tolls Ridiculous". Newsday. April 30, 1977. p. 4. ISSN 2574-5298. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Prial, Frank J. (December 8, 1971). "Network of Malls Urged By City for Midtown Area". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Landmark Status Given To Queensboro Bridge". The New York Times. November 24, 1973. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 29, 2022. "This Bridge to Wear A New Gold Plate". New York Daily News. November 24, 1973. p. 5. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved March 29, 2022 – via newspapers.com. Lieberman, Mark (September 26, 1973). "No Tollgate on a Bridge to the Past?". New York Daily News. p. 171. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved March 29, 2022 – via newspapers.com. "Formal Landmark Status Is Given to Central Park". The New York Times. May 10, 1974. p. 41. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 120003956. Fowler, Glenn (February 10, 1974). "City Cites Boerum Hill". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Manes: 2 Toll-Free Ways Over Queensboro Bridge". New York Daily News. January 20, 1977. p. 560. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Better Subways, Not Tolls Manes Pollution Solution". New York Daily News. February 25, 1977. p. 450. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Weisman, Steven R. (August 6, 1977). "Beame, U.S. Reach an 'Understanding' on a Parking Ban". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017. Mulligan, Arthur (April 21, 1976). "Queensboro Bridge Lane Closing". New York Daily News. p. 25. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved January 18, 2024 – via newspapers.com. See: Kaiser, Charles (July 8, 1977). "Plans for $2 Million Open-Air Market Under Queensboro Bridge Are Approved". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 19, 2023. Retrieved October 12, 2023; "Board of Estimate Votes a New Lease For Bridgemarket". The New York Times. December 23, 1977. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 19, 2023. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Geline, Robert (July 14, 1977). "Warn Queensboro Bridge May Be Like the London". New York Daily News. p. 18. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Treen, Joseph M. (February 27, 1978). "Queensborough Bridge: Safe, but Awfully Seedy: Queensborough Bridge Decaying". Newsday. p. 1. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 923100586. Larkin, Kathy (November 16, 1982). "Bridge Masters". New York Daily News. p. 194. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Extensive Inspection of 6 New York City Bridges Scheduled by State". The New York Times. March 26, 1978. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023; "City Bridges To Be Repaired, Governor Says". Newsday. March 26, 1978. p. 19Q. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 964216095. Treen, Joseph M. (March 30, 1978). "Repairs in the Works For 59th Street Bridge". Newsday. p. 18Q. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 964676127. "Queensboro Bridge, Under the Brush". Newsday. September 7, 1978. p. 19Q. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 964688974. Rabin, Bernard (December 30, 1977). "Paint Job in Spring for Queensboro Bridge". New York Daily News. p. 416. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Fried, Joseph P. (January 30, 1979). "Reverse-Traffic Lane Speeding Buses to Queens". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "2 Lanes Closed on Queensboro". Newsday. August 7, 1979. p. 1Q. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 965307340. "The City". The New York Times. August 7, 1979. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Miele, Alfred (August 7, 1979). "Two Queensboro Lanes Rotting; Shut for 3 Yrs". New York Daily News. p. 70. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Barbanel, Josh (November 28, 1982). "Shaky Bridges In New York". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Bike Lane Opens on Queensboro". New York Daily News. July 5, 1979. p. 98. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Thomas, Robert McG Jr. (October 28, 1980). "New York City Gets $96.7 Million In Federal Transportation Funds". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Calderone, Joe (January 2, 1985). "Detours Through 1992 On Queensboro Bridge". Newsday. p. 25. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 1469993383. "Funds for Bridge Repairs". Newsday. December 3, 1981. p. 23. ISSN 2574-5298. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Queensboro Bridge Lanes to Close". The New York Times. July 7, 1983. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Repairs Set for 3d Ave. Bridge". New York Daily News. July 7, 1983. p. 257. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Queensboro Bridge ramp will close". New York Daily News. March 9, 1984. p. 190. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Metro Datelines; Queensboro Ramp Reopened to Traffic". The New York Times. October 6, 1988. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 15, 2022. Dunlap, David W. (August 16, 1985). "It's Time to Cross Some Bridges: a Guide to 4 Prominent Promenades". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "The City; $60 Million Given For Bridge Repairs". The New York Times. October 7, 1985. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Hevesi, Dennis (February 7, 1987). "Queensboro Bridge Plan to Add to Traffic Woes". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 15, 2022. "2 Queensboro Bridge Ramps to Close for a Year". The New York Times. October 4, 1987. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Severe Corrosion Found on Queensboro Bridge". The Reporter Dispatch. September 29, 1988. p. 8. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Kandel, Bethany (April 13, 1988). "New York's troubled bridges; NYC span closed; traffic snarl certain". USA Today. p. 3A. ProQuest 306018539. Dallas, Gus (April 12, 1987). "Why Gridlock Will Span City". New York Daily News. pp. 635, 636, 637. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Polsky, Carol (October 28, 1989). "Queensboro Bridge to Open Lanes". Newsday. p. 10. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278172922. Rist, Curtis (December 3, 1989). "Manhattan a Bridge Too Far Commuters hit where they live". Newsday. p. 4. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278162543. Sims, Calvin (March 18, 1990). "M.T.A. Proposes Rail Line to Link Major Airports". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 9, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2016. Levy, Clifford J. (February 1, 1995). "Port Authority May Scale Back Airport Rail Line". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 1, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017. "Time for Bridge Traffic Jams". The New York Times. June 12, 1990. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 17, 2023. Carper, Alison (June 12, 1990). "Bridge Work Delays Drivers". Newsday. p. 19. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278327390. Perez-Rivas, Manuel (June 14, 1990). "Bridge Snarls Anger Queens Residents want DOT to speed Queensboro repairs". Newsday. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278199121. "Paved With Intentions". Newsday. October 15, 1993. p. 43. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278688150. Sachar, Emily (July 12, 1993). "Span to Get Carpool Lane". Newsday. p. 12. ISSN 2574-5298. Retrieved October 18, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Wald, Matthew L. (April 4, 1994). "Part of a Bridge Over East River Is Marked Out For Car Pools". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 15, 2022. Rist, Curtis (April 18, 1994). "Bridge Carpool Lanes". Newsday. p. 4. ISSN 2574-5298. Retrieved October 18, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Sachar, Emily (October 2, 1994). "City on the Go Slow Lane Blues a Repairman With a Touch for Glass". Newsday. p. A68. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278881930. Manns, Lisa (July 6, 1995). "Queensboro Bridge Slated For Repairs Once Again This time, it's a $161M project that could last 42 months". Newsday. p. B07. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278889776. Ramirez, Anthony (October 20, 1996). "In Land of Shattered Nerves, Bridge Traffic Worsens". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Pierre-Pierre, Garry (November 12, 1996). "Light Traffic On First Day Of Reversal At a Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Pierre-Pierre, Garry (October 31, 1996). "Queensboro Bridge Entrances Will Exit". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 18, 2017. Winslow, Olivia (October 31, 1996). "Rudy Makes U-Turn On Queensboro". Newsday. p. A29. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278985395. Ramirez, Margaret (November 13, 1996). "Bridging the Gaffe Sparks Protest". Newsday. p. A23. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278956052. Kennedy, Randy (November 11, 1996). "Queensboro To Restore Old Routes As of Today". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 18, 2017. Kheel, Curtis J. (November 12, 1996). "Protest at Q'boro Bridge". Newsday. p. A22. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 278988193. Cooper, Michael (September 30, 1997). "Worker Dies as Scaffold Collapses in Repair Job". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Hetter, Katia (July 19, 1998). "Trouble Over Bridged Water / City's Queensboro lane switch plan upsets business". Newsday. p. A24. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 279107687. James, Rutenberg (August 3, 1998). "City Bridgework Brings Rerouting". New York Daily News. p. 2. ISSN 2692-1251. ProQuest 313599435. Foley, Elizabeth (August 3, 1998). "Repairs Close Lanes On Bridge". Newsday. p. A29. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 279111933. Greene, Leonard (July 22, 1998). "Lane Changes for Queensboro". Newsday. p. A29. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 279111008. "Quick Hit / Queensboro Bridge Daily Use 1997". New York Daily News. August 26, 1999. p. 2. ISSN 2692-1251. ProQuest 313699965. Donohue, Pete (September 10, 2000). "More Road Blues Likely on Queensboro Bridge". New York Daily News. p. 32. ISSN 2692-1251. ProQuest 305611345. Evans, Martin C. (October 2, 2001). "America's Ordeal / Early Birds Try to Beat Restrictions". Newsday. p. A30. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 279501619. Blair, Jayson (October 1, 2001). "City, Noting Traffic Decrease, Continues Lone Driver Rules". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 19, 2023. O'Grady, Jim (March 3, 2002). "Neighborhood Report: Queensboro Bridge; Tolls on East River Bridges? Not in Their Backyard". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Bowles, Pete; Thrush, Glenn (October 8, 2003). "Mayor Wavers on Bridge Tolls / Cites lengthy process to start". Newsday. p. A16. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 279772214. "Innovations & Accomplishments" (PDF). New York City Department of Transportation. 2006. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Robin, Joshua (August 22, 2005). "The Fold: Queensboro Bridge Makeover, Restoration on the River". Newsday. p. A22. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 279974075. Brownlow, Ron (October 20, 2005). "Fire On Queensboro Bridge Stops Traffic For Hours". Queens Chronicle. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Robin, Joshua; Bowles, Pete (October 20, 2005). "Fire puts bridge's face-lift on hold". Newsday. p. A14. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 279968514. Brady, Emily (April 8, 2007). "A Bridge Not Quite Far Enough for Some". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "Queensboro Bridge Centennial Celebration Events and Exhibits". NYC Bridge Centennial Commission. Archived from the original on October 27, 2011. Retrieved February 20, 2010. Nir, Sarah Maslin (December 24, 2013). "Queensboro Bridge Lane to Be Closed Every Night". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 18, 2017. "East Side Residents Say Ed Koch Queensboro Bridge Traffic Is Keeping Them Awake". CBS New York. October 16, 2015. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Matua, Angela (April 26, 2016). "The 107-year-old Queensboro Bridge will receive $244 million in funding for repairs". QNS.com. Retrieved September 8, 2023. "Queensboro Bridge To Get $244 Million For Repairs In Mayor's Budget". LIC Post. April 27, 2016. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Robbins, Christopher (January 28, 2021). "The Brooklyn Bridge Will Finally Get Its Own Bike Lane". Gothamist. Retrieved January 28, 2021. Fitzsimmons, Emma G. (January 28, 2021). "Car Lanes to Become Bike Lanes on 2 Major New York City Bridges". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 28, 2021. Duggan, Kevin (February 3, 2022). "City punts fix for 'treacherous' Queensboro Bridge bike and pedestrian path by another year". amNewYork. Retrieved January 18, 2024; McLogan, Elle (September 6, 2023). "City Councilmember Julie Won slams delayed transformation of Queensboro Bridge pathway". CBS New York. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Repair Work on the Queensboro Bridge Begins, at Least One Vehicle Lane to Remain Closed for Nearly 2 Years". LIC Post. February 14, 2022. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Queensboro Bridge Lane Closures Begin For 2-Year Repair Project". CBS News. February 12, 2022. Retrieved March 10, 2022. Strahan, Tracie; Siff, Andrew (May 5, 2023). "Congestion Pricing in NYC Gets Fed Approval, Final Call Likely Weeks Away". NBC New York. Retrieved May 5, 2023. Gannon, Michael (May 11, 2023). "Congestion pricing clears federal hurdle". Queens Chronicle. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "Approves 'l' Extensions: Public Service Commission Favors the Interborough Layouts". New-York Tribune. December 8, 1910. p. 6. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572381564; "Grants Elevated Extensions". The New York Times. December 8, 1910. p. 3. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Queens Elevated Road; Plans Prepared for Route from Queensboro Bridge to Flushing". The New York Times. August 14, 1910. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 6, 2024. "Manhattan East Side Transit Alternatives (MESA): Major Investment Study/Draft Environmental Impact Statement, August 1999". Metropolitan Transportation Authority, United States Department of Transportation, Federal Transit Administration. August 1999. Retrieved July 11, 2016; "Pioneer Elevated Rattles Its Last". The Daily Oklahoman. June 14, 1942. p. 45. Retrieved January 15, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Plan New Subway". The Chat. September 18, 1909. p. 14. Retrieved November 30, 2023 – via newspapers.com; "New Subway Planned to Help Queens". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 14, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved November 30, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Subway Report Divides New Franchises Between B.R.T. Co. and the Interborough; Triborough to Be Built If They Reject It". The Brooklyn Citizen. June 13, 1911. pp. 1, 2. Retrieved May 30, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Lines in Manhattan Progressing Rapidly". The Brooklyn Citizen. May 23, 1914. p. 14. Archived from the original on May 15, 2023. Retrieved May 15, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Queens Tunnel Act Now Before Mayor". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. April 23, 1915. p. 15. Retrieved May 30, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "M'Call Opposes a 59th St Tunnel; Tells Estimate Board Subway Cars Should Cross the Queensboro Bridge". The New York Times. June 17, 1915. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 30, 2023. "Adopts Tunnel To Queens.; Service Board Approves Change in New Subway Route". The New York Times. July 29, 1915. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on May 4, 2022. Retrieved December 3, 2017. "P. S. Board Approves Tunnel to Queens". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. July 28, 1915. p. 3. Retrieved May 30, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Levy, Clifford J. (February 1, 1995). "Port Authority May Scale Back Airport Rail Line". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 1, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017. Stern, Robert A. M.; Fishman, David; Tilove, Jacob (2006). New York 2000: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Bicentennial and the Millennium. New York: Monacelli Press. p. 68. ISBN 978-1-58093-177-9. OCLC 70267065. OL 22741487M. Boardman, Robert C. (March 10, 1950). "Manhattan's Last Trolley Line Still a Nickel and Keeping Busy". New York Herald Tribune. p. 21. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1326823304. Schneider, Daniel B. (March 1, 1998). "F.Y.I." The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "Ask to Cross Bridge". New-York Tribune. December 12, 1908. p. 14. Retrieved November 29, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "First Car Over Queensboro Bridge; Spur Built and Line Placed in Operation Four Hours After Franchise Is Granted". The New York Times. September 18, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 6, 2024; "Trolleys Run To-night on Queens' Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 18, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Queens Trolley Lines Use Queensboro Bridge". Times Union. October 4, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com; "Across Queensboro Bridge". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. October 5, 1909. p. 4. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "First Car Over Queensboro Bridge; Spur Built and Line Placed in Operation Four Hours After Franchise Is Granted". The New York Times. September 18, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Roberts, John A. (October 1, 2020). "The Queensboro Bridge Railway: Last Trolley Standing". The Juniper Park Civic Association. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "Bridge Line Incorporated; New Company to Run Over the Queensboro Bridge". The New York Times. May 30, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 30, 2023. "Queensborough Bridge Centennial". New York Division Bulletin. 52 (3). Electric Railroaders Association: 1, 5. March 2009. Retrieved January 1, 2016. "South Shore Co.'s Franchise Killed; Public Service Commission Refuses What It Calls a Fifty-Year Monopoly". The New York Times. June 9, 1909. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 30, 2023; "On Queensboro Bridge: Holds Up Car Franchise P. S. C. Thinks South Shore Contract Unfair to the City". New-York Tribune. June 9, 1909. p. 14. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 572198675. "Lifts to Connect Blackwell's Island With Bridge Span". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 4, 1918. p. 2. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Trolley Station on Bridge". Times Union. January 3, 1918. p. 6. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Whalen Rips Up Third Av. Tracks; Cuts Queensboro Bridge Connection With Queens County and Steinway Lines". The New York Times. September 17, 1922. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024; "Queens Busses Defy Court Writ; Whalen Rips Rival Tracks". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 17, 1922. p. 5. Retrieved January 7, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "P. S. C. Sounds a Requiem: Ends Trolley Car Rules". New York Herald Tribune. July 24, 1960. p. 3. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 1325116113. "New Transportation Link Unites Queens and Manhattan by Unbroken Chain". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. February 3, 1910. p. 13. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com; "75,000 Cross Queens Bridge; First Day of Through Service Brings Rush -- Jackson Avenue Desolate". The New York Times. February 6, 1910. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 6, 2024. "Abandoned Stations : Queensborough Bridge Railway terminal". columbia.edu. Retrieved January 6, 2024. "New Queens Trolley Road; One Section of New Line to Jamaica Opened". The New York Times. February 2, 1913. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 6, 2024; "Cars to Winfield Start Trips Today on Jamaica Route". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. January 29, 1913. p. 10. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com. Vincent F., Seyfried (1950). "New York and Queens County Railway and the Steinway Lines, 1867-1939". archive.org. Vincent F. Seyfried. Retrieved December 20, 2015. Dunlap, David W. (July 11, 2003). "Bell Tolls for Reminder of Trolleys Past; City Seeks to Dismantle the Last Kiosk Standing in Manhattan". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Zimmer, Amy (February 23, 2011). "Playground Gates, Green Roof Get UES Preservation Awards". DNAinfo New York. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Hughes, C. J. (September 2, 2007). "An Island Joins the Mainstream". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "Queens Bus Map" (PDF). Metropolitan Transportation Authority. August 2022. Retrieved September 29, 2022. "Bridge Tower Climbing to End". Times Union. October 12, 1912. p. 8. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Oppose Bridge Elevator". The New York Times. November 17, 1912. p. 93. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com; "'Good Roads' Men Fight Elevators for Queensboro Bridge". The Evening World. November 6, 1912. p. 18. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com; "Undertakers Objectors". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. November 10, 1912. p. 13. Retrieved January 6, 2024 – via newspapers.com. "Test for Bridge Elevator; Inclosure Built on Queensboro Span to Study Vehicular Congestion". The New York Times. November 24, 1912. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 6, 2024. "Unique Building to Join Queensboro Bridge; Will Serve Both as Patients' Entrance to Blackwell's Island and Storage Warehouse for Many City Institutions Located There". The New York Times. June 25, 1916. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. Bailey, Anthony (December 1, 1974). "Manhattan's other island". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 12, 2023. McCandlish, Phillips (April 7, 1957). "City's Last Trolley at End of Line; Buses Will Replace 49-Year Route on Queensboro Span" (PDF). The New York Times. p. 1. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 17, 2008. Greater Astoria Historical Society & Roosevelt Island Historical Society 2008, p. 67. Levitan, Benjamin W. (March 31, 1920). "Department of Architectural Engineering: a Unique Institutional Building the Elevator Storehouse, Blackwell's Island, New York City". The American Architect. Vol. 117, no. 2310. p. 415. ProQuest 124682587. Petroff, John (August 27, 1973). "Bridge Bits" (letter to the editor)". New York. p. 5. Retrieved March 7, 2015. Welch, Mary Scott (July 2, 1973). "Walking the City's Bridges". New York. p. 31. Retrieved March 7, 2015. "Will the New Bridge Be Ugly?: Discussion as to the Architectural Beauty of the Blackwell's Island Structure". New-York Tribune. April 14, 1901. p. A1. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571018973. "Eye-bar Tests Seen by Bridge Engineers". Times Union. July 18, 1904. p. 12. Retrieved November 10, 2023 – via newspapers.com. Feinberg, Alexander (March 28, 1959). "Queensboro Bridge Will Be 50 on Monday; Span That Opened Queens to Growth to Have Birthday". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 18, 2024. LaRosa, Paul (March 29, 1984). "Bridging the Gap: A Modest Gala". New York Daily News. p. 204. ISSN 2692-1251. Retrieved October 12, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Ever on the Island!: Soon You Can Inspect Blackwell's Without Inconvenience". New-York Tribune. December 4, 1904. p. A4. ISSN 1941-0646. ProQuest 571616885. "All Past Booms Eclipsed by Queens Speculation: Prices Advanced in Many Instances Threefold—Total Investment Estimated at $40,000,000—Facts and Conditions of the Movement". The New York Times. March 25, 1906. p. RE12. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 96672807. "East 59th Street Again to the Fore; Buying Stimulated by Advancing Work on Blackwell's Island Bridge". The New York Times. March 24, 1907. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "New L.I. Lines Expected". New-York Tribune. September 4, 1905. p. 3. Retrieved November 15, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "The Queensboro Bridge Dedicated to a New Era for Long Island". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. June 12, 1909. p. 1. Retrieved November 30, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Blackwell's Island Bridge Gives Further Realty Stimulus". The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. September 26, 1908. p. 26. Retrieved November 29, 2023 – via newspapers.com. "Queens and Transit.: Development of the Borough Due to Good Transportation". The New York Times. September 16, 1923. p. REA1. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 103199641. "Industrial Plants Costing Millions of Dollars Within Few Blocks of Queensboro Bridge Plaza". The New York Times. June 28, 1914. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Jackson Heights Built Since 1909: Queensboro Bridge Transformed Farm Land Beyond-- New Projects in Sight". The Wall Street Journal. March 16, 1931. p. 22. ISSN 0099-9660. ProQuest 130916844. Robin, Joshua (March 4, 2001). "Queens Blvd. in Reverse". Newsday. p. A07. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 279403746. Alleman, Richard (2013). New York: The Movie Lover's Guide: The Ultimate Insider Tour of Movie New York. Crown. p. 441. ISBN 978-0-8041-3778-2. Robin, Joshua; Cheng, Mae M. (May 4, 2002). "Spidey's Web Over Queens". Newsday. p. A06. ISSN 2574-5298. ProQuest 279616127. Flegenheimer, Matt (November 14, 2011). "Traffic to Stymie Even the Batmobile Shows the Two Sides of Movie Production". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 10, 2023. Eldredge, Niles and Horenstein, Sidney (2014). Concrete Jungle: New York City and Our Last Best Hope for a Sustainable Future. Berkeley, California: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-27015-2. "The Erection of the Blackwell's Island Bridge". Scientific American. Vol. XCVIII, no. 6. August 10, 1907. pp. 100–101. ProQuest 126851967. Greater Astoria Historical Society; Roosevelt Island Historical Society (2008). The Queensboro Bridge. Arcadia Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7385-5488-4. Historic Structures Report: Queensboro Bridge (PDF) (Report). National Register of Historic Places, National Park Service. December 20, 1978. Kunz, F.C. (1909). Report on the Blackwell's Island Bridge (Queensboro Bridge). Pennsylvania Steel Company. Wingate, C.F.; Meyer, H.C. (1913). "Maintenance of Great City Bridges". Engineering Record. Vol. 67. McGraw Publishing Company. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Queensboro Bridge. NYCDOT.gov Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) No. NY-19, "Queensboro Bridge" Queensboro Bridge at Structurae