The George Washington Bridge is a double-decked suspension bridge spanning the Hudson River, connecting Fort Lee in Bergen County, New Jersey, with the Washington Heights neighborhood of Manhattan in New York City. It is named after Founding Father George Washington, the first president of the United States. The George Washington Bridge is the world's busiest motor vehicle bridge, carrying a traffic volume of over 104 million vehicles in 2019[update], and is the world's only suspension bridge with 14 vehicular lanes. The bridge is owned by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, a bi-state government agency that operates infrastructure in the Port of New York and New Jersey. The George Washington Bridge is also informally known as the GW Bridge, the GWB, the GW, or the George, and was known as the Fort Lee Bridge or Hudson River Bridge during construction. The George Washington Bridge measures 4,760 feet (1,450 m) long and has a main span of 3,500 feet (1,100 m). It was the longest main bridge span in the world from its 1931 opening until the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco opened in 1937. The George Washington Bridge is an important travel corridor within the New York metropolitan area. It has an upper level that carries four lanes in each direction and a lower level with three lanes in each direction, for a total of 14 lanes of travel. The speed limit on the bridge is 45 mph (72 km/h). The bridge's upper level also carries pedestrian and bicycle traffic. Interstate 95 (I-95) and U.S. Route 1/9 (US 1/9, composed of US 1 and US 9) cross the river via the bridge. U.S. Route 46 (US 46), which lies entirely within New Jersey, terminates halfway across the bridge at the state border with New York. At its eastern terminus in New York City, the bridge continues onto the Trans-Manhattan Expressway (part of I-95, connecting to the Cross Bronx Expressway). The idea of a bridge across the Hudson River was first proposed in 1906, but it was not until 1925 that the state legislatures of New York and New Jersey voted to allow for the planning and construction of such a bridge. Construction on the George Washington Bridge started in September 1927; the bridge was ceremonially dedicated on October 24, 1931, and opened to traffic the next day. The opening of the George Washington Bridge contributed to the development of Bergen County, New Jersey, in which Fort Lee is located. The upper deck was widened from six to eight lanes in 1946. The six-lane lower deck was constructed beneath the existing span from 1959 to 1962 because of increasing traffic flow. The George Washington Bridge was designed by chief civil engineer Othmar Ammann, design engineer Allston Dana, and assistant chief engineer Edward W. Stearns, with Cass Gilbert as consulting architect. It connects Fort Lee in Bergen County, New Jersey, with Washington Heights in Manhattan, New York. The bridge's construction required 113,000 short tons (101,000 long tons; 103,000 t) of fabricated steel; 28,000 short tons (25,000 long tons; 25,000 t) of wire, stretching 106,000 miles (171,000 km); and 20,000 short tons (18,000 long tons; 18,000 t) of masonry. The bridge carries 14 lanes of traffic, seven in each direction. As such, the George Washington Bridge contains more vehicular lanes than any other suspension bridge and is the world's busiest vehicular bridge. The fourteen lanes of the bridge are split unevenly across two levels: the upper level contains eight lanes while the lower level contains six lanes. The upper level opened on October 25, 1931, and is 90 feet (27 m) wide. The upper level originally had six lanes, though two more lanes were added in 1946. Although the lower level was part of the original plans for the bridge, it did not open until August 29, 1962. The upper level has a vertical clearance of 14 feet (4.3 m), and all trucks and other oversize vehicles must use the upper level. Trucks are banned from the lower level, which has a clearance of 13.6 feet (4.1 m). All lanes on both levels are 8 feet 6 inches (2.59 m) wide. Vehicles carrying hazardous materials (HAZMATs) are prohibited on the lower level due to its enclosed nature. HAZMAT-carrying vehicles may use the upper level, provided that they conform to strict guidelines as outlined in the Port Authority's "Red Book". There are two sidewalks on the upper span of the bridge, one on each side. The northern sidewalk was largely closed after the September 11 attacks; it reopened in 2017 while a temporary suicide prevention fence was installed on the southern sidewalk, in preparation for the installation of permanent fences on both sidewalks. Prior to 2023, pedestrians had to traverse a total of 171 steps while using the northern sidewalk. As part of a renovation, the steps were replaced by a ramp, and two viewing platforms were added. The George Washington Bridge measures 4,760 feet (1,450 m) long and has a main span of 3,500 feet (1,100 m). Accounting for the height of the lower deck, the bridge stretches 212 feet (65 m) above mean high water at its center, and 195 feet (59 m) above mean high water under the New York anchorage. The bridge's main span was the longest main bridge span in the world at the time of its opening in 1931, and was nearly double the 1,850 feet (560 m) of the previous recordholder, the Ambassador Bridge in Detroit. It held this title until the opening of the Golden Gate Bridge in 1937. The completion of the George Washington Bridge proved that longer suspension bridges were both physically and economically feasible. Prior to the bridge's construction, engineers had believed that a suspension span's length was a large indicator of a suspension bridge's economic feasibility. The George Washington Bridge's total width is 119 feet (36 m). When the upper deck was built, it was only 12 feet (3.7 m) thick without any stiffening trusses on the sides, resulting in a deck weighing 1,100 pounds per square foot (5,400 kg/m2) and a length-to-thickness ratio of about 350 to 1. At the time of the George Washington Bridge's opening, most long suspension spans had stiffening trusses on their sides, and spans generally had a length-to-thickness ratio of 60 to 1, which translated to a weight of 13,000 to 14,000 pounds per square foot (63,000 to 68,000 kg/m2) and a thickness equivalent to an 11-story building. During the planning process, Ammann designed the deck around the "deflection theory", an as-yet-unconfirmed assumption that a longer suspension deck did not need to be as stiff in proportion to its length, because the weight of the longer deck itself would provide a counterweight against the deck's movement. This had been tested by Leon Moisseiff when he designed the Manhattan Bridge in 1909, though it was less than half the length of the George Washington Bridge. Stiffening trusses were ultimately excluded from the George Washington Bridge's design to save money; instead, a system of plate girders was installed on the underside of the upper deck. This provided the stiffening that was necessary for the bridge deck, and it was replicated on the lower deck during its construction. The plate-girders underneath each deck, combined with an open-truss design on the bridge's side that connected the decks with each other, resulted in an even stiffer span that was able to resist torsional forces. Four 3-foot (0.91 m)-diameter main cables support the bridge deck. Each main cable contained 61 strands, with each strand made of 434 individual wires, for a total of 26,474 wires per main cable, and 105,986 in all. The cables are covered by a sheath of weather-resistant steel. The upper bridge deck is held by vertical suspender wires attached directly to the main cables by saddle connections; the lower deck is supported by girders attached to the upper. The main cables are anchored in concrete on both sides of the bridge, in a purpose-built anchorage on the New York side and bored and set directly into the cliffs of the Palisades on the New Jersey. Originally, the end of each cable was supposed to receive one of several ornamental designs, such as a wing, fin, tire, or statue; cost-savings after the start of the Great Depression in 1929 preempted the flourishes. The suspension towers on each side of the river are each 604 feet (184 m) tall. They are composed of sections weighing between 37 and 40 short tons (33 and 36 long tons) and contain a combined 475,000 rivets. Each bridge has two archways, one above and one below the decks. The George Washington Bridge is classified as a fracture critical bridge, making it vulnerable to collapse if parts of the towers were to fail, although the towers are located offshore. The original design called for the towers to be encased in concrete and granite in a Revival style, similar to the Brooklyn Bridge. Additional scrutiny of the proposed bridge's engineering found that the steel alone could support the towers, with only a decorative stone facade being retained in the plan. Elevators to carry sightseers to restaurants and observatory proposed decks at the top of each tower were also all pared from the design. Ultimately, even stone facades were postponed in 1929 during the Great Depression due to rising material costs. Even though the steel towers had been left that way for cost reasons, some aesthetic critiques of the bare steel towers were favorable. Several groups, such as the American Institute of Steel Construction, believed that covering the steel framework with masonry would be both misleading and "fundamentally ugly". While the exposed steel towers' design was negatively received by a few critics such as Raymond Hood and William A. Boring, the public reception at the bridge's opening was generally positive. The Swiss-French architect Le Corbusier wrote of the towers: "The structure is so pure, so resolute, so regular that here, finally, steel architecture seems to laugh." Milton MacKaye wrote in The New Yorker that the George Washington Bridge had established Ammann as "one of the immortals of bridge engineering and design, a genius." Ammann never incorporated masonry towers in his bridge plans again. He wrote that the "sturdy appearance and well-balanced distribution of steel in the columns and bracing" gave the bridge's towers "a good appearance, a neat appearance". Over time, the exposed steel towers, with their distinctive criss-crossed bracing, became one of the George Washington Bridge's most identifiable characteristics. Starting on July 4, 2000, and for subsequent special occasions, each of the George Washington Bridge's suspension towers has been illuminated by 380 light fixtures that highlight the exposed steel structure. On each tower there are a mix of 150 and 1000 watt metal halide lamp fixtures. The architectural lighting design was completed by Domingo Gonzalez Associates. Since 1947 or 1948, the bridge has flown the world's largest free-flying American flag on special occasions. Hung inside the arch of the New Jersey tower, it measures 90 feet (27 m) long, 60 feet (18 m) wide, and 450 pounds (200 kg). Until 1976, the flag was taken out of a garage in New Jersey and manually erected on national holidays. During the United States' bicentennial, a mechanical hoisting system was installed, and the flag was stored along the bridge's girders when not in use. When weather allows, it is hoisted on Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Flag Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, and Veterans Day. Since 2006, the flag is also flown on September 11 of each year, honoring those lost in the September 11 attacks. On events where the flag is flown, the tower lights are lit from dusk until 11:59 p.m. The bridge sits near the sites of Fort Washington (in New York) and Fort Lee (in New Jersey), which were fortified positions used by General George Washington and his American forces as they attempted to deter the occupation of New York City in 1776 during the American Revolutionary War. Unsuccessful, Washington evacuated Manhattan by ferrying his army between the two forts. By the end of the 19th century there were more than 200 separate municipalities along the lower Hudson River and the New York Bay, with no unified agency to control commerce or transport in the area and no fixed crossing. The first was proposed in 1888 by civil engineer Gustav Lindenthal, who later became New York City's bridge commissioner. The Hudson and Manhattan Railroad and the Pennsylvania Railroad opened three pairs of tubes under the lower Hudson in the 1900s. The first vehicular crossing across the lower Hudson River, the Holland Tunnel, was opened in 1927, connecting Lower Manhattan with Jersey City. A vehicular bridge across the Hudson River was being considered as early as 1906, during the planning for the Holland Tunnel. Three possible locations for a suspension bridge were considered in the vicinity of 57th, 110th, and 179th Streets in Manhattan, with others rejected on the grounds of aesthetics, geography, or traffic flows. In 1920, English architect Alfred C. Bossom proposed a double-decker bridge with room for vehicular and railroad traffic near 57th Street in Midtown Manhattan. The same year, Othmar Ammann and Gustav Lindenthal proposed a vehicular and railroad bridge to 57th Street in Manhattan, topped by an office building on the Manhattan end that would have been the world's tallest. Lindenthal's plan failed because it did not receive permits from the United States Army Corps of Engineers or approval from the city, and because Midtown Manhattan real estate developers and planners opposed the plan. Ammann unsuccessfully attempted to convince Lindenthal to build his bridge elsewhere, without a tower atop the bridge's terminus. In January 1924, the New York State Chamber of Commerce voted against the 57th Street location in favor of another upstream. Despite this, Lindenthal proposed that a bridge be built there, and carry 16 railroad tracks and 12 lanes of automotive traffic. Meanwhile, Ammann became chief engineer of the Port of New York Authority (now the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey), which was created in 1921 to oversee commerce and transport along the lower Hudson River and New York Bay. He had disassociated himself from Lindenthal's proposal by 1923, conducting his own studies on the feasibility of a bridge from 178th Street in Fort Washington, Manhattan, to Fort Lee in New Jersey. Ammann's advocacy for the Fort Washington–Fort Lee bridge gained support from both New Jersey governor George Silzer and New York governor Alfred E. Smith by mid-1923. In May 1924, Colonel Frederick Stuart Greene, the New York Superintendent of Public Works, announced a plan to construct a suspension bridge between Fort Lee and Fort Washington. At that location, both sides were surrounded by steep cliffs (The Palisades on the New Jersey side, and Washington Heights on the New York side). Thus, it was possible to build the bridge without either impeding maritime traffic or requiring lengthy approach ramps from ground level. A New Jersey state assemblyman introduced a bill for the Hudson River bridge that December. This bill was passed in the New Jersey Assembly in February 1925. After an initial rejection by Silzer, the Assembly made modifications before passing the bill again in March, after which Silzer signed the bill. Around the same time, the New York state legislature was also considering a similar bill. A dispute developed between New York civic groups, who supported the construction of the Hudson River Bridge; and the Parks Conservation Association, who believed that the bridge towers would degrade the quality of Fort Washington Park directly underneath the proposed bridge's deck. In late March 1925, the chairman of the Parks Conservation Association noted that the proposed New York state legislation would provide for the actual construction of the bridge, rather than just the planning. Ultimately, the Hudson River bridge bill was passed in the New York state legislature, and Smith approved the bill that April. In March 1925, Silzer asked Ammann to devise preliminary plans for the Hudson River bridge. Ammann found that the width of the Hudson River decreased by more than 1,000 feet (300 m) when it passed between Fort Lee and Fort Washington. The ledges of Fort Lee and Fort Washington were respectively 300 and 200 feet (91 and 61 m) above mean water level at this point, which was not only ideal geography for a suspension bridge, but also allowed the bridge to be high enough to give sufficient clearance for maritime traffic. However, the differing heights meant that a large cut had to be made through the Fort Lee ledge so that the bridge approach could be built there. The same month, the New Jersey legislature asked for funds for test bores to determine if the geological strata would support the bridge. In response to continuing concerns from park preservationists, Ammann stated that placing the New York suspension tower anywhere else would make the bridge look asymmetrical, which he believed was a worse outcome than placing the tower within the park. The states conducted a study in mid-1925, which found that the Hudson River bridge would be able to pay for itself in twenty-five years if a 50-cent toll were to be placed on every vehicle. After funding was secured, surveyors began examining feasible sites for the future bridge's approaches in August 1925. By law, the New York end of the Hudson River Bridge could only be constructed between 178th and 185th Streets, and the New Jersey end had to be built directly across the river. Geologists made 300-foot (91 m) test bores on the New Jersey side to determine if the site was feasible for laying foundations for the bridge. Othmar Ammann was hired as the bridge's chief engineer. In Ammann's original plans for the bridge, which had been published in March 1925, he had envisioned that the bridge would contain two sidewalks; a roadway that could carry up to 8,000 vehicles per hour; and space for four railroad tracks, in case the two North River railroad tunnels downstream exceeded their train capacity. Cass Gilbert was hired in January 1926 to design architectural elements for the Hudson River bridge, including the suspension towers. The bridge design had yet to be finalized, and its cost could not even be estimated at that point due to the complexity of factors. Gilbert released preliminary sketches of the Hudson River bridge that March; by then, the architect had decided that the span would be a suspension bridge. The sketch accompanied a feasibility report that Ammann and other engineers presented to the Port of New York Authority, which was to operate the bridge. The central span was to be 3,500 feet (1,100 m) long, longer than any other suspension bridge in existence at the time, and 200 feet above mean high water. The bridge would initially carry four lanes of vehicular traffic and sidewalk lanes; the plans called for three additional phases of expansion, culminating in an eight-lane bridge deck with four rapid-transit tracks underneath. The span would be supported by two towers, each 650 feet (200 m) tall. There would also be space to build a second deck in the future below the main deck. Ammann's team also found that the most feasible location for the bridge was at 179th Street in Manhattan (as opposed to 181st or 175th Streets). This was both because the 179th Street location was more aesthetically appealing than the other two locations, and because a 179th Street bridge would be cheaper and shorter in length than a bridge at either of the other streets. At this point in the planning process, the Hudson River bridge's estimated cost was $40 million or $50 million. Because of the proposed bridge's length, engineers also had to test the strength of materials, including suspension cables, that were to be used in the span. Ammann's research department constructed scale models of various designs for the bridge and tested them in wind tunnels. By late 1926, one engineer predicted that construction on the Hudson River bridge would start the following summer. In December 1926, the final plans for the bridge were approved by the public and by the War Department. The Port Authority planned to sell off $50 million worth of bonds to pay for the bridge, and the initial $20 million bond issue was sold that December. Further issues arose when the New Jersey Assembly passed a bill in March 1927, which increased the New Jersey governor's power to veto Port Authority contracts. Smith, the New York governor, and Silzer, the now-former New Jersey governor who had been appointed Port Authority chairman, both objected to the bill since the Port Authority had been intended as a bi-state venture. Afterward, the then-current New Jersey governor A. Harry Moore worked with legislators to revise the legislation. The revised law was ultimately not a significant deviation from the Port Authority's practice at the time, wherein the Port Authority was already submitting its contracts to New Jersey government for review. The George Washington Bridge's construction employed three teams of workers: one each for the New Jersey tower, the New York tower, and the deck. The construction process was relatively safe, although twelve or thirteen workers died during its construction. Of these, three were killed when the foundation for the New Jersey tower flooded; a fourth worker was killed by a blast at the New Jersey anchorage; and the others died because of their own carelessness, according to Port Authority records. In April 1927, the Port Authority opened the first bids for the construction of the Hudson River bridge. It was specifically seeking bids for the construction of the New Jersey suspension tower's foundation. The Manhattan suspension anchorage's location was still undecided at this time. A bid for the New Jersey tower was awarded later that month. In May, the Port Authority opened more bids for the construction of the bridge's approaches and anchorage on the New Jersey side. Dredging operations on the Hudson River, which would allow large ships to pass underneath the bridge, also started that May. By late August, the Port Authority had started condemning plots of land for the bridge's approaches. Montgomery B. Case, the bridge’s chief construction engineer, began construction on the Hudson River bridge on September 21, 1927, with groundbreaking ceremonies held at the sites of both future suspension towers. Each tower was to have a base with a perimeter measuring 89 by 98 feet (27 by 30 m), and descending 80 feet into the riverbed. The riverbed around the towers' sites was dredged first, and then steel pilings were placed in the riverbed to create a watertight cofferdam. The cofferdams for the bridge were the largest ever built at the time. In early October of that year, the Port Authority received bids for the construction of the bridge deck. There were two main methods being considered for the span's construction: the cheaper "wire-cable" method and the more expensive "eyebar" method. The wire-cable method, where the vertical suspender wires are attached directly to the main cables and the deck directly, would require a stiffening truss to support the deck. The eyebar method, where the suspender wires are attached to a chain of eyebars (metal bars with holes in them), would be self-supporting. Ultimately, the Port Authority chose the wire-cable design because of costs, and it awarded the contract for constructing the deck to John A. Roebling Sons' Company. The corresponding contract for manufacturing the steel was awarded to the McClintic-Marshall Company [Wikidata]. The first serious accident during the bridge's construction occurred in December 1927, when three men drowned while working in a caisson on the New Jersey side. Bids for the Manhattan suspension tower were advertised in March 1928. At this point, 64% of the total projected worth of construction contracts had been awarded. The piers that provided foundation for the New Jersey suspension tower and approaches were being constructed. The cliffs on both sides of the river were high enough that only minimal bridge approaches were required on either side. The towers' foundations could reach at most 190 feet (58 m) below mean low water, where the foundations would hit a layer of solid rock. In May 1928, builders started drilling a 50-foot-deep (15 m) cut through the Palisades on the New Jersey side so that the Hudson River bridge approach could be built. By June 1928, half of the money earned during the previous year's $20 million bond sale had been spent on construction. By that October, nearly all blasting operations had been completed. The suspension tower on the New Jersey side had been constructed to a height of 250 feet (76 m), and the tower on the New York side was progressing as well. The suspension towers consisted of 13 segments, each of which were almost 50 feet high. The New York anchorage required 370,000 short tons (330,000 long tons; 340,000 t) of concrete, being freestanding, while the New Jersey anchorage was blasted into the Palisades. By March 1929, the concrete structure of the New York anchorage had been completed, three months ahead of schedule. The anchorage on the New Jersey side, which had been fully bored, consisted of two holes that had been bored 250 feet into the face of the Palisades. On the New Jersey side, 225,000 cubic yards (172,000 m3) of rock had to be blasted out to make way for the New Jersey approach. The suspension towers were nearly complete at the time of the report; only 100 feet of each tower's height remained to be built. Anchors were being placed in the two holes that were being drilled for the New Jersey anchorage, and this task was also nearing completion. In April, the Port Authority acquired the last of the properties that were in the path of the bridge's Manhattan approach. Plans for the Manhattan approach were approved by the New York City Board of Estimate around the same time. The approach was to consist of scenic, meandering ramps leading to both Riverside Drive and the Henry Hudson Parkway, which run along the eastern bank of the Hudson River at the bottom of the cliff in Washington Heights. The bridge would also connect to 178th and 179th Streets, at the top of Washington Heights. A third connection would be made to an underground highway running between and parallel to 178th and 179th Streets; this connection would become the 178th–179th Street Tunnels, and would later be replaced by the Trans-Manhattan Expressway. The original plan for the approach to the underground highway stated that the approach would be made using a monumental stone viaduct descending from the span at a 2.2% gradient. The Port Authority started evicting residents in the approach's path in October 1929. The same month, the Port Authority sold the final $30 million in bonds to pay for the bridge. The plans for the Hudson River bridge's Fort Lee approach were also changed in January 1930. Originally, the bridge would have terminated in a traffic circle, a type of intersection design that was being built around New Jersey during the 1920s and 1930s. However, the revised plans called for a grade-separated highway approach that would connect to a traffic "distributing basin" with ramps to nearby highways. The total cost of land acquisition for the bridge approaches on both sides of the Hudson River exceeded $10 million. After the towers were completed, two temporary catwalks were built between the two suspension towers. Then, workers began laying the bridge's four main cables, a series of thick cables that stretch between the tops of the two towers and carry what would later become the upper deck. The first strand of the first main cable was hoisted between both towers in July 1929, in a ceremony attended by the governors of both states and the mayors of New York City and Fort Lee. The two temporary catwalks allowed workers to spin the wires for the main cables on-site. The wires for the cables were spun by dozens of reels at a dock near the base of the New York anchorage; each reel contained 30 miles of wire at any given time. A total of 105,986 wires were used in the bridge when it was completed. By February 1930, the bridge was halfway complete; since construction was two months ahead of schedule, the bridge was scheduled to open in early 1932. A team of 350 men was spinning the wires for each of the 36-inch-wide (91 cm) main cables, which were 22% complete. In addition, the builders had started ordering steel for the deck. By April, the spinning of the main cables was half complete. The first main cable was completed in late July 1930, and the other three main cables were completed that August, with the laying of the last wire being marked by a ceremony. The spinning of the main cables had taken ten months in total. After the main cables were laid, workers spun the suspender wires that connected the main cables with the deck. When it was finished, the system of cables would support 90,000 short tons (80,000 long tons) of the deck's weight, though the cables would be strong enough to carry 350,000 short tons (310,000 long tons), four times as much weight. The construction of a lower deck for rail usage was postponed, since the start of the Depression meant that there would not be enough railroad traffic to justify the construction of such a deck in the near future. An agreement between the Port of New York Authority and the City of New York, dated July 29, 1930, was formed to convey property and property easements granted in relation to the New York Approach to the then Hudson River Bridge. That month, the Port Authority opened the bidding process for contracts to build the Hudson River bridge's approaches on the New York side. These included contracts for the 178th-179th Street Tunnels and the Riverside Drive connection. The tunnel contracts were awarded later that month. In August, the bidding process for the Fort Lee approaches was opened. Bids for the Riverside Drive connection were received the following month. Prior to and during construction, the bridge was unofficially known as the "Hudson River Bridge" or "Fort Lee Bridge". The Hudson River Bridge Association started seeking suggestions for the bridge's official name in October 1930. Residents of New York and New Jersey were encouraged to send naming choices to the association, which would then forward the suggestions to the Port Authority. According to ballot voting submitted to the Port Authority, the "Hudson River Bridge" name was the most popular choice. The Port Authority preferred the name "George Washington Memorial Bridge", which had been proposed by a board member, and still others championed the name "Palisades Bridge". However, the Port Authority formally adopted the "George Washington" name on January 13, 1931, honoring the general and future president's evacuation of Manhattan at the bridge's location during the Revolutionary War. This was described as potentially confusing, since there was already a "Washington Bridge" connecting 181st Street with the Bronx, directly across Manhattan from the "George Washington Bridge" across the Hudson River. Shortly afterward, the Port Authority Board of Commissioners voted to reconsider the renaming of the Hudson River Bridge, stating that it was open to alternate names. Hundreds of naming choices had been submitted by this time. The most popular naming choices were those of Washington, Christopher Columbus, and Hudson River namesake Henry Hudson. The span was again officially named for George Washington in April 1931. This decision was applauded by then-congressman Fiorello La Guardia, who felt that other options "insulted the memory of our first President and encouraged the Reds". The system of girders to support the deck was installed throughout 1930, and the last girder was installed in late December 1930. In March 1931, the Port Authority announced that the Hudson River Bridge was set to open later that year, rather than in 1932 as originally planned. At that time, the Port Authority had opened bids for paving the road surface. Later that month, the agency published a report, which stated that the bridge's early opening date was attributable to how quickly and efficiently the various materials had been transported. In June 1931, forty bankers became the first people to cross the bridge. Work was progressing quickly on the bridge approaches in New Jersey, and the New York City government was considering building another bridge between Manhattan and the Bronx (the Alexander Hamilton Bridge) to connect with the George Washington Bridge. Bids for constructing tollbooths and floodlight towers were opened in July 1931. The George Washington Bridge was dedicated on October 24, 1931, and the bridge opened to traffic on October 25, 1931, eight months ahead of schedule. The opening ceremony, attended by 30,000 guests, was accompanied by a show from military airplanes, as well as speeches from politicians including Morgan Foster Larson, the governor of New Jersey, and Franklin D. Roosevelt, the governor of New York. The first people to cross the George Washington Bridge were reportedly two elementary school students who roller-skated across the bridge from the New York side. Pedestrians were allowed to walk the length of the George Washington Bridge between 6 p.m. and 11 p.m. The bridge was formally opened to traffic the next day. The Port Authority collected tolls for drivers who used the bridge in either direction; as with the Holland Tunnel, the toll was set at 50 cents for passenger cars, with different toll rates for other vehicle types. Pedestrians paid a toll of 10 cents each, which was lowered to 5 cents in 1934. Within the first 24 hours of the George Washington Bridge's official opening, 56,312 cars used the span, as well as 100,000 pedestrians (including those who had walked across after the ceremony). The Port Authority reported that 33,540 pedestrians crossed the bridge on the first day, of which 20,000 paid a toll to cross. During the George Washington Bridge's construction, the cost of the bridge was estimated at $75 million, and the bridge was expected to carry eight million vehicles and 1.5 million pedestrians in its first year of operation. When the George Washington Bridge opened, it was estimated that eight million vehicles would use the bridge in its first year, and that the bridge could ultimately carry 60 million vehicles annually after a second deck was added. The bridge's final cost was estimated at $60 million. Real-estate speculators believed that the bridge's construction would raise real-estate values in Fort Lee, since the borough's residents would be able to more easily access New York City. During the construction of the George Washington Bridge, speculators spent millions of dollars to buy land around the bridge's New Jersey approach. The bridge was later credited with helping raise land prices and encouraging residential development in formerly agricultural parts of Bergen County. It also spurred the rise of the trucking industry along the United States' East Coast, supplanting much of the freight railroads that used to carry cargo. In the George Washington Bridge's first week of operation, the bridge carried 116,265 vehicles, compared to the Holland Tunnel's 173,010 vehicles, despite the fact that the tunnel had fewer lanes than the bridge did. During that time span, 56,000 pedestrians used the bridge. A week after the bridge opened, the 10-lane tollbooth was expanded to 14 lanes because of heavy weekend traffic volumes. In its first year of operation, the George Washington Bridge saw 5.5 million vehicular crossings and nearly 500,000 pedestrian crossings. Traffic counts on the George Washington Bridge grew year after year. By the time of the bridge's tenth anniversary in 1941, the span had been used by 72 million vehicles total, including a record 9.1 million vehicles in 1940. New Jersey Route 4, which connected directly to the bridge's western end, opened in July 1932. The 178th-179th Street Tunnels, which connected Amsterdam Avenue on the eastern side of Manhattan to the bridge's eastern end on the west side of Manhattan, were supposed to be completed in late 1932. Direct approaches to Riverside Drive and the Hudson River Parkway were completed in 1937, and the tunnels were completed in 1938–1939. A ramp eastward from the bridge and southward to the Harlem River Drive was also completed around this time. On the New Jersey side, state highways were also being modernized to handle bridge traffic. The bridge's westbound entrance ramp from Fort Washington Avenue, at the top of the cliff on the Manhattan side, opened in April 1939. The corresponding eastbound exit ramp, as well as the 178th Street Tunnel, opened in June 1940. The 179th Street tunnel opened in 1950. Originally, the George Washington Bridge's single deck consisted of six lanes, with an unpaved center median. In 1946, the median was paved over and two more lanes were created on the upper level, widening it from six lanes to eight lanes. The two center lanes on the upper level served as reversible lanes, which could handle traffic in either direction, depending on traffic flows. The bridge was initially lit by 200 lights to provide warning to pilots flying at night. The Port Authority enacted a photography ban during World War II in the 1940s. Additionally, from May 1942 to May 1945, the lights on the bridge were shut off at night as a precautionary measure. After the war ended, the lights were turned back on, but the photography ban was upheld. The completion of the George Washington Bridge's lower deck, as well as the construction of a new bus terminal and other highway connections near the bridge, were recommended in a 1955 study that suggested improvements to the New York City area's highway system. The lower deck was approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. A Bergen County leader voted against the construction of the lower level in 1956, temporarily delaying construction plans. The New York City Planning Commission approved the George Washington Bridge improvement in June 1957, and the Port Authority allocated funds to the improvement that July. The $183 million project included the construction of the lower deck; the George Washington Bridge Expressway, a 12-lane expressway connecting to the Alexander Hamilton Bridge and the Cross Bronx Expressway (later I-95 and US 9); the George Washington Bridge Bus Station above the expressway; and a series of new ramps to and from the Henry Hudson Parkway. On the New Jersey side, two depressed toll plazas, one in each direction, were to be constructed for lower level traffic. Highway connections were also being built on the New Jersey side, including a direct approach from I-95. Construction of the approaches started in September 1958. Work on the lower level itself started on June 2, 1959, but work was briefly halted later that year because of a lack of steel. By February 1960, construction was underway on the lower level; the supporting steelwork for the future deck had been completed, and the sections for the lower deck were being installed. The George Washington Bridge's lower deck would comprise 75 steel slabs; each slab weighed 220 tons and measured 108 feet (33 m) wide by 90 feet (27 m) feet long, with a thickness of 30 feet (9.1 m). The construction of the slabs proceeded from either side of the bridge. The right-of-way for the George Washington Bridge Expressway had been almost entirely cleared except for the ventilation buildings for the 178th-179th Street Tunnels. The segments of the lower deck had been laid completely by September 1960, at which point workers started pouring the concrete for the deck's roadway, a process that took five weeks. The layer of concrete measured 4 inches (10 cm) thick. Finally, the deck was paved over with a 2.5-inch (6.4 cm) layer of asphalt. New ramps to the George Washington Bridge in New Jersey, including from the newly completed I-95, opened in mid-1962. The lower deck was opened to the public on August 29, 1962. The lower level, nicknamed "Martha" after George's wife Martha Washington, increased the capacity of the bridge by 75 percent, and simultaneously made the George Washington Bridge the world's only 14-lane suspension bridge. In addition to providing extra capacity, the lower level served to stiffen the bridge in high winds; before the lower deck was constructed, the George Washington Bridge was known to swing up to 30 inches (76 cm). The George Washington Bridge Bus Station opened on January 17, 1963 and the Alexander Hamilton Bridge opened on January 15, 1963, thus allowing more traffic to use the George Washington Bridge. In the first year after the lower level's opening, the expanded bridge had carried 44 million vehicles. By comparison, 35.86 million vehicles had crossed the bridge in an 11-month period between September 1, 1961 and July 31, 1962. In addition, traffic congestion at the George Washington Bridge was reduced after the lower level opened, and the Port Authority was able to make repairs to the upper level for the first time in the bridge's history. A fixed median was added to the upper deck in the 1970s. The bridge was carrying 82.8 million vehicles per year by 1980. The George Washington Bridge was designated a National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark by the American Society of Civil Engineers on October 24, 1981, the 50th anniversary of the bridge's dedication ceremony. The 50th anniversary was also marked with a parade of automobiles. At that point, 1.8 billion vehicles had used the bridge throughout its lifetime. In 1990, the Port Authority announced a minor rehabilitation for the George Washington Bridge. As part of the project, the supporting structural steel for the upper deck would be replaced, and some ramps would be rebuilt. The ramps on the New York side, connecting with Riverside Drive and the Henry Hudson Parkway, were to be reconstructed for $27.6 million after studies in the late 1980s showed deterioration on these ramps. Although the Port Authority had announced the repairs in advance, the start of roadwork in September 1990 caused extensive traffic jams. In 2000, the Port Authority proposed building a ramp from the lower level to the Palisades Interstate Parkway on the New Jersey side. Originally, the ramp would have cost $86.5 million and would have been completed in 2003 or 2004. However, the connection was ultimately not built. The northern sidewalk was closed after the September 11 attacks in 2001 because of security concerns. In December 2011, the Port Authority announced plans to repair the bridge. For the first time, the vertical suspender ropes would be replaced, at an expected cost of more than $1 billion paid for by toll revenue. On August 5, 2013, repair crews began an $82-million effort to fix cracks in upper-deck structural steel caused by traffic, particularly heavy trucks. The plan called for replacing 632 road deck panels, which would add at least 20 years of service life to the roadway. The work proceeded at night, and was slated to be complete by year's end. Delays prevented completion, and ultimately the work was halted for the winter. Work restarted in June 2014 and was expected to last another 12 weeks. The Port Authority also started a $2 billion project to renovate or replace bridge components. The lower level was repaved in 2016, and repainting work and maintenance platform replacement on the lower deck was completed in 2017. The bridge's 592 vertical suspender ropes were then replaced to fix damage caused by excessive heat and humidity. The staircases leading to the sidewalks on both the northern and southern sides of the upper deck were also being replaced with ramps that were compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. The Trans-Manhattan Expressway was being renovated in conjunction with this project. On the New Jersey side, the Palisades Interstate Parkway cloverleaf ramp onto the eastbound George Washington Bridge would be replaced at a cost of $112.6 million by 2019. Two overpasses near the bridge would also be refurbished. The northern sidewalk reopened in early 2023, after the suspender ropes on that side had been replaced. By early 2024, the restoration project was half complete, and workers were restoring the southern sidewalk. The George Washington Bridge carries I-95 and US 1/9 between New Jersey and New York. Coming from New Jersey, US 46 terminates at the state border in the middle of the bridge. Further west, I-80, US 9W, New Jersey Route 4, and the New Jersey Turnpike also feed into the bridge via either I-95, U.S. 1/9, or U.S. 46 but end before reaching it. I-80 also gives drivers from the Garden State Parkway and Route 17 access to the bridge, and access to them as seen by signage on I-95 south. The Palisades Interstate Parkway connects directly to the bridge's upper level, though not to the lower level; however, a ramp to link the Interstate Parkway to the lower level was proposed in 2000. The marginal roads and local streets above the highways are known as GWB Plaza. The bridge's toll plaza, which collects tolls from eastbound/northbound traffic only, is located on the New Jersey side. On the New York side, the 12-lane Trans-Manhattan Expressway heads east across the narrow neck of Upper Manhattan, from the bridge to the Harlem River. It provides access from both decks to 178th and 179th Streets, which cross Manhattan horizontally, where U.S. 9 leaves the expressway and follows Broadway; the Henry Hudson Parkway and Riverside Drive, on the Hudson River's eastern bank along the west side of Manhattan; and to Amsterdam Avenue and the Harlem River Drive, on the Harlem River's western bank on the east side. The expressway connects directly with the Alexander Hamilton Bridge, which spans the Harlem River as part of the Cross-Bronx Expressway (I-95), providing access to the Major Deegan Expressway (I-87). Heading towards New Jersey, local access to the bridge is available from 179th Street. There are also ramps connecting the bridge to the George Washington Bridge Bus Terminal, a commuter bus terminal with direct access to the New York City Subway at the 175th Street station on the IND Eighth Avenue Line (served by the A train). Originally, the approach to the George Washington Bridge from the New York side consisted of a roundabout encircling a fountain, which was designed by Cass Gilbert. This plan was deemed not feasible as a result of the congestion that the weaving movements would create. The final plans called for meandering roadways from Riverside Drive and Henry Hudson Parkway, which run along the eastern bank of the Hudson River at the bottom of the cliff in Washington Heights. The Henry Hudson Parkway actually passes under the New York side's anchorage using an underpass designed by Gilbert. The connection to the 178th–179th Street Tunnels, which connected to the southbound Harlem River Drive, opened in 1940. The tunnels were replaced by the Trans-Manhattan Expressway, which opened in 1962. The tunnels and expressway were built to minimize disruption to the Washington Heights neighborhood, which had already been developed at the time. Further south along the Hudson River, the Lincoln Tunnel (Route 495) and Holland Tunnel (Interstate 78/Route 139) also enter Manhattan. Both tunnels are operated by the Port Authority, which collects tolls from drivers crossing the Hudson River eastbound toward New York City. The Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge (I-278), connecting the New York City boroughs of Staten Island and Brooklyn, is the southernmost alternate route. It connects to the Bayonne Bridge, Goethals Bridge, and Outerbridge Crossing between Staten Island and New Jersey. All four bridges to Staten Island collect tolls for drivers driving into the island. Farther north within the New York metropolitan area, the Tappan Zee Bridge (Interstates 87/287 and New York State Thruway) avoids the congested Cross Bronx Expressway and the city proper. Thruway traffic sometimes uses the George Washington Bridge as a detour, since no roads cross the Hudson River between the George Washington and Tappan Zee bridges. The Tappan Zee Bridge also charges tolls for eastbound drivers. Even farther north is the Bear Mountain Bridge, carrying U.S. 6 and U.S. 202, about 20 miles (32 km) north of the Tappan Zee Bridge; it also charges tolls for eastbound drivers. As of January 7, 2024[update], the tolls-by-mail rate going from New Jersey to New York City are $17.63 for cars and motorcycles; there is no toll for passenger vehicles going from New York City to New Jersey. New Jersey and New York–issued E-ZPass users are charged $13.38 for cars and $12.38 for motorcycles during off-peak hours, and $15.38 for cars and $14.38 for motorcycles during peak hours. Users with E-ZPass issued from agencies outside of New Jersey and New York are charged the tolls-by-mail rate. Tolls are collected at a series of tollbooths on the New Jersey side. The bridge has 29 toll lanes: 12 in the main upper-level toll plaza, 10 in the lower-level toll plaza, and seven in the Palisades Interstate Parkway toll plaza leading to the upper level. The toll plazas on the lower level and Palisades Parkway are not staffed during the overnight hours and accept only E-ZPass transactions during this period. Originally, tolls were collected in both directions. The original toll booth was designed by Gilbert, who also designed a classical-style maintenance booth, neither of which is extant. In August 1970, the toll was abolished for westbound drivers, and at the same time, eastbound drivers saw their tolls doubled. The tolls of eleven other New York–New Jersey and Hudson River crossings along a 130-mile (210 km) stretch, from the Outerbridge Crossing in the south to the Rip Van Winkle Bridge in the north, were also changed to south- or eastbound-only at that time. E-ZPass was accepted for toll payment on the George Washington Bridge starting in July 1997. Soon afterward, the Port Authority proposed removing the tollbooths for the E-ZPass lanes on the lower level and Palisades Parkway toll plazas, replacing them with electronic toll collection gantries to allow motorists to maintain highway speeds. Pedestrians and cyclists may cross free of charge on the south sidewalk. Pedestrians traveling in either direction originally paid tolls of 10 cents when the bridge opened. The pedestrian toll was reduced to 5 cents in 1935 and discontinued altogether in 1940. Open road tolling was implemented for drivers going from Palisades Interstate Parkway on February 2, 2020, on the lower level on November 7, 2020, and on the upper level on July 10, 2022. The tollbooths will be dismantled, and drivers will no longer be able to pay cash at the bridge. Instead, there will be cameras mounted onto new overhead gantries on the New Jersey side going to New York. A vehicle without E-ZPass will have a picture taken of its license plate and a bill for the toll will be mailed to its owner. For E-ZPass users, sensors will detect their transponders wirelessly. In March 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, all-electronic tolling was temporarily placed in effect for all Port Authority crossings, including the George Washington Bridge. Cash toll collection was temporarily reinstated on the upper level only from October 2020 to July 2022 while the required open road tolling infrastructure was being installed. The carpool discount was eliminated when open-road tolling commenced on the upper level in July 2022. Tolls for the bridge cost $.50 one way in 1931, but have been raised over the years to a $17 cash toll for passenger vehicles, which was enacted on January 8, 2023. Prior to July 10, 2022, a discounted carpool toll ($7.75) was available at all times for cars with three or more passengers using NY or NJ E-ZPass, who proceed through a staffed toll lane (provided they have registered with the free "Carpool Plan"), except if entering from the Palisades Interstate Parkway entrance to the bridge. The Carpool Plan ended when the George Washington Bridge implemented cashless tolling. The George Washington Bridge contains two sidewalks that can be used by pedestrians and bicyclists. The southern sidewalk (accessible by a long, steep ramp on the Manhattan side of the bridge) is shared by cyclists and pedestrians. The entrance in Manhattan is at 178th Street, just west of Cabrini Boulevard, and also has access to the Hudson River Greenway north of the bridge. Both sidewalks are accessible on the New Jersey side from Hudson Terrace. The George Washington Bridge carries New York State Bicycle Route 9, a bike route that runs from New York City north to Rouses Point. The Port Authority closed the northern sidewalk at all times in 2008. Though it offers direct access into Palisades Interstate Park, the northern sidewalk requires stairway climbs and descents on both sides, which was inaccessible for people with physical disabilities and posed a risk in poor weather conditions. Advocacy groups such as Transportation Alternatives also suggested improvements. As part of the project to replace the bridge's vertical support cables, the connections to both sidewalks will be enhanced or rebuilt and made ADA-compliant. While the south-side cables are being replaced, that sidewalk will be closed and the north sidewalk will be open. Once the entire project is completed in 2027, pedestrians will use the south sidewalk and cyclists will use the north sidewalk. The sidewalk aspect of the project is expected to cost $118 million. The George Washington Bridge is among the most frequently chosen sites in the New York metropolitan area for suicide by jumping or falling off the bridge. The first death by jumping occurred before the bridge even opened, though it was unintentional. On September 21, 1930, a stunt jumper named Norman J. Terry jumped off the bridge's deck in front of a crowd of thousands, but because his body was facing the wrong way, he broke his neck upon hitting the water. The first intentional suicide occurred on November 3, 1931, a little more than one week after the bridge opened. Several suicide attempts off the George Washington Bridge have been widely publicized. In 1994, a person going by the name "Prince" called The Howard Stern Show while on the bridge, threatening to kill himself, but Stern managed to talk him out of it. The 2010 suicide of Tyler Clementi, who had jumped from the bridge, drew national attention to cyberbullying and the struggles facing LGBT youth. In 2012, a record 18 people threw themselves off the bridge to their deaths, while 43 others attempted to do so but survived. There were 18 deaths reported in both 2014 and 2015. In 2014, 74 people were stopped by the Port Authority police, while the next year, another 86 people were stopped by the Port Authority police. In 2016, there were 12 reported deaths, a decrease from previous years, while 70 people were stopped by the Port Authority police. In 2017, the Port Authority proposed equipping a two-person Emergency Services Unit team with harnesses to prevent suicides from the bridge. Following 15 reported deaths and 68 attempts in 2017, the Port Authority installed protective netting and an 11-foot-high (3.4 m) fence along each upper level sidewalk. The netting partially overhangs the sidewalks in order to prevent potential jumpers from scaling the fence directly. The southern sidewalk was closed from September to December 2017 so that a temporary fence could be installed there. Once the temporary fence had been erected, the permanent 11-foot-high barrier was constructed on the northern sidewalk, followed by the permanent barrier on the southern sidewalk. From September 9 to 13, 2013, dedicated toll lanes for one of the local Fort Lee entrances to the bridge's upper level were reduced from three to one, with the two other lanes diverted to highway traffic, without notification to local government officials and emergency responders. The closures were made on the direction of aides and appointees of New Jersey Governor Chris Christie, causing a political controversy called "Bridgegate". The local toll lane reductions caused massive traffic congestion, with major delays for school transportation and police and emergency service responses within Fort Lee. The repercussions and controversy surrounding these actions have been investigated by the Port Authority, federal prosecutors, and a New Jersey legislature committee. On September 12, 2020, a hundred anti-police brutality protesters from the Black Lives Matter movement converged from both New York and New Jersey, blocking the upper level of the bridge for about an hour before walking to the New York City Police Department's 34th Precinct in Manhattan. On December 28, 1966, a 19-year-old pilot made an emergency landing on the bridge's New Jersey side after his plane's engine failed. There were no deaths reported, because there was very little traffic at the time, but the pilot and his passenger were injured. At the time, there was no median barrier on the bridge's upper deck. In June 1977, two tractor-trailers nearly fell off the lower level after jackknifing, then going through both the roadway barrier and a mesh net next to the roadway. One of the drivers was hurt slightly, while the other driver was not hurt. The accident also involved a third tractor-trailer and two passenger cars, none of whose occupants were hurt. Accidents involving trucks dumping their cargo have also occurred on the George Washington Bridge. Watermelons, frozen chicken parts, and horse manure have all fallen onto the bridge's roadway at some point. The first-ever complete closure of the George Washington Bridge occurred on August 6, 1980, when a truck carrying highly flammable propane gas across the bridge started to leak. As a safety precaution in case the fuel started to ignite, traffic across the bridge was halted for several hours, and 2,000 people living near the bridge were evacuated. Since the George Washington Bridge is the primary crossing between New Jersey and New York City, the closure caused traffic jams that stretched for up to 30 miles (48 km), and the effects of this congestion could be seen more than 45 miles (72 km) away. Two police officers eventually plugged the leak with an inexpensive device. Up to that point, trucks carrying flammable material had been allowed to use the George Washington Bridge. After the incident, New York City officials conducted a study on whether to prohibit hazardous cargo from traveling through the city. During the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, several news organizations, including CNN, reported that a vehicle filled with explosives had been found on the lower level of the bridge. However, several investigations found no evidence of a vehicle containing explosives on the bridge. The bridge is seen in a number of movies set in New York: Ball of Fire (1941) was the first film to show the bridge. In Force of Evil (1948), Leo Morse is buried under the bridge by the mob of gangsters employing his brother Joe. In How to Marry a Millionaire (1953), Loco and Brewster are fêted as being in the 50 millionth car to cross the bridge as part of the "George Washington Bridge Week" festivities. In Network (1976), Schumacher tells a funny story in which, having overslept for a news shoot about the bridge's new lower deck, gets into a cab wearing a raincoat over his pajamas and tells the driver to take him to the middle of the bridge. The taxi driver, concerned that Schumacher intends to jump, begs him: "Don't do it buddy! You're a young man!" Sully (2016) reenacts how Sullenberger overflew the bridge by a few hundred feet. The bridge was also shown in The Godfather (1972), and Cop Land (1997). The bridge has been featured in music. In the opening singalong for Sesame Street, Ernie sang the words "George Washington Bridge" to the tune of Sobre las Olas ("The Loveliest Night of the Year"). In addition, William Schuman's 1950 work George Washington Bridge. Nina Rosario sings "Just me and the GWB asking, 'Gee, Nina, what'll you be?'" in "Breathe" from In the Heights. In visual art, the first issue of the comic Atomic War! published in November 1952, the George Washington Bridge is shown collapsing during a bombing of New York City. Additionally, painters George Ault and Valeri Larko have both created artworks named after the bridge. Video games such as Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty also showed the George Washington Bridge. The construction of the bridge is detailed in George Washington Bridge: A Timeless Marvel and George Washington Bridge: Poetry in Steel. The bridge and the nearby Little Red Lighthouse are the subjects of Hildegarde Swift's 1942 children's book The Little Red Lighthouse and the Great Gray Bridge. Transport portal Engineering portal New Jersey portal New York (state) portal New York City portal List of bridges documented by the Historic American Engineering Record in New Jersey List of bridges documented by the Historic American Engineering Record in New York List of fixed crossings of the Hudson River A New York Times article from 1989 cites the flag as having flown since 1947, while the Port Authority gives a date of 1948. In 1910, the Washington Chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution erected a stone monument to the Battle of Fort Washington. The monument is about 100 yards (91 m) northeast of the Little Red Lighthouse, near the eastern bridge anchorage. MTA Bridges and Tunnels collects tolls for the Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge while the Port Authority collects tolls for the other three bridges to Staten Island. "Facts & Info – George Washington Bridge". Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Archived from the original on March 1, 2019. Retrieved February 27, 2010. "George Washington Bridge". ASCE Metropolitan Section. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "Traffic Restrictions – George Washington Bridge". The Port Authority of NY & NJ. Retrieved June 18, 2018. "New York City Bridge Traffic Volumes" (PDF). New York City Department of Transportation. 2016. p. 11. Retrieved March 16, 2018. "What is the world's busiest bridge?". Travel Trivia. Retrieved June 23, 2020. A staggering 108 million vehicles cross the bridge annually, making the George Washington Bridge the busiest bridge on Earth "Number of the Day - 104M". NJ Spotlight. November 20, 2020. Retrieved March 18, 2023. "George Washington Bridge 80th Anniversary; The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey celebrates the 80th anniversary of the October 25, 1931 opening of the George Washington Bridge." Archived December 28, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Accessed January 24, 2013. Rose, Lacey (March 2, 2006). "Inside the Booth". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 22, 2006. Retrieved January 15, 2008. Like the PATH trains, which also connect New York to New Jersey, the G.W. Bridge is run by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, a public agency that employees 7,000 workers [sic] and has annual revenues of $2.9 billion. Ervolino, Bill (October 24, 2018). "Happy birthday George Washington Bridge! You look pretty good for 87". North Jersey. Retrieved January 12, 2019. By 1962, New Jerseyans were routinely referring to Ammann's masterpiece as "the GWB" and "the George." Jones, Charisse (October 20, 2006). "Upkeep Costs Rise as USA's Bridges Age". USA Today. Retrieved January 15, 2008. The George Washington Bridge — locals call it 'the GW' — is one of a collection of dazzling spans that link New York's five boroughs or the city and New Jersey. "Hudson Bridge Is Nearer Realization". The New York Times. March 1, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 1, 2018. "Last Wire Of Span Spun Over Hudson". The New York Times. August 8, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved September 18, 2018. Reier 2000, p. 100. "Allston Dana Is Engineer of Design for the Ft. Lee Bridge". Scarsdale Inquirer. Vol. XI, no. 6. Scarsdale Women's Club Publications. December 27, 1927. Retrieved September 17, 2018. Rastorfer 2000, p. 163. Rastorfer 2000, pp. 43, 163. Stern, Gilmartin & Mellins 1987, p. 679. "George Washington Bridge 80th Anniversary". The Port Authority of NY & NJ. October 25, 2011. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved June 18, 2018. Ingraham, Joseph C. (August 30, 1962). "Lower Deck of George Washington Bridge Is Opened". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 6, 2010. Stern, Gilmartin & Mellins 1987, p. 681. Rastorfer 2000, p. 41. Collins, Beth (December 2, 2011). "10 record-breaking bridges". CNN. Retrieved November 13, 2018. "George Washington Bridge". Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Retrieved May 10, 2019. George Washington Bridge – The busiest bridge in the world, connecting northern Manhattan and Fort Lee, NJ. Maag, Christopher (May 9, 2019). "How crews will re-suspend the GWB while 280,000 cars drive beneath them daily". North Jersey Media Group. Retrieved May 10, 2019. High above the Hudson, engineers are working to rehang the world's busiest bridge — while it remains in service. "Two Governors Open Great Hudson Bridge As Throngs Look On" (PDF). The New York Times. October 25, 1931. p. 1. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 6, 2010. "History – George Washington Bridge". Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Retrieved March 6, 2010. "New York City Truck Route Map: Reverse Side" (PDF). nyc.gov. New York City Department of Transportation. June 8, 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 27, 2017. Retrieved September 12, 2017. For the Red Book itself, see: "HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Transportation Regulations at Tunnel and Bridge Facilities" (PDF). The Port Authority of NY & NJ. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 10, 2019. Retrieved June 18, 2018. "Pedestrian & Bicycle Information – George Washington Bridge". The Port Authority of NY & NJ. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved June 18, 2018. Higgs, Larry (February 14, 2023). "Hello ramp! The 171 steps that led to the George Washington Bridge walkway are no more". nj. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Suicide Prevention Fence Coming To George Washington Bridge Walkway « CBS New York". CBS New York. September 18, 2017. Retrieved November 23, 2018. Krisel, Brendan (September 19, 2017). "Safety Fences Coming To George Washington Bridge Walkways". Washington Heights-Inwood, NY Patch. Retrieved November 23, 2018. Beck-Aden, Emmy (February 14, 2023). "'Restoring the George' Program Brings Renovated Walkway to GWB to Enhance Safety". NBC New York. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Tides of Bridge Traffic". The New York Times. October 18, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 18, 2018. "The World's Great Spans". The New York Times. October 18, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. Carmody, Deirdre (October 10, 1981). "A 50-Year View of the George Washington Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 25, 2018. Reier 2000, pp. 100–101. Rastorfer 2000, pp. 59, 61. Reier 2000, p. 101. Rastorfer 2000, p. 63. Billington, D.P. (1985). The Tower and the Bridge: The New Art of Structural Engineering. Princeton paperbacks. Princeton University Press. p. 136. ISBN 978-0-691-02393-9. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Rastorfer 2000, p. 49. Skinner, Frank W. (October 18, 1931). "How the Bridge Was Built". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. Eddy, J. L. Jr. (May 25, 1930). ""Weaving" A Great Span Over The Hudson River". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Rastorfer 2000, p. 50. "Fort Lee Contract Goes To Roebling". The New York Times. October 14, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "American Bridge Plan Looms as Victor in Keen Hudson Span Controversy" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle. October 9, 1927. pp. A11. Retrieved June 5, 2018 – via Fultonhistory.com. "Work is Speeded on Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. March 24, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. Rastorfer 2000, p. 57. Rastorfer 2000, pp. 57–59. Rastorfer 2000, p. 45. McGinty, Jo Craven; Overberg, Paul (March 29, 2024). "These Eight U.S. Bridges Are Vulnerable to a Repeat of the Baltimore Crash". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved April 1, 2024. "Sketch of Proposed $40,000,000 Bridge Across the Hudson". The New York Times. March 11, 1926. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 3, 2018. Rastorfer 2000, p. 43. Brock, H. i (September 6, 1931). "A Span That Symbolizes The Steel Age". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. Billington, David P. (1985). The Tower and the Bridge: The New Art of Structural Engineering. Princeton University Press. pp. 134. ISBN 0-691-02393-X. Reier 2000, pp. 103–104. Rastorfer 2000, pp. 43, 45. Richman, Steven M. The Bridges of New Jersey: Portraits of Garden State Crossings, p. 118. Rutgers University Press, 2005. ISBN 9780813535104. "The engineer, Othmar Ammann, and his architect, Cass Gilbert, had originally designed statuesque anchors, which were abandoned for cost reasons." Stern, Gilmartin & Mellins 1987, p. 679; Reier 2000, p. 104. "Criticize Masonry For Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. July 7, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. Rastorfer 2000, pp. 41, 43. Stern, Gilmartin & Mellins 1987, p. 682. Reier 2000, pp. 104–105. "George Washington Bridge Interesting Facts" (PDF). Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 14, 2006. Retrieved February 20, 2017. Schneider, Daniel (September 24, 2000). "F.Y.I." The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 20, 2017. Yee, Roger (2007). Lighting Spaces. Visual Profile. p. 64. ISBN 978-1-58471-116-2. Berkowitz, Natalie (July 2, 1989). "Old Glory Fills Crew With Pride". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved September 13, 2018. "George Washington Bridge Interesting Facts" (PDF). Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 14, 2006. Retrieved May 28, 2007. "World's Largest Free-Flying American Flag to Fly at George Washington Bridge in Honor of 9/11 Victims" (Press release). Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. September 8, 2006. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved February 27, 2010. "85 Years Strong, George Washington Bridge Still Adds Grace to NYC Skyline". ASCE News. June 21, 2018. Retrieved January 12, 2019. Renner, James (January 1998). "DAR Monument". Washington Heights & Inwood Online. Archived from the original on September 25, 2010. Retrieved March 13, 2010. Reier 2000, p. 95. Stern, Gilmartin & Mellins 1987, p. 675. Cudahy, Brian J. (2002), Rails Under the Mighty Hudson (2nd ed.), New York: Fordham University Press, p. 10, ISBN 978-0-82890-257-1, OCLC 911046235 "Great Crowd Treks Into Holland Tubes After Gala Opening". The New York Times. November 13, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 9, 2018. "Historic Structures Report: Holland Tunnel". National Register of Historic Places, National Park Service. November 4, 1993. p. 9. Retrieved September 11, 2020. "Vehicular Tunnel Under the Hudson Seems Assured". New York Sun. January 26, 1919. pp. 1, 7 – via Fultonhistory.com. "Want Three Bridges Across North River". The New York Times. December 6, 1908. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 3, 2018. "Tunnels Not Bridge Favored To Jersey". The New York Times. April 22, 1913. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 4, 2018. Stern, Gilmartin & Mellins 1987, pp. 675, 677. Stern, Gilmartin & Mellins 1987, p. 677. "Chamber Opposes Bridge At 57th St". The New York Times. January 4, 1924. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 1, 2018. Lindenthal, Gustav (January 13, 1924). "Lindenthal Outlines Hudson Bridge Plan". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 1, 2018. "Greene Tells Plan For Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. May 4, 1924. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 1, 2018. "For New Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. December 30, 1924. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 1, 2018. "Arthur Kill Spans Voted In Trenton". The New York Times. February 11, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 1, 2018. "Pass Fort Lee Bridge Bill". The New York Times. March 3, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 1, 2018. "Silzer Signs Bill For Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. March 10, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 1, 2018. "To Fight For Bridge At 178th Street". The New York Times. March 19, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 1, 2018. "Location of Great Anchorage for Fort Lee Bridge in Park Is Cause of New York Protests" (PDF). Newburgh News. February 15, 1926. p. 1. Retrieved June 5, 2018 – via Fultonhistory.com. "Cites Bill Putting Park In Jeopardy". The New York Times. March 22, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 1, 2018. "Governor Approves 128 Bills, Vetoes 17". The New York Times. April 3, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 1, 2018. "Survey Hudson Site For Longest Bridge". The New York Times. August 18, 1925. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 3, 2018. "Defends The Plans For Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. February 25, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. Staff (January 1930) "Giant of World's Bridges Rising in New York", Popular Mechanics p.464 "Gilbert to Design the Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. January 6, 1926. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 3, 2018. "$50,000,000 Bridge To Ft. Lee Approved By Interstate Board". The New York Times. March 13, 1926. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 3, 2018. "Reports Progress On Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. March 11, 1928. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Hudson Suspension Span Will Be Carefully Tested". The New York Times. July 18, 1926. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 3, 2018. "Materials Entering Into Big Span Across Hudson River at Fort Lee Will be Well Tested" (PDF). Newburgh News. August 12, 1926. p. 16. Retrieved June 8, 2018 – via Fultonhistory.com. "Tells Hudson Span Plans". The New York Times. October 21, 1926. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 3, 2018. "Final Hearing Backs Hudson Bridge Plan". The New York Times. December 3, 1926. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 3, 2018. "Gets Final Permit For Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. December 14, 1926. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 3, 2018. "Fort Lee Bridge Bonds Are Awarded". The New York Times. December 10, 1926. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 3, 2018. "Jersey Bridge Bill Faces Court Fight". The New York Times. March 26, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Treaty Abrogation on Port Authority Between New York and New Jersey Go to Court" (PDF). Ballston Spa Daily Journal. March 28, 1927. p. 1. Retrieved June 5, 2018 – via Fultonhistory.com. "Still Seek Way Out Of Bridge Tangle". The New York Times. April 1, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "No Upset Likely In Bridge Program". The New York Times. April 3, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. Reier 2000, p. 102. "First Bids Opened For Ft Lee Bridge". The New York Times. April 12, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "More Time on Bridge Bids". The New York Times. April 25, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "First Contract Let For Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. April 30, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "18 Bids Received On Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. June 1, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Biggest Dredge in World Starts Work To Prepare Hudson River for Bridge". The New York Times. May 8, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Seeks Land at Fort Lee". The New York Times. August 29, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "New Span To Be Lecture Subject". The Montclair Times. November 6, 1931. "Ground Is Broken For Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. September 22, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. International News Service (September 22, 1927). "Start Digging For New Span" (PDF). Yonkers Statesman. p. 9. Retrieved June 5, 2018 – via Fultonhistory.com. "World's Largest Suspension Bridge, Over Hudson River, To Be Opened to Traffic in 1932" (PDF). Brooklyn Daily Eagle. March 11, 1928. pp. 20A. Retrieved June 8, 2018 – via Fultonhistory.com. "Open Bids For Span Over Hudson River". The New York Times. October 4, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. Steinman, David Barnard (1922). A Practical Treatise on Suspension Bridges: Their Design, Construction and Erection. Wiley. p. 74. "Bridge Steel Ordered". The New York Times. October 21, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "3 Drown at Work in Hudson Caisson". The New York Times. December 24, 1927. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Hudson Bridge Bids In For Manhattan Side". The New York Times. March 6, 1928. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Fast Bridge Work At Staten Island". The New York Times. April 15, 1928. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Groove Cut In Palisades For Hudson Bridge Road". The New York Times. May 6, 1928. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Bond Men Watch Hudson River Span". The New York Times. September 29, 1928. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. Poore, C. G. (October 7, 1928). "Bridging The Hudson A Spectacular Job". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Buys Final Plot For Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. April 14, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Bridge Approaches Beautify Hudson". The New York Times. April 18, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "To Raze 20 Flats In Path Of Bridge". The New York Times. October 27, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Municipal Loans; Port of New York Authority". The New York Times. October 23, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 18, 2018. "Plan to Eliminate Hudson Span Plaza". The New York Times. January 8, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Peterson, Iver (November 12, 1991). "Squaring Traffic Circles With Lights and Bridges". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. "Land for the New Hudson River Bridge Approaches to Cost Over $10,000,000". The New York Times. April 20, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Rastorfer 2000, p. 55. "First Wire Hoisted For Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. July 10, 1929. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. Poore, C. G. (September 15, 1929). "A Dizzy Task For Men Without Nerves". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "Hudson River Bridge Now 50% Complete". The New York Times. February 25, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. "Pushes Hudson Span Work". The New York Times. April 19, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. "Finish First Cable For Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. July 29, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. "To Complete Span Cables". The New York Times. August 5, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Poore, C. G. (July 14, 1929). "Weaving Bridge Cables High Above The Hudson". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 5, 2018. "New Deck Begun On Bridge Here". The New York Times. June 2, 1959. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 15, 2018. Records and Briefs. New York State Appellate Division. p. 94. Retrieved June 16, 2020. For media related to this agreement, see Media:Page 1 of the "1930 Agreement" between City of New York and Port of New York Authority.jpg. "Will Get Bids Monday On Bridge Approach". The New York Times. July 10, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. "Ft. Lee Bridge To Have Approach 350 Ft. Wide". The New York Times. August 6, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. "12 Bid on Bridge Drives". The New York Times. September 16, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Maeder, Jay (February 17, 2011). "Name That Bridge, 1931 Edition". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 18, 2011. "Seek Name for Bridge". The New York Times. October 26, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Reier 2000, p. 103. "Washington Memorial Bridge Is Name of New Hudson Span". The New York Times. January 14, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Informs President of Bridge Naming". The New York Times. January 15, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Port Board Votes to Rename Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. January 23, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "New Bridge Names Pour In". The New York Times. January 30, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Washington Leads as Name for Bridge". The New York Times. February 12, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Hudson Span Named George Washington". The New York Times. April 24, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Giant Span Given Name" (PDF). Buffalo Courier Express. April 24, 1931. p. 2. Retrieved June 8, 2018 – via Fultonhistory.com. "Final Rivets Driven In Bridge Girders". The New York Times. December 30, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "New Hudson Bridge To Open This Year". The New York Times. March 4, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Lauds Port Facilities In Building Of Bridge". The New York Times. March 15, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Forty Bankers Hike Over Hudson Bridge". The New York Times. June 24, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 25, 2018. "New Jersey Highways to Serve New Hudson River Bridge". The New York Times. April 26, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Asks Funds to Plan New Harlem Bridge". The New York Times. May 6, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Bridge Bids Opened". The New York Times. July 7, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. Reier 2000, p. 105. Reier 2000, pp. 105–106. "56,312 Cars Cross Bridge on First Day". The New York Times. October 26, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 6, 2010. "Pedestrians to Get Lower Bridge Toll". The New York Times. November 9, 1934. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 9, 2018. "Speeding the Hudson Bridge". Popular Science. November 1929. p. 49. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Warner, Arthur (October 18, 1931). "An Astounding Span Of Steel And Wire". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. Rastorfer 2000, p. 39. "Heavy Realty Sales In Bergen County". The New York Times. June 8, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Hanley, Robert (October 25, 1981). "What Hath a Bridge Wrought". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 28, 2018. "More Autos Use Tunnel Than New Bridge". The New York Times. November 1, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 9, 2018. "Bridge Service Extended". The New York Times. October 31, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 9, 2018. "Washington Bridge a Year Old". The New York Times. October 25, 1932. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 9, 2018. "Hudson Span Marks Tenth Anniversary". The New York Times. October 26, 1941. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 10, 2018. "Hudson Bridge Link Ready". The New York Times. July 24, 1932. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 10, 2018. "Tube To Hudson Span To Be Ready In Fall". The New York Times. January 24, 1932. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 9, 2018. Mathieu, George M. (July 23, 1939). "City's Improved Exits Ready". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 9, 2018. "New Bridge Ramp Ready". The New York Times. April 7, 1939. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 10, 2018. "Cross-city Tunnel Opens Tomorrow; Manhattan's First East-West Drive Goes Under Heights From Washington Bridge" (PDF). The New York Times. June 26, 1940. p. 25. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 26, 2021. "New 6 Lane Lower Level Adds 75% to Capacity" (PDF). Riverdale Press. August 30, 1962. p. 12. Retrieved June 18, 2018 – via Fultonhistory.com. "200 Washington Bridge Lights To Warn Night-Flying Aviators". The New York Times. May 30, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Photo Ban Emphasized". The New York Times. July 24, 1942. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 10, 2018. "Bridge Lights On Tonight". The New York Times. May 15, 1945. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 10, 2018. "Excerpts From Proposal to Meet City's Bridge and Highway Needs for Next 2 Decades". The New York Times. January 17, 1955. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 15, 2018. "Little Falls Resident Works On George Washington Bridge Project" (PDF). Little Falls Herald. July 26, 1960. p. 12. Retrieved June 15, 2018 – via Fultonhistory.com. Ingraham, Joseph C. (March 5, 1956). "Plan For 2 Decks On Bridge Fades". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 7, 2018. "Bridge Program Advanced By City". The New York Times. June 5, 1957. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 15, 2018. Ingraham, Joseph C. (July 12, 1957). "Fund Is Allotted Bridge To Jersey". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 15, 2018. Stengren, Bernard (February 22, 1960). "George Washington Bridge Loops to Open in Fall". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 15, 2018. "Dedication Rites Set Tomorrow For George Washington 2nd Deck" (PDF). Tarrytown Daily News. August 28, 1962. p. 5. Retrieved June 18, 2018 – via Fultonhistory.com. "It's A Rocky Road To Bigger Bridge". The New York Times. September 20, 1961. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 15, 2018. Ingraham, Joseph C. (October 27, 1959). "Lack of Steel Halts A Bridge Job Here". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 15, 2018. "5-Week Pouring Job Is Begun For Lower Roadway of Bridge". The New York Times. September 28, 1960. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 15, 2018. "2d Deck of Bridge Near Completion". The New York Times. July 27, 1962. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 15, 2018. "Jersey to Open New Ramps With Rise in Bridge Traffic". The New York Times. July 31, 1962. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 15, 2018. Rockland 2008, p. 81–82. Marvin, Scott (October 25, 2013). "Happy birthday George Washington Bridge! See rare 1981 interview with the man who crossed it on horse on the first day". WPIX. Retrieved February 10, 2020. And with a total of 14 lanes, it's the only one of its kind. "New York-New Jersey Win Double Header". Brooklyn Daily. January 18, 1963. pp. 7, 16 – via Fultonhistory.com. "2d Level of Bridge Brings New Record For Hudson Traffic". The New York Times. August 29, 1963. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 18, 2018. Osby, Liv (March 3, 1990). "Bridge, tunnel repairs could slow commuters". Daily Record. Morristown, NJ. p. 3. Retrieved November 13, 2018 – via Newspapers.com. "Hudson crossing ramps in NYC will be rebuilt". The Courier-News. Bridgewater, NJ. March 10, 1991. p. 18. Retrieved November 13, 2018 – via Newspapers.com. James, George (September 8, 1990). "Chaos Set Off By Shutdown At Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 20, 2018. Egbert, Bill (January 15, 2001). "Wish list likened to Erie Canal impact". New York Daily News. p. 4. Retrieved November 13, 2018 – via Newspapers.com. Khan, Liza (December 27, 2000). "$87M ramp could ease traffic". The Journal-News. White Plains, NY. p. 23. Retrieved November 13, 2018 – via Newspapers.com. Haughney, Christine (December 8, 2011). "Now 80, George Washington Bridge Will Undergo Repairs". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 9, 2011. "New York City's George Washington Bridge to undergo major construction project starting Monday". syracuse.com. The Associated Press. August 2, 2013. Retrieved June 30, 2014. "Overnight repair work on GWB begins; 3 upper-level lanes close down". 7online.com. June 16, 2014. Retrieved July 7, 2014. DeAngelis, Jenna (January 12, 2024). "George Washington Bridge rehab project reaches halfway point". CBS New York. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "A Look at the Timeline for Restoring the George Washington Bridge – New York YIMBY". New York YIMBY. February 2, 2017. Retrieved May 31, 2018. "Projects ramping up around the GWB". North Jersey. May 2, 2016. Retrieved November 13, 2018. "George Washington Bridge "Restoring the George" Construction Program: Supplemental Information on Bicycle and Pedestrian Access" (PDF). New Jersey Bike and Walk Coalition. Retrieved April 18, 2019. Google (May 30, 2018). "George Washington Bridge" (Map). Google Maps. Google. Retrieved May 30, 2018. Rastorfer 2000, p. 71. "Tolls – Bridges & Tunnels". Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Retrieved February 27, 2010. Google (July 30, 2013). "GW Bridge ramps to GW Bridge Bus Terminal" (Map). Google Maps. Google. Retrieved July 30, 2013. "MTA Neighborhood Maps: neighborhood". Metropolitan Transportation Authority. 2018. Retrieved October 1, 2018. Rastorfer 2000, p. 66. LaRock, Hana (December 16, 2013). "How to Avoid the Tolls From New Jersey to New York". USA Today. Retrieved May 31, 2018. "New Toll Fare Rates for the Bridges & Tunnels Effective December 6, 2015 at 3:00 AM". Port Authority of New York & New Jersey. Retrieved November 23, 2015. "2017 Toll Information". MTA Bridges & Tunnels. Retrieved March 16, 2017. Newman, Andy (October 10, 1997). "Finding Alternatives to Alternate Routes". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 31, 2018. "Incentive Pricing Toll Schedules – Cashless Tolling". New York State Thruway. November 7, 2014. Retrieved January 12, 2019. "Bear Mountain Bridge | History | Facts". nysba.ny.gov. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "Tolls". Port Authority of New York & New Jersey. Retrieved February 2, 2020. Moran, Nancy (August 13, 1970). "One-Way Tolls Confusing Some Drivers". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 9, 2018. MacFarquhar, Neil (July 29, 1997). "Some Changes Via E-Z Pass at George Washington Bridge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved September 13, 2018. "E-ZPass bridge tollbooths may be history". Central New Jersey Home News. New Brunswick, NJ. June 19, 2000. p. 3. Retrieved November 13, 2018 – via Newspapers.com. "Toll Rules Fixed By Port Authority". The New York Times. December 31, 1934. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 18, 2018. "Jersey Bridge Tolls End For Pedestrians". The New York Times. May 29, 1940. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 18, 2018. Higgs, Larry (October 22, 2020). "Cash tolls at the Lincoln Tunnel and GWB are back, but not for long". nj. Retrieved December 24, 2020. "GWB, Lincoln & Holland tunnels getting rid of toll booths". New Jersey 101.5. July 25, 2019. Retrieved July 26, 2019. "In Line With Emergency Orders From New York and New Jersey, Port Authority to Collect Tolls Exclusively by Electronic Means and Temporarily Suspend Cash Toll Collection at Hudson River Crossings". Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. March 22, 2020. Retrieved March 28, 2020. Alexander, Dan (June 9, 2022). "Major toll changes for George Washington Bridge drivers coming this summer". New Jersey 101.5. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Higgs, Larry (June 9, 2022). "Cashless tolls are coming to the GWB, but carpool discounts are ending". nj. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Strunsky, Steve (December 5, 2014). "How the George Washington Bridge toll has risen through the years". NJ Advance Media. Retrieved June 19, 2016. 1634–1699: McCusker, J. J. (1997). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States: Addenda et Corrigenda (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1700–1799: McCusker, J. J. (1992). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1800–present: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. "Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800–". Retrieved February 29, 2024. "Port Authority Bridge and Tunnel Tolls Increase at Midnight". The New York Times. May 5, 1975. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 9, 2018. Anderson, Susan Heller; Carroll, Maurice (December 21, 1983). "New York Day by Day". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 10, 2018. "Tolls to Rise April 12 on Hudson Crossings". The New York Times. April 3, 1987. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 10, 2018. Levine, Richard (March 23, 1991). "Port Authority Raises Tolls for 6 Bridges and Tunnels to $4". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 10, 2018. Smothers, Ronald (January 26, 2001). "Port Authority Increases Tolls and Train Fare". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 10, 2018. Epstein, Joe (January 4, 2008). "Port Authority raises bridge and tunnel toll to $8". NJ.com. Retrieved April 16, 2018. "Commuters Face Higher Hudson River Crossing Tolls For Start Of Work Week". CBS New York. New York: WCBS-TV. September 18, 2011. Retrieved April 16, 2018. "Toll Increases Take Effect On Port Authority Crossings". CBS New York. New York: WCBS-TV. December 2, 2012. Retrieved April 16, 2018. "Tolls Going Up At Port Authority Crossings". CBS New York. New York: WCBS-TV. December 5, 2014. Retrieved April 16, 2018. "Latest round of Port Authority toll hikes take effect this weekend". ABC7 New York. December 4, 2015. Retrieved April 16, 2018. "This is How Much New Tolls Cost for NYC Bridges, Tunnels". NBC New York. January 4, 2020. Retrieved January 5, 2020. Higgs, Larry (December 31, 2022). "Tolls are going up on N.J. highways, bridges and tunnels in 2023. Here's how much and where". NJ.com. Archived from the original on January 3, 2023. Retrieved January 3, 2023. Westbrook, Elijah (January 8, 2024). "Toll increases take effect for Holland and Lincoln tunnels, George Washington, Bayonne and Goethals bridges". CBS New York. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Tolls". www.panynj.gov. Retrieved March 28, 2020. "Pedestrian & Bicycle Information – George Washington Bridge". Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Archived from the original on October 30, 2019. Retrieved February 27, 2010. "State Bicycle Route 9 Map". New York State Department of Transportation. Retrieved January 12, 2019. Yellin, Deena (October 12, 2014). "A controversial planned GWB pedestrian lane attracts critics". The Record (Bergen County). Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved June 19, 2016. It includes replacing stairways on the bridge's north side with access ramps and removing a tight hairpin turn on the south side walkway to make it safer and accessible to wheelchairs. "Support Grows in NJ for GW Bridge to "River Road" Connector Path". Reclaim Magazine. Transportation Alternatives: 15. Summer 2003. Retrieved February 27, 2010. Zabriskie, Phil (May 8, 2008). "The Mysteries of the Suicide Tourist". New York Magazine. Retrieved April 13, 2012. Dittrich, Luke (August 9, 2016). Patient H.M.: A Story of Memory, Madness, and Family Secrets. Random House Publishing Group. pp. 27–29. ISBN 978-0-679-64380-7. "213-foot Leap Kills Stunter" (PDF). Troy Times. Associated Press. September 22, 1930. p. 1. Retrieved June 5, 2018 – via Fultonhistory.com. "Dies In Stunt Dive From Ft. Lee Bridge". The New York Times. September 22, 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 6, 2018. "First Suicide at New Bridge". The New York Times. November 4, 1931. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 9, 2018. Shock Jock Howard Stern Stops Caller's Suicide Leap : Media: Man phoned in threat from edge of bridge. Radio personality says he decided to 'keep this man laughing' until authorities could arrive. Los Angeles Times (December 8, 1994). Retrieved on July 23, 2013. Weber, Bruce (December 8, 1994). "Now a Caller From the G. W. Bridge: Stern to the Rescue". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 28, 2018. Parker, Ian (January 29, 2012). "The Story of a Suicide". The New Yorker. Retrieved February 5, 2012. Messing, Philip (January 14, 2013). "Sad GWB suicide record". New York Post. Retrieved January 14, 2013. "12 people jumped to deaths from George Washington Bridge in 2016". Daily News. New York. Tracy, Thomas; Greene, Leonard (February 21, 2017). "Exclusive: Port Authority eyeing harness-equipped suicide prevention units on George Washington Bridge". Daily News. New York. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "At George Washington Bridge, a Fence Rises to Deter Suicides". The New York Times. December 29, 2017. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 9, 2018. Baxter, Christopher (March 11, 2014). "UPDATED: Timeline of Port Authority's George Washington Bridge controversy". The Star-Ledger. Retrieved March 31, 2014. "For Christie, perhaps a bridge too far". The Washington Post. January 9, 2014. "The backstory of Christie's 'Bridgegate' scandal". USA Today. January 10, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2014. Strunsky, Steve (October 16, 2013). "George Washington Bridge lane closures prompt internal review, lawmaker outrage". The Star-Ledger. Retrieved April 3, 2014. Chung, Jen (January 9, 2014). "U.S. Attorney Now Investigating Bridgegate". Gothamist. Archived from the original on January 12, 2014. Retrieved January 10, 2014. Costa, Robert (January 13, 2014). "Broader investigation of N.J. bridge closures launched". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 13, 2014. "A Hiring by Christie Raises Questions Over Cooperation". The New York Times. January 16, 2014. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved January 20, 2014. Keogh, Elizabeth (September 12, 2020). "Protesters stop traffic on NYC side of George Washington Bridge". nydailynews.com. Retrieved September 14, 2020. "Protesters Shut Down George Washington Bridge, Clash With NYPD". NBC New York. September 13, 2020. Retrieved September 14, 2020. "Pilot, 19, Defends Bridge Landing". The New York Times. December 28, 1965. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 18, 2018. McFadden, Robert D. (June 10, 1977). "Two Trucks Rip Net Over Hudson, But Bridge Beam Catches the Cabs". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 25, 2018. McFadden, Robert D. (August 8, 1980). "A Propane Gas Leak On Bridge To Jersey Causes Huge Tie-up". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 28, 2018. Buder, Leonard (August 9, 1980). "Koch Salutes 2 Who Plugged Propane Leak". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 28, 2018. Farber, M.A. (August 8, 1980). "Tank Truck Followed Regulations, Officials Report". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 28, 2018. Farber, M.A. (August 9, 1980). "Propane Leak Spurs Study By New York". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 28, 2018. "CNN.com - Transcripts". edition.cnn.com. Retrieved December 19, 2021. Lima, Paulo; Stile, Charles (September 12, 2001). "New Jersey gives its all to a neighbor in dire need". The Record. Colford, Paul D. (September 15, 2001). "False accounts taint stories". Daily News. Rockland 2008, p. 123. Rockland 2008, p. 125. Rockland 2008, p. 124. Megraw, Jeremy (October 25, 2011). "I ♥ G-Dubs: A Love Letter to the George Washington Bridge on its 80th Birthday". nypl.org. New York Public Library for the Performing Arts. Retrieved September 17, 2018. Hay, Susan (September 7, 2016). "Sully: The untold story of US Airways Flight 1549 – Toronto". Global News. Retrieved September 18, 2018. "The New York Filming Locations of The Godfather, Then and Now". Scouting NY. January 26, 2014. Retrieved September 18, 2018. Rockland 2008, p. 126. Thrush, Glenn (August 18, 1997). "The Real Cop Land". New York Magazine. p. 30. Retrieved September 20, 2018. Rockland 2008, pp. 133–134. Rockland 2008, p. 133. "William Schuman's GWB Tribute Finds New Resonance – New York's Classical Music Radio Station". WQXR. January 10, 2014. Retrieved September 17, 2018. Swift, Hildegarde (1942). The Little Red Lighthouse and the Great Gray Bridge. Lynd Ward (illustrator) (2002 ed.). Harcourt, Brace, and World. ISBN 0-15-204571-6. "In the Heights" Original Broadway Company & Mandy Gonzalez – Breathe, retrieved February 19, 2023 "Atomic War! #1". p. 09. Rockland 2008, p. 130. Keighley, Geoff (May 16, 2012). "The Final Hours of Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty". GameSpot. Retrieved April 2, 2019. Rastorfer, Darl (2006). George Washington Bridge : a timeless marvel. New York, N.Y: The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey in association with Darl Rastorfer and Associates. ISBN 978-0-9789640-0-9. OCLC 85791384. "Fort Washington Park Highlights". The Little Red Lighthouse : NYC Parks. June 26, 1939. Retrieved September 17, 2018. For the book itself, see: Swift, Hildegarde (1974). The little red lighthouse and the great gray bridge. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. ISBN 978-0-15-204573-9. OCLC 695588. Rastorfer, Darl (2000). "Chapter 2: The George Washington Bridge". Six bridges : the legacy of Othmar H. Ammann. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-08047-6. OCLC 41977224. Reier, Sharon (2000). The Bridges of New York. New York City Series. Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-41230-6. Rockland, Michael Aaron (2008). The George Washington Bridge: Poetry in Steel. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-4375-8. Stern, Robert A. M.; Gilmartin, Patrick; Mellins, Thomas (1987). New York 1930: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Two World Wars. New York: Rizzoli. ISBN 978-0-8478-3096-1. OCLC 13860977. Doig, Jameson W. Empire on the Hudson: Entrepreneurial vision and political power at the Port of New York Authority (Columbia University Press, 2013) Plotch, Philip M. and Jen Nelles, Mobilizing the Metropolis: How the Port Authority Built New York (University of Michigan Press, 2023) KML file (edit • help) Template:Attached KML/George Washington Bridge KML is from Wikidata Wikimedia Commons has media related to George Washington Bridge. George Washington Bridge Official Site by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey George Washington Bridge at Bridges & Tunnels George Washington Bridge at NYCRoads.com George Washington Bridge at Structurae Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) No. NY-129, "George Washington Bridge", 77 photos, 12 color transparencies, 6 data pages, 8 photo caption pages The George Washington Bridge in Heavy Smog, View Toward the New Jersey Side of the Hudson River from World Digital Library