Zolotonosha Raion is a raion (district) of Cherkasy Oblast, central Ukraine. Its administrative centre is located at the city of Zolotonosha. Population: 135,445 (2022 estimate). On 18 July 2020, as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, the number of raions of Cherkasy Oblast was reduced to four, and the area of Zolotonosha Raion was significantly expanded. Two abolished raions, Chornobai and Drabiv Raions, as well as the city of Zolotonosha, which was previously incorporated as a city of oblast significance and did not belong to the raion, were merged into Zolotonosha Raion. The January 2020 estimate of the raion population was 39,349 (2020 est.). After the reform in July 2020, the raion consisted of 11 hromadas: Chornobai settlement hromada with the administration in the rural settlement of Chornobai, transferred from Chornobai Raion; Drabiv settlement hromada with the administration in the rural settlement of Drabiv, transferred from Drabiv Raion; Helmiaziv rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Helmiaziv, retained from Zolotonosha Raion; Irkliiv rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Irkliiv, transferred from Chornobai Raion; Nova Dmytrivka rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Nova Dmytrivka, retained from Zolotonosha Raion; Pishchane rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Pishchane, retained from Zolotonosha Raion; Shramkivka rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Shramkivka, transferred from Drabiv Raion; Velykyi Khutir rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Velykyi Khutir, transferred from Drabiv Raion; Voznesenske rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Voznesenske, retained from Zolotonosha Raion; Zolotonosha urban hromada with the administration in the city of Zolotonosha, transferred from Zolotonosha Municipality; Zorivka rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Zorivka, retained from Zolotonosha Raion. Before the 2020 reform, the raion consisted of five hromadas: Helmiaziv rural hromada with the administration in Helmiaziv; Nova Dmytrivka rural hromada with the administration in Nova Dmytrivka; Pishchane rural hromada with the administration in Pishchane; Voznesenske rural hromada with the administration in Voznesenske; Zorivka rural hromada with the administration in Zorivka. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 2020-07-18. Retrieved 2020-10-03. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2020 року / Population of Ukraine Number of Existing as of January 1, 2020 (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2023. "Чорнобаївська районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Драбівська районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Золотоношская городская громада" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Золотоніська районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України.