Horodnia (Ukrainian: Городня́ [ɦorɔˈdnʲɐ] ) is a small city in Chernihiv Raion, Chernihiv Oblast, Ukraine. It has had city status since 1957. Horodnia hosts the administration of Horodnia urban hromada, one of the hromadas of Ukraine. Population: 11,506 (2022 estimate). Horodnia is situated on both banks of the Chibrizh River. Horodnia was first mentioned in historical literature at the beginning of the 17th century. There are different ideas about the origin of its name. A source of local pride comes from three cannons presented by Peter I for the heroism of the people of Horodnia during the Swedish invasion in 1709. Until 18 July 2020, Horodnia was the administrative center of Horodnia Raion. The raion was abolished in July 2020 as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Chernihiv Oblast to five. The area of Horodnia Raion was merged into Chernihiv Raion. Horodnia was occupied by Russian forces during the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War. Russian forces were reported to have left the town on 1 April 2022. Distribution of the population by native language according to the 2001 census: The town has two secondary schools, two boarding schools, a music school, and a sport school.[citation needed] Many famous people were born, lived and studied in Horodnia. Among them are poets Vasyl Chumak [uk], Abram Katsnelson [uk], Petro Pynytsia [uk], ethnographer Stepan Nis [uk]; Mykola Volkovych [uk], doctor and professor; and politician and Hero of Ukraine Levko Lukyanenko. Former politician and the Prime Minister of Ukraine Oleksiy Honcharuk grew up and finished school in Horodnia.[citation needed] "Городнянская городская громада" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 2020-07-18. Retrieved 2020-10-03. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. "Суспільне Чернігів". "Рідні мови в об'єднаних територіальних громадах України" (in Ukrainian). The murder of the Jews of Horodnia during World War II, at Yad Vashem website.