Global marketing is defined as “marketing on a worldwide scale reconciling or taking global operational differences, similarities and opportunities in order to reach global objectives". Global marketing is also a field of study in general business management that markets products, solutions and services to customers locally, nationally, and internationally. International marketing is the application of marketing principles in more than one country, by companies overseas or across national borders. It is done through the export of a company's product into another location or entry through a joint venture with another firm within the country, or foreign direct investment into the country. International marketing is required for the development of the marketing mix for the country. International marketing includes the use of existing marketing strategies, mix and tools for export, relationship strategies such as localization, local product offerings, pricing, production and distribution with customized promotions, offers, website, social media and leadership. Internationalization and international marketing is when the value of the company is "exported and there is inter-firm and firm learning, optimization, and efficiency in economies of scale and scope". Evolution The international marketplace was transformed by shifts in trading techniques, standards and practices. These changes were reinforced and retained by advanced technologies and evolving economic relationships amongst the companies and organizations involved in international trade. The traditional ethnocentric conceptual view of international marketing trade was counterbalanced by a global view of markets. Domestic marketing consists of the marketing strategies used by a company to allow customers to purchase a product or service within a local market Domestic marketing leads to familiarity with the extent of political risk, the quality of skilled human resources and natural resources, and the ramifications of existing and likely legislation in relevant areas such as safety, hygiene, employment, and ownership of capital. These markets are restrained by the laws and regulations of the country. Domestic marketing is typically organized at the headquarters. Global marketing relies on firms that understand the requirements associated with servicing customers locally with global standard solutions or products and localizes that product to maintain an optimal balance of cost, efficiency, customization and localization in a control-customization continuum to meet local, national and global requirements. Global marketing and global branding are integrated. Branding is a structured process of analyzing "soft" assets and "hard" assets of a firm's resources. The strategic analysis and development of a brand includes customer analysis (trends, motivation, unmet needs, segmentation), competitive analysis (brand image/brand identity, strengths, strategies, vulnerabilities), and self-analysis (existing brand image, brand heritage, strengths/capabilities, organizational values). "Global brand identity development is the process of establishing brands of products, the firm, and services locally and worldwide with consideration for scope, product attributes, quality, uses, users and country of origin; organizational attributes; personality attributes, and brand-customer relationship; and important symbols, trademarks metaphors, imagery, mood, photography and the company's brand heritage". A global marketing and branding implementation system distributes marketing assets, affiliate programs and materials, internal communications, newsletters, investor materials, event promotions and trade shows to deliver integrated, comprehensive and focused communication, access and value to the customers. A minimum level of performance is placed onto each product. The price of a product varies based on production cost, target segment, and supply-demand dynamics alongside several types of pricing strategies, each tied in with an overall business plan. Pricing is also used as a demarcation to differentiate the image of a product. The price varies from market to market. The place refers to the point of sale. The distribution of product is reliant on the competition offered to the market. Coca-Cola does not implement vending machines in all cultures. Beverages are sold by the pallet via warehouse stores in the United States while it is not seen in India. Placement decisions are reliant on the position of the product in the market place. For example, a high-end product would not be distributed via a dollar store in the United States. Conversely, a product promoted as the low-cost option in France would give rise to limited success in a high end area. Advertising, word of mouth, press reports, incentives, commissions and awards to the trade will account for product acknowledgement. It may also include consumer schemes, direct marketing, contests and prizes. People may be considered to be a firm's most valuable asset. Core values of firms such as integrity, honesty, leadership, social responsibility, drive for profit, drive for quality products and services are reasons behind customer loyalty. Processes for creative and delivering products and services are intangible assets that improves the quality of the product and services. Digital economy today enables firms to provide non-physical services over the internet and companies' products such as Software-as-a-Service (Saas). Historically, banks with retail locations signal the financial strength of their institutions. Retail locations for consumer brands add onto the evidence of the popularity and reach of their brands. There are trust requirements before a customer makes a purchase from a company, as such, companies without brick and mortar must provide existential proof of their legitimate software company. Global marketing may lead to: Economies of scale in production and distribution Lower marketing costs Power and scope Consistency in brand image Ability to leverage ideas quickly and efficiently Uniformity of marketing practices Helps to establish relationships outside of the 'political arena' Helps to encourage ancillary industries to be set up to cater to the needs of the global player Benefits of eMarketing over traditional marketing Global marketing may also lead to: Differences in consumer needs, wants, and usage patterns for products Differences in consumer response to marketing mix elements Differences in brand and product development and the competitive environment Differences in the legal environment, some of which may conflict with those of the home market Differences in the institutions available, some of which may call for the creation of entirely new ones (e.g. infrastructure) Differences in administrative procedures Differences in product placement Differences in the administrative procedures and product placement can occur Advertising Advertising research Globalization International marketing Marketing Marketing research Nation branding wikt:Picture Sorts Visual marketing A Dictionary of Marketing. Oxford University Press. 24 March 2011. ISBN 978-0-19-959023-0. Retrieved 4 October 2017. "International Marketing vs Global Marketing (10 Differences)". eduCBA. 16 September 2016. Retrieved 4 October 2017. Johansson, Johny K. (2010). "Global Marketing Strategy". Wiley International Encyclopedia of Marketing. Wiley International Encyclopedia of Marketing Online. doi:10.1002/9781444316568.wiem01024. ISBN 9781405161787. Bryan, Jesse. "Digital Marketing on Instagram". Eurweb.com. Retrieved 19 October 2023. "International Marketing". marketing-schools.org. 2012. Retrieved 30 October 2020. "Global Marketing Mix | Boundless Marketing". courses.lumenlearning.com. Retrieved 2 April 2021. "International Marketing | Fastweb". www.fastweb.com. Retrieved 2 April 2021. "Domestic marketing vs international marketing". termscompared.com. Terms Compared. 24 February 2020. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Paliwoda & Thomas, Stanley J. & Michael J. (1998). International Marketing. London, England: The Chartered Institute of Marketing. p. 13. ISBN 978-1-135-38710-5. Building Strong Brands, David Aaker, E.T. Grether Professor of Marketing Strategy at the Haas School of Business at the University of California at Berkeley https://courses.aiu.edu/Certificate/Human%20Resources%20and%20MKT/Global%20Marketing/Leccion%201/Global%20Marketing%20sesion%201.pdf[bare URL PDF] "Definition of Marketing Mix | What is Marketing Mix ? Marketing Mix Meaning". The Economic Times. Retrieved 21 April 2019. Hollensen, Svend (2020) Global Marketing, 8th edition, Pearson, ISBN 978-1-292-25180-6 . Svante Andersson & Göran Svensson (editors) (2009) Global Marketing: think globally and act locally, Lund: Studentlitteratur, ISBN 978-91-44-05555-8 . Kotabe, Masaki and Helsen, Kristiaan (2004) Global Marketing Management, 3rd edition, John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 0-471-23062-6 . Philip Kotler & Keller (2005) Marketing Management, 12th edition, ISBN 81-203-2799-3 . Theodore Levitt (May–June 1983) "The Globalization of Markets", Harvard Business Review 61: 92–10. Young, Charles E. (April 2005) Advertising Research Handbook, Ideas in Flight, Seattle, ISBN 0-9765574-0-1. Media related to Global marketing at Wikimedia Commons Digital Marketing