The president of Abkhazia is the head of state in Abkhazia, a breakaway state recognized as part of Georgia, under Russian military occupation. The position was created in 1994. Before the office of president was created the head of state position was known as the chairman of Parliament between 1992 and the creation of the 1994 constitution. Before the position of Chairman of Parliament, the highest office in Abkhazia was the chairman of the Supreme Soviet. The post would last from the declaration of sovereignty from the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic on 25 August 1990 until the outright declaration of independence on 23 July 1992. During Alexander Ankvab's presidency, Parliament decided to scrap from the Presidential oath the phrase: Жәлар рылахь соуааит иҧшьоу абри ахақәкы сацәхьаҵны саныҟала — If I deviate from this path, then let me be punished by my people During a meeting on 16 July 2014, following the Abkhazian Revolution, Parliament decided to restore this phrase. According to Vice Speaker Emma Gamisonia, the decision to remove the phrase had been taken because it was perceived as a curse, following the premature death of Abkhazia's first two presidents, Vladislav Ardzinba and Sergei Bagapsh. MP Daur Arshba claimed that the decision had been taken illegally, without the necessary quorum. On 18 August, the People's Assembly of Abkhazia additionally adopted a bill authored by Said Kharazia, and first proposed by him during the meeting on 16 July, adding the invocation Иа Анцәа Ду, суҳәоит Сыԥсадгьыли сыуаажәлари рымаҵ аураҿы амчи алшареи суҭарц! — Almighty God, give me strength to serve country and people! Abkhazia portal Government of the Republic of Abkhazia Prime Minister of Abkhazia Minister for Foreign Affairs of Abkhazia "Восстановлен текст присяги президента в первоначальной редакции". Apsnypress. 16 July 2015. Retrieved 7 March 2015. "Депутаты парламента большинством голосов внесли изменение в текст присяги президента РА". Apsnypress. 18 August 2014. Retrieved 17 September 2014. President of the Republic of Abkhazia – Official site (English Version) v t e