Novoselytsia Raion (Ukrainian: Новоселицький район, Romanian: Raionul Noua Suliță pronounced [raˈjonul ˈnowa ˈsulit͡sə]) was a raion (administrative district) in Chernivtsi Oblast, (province) in the west of Ukraine. The western part of its territory lied in the historical region of Bukovina, the eastern part in Bessarabia, while one village (Boianivka) was part of the Hertsa region. The center of the raion was the city of Novoselytsia. The raion was abolished on 18 July 2020 as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Chernivtsi Oblast to three. The area of Novoselytsia Raion was split between Chernivtsi and Dnistrovskyi Raions. The last estimate of the raion population was 76,744 (2020 est.) According to the 2001 Ukrainian Census, the raion's population was 87,241. The ethnical composition was as follows: Among the 50,329 self-identified Moldovans, 47,585 self-identified their language as Moldovan and 2,264 as Romanian according to the Ukrainian census of 2001. The singer Sofia Rotaru was born in Marshyntsi, one of the Romanian speaking villages of the Raion. The village of Tarasivtsi, located in the raion, is notable as the only place in Ukraine where the Moldovan (Romanian) language has been designated as a regional language. This occurred after Ukraine permitted regional languages to be designated in August 2012 . Novoselytsia Raion had 1 city and 30 communes: Novoselytsia - administrative seat Communes Balkivtsi Berestia Boiany Cherlenivka Chornivka Dovzhok Dranytsia Dynivtsi Forosna Kostychany Koteleve Mahala Malynivka Mamalyha Marshyntsi Nesvoia Podvirne Prypruttia Ridkivtsi Rokytne Rynhach Shcherbyntsi Sloboda Stalnivtsi Strointsi Tarasivtsi Toporivtsi Vanchykivtsi Zelenyi Hai Zhylivka Of these, Boiany, Chornivka, Mahala, Sloboda, Pripruttia, Toporivtsi and Zelenyi Hai are in the historical region of Bukovina, while the remainder are in Bessarabia. At the time of disestablishment, the raion consisted of six hromadas: Boiany rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Boiany, transferred to Chernivtsi Raion; Mahala rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Mahala, transferred to Chernivtsi Raion; Mamalyha rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Mamalyha, transferred to Dnistrovskyi Raion; Novoselytsia urban hromada with the administration in Novoselytsia, transferred to Chernivtsi Raion; Toporivtsi rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Toporivtsi, transferred to Chernivtsi Raion; Vanchykivtsi rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Vanchykivtsi, transferred to Chernivtsi Raion. Toporyvtsi rural hromada also contained three villages, Kolinkivtsi, Hrozyntsi, and Bochkivtsi, which belonged to Khotyn Raion. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 2020-07-18. Retrieved 2020-10-03. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2020 року / Population of Ukraine Number of Existing as of January 1, 2020 (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2023. See Ion Popescu and Constantin Ungureanu, Romanii dn Ucraina - intre trecut si viitor, vol. 1 (Romanii din Regiunea Cernauti), Cernauti, 2005, p. 259, 260, with the figure from the 2001 Ukrainian census. "Popov: No bilingualism in Kyiv", Kyiv Post, September 19, 2012 "Новоселицька районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Топоривская громада" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. Novoselytskyi Raion - official website (in Ukrainian) Verkhovna Rada website - Administrative divisions of Novoselytskyi Raion (in Ukrainian)