Karosta is a former Russian Imperial and Soviet naval base on the Baltic Sea, which today is a neighbourhood in Liepāja, Latvia. The naval base was originally constructed in 1890-1906 for Tsar Alexander III of Russia, and named Порт Императора Александра III. Built on the bare coast it consisted of a large man-made harbour including a large breakwater and inland submarine base. During Latvian independence after World War I, the base was called Kara osta (War Port in Latvian), later shortened to Karaosta and Karosta (Кароста in Russian). It was a closed military area and army town during the Soviet period, serving as a base for the Soviet Baltic Fleet. It was inaccessible to the civilians of neighbouring Liepāja. When the Soviet Union military left Latvia in 1994 after the restoration of Latvian independence, Karosta became largely uninhabited and most structures fell to ruin. In late 1990s, the area was troubled by high unemployment, street crime and drug problems. It is today a neighbourhood in the northern outskirts of Liepāja in Latvia, occupying a third of the area of the city. Today, Karosta is a popular place for tourists and artists, who are attracted to its historical sights, such as the scenic seascapes with partially blasted fortresses on the Baltic shore. The K@2 Artists center was established in 2000 and acts as a frame for many cultural activities by local and foreign artists who come to Karosta for art projects and to get inspiration from Karosta’s nature, buildings, ruins, and people. The army headquarters include czar-era mansions used by admirals, a palace for the czar (reportedly only used once), an impressive Russian Orthodox Naval Cathedral, as well as underground bunkers and abandoned storehouses. Soviet-era buildings include many rows of block housing. At its height Karosta was home to over 20,000 people. Karosta military prison has now been converted into a museum (open May - September) and it is possible to spend the night in the guardhouse, processed as a prisoner would have been. The old water tower The first battery of the north forts Ruins of the Northern forts Ruins of the riding arena Kalpaka bridge, connects Karosta with other parts of Liepāja Soviet blockhouses in Karosta In 2008 Ivory Tower Pictures produced a television documentary called Karosta: Life After the USSR directed by Peter King. Russian text from Sankt Petersburg, 1895 100 gadi 100 kartēs, ISBN 978-9984-07-746-8, page 22 Liepāja Naval Port Liepāja Naval Port Wikimedia Commons has media related to Karosta. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Liepaja. Ivory Tower Pictures - Producers of Karosta: Life After the USSR (web archive) Official site (web archive) Images of old fort Official Latvian Tourism Portal Karosta Prison 56°33′0″N 21°0′20″E﻿ / ﻿56.55000°N 21.00556°E﻿ / 56.55000; 21.00556