The prime minister of Armenia (Armenian: Հայաստանի Հանրապետության վարչապետ, romanized: Hayastani Hanrapetut’yan varch’apet) is the head of government and most senior minister within the Armenian government, and is required by the constitution to "determine the main directions of policy of the Government, manage the activities of the Government and coordinate the work of the members of the Government." Also, according to the constitution, the prime minister heads the Security Council, which prescribes the main directions of the country's defense policy; thus, the prime minister is effectively the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces of Armenia.Nikol Pashinyan is the current prime minister. He took the office on 8 May 2018 following the resignation of Serzh Sargsyan. The office of prime minister was first established in 1918 with the foundation of the First Republic of Armenia. The prime minister chosen by the National Council of Armenia and was accountable for international, domestic and regional issues. The first Prime Minister became Hovhannes Katchaznouni whose cabinet was made up from five members, all of which were from ARF. In addition, a ministry of interior was created, whose first head was Aram Manukian. It vanished when the First Republic of Armenia was incorporated into the Transcaucasian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic and then transferred into a full Soviet republic. The governmental structure of the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic was similar to that of the other Soviet republics. The highest executive and administrative organ of state power was the Council of Ministers. The Council consisted of the following positions: Chairman Vice Chairman Chairman of the State Planning Commission Cabinet Ministers Representative of the Committee of Agricultural Stocks Chairman of the Board of Arts Representative of the All-Union People's Commissariat When Armenia regained its independence in 1991, the office of prime minister was reintroduced. Under the new 2015 constitution, the prime minister is the most powerful and influential person in Armenian politics. The prime minister is appointed by the president of Armenia upon the vote of the National Assembly. The prime minister can be removed by a vote of no confidence in Parliament. In the constitutional referendum held in 2015, citizens voted in favor of transferring Armenia into a parliamentary republic. The Prime Minister's Staff has the task of ensuring the enforcement of the powers vested in the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Ministers, as well as making preparations for Cabinet meetings: Prime ministers      α.   ^ Assassinated while in office in the 1999 Armenian parliament shooting.      β.   ^ Died of heart attack while in office. "PM Nikol Pashinyan receives congratulations on 27th anniversary of Armenia's independence". Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 19 January 2019., The Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia "Hovhannes Kajaznuni and Aram Manukyan: Armenia's Forgotten Founding Fathers – Chai Khana". 2 April 2018. "How much salary does the Prime Minister get?". iravaban.net. 9 May 2018. LLC, Helix Consulting. "Constitution of the Republic of Armenia – Library – The President of the Republic of Armenia [the official site]". www.president.am. Retrieved 10 April 2018. [1],. LLC, Helix Consulting. "Staff – Office of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia – The Government of the Republic of Armenia". www.gov.am. Retrieved 20 December 2023. Historical Overview – Former Prime Ministers – The Government of Armenia Portal:  Politics