Storozhynets Raion (Ukrainian: Сторожинецький район, Romanian: Raionul Storojineț) was a raion (administrative district) in Chernivtsi Oblast, (province), in the historical region of Bukovina, in western part of Ukraine. The administrative center of the raion was the city of Storozhynets. It bordered with Romania from south, Vyzhnytsia Raion from west, Kitsman Raion from north, municipality of Chernivtsi and Hlyboka Raion from east. The raion was abolished on 18 July 2020 as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Chernivtsi Oblast to three. The area of Storozhynets Raion was merged into Chernivtsi Raion. The last estimate of the raion population was 100,918 (2020 est.) At the time of disestablishment, the raion consisted of six hromadas: Chudei rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Chudei; Kamiana rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Kamiana; Krasnoilsk settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Krasnoilsk; Petrivtsi rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Verkhni Petrivtsi; Storozhynets urban hromada with the administration in Storozhynets; Velykyi Kuchuriv rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Velykyi Kuchuriv. According to the 2001 Ukrainian Census, the raion's population was 95,295. The ethnic composition of the district's population as reported by the census: 56,786 Ukrainians, 35,095 Romanians, 1,367 Russians, 307 Moldovans, and 1,740 other. The Romanian population was concentrated in the south of the raion, especially around the urban-type settlement of Krasnoilsk (Romanian: Crasna). The raion had 1 city (Storozhynets), 1 urban-type settlement (Krasnoilsk), 24 communes (selsoviets), and 13 villages attached to communes. These villages were Banyliv Pidhirnyi (Romanian: Bănila pe Siret, Bănila Moldovenească between 1922–1944, German: Augustendorf) Bobivtsi (Romanian: Bobești) Novi Broskivtsi (Romanian: Broscăuții Noi, German: Broschkoutz Neu) Stari Broskivtsi (Romanian: Broscăuții Vechi, German: Broschkoutz Alt) Budenets (Romanian: Budineț, German: Budinetz, has Romanian majority) Kamiana (Romanian: Camena, German: Kamena) Cheresh (Cireș, German: Cziresz, has Romanian majority) Chudei (Romanian: Ciudei, German: Czudyn, Mezhirechye between 1944–1995, has Romanian majority) Komarivtsi (Romanian: Comărești) Kostyntsi (Romanian: Costești, German: Kostestie) Stara Krasnoshora (Romanian: Crăsnișoara Veche, Polish: Stara Huta Krasna, German: Althütte, former Ukrainian: Altkhyute between 1775–1918, has Polish majority) Velykyi Kuchuriv (Romanian: Cuciurul Mare, Romanian: Kuczurmare, Polish: Kuczurów Wielki) Davydivka (Romanian: Davideni, German: Dawideny) Yizhivtsi (Romanian: Igești, German: Idzestie, has Romanian majority) Stara Zhadova (Romanian: Jadova, German: Zadowa Alt) Mykhalcha (Romanian: Mihalcea, German: Mihalcze) Panka (Romanian: Panca, German: Panka) Nyzhni Petrivtsi (Romanian: Pătrăuții de Jos, German: Unter Petroutz, Polish: Pietrowce Dolne, has Romanian majority) Verkhni Petrivtsi (Romanian: Pătrăuții de Sus, German: Ober Petroutz, has Romanian majority) Ropcha (Romanian: Ropcea, has Romanian majority) Sloboda-Komarivtsi (Romanian: Slobozia Comăreștilor, German: Komarestie Slobodzia) Sniachiv (Romanian: Sneci, Polish: Sniacziw) Tysovets (Romanian: Tișăuți, German: Teschoutz) Zrub-Komarivskyi (Romanian: Trei Movile) Arshytsia (Romanian: Arșița, has Romanian majority) Kabivtsi (Romanian: Căbești, German: Kabestie) Kosovanka (Romanian: Cosovanca) Nova Kranoshora (Romanian: Crăsnișoara Nouă, German: Neuhütte, has Romanian majority) Dubove (Romanian: Dubova) Dibrivka (Romanian: Dumbrava) Hlybochok (Romanian: Hlibacioc) Hodyliv (Romanian: Hodilău) Nova Zhadova (Romanian: Jadova Nouă, German: Zadowa Alt) Spaska (Romanian: Spasca) Ursoia (Romanian: Ursoaia, Usole between 1944–1995, has Romanian majority) Zabolottia (Romanian: Zabolotie, Yablonovets between 1944–1995) Zavoloka (Romanian: Zavoloca) "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 2020-07-18. Retrieved 2020-10-03. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. 17 July 2020. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2020 року / Population of Ukraine Number of Existing as of January 1, 2020 (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2023. "Сторожинецька районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Ukraine Raions". "Noi,NU! Revistă de atitudine și cultură - Românii din Ucraina (1)". noinu.rdscj.ro. Archived from the original on 22 March 2008. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Storozhynetskyi Raion - official website (in Ukrainian) Verkhovna Rada website - Administrative divisions of Storozhynetskyi Raion (in Ukrainian)