Robert Fico (Slovak pronunciation: [ˈrɔbert ˈfitsɔ]; born 15 September 1964) is a Slovak politician currently serving as the Prime Minister of Slovakia since 2023, having served previously from 2006 to 2010 and from 2012 to 2018. He founded the Direction – Social Democracy (Smer) party in 1999 and has led the party since its foundation. Fico holds a record as the longest-serving prime minister in the country's history, having served for a total of over 10 years. First elected to Parliament in 1992 (whilst within Czechoslovakia), he was later appointed to the Council of Europe. Following his party's victory in the 2006 parliamentary election, he formed the first Fico Cabinet. Fico's political positions have been described as populist. After the 2010 parliamentary election, Fico served as an opposition member of parliament, effectively holding the position of the leader of the opposition. Following a motion of no confidence against the Iveta Radičová cabinet, Fico was re-appointed as prime minister after leading Smer to a landslide election victory in the 2012 parliamentary election, winning 83 seats and forming a government with an absolute majority in Parliament, the first such since 1989. In 2013, Fico officially declared his candidacy for the 2014 presidential election. Fico lost the election to his political rival Andrej Kiska in the second round of voting on 29 March 2014. On 15 March 2018, in the wake of the political crisis following the murder of Ján Kuciak, Fico delivered his resignation to President Andrej Kiska, who then formally charged Deputy Prime Minister Peter Pellegrini with the formation of a new government. During the 2023 parliamentary election, Fico ran on a campaign to cease military support to Ukraine in the Russo-Ukrainian War and expressed interest in beginning peace talks. His party Direction – Social Democracy (Smer), won the most votes in the election, with 22.95% of the vote and winning 42 seats. Fico formed a coalition with Voice – Social Democracy (Hlas) and the Slovak National Party, and began his fourth term as prime minister on 25 October. Fico was born on 15 September 1964, in the town of Topoľčany in the southwestern Nitra Region. His father, Ľudovit Fico, was a forklift operator, and his mother, Emilie Ficová, worked in a shoe store. He has two siblings; his brother Ladislav is a construction entrepreneur, and his sister Lucia Chabadová, who is fourteen years younger, is a prosecutor. Fico grew up and lived with his family in the village of Hrušovany, until the age of six, when they moved to the nearby town of Topoľčany. Fico has described his childhood ambitions as wanting to become either a politician, a sports reporter, or an archeologist. After completing elementary school, he enrolled in the local Gymnasium of Topoľčany, graduating in the summer of 1982. Later the same year he enrolled in the Law Faculty of the Comenius University in Bratislava, in what was then Czechoslovakia. His teachers were impressed with him, and one of his teachers from university, the future prime minister Jozef Moravčík, described him as "ambitious, very confident and very involved in discussions." He graduated as juris doctor in 1986 specializing in criminal law.[citation needed] After graduating from university, Fico completed his mandatory military service as an assistant military investigator, stationed in the (now-Czech) town of Janovice between 1986 and 1987. He later worked for the Institute of State and Law of the Slovak Academy of Sciences, as well as with the Justice Ministry until 1992. During this period he wrote and completed his PhD degree, with a thesis on "The death penalty in Czechoslovakia" and, in the early 1990s, undertook studies at the School of Slavonic and East European Studies in London under a Masaryk scholarship. In 2002 he completed his postgraduate study, earning him the title of associate professor. Fico joined the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia in 1986, having applied in 1984. After the Velvet Revolution of 1989, and the collapse of the communist regime in Czechoslovakia, Fico joined the Party of the Democratic Left (SDĽ), a successor of the Communist Party of Slovakia. He was first elected as Member of Parliament in 1992. From 1994 to 2000 Fico represented Slovakia as its legal counsel at the European Court of Human Rights but lost all 14 cases which he handled. In 1998 he was elected deputy chairman of the party. Later the same year, Fico ran for the post of general prosecutor, but his party endorsed another candidate instead, arguing Fico was too young. In the 1998 elections that saw the fall of the government of Vladimír Mečiar, Fico received the biggest number of preferential votes among his party colleagues. A year later, when support for the SDĽ dropped below the threshold required to get into parliament, he left the party, saying he was disappointed with the way the government worked. As early as in the autumn of 1998, a four-person group consisting of Fico, his associate Frantisek Határ, political strategist Fedor Flašík, and media executive Monika Flašíková-Beňová had begun to discuss and lay plans for launching a new political party on the left. These plans were driven by the falling popularity of the existing parties, and the rising popularity of Fico. Almost immediately after leaving SDĽ, the group founded Direction – Social Democracy (SMER), which Fico first labelled a party of the third way, with himself as leader. Fico established himself as an opposition politician criticizing the unpopular reforms of the right-wing government of Mikuláš Dzurinda. In order to keep SMER from repeating the fate of his previous party, Fico introduced a strict set of regulations for his new party, called the "clean hands" policy. The rules stipulated that no one with ties from the previous communist regime or people who had background with other political parties was allowed to hold party office. This created a new generation of politicians uninvolved in previous corruption scandals; among them was Monika Flašíková-Beňová, Robert Kaliňák and Pavol Paška. Another rule was that all party chapters on the regional and local levels were to be 100% financially self-sufficient, and all financial donations were to be made public to the media. Between 2002 and 2006 Smer was the main opposition party in the Slovak parliament. In 2004, it merged with nearly all the leftist parties active on the Slovak political scene, including its parent party SDĽ, becoming the dominant single political party in Slovakia. In the 2006 Slovak parliamentary election, SMER won with 29.1% of the votes. The election victory came after a campaign focused on reversing the deeply un-popular austerity reforms within the healthcare and education sectors, reforms which were pushed through by then ministers Rudolf Zajac and Martin Fronc. They subsequently formed a coalition government with Vladimír Mečiar's People's Party – Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) and Ján Slota's Slovak National Party (SNS). SNS is a right-wing populist party which has been known for making anti-Roma and anti-Hungarian comments, including a drunken public speech by Ján Slota, in which he threatened to "get in tanks and level Budapest to the ground." One reaction to the coalition came from the EU-wide Party of European Socialists (PES), who suspended SMER's application to join the PES. In late February 2008, however, the Assembly of PES conditionally reinstated the application after both SMER and SNS signed a letter committing themselves to respect minority rights. Fico has never publicly condemned SNS' remarks and speeches, and government-level relations between Slovakia and Hungary deteriorated in his first term in office. Several meetings between the two countries' prime ministers were abruptly cancelled, and those few that did take place resulted in little improvement of relations. On 10 April 2007, the Deputy Director of the Slovak Land Fund and HZDS nominee Branislav Bríza signed a contract on the basis of which restitutors from eastern Slovakia became the owners of lucrative land in the Tatra village of Veľký Slavkov. These restitutors then quickly sold the land to the company GVM for 13 million Slovak crowns (Slovak currency prior to Euro). The figurehead of the company was a friend of Mečiar Milan Bališ. Bríza did so while his boss Hideghéty was on vacation. April 10 was the last day when Bríza had full power acting on behalf of his boss in the absence of his boss. This was the seventh suspicious contract he had signed up to that point. Such practices were previously criticized by Fico as they were common during the tenure of his Coalition partner HDZS leader Mečiar. This scandal almost led to the collapse of the Coalition. It led to the Minister of Agriculture for HDZS Miroslav Jureňa resigning. Fico demanded Bríza to resign. Estimated damage to the state was half a billion Slovak crowns. Justice was delivered on 8 September 2015 when Bríza was deemed guilty and sentenced to 2 years probation. Before the 2010 elections, Fico's party was in a relatively strong position according to several polls. However, just before the election a political scandal broke out, described as one of the gravest in the country's 17-year history. A voice recording surfaced in which a voice strongly resembling that of Fico claims that he raised several million euros in undeclared funds for the 2002 election as well as calling for a "parallel financial structure" to be created for the financing of Smer's election campaign. Slovak media sources such as Sme carried the news about the recording in great detail; however, Fico dismissed it as a forgery. Fico also attacked the media sources that published information about the recording, saying "Should I go over there and give you a smack because you are scoundrels? What you are doing is unheard of. You are masturbating on the prime minister every day." Sme announced Fico has since been questioned on the matter. Former Minister of Justice Daniel Lipšic told the press he has "handed the recording to the general attorney office." In the election, Fico's SMER remained the biggest party in Parliament, with 62 seats. However, his coalition partners were decimated, with the HZDS being completely shut out. Unable to find a partner willing to give him the 14 seats, he needed to stay in office, Fico resigned. He said he "respects the election result" and expressed his desire to lead a resolute opposition after his narrow loss. Following the fall of the centre-right coalition government that replaced his, Fico's Smer-SD returned to power being the first party since the breakup of Czechoslovakia to win an absolute majority of seats. Fico initially sought to form a national unity government with SDKU or KDH, but when this failed he formed the first one-party government in Slovakia since 1993. On 18 December 2013, Fico officially announced his candidacy for the upcoming 2014 presidential election. "I understand my candidacy as a service to Slovakia," Fico said on December 18. He argued that he did not see his candidacy as an adventure, an escape or an attempt to culminate his political career. His campaign ran under the motto "Ready for Slovakia." On 9 January 2014, the Slovak Parliament, under Speaker Pavol Paška, officially approved the candidatures of Fico and 14 other candidates. Fico was defeated by the independent candidate Andrej Kiska, whose support from the Slovak right wing led him to victory by a wide margin (approximately 59%–41%) in the second round of voting on 29 March 2014. Fico's party won the 2016 parliamentary elections, amassing a plurality of seats, but failed to win a majority. On 7 March 2016, President of Slovakia Andrej Kiska invited each elected party, with the exception of Kotleba – People's Party Our Slovakia, for post-election talks. Fico was given the first opportunity by the President to form a stable coalition. On 17 March, incumbent Fico informed president Andrej Kiska that he would form a four-party government coalition, including Smer–SD, the Slovak National Party, Most–Híd and Network. On 14 March 2018, Fico publicly stated that he was ready to tender his resignation as prime minister in order to avoid an early election as well as to "solve the political crisis" involving the murder of investigative journalist Ján Kuciak. Kuciak also examined the work of the Italian mafia 'Ndrangheta in Slovakia. According to the police, Mária Trošková, who is an assistant to Robert Fico, could have ties to 'Ndrangheta. Fico's announcement came after a meeting with President Kiska. In that meeting, Fico laid out a number of specific conditions that needed to be met by the president in order for him to resign. Those conditions were amongst others; that the result of the 2016 Slovak parliamentary election be respected, that the current ruling government coalition must continue, and lastly, that Smer-SD as the largest party currently in parliament name the next prime minister. Fico stated that he already had a candidate in mind; Slovak media widely reported that the next prime minister would be Deputy Prime Minister Peter Pellegrini. On 15 March, President Kiska formally accepted the resignation of prime minister Fico and his cabinet, and thereby tasked Pellegrini with forming a new government. Fico attended a two-day EU summit that began on 26 October 2023. A large part of Fico's election victory in 2006 was attributed to his loud criticism of the previous right-wing government's economic, tax, social, pension and legislative reforms. The reforms were generally perceived as very positive and successful by such international bodies as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the OECD. In 2023, Fico referred to adoption by same-sex couples as a perversion, stated that he would never support same-sex marriage: "gender ideology in schools is unacceptable". At the start of his second term as Prime Minister in 2012, Fico introduced a new "Labour Code," which granted entitlement to a lay-off notice period as well as severance pay, reduced overtime, making layoffs more expensive for employers, shorter temporary work contracts and more power for trade unions. In addition, it curbed the ‘chaining’ of fixed-term employment contracts, whereby currently it is possible to extend a fixed-term employment contract three times over three years. The Code was revised in 2014 when it introduced severe restrictions of the work on agreement performed outside regular employment. Under the latest revision, employers will be able to conclude agreements with employees for 12 months only. In 2010, Fico faced large-scale protests and a blockade of major cities by truckers upset about what they considered to be badly implemented tolls on the highways. Truckers demanded that fuel prices be lowered to compensate for the tolls. Fico initially refused to speak with representatives of the truckers, saying he would not "be blackmailed", but a few days later capitulated. The cuts given to truckers will amount to about €100,000,000. One of few modifications Fico's government did implement was a slight modification to the unusual flat tax system introduced by the previous government, in a way that slightly decreased or eradicated a tax-free part of income for higher income earners. A lower value added tax was imposed on medications and books, though in spite of his election promises Fico failed to extend this onto a wider group of products such as groceries. Among the measures were controversial legislative changes which effectively banned private health insurance companies from generating profit. As a result, Slovakia is being sued by several foreign shareholders of local health insurers through international arbitrations. In 2007, Fico unsuccessfully tried to regulate retail food prices, an unprecedented effort in a generally free market European Union. In August 2008, Fico threatened the foreign shareholders of a local gas distributor SPP, the French Gaz de France and the German E.ON, with nationalization and seizure of their ownership shares in a dispute over retail gas prices. In foreign relations with Europe, Fico's government faced controversies due to its affiliation with the internationally isolated parties of Vladimír Mečiar and Ján Slota. However, his leadership, Slovakia entered the Eurozone in 2009, and Fico himself in a speech to the Oxford Union praised Slovakia's entry into the European Union as a "success story." Fico opposed Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence from Serbia, which he called a "major mistake". Slovakia has not recognised Kosovo as a sovereign state; one of Fico's three cabinets have recognised Kosovo and he continued to iterate his opposition towards recognition afterwards. Responding to the 2013 Euromaidan protests in Ukraine, Fico declared that the "EU is no religious obligation" as well as that the EU was "so in love with itself" that it is convinced there is no better alternative to it in the world. He subsequently condemned the use of violence, but said that the protests were an internal affair in Ukraine. Commenting on Brexit in November 2016, Fico stated that it was unclear what the United Kingdom wanted, adding that it "must suffer" more than the 27 countries who will remain in the bloc. He also stated that the UK will not be allowed to make EU workers "second-class citizens" while still receiving the benefits of the single market. In light of election of Donald Trump, he commented that it might spur Europe to bolster its military. In August 2017, Fico said: "The fundamentals of my policy are being close to the (EU) core, close to France, to Germany. I am very much interested in regional cooperation within the Visegrád Four but Slovakia's vital interest is the EU. In 2022 and 2023, Fico was a loud critic of the Von der Leyen Commission and her foreign and military policies in relation to Russian invasion of Ukraine. He also expressed disagreements with the Commission in questions of immigration. Simultaneously, he continued to applaud and support his party's former presidential candidate and European Commissioner Maroš Šefčovič. Fico rejected European Commission's plan to distribute refugees and economic migrants from the Middle East and Africa among EU member states, saying: "As long as I am prime minister, mandatory quotas will not be implemented on Slovak territory." He has subsequently sought to associate refugees and Muslims with terrorism, claiming that "thousands of terrorists and Islamic State fighters are entering Europe with migrants and stating: "We monitor every single Muslim in Slovakia." In May 2016, he stated that Slovakia will not accept "one single Muslim" migrant into the country, weeks before the country was scheduled to take over the presidency of EU. He further stated "When I say something now, maybe it will seem strange, but I'm sorry, Islam has no place in Slovakia. I think it is the duty of politicians to talk about these things very clearly and openly. I do not wish there were tens of thousands of Muslims." On 30 November 2016, the Slovak parliament under Fico government passed a bill that requires all religious movements and organizations to have a minimum of 50,000 verified practicing members in order to become state-recognized, up from 20,000. Compensating for his lack of close political allies within the EU (the former head of the Czech Social Democratic Party, Jiří Paroubek, being a notable exception), Fico sought to strengthen relations with several non-EU countries such as Serbia and Russia. This broke with a pro-NATO, Western-focused trend established after the 1998 Slovak election. After coming to power in 2006, Fico declared that Slovakia's relations with Russia would improve after eight years of "neglect." Fico referred to "Slavonic solidarity," which was a central theme of the Slovak National Awakening in the 1850s. On April 4, 2008, during a visit by Russian prime minister Viktor Zubkov, Fico said: "In Slovakia, there have been efforts to deliberately ignore Slavonic solidarity." Slovakia modernised Russian MiG fighters in Russia and did not buy new jets from the West. Additionally, Fico accused Georgia of provoking Russia when attacking South Ossetia in the 2008 Russo-Georgian war. Under his premiership, the Slovak foreign ministry rejected the Crimean referendum which incorporated Crimea into Russia. However, Fico himself, remained silent on the issue. In 2023, Fico iterated the stance that Crimean annexation was done in violation of international law. Simultaneously, he stated that the Ukrainian recapture of Crimea would not solve the Russo-Ukrainian War. Regarding the EU sanctions against Russia in 2014, Fico denounced them as "senseless," and a "threat to the Slovak economy." He condemned the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, but was also critical towards European sanctions against Russia, arguing that the sanctions improve Russian autarky and only harm the Russian population and Europeans, rather than the regime. Fico invited the Russian diplomat Igor Bratchikov to speak at the celebration of the Slovak National Uprising on 29 August 2022. Tension between Slovakia and Hungary, unstable from the past, was inflamed in 2006 following the parliamentary election and Fico's decision to include nationalist Ján Slota and his Slovak National Party into his governing coalition. Slota was known for his fierce anti-Hungarian rhetoric, including that "Hungarians are a tumor on the Slovak nation that needs to be immediately removed." In the wake of the election several incidents occurred which further inflamed nationalist sentiment on both sides, including the alleged beating of a Hungarian woman in South Slovakia. Fico reacted by condemning the extremism, but rebuked the Hungarian government by declaring "The Slovak government doesn't need to be called on to strike against extremism." The row heated up again in September 2007, when Fico's government introduced a law making the Beneš decrees inviolable. This was in response to demands from ethnic Hungarian politicians that compensations should be made to persons affected by the decrees. In May 2008, Fico labelled Hungary a potential threat during a speech commemorating the 161st anniversary of the day that Slovaks demanded national equality with other nations within the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. Fico used the anniversary to openly criticise the political situation in Hungary and warn about the influence it might have on Slovakia. Especially he warned against the Hungarian right-wing politician Viktor Orbán, and his party Fidesz, which he called an "extreme nationalist party." Since then, however, relations between the two countries have slightly improved. By 2022, Fico's relationship with Orbán's government in Hungary had warmed considerably. In 2022, Fico welcomed Orbán's re-election in Hungary, praising his nationalistic approach and stance on the Russo-Ukrainian war. Similarly, Hungarian Foreign Minister Péter Szijjártó welcomed Fico's return to office in 2023, noting "Robert Fico has the same views on the war, migration and gender issues as us". Responding to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Fico voiced opposition to supplying arms and ammunitions through Slovak territory. He also opposed Ukrainian membership in NATO and argued that the accession of Ukraine to the European Union by 2025 was an unrealistic scenario. Fico said that sending more and more weapons to Ukraine has only encouraged more killings and endless war, and instead efforts should be made to reach a ceasefire and push Russia and Ukraine toward peace talks. In September 2023, he stated in an interview: "Why don't we force the warring parties, use the weight of the EU and the U.S. to make them sit down and find some sort of compromise that would guarantee security for Ukraine?" He praised the peace plans to end the war put forward by the Vatican, Brazil and China. Fico said Slovakia would continue to help Ukraine in a humanitarian way and his government would do everything possible to start peace talks. In 2023, Fico said Ukraine's Azov Battalion was "clearly a fascist regiment". During a rally on 30 August, he also said that the War in Donbas started in 2014 when "Ukrainian Nazis and fascists started murdering the Russian population of Donbas". Fico was a vocal opponent of the one-time planned construction of new U.S. anti-ballistic missile and radar systems in military bases in neighbouring Czech Republic and Poland and one of his first steps upon taking office was withdrawing Slovak troops from Iraq. Fico described the Iraq War as "unjust and wrong" and said that the US-led invasion of Iraq in March 2003 "caused huge tensions. To speak about any democracy in Iraq is a fantasy", adding that "the security situation [in Iraq] is catastrophic". In November 2013, Fico visited the U.S. President Barack Obama in Washington D.C., where they spoke about the US-Slovak partnership, which Fico's spokesperson said is "based on shared democratic values and principles," after which he affirmed the strategic partnership between the two countries. Fico and SMER-SD were vocal opponents of the Slovak–American Defence Cooperation Agreement as disadvantageous to Slovakia, attacking Cabinet of Eduard Heger, especially Minister of Defence Jaroslav Naď, as well as President Zuzana Čaputová, accusing the latter of being an "American servant", in reference to promotion of American military and political interests in Slovakia. In November 2021, Fico described journalists as "Soros' corrupt gang of swines for whom water is already boiling." He says that the media is "obsessed" with him and his party; they want to "destroy" it and are "waging a jihad against it." In 2022, Fico repeatedly stated that journalists were an "organized criminal group with the aim of breaking Slovak statehood" and called on the Slovak Police Force to investigate them. During his press conferences he often verbally attacks, belittles and taunts the present journalists, often accusing them of bias and attacks on his government. On several occasions he has openly and on record used profanities against specific journalists ("idiots," "pricks, "prostitutes", "snakes", "hyenas"). He has also been recorded ridiculing journalists' physical appearance. In 2009, Fico repeatedly described the Slovak press as a "new opposition force" that was biased and was harming national and state interests. Fico also accused the press of failing to "stand behind the common people." In November 2016, he termed journalists questioning him about allegations of public procurement rules during Slovakia's EU presidency, as "dirty, anti-Slovak prostitutes." He also stated the accusations were a targeted attack to smear the country's presidency of EU. In July 2012, Fico declared "Eternal Peace" between him and the Slovak press. He also stated his desire to change his attitude towards the media, saying "I think it is enough" and that he does not plan any further lawsuits against media outlets except in extraordinary situations. Fico further said: "You have to spend an incredible amount of energy on it [lawsuits], it means several years of conflict, one conflict takes usually five or six years [to resolve]," adding that lawsuits involve "legal fees, paying a lawyer, everything around that." In June 2023, Reporters Without Borders asked Fico to stop legitimizing harassment of journalists. This occurred after Fico participated in a discussion with Daniel Bombic, a Slovak YouTuber known as Danny Kollar, for whose arrest three international warrants had been issued due to alleged online harassment and extremist crimes. Matej Príbelský, a journalist of Aktuality.sk who reported on the discussion, received multiple hateful messages and comments, including calls for violence, after Bombic asked his followers to "transmit their comments and impressions" to Príbelský, saying that "the score-settling will follow". RDF reasoned that Fico was legitimizing harassment of journalists by participating in the discussion and not denouncing the calls for violence against Príbelský. Fico is married to Svetlana Ficová (née Svobodová), a lawyer and associate professor from Žilina. They were classmates while both were studying law at the Comenius University in Bratislava, and they married in 1988. They have one son together, Michal, who studied at the University of Economics in Bratislava. Apart from his native Slovak, Fico is fluent in English and Russian. Fico has rarely discussed his religious life in public. In his application to join the Communist Party in 1984, Fico stated that he was "strictly atheistic", as was required in order to be accepted. According to the testimonial from college added to the application, he held a "scientific Marxist-Leninist worldview" and "no problems with regards to religion." In a promotional video during presidential election campaign in 2014, Fico said he grew up in a Roman Catholic family and that he considers himself a Catholic. He discussed his baptism, holy communion, confirmation and how the Catholic faith had impacted his childhood. He stated: "Perhaps if I did my profile in relation to the Catholic Church, I would end up better off than any MP of the KDH." He also described growing up with his grandfather, a man who "very strictly respected the rules of standard Christian life," stating that it profoundly impacted him. However, historian and former researcher of the National Memory Institute Patrik Dubovský consider it being an attempt to manipulate public opinion, because "confirmation was in direct conflict with Communist Party membership, which political programme was based on atheism." During the communist period, religiously active people were severely persecuted, especially after the repression of Charta 77. During a televised debate, Fico refused to answer a television presenter's question about whether he is a Christian or an Atheist, and said that he considered it a private matter. Regarding his baptism, holy communion and confirmation, Fico said that he was baptised as an infant and the holy communion with confirmation followed afterwards, as it was with every child who grew up in his home village, according to him. In August 2010, Fico was photographed around midnight in a gay bar in downtown Bratislava together with a woman, who was later revealed to be 25-year-old Jana Halászová, a secretary at the Smer-SD party headquarters. It was later revealed that Halászová had been given extensive privileges, including her own parking space in the Parliament car park, without being a member. Halászová had also bought a luxurious car worth around €30,000 and bought a new flat without a mortgage in August 2012 in a neighbourhood where a one-room flat costs approximately €100,000, despite being a secretary. In addition, both her sister and step-mother had recently been given jobs within various ministries. In August 2013, Fico was photographed while embracing and kissing his now-secretary Halászová, after taking her for a private dinner at a chateau in Čereňany, 160 kilometres from Bratislava. The photos created another round of speculation about the true nature of their relationship as well as whether or not he had used public funds to pay for the dinner. A month later, the tabloid 7 Plus reported that Fico and Halászová had been photographed together in a luxury restaurant while vacationing together in the Croatian town of Opatija. In response to this latest story, Fico filed a defamation lawsuit against 7 Plus magazine. In March 2018, after murder of Ján Kuciak, Slovak investigative journalist Eugen Korda in interview for public Czech Television TV alleged that Mária Trošková, Fico's assistant, is also his lover. Trošková escorted Fico on multiple high-level diplomatic meetings, including a summit with Angela Merkel. Subsequently, direct connection between Mária Trošková and convicted 'Ndrangheta member Antonino Vadalà [de] was revealed by the press. While her romantic connection to Fico was not confirmed, her former relationship with Vadala was. Despite the evidence Fico was publicly supporting Trošková and the secretary of the Security Council Viliam Jasaň. After the public outrage, Trošková abandoned her position as State Counsellor and Fico's assistant and disappeared from the public eye.[citation needed] In 2020, Slovak daily newspaper Denník N identified Katarína Szalayová as Fico's lover. She used a luxury car worth around €40,000, even though her net monthly salary of the prosecution office employee was around €600. After leaving the prosecution office, Szalayová gained employment in the law firm of Robert Kaliňák, former deputy prime minister during Fico's cabinets and incumbent member of SMER–SD party presidium. Terenzani-Stankova, Michaela. "Who is Robert Fico?". Sme.sk. Retrieved 17 March 2014. "Kiska becomes president (UPDATED)". Retrieved 15 March 2018. "Fico podá demisiu, novým premiérom môže byť Pellegrini (minúta po minúte)". sme.sk (in Slovak). 15 March 2018. Retrieved 15 March 2018. Heijmans, Philip (15 March 2018). "Slovakia's PM Robert Fico resigns amid public outcry". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 15 March 2018. Kottasová, Ivana; Tanno, Sophie; Chen, Heather (1 October 2023). "Pro-Russian politician wins Slovakia's parliamentary election". CNN. Retrieved 2 October 2023. "Slovakia elections: Populist party wins vote but needs allies for coalition". BBC News. 30 September 2023. Retrieved 2 October 2023. "Výsledky predčasných volieb 2023". Denník N (in Slovak). 18 September 2023. Retrieved 2 October 2023. "Dobrý katolík alebo dobrý komunista? Pozrite si prihlášku Roberta Fica do KSČ". Hospodárske noviny. Retrieved 19 January 2014. "Premiérovu mladšiu sestru nasadil štát proti mafii". Pravda.sk (in Slovak). 24 September 2009. Retrieved 20 January 2014. Nicholson, Tom. "Who's afraid of Róbert Fico?". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 20 March 2014. "Visit of Slovak Prime Minister". UCL. 19 June 2007. "Prime Minister". Robert Fico. Government of the Slovak Republic. Retrieved 16 December 2012. "European Court of Human Rights: Annual surveys of activity" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2011.[page needed] "PRESIDENTIAL VOTE: Profiles of the candidates - 1st part". The Slovak Spectator. 12 March 2014. Retrieved 13 March 2014. "Finding Fico". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 20 March 2014. Jurinova, Martina (28 February 2005). "KDH woos opposition". Retrieved 21 November 2021. Lesná, Ľuba (13 October 2008). "SNS boss crosses another line". The Slovak Spectator. "Slota lets rip, again". Slovak Spectator. 16 June 2008. "Why is Slovakia not in NATO? Ján Slota explains". The Slovak Spectator. 13 February 2008. Vilikovská, Zuzana (3 September 2008). "Slota ridicules Hungarians during PMs' meeting". The Slovak Spectator. Vilikovská, Zuzana (16 October 2008). "SMK taking Slota to court over anti-Hungarian statements". The Slovak Spectator. Lesná, Ľuba (15 December 2008). "Slovak–Hungarian relations thawing slower than hoped". The Slovak Spectator. "The state lost land for a billion". Sme. 12 November 2007. "It almost collapsed Fico's first Government". Aktuality.sk. 9 September 2008. "Slovak PM reeling from bombshell on eve of elections". Businessneweurope.eu. 11 June 2010. Archived from the original on 13 February 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2011. Balogová, Beata (11 June 2010). "Daily publishes a recording resembling Fico's voice". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "Vote 2010: Fico accepts election defeat, returns mandate". The Slovak Spectator. 23 June 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "Fico throws his hat into presidential ring". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 2 January 2014. Minarechová, Radka (10 January 2014). "15 candidates to run for president". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 19 January 2014. Skacel, Jiří; Lopatka, Jan (30 March 2014). "Political newcomer Kiska trounces PM Fico in Slovak presidential election". Reuters. Cunningham, Benjamin (7 March 2016). "5 takeaways from Slovakia's election". Politico. Retrieved 8 March 2016. "President Kiska will authorise Fico to form government". The Slovak Spectator. 7 March 2016. Retrieved 9 March 2016. "New Slovak Government and Posts". Nový Čas. 17 March 2016. Retrieved 17 March 2016. Terenzani, Michaela. "UPDATED: Fico is ready to resign tomorrow". Retrieved 14 March 2018. "UPDATED: Investigative journalist killed in his house". The Slovak Spectator. 26 February 2018. Retrieved 16 March 2018. "Robert Fico – Slovenský premiér a jeho kariéra od začátku po Kuciakovu smrt a spor s Kiskou - Reflex.cz". Reflex.cz (in Czech). Retrieved 16 March 2018. "Minúta po minúte: Fico podá demisiu, novým premiérom môže byť Pellegrini". Sme.sk. Retrieved 14 March 2018. "Pellegrini is the new PM". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 15 March 2018. "Slovakia swears in a new Cabinet led by a populist ex-premier who opposes support for Ukraine". AP News. 25 October 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Jon, Henley (25 October 2023). "Slovakia's new prime minister Robert Fico to attend EU summit". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. "OECD satisfied with Slovakia's economic performance". The Slovak Spectator. 19 March 2008. "Slovakia campaign rhetoric raises LGBTQ concern". France24. 26 September 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Liptakova, Jana. "Revamped Labour Code gets mixed reception". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 16 March 2014. "Government approves limiting the duration of work on agreement". The Slovak Spectator. 27 February 2014. Retrieved 16 March 2014. "Slovakia gives in to truckers' demands". Financial Times. 12 January 2010. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "Slovakia will face arbitration for health insurance profit ban". Slovak Spectator. 17 July 2008. "Fico attacks retail chains over rising prices". Institute of Economic and Social Studies. 22 July 2007. Archived from the original on 21 July 2009. "Fico threatens nationalisation to stop energy increases". The Slovak Spectator. 18 August 2008. "Slovak PM threatens to expropriate utilities-paper". Reuters. 18 August 2008. "Euro-socialists suspend Fico's Smer party". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 21 January 2014. "Fico giving new face to Slovak foreign policy". Slovak Spectator. 22 January 2007. "Slovakia: Declaration violates basic international law". B92. 25 February 2008. Archived from the original on 3 December 2012. Villikovska, Zuzana. "PM calls Kosovo independence a 'major mistake'". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 21 January 2014. Daniška, Jaroslav; Daniš, Dag. "Robert Fico: Idem do kampane, v ktorej ma chcú zatvoriť". Štandard (in Slovak). Retrieved 21 March 2023. Terenzani-Stankova, Michaela. "Ukraine: a challenge for Slovakia". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 21 January 2014. Tomek, Radoslav (22 November 2016). "It's Not Clear U.K. Knows What It Wants on Brexit, Slovakia Says". Bloomberg. Payton, Matt (19 September 2016). "Europe will make Brexit 'very painful' for the UK, claims Slovakia's Prime Minister". The Independent. Jancariková, Tatiana (15 August 2017). "Slovakia's future is with core EU, not eurosceptic eastern nations: PM]". Reuters. Swidlicki, Paweł (24 September 2015). "This East-West split over EU refugee quotas will have long-lasting consequences". The Daily Telegraph. "Slovak election: PM Fico sees Muslim 'threat'". BBC News. 4 March 2016. "Fico: Security more important than migrants' rights". The Slovak Spectator. 16 November 2015. Matharu, Hardeep (27 May 2016). "Slovakian Prime Minister says 'Islam has no place in this country' – weeks before it takes over EU presidency". The Independent. "Slovakia toughens church registration rules to bar Islam". Reuters. 30 November 2016. "Slovakia tightens law to bar Islam from becoming state religion". 5 December 2016. Samuels, Gabriel (1 December 2016). "Slovakia bars Islam from becoming state religion". The Independent. Lesná, Ľuba. "Searching for the right tone with Russia Major Discussions On Security Are Reserved For Superpowers". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 21 January 2014. "Russland übergibt Slowakei modernisierte MiG-29 nach Nato-Standards | Wirtschaft | RIA Novosti" (in German). De.rian.ru. 29 February 2008. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "Slovak Prime Minister Knows Who Provoked this War in the Caucasus". HNonline.sk. Archived from the original on 5 October 2011. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "Slovakia rejects Crimea referendum". Retrieved 9 June 2014. "Fico still critical of sanctions". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 2 September 2014. "Vladimir Putin used to be popular in Slovakia. Then he invaded Ukraine". Euronews. 29 March 2022. Krempaský, Ján (30 August 2022). "Diplomati o ruskom veľvyslancovi na oslavách SNP: To, čo urobil Fico vo Zvolene, je hanebné". Sme (in Slovak). Retrieved 1 May 2023. "Kubiš tries to calm Hungarian worries". The Slovak Spectator. 28 August 2006. Retrieved 21 January 2014. "Anti-Hungarian displays continue". The Slovak Spectator. 28 August 2006. Retrieved 21 January 2014. Lesná, Ľuba. "Slovak-Hungarian tensions heat up". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 21 January 2014. Lesná, Ľuba. "Fico's Hungarian warning". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 21 January 2014. Boyd, John (20 May 2012). "PMs Orban and Fico Promise Better Relations". The Daily. Archived from the original on 29 September 2015. "EU democratic leaders turn their back on Orbán". 6 April 2022. "Hungary welcomes victory of Slovakia's Fico in elections, foreign minister says". Reuters. 1 October 2023. Morris, Loveday (25 June 2023). "A pro-Russian tide in Slovakia could threaten Europe's unity on Ukraine". The Washington Post. Retrieved 5 September 2023. "Slovakia's Election Threatens to Upend Western Unity on Ukraine". Voice of America. 27 September 2023. "We won't send another bullet to Kyiv, says Slovakia's PM frontrunner". The Daily Telegraph. 29 September 2023. "Fico says West's arms deliveries to Kyiv 'supports killings'". Euractiv. 18 May 2023. "Slovakia's poll winner defies European consensus on Ukraine". Reuters. 1 October 2023. "Robert Fico stated that "there are fascists in the Ukrainian army"". Newsyou. 4 October 2023.[dead link] Court, Elsa (18 September 2023). "AP: Slovak election frontrunner vows to stop support for Ukraine". The Kyiv Independent. Cameron, Rob (30 September 2023). "Ukraine war: Slovakia's Robert Fico eyes comeback in Saturday's election". BBC. "U.S. missile defence in Europe angers Russia". CBC. 5 March 2007. "Slovaks pull soldiers from Iraq, PM says war wrong". Reuters. 3 February 2007. "Obama meets Fico in White House". The Slovak Spectator. 23 November 2013. Retrieved 21 January 2014. "Novinári sú Sorosova skorumpovaná banda prasiat, vyhlásil Fico v parlamente". SITA (in Slovak). 3 November 2021. "Robert Fico: Opozičné médiá chcú zlikvidovať Smer". Pravda (in Slovak). 15 August 2019. "Medzinárodná organizácia Reportéri bez hraníc kritizuje Roberta Fica". Denník N (in Slovak). N Press. 25 January 2022. "The Media's Role in Slovakia". Association of European Journalists. 25 December 2008. Archived from the original on 20 March 2009. Retrieved 6 March 2009. "Fico: Journalists are "idiots"". The Slovak Spectator. 7 November 2008. "Fico zverejnil VIDEO útoku na novinárov: Prostitútky, slizkí hadi...teraz je to záchodový pavúk!". Topky (in Slovak). Retrieved 21 November 2021. Balogová, Beata. "Fico drops cartoon lawsuit". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 20 January 2014. "Slovakia's PM calls journalists 'dirty anti-Slovak prostitutes'". The Guardian. 23 November 2016. Retrieved 9 December 2016. "Fico sues 7 Plus publisher". The Slovak Spectator. 16 September 2013. Retrieved 7 March 2014. "RSF asks former Slovak PM Robert Fico to stop legitimising harassment of journalists". RSF. 26 June 2023. Retrieved 14 July 2023. "Reportéri bez hraníc žiadajú Fica, aby nelegitimizoval šikanu novinárov". Denník N. 26 June 2023. Retrieved 14 July 2023. "Manželky prezidentských kandidátov: Ktorá bude prvou dámou?". Nový čas. Retrieved 6 March 2014. Burcik, Matus (12 July 2011). "Pre Boreca pracuje Ficova manželka". Sme (in Slovak). Retrieved 16 December 2012. Mihailikova, Maria (14 August 2009). "Ficovu manželku štát platí za skúmanie paragrafov". Pravda.sk (in Slovak). Retrieved 16 December 2012. Devanova, Andrea. "Spoločnosť a politika Budúci premiér - sólový hráč s fotografickou pamäťou". Hospodárske noviny (in Slovak). Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 20 January 2014. Petkova, Zuzana (14 February 2011). "Právo stále berie aj bez prijímačiek". Sme.sk (in Slovak). Retrieved 16 December 2012. Benediktovičová, Mária. "Fico v prihláške do KSČ: Som prísny ateista". Sme (in Slovak). Retrieved 19 January 2014. Terenzani, Michaela. "Confusion arises over Fico's religious background". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 20 January 2014. Balogová, Beáta (13 January 2014). "The president's speech". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 19 January 2014. Blaško, Peter (12 March 2014). "Sledovali sme online: Do Kisku sa pustil Fico aj Kňažko. Pre scientológiu". Hospodárske noviny (in Slovak). Archived from the original on 17 March 2014. Retrieved 23 March 2014. "Robo, kedy si stratil vieru v Boha? Premiér Fico zatĺka, či je veriaci, alebo nie". Plus jeden deň (in Slovak). Retrieved 23 June 2014. "Smeráčka Janka z gay baru: V parlamente parkovala na výnimku". Nový čas. Retrieved 7 March 2014. "Fico a mladá tajomníčka Janka: Ich vzťah odhalil Nový Čas!". Nový čas. 30 August 2013. Retrieved 7 March 2014. Cuprik, Roman. "Is 'kissing story' relevant for public?". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 7 March 2014. Bolech, Daniela. "Rodina Ficovej tajomníčky Halászovej: Sestra aj macocha robia pre štát". Nový čas. Retrieved 7 March 2014. "Mlčal ako hrob: Fico sa k fotke s Halászovou priamo nevyjadril". Nový čas. Retrieved 7 March 2014. "PM Fico Caught in Passionate Embrace with Secretary". 28 August 2013. Retrieved 16 September 2013. "Prvé foto Ficovej ženy od zverejnenia chúlostivých záberov: Prestala Svetlana nosiť obrúčku?". Nový čas. Retrieved 7 March 2014. Minarechova, Radka (11 October 2013). "Fico dismisses calls to explain dinner". The Slovak Spectator. Retrieved 7 March 2014. "Fico sues 7 Plus publishing house". Slovak Spectator. 7 September 2013. Retrieved 7 March 2014. "Novinář Korda šokuje: Trošková z Kuciakova článku je Ficova milenka, ať odejde i z jeho postele". Blesk (in Czech). Czech News Center. 6 March 2018. Gažovič, Ondrej (7 March 2018). "O čom rokovala Mária Trošková s Angelou Merkelovou?". Denník N (in Slovak). "Slovakia: Mafia ties and journalist's murder threaten to bring down government". Deutsche Welle. 12 March 2018. Retrieved 10 February 2020. "Fico stands by Trošková". The Slovak Spectator. 27 February 2018. Pribelský, Matej (4 August 2022). "Ficova priateľka po odchode z prokuratúry pracuje u Kaliňáka. Nenechal som si ujsť talent, hovorí". Aktuality.sk (in Slovak). The Fico Threat, by Martin M. Simecka (March 2009 essay) Fico profile "Slovakia's election: Slovakia turns left". The Economist. 11 March 2012.