Hekurudha Shqiptare or HSH (Albanian Railways) is the state-owned operator of the Albanian railway system and became a private company in 2005. The system's main passenger terminal was Durrës railway station in the port city of Durrës. HSH's infrastructure used to run east to Pogradec (up to Librazhd as of 2012[update]), south to Vlorë and north to Shkodër. There was also a branch line to the capital Tirana (up to Kashar, 10 km away as of 2015[update]). The network was extended beyond Shkodër in the 1980s into what is now Montenegro, via the Albanian border town of Hani i Hotit. But this section of the system is for freight only. There is also no physical rail connection between Albania and neighbouring Kosovo, North Macedonia, or Greece. The HSH network was entirely unelectrified, and trains were hauled by Czechoslovak T-669 diesel-electric locomotives. The system was single-track throughout, with passing loops at various points. Second-hand passenger rolling stock from Germany's DB and former DR, Italy's FS, Austria's ÖBB, and Poland's PKP was used. Trains suffered internal and external damage from vandalism, including the stoning of locomotives and carriages. Further problems arose from landslide damage to sections of the track or because lengths of rail were stolen for iron scrap. The system is barely surviving with an Elbasan–Durrës train and a Shkodër–Laç train, although rehabilitation is currently underway on the Durrës–Tiranë railway, with other projects in various stages of planning. Construction work to upgrade the Durrës–Tiranë line and to link it with Rinas Airport with electric-powered trains started in 2021 with a loan from EBRD. Works are expected to finish in 2025. Approval was given by the Albanian and Kosovo governments in 2021 to a feasibility study of a Prishtina–Durrës route to be undertaken in 2023. The initial findings are now being developed into a full plan for the track. In 2015, some rail stations and rolling stock along the Durres-Tirane line were renovated and adopted a red and white livery. The scenic Librazhd-Pogradec line was closed for passenger traffic in 2012. The stored locomotives and carriages from Prrenjas are being moved to Elbasan. As a result, this section may be dismantled, as it doesn't link any major cities. There are several freight-only branch lines. Occasional freight trains may run between Podgorica and Shkodër and between Durrës and the oil refinery at Ballsh. The Tirana-Shkodër line is closed, except for the Durrës Elbasan train and a section between Shkodër and Lac. Trains portal History of rail transport in Albania Rail transport in Albania Transport in Albania List of European railways "Work starts for new Tirana-Durres railway; EBRD". Albanian Daily News. Retrieved 2021-11-09. "Kosovo-Albania: Pristina approves a rail link project". 7 July 2022. Molter, Romano (2020). Die vergessene Eisenbahn: Eine Reise in die Geschichte der albanischen Eisenbahnen 1916-2020 (in German). Railway-Media-Group. ISBN 9783902894878. Drehscheibe Online Lokstatistik Josef Pospichal Focken, Heiki (2008), Lok Report: Albanien. Auf Schienen durch das Land der Skipetaren, Angelfire.com: HSH Passenger Stocklist Official website of HSH Official HSH Trains Timetable, 2015 HSH System Map and Timetable as of 2011 Albrail Official Site (operator of Fier-Vlorë railway line) Site dedicated to HSH (in Albanian) A 2019 documentary by Deutsche Welle about the Albanian railway - Albania's last trains on YouTube