Formula One portal McLaren Racing Limited is a British motor racing team based at the McLaren Technology Centre in Woking, Surrey, England. McLaren is best known as a Formula One chassis constructor, the second oldest active team and the second most successful Formula One team after Ferrari, having won 183 races, 12 Drivers' Championships and 8 Constructors' Championships. McLaren also has a history of competing in American open wheel racing, as both an entrant and a chassis constructor, and has won the Canadian-American Challenge Cup (Can-Am) sports car racing championship. The team is a subsidiary of the McLaren Group, which owns a majority of the team. Founded in 1963 by New Zealander Bruce McLaren, the team won its first Grand Prix at the 1968 Belgian Grand Prix, but their greatest initial success was in Can-Am, which they dominated from 1967 to 1971. Further American triumph followed, with Indianapolis 500 wins in McLaren cars for Mark Donohue in 1972 and Johnny Rutherford in 1974 and 1976. After Bruce McLaren died in a testing accident in 1970, Teddy Mayer took over and led the team to their first Formula One Constructors' Championship in 1974, with Emerson Fittipaldi and James Hunt winning the Drivers' Championship in 1974 and 1976 respectively. 1974 also marked the start of a long-standing sponsorship by the Marlboro cigarette brand. In 1981, McLaren merged with Ron Dennis' Project Four Racing; Dennis took over as team principal, and shortly afterwards organised a buyout of the original McLaren shareholders to take full control of the team. This began the team's most successful era; with Porsche and Honda engines, Niki Lauda, Alain Prost, and Ayrton Senna won seven Drivers' Championships between them and the team took six Constructors' Championships. The combination of Prost and Senna was particularly dominant—together they won all but one race in 1988—but later their rivalry soured and Prost left for Ferrari. Fellow English team Williams offered the most consistent challenge during this period, the two winning every constructors' title between 1984 and 1994. By the mid-1990s, Honda had withdrawn from Formula One, Senna had moved to Williams, and the team went three seasons without a win. With Mercedes-Benz engines, West sponsorship, and former Williams designer Adrian Newey, further championships came in 1998 and 1999 with driver Mika Häkkinen, and during the 2000s the team were consistent front-runners, with driver Lewis Hamilton taking their latest title in 2008. Ron Dennis retired as McLaren team principal in 2009, handing over to long-time McLaren employee Martin Whitmarsh. At the end of 2013, after the team's worst season since 2004, Whitmarsh was ousted. McLaren announced in 2013 that they would be using Honda engines from 2015 onwards, replacing Mercedes-Benz. The team raced as McLaren Honda for the first time since 1992 at the 2015 Australian Grand Prix. In September 2017, McLaren announced they had agreed on an engine supply with Renault from 2018 to 2020. McLaren is using Mercedes-Benz engines from the 2021 season until at least 2030. After initially returning to the Indianapolis 500 in 2017 as a backer of Andretti Autosport to run Fernando Alonso and then in 2019 as an independent entry, McLaren announced in August 2019 that they would run in conjunction with Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports starting in 2020 to run the full IndyCar Series, the combined entry being named Arrow McLaren SP. Initially having no ownership interest in the team, McLaren would purchase 75% of the operation in 2021. McLaren entered the electric off-road racing series Extreme E in 2022, and also joined Formula E in the 2022–23 season. Bruce McLaren Motor Racing was founded in 1963 by New Zealander Bruce McLaren. Bruce was a works driver for the British Formula One team Cooper with whom he had won three Grands Prix and come second in the 1960 World Championship. Wanting to compete in the Australasian Tasman Series, Bruce approached his employers, but when team owner Charles Cooper insisted on using 1.5-litre Formula One-specification engines instead of the 2.5-litre motors permitted by the Tasman rules, Bruce decided to set up his own team to run him and his prospective Formula One teammate Timmy Mayer with custom-built Cooper cars. Bruce won the 1964 series, but Mayer was killed in practice for the final race at the Longford Circuit in Tasmania. When Bruce McLaren approached Teddy Mayer to help him with the purchase of the Zerex sports car from Roger Penske, Teddy Mayer and Bruce McLaren began discussing a business partnership resulting in Teddy Mayer buying in to Bruce McLaren Motor Racing Limited (BMMR) and ultimately becoming its largest shareholder. The team was based in Feltham in 1963 and 1964, and from 1965 until 1981 in Colnbrook, England. The team also held a British licence. Despite this, Bruce never used the traditional British racing green on his cars. Instead, he used colour schemes that were not based on national principles (e.g. his first F1 car, the McLaren M2B, was painted white with a green stripe, to represent a fictional Yamura team in John Frankenheimer's film Grand Prix). During this period, Bruce drove for his team in sports car races in the United Kingdom and North America and also entered the 1965 Tasman Series with Phil Hill, but did not win it. He continued to drive in Grands Prix for Cooper, but judging that team's form to be waning, decided to race his own cars in 1966. Bruce McLaren made the team's Grand Prix debut at the 1966 Monaco race (of the current Formula One teams, only Ferrari is older). His race ended after nine laps due to a terminal oil leak. The 1966 car was the M2B designed by Robin Herd, but the programme was hampered by a poor choice of engines: a 3.0-litre version of Ford's Indianapolis 500 engine and a Serenissima V8 were used, the latter scoring the team's first point in Britain, but both were underpowered and unreliable. For 1967 Bruce decided to use a British Racing Motors (BRM) V12 engine, but due to delays with the engine, was forced initially to use a modified Formula Two car called the M4B powered by a 2.1-litre BRM V8, later building a similar but slightly larger car called the M5A for the V12. Neither car brought great success, the best result being a fourth at Monaco. For 1968, after driving McLaren's sole entry for the previous two years, Bruce was joined by 1967 champion and fellow New Zealander Denny Hulme, who was already racing for McLaren in Can-Am. That year's new M7A car, Herd's final design for the team, was powered by Cosworth's new and soon to be ubiquitous DFV engine (the DFV would go on to be used by McLaren until 1983) and with it a major upturn in form proceeded. Bruce won the Race of Champions at the Brands Hatch circuit and Hulme won the International Trophy at Silverstone, both non-championship races, before Bruce took the team's first championship win at the Belgian Grand Prix. Hulme also won the Italian and Canadian Grands Prix later in the year, helping the team to second in the Constructors' Championship. Using an updated 'C' version on the M7, a further three podium finishes followed for Bruce in 1969, but the team's fifth win had to wait until the last race of the 1969 championship when Hulme won the Mexican Grand Prix. That year, McLaren experimented with four-wheel drive in the M9A, but the car had only a single outing driven by Derek Bell at the British Grand Prix; Bruce described driving it as like "trying to write your signature with somebody jogging your elbow". The year 1970 started with a second-place each for Hulme and Bruce in the first two Grands Prix, but in June, Bruce was killed in a crash at Goodwood while testing the new M8D Can-Am car. After his death, Teddy Mayer took over effective control of the team; Hulme continued with Dan Gurney and Peter Gethin partnering him. Gurney won the first two Can-Am events at Mosport and St. Jovite and placed ninth in the third, but left the team mid-season, and Gethin took over from there. While 1971 began promisingly when Hulme led the opening round in South Africa before retiring with broken suspension, ultimately Hulme, Gethin (who left for BRM mid-season,) and Jackie Oliver again failed to score a win. The 1972 season saw improvements though: Hulme won the team's first Grand Prix for 2+1⁄2 years in South Africa and he and Peter Revson scored ten other podiums, the team finishing third in the Constructors' Championship. McLaren gave Jody Scheckter his Formula One debut at the final race at Watkins Glen. All McLaren drivers used the Ford-Cosworth engines, except for Andrea de Adamich and Nanni Galli who used engines from Alfa Romeo in 1970. The McLaren M23, designed by Gordon Coppuck, was the team's new car for the 1973 season. Sharing parts of the design of both McLaren's Formula One M19 and Indianapolis M16 cars (itself inspired by Lotus's 72), it was a mainstay for four years. Hulme won with it in Sweden and Revson took the only Grand Prix wins of his career in Britain and Canada. In 1974, Emerson Fittipaldi, world champion with Lotus two years earlier, joined McLaren. Hulme, in his final Formula One campaign, won the Argentinian season-opener; Fittipaldi, with wins in Brazil, Belgium and Canada, took the Drivers' Championship. It was a close fight for Fittipaldi, who secured the title with a fourth at the season-ending United States Grand Prix, putting him three points ahead of Ferrari's Clay Regazzoni. With Hulme and multiple motorcycle world champion Mike Hailwood, he also sealed McLaren's first Constructors' Championship. The year 1975 was less successful for the team: Fittipaldi was second in the championship behind Niki Lauda. Hulme's replacement Jochen Mass took his sole GP win in Spain. At the end of 1975, Fittipaldi left to join his brother's Fittipaldi/Copersucar team. With the top drivers already signed to other teams, Mayer turned to James Hunt, a driver on whom biographer Gerald Donaldson reflected as having "a dubious reputation". In 1976, Lauda was again strong in his Ferrari; at midseason, he led the championship with 56 points while Hunt had only 26 despite wins in Spain (a race from which he was initially disqualified) and France. At the German Grand Prix, though, Lauda crashed heavily, was nearly killed, and missed the next two races. Hunt capitalised by winning four more Grands Prix giving him a three-point deficit going into the finale in Japan. Here it rained torentially, Lauda retired because of safety concerns, and Hunt sealed the Drivers' Championship by finishing third. McLaren, though, lost the Constructors' Championship to Ferrari. In 1977, the M23 was gradually replaced with the M26, the M23's final works outing being Gilles Villeneuve's Formula One debut with the team in a one-off appearance at the British Grand Prix. Hunt won on three occasions that year, but the Lauda and Ferrari combination proved too strong, Hunt and McLaren managing just fifth and third in the respective championships. From there, results continued to worsen. Lotus and Mario Andretti took the 1978 titles with their 78 and 79 ground-effect cars and neither Hunt nor Mass's replacement Patrick Tambay were able to seriously challenge with the nonground-effect M26. Hunt was dropped at the end of 1978 in favour of Lotus's Ronnie Peterson, but when Peterson was killed by a crash at the Italian Grand Prix, John Watson was signed, instead. No improvement occurred in 1979; Coppuck's M28 design was described by Mayer as "ghastly, a disaster" and "quite diabolical" and the M29 did little to change the situation. Tambay scored no points and Watson only 15 to place the team eighth at the end of the year. The 1980s started much as the 1970s had ended: Alain Prost took over from Tambay but Watson and he rarely scored points. Under increasing pressure since the previous year from principal sponsor Philip Morris and their executive John Hogan, Mayer was coerced into merging McLaren with Ron Dennis's Project Four Formula Two team, also sponsored by Philip Morris. Dennis had designer John Barnard who, inspired by the carbon-fibre rear wings of the BMW M1 race cars that Project Four was preparing, had ideas for an innovative Formula One chassis constructed from carbon-fibre instead of conventional aluminium alloy. On their own, they lacked the money to build it, but with investment that came with the merger it became the McLaren MP4 (later called MP4/1) of 1981, driven by Watson and Andrea de Cesaris. In the MP4, Watson won the British Grand Prix and had three other podium finishes. Soon after the merger, McLaren moved from Colnbrook to a new base in Woking and Dennis and Mayer initially shared the managing directorship of the company; by 1982, Mayer had departed and Tyler Alexander's and his shareholdings had been bought by the new owners. In the early 1980s, teams like Renault, Ferrari and Brabham were using 1.5-litre turbocharged engines in favour of the 3.0-litre naturally aspirated engines that had been standard since 1966. Having seen in 1982 the need for a turbo engine of their own, Dennis had convinced Williams backer Techniques d'Avant Garde (TAG) to fund Porsche-built, TAG-branded turbo engines made to Barnard's specifications; TAG's founder Mansour Ojjeh would later become a McLaren shareholder. In the meantime, they continued with Cosworth engines as old rival Lauda came out of retirement in 1982 to drive alongside Watson in that year's 1B development of the MP4. They each won two races, Watson notably from 17th place on the grid in Detroit, and at one stage of the season McLaren were second in the constructors' championship. As part of a dispute with FISA, they boycotted the San Marino Grand Prix. Although 1983 was not so fruitful, Watson did win again in the United States, this time from 22nd on the grid at Long Beach. Having been fired by Renault, Prost returned to McLaren once again for 1984. Now using the TAG engines, the team dominated, scoring 12 wins and 2+1⁄2 times as many constructors' points as nearest rival Ferrari. In the Drivers' Championship, Lauda prevailed over Prost by half a point, the narrowest margin ever. The McLaren-TAGs were again strong in 1985; a third Constructors' Championship came their way while this time Prost won the Drivers' Championship. In 1986, the Williams team were resurgent with their Honda engine and drivers Nigel Mansell and Nelson Piquet, while at McLaren, Lauda's replacement, 1982 champion Keke Rosberg could not gel with the car. Williams took the Constructors' Championship, but for Prost, wins in San Marino, Monaco, and Austria combined with the fact that the Williams drivers were taking points from each other meant that he retained a chance going into the last race, the Australian Grand Prix. There, a puncture for Mansell and a precautionary pit stop for Piquet gave Prost the race win and his second title, making him the first driver to win back-to-back championships since Jack Brabham in 1959 and 1960. In 1987 Barnard departed for Ferrari to be replaced by Steve Nichols (who himself joined Ferrari in 1989). In the hands of Prost and Stefan Johansson, though, Nichols's MP4/3 and the TAG engine could not match the Williams-Honda. For 1988, Honda switched their supply to McLaren and, encouraged by Prost, Dennis signed Ayrton Senna to drive. Despite regulations reducing the boost pressure and fuel capacity (and therefore, power) of the turbo cars, Honda persisted with a turbocharged engine. In the MP4/4, Senna and Prost engaged in a season-long battle, winning 15 of the 16 races (at the other race at Monza, Senna had been leading comfortably, but collided with back-marker Jean-Louis Schlesser). At the Portuguese Grand Prix, their relationship soured when Senna squeezed Prost against the pit wall; Prost won, but afterwards said, "It was dangerous. If he wants the world championship that badly he can have it." Prost scored more points that year, but because only the best 11 results counted, Senna took the title at the penultimate race in Japan. The next year, with turbos banned, Honda supplied a new 3.5-L naturally aspirated V10 engine and McLaren again won both titles with the MP4/5. Their drivers' relationship continued to deteriorate, though, especially when, at the San Marino Grand Prix, Prost felt that Senna had reneged on an agreement not to pass each other at the first corner. Believing that Honda and Dennis were favouring Senna, Prost announced mid-season that he would leave to drive at Ferrari the following year. For the second year in succession, the Drivers' Championship was decided at the Japanese Grand Prix, this time in Prost's favour after Senna and he collided (Senna initially recovered and won the race, but was later disqualified). With former McLaren men Nichols and Prost (Barnard had moved to the Benetton team), Ferrari pushed the British team more closely in 1990. McLaren, in turn, brought in Ferrari's Gerhard Berger, but like the two seasons before, the Drivers' Championship was led by Prost and Senna and settled at the penultimate race in Japan. Here, Senna collided with Prost at the first corner, forcing both to retire, but this time Senna escaped punishment and took the title; McLaren also won the Constructors' Championship. The 1991 year was another for McLaren and Senna, with the ascendant Renault-powered Williams team their closest challengers. By 1992, Williams, with their advanced FW14B car, had overtaken McLaren, breaking their four-year run as champions, despite the latter winning five races that year. As Honda withdrew from the sport at end of 1992, McLaren sought a new engine supplier. A deal to secure Renault engines fell through, subsequently McLaren switched to customer Ford engines for the 1993 season. Senna—who initially agreed only to a race-by-race contract before later signing for the whole year—won five races, including a record-breaking sixth victory at Monaco and a win at the European Grand Prix, where he went from fifth to first on the opening lap. His teammate, 1991 CART champion Michael Andretti, fared much worse; he scored only seven points, and was replaced by test driver Mika Häkkinen for the final three rounds of the season. Williams ultimately won both titles and Senna—who had flirted with moving there for 1993—signed with them for the 1994 season. During the 1993 season McLaren took part in a seven part BBC Television documentary called A Season With McLaren. McLaren tested a Lamborghini V12 engine ahead of the 1994 season, as part of a potential deal with the then-Lamborghini owner Chrysler, before eventually deciding to use Peugeot engines. With Peugeot power, the MP4/9 was driven by Häkkinen and Martin Brundle, despite achieving eight podiums over the season no wins were achieved. Peugeot was dropped after a single year due to multiple engine failures/unreliability which cost McLaren potential race victories and they switched to a Mercedes-Benz-branded, Ilmor-designed engine. For 1995 season onwards, McLaren ended their engine deal with Peugeot Sport and started an engine full-works partnership with Mercedes-Benz High Performance Engines for the first time, after the German manufacturer spent one year in partnership with the Sauber team. The partnership included free engines from Mercedes-Benz that built and assembled by Ilmor Engineering, Mercedes-Benz official team vehicles, financial support, also earned full-factory support from Daimler AG and Mercedes-Benz and also Mercedes-Benz and Ilmor staff would work with the team at their Woking base. McLaren's Formula One car for the 1995 season, the MP4/10, was not a front-runner and Brundle's replacement, former champion Nigel Mansell, was unable to fit into the car at first and departed after just two races, with Mark Blundell taking his place. While Williams dominated in 1996, McLaren, now with David Coulthard alongside Häkkinen, went a third successive season without a win. In 1997, however, Coulthard broke this run by winning the season-opening Australian Grand Prix; Häkkinen and he would each win another race before the end of the season, and highly rated designer Adrian Newey joined the team from Williams in August that year. Despite the car's improved pace, unreliability proved costly throughout the season, with retirements at the British and Luxembourg Grands Prix occurring whilst Häkkinen was in the lead. With Newey able to take advantage of new technical regulations for 1998, and with Williams losing their works Renault engines following Renault's temporary withdrawal from the sport, McLaren were once again able to challenge for the championship. Häkkinen and Coulthard won five of the first six races despite the banning of the team's "brake steer" system, which allowed the rear brakes to be operated individually to reduce understeer, after a protest by Ferrari at the second race in Brazil. Schumacher and Ferrari provided the greatest competition, the former levelled on points with Häkkinen with two races to go, but wins for Häkkinen at the Luxembourg and Japanese Grands Prix gave both him the Drivers' Championship and McLaren the Constructors' Championship. Häkkinen won his second Drivers' Championship the following season, but due to a combination of driver errors and mechanical failures, the team lost the constructors' title to Ferrari. In 2000 McLaren won seven races in a close fight with Ferrari, but ultimately Ferrari and Schumacher prevailed in both competitions. This marked the start of a decline in form as Ferrari cemented their dominance of Formula One and also beryllium engine material banned in Formula One that affected Mercedes engine performance. In 2001, Häkkinen was outscored by Coulthard for the first time since 1997 and retired (ending Formula One's longest ever driver partnership), his place taken by Kimi Räikkönen, then in 2002, Coulthard took their solitary win at Monaco while Ferrari repeated McLaren's 1988 feat of 15 wins in a season. The year 2003 started promisingly, with one win each for Coulthard and Räikkönen at the first two Grands Prix. However, they were hampered when the MP4-18 car designed for that year suffered crash test and reliability problems, forcing them to continue using a 'D' development of the year-old MP4-17 for longer than they had initially planned. Despite this, Räikkönen scored points consistently and challenged for the championship up to the final race, eventually losing by two points. The team began 2004 with the MP4-19, which technical director Adrian Newey described as "a debugged version of [the MP4-18]". It was not a success, though, and was replaced mid-season by the MP4-19B. With this, Räikkönen scored the team's and his only win of the year at the Belgian Grand Prix, as McLaren finished fifth in the Constructors' Championship, their worst ranking since 1983. Coulthard left for Red Bull Racing in 2005 to be replaced by former CART champion Juan Pablo Montoya for what was McLaren's most successful season in several years as he and Räikkönen won ten races. However, both the team not being able to work out why the car could not heat its tyres properly in the early stages of the season and the overall unreliability of the MP4-20 cost several race victories when Räikkönen had been leading or in contention to win and also costing him grid positions in some qualifying sessions, which allowed Renault and their driver Fernando Alonso to capitalise and win both titles. In 2006, the superior reliability and speed of the Ferraris and Renaults prevented the team from gaining any victories for the first time in a decade. Montoya parted company acrimoniously with the team to race in NASCAR after the United States Grand Prix, where he crashed into Räikkönen at the start; test driver Pedro de la Rosa deputised for the remainder of the season. The team also lost Räikkönen to Ferrari at the end of the year. Steve Matchett argued that the poor reliability of McLaren in 2006 and recent previous years was due to a lack of team continuity and stability. His cited examples of instability are logistical challenges related to the move to the McLaren Technology Centre, Adrian Newey's aborted move to Jaguar and later move to Red Bull, the subsequent move of Newey's deputy to Red Bull, and personnel changes at Ilmor. After scoring no victories in 2006, the team returned to competitive status in 2007. That year saw Fernando Alonso race alongside Formula One debutant and long-time McLaren protégé Lewis Hamilton. The pair scored four wins each and led the Drivers' Championship for much of the year, but tensions arose within the team, BBC Sport claimed that Alonso was unable to cope with Hamilton's competitiveness. At the Hungarian Grand Prix, Alonso was judged to have deliberately impeded his teammate during qualifying, so the team were not allowed to score Constructors' points at the event. An internal agreement within the McLaren team stated that drivers would alternatively have an extra lap for qualifying, however, Lewis Hamilton refused to accept for the Hungarian Grand Prix. Subsequently, the McLaren team was investigated by the FIA for having proprietary technical blueprints of Ferrari's car – the so-called "Spygate" controversy. At the first hearing, McLaren management consistently denied all knowledge, blaming a single "rogue engineer". However, in the final hearing, McLaren was found guilty and the team was excluded from the Constructors' Championship and fined $100 million. The drivers were allowed to continue without penalty, and while Hamilton led the Drivers' Championship heading into the final race in Brazil, Räikkönen in the Ferrari won the race and the Drivers' Championship, a single point ahead of both McLaren drivers. In November, Alonso and McLaren agreed to terminate their contract by mutual consent, Heikki Kovalainen filling the vacant seat alongside Hamilton. In 2008, a close fight ensued between Hamilton and the Ferraris of Felipe Massa and Räikkönen; Hamilton won five times and despite also crossing the finish line first at the Belgian Grand Prix, he was deemed to have gained an illegal advantage by cutting a chicane during an overtake and was controversially demoted to third. Going into the final race in Brazil, Hamilton had a seven-point lead over Massa. Massa won there, but Hamilton dramatically clinched his first Drivers' Championship by moving into the necessary fifth position at the final corner of the final lap of the race. Despite winning his first Grand Prix in Hungary, Kovalainen finished the season only seventh in the overall standings, allowing Ferrari to take the constructors' title. Before the start of the 2009 season, Dennis retired as team principal, handing responsibility to Martin Whitmarsh, but the year started badly: the MP4-24 car was off the pace and the team was given a three-race suspended ban for misleading stewards at the Australian and Malaysian Grands Prix. Despite these early problems, a late revival had Hamilton win at the Hungarian and Singapore Grands Prix. For the 2010 season, McLaren lost its status as the Mercedes works team; Mercedes decided to buy the Brackley-based Brawn team that had won the 2009 titles with its customer engines, Whitmarsh having chosen to abandon their exclusive rights to the Mercedes engines to help Brawn run. Mercedes still continued providing engines to McLaren, albeit under a supplier-customer relationship rather than the works partnership as before, while it sold its 40% shares of McLaren over two years. McLaren signed 2009 champion, Jenson Button, to replace Kovalainen alongside Hamilton in 2010. Button won twice (in Australia and China) and Hamilton three times (in Turkey, Canada, and Belgium), but they and McLaren failed to win their respective championships, that year's MP4-25 largely outpaced by Red Bull's RB6. Hamilton and Button remained with the team into 2011, with Hamilton winning three races – China, Germany, and Abu Dhabi and Button also winning three races – Canada, Hungary, and Japan. Button finished the Drivers' Championship in second place with 270 points behind 2011 Drivers' Champion Sebastian Vettel of Red Bull Racing, ahead of Hamilton's 227 points. McLaren was second in the Constructors' Championship to Red Bull Racing. Throughout the season, Hamilton was involved in several incidents with other drivers including – most notably – multiple collisions with 2008 title rival Massa. In 2012, McLaren won the first race of the year in Australia with a dominant victory by Button and a 3rd place from pole for Hamilton, while Hamilton went on to win in Canada, but by the mid-way mark of the season at the team's home race at Silverstone, the McLaren cars managed only eighth place (Hamilton) and 10th place (Button), while the drivers' and Constructors' Championships were being dominated by Red Bull Racing and Ferrari, whose cars occupied the first four places of the British Grand Prix, this was partially due to pit stop problems and Button's temporary dip in form after not adapting as well as Hamilton to the new Pirelli tyres. The car also suffered reliability problems which cost the team and its drivers numerous potential points, most notably in Singapore and Abu Dhabi, where Hamilton had been leading from the front in both races and in Italy where the team lost a 1-2 finish when Button's car failed with fuel problems on lap 33. Sergio Pérez replaced Hamilton for 2013, after Hamilton decided to leave for Mercedes. The team's car for the season, the MP4-28, was launched on 31 January 2013. The car struggled to compete with the other top teams and the season had McLaren fail to produce a podium finish for the first time since 1980. Kevin Magnussen replaced Pérez for 2014, and Ron Dennis, who had remained at arm's length since stepping down from the team principal role, returned as CEO of the operation. McLaren was the first team to officially launch their 2014 car, the MP4-29, which was revealed on 24 January 2014. They had a largely unsuccessful 2014; their best result was in Australia where – after Daniel Ricciardo's disqualification from second place – Magnussen finished second and Button third. Button subsequently finished fourth in Canada, Britain, and Russia. Their highest grid position was in Britain with Button's third place on the grid. For 2015, McLaren ended their engine deal with Mercedes which included buying back the 40% stake that Mercedes held in the team and reforging their historical partnership with Honda. The Honda deal not only meant they would supply engines, but that Honda staff would work with the team at their Woking base as well as received full-factory support from Honda including official team vehicles and free engines. The team announced Fernando Alonso and Jenson Button as their race drivers, with Kevin Magnussen demoted to test driver. During pre-season testing at the Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya in February, Alonso suffered a concussion and, as a result, Kevin Magnussen replaced him for the season-opening Australian Grand Prix in March. At that inaugural race of the season, Jenson Button finished 11th, but was lapped twice and finished last of the finishing cars. Following considerable unreliability and initial suggestions that the Honda engine was underpowered relative to its competitors, steady performance gains eventually resulted in Button managing to score the team's first (four) points of the season at the sixth round in Monaco. By contrast, Alonso scored his first point three races later at the British Grand Prix. The Hungarian Grand Prix saw the team score their best result of the season with Alonso and Button finishing fifth and ninth, respectively. However, McLaren did not score points in the next four races until Button finished ninth at the Russian Grand Prix. At the following United States Grand Prix, Button scored his best result of the season with sixth place. The team finished ninth in the constructors' standings with 27 points, McLaren's worst performance since 1980. McLaren retained the Alonso - Button pairing for the 2016 season. The second year of the Honda partnership was better than the first, with the team being able to challenge for top 10 positions on a more regular basis. However, the season started with a massive crash at the Australian Grand Prix in which Fernando Alonso sustained rib fractures and a collapsed lung after colliding with Esteban Gutiérrez and somersaulting into the crash barriers. Alonso, as a result of his injuries, was forced to miss the second round of the Championship, the Bahrain Grand Prix, and was replaced by reserve driver Stoffel Vandoorne. Vandoorne produced an impressive performance in his first race to score the team's first point of the season with 10th place. The next points for McLaren came at the Russian Grand Prix with Alonso and Button finishing sixth and 10th respectively. The rain-affected Monaco Grand Prix was one of best races of the season for the team. Alonso finished fifth, having kept Nico Rosberg's Mercedes behind him for 46 laps, while Button scored two points with ninth. At the Austrian Grand Prix, Button recorded his best result of the season with a sixth-place after qualifying third in a wet/dry session. After a disappointing display at their home race, the British Grand Prix at Silverstone, the team scored points at the next three rounds with six points in Hungary, four in Germany, and six points again thanks to an impressive seventh-place finish from Alonso at the Belgian Grand Prix. At the United States Grand Prix, McLaren matched their Monaco result with 12 points after an attacking race from Alonso saw him claim fifth position while Button once again finished ninth. After a season of significant progress compared to 2015, Alonso and Button finished the championship in 10th and 15th places respectively with the team ending the season in sixth place in the Constructors' Championship with 76 points. On 3 September 2016, Jenson Button announced he would take a sabbatical from Formula One for the 2017 season. He then confirmed on 25 November that he would retire from F1 altogether with Vandoorne being Alonso's new Teammate for 2017. In February 2017, McLaren signed Lando Norris to their Young Driver Programme. Alonso did not take part in the 2017 Monaco Grand Prix as he was participating in the Indianapolis 500. Instead Jenson Button returned for the one race as his replacement. McLaren finished 2017 9th with 30 points in total. McLaren announced during the 2017 Singapore Grand Prix weekend that they would split from engine supplier Honda at the end of the 2017 season and had agreed on a three-year customer deal to be supplied with Mecachrome-assembled Renault engines. Team boss Éric Boullier described their performance between 2015 and 2017 as a "proper disaster" for the team's credibility. 2018 was the first season in McLaren's history when their cars were powered by Renault engines. McLaren also announced that Fernando Alonso and Stoffel Vandoorne would remain with the team for the 2018 season. On 6 November 2017, the team announced that Lando Norris would be the team's test and reserve driver. At the season-opening Australian Grand Prix, Fernando Alonso scored the team's best finish since the 2016 Monaco Grand Prix with fifth, Alonso said that the team's target would be Red Bull Racing. McLaren had a relatively good start to the season with points finishes in the next four races, but in the next 16 races after Spain, McLaren only scored 22 points, 8 points less than in the same period in 2017. On 14 August 2018, Fernando Alonso announced he would not compete in Formula One in 2019, ending his four-year spell at the team. Carlos Sainz Jr. was signed as his replacement on a multi-year deal. On 3 September 2018, it was announced that Stoffel Vandoorne would be leaving the team at the end of the season, with Lando Norris being promoted from reserve driver to replace him in 2019. McLaren struggled with performance throughout the season, with the McLaren drivers being knocked out 21 times in the first qualifying session, and McLaren having the second-worst average qualifying ranking of any team, only ahead of Williams. The team finished the disappointing season – after being helped by the exclusion of Force India's points from the first 12 races – in 6th place with 62 points, 357 points behind their target, Red Bull Racing, with the same engine. The 2019 season was much more positive for McLaren, with the team securely establishing themselves as the best constructor behind Mercedes, Ferrari, and Red Bull. At the Brazilian Grand Prix, Sainz recorded the team's first podium since the 2014 Australian Grand Prix, finishing fourth on the road but later promoted to third after Lewis Hamilton received a post-race penalty, meaning that the team missed out on the official podium ceremony. McLaren ended the season in 4th place with 145 points, their best result since 2014 and 54 points ahead of their nearest competitor, Renault. McLaren retained Norris and Sainz for the 2020 season. The season was significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The season was shortened to 18 races, with the season opener to take place in Austria. At the Austrian Grand Prix, Norris achieved his first ever podium, finishing in third. Sainz achieved the team's second podium in 2020 at the Italian Grand Prix, where he finished second. The team finished the 2020 season third in the constructors' championship with 202 points. Sainz finished the driver's championship in sixth with 105 points and Norris in ninth with 97 points. McLaren again used Mercedes engines in 2021 after their deal with Renault ended. McLaren had previously collaborated with Mercedes from 1995 through 2014 (1995 to 2009 was a works partner and later 2010 to 2014 was a customer partner) but this time a customer role system. Daniel Ricciardo moved from Renault to partner Lando Norris for the 2021 Formula One World Championship on a multi-year deal. Ricciardo replaced Carlos Sainz, who moved to Ferrari. In the season's first nine races, the team scored three podiums with Mercedes power, in Italy, Monaco and Austria, all courtesy of Norris. At the 2021 Italian Grand Prix, Ricciardo scored his first win since the 2018 Monaco Grand Prix, and McLaren's first win since the 2012 Brazilian Grand Prix. A second-place finish for Norris also meant that McLaren achieved their first one-two finish since the 2010 Canadian Grand Prix and the only one-two finish for the 2021 season. Norris secured the team's first pole position in the hybrid era at the 2021 Russian Grand Prix but was unable to convert it to a win, finishing in seventh place due to the sudden drastic change in weather conditions and team strategy in the last two laps of the race. A subsequent drop in form in the latter part of the season saw McLaren ending up fourth in the constructors' championship behind Ferrari. For the 2022 season, McLaren retained both Norris and Ricciardo. Ricciardo tested positive for COVID-19 ahead of the pre-season tests in Bahrain, which meant Norris was required to do all the remaining running for the test although a brake problem limited the testing he was able to conduct. Both drivers struggled at the first race in Bahrain, with neither driving reaching Q3 – the first time since the 2020 Turkish Grand Prix – and finishing 14th and 15th in the race. Norris achieved third at the Emilia Romagna Grand Prix. After Norris missed the first day at the track during the São Paulo Grand Prix weekend, McLaren suffered their first double DNF finish since Monaco 2017 as Norris had an electrical fault and Ricciardo was involved in a collision with Haas' Kevin Magnussen. Compared to his teammate, Ricciardo struggled and many were critical of his performance, with some suggesting that McLaren would drop him. This forced Ricciardo into releasing a statement on Instagram, confirming he would stay through to 2023. In August 2022, Riccardo's contract for 2023 was terminated by mutual agreement. Oscar Piastri replaced Ricciardo for the 2023 season after a contract dispute with Alpine F1 Team was resolved in McLaren's favour by the FIA Contract Recognition Board. McLaren finished the season in fifth place in the constructors' championship behind Alpine. The 2023 season celebrated the 60th anniversary of the team's founding, with the season's car named the MCL60 in commemoration. The season started with a myriad of issues for the team, causing them to release a public statement after the Saudi Arabian Grand Prix, announcing certain organisational changes; James Key would be replaced as Technical Director and replaced by a Technical Executive Team consisting of three new specialised Technical Director roles consisting of Peter Prodomou as Technical Director, Aerodynamics, David Sanchez (joining in January 2024 after his gardening leave ends) as Technical Director, Car concept and performance, and Neil Houdly, Technical Director Engineer and Design who is a placeholder for Rob Marshall, who, like Sanchez, has been hired from a rival team but is on gardening leave until January 2024. After not scoring points in the first two races, Norris and Piastri finished the chaotic Australian Grand Prix in sixth and eighth place respectively, with Piastri scoring his first points in Formula One and for McLaren. At the Spanish Grand Prix, Norris qualified in a surprising third place whereas Piastri started in ninth. On race day, Norris made contact with Hamilton at the start of the race and damaged his front wing. He dropped down to the bottom end of the grid after making a pit stop for a front wing change and finished the race in 17th whereas Piastri finished in 13th. McLaren brought new car upgrades for Norris for the Austrian Grand Prix while Piastri received his at the British Grand Prix. With the new car upgrades, Norris qualified in third in the sprint shootout. At the sprint in wet conditions, Norris' car went into anti-stall due to the lack of grip at turn 3 on the first lap which dropped him immediately to tenth. He finished the sprint in ninth. Norris qualified in fourth for the race and finished in fifth after battling mostly with Hamilton and Sainz throughout the race. Norris got promoted to fourth after Sainz, who finished fourth, was given a post-race ten-second time penalty for exceeding track limits. At the British Grand Prix, with both cars having the new upgrades, Norris and Piastri qualified in second and third respectively, giving McLaren their best qualifying result of the season at that moment. On race day, Norris had a quicker start and overtook Verstappen at the first corner to lead the race for the first four laps before being overtaken by Verstappen on lap five. Piastri, too, had a good start to keep third position and built a sizeable lead against Charles Leclerc. Piastri made his pit stop on lap 29 but two laps later, Kevin Magnussen's engine caught fire which called out the virtual safety car and safety car where Hamilton benefitted to jump ahead of Piastri into third after making his pit stop. Norris also pitted during the safety car and came out ahead of Hamilton. Norris, who switched to the hard tyres, defended his position against Hamilton (who switched to the soft tyres) when the race resumed to finish in second place, giving McLaren and Norris their first second-place finish since the 2021 Italian Grand Prix. Piastri finished in fourth place after battling against George Russell in his best Formula One career finish at that point. Norris scored his first ever consecutive podium finish by finishing second at the Hungarian Grand Prix. Unfortunately for Piastri, after being in second place at the start of the race from fourth, he finished in fifth place after suffering floor damage. At the Belgian Grand Prix, Piastri qualified in second position in the sprint shootout, his highest qualifying position to date and missed out on pole position by 11 milliseconds. During the sprint race, Piastri led the race on the second lap for the first time in his Formula One career but was overtaken by Verstappen on lap 5. Piastri finished the sprint in second place whereas Norris finished in sixth. McLaren introduced further upgrades to the MCL60 at the Singapore Grand Prix, where Piastri, having been impeded by Lance Stroll's heavy crash, started seventeenth with Norris in fourth. Both cars would make their way up the Marina Bay Street Circuit; Piastri recovered ten places to finish seventh, while Norris took advantage of George Russell finding the walls and the assistance of his former teammate and race leader Carlos Sainz Jr. to finish second. At the Japanese Grand Prix, Norris and Piastri finished in second and third respectively, giving McLaren their first double podium finish of the season and their first since the 2021 Italian Grand Prix. This is also Piastri's first podium finish in Formula One. Piastri won the Qatar Grand Prix sprint race, marking McLaren's first sprint race victory in Formula One; both would recover from lower grid positions in the main race to finish second and third respectively. It was in this race that McLaren recorded the fastest pit stop in Formula One, setting a pit stop time of 1.80 seconds, 0.02 quicker than the previous record set by Red Bull Racing in the 2019 Brazilian Grand Prix. At the United States Grand Prix Norris and Piastri finished fourth and fifth respectively in the sprint, while Norris finished third in the main race, only to be promoted to second after Hamilton's car was found to be illegal in post race inspections, with Piastri retiring on lap 10 from a damaged intercooler after contact with Ocon on lap 1. The Mexican Grand Prix saw Norris knocked out in Q1 after being unable to set a competitive lap time, due to mistakes and yellow flags. The team decided against running a fresh power unit and incurring penalties despite the low grid position and losing some engine components at the first race in Bahrain and Norris recovered to a brilliant fifth place finish, ahead of Piastri in eighth. The Brazilian Grand Prix saw Norris take pole for the sprint race with Piastri in tenth, but only could convert that to a second and tenth place finish respectively. Norris started the race in sixth with Piastri again in tenth. A very good start saw Norris jump to second by the first corner, where he remained for the rest of the race. Meanwhile, Piastri got caught up in a turn one incident which damaged his rear wing and diffuser, the team was able to repair his car under the red flag, but due to needing to pit immediately while the rest of the cars went around for another lap under the safety car he ended up a lap down. He eventually finished in 16th, two laps down. The Las Vegas Grand Prix saw a double Q1 elimination for the first time since Miami earlier in the year, this being down to the team electing against using a second set of softs for their final runs. The race was not any much better; Norris suffered his first retirement of the season on lap 3 after a heavy crash going around the eleventh corner with his car bottoming out over the bumps, with the car heavy on fuel and the tyre pressures low from the lack of temperature. Norris was admitted to a hospital for precautionary checks but was released soon after. Meanwhile, Piastri fought valiantly up the grid. However, on lap 17 he collided with Hamilton, causing a puncture. Having started on hards, he boxed to hards again in hope for a late safety car. Unfortunately for him, the safety car came out 10 laps later, on lap 27 of 50; at that point, the medium tyres could not be run for that long optimally. At the restart, he was 4th and showed impressive pace against the front runners, staying out until lap 44 to build an overcut on those behind. He would then switch to the mediums and come out twelfth, where he fought up to eventually finish in tenth with the fastest lap. During the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix weekend, McLaren signed an extension to use Mercedes engines until 2030. For the race, Piastri started third with Norris in fifth after a mistake on his final run in Q3 cost him a likely front row. The cars finished the race in fifth for Norris and sixth for Piastri, rounding off the 2023 season for McLaren, seeing them take fourth place in the constructors' championship, with Norris taking sixth and Piastri taking ninth in the drivers' championship. McLaren's first racing car designed and built "from the rubber up" by Bruce McLaren Motor Racing was the M1. The car with a small block Oldsmobile had immediate success driven by Bruce McLaren. The car was raced in North America and Europe in 1964 in various A sports and United States Road Racing Championship events. In 1965 the team car was the M1A prototype from which the production Elva M1As were based. In late 1965, the M1B (also known as Mk2) was the team car for the North American races at the end of the year. For the Can-Am Series, which started in 1966, McLaren created the M3 which Bruce and Chris Amon drove – customer cars also appeared in several races in the 1966 season. With the M3, they led two races but scored no wins, and the inaugural title was taken by John Surtees in a Lola T70. The following year, Robin Herd purpose-designed the Chevrolet V8-powered M6A, delays with the Formula One programme allowing the team to spend extra resources on developing the Can-Am car which was the first to be painted in McLaren orange. With Denny Hulme now partnering Bruce, they won five of six races and Bruce won the championship, setting the pattern for the next four years. In the 1968 season, they used a new car, the M8, to win four races; non-works McLarens took the other two, but this time Hulme was victorious overall. In the 1969 season, McLaren domination became total as they won all 11 races with the M8B; Hulme won five, and Bruce won six and the Drivers' Championship. From 1969 onwards, McLaren M12 – the customer "variant" of the M8 – was driven by several entrants, including a version modified by Jim Hall of Chaparral fame. McLaren's success in Can-Am brought with it financial rewards, both prize money and money from selling cars to other teams, that helped to support the team and fund the nascent and relatively poor-paying Formula One programme. When Bruce was killed testing the 1970 season's M8D, he was at first replaced by Dan Gurney, then later by Peter Gethin. They won two and one races, respectively, while Hulme won six on the way to the championship. Private teams competing in the 1970 Can-Am series included older M3Bs as well as the M12 – the customer version of the team's M8B. In the 1971 season, the team held off the challenge of 1969 world champion Jackie Stewart in the Lola T260, winning eight races, with Peter Revson taking the title. Hulme also won three Can-Am races in the 1972 season, but the McLaren M20 was defeated by the Porsche 917/10s of Mark Donohue and George Follmer. Faced by the greater resources of Porsche, McLaren decided to abandon Can-Am at the end of 1972 and focus solely on open-wheel racing. When the original Can-Am series ceased at the end of the 1974 season, McLaren was by far the most successful constructor with 43 wins. McLaren first contested the United States Auto Club's (USAC) Indianapolis 500 race in 1970, encouraged by their tyre supplier Goodyear, which wanted to break competitor Firestone's stranglehold on the event. With the M15 car, Bruce, Chris Amon, and Denny Hulme entered, but after Amon withdrew and Hulme was severely burned on the hands in an incident in practice, Peter Revson and Carl Williams took their places in the race to retire and finish seventh, respectively. The team also contested some of the more prestigious races in the USAC championship that year, as they would do in subsequent years. For 1971 they had a new car, the M16, which driver Mark Donohue said: "...obsoleted every other car on track..." At that year's Indianapolis 500, Revson qualified on pole and finished second, whilst in 1972, Donohue won in privateer Team Penske's M16B. The 1973 event had Johnny Rutherford join the team; he qualified on pole, but finished ninth, Revson crashed out. McLaren won their first Indianapolis 500 in 1974 with Rutherford. The McLaren and Rutherford combination was second in 1975 and won again in 1976. Developments of the M16 had been used throughout this period until the new M24 car was introduced in 1977. The team did not reproduce their recent success at Indianapolis in 1977, 1978, or 1979, and although they continued to win other USAC races, by the end of 1979, they decided to end their involvement. On 12 April 2017, McLaren revealed they would participate in the 2017 Indianapolis 500 with their current Formula 1 driver Fernando Alonso at the wheel of a Honda-powered McLaren-branded Andretti Autosport IndyCar. In qualifying, Alonso secured a second-row start from fifth. During the race Alonso led 27 laps in his first Indy 500 start. With 21 laps remaining Alonso was running seventh when his Honda engine failed. He was classified 24th. After his retirement he received a standing ovation from the grandstands. Alonso was praised for his strong debut. On 10 November 2018, McLaren announced that they would participate in the 2019 Indianapolis 500 with Fernando Alonso and using Chevrolet engines. However, after mechanical difficulties and a severe crash in practice, the team failed to qualify for the race. In August 2019, it was announced McLaren would contest the championship full-time in 2020, collaborating with Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports to form Arrow McLaren SP. Zak Brown stated in an interview with Leigh Diffey that McLaren joining the IndyCar Series full time was spurred by two different objectives. The first was to market the McLaren brand and some of the McLaren Formula One team's prominent American based sponsors in a primarily North America centric racing series, as Formula One only had three races in North America in 2021 and only one of those races was in the United States. The second was to branch McLaren's engineering expertise into a racing series that the other Formula One teams were not involved in, as Brown thought McLaren would stand out more amongst its competitors in IndyCar than it would in other racing series. Brown also stated that McLaren chose to partner with Schmidt Peterson Motorsports because their previous efforts fielding their team with assistance from Andretti Autosport and Carlin exclusively for the Indianapolis 500 had not been successful and that the purchase of the IndyCar Series by Penske Entertainment gave McLaren more confidence in the long term viability and stability of the series compared to the previous ownership under Tony George. In August 2021, it was announced that McLaren Racing will acquire a majority stake in the IndyCar Team. The transaction closed by the end of the year and saw McLaren Racing take a 75% share of the team. Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. For the 2022 IndyCar Series, the team's first under McLaren ownership, both O'Ward and Rosenqvist would return to the team as full time entries. The No. 6 car would again return on a part-time basis for the GMR Grand Prix and the 2022 Indianapolis 500 driven by Juan Pablo Montoya. O'Ward and Rosenqvist would finish second and fourth in the Indianapolis 500 respectively, the team's best finish at Indianapolis to date. The team announced they had signed Alexander Rossi to drive a third full time car from 2023 and beyond. For 2023, the team announced they had signed Alexander Rossi to drive a third full time car. Additionally, team president Taylor Kiel left the team. His duties were parsed and redistributed between Brian Barnhart, who joins the team with Rossi from Andretti Autosport as General Manager, and Gavin Ward. In conjunction with McLaren's 60th-anniversary celebration, the team raced a special livery for the 2023 Indianapolis 500 to celebrate McLaren's Triple Crown achievement. The liveries of the Nos. 7, 6 and 5 were painted as the McLaren M16C/D that won the 1974 Indianapolis 500, the McLaren MP4/2 that won the 1984 Monaco Grand Prix, and the McLaren F1 GTR that won the 1995 24 Hours of Le Mans respectively to honour the three winning McLaren cars that forms the Triple Crown. For 2024, Rosenqvist moved to Meyer Shank Racing and was replaced by David Malukas who moved from Dale Coyne Racing. Neom is McLaren's title partner into their endeavour to electric motorsport as NEOM McLaren Electric Racing. In June 2021, McLaren announced it would enter Extreme E in the 2022 season using existing personnel from outside the Formula One program with Tanner Foust and Emma Gilmour (becoming the first woman factory driver for McLaren) as drivers for the team. Entering as McLaren XE, the team was rebranded for their second race and is known as NEOM McLaren Extreme E Team for sponsorship reasons. The team won its first podium by finishing second in the Energy X-Prix. In the process, Gilmour became the first woman podium winner for McLaren. The team finished in fifth place in the Team's Championship standings. McLaren retained Foust and Gilmour for the 2023 season. The team won its second podium by finishing second in Round 4 at the Hydro X-Prix. In Round 7 at the Island X-Prix II, Gilmour suffered a fractured rib and a concussion following a crash during the first free practice session and was ruled out for the rest of the weekend. She was replaced by Extreme E's championship reserve driver Tamara Molinaro for Rounds 7 and 8. McLaren withdrew from Round 8 due to the spare car being too heavily damaged in Round 7's redemption race after Molinaro colided with JBXE's Hedda Hosås on the run down to the first jump at the start of the race and rolled the car. This is the first instance of a team withdrawing from a race in Extreme E. For the final two rounds of the season, McLaren announced that Gilmour was still recovering from her injuries and was replaced by Hosås. McLaren finished in eighth place in the Team's Championship standings. At the end of the season, McLaren announced that Foust and Gilmour will leave the team. For the 2024 season, McLaren announced a new driver pairing of Cristina Gutiérrez and Mattias Ekström, who moved from X44 and Acciona | Sainz XE Team respectively. The team won its first podium of the season by finishing second in Round 1 at the Desert X-Prix. In December 2020, Zak Brown announced McLaren's interest in entering Formula E once the company's battery supplier contract has expired. In January the following year, McLaren signed an option to enter the championship for 2022. McLaren announced the acquisition of the Mercedes-EQ Formula E Team in May 2022 and debuted in the 2022–23 season as NEOM McLaren Formula E Team using Nissan's EV powertrain. René Rast, who last raced in the 2020–21 season with Audi Sport ABT Schaeffler, and Jake Hughes were signed as drivers for the team. McLaren made its ePrix debut at the 2023 Mexico City ePrix. Hughes qualified in third and finished the race in fifth place whereas Rast qualified in fifteenth but retired from the race on lap 40 after colliding with Mahindra's Oliver Rowland. McLaren achieved several milestones at the Diriyah ePrix. In the first round, Hughes qualified at second place (missing out on pole position by 0.060s) but finished in eighth whereas Rast qualified and finished in fifth place while scoring McLaren's first fastest lap in Formula E. In the second round, Hughes secured McLaren's maiden pole position in Formula E and Rast qualified in third place. Hughes finished the race in fifth and Rast finished in third place, giving McLaren their maiden podium finish in Formula E. Hughes qualified in second at the Monaco ePrix but was later promoted to pole position after Nissan's Sacha Fenestraz was stripped of his pole position for exceeding his power limit in his final run. Hughes finished the race in fifth place whereas Rast finished in seventeenth after suffering from multiple collisions. At the London ePrix, McLaren raced the world's first motorsport livery designed using AI. McLaren finished the season in eighth in the Teams' Championship. In August 2023, McLaren announced that Hughes had re-signed with the team whereas Rast will leave for the 2023–24 season. Rast was replaced by Sam Bird, moving from Jaguar Racing. Bird won McLaren's maiden electric race victory at the São Paulo ePrix. McLaren is reviewing the LMH and GTP regulations for a possible entry into the FIA World Endurance Championship (WEC) LMH and IMSA WeatherTech SportsCar Championship GTP classes respectivelyin the future. Besides the cars raced by the works team, a variety of McLaren racing cars have also been used by customer teams. In their formative years, McLaren built Formula Two, hillclimbing, Formula 5000 and sports racing cars that were sold to customers. Lacking the capacity to build the desired numbers, Trojan was subcontracted to construct some of them. In Can-Am, Trojan built customer versions of the M6 and M8 cars and ex-works cars were sold to privateers when new models arrived; half of the field was McLarens at some races. Author Mark Hughes says, "over 220" McLarens were built by Trojan. In USAC competition and Formula One, too, many teams used McLarens during the late 1960s and 1970s. A 1972 M8F was rebuilt as the C8 for use in Group C racing in 1982, but had little success. In the mid-1990s, McLaren Racing's sister company, McLaren Cars (now McLaren Automotive) built a racing version of their F1 road car, the F1 GTR which won the 1995 24 Hours of Le Mans and the 1995 and 1996 BPR Global GT Series. In 2011, a GT3 version of the MP4-12C road car was developed in partnership with CRS Racing, making its competitive debut at the VLN and ADAC GT Masters in 2012. The MP4-12C was succeeded by the McLaren 650S and then the McLaren 720S for GT3 racing, while a GT4 version of the McLaren 570S was also developed as well. In 2022, McLaren Automotive announced a new GT4 model based on the McLaren Artura, along with an unrestricted version named the Artura Trophy, which is to be used in McLaren's planned one-make series. In October 2023, McLaren Automotive announced its intent to participate in the 2024 24 Hours of Le Mans under the new LMGT3 category through CEO Zak Brown's United Autosports as its customer team. McLaren Automotive also announced that it will enter the 2024 IMSA SportsCar Championship under the GT Daytona Pro (GTD Pro) category through Pfaff Motorsports as its customer team. Both United Autosports and Pfaff Motorsports will be using the McLaren 720S GT3 Evo. In the following month, McLaren Automotive confirmed its participation in the 2024 FIA World Endurance Championship season in the LMGT3 category in collaboration with United Autosports. McLaren Racing is majority owned by the McLaren Group, having sold 15% of the team to American investors MSP Sports Capital in 2020, rising to a 33% stake in 2022. The team had previously been wholly owned by the Group since its inception. After Bruce McLaren died in a testing accident in 1970, Teddy Mayer took over the team. In 1981, McLaren merged with Ron Dennis' Project Four Racing; Dennis took over as team principal and shortly after organised a buyout of the original McLaren shareholders to take full control of the team. Dennis offered Mansour Ojjeh the chance to purchase 50% of the team in 1983, with McLaren becoming a joint venture with Ojjeh's TAG Group. In 2000, after supplying engines to the team through its Mercedes subsidiary for 5 years, DaimlerChrysler (now Daimler AG) exercised an option to buy 40% of the TAG McLaren Group. Dennis and Ojjeh each retained a 30% share, and each sold half of their stake to the Mumtalakat Holding Company (the sovereign wealth fund of the Kingdom of Bahrain) in 2007. Although Daimler were reportedly considering acquiring the remaining 60% from Dennis and Ojjeh, they instead bought Brawn GP (renaming it Mercedes GP) in November 2009; their McLaren shares were sold back to Mumtalakat, Dennis, and Ojjeh in 2010. Dennis stepped down as both CEO and team principal of McLaren in 2009, handing both roles over to Martin Whitmarsh. However, following the uncompetitive 2013 season, Dennis retook the role in January 2014; Whitmarsh formally left the team later that year. Dennis sought to take a controlling interest in the company, but his relationship with Ojjeh had deteriorated, perhaps as early as 2013. In 2016, Dennis was forced out of his role as CEO by Ojjeh. He sold his remaining shares in the company the next year. After Dennis' 2014 return, he had abolished the position of team principal at McLaren, saying it was an 'outdated' position. Éric Boullier was instead named racing director in January 2014, becoming responsible for the F1 team. After Dennis' exit, Zak Brown was chosen for the post of Group executive director, with the positions of Group CEO and Racing CEO both being left vacant. While his position was formally within the wider McLaren Group, it was understood that his role would focus only on the F1 team. The increasing awareness of the mediocrity of the car prompted a reshuffle in 2018: Brown was appointed McLaren Racing CEO in April, and when Boullier resigned in July, his position was divided between Gil de Ferran as sporting director and Andrea Stella as performance director. In May 2019, Andreas Seidl was appointed as the new team principal. In December 2022, Seidl left McLaren to join Sauber as CEO with Stella promoted to team principal. Since 2004 the team has been based at the McLaren Technology Centre in Woking, England. Facilities there include a wind tunnel and a driving simulator which is said to be the most sophisticated in the sport. The team also created the McLaren Driver Development Programme, which currently has five drivers signed to it as of October 2023. McLaren has had an uneasy relationship with Formula One's governing body, the FIA, and its predecessor FISA, as well as with the commercial rights holders of the sport. McLaren was involved, along with the other teams of the Formula One Constructors Association (FOCA), in a dispute with FISA and Alfa Romeo, Renault, and Ferrari over control of the sport in the early 1980s. During this dispute, known as the FISA-FOCA war, a breakaway series was threatened, FISA refused to sanction one race, and FOCA boycotted another. It was eventually resolved by a revenue-sharing deal called the Concorde Agreement. Subsequent Concorde Agreements were signed in 1987 and 1992, but in 1996, McLaren was again one of the teams which disputed the terms of a new agreement, this time with former FOCA president Bernie Ecclestone's Formula One Promotions and Administration organisation; a new 10-year agreement was eventually signed in 1998. Similar arguments restarted in the mid-2000s, with McLaren and their part-owner Mercedes again threatening to start a rival series, before another Concorde Agreement was signed in 2009. In 2007, McLaren were involved in an espionage controversy after their chief designer Mike Coughlan obtained confidential technical information from Ferrari. McLaren was excluded from the Constructors' Championship for one year, and the team was fined US$100 million. Although the terms of the most recent agreements, in 2013 and 2021, have been extensively negotiated on, McLaren have not taken as openly hostile a stance as in the past. McLaren's Formula One team was originally called Bruce McLaren Motor Racing, and for their first season ran white-and-green coloured cars, which came about as a result of a deal with the makers of the film Grand Prix. Between 1968 and 1971, the team used an orange design, which was also applied to cars competing in the Indianapolis 500 and Can-Am series, and was used as an interim testing livery in later years. In 1968, the Royal Automobile Club and the FIA relaxed the rules regarding commercial sponsorship of Formula One cars, and in 1972, the Yardley of London cosmetics company became McLaren's first title sponsor and the team raced as Yardley Team McLaren. As a result, the livery was changed to a predominantly white one to reflect the sponsor's colours. This changed in 1974, when Philip Morris joined as title sponsor through their Marlboro cigarette brand, whilst one car continued to run—ostensibly by a separate team—with Yardley livery for the year. Marlboro's red-and-white branding lasted until 1996, during which time the team went by various names incorporating the word "Marlboro", making it the then longest-running Formula One sponsorship (and still the longest title sponsorship, which has since been surpassed by Hugo Boss' sponsorship of the team, which ran from 1981 to 2014). In 1997, Philip Morris moved its Marlboro sponsorship to Ferrari and was replaced by Reemtsma's West cigarette branding, with the team entering under the name West McLaren Mercedes. As a result, McLaren adopted a silver and black livery. By mid-2005, a European Union directive banned tobacco advertising in sport, which forced McLaren to end its association with West. In 2006, the team competed without a title sponsor, entering under the name Team McLaren Mercedes. McLaren altered their livery to introduce red into the design, and changed the silver to chrome. In 2007, McLaren signed a seven-year contract with telecommunications company Vodafone, and became known as Vodafone McLaren Mercedes. The arrangement was due to last until 2014, although the team announced at the 2013 Australian Grand Prix that their partnership would conclude at the end of the 2013 season. Despite explaining the decision to conclude the sponsorship as being a result of Vodafone's desire to reconsider its commercial opportunities, it was later reported that the decision to run the 2012 Bahrain Grand Prix despite an ongoing civil uprising and protests against the race, and Vodafone's inability to remove their logos from the McLaren cars during the race as being a key factor in the decision to terminate the sponsorship. Diageo-owned whisky brand Johnnie Walker, an associate sponsor since 2005, offered to take over as title sponsor at the end of 2013, but their offer of £43 million was turned down by McLaren chairman Ron Dennis, who believed it to be "too small." At the end of 2015, it was announced that McLaren was due to lose sponsor TAG Heuer to Red Bull Racing. McLaren chief Ron Dennis later admitted to falling out with TAG Heuer CEO Jean-Claude Biver. In 2015, McLaren was without a title sponsor and was set to lose a further £20 million in sponsorship in 2016. Between 2015 and 2017, the team competed as McLaren Honda due to their engine partnership with Honda. The team has competed as McLaren F1 Team since 2018. CEO Zak Brown has said that he will not be selling the name of the team to a title sponsor to keep the team's name intact and will be looking for major sponsors instead. McLaren's cars were originally named with the letter M followed by a number, sometimes also followed by a letter denoting the model. After the 1981 merger with Project Four, the cars were called "MP4/x", or since 2001 "MP4-x", where x is the generation of the chassis (e.g. MP4/1, MP4-22). "MP4" stood initially for "Marlboro Project 4", so that the full title of the cars (McLaren MP4/x) reflected not only the historical name of the team, but also the names of the team's major sponsor and its new component part. Since the change of title sponsor in 1997, "MP4" was said to stand for "McLaren Project 4". From 2017, following Ron Dennis' departure from the team, the naming scheme of the cars changed to "MCL" followed by a number. Since 2017, McLaren have increasingly adopted orange colours, designed to recall Bruce McLaren's liveries. In 2019, British American Tobacco (BAT) agreed to a global partnership with McLaren under its "A Better Tomorrow" campaign to promote BAT's alternative smoking products Vuse (previously Vype) and Velo (previously Lyft). The agreement has enticed a similar controversy to the Mission Winnow sponsorship with Scuderia Ferrari due to the association with tobacco companies. In July 2020, McLaren announced a multi-year strategic partnership with long time sponsor Gulf Oil International, which includes Gulf Oil being the preferred lubricant supplier to McLaren Automotive and a special Gulf livery for the 2021 Monaco Grand Prix. In May 2022, OKX signed a multi-year sponsorship deal with McLaren as a primary partner. The deal was expanded in March 2023 with OKX becoming McLaren's official primary partner where OKX will receive increased branding presence on the car. The expanded deal also includes OKX supporting the McLaren Shadow esports team. As part of McLaren's 60th-anniversary celebration, the team revealed a special livery for the 2023 Monaco and Spanish Grands Prix to celebrate their Triple Crown achievement. The Triple Crown livery is the amalgamation of the liveries of the three winning McLaren cars that forms the Triple Crown – the papaya of the M16C/D that won the 1974 Indianapolis 500 at the rear, the white of the MP4/2 that won the 1984 Monaco Grand Prix at the middle, and the black of the F1 GTR that won the 1995 24 Hours of Le Mans at the front of the MCL60. McLaren's IndyCar Series sister team also raced their version of the Triple Crown livery for the 2023 Indianapolis 500, with the liveries of the Nos. 7, 6 and 5 painted as the M16C/D, MP4/2 and F1 GTR respectively. For the 2023 British Grand Prix, in conjunction with primary partner Google Chrome, McLaren will race a chrome livery in a throwback to the fan favourite livery from 2006 to 2014. The chrome livery was more commonly associated with the Vodafone McLaren years. McLaren and OKX collaborated again for the 2023 Singapore and Japanese Grands Prix to race a predominantly black car with streaks of the standard papaya orange called "Stealth Mode". McLaren and Vuse collaborated for a 3rd time for the 2023 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix (the previous 2 collaborations being in 2021 and 2022) to race a car with a similar livery to the main livery of 2023, but featuring more papaya on the front wing, along with an updated sidepod which features abstract shapes, influenced by rolling sand dunes and ocean waves. Constructors' Championships winning percentage: 13.8% Drivers' Championships winning percentage: 20.7% Winning percentage: 19.2% Seven drivers have won a total of twelve Drivers' Championships with McLaren: Emerson Fittipaldi (1974) James Hunt (1976) Niki Lauda (1984) Alain Prost (1985, 1986, 1989) Ayrton Senna (1988, 1990, 1991) Mika Häkkinen (1998, 1999) Lewis Hamilton (2008) (key) ^ In conjunction with Andretti Autosport. ^ In conjunction with Arrow Schmidt Peterson Motorsports. (Races in bold indicate best qualifiers; races in italics indicate fastest super sector) Notes * – Season still in progress. Current team Mercedes first competed in 1954–1955, but did not race again until 2010. Individual driver numbers were not allocated at the time, as numbers differed by event. "2023 FIA Formula One World Championship Entry List". Federation Internationale de l'Automobile. 14 March 2015. Retrieved 21 December 2022. "McLaren Formula 1 team announces signing of Rob Marshall". Formula1.com. 30 May 2023. Retrieved 30 May 2023. "Key out, Sanchez in as McLaren restructures F1 team". autosport.com. 25 March 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023. "Lando Norris agrees major contract extension to stay at McLaren until 2025". formula1.com. 9 February 2022. Archived from the original on 14 June 2022. Retrieved 18 June 2022. "2021 FIA F2 champion Oscar Piastri to join McLaren Racing in 2023". mclaren.com. 2 September 2022. Archived from the original on 2 September 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2022. "F1 2023: Piastri explains why he chose number 81 for debut". RaceFans. 27 September 2022. Retrieved 27 September 2022. "McLaren Formula 1 Team confirm Pato O'Ward as a 2024 F1 reserve driver". www.mclaren.com. Retrieved 4 January 2024. "McLaren announce Ryo Hirakawa as 2024 reserve driver". www.formula1.com. Retrieved 4 January 2024. Benson, Andrew (4 March 2013). "McLaren poised to switch to Honda engines for 2015 season". BBC. Retrieved 7 January 2020. "McLAREN F1 TO BE POWERED BY MERCEDES-BENZ FROM 2021". McLaren Racing. Retrieved 28 September 2019. "McLaren agree extension to use Mercedes power until 2030". Formula 1. 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Ayello, Jim. "Arrow SPM splits with Honda, partners with McLaren, Chevrolet". The Indianapolis Star. "McLaren Racing buys majority share of Arrow McLaren SP". Sportsnet.ca. Retrieved 27 August 2021. "McLaren Racing - McLaren Racing to enter Extreme E in 2022". www.mclaren.com. Retrieved 11 June 2021. "McLAREN RACING TO COMPETE IN FORMULA E FROM SEASON NINE". McLaren Racing. 14 May 2022. "McLAREN IN FORMULA 1". mclaren.com. Archived from the original on 28 May 2008. Retrieved 12 April 2007. Nye 1988, p. 65 Henry 1999, p. 15 Henry, Alan (6 February 2009). "Obituary: Teddy Mayer". The Guardian. Retrieved 30 March 2010. "Case History". Corktree.tripod.com. Retrieved 3 September 2017. "1970 Austrian Grand Prix Entry list" (in German). Racing Sport Cars. "McLaren Formula 1 - McLaren & Papaya". Archived from the original on 26 March 2019. Retrieved 4 October 2018. Nye 1988, pp. 72–85 Henry 1999, p. 18 "Formula One Teams". Formula One. Retrieved 10 April 2010. "Mercedes Grand Prix team profile". BBC Sport. 5 March 2010. Retrieved 12 April 2010. "Formula One – hard and unforgiving". Bruce McLaren Trust. Archived from the original on 24 May 2010. Retrieved 29 March 2010. Taylor 2009, p. 14 "The World Factbook – New Zealand". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 23 June 2010. Henry 1999, p. 22 Hughes, Mark. "Clockwork Orange – McLaren Domination". Bruce McLaren Trust. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 8 April 2010. Nye 1988, p. 54 Tremayne & Hughes 1998, pp. 223–228 "M7A: McLaren's lucky number". Motor Sport. 84 (8). Stratfield. August 2008. "McLaren Team Profile". Formula1.com. Formula One. Archived from the original on 15 March 2015. Retrieved 24 March 2010. Henry 1999, p. 24 Henry 1999, p. 23–24 Henry 1999, p. 25 Henry 1999, p. 26 Nye 1988, p. 174 Henry 1999, Appendix 1 Donaldson, Gerald. "Emerson Fittipaldi". Formula1.com. Formula One. Retrieved 1 April 2010. Donaldson, Gerald. "Denny Hulme". Formula1.com. Formula One. Retrieved 1 April 2010. Donaldson, Gerald (1995). James Hunt: The Biography. CollinsWillow. p. 158. ISBN 0-00-218493-1. Henry 1999, p. 32 Donaldson, Gerald. "Niki Lauda". Formula1.com. Formula One. Retrieved 1 April 2010. Donaldson, Gerald (2003). Villeneuve: The Life of the Legendary Racing Driver (1st paperback ed.). Virgin Books. p. 80. ISBN 0-7535-0747-1. Henry 1999, p. 34 Jones, Bruce, ed. (1997). The Ultimate Encyclopedia of Formula One. Hodder & Stoughton. p. 43. ISBN 0-340-70783-6. Nye 1988, pp. 211–213 Henry 1999, p. 33 Donaldson, Gerald. "Alain Prost". Formula1.com. Formula One. Retrieved 1 April 2010. Henry, Alan (25 February 2003). "Motor Racing: Jaguar land Crocodile's brother". The Guardian. UK. p. 31. Retrieved 9 April 2007. Henry 1999, p. 37 Henry 1999, pp. 37–40 Widdows, Rob (May 2007). "Carbon natural". Motor Sport. 83 (5). Stratfield. Henry 1999, p. 41 Nye 1988, pp. 42–43 Nye 1988, pp. 48–49 Henry 1999, pp. 42–44 Blundsden, John (7 July 1988). "Dennis confronts the difficulties of his own success". The Times. UK. Nye 1988, p. 235 Henry 1999, p. 45 Henry 1999, p. 46 Henry 1999, p. 53 Henry 1999, pp. 57–63 Henry 1999, p. 63 Henry 1999, p. 78 Tremayne & Hughes 1998, pp. 198–199 Roebuck, Nigel (October 2008). "The best of enemies". Motor Sport. 84 (10). Stratfield. Henry 1999, p. 65 Rubython 2006, p. 170 Rubython 2006, p. 171 "1988 FIA Formula One World Championship". Formula1.com. Formula One. Archived from the original on 7 October 2014. Retrieved 2 April 2010. Henry 1999, pp. 70–71 Henry 1999, p. 71 Henry 1999, p. 73 "Ayrton Senna by Alain Prost". prostfan.com. Retrieved 4 April 2010. Henry 1999, pp. 76–77 Henry 1999, p. 80 "The changing face of F1". BBC Sport. 28 February 2005. Retrieved 4 April 2010. "Honda pulls out of Formula 1 racing". UPI. 11 September 1992. Retrieved 6 October 2023. Henry 1999, pp. 87–88 Rubython 2006, p. 282 Rubython 2006, pp. 288–289 Henry 1999, pp. 89–91 Rubython 2006, p. 290 "Andretti in Indy 500 return". BBC Sport. 27 March 2001. Retrieved 4 April 2010. Henry 1999, p. 95 "The TEAM – A SEASON WITH MCLAREN". British Film Institute Film & TV Database. Archived from the original on 31 January 2015. Retrieved 24 March 2010. Henry 1999, pp. 95–101 "McLaren and Peugeot part ways". motorsport.com. 25 October 1994. Archived from the original on 24 February 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2022. Allsop, Derick (24 May 1995). "Mansell faces retirement after McLaren exit". The Independent. UK. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2010. Henry 1999, p. 104 "Newey's magic touch". BBC Sport. 2 June 2001. Retrieved 27 March 2010. Wright, Peter (8 March 1998). "The 1998 Formula 1 cars". grandprix.com. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 13 April 2010. Bishop, Matt. "Pedal to Metal". The Best of F1 Racing 1996–2006. p. 66. Tremayne, David (29 March 1998). "Motor Racing: No brake in McLaren routine". The Independent. UK. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 27 March 2010. Tremayne & Hughes 1998, p. 232 "Hakkinen announces retirement". BBC Sport. 26 July 2002. Retrieved 7 April 2010. Benson, Andrew (23 December 2003). "Bold new dawn for McLaren". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 April 2010. "McLaren agree to release Montoya". BBC Sport. 11 July 2006. Retrieved 26 March 2010. "Ferrari reveal Raikkonen signing". BBC Sport. 10 September 2006. Retrieved 26 March 2010. Matchett, Steve (June 2007). "No-catch 22". F1 Racing. Haymarket Publishing. pp. 58–63. "Hamilton gets 2007 McLaren drive". BBC. 24 November 2006. Retrieved 30 March 2010. Moffitt, Alastair (20 December 2005). "Alonso to make shock switch from Renault to McLaren". The Independent. UK. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2007. "How Hamilton drove Alonso to the edge". BBC Sport. 16 September 2007. Retrieved 8 April 2010. "Hungarian Grand Prix 2007". BBC. 5 August 2007. Retrieved 8 April 2010. "McLaren hit with constructors' ban". BBC Sport. 13 September 2007. Retrieved 27 March 2010. Benson, Andrew (2 November 2007). "Alonso secures exit from McLaren". BBC Sport. Retrieved 2 November 2007. "Kovalainen to partner Hamilton at McLaren for 2008". Formula One. 14 December 2007. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 14 December 2007. Smith, Ben (8 September 2008). "World media bemused by Lewis Hamilton decision". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on 2 December 2008. Retrieved 21 March 2010. Eason, Kevin (16 January 2009). "Ron Dennis leaves McLaren in safe hands". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 11 November 2011. "McLaren given suspended race ban". BBC Sport. 29 April 2009. Retrieved 24 March 2010. "The incredible tale of McLaren and Mercedes' F1 split". The Race. 18 September 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021. Benson, Andrew (18 November 2009). "Button joins Hamilton at McLaren". BBC Sport. Retrieved 27 March 2010. "Lewis Hamilton and Felipe Massa: A season of flashpoints". TheGuardian.com. 30 October 2011. "Abu Dhabi GP: Lewis Hamilton says McLaren not good enough". BBC Sport. 4 November 2012. Retrieved 5 November 2012. "Lewis Hamilton wins Italian Grand Prix as Button and Vettel retire". TheGuardian.com. 9 September 2012. Benson, Andrew (28 September 2012). "Lewis Hamilton to leave McLaren after signing Mercedes contract". BBC Sport. Retrieved 29 September 2012. "Lewis Hamilton: Sergio Perez joins McLaren from Sauber". BBC Sport. 28 September 2012. Retrieved 29 September 2012. "McLaren set to launch MP4-28 on January 31". ESPN F1. 20 December 2012. Retrieved 7 January 2013. Benson, Andrew. "BBC Sport – McLaren unveil MP4-29 car for 2014 Formula 1 season". BBC Sport. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "Data Search Results". chicanef1.com. Retrieved 31 January 2015. "2015 Results - Sunday Tab". grandprix.com.au. Archived from the original on 16 March 2015. "Jenson Button proud of first McLaren 2015 F1 points in Monaco GP". Autosport. 25 May 2015. "Race Notes – Sunday - British GP – F1 2015". Grandprix.com. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 5 July 2015. "Hungarian Grand Prix 2015 - live". 26 July 2015. Archived from the original on 28 July 2015. Retrieved 26 July 2015. Ramsey, Jonathon (31 July 2015). "Race Recap: 2015 Hungarian Grand Prix is Magyar for 'What a race!'". AutoBlog. Retrieved 26 July 2015. Benson, Andrew (22 February 2017). "Lando Norris: McLaren sign British teenager to young driver programme". BBC Sport. Retrieved 22 February 2017. "Monaco Grand Prix: Jenson Button feeling no pressure on Formula 1 return". BBC Sport. 24 May 2017. Retrieved 5 November 2017. "McLaren-Honda split after three years of troubled partnership". BBC Sport. 15 September 2017. Retrieved 15 September 2017. Galloway, James (21 September 2017). "McLaren-Honda reunion a 'disaster' for credibility, says Eric Boullier". Sky Sports. Retrieved 22 September 2017. "Alonso to race on with McLaren in 2018". Formula1.com. Retrieved 5 November 2017. Elizalde, Pablo. "Stoffel Vandoorne confirmed at McLaren for 2018 Formula 1 season". Autosport.com. Retrieved 5 November 2017. "Lando Norris: McLaren promote young Briton to test and reserve driver for 2018". BBC Sport. 6 November 2017. Retrieved 6 November 2017. "Proud Alonso targets Red Bull after fifth-place finish". Formula1.com. Retrieved 30 March 2018. "McLaren confirms Fernando Alonso decision". McLaren. 14 August 2018. Archived from the original on 14 August 2018. Retrieved 16 August 2018. "Carlos Sainz to race for McLaren from 2019". McLaren. 16 August 2018. Archived from the original on 9 May 2019. Retrieved 16 August 2018. "Lando Norris to drive for McLaren in 2019". McLaren. 3 September 2018. Archived from the original on 3 September 2018. Retrieved 3 September 2018. "2018 F1 qualifying data". www.racefans.net. Retrieved 3 February 2020. "Hamilton loses podium after penalty for Albon clash". www.motorsport.com. 17 November 2019. Retrieved 1 February 2020. "Carlos and Lando will continue with the team next year". McLaren. 9 July 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2022. Batchelor, Joseph (2 June 2020). "All eyes on Austria as F1 season set to start in Spielberg". Red Bull. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "'Speechless' Norris thought he'd 'fudged' chance of maiden podium finish". Formula 1. 5 July 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2022. Wood, Ryan (6 July 2020). "Norris 'proud' to snatch third place with fastest lap on final lap". Motorsport Week. Retrieved 31 July 2022. Partridge, Jarrod (7 September 2020). "Carlos Sainz happy with second at 2020 Italian Grand Prix". F1 Chronicle. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "2020 Constructor Standings". Formula 1. Retrieved 21 January 2021. "2020 Driver Standings". Formula 1. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "McLaren F1 To Be Powered By Mercedes-Benz From 2021". McLaren.com/racing. McLaren Technology Group. 27 September 2019. Retrieved 27 September 2019. "Why McLaren and Mercedes have joined forces again for 2021". F1. Formula One World Championship. 29 September 2019. Retrieved 29 September 2019. "McLaren swoop for Daniel Ricciardo as Carlos Sainz's replacement for 2021". F1. Formula One World Championship. 15 May 2020. Retrieved 14 May 2020. "Sainz confirmed as Leclerc's Ferrari team mate for 2021". F1. Formula One World Championship. 14 May 2020. Retrieved 14 May 2020. "2021 Italian Grand Prix race report and highlights: Ricciardo leads stunning McLaren 1-2 at Monza after Verstappen and Hamilton collide again". www.formula1.com. Retrieved 12 September 2021. Beaver, Dan (19 May 2021). "Lando Norris signs extension with McLaren F1 for '2022 and beyond'". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on 31 July 2022. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "McLaren Racing Statement - Daniel Ricciardo tests positive for covid-19". McLaren. 11 March 2022. Retrieved 31 July 2022. Cline, Ashley (12 March 2022). "McLaren faces challenges on second day of testing in Bahrain". The Checkered Flag. Retrieved 31 July 2022. McDonagh, Connor (14 March 2022). "Norris bemoans 'not ideal' Bahrain F1 test after brake issues". Crash. Retrieved 31 July 2022. Saha, Rishika (20 March 2022). "McLaren fails to qualify into Q3 for the first time since the Turkish Grand Prix in 2020". First Sportz. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "Norris hails 'amazing' McLaren performance after consecutive Imola podiums". Formula 1. 24 April 2022. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "'I'm not here to let everyone past' – Norris defends collision with Leclerc after 'disappointing' DNF in Sao Paulo | Formula 1®". www.formula1.com. Retrieved 16 November 2022. "'Lap one incidents are brutal' – Magnussen and Ricciardo reflect on race-ending collision in Sao Paulo | Formula 1®". www.formula1.com. Retrieved 16 November 2022. Golding, Nick (28 May 2022). "McLaren unhappy after Ricciardo 'simply struggled'". Formula 1 News. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "Daniel Ricciardo has McLaren contract but 'mechanisms' for 2023 as F1 'rumours grow louder'". Sky Sports. 7 June 2022. Retrieved 31 July 2022. Straw, Edd (21 July 2022). "Who Ricciardo was targeting with statement on his F1 future". The Race. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "Daniel Ricciardo to leave McLaren at end of 2022 season as team eye wantaway Alpine driver Oscar Piastri". Sky Sports. Retrieved 24 August 2022. "Decision of the Contract Recognition Board 02/09/2022". Federation Internationale de l'Automobile. 2 September 2022. Retrieved 3 September 2022. "Piastri to drive for McLaren as Alpine lose appeal". BBC Sport. Retrieved 2 September 2022. "What is McLaren60?". McLaren Racing. McLaren Racing Ltd. 8 February 2023. Archived from the original on 9 February 2023. Retrieved 9 February 2023. Lyndon-Griffiths, Hamilton (13 February 2023). "McLaren presents 2023 F1 car and livery for 60th celebratory year". Read Motorsport. Retrieved 4 July 2023. "How a 15mm difference triggered McLaren's F1 2023 woes". Autosport.com. 7 March 2023. Retrieved 23 March 2023. Noble, Jonathan (24 February 2023). "McLaren failed to hit development targets with 2023 F1 car". motorsport.com. Retrieved 23 March 2023. Benson, Andrew. "Formula 1: McLaren technical director James Key leaves as new team structure revealed". BBC.com. BBC SPORT. Retrieved 23 March 2023. "McLaren Formula 1 Team Announces Organisational Changes". mclaren.com. McLaren. Retrieved 23 March 2023. "McLaren announce signing of Rob Marshall from Red Bull as new technical chief | Formula 1®". www.formula1.com. Retrieved 22 November 2023. Richards, Giles (2 April 2023). "Max Verstappen wins Australian GP as chaotic F1 race finishes under safety car". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. "Official Grid – Who starts where for Sunday's Spanish Grand Prix | Formula 1®". www.formula1.com. Retrieved 4 June 2023. Kalinauckas, Alex (4 June 2023). "F1 Spanish GP: Verstappen breezes to win by over 24s from Hamilton". motorsport.com. Retrieved 4 June 2023. Valantine, Henry (30 June 2023). "Ferrari, McLaren lead the way with key updates as Austrian GP upgrades unveiled". PlanetF1. Retrieved 3 July 2023. Gale, Ewan (29 June 2023). "Piastri misses out on McLaren upgrade". RacingNews365. Retrieved 3 July 2023. Kew, Matt (1 July 2023). "How Norris "lost everything" in Austrian GP F1 sprint race". www.motorsport.com. Retrieved 3 July 2023. Noble, Jonathan (2 July 2023). "Norris explains why anti-stall kicked in during Austria F1 sprint race". www.motorsport.com. Retrieved 3 July 2023. "Norris hails McLaren as updates aid P4 qualifying charge in Austria despite 'messing up' lap | Formula 1®". www.formula1.com. 30 June 2023. Retrieved 3 July 2023. "Austrian GP results confirmed as Sainz and Hamilton demoted". www.formula1.com. 3 July 2023. Retrieved 3 July 2023. Boxall-Legge, Jake (8 July 2023). "F1 British GP: Verstappen on pole as McLaren drivers star". www.motorsport.com. Retrieved 8 July 2023. Bradley, Charles (9 July 2023). "F1 race results: Max Verstappen wins British GP". www.motorsport.com. Retrieved 10 July 2023. Boxall-Legge, Jake (23 July 2023). "F1 Hungarian GP: Verstappen wins by 33s to give Red Bull record-breaking victory". www.motorsport.com. Retrieved 23 July 2023. Chokhani, Darshan (25 July 2023). "Norris reflects on another podium; Piastri suffered floor damage". FormulaRapida.net. Retrieved 29 July 2023. Foster, Michelle (29 July 2023). "Belgian Grand Prix: Max Verstappen on pole in delayed Sprint Shootout". PlanetF1. Retrieved 29 July 2023. Richards, Giles (29 July 2023). "Max Verstappen wins wet Belgian F1 GP sprint race with Oscar Piastri second". The Observer. ISSN 0029-7712. Archived from the original on 30 July 2023. Retrieved 30 July 2023. "Sainz credits key 'Carlando' moment for preventing him being 'dead meat' on his way to Singapore victory". Formula One. 17 September 2023. Retrieved 14 December 2023. Sullivan, Matthew (24 September 2023). "'Pretty special': Oscar Piastri claims maiden podium at Japanese Grand Prix". news.com.au. Retrieved 24 September 2023. "Fastest F1 pit stop: McLaren just set the world record with this speedy stop". USA TODAY. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Explained: Why Lewis Hamilton and Charles Leclerc were disqualified from the 2023 United States GP | Formula 1®". www.formula1.com. Retrieved 22 November 2023. Goddard, Benjamin (18 March 2023). "Lando Norris makes candid admission on 'whole new engine' on McLaren". Express.co.uk. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Ricciardo and Piastri react to opening lap 'chaos' in Brazil". www.formula1.com. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "The 'painful' culprit behind McLaren's sudden fall from grace". The Race. 18 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. Nye 1988, p. 36 Taylor 2009, p. 301 Nye 1988, pp. 125–128 Nye 1988, pp. 136–137 Nye 1988, p. 143 Nye 1988, p. 144 Nye 1988, pp. 146–148 Noble, Jonathan; Straw, Edd (12 April 2017). "Fernando Alonso to race in 2017 Indianapolis 500". autosport.com. Retrieved 12 April 2017. "Dixon claims third 500 pole, Alonso fifth". GPUpdate.net. Archived from the original on 1 June 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2017. "Alonso says he will "definitely" return to the Indy 500". motorsport.com. 28 May 2017. Retrieved 1 June 2017. Doyel, Gregg (28 May 2017). "Doyel: Fernando Alonso won everything but the race". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved 22 November 2017. Speedway, Andrew Lawrence at the Indianapolis Motor (29 May 2017). "Fernando Alonso's Indy 500 debut was superb but his engine let him down again". The Guardian. Retrieved 1 June 2017. "Indy 500: Fernando Alonso retires after brilliant debut race as Takuma Sato wins". BBC Sport. 28 May 2017. Retrieved 1 June 2017. "McLaren returns to the Indy 500 with Fernando Alonso in 2019". mclaren.com. Archived from the original on 11 November 2018. Retrieved 10 November 2018. "Alonso, McLaren to use Chevrolet power at 2019 Indy 500". IndyCar.com. Retrieved 4 December 2018. Beer, Matt (19 May 2019). "Fernando Alonso and McLaren fail to qualify for Indianapolis 500". Autosport.com. Malsher, David (9 August 2019). "McLaren returns to IndyCar full-time partnering with Arrow SPM". Motorsport.com. Motorsport Network. Retrieved 9 August 2019. Diffey, Leigh. "Long Beach 'where it all started' for Zak Brown". Youtube. NBC Sports Network. Retrieved 1 October 2021. "McLaren Racing - McLaren Racing opens new IndyCar chapter with agreement to acquire majority stake in AMSP". Pyrson, Mike (11 January 2022). "Juan Pablo Montoya Returning to Indy 500 in 2022". Autoweek. Hearst Autos. Retrieved 23 January 2022. Cavin, Curt. "ROSSI READY TO CHALLENGE FOR CHAMPIONSHIP WITH AMSP MOVE". Indycar.com. Indycar Group. Retrieved 3 June 2022. Cavin, Curt. "ROSSI READY TO CHALLENGE FOR CHAMPIONSHIP WITH AMSP MOVE". Indycar.com. Indycar Group. Retrieved 3 June 2022. Pruett, Marshall (4 October 2022). "AMSP appoints Barnhart as GM; Ward as racing director". RACER. Retrieved 4 October 2022. "Triple Crown Liveries Revealed". www.mclaren.com. Retrieved 1 June 2023. Wood, Will (14 April 2023). "McLaren unveil special Indy 500 'Triple Crown' liveries · RaceFans". RaceFans. Retrieved 1 June 2023. Ryan, Nate (5 September 2023). "Felix Rosenqvist joining Meyer Shank Racing for 2024 as Simon Pagenaud leaves team". NBC Sports. Retrieved 9 September 2023. Martin, Bruce (8 September 2023). "Arrow McLaren Rounds Out 2024 IndyCar Lineup With David Malukas". Forbes. Retrieved 9 September 2023. "McLAREN RACING AND NEOM ANNOUNCE STRATEGIC TITLE PARTNERSHIP". McLaren Racing. 27 June 2022. "McLaren Racing - McLaren Racing to enter Extreme E in 2022". www.mclaren.com. Retrieved 20 August 2021. "McLaren Racing to enter Extreme E in 2022". Extreme E - The Electric Odyssey. 11 June 2021. Retrieved 13 February 2024. "McLaren Racing signs Emma Gilmour for maiden Extreme E tilt". www.motorsport.com. 3 November 2021. Retrieved 3 November 2021. "Emma Gilmour makes history as first female driver to podium for iconic race team McLaren". Stuff. 28 November 2022. "First woman podium winner for McLaren". Twitter. 28 November 2022. "10 reasons to be excited for 2023". www.mclaren.com. 23 January 2023. Retrieved 14 May 2023. "Veloce Racing take the win in Round 4 at the Hydro X Prix". Extreme E - The Electric Odyssey. 14 May 2023. Retrieved 14 May 2023. Dominik, Wilde (15 September 2023). "McLaren's Gilmour suffers broken rib, concussion in Extreme E spill". RACER. Retrieved 16 September 2023. Wilde, Dominik (16 September 2023). "Acciona Sainz team wins opening Island X Prix". RACER. Retrieved 17 September 2023. Wilde, Dominik (16 September 2023). "McLaren withdraws from Island X Prix II after second roll". RACER. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "NEOM McLaren Extreme E Team announce Hedda Hosås to replace recovering Emma Gilmour for Copper X Prix". McLaren. 21 November 2023. Retrieved 21 November 2023. "Emma Gilmour and Tanner Foust to depart the NEOM McLaren Extreme E Team". McLaren. 13 December 2023. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "NEOM McLaren Extreme E Team announce Cristina Gutiérrez and Mattias Ekström". McLaren. 1 February 2024. Retrieved 1 February 2024. "Rosberg X Racing win epic opening round of Season 4". Extreme E. 17 February 2024. Retrieved 17 February 2024. Baldwin, Alan (12 December 2020). "McLaren interested in Formula E once Gen3 car comes in". Reuters. Retrieved 11 January 2021. Kew, Matt (11 January 2021). "McLaren signs option to join Formula E agreement from 2022". Autosport. Motorsport Network. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "McLAREN RACING TO BE POWERED BY NISSAN FORMULA E GEN3 POWERTRAINS FROM SEASON 9". McLaren Racing. 23 June 2022. "Rene Rast returns to Formula E with McLaren Racing from Season 9". FIA Formula E. 23 August 2022. Retrieved 23 August 2022. "McLaren Racing - NEOM McLaren Formula E team announces its full Season 9 driver line-up". www.mclaren.com. 29 November 2022. "Di Grassi seals pole in Mexico City on Mahindra debut". The Official Home of Formula E. 14 January 2023. "Dominant Dennis becomes first winner of GEN3 era in Mexico City". The Official Home of Formula E. 14 January 2023. Western, Yasmin (14 January 2023). "Dominant Dennis takes Mexico City E-Prix win for Andretti". Motorsport Week. "Buemi denies McLaren to end four-year pole drought". The Race. 27 January 2023. "McLaren Racing - 2023 Diriyah E-Prix Race 1". www.mclaren.com. 27 January 2023. "Hughes seals maiden Julius Baer Pole Position for Round 3 in Diriyah". The Official Home of Formula E. 28 January 2023. "Wehrlein doubles up in Diriyah to take standings lead". The Official Home of Formula E. 28 January 2023. Mackley, Stefan (6 May 2023). "Monaco E-Prix: Hughes handed pole after Fenestraz penalised". www.autosport.com. Retrieved 6 May 2023. Khorounzhiy, Valentin (6 May 2023). "Cassidy wins in Monaco from ninth, takes Formula E points lead". The Race. Retrieved 15 May 2023. "NEOM McLaren Formula E Team unveil world first generative AI-designed livery in motorsport". SportBusiness. 28 July 2023. Archived from the original on 28 July 2023. Retrieved 29 July 2023. "NEOM McLaren Formula E Team unveils world first AI-designed racing car". Al Arabiya English. 28 July 2023. Archived from the original on 28 July 2023. Retrieved 29 July 2023. Mackley, Stefan (17 August 2023). "Hughes re-signs with McLaren Formula E team as Rast leaves". www.motorsport.com. Retrieved 17 August 2023. "NEOM McLaren Formula E Team Announces Sam Bird". McLaren.com. Retrieved 22 August 2023. Wyrich, Sandrine (16 March 2024). "Formula E Sao Paulo E-Prix - Sam Bird produces stunning last-lap overtake to win race in Brazil". Eurosport. Retrieved 17 March 2024. Lloyd, Daniel (22 April 2021). "McLaren Clarifies Position on LMDh Evaluations – Sportscar365". sportscar365.com. Retrieved 3 November 2021. "McLaren chasing engine partner for WEC effort". Speedcafe. 6 August 2021. Retrieved 3 November 2021. Development, PodBean. "MP 1351: Catching Up With Zak Brown | The Marshall Pruett Podcast". marshallpruett.podbean.com. Retrieved 24 December 2022. Nye 1988, p. 92 Nye 1988, p. 86 Nye 1988, Appendix 2 Nye 1988, p. 76 Nye 1988, pp. 128–213 "McLaren C8". Tutto McLaren. Retrieved 27 September 2013. "McLAREN F1 GTR RACE CAR – INTRODUCTION". mclarenautomotive.com. Archived from the original on 11 July 2008. Retrieved 9 April 2010. "New McLaren MP4-12C GT3 breaks cover". McLaren GT. McLaren Group. 11 March 2011. Archived from the original on 15 October 2011. Retrieved 22 November 2011. "McLaren Artura GT4 to be track ready for '23". Motor Sport Magazine. Retrieved 7 August 2022. "McLaren launches one-make series for unrestricted Artura racer | GRR". www.goodwood.com. Retrieved 7 August 2022. Kilbey, Stephen (6 October 2023). "McLaren confirms United Autosports as its LMGT3 customer team". RACER. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 6 October 2023. James, Richard S. (9 October 2023). "More McLarens racing globally the goal for Pfaff-McLaren partnership". RACER. Archived from the original on 11 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "2024 FIA WEC entry list features 14 manufacturers and record number of Hypercars". FIA WEC. 27 November 2023. Archived from the original on 27 November 2023. Retrieved 28 November 2023. "Two McLaren LMGT3 entries confirmed for 2024 FIA WEC". United Autosports. Archived from the original on 27 November 2023. Retrieved 28 November 2023. Benson, Andrew (13 December 2020). "McLaren Racing to sell third of company to US-based investors". BBC Sport. Retrieved 12 July 2023. "DaimlerChrysler buys into F1 team". The Guardian. 4 February 2000. Retrieved 7 April 2010. "Daimler takes large stake in McLaren". The Independent. 11 July 1999. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 19 October 2021. Noble, Jonathan (9 January 2007). "Bahrain company buys into McLaren". Autosport. Haymarket Media. Retrieved 11 January 2007. Benson, Andrew (16 November 2009). "Mercedes takes over Brawn F1 team". BBC Sport. Retrieved 23 November 2009. "McLaren reclaim shares from Daimler". The Guardian. 18 March 2010. Retrieved 19 October 2021. Bryant, Tom (16 April 2009). "Ron Dennis steps down from F1 team McLaren". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 March 2010. Holt, Sarah (16 January 2009). "Dennis to quit as McLaren F1 boss". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 April 2009. "Ron Dennis replaces Martin Whitmarsh as CEO in coup". BBC Sport. 16 January 2014. Retrieved 22 January 2014. "Ex-team principal Martin Whitmarsh formally parts ways with McLaren". 26 August 2014. Retrieved 10 September 2014. Benson, Andrew (12 December 2014). "Dennis seeks control of McLaren". Retrieved 19 October 2021. Benson, Andrew (30 June 2017). "How Ron Dennis lost control of McLaren". BBC Sport. Retrieved 19 October 2021. "Ron Dennis: McLaren chairman fails with High Court bid". 11 November 2016. Retrieved 27 April 2019. "Ron Dennis sells his shares in McLaren companies". 30 June 2017. Retrieved 27 April 2019. Benson, Andrew (6 March 2014). "McLaren: Ron Dennis on his restructuring of the team". BBC Sport. Retrieved 10 March 2014. Benson, Andrew (29 January 2014). "Eric Boullier appointed racing director at McLaren after Lotus exit". BBC Sport. Retrieved 10 March 2014. "McLaren confirms Zak Brown as new executive director". Motorsport.com. Retrieved 21 November 2016. "Eric Boullier quits McLaren, Gil de Ferran appointed Sporting Director". skysports.com. Retrieved 4 July 2018. "McLaren Formula 1 - Getting to know: Andreas Seidl". www.mclaren.com. Archived from the original on 9 May 2019. Retrieved 10 May 2019. "McLaren Racing - McLaren Formula 1 appoints Andrea Stella as new Team Principal with immediate effect". www.mclaren.com. 13 December 2022. "Andreas Seidl leaves McLaren to join Sauber ahead of Audi transition; Andrea Stella appointed McLaren team principal". Sky Sports. 13 December 2022. "Highlights". mclaren.com. Archived from the original on 21 January 2015. Retrieved 1 May 2010. Allen, James (30 December 2009). "F1 in the Future – Simulation and Gaming". James Allen on F1. Archived from the original on 3 January 2010. Retrieved 1 May 2010. "What is the McLaren Driver Development programme". www.mclaren.com. 19 October 2023. Retrieved 27 October 2023. Tremayne & Hughes 1998, p. 114 Collings 2004, pp. 116–117 Collings 2004, pp. 145–148 Collings 2004, pp. 217–224 "New deal ends F1 breakaway fears". BBC Sport. 1 August 2009. Retrieved 26 March 2010. "World Motor Sport Council: Decision" (PDF). Marcas de coches. 13 September 2007. Retrieved 1 May 2010. "The Colours of McLaren". The Bruce McLaren Movie Official Website. Retrieved 26 March 2010. von Wegner, Alexander (1999). "Grand Prix Motor Racing". Speed and Power. Parragon. p. 77. ISBN 0-7525-3144-1. "Orange livery for interim McLaren". Formula1.com. Formula One. 9 January 2006. Archived from the original on 6 August 2014. Retrieved 26 March 2010. Tremayne & Hughes 1998, pp. 238–248 Tremayne & Hughes 1998, p. 246 Taylor 2009, pp. 98–101 "Hugo Boss". mclaren.com. Archived from the original on 18 December 2010. Retrieved 26 March 2010. Tremayne & Hughes 1998, p. 250 "Hugo Boss switches from McLaren to Mercedes". GPUpdate.net. JHED Media BV. 1 October 2014. Retrieved 1 February 2015. "McLaren Seasons". Grand Prix Archive. Crash Media Group. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Retrieved 13 April 2010. "Hill linked again with McLaren". The Independent. 28 August 1996. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2010. Tremayne, David (1 August 2005). "Minority stall as tobacco ban starts". The Independent. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 26 March 2010. "McLaren seal deal with Vodafone". BBC Sport. 14 December 2005. Retrieved 12 April 2007. Collantine, Keith (14 March 2013). "McLaren to lose Vodafone title sponsorship". F1 Fanatic. Keith Collantine. Retrieved 17 March 2013. Fildes, Nic (14 March 2013). "Bahrain violence convinces Vodafone to end its F1 deal". The Times. Retrieved 17 March 2013. "McLaren set to lose £20m in sponsorship next year". Telegraph.co.uk. 4 September 2015. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. "Richard Mille". MCLAREN-HONDA Formula 1 team. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "McLaren". Formula1.com. Retrieved 24 January 2018. Cooper, Adam (19 December 2017). "McLaren won't have a title sponsor in 2018 - Brown". www.motorsport.com. Retrieved 4 July 2023. Smith, Luke (1 March 2018). "McLaren not looking for traditional F1 title sponsor". Crash. Retrieved 4 July 2023. Nye 1988, Appendix 1 "History of McLaren – Timeline – The 2000s". mclaren.com. Archived from the original on 3 January 2008. Retrieved 29 December 2007. Schlegelmilch, Rainer W.; Lehbrink, Hartmut (1999). McLaren Formula 1. Könemann. p. 98. ISBN 3-8290-0945-3. "Formula One Teams Profile: McLaren". espnstar.com. ESPN. Archived from the original on 29 April 2007. Retrieved 12 April 2007. "McLaren announce new car name". Formula1.com. Formula One World Championship Ltd. 3 February 2017. Retrieved 3 February 2017. Mitchell, Scott (11 February 2019). "Former BAR team owner BAT back into Formula 1 with McLaren deal". Autosport.com. Retrieved 11 February 2019. "McLaren removes British American Tobacco slogan in Melbourne". www.racefans.net. 14 March 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2020. Noble, Jonathan (24 July 2020). "McLaren set for F1 reunion with Gulf Oil in new sponsorship deal". Autosport.com. "McLaren Racing - Gulf partners with McLaren to announce multi-year partnership covering F1 and luxury supercars". www.mclaren.com. 28 July 2020. "McLaren Racing - McLaren Racing and Gulf Oil International unveil limited edition Monaco Grand Prix livery". www.mclaren.com. 16 May 2021. "McLaren Racing announces OKX as a Primary Partner of McLaren Formula 1 Team". McLaren Racing. Retrieved 7 May 2022. "McLaren Racing announces expansion with Official Primary Partner OKX". www.mclaren.com. 30 March 2023. "McLaren to run one-off 'Triple Crown' livery at Monaco Grand Prix as part of 60th anniversary celebrations | Formula 1®". www.formula1.com. 23 May 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2023. Alex, Kalinauckas (23 May 2023). "McLaren reveals 'Triple Crown' livery for Monaco and Spanish F1 races". www.motorsport.com. Retrieved 1 June 2023. "Triple Crown Liveries Revealed". www.mclaren.com. Retrieved 1 June 2023. Hall, Sam (3 July 2023). "McLaren unveils throwback chrome F1 livery for British GP". www.motorsport.com. Retrieved 4 July 2023. Saunders, Nate (3 July 2023). "McLaren adds chrome throwback to British GP livery". ESPN.com. Retrieved 4 July 2023. ESPN (13 September 2023). "McLaren runs 'Stealth Mode' livery for Singapore, Japan". ESPN.com. Retrieved 24 September 2023. "McLaren unveil 'Stealth Mode' livery for Singapore and Japan". www.formula1.com. 13 September 2023. Retrieved 24 September 2023. "McLaren Racing and Vuse reveal one-off livery designed by emerging UAE-based artist". www.mclaren.com. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "McLaren Racing and Vuse unveil special Abu Dhabi Grand Prix livery designed by emerging artist". www.mclaren.com. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Applying a livery against the clock". www.mclaren.com. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "McLaren – Seasons". StatsF1. Retrieved 26 August 2018. "Hall of Fame - the World Champions". Formula1.com. Formula One World Championship Limited. Retrieved 26 July 2015. Collings, Timothy (2004) [2001]. The Piranha Club (Revised and updated ed.). Virgin Books. ISBN 0-7535-0965-2. Henry, Alan (1999). McLaren: Formula 1 Racing Team. Haynes. ISBN 1-85960-425-0. Nye, Doug (1988) [1984]. McLaren: The Grand Prix, Can-Am and Indy Cars (New ed.). Guild Publishing. ISBN 0-905138-54-6. Rubython, Tom (14 October 2006). The Life of Senna (1st softback ed.). BusinessF1 Books. ISBN 0-9546857-3-3. Taylor, William (2009) [2008]. Tremayne, David (ed.). McLaren – The Cars 1964–2008 (Second ed.). Coterie Press. ISBN 978-1-902351-34-6. Tremayne, David; Hughes, Mark (1998). The Concise Encyclopedia of Formula One. Dempsey Parr. ISBN 1-84084-037-4. All Formula One World Championship results are taken from Formula1.com. Formula One Administration. Media related to McLaren (racing team) at Wikimedia Commons Official website