This is a list of the prime ministers of Poland. The Prime Minister of Poland is both the leader of the cabinet and the head of government of Poland. Colour key (for political parties):   National-Democratic Party (SDN)   Party of the National Right (SPN)   Independent Colour key (for political parties):   Polish Socialist Party (PPS) Note: Until 11 November, Daszyński was Prime Minister in the Polish People's Republic, based at Lublin, in the territory occupied by Austrian troops. On 11 November, he was invited to form a national government but failed and resigned three days later. Colour key (for political parties):   Polish Socialist Party (PPS)   Polish People's Party "Piast" (PSL Piast)   Popular National Union (ZLN)   Polish Christian Democratic Party (PSChD)   Party of the National Right (SPN)   Nonpartisan Bloc for Cooperation with the Government (BBWR)   Independent After the German conquest of Poland, a Polish government-in-exile was formed under the protection of France and Britain. The government was recognised by the United Kingdom and the United States until 5 July 1945, when the Western Allies accepted Joseph Stalin's communist government. By the end of 1946, the government-in-exile had lost recognition by all but a handful of independent nations. Despite this, it continued in London until the election of Lech Wałęsa as President of the Republic of Poland in December 1990. In 1954, one group within the government-in-exile opposed the continuation of August Zaleski as President of the government-in-exile beyond the end of his seven-year term. They established the Council of National Unity, vested the powers of the President in the Rada Trzech (three-man council), and appointed their own government, the Executive for National Unity. After the death of Zaleski in 1972, the Council of National Unity dissolved and ceded its powers to Zaleski's successor Stanisław Ostrowski. Roman Odzierzyński (1954–1955) Adam Ciołkosz (1956–1959) Witold Czerwiński (1959–1963) Adam Ciołkosz (1963 – December 1966) Jan Starzewski (December 1966 – 1967) Kazimierz Sabbat (1967 – 8 July 1972) Colour key (for political parties):   Polish Socialist Party (PPS)   Polish United Workers' Party (PZPR)   Solidarity Citizens' Committee (KO‘S') Political parties Christian Democrats   Polish People's Party (2)   Solidarity Electoral Action (1) Conservatives   Centre Agreement / Law and Justice (5) Liberals   Solidarity Citizens' Committee / Democratic Union (2)   Liberal Democratic Congress (1)   Civic Platform (3) Social Democrats   Social Democracy / Democratic Left Alliance (4) 1 Invited to form a government by the President, but failed to form a government and resigned List of heads of state of Poland List of Polish monarchs President of Poland Roman Wapiński, Władysław Sikorski, Polski Słownik Biograficzny, zeszyt 154 (T. XXXVII/3), 1997, p. 474 The Chancellery of the Prime Minister