Emmanuel Jean-Michel Frédéric Macron (French: [emanɥɛl makʁɔ̃]; born 21 December 1977) is a French politician who has been President of France since 2017. Macron is ex officio one of the two Co-Princes of Andorra. He previously was Minister of Economics, Industry and Digital Affairs under President François Hollande from 2014 to 2016, and as Deputy Secretary-General to the President from 2012 to 2014. He is a founding member of Renaissance, a centrist political party. Born in Amiens, Macron studied philosophy at Paris Nanterre University, later completing a master's degree in public affairs at Sciences Po and graduating from the École nationale d'administration in 2004. He worked as a senior civil servant at the Inspectorate General of Finances and later became an investment banker at Rothschild & Co. Appointed Élysée deputy secretary-general by President François Hollande shortly after his election in May 2012, Macron was one of Hollande's senior advisers. Appointed Minister of Economics, Industry and Digital Affairs in August 2014 in the second Valls government, he led a number of business-friendly reforms. He resigned in August 2016, in order to launch his 2017 presidential campaign. A member of the Socialist Party from 2006 to 2009, he ran in the election under the banner of En Marche, a centrist and pro-European political movement he founded in April 2016. Partly as a result of the Fillon affair which sank the Republican nominee François Fillon's chances, Macron topped the ballot in the first round of voting, and was elected President of France on 7 May 2017 with 66.1% of the vote in the second round, defeating Marine Le Pen of the National Front. At the age of 39, he became the youngest president in French history. In the 2017 legislative election in June, his party, renamed La République En Marche! (LREM), secured a majority in the National Assembly. He appointed Édouard Philippe as prime minister. When Philippe resigned in 2020, Macron appointed Jean Castex to replace him. Macron was elected to a second term in the 2022 presidential election, again defeating Le Pen, thus becoming the first French presidential candidate to win reelection since Jacques Chirac defeated Jean-Marie Le Pen in 2002. However, in the 2022 legislative election, his centrist coalition lost its absolute majority, resulting in a hung parliament and the formation of France's first minority government since the fall of the Bérégovoy government in 1993. Macron's current prime minister is Gabriel Attal, youngest head of government in French history and first openly gay man to hold the office, whom he appointed in January 2024 to replace Élisabeth Borne, the second female Prime Minister of France, after a major government crisis. During his presidency, Macron has overseen several reforms to labour laws, taxation, and pensions; and has pursued a renewable energy transition. Dubbed "president of the rich" by political opponents, increasing protests against his domestic reforms and demanding his resignation marked the first years of his presidency, culminating in 2018–2020 with the yellow vests protests and the pension reform strike. From 2020, he led France's response to the COVID-19 pandemic and vaccination rollout. In 2023, the government of his prime minister, Élisabeth Borne, passed legislation raising the retirement age from 62 to 64; the pension reforms proved controversial and led to public sector strikes and violent protests. In foreign policy, he called for reforms to the European Union (EU) and signed bilateral treaties with Italy and Germany. Macron conducted €42 billion in trade and business agreements with China during the China–United States trade war and oversaw a dispute with Australia and the United States over the AUKUS security pact. He continued Opération Chammal in the war against the Islamic State and joined in the international condemnation of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. Macron was born on 21 December 1977 in Amiens. He is the son of Françoise Macron (née Noguès), a physician, and Jean-Michel Macron, professor of neurology at the University of Picardy. The couple divorced in 2010. He has two siblings, Laurent, born in 1979, and Estelle, born in 1982. Françoise and Jean-Michel's first child was stillborn. The Macron family legacy is traced back to the village of Authie, Picardy. One of his paternal great-grandfathers, George William Robertson, was English, and was born in Bristol, United Kingdom. His maternal grandparents, Jean and Germaine Noguès (née Arribet), are from the Pyrenean town of Bagnères-de-Bigorre, Gascony. He commonly visited Bagnères-de-Bigorre to visit his grandmother Germaine, whom he called "Manette". Macron associates his enjoyment of reading and his leftward political leanings to Germaine, who, after coming from a modest upbringing of a stationmaster father and a housekeeping mother, became a teacher then a principal, and died in 2013. Although raised in a non-religious family, Macron was baptised a Catholic at his own request at age 12; he is agnostic today. Macron was educated mainly at the Jesuit institute Lycée la Providence in Amiens before his parents sent him to finish his last year of school at the elite Lycée Henri-IV in Paris, where he completed the high school curriculum and the undergraduate program with a "Bac S, Mention Très bien". At the same time, he was nominated for the "Concours général" (most selective national level high school competition) in French literature and received his diploma for his piano studies at Amiens Conservatory. His parents sent him to Paris due to their alarm at the bond he had formed with Brigitte Auzière, a married teacher with three children at Jésuites de la Providence, who later became his wife. In Paris, Macron twice failed to gain entry to the École normale supérieure. He instead studied philosophy at the University of Paris-Ouest Nanterre La Défense, obtaining a DEA degree (a master level degree), with a thesis on Machiavelli and Hegel. Around 1999 Macron worked as an editorial assistant to Paul Ricoeur, the French Protestant philosopher who was then writing his last major work, La Mémoire, l'Histoire, l'Oubli. Macron worked mainly on the notes and bibliography. Macron became a member of the editorial board of the literary magazine Esprit. Macron did not perform national service because he was pursuing his graduate studies. Born in December 1977, he belonged to the last cohort for whom military service was mandatory. Macron obtained a master's degree in public affairs at Sciences Po, majoring in "Public Guidance and Economy" before training for a senior civil service career at the selective École nationale d'administration (ENA), training at the French Embassy in Nigeria and at the prefecture of Oise before graduating in 2004. After graduating from ENA in 2004, Macron became an Inspector in the Inspection générale des finances (IGF), a branch of the Finance Ministry. Macron was mentored by Jean-Pierre Jouyet, the then-head of the IGF. During his time as an Inspector of Finances, Macron gave lectures during the summer at the "prep'ENA" (a special cram school for the ENA entrance examination) at IPESUP, an elite private school specializing in preparation for the entrance examinations of the Grandes écoles, such as HEC or Sciences Po. In 2006, Laurence Parisot offered him the job of managing director for Mouvement des Entreprises de France, the largest employer federation in France, but he declined. In August 2007, Macron was appointed deputy rapporteur for Jacques Attali's "Commission to Unleash French Growth". In 2008, Macron paid €50,000 to buy himself out of his government contract. He then became an investment banker in a highly-paid position at Rothschild & Cie Banque. In March 2010, he was appointed to the Attali Commission as a member. In September 2008, Macron left his job as an Inspector of Finances and took a position at Rothschild & Cie Banque. Macron left the government when Nicolas Sarkozy became president. He was originally offered the job by François Henrot. His first responsibility at the bank was assisting with the acquisition of Cofidis by Crédit Mutuel Nord Europe. Macron formed a relationship with Alain Minc, a businessman on the supervisory board of Le Monde. In 2010, Macron was promoted to partner with the bank after working on the recapitalization of Le Monde and the acquisition by Atos of Siemens IT Solutions and Services. In the same year, Macron was put in charge of Nestlé's acquisition of Pfizer's infant nutrition division for €9 billion, which made him a millionaire. In February 2012, Macron advised businessman Philippe Tillous-Borde, the CEO of the Avril Group. Macron reported that he had earned €2 million between December 2010 and May 2012. Official documents show that between 2009 and 2013, Macron had earned almost €3 million. He left Rothschild & Cie in 2012. In his youth, Macron worked for the Citizen and Republican Movement for two years, but he never applied to be a member. Macron was an assistant for Mayor Georges Sarre of the 11th arrondissement of Paris during his time at Sciences Po. Macron had been a member of the Socialist Party since he was 24, but last renewed his membership for the period 2006–2009. Macron met François Hollande through Jean-Pierre Jouyet in 2006 and joined his staff in 2010. In 2007, Macron attempted to run for a seat in the National Assembly in Picardy under the Socialist Party label in the 2007 legislative elections; however, his application was declined. Macron was offered the chance to be the deputy chief of staff to Prime Minister François Fillon in 2010, though he declined. On 15 May 2012, Macron became the deputy secretary-general of the Élysée, a senior role in President François Hollande's staff. Macron served with Nicolas Revel. He served under the secretary-general, Pierre-René Lemas. During the summer of 2012, Macron put forward a proposal that would increase the 35-hour work week to 37 hours until 2014. He also tried to hold back the large tax increases on the highest earners that were planned by the government. Hollande refused Macron's proposals. In 2013, his was one of the deciding votes against regulating the salaries of CEOs. Nicolas Revel, the other deputy secretary-general of the Élysée opposed Macron on a proposed budget responsibility pact favoured by the Medef. On 10 June 2014, it was announced that Macron had resigned from his role and was replaced by Laurence Boone. Reasons given for his departure included his disappointment at not being included in the first Government of Manuel Valls and his frustration with his lack of influence on the reforms proposed by the government. This was following the appointment of Jean-Pierre Jouyet as chief of staff. Jouyet said that Macron left to "continue personal aspirations" and create his own financial consultancy firm. It was later reported that he was planning to create an investment firm that would attempt to fund educational projects. Shortly afterwards he was hired as a research fellow at the University of Berlin with the help of businessman Alain Minc. He had also sought a position at Harvard University. Offered a chance to be a candidate in the municipal elections in 2014 in his hometown of Amiens, Macron declined, leading François Hollande to reject Manuel Valls's idea of appointing him Budget Minister, as he had never been elected to public office. He was appointed as the Minister of Economics and Industry in the second Valls Cabinet on 26 August 2014, replacing Arnaud Montebourg. He was the youngest Minister of Economics since Valéry Giscard d'Estaing in 1962. Macron was branded by the media as the "Anti-Montebourg" due to being pro-EU and much more moderate, while Montebourg was eurosceptic and left-wing. As Minister of Economics, Macron was at the forefront of pushing through business-friendly reforms. On 17 February 2015, prime minister Manuel Valls pushed Macron's signature law package through a reluctant parliament using the special 49.3 procedure. Macron increased the French share in the company Renault from 15% to 20% and then enforced the Florange law which grants double voting rights on shares registered for more than two years unless two-thirds of shareholders vote to overturn it. This gave the French state a minority share in the company though Macron later stated that the government would limit its powers within Renault. Macron was widely criticized for being unable to prevent the closing down of an Ecopla factory in Isère. In August 2015, Macron said that he was no longer a member of the Socialist Party and was an independent. A law which had originally been sponsored by Arnaud Montebourg before he left the government, and which had focused on "purchasing power", grew into the Macron law [fr], a grab bag of measures liberalizing laws prohibiting work on Sunday and at night; restrictions on coaches for public transportation; regulations for debt collectors, barristers and auctioneers; and rules governing the rental of equipment by the military from private companies. The law also sought to simplify many government procedures, such as that for obtaining a driving licence. Manuel Valls, fearing that it would not pass in the National Assembly, decided to push the law through with the 49.3 procedure and so it was adopted on 10 April 2015. Estimates of the increase in GDP the law might generate ranged from 0.3% to 0.5%. Macron first became known to the French public after his appearance on the French TV programme Des Paroles Et Des Actes in March 2015. Before forming his political party En Marche!, he gave a number of speeches, his first one in March 2015 in Val-de-Marne. He threatened to leave Manuel Valls' second government over the proposed removal of dual-nationality from terrorists. He also took various foreign trips, including one to Israel where he spoke on the advancement of digital technology. Tensions around the question of Macron's loyalty to the Valls government and Hollande increased when they turned down a bill he put forward dubbed "Macron 2", which had a larger scope than his original law. Macron was given the chance to help draft into the El Khomri law and put specific parts of "Macron 2" into the law though El Khomri was able to overturn these with the help of other ministers.[citation needed][clarification needed] Amid tensions and deterioration of relations with the current government, Macron founded an independent political party, En Marche, in Amiens on 6 April 2016. A liberal, progressive political movement that gathered huge media coverage when it was first established, the party and Macron were both reprimanded by President Hollande and the question of Macron's loyalty to the government was raised. Several MEPs spoke out in support for the movement though the majority of the Socialist Party spoke against En Marche including Manuel Valls, Michel Sapin, Axelle Lemaire and Christian Eckert. In June 2016, support for Macron and his movement, En Marche, began to grow in the media with Libération reporting that L'Express, Les Échos, Le 1 [fr], and L'Opinion had begun to support him. Following several controversies surrounding trade unionists and their protests, Acrimed [fr] reported that major newspapers began to run front-page stories about Macron and En Marche. Criticized by both the far-left and the far-right, these pro-Macron influencers in the press were dubbed "Macronites". In May 2016, Orleans mayor Olivier Carré invited Macron to the festival commemorating the 587th anniversary of Joan of Arc's efforts during the Siege of Orléans.LCI reported that Macron was trying to take back the symbol of Joan of Arc from the far-right. Macron later went to Puy du Fou and declared he was "not a socialist" in a speech amid rumours he was going to leave the current government. On 30 August 2016, Macron resigned from the government ahead of the 2017 presidential election, to devote himself to his En Marche movement. There had been rising tensions and several reports that he had wanted to leave the Valls government since early 2015. He initially planned to leave after the cancellation[clarification needed] of his "Macron 2" law but decided to stay on temporarily after a meeting with President François Hollande. Michel Sapin was announced as Macron's replacement, while Hollande said he felt Macron had "methodically betrayed" him. An IFOP poll showed that 84% of those surveyed agreed with his decision to resign. Macron first showed his intention to run by forming En Marche, but following his resignation from the government, he was able to dedicate more time to his movement. He first announced that he was considering running for president in April 2016, and after his resignation from the position of economy minister, media sources began to identify patterns in his fundraising indicating he would run. In October 2016, Macron criticized Hollande's goal of being a "normal" president, saying that France needed a more "Jupiterian presidency". On 16 November 2016, Macron formally declared his candidacy for the French presidency after months of speculation. In his announcement speech, he called for a "democratic revolution" and promised to "unblock France". He had expressed hope that Hollande would run several months earlier, saying that—as the sitting president—he was the legitimate Socialist party candidate. Macron's book Révolution was published on 24 November 2016 and reached fifth position on the French best-seller list in December 2016. Shortly after announcing his run, Jean-Christophe Cambadélis and Manuel Valls both asked Macron to run in the Socialist Party presidential primary, which he ultimately refused to do. Jean-Christophe Cambadélis began to threaten to exclude members who associated or supported Macron following Lyon mayor Gérard Collomb throwing his support behind him. Macron's campaign, headed by French economist Sophie Ferracci, announced in December 2016 that it had raised 3.7 million euros in donations, three times the budget of then-front runner Alain Juppé. Macron came under criticism from several individuals, including Benoît Hamon−who requested he reveal a list of his donors and accused him of conflicts of interest due to the time he spent at Rothschilds, which Macron dismissed as "demagogy". Journalists Marion L'Hour and Frédéric Says later reported that he had spent €120,000 on setting up dinners and meetings with various personalities within the media and in French popular culture while at Bercy. Christian Jacob and Philippe Vigier accused him of using this money to campaign without campaigning. His successor, Michel Sapin, saw nothing illegal about his actions, saying that he had the right to spend the funds. Macron called the allegations "defamatory" and said that none of the ministerial budget had been spent on his party. Macron's campaign enjoyed considerable coverage from the media. Mediapart reported that over fifty magazine covers were dedicated purely to him. Friends with the owners of Le Monde and Claude Perdiel, the former owner of Nouvel Observateur, he was labelled the "media candidate" by the far-left and far-right and was viewed as such in opinion polls. Many observers compared his campaign to a product being sold due to Maurice Lévy, a former Publicis CEO, using marketing tactics to try to advance his presidential ambitions. The magazine Marianne reported that BFM TV, owned by Patrick Drahi, broadcast more coverage of Macron than of all the other main candidates combined. Marianne speculated that this might be due to the campaigns links with Drahi through Bernard Mourad. François Bayrou, with whom Macron had been compared, announced he was not going to stand in the presidential election and instead formed an electoral alliance with Macron, whose poll ratings began to rise. After several legal issues surrounding François Fillon were publicized, Macron overtook him in the polls to become the front-runner. Macron attracted criticism for the time taken to spell out a formal program during his campaign; despite declaring in November that he had still not released a complete set of proposals by February, attracting both attacks from critics and concern among allies and supporters. He eventually laid out his 150-page formal program on 2 March, publishing it online and discussing it at a marathon press conference that day. Macron accumulated a wide array of supporters, securing endorsements from François Bayrou of the Democratic Movement (MoDem), MEP Daniel Cohn-Bendit, the ecologist candidate François de Rugy of the primary of the left, and Socialist MP Richard Ferrand, secretary-general of En Marche, as well as numerous others – many of them from the Socialist Party, but also a significant number of centrist and centre-right politicians. The Grand Mosque of Paris urged French Muslims to vote en masse for Macron. On 23 April 2017, Macron received the most votes in the first round of the presidential election, with more than 8 million votes (24%) and faced Marine Le Pen in the second round, with the support of former candidates François Fillon and Benoît Hamon and the sitting president François Hollande. Many foreign politicians supported Macron in his bid against right-wing populist candidate Marine Le Pen, including European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and former US President Barack Obama. A debate was arranged between Macron and Le Pen on 3 May 2017. The debate lasted for two hours and opinion polls showed that he was perceived to have won. In March 2017, Macron's digital campaign manager, Mounir Mahjoubi, told Britain's Sky News that Russia is behind "high level attacks" on Macron, and said that its state media are "the first source of false information". He said: "We are accusing RT (formerly known as Russia Today) and Sputnik News (of being) the first source of false information shared about our candidate ...". Two days before the French presidential election on 7 May, it was reported that nine gigabytes of Macron's campaign emails had been anonymously posted to Pastebin, a document-sharing site. These documents were then spread onto the imageboard 4chan, which led to the hashtag "#macronleaks" trending on Twitter. In a statement the same evening, Macron's political movement, En Marche, said: "The En Marche movement has been the victim of a massive and coordinated hack this evening which has given rise to the diffusion on social media of various internal information". Macron's campaign had previously been presented a report in March 2017 by the Japanese cyber security firm Trend Micro detailing how En Marche had been the target of phishing attacks. Trend Micro said that the group conducting these attacks was the Russian hacking group Fancy Bear, also accused of hacking the Democratic National Committee on 22 July 2016. 21,075 verified emails and another 50,773 emails it could not verify were released in July 2017 by WikiLeaks. This followed Le Pen accusing Macron of tax avoidance. On 7 May 2017, Macron was elected President of France with 66.1% of the vote to Marine Le Pen's 33.9%. The election had record abstention at 25.4%, and 8% of ballots were blank or spoiled. Macron resigned from his role as president of En Marche and Catherine Barbaroux became interim leader. Macron qualified for the runoff after the first round of the election on 23 April 2017. He won the second round of the presidential election on 7 May 2017 by a landslide according to preliminary results, making the candidate of the National Front, Marine Le Pen, concede. At 39, he became the youngest president in French history and the youngest French head of state since Napoleon. He is also the first president of France born after the establishment of the Fifth Republic in 1958. Macron formally became president on 14 May. He appointed Patrick Strzoda as his chief of staff and Ismaël Emelien as his special advisor for strategy, communication and speeches. On 15 May, he appointed Édouard Philippe of the Republicans as Prime Minister. On the same day, he made his first official foreign visit, meeting in Berlin with Angela Merkel, the Chancellor of Germany. The two leaders emphasised the importance of France–Germany relations to the European Union. They agreed to draw up a "common road map" for Europe, insisting that neither was against changes to the Treaties of the European Union. In the 2017 legislative election, Macron's party La République En Marche and its Democratic Movement allies secured a comfortable majority, winning 350 seats out of 577. After the Republicans emerged as the winners of the Senate elections, government spokesman Christophe Castaner stated the elections were a "failure" for his party. On 3 July 2020, Macron appointed the centre-right Jean Castex as the Prime Minister of France. Castex, described as a social conservative, was a member of the Republicans. The appointment was described as "doubling down on a course that is widely seen as centre-right in economic terms". In his first few months as president, Macron pressed for the enactment of a package of reforms on public ethics, labour laws, taxes, and law enforcement agency powers.[citation needed] In response to Penelopegate, the National Assembly passed a part of Macron's proposed law to stop mass corruption in French politics by July 2017, banning elected representatives from hiring family members. Meanwhile, the second part of the law scrapping a constituency fund was scheduled for voting after Senate objections. Macron's plan to give his wife an official role within government came under fire with criticisms ranging from its being undemocratic to what critics perceive as a contradiction to his fight against nepotism. Following an online petition of nearly 290,000 signatures on change.org Macron abandoned the plan. On 9 August, the National Assembly adopted the bill on public ethics, a key theme of Macron's campaign, after debates on the scrapping the constituency funds. Macron aims to shift union-management relations away from the adversarial lines of the current French system and toward a more flexible, consensus-driven system modelled after Germany and Scandinavia. He has also pledged to act against companies employing cheaper labour from eastern Europe and in return affecting jobs of French workers, what he has termed as "social dumping". Under the Posted Workers Directive 1996, eastern European workers can be employed for a limited time at the salary level in eastern European countries, which has led to dispute between the EU states. The French government announced the proposed changes to France's labour rules ("Code du Travail"), being among the first steps taken by Macron and his government to galvanize the French economy. Macron's reform efforts have encountered resistance from some French trade unions. The largest trade union, the CFDT, has taken a conciliatory approach to Macron's push and has engaged in negotiations with the president, while the more militant CGT is more hostile to reforms. Macron's labour minister, Muriel Pénicaud, is overseeing the effort. The National Assembly including the Senate approved the proposal, allowing the government to loosen the labour laws after negotiations with unions and employers' groups. The reforms, which were discussed with unions, limit payouts for dismissals deemed unfair and give companies greater freedom to hire and fire employees as well as to define acceptable working conditions. The president signed five decrees reforming the labour rules on 22 September. Government figures released in October 2017 revealed that during the legislative push to reform the labour code, the unemployment rate had dropped 1.8%, the biggest since 2001. Speaking on refugees and, specifically, the Calais Jungle, Macron said on 16 January 2018 that he would not allow another refugee camp to form in Paris before outlining the government policy towards immigration and asylum. He has also announced plans to speed up asylum applications and deportations but give refugees better housing. On 23 June 2018, President Macron said: "The reality is that Europe is not experiencing a migration crisis of the same magnitude as the one it experienced in 2015", "a country like Italy has not at all the same migratory pressure as last year. The crisis we are experiencing today in Europe is a political crisis". In November 2019, Macron introduced new immigration rules to restrict the number of refugees reaching France, while stating to "take back control" of the immigration policy. Pierre de Villiers, then-Chief of the General Staff of the Armies, stepped down on 19 July 2017 following a confrontation with Macron. De Villiers cited the military budget cut of €850 million as the main reason he was stepping down. Le Monde later reported that De Villiers told a parliamentary group, "I will not let myself be fucked like this." Macron named François Lecointre as De Villiers' replacement. Macron's government presented its first budget on 27 September, the terms of which reduced taxes as well as spending to bring the public deficit in line with the EU's fiscal rules. The budget replaced the wealth tax with one targeting real estate, fulfilling Macron's campaign pledge to scrap the wealth tax. Before it was replaced, the tax collected up to 1.5% of the wealth of French residents whose global worth exceeded €1.3m. In February 2018, Macron announced a plan to offer voluntary redundancy in an attempt to further cut jobs from the French civil service. In December 2019, Macron announced that he would scrap the 20th-century pension system and introduce a single national pension system managed by the state. In January 2020, after weeks of public transport shutdown and vandalism across Paris against the new pension plan, Macron compromised on the plan by revising the retirement age. In February, the pension overhaul was adopted by decree using Article 49 of the French constitution. However, on 16 March 2020, Macron announced that the draft legislation would be pulled as France went into lockdown to slow the spread of COVID-19. In July 2017, the Senate approved its first reading of a controversial bill with stricter anti-terror laws, a campaign pledge of Macron. The National Assembly voted on 3 October to pass t bill 415–127, with 19 abstentions. Interior Minister Gérard Collomb described France as being "still in a state of war" ahead of the vote, with the 1 October Marseille stabbing having taken place two days prior. The Senate then passed the bill on its second reading by a 244–22 margin on 18 October. Later that day Macron stated that 13 terror plots had been foiled since early 2017. The law replaced the state of emergency in France and made some of its provisions permanent. The bill was criticized by human rights advocates. A public poll by Le Figaro showed 57% of the respondents approved of it even though 62% thought it would encroach on personal freedoms. The law gives authorities expanded power to search homes, restrict movement, close places of worship, and search areas around train stations and international ports and airports. It was passed after modifications to address concerns about civil liberties. The most punitive measures will be reviewed annually and were scheduled to lapse by the end of 2020. The bill was signed into law by Macron on 30 October 2017. He announced that starting 1 November, it would bring an end to the state of emergency. Visiting Corsica in February 2018, Macron sparked controversy when he rejected Corsican nationalist wishes for Corsican as an official language but offered to recognize Corsica in the French constitution. Macron also proposed a plan to "reorganise" the Islamic religion in France saying: "We are working on the structuring of Islam in France and also on how to explain it, which is extremely important – my goal is to rediscover what lies at the heart of laïcité, the possibility of being able to believe as not to believe, in order to preserve national cohesion and the possibility of having free consciousness." He declined to reveal further information about the plan. Macron attended the 2017 Brussels summit on 25 May 2017, his first NATO summit as president of France. At the summit, he met US President Donald Trump for the first time. The meeting was widely publicized due to a handshake between the two of them, characterized as a "power-struggle". On 29 May 2017, Macron met with Vladimir Putin at the Palace of Versailles. The meeting sparked controversy when Macron denounced Russia Today and Sputnik, accusing the news agencies of being "organs of influence and propaganda, of lying propaganda". Macron also urged cooperation in the conflict against ISIS and warned that France would respond with force in Syria if chemical weapons were used. In response to the chemical attack in Douma, Syria in 2018, Macron directed French participation in airstrikes against Syrian government sites, coordinated with the United States and the United Kingdom. In his first major foreign policy speech on 29 August, President Macron stated that fighting Islamist terrorism at home and abroad was France's top priority. Macron urged a tough international stance to pressure North Korea into negotiations, on the same day it fired a missile over Japan. He also affirmed his support for the Iranian nuclear deal and criticized Venezuela's government as a "dictatorship". He added that he would announce his new initiatives on the future of the European Union after the German elections in September. At the 56th Munich Security Conference in February, Macron presented his 10-year vision policy to strengthen the European Union. Macron remarked that larger budget, integrated capital markets, effective defence policy and quick decision-making held the key for Europe. He added that reliance on NATO and especially the US and the UK was not good for Europe, and a dialogue must be established with Russia. Prior to the 45th G7 summit in Biarritz, France, Macron hosted Vladimir Putin at the Fort de Brégançon, stating that "Russia fully belongs within a Europe of values." At the summit itself, Macron was invited to attend on the margins by Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif.[clarification needed] Macron, who "attempted a high-risk diplomatic gambit", thought that the Foreign Minister of Iran might be able to defuse the tense situation over the Iranian nuclear programme in spite of the recent uptick in tensions between the Islamic Republic and the United States and Britain. In March 2019, at a time when China–U.S. economic relations were troubled with a trade war underway, Macron and Chinese leader Xi Jinping signed a series of 15 large-scale trade and business agreements totaling 40 billion euros (US$45 billion) which covered many sectors over a period of years. This included a €30 billion purchase of airplanes from Airbus. Going beyond aviation, the new trade agreement covered French exports of chicken, a French-built offshore wind farm in China, a Franco-Chinese cooperation fund, as well as billions of Euros of co-financing between BNP Paribas and the Bank of China. Other plans included billions of euros to be spent on modernizing Chinese factories, as well as new ship building. In July 2020, Macron called for sanctions against Turkey for violating Greece's and Cyprus' sovereignty, saying it is "not acceptable that the maritime space of (EU) member states be violated and threatened." He also criticized Turkish military intervention in Libya. Macron said that "We have the right to expect more from Turkey than from Russia, given that it is a member of NATO." In 2021, Macron was reported as saying Northern Ireland was not truly part of the United Kingdom following disputes with UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson over implementations of the Northern Ireland protocol. He later denied this, saying he was referring to the fact that Great Britain is separated from Northern Ireland by sea in reference to the Irish Sea border. French-U.S. relations became tense in September 2021 due to fallout from the AUKUS security pact between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia. The security pact is directed at countering Chinese power in the Indo-Pacific region. As part of the agreement, the U.S. agreed to provide nuclear-powered submarines to Australia. After entering into AUKUS, the Australian government canceled an agreement that it had made with France for the provision of French conventionally powered submarines, angering the French government. On 17 September, France recalled its ambassadors from Australia and the US for consultations. Despite tension in the past, France had never before withdrawn its ambassador to the United States. After a call between Macron and U.S. President Joe Biden on request from the latter, the two leaders agreed to reduce bilateral tensions, and the White House acknowledged the crisis could have been averted if there had been open consultations between allies.[unreliable source?] On 26 November 2021, Macron and Italian Prime Minister Mario Draghi signed the Quirinal Treaty at the Quirinal Palace in Rome. The treaty aimed to promote the convergence and coordination of French and Italian positions in matters of European and foreign policies, security and defence, migration policy, economy, education, research, culture and cross-border cooperation. During the prelude to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Macron spoke face-to-face and on the phone to Russian President Vladimir Putin. During Macron's campaign for the re-election, nearly two months after the Russian invasion began, Macron called on European leaders to maintain dialogue with Putin. According to an IFOP poll for Le Journal du Dimanche, Macron started his five-year term with a 62% approval rating, which rose to 64% by 24 June. One month later, Macron suffered a 10% point drop in popularity, the largest at the beginning of a term for any president since Jacques Chirac in 1995, and by August, his popularity had fallen off 24 percentage points since June. This was attributed to his recent confrontations with former Chief of Defence Staff Pierre de Villiers, the nationalization of the Chantiers de l'Atlantique shipyard owned by the bankrupt STX Offshore & Shipbuilding, and a reduction in housing benefits. By the end of September 2017, seven out of ten respondents said that they believed Emmanuel Macron was respecting his campaign promises, though a majority felt that the policies the government was putting forward were "unfair". Macron's popularity fell sharply again in 2018, reaching about 25% by the end of November during the yellow vests movement.[unreliable source?] During the COVID-19 pandemic in France, his popularity increased, reaching 50% at its highest in July 2020. On 18 July 2018, Le Monde revealed in an article that a member of Macron's staff Alexandre Benalla posed as a police officer and beat a protester during May Day demonstrations in Paris earlier in the year and was suspended for a period of 15 days before only being internally demoted. The Élysée failed to refer the case to the public prosecutor and a preliminary investigation into the case was not opened until the day after the publication of the article, and the lenient penalty served by Benalla raised questions within the opposition about whether the executive deliberately chose not to inform the public prosecutor as required under the code of criminal procedure. In the 2022 election, Macron was the first incumbent to be re-elected since Jacques Chirac defeated Jean-Marie Le Pen in the 2002 election. Macron again defeated Marine Le Pen in the runoff, this time by a closer margin, with 58.55% of the votes to Le Pen's 41.45%. Due to near-record abstentions, this represented 38.52% of registered voters, the lowest figure since Georges Pompidou's 37.5% in 1969. The French far-right received their highest vote total since the start of the French Republic, with nationalist candidates (Le Pen, Zemmour and Dupont-Aignan) winning 32.3% of the votes in the first round and Le Pen achieving a record 41.5% of the votes in the second round.[citation needed] Though Macron's second inauguration took place on 7 May 2022, his second presidential term officially began on 14 May 2022. On 16 May 2022, Prime Minister Jean Castex resigned after 22 months as head of government. The same day, President Macron appointed Élisabeth Borne at the Hôtel Matignon, thus making her the second female PM in French history after Édith Cresson between 1991 and 1992. She then formed a new government on 20 May 2022. In June 2022, one month into his second term, less than two weeks before the end of the French presidency of the Council of the EU and days after he called for voters to hand him a "solid majority" in a controversial 'tarmac speech', Macron lost his parliamentary majority and was returned a hung parliament in the second round of the 2022 legislative election: Macron's presidential coalition, which had a 115-seat majority going into the election, failed to reach the threshold of 289 seats needed to command an overall majority in the National Assembly, retaining only 251 out of the 346 it had held in the previous Assembly, and falling 38 short of an absolute majority. Crucially, three close political allies to President Macron were defeated in the elections: incumbent President of the National Assembly Richard Ferrand, Macron's own LREM parliamentary party leader Christophe Castaner and MoDem parliamentary group leader Patrick Mignola, thus effectively "decapitating" Macron's parliamentary bloc leadership and further weakening the President's political position in hung parliament territory. Three government ministers resigned after losing their seats: Justine Bénin (junior minister for the Sea), Brigitte Bourguignon (Minister for Health and Prevention) and Amélie de Montchalin (Minister for Ecological Transition). Macron's government, still led by Prime Minister Élisabeth Borne, was reshuffled in early July 2022 and continued as a minority administration, after talks with opposition leaders to form a stable majority government failed. Macron's second presidential term began with two significant political controversies. Hours after the new Borne cabinet was announced, rape accusations against newly appointed Minister for Solidarity Damien Abad were made public, and on 28 May, the handling of the 2022 UEFA Champions League final chaos at the Stade de France in Saint-Denis drew criticism at home and abroad. Despite its minority status in the legislature after the 2022 legislative election, Macron's government passed bills to ease the cost-of-living crisis, to repeal the COVID-era "state of health emergency", and to revive the French nuclear energy sector. However, government proposals were defeated several times in the National Assembly and by the end of 2022, the Borne cabinet had had to use the provisions of Article 49.3 of the Constitution ten times in a row to pass the 2023 Government Budget and Social Security Budget. In March 2023, Macron's government passed a law raising the retirement age from 62 to 64, partly bypassing Parliament by again resorting to Article 49.3 to break the parliamentary deadlock.Nationwide protests that had begun when the bill was introduced back in January increased in intensity after the reform was passed without a solemn vote.[citation needed][clarification needed] On 20 March 2023, Macron's cabinet, headed by Prime minister Borne, survived a cross-party motion of no-confidence by only nine votes, the slimmest margin for such a vote since 1992. On 12 June 2023, his government survived its 17th no-confidence motion since the beginning of the 16th legislature; the motion, brought by the left-wing NUPES coalition, fell 50 votes short of the 289 votes needed. In early summer 2023, French authorities faced riots following the killing of Nahel M., aged 17, by a police officer during a traffic stop. To calm widespread unrest, comparable in intensity to the 2005 French riots[citation needed], Macron's administration ramped up government response, with a total of 45,000 police officers deployed on the ground and a ministerial order advising courts to apply harsher sentences and accelerated procedures: this crackdown resulted in over 1,300 arrests on the fourth night of unrest alone, bringing the total number of arrests since the riots' beginning to over 2,000 as of 1 July. On 20 July 2023, Macron carried out a government reshuffle at the end of the "hundred days of appeasement and action" he called for in April 2023 following the violent protests surrounding the passage of his pension system reform. Pap Ndiaye and Marlène Schiappa were sacked as part of the reshuffle. On 1 August 2023, Macron signed into law a multi-year military planning bill, which set the stage for a 40%-increase in military spending to a total of €413 billion between 2024 and 2030, after it was passed by the French parliament on 13 July 2023. In February 2023, Macron's government introduced an immigration and asylum bill aimed at removing deportation safeguards, fast-tracking asylum application process and immigration litigation, while also facilitating legalization of undocumented workers. His government later pulled the draft legislation amid fears of defeat in Parliament, instead planning to hold talks with the centre-right LR party before reintroducing the bill in the autumn. In August 2023, in a lengthy interview with weekly magazine Le Point, Macron said that France "must significantly reduce immigration, starting with illegal immigration" because the "current situation is not sustainable". On 11 December 2023, the "flagship" immigration bill introduced by Macron's government was unexpectedly defeated after the narrow passage of a motion for preliminary dismissal in the National Assembly. Political commentators and news media described the vote as a "spectacular debacle", eventually sparking a major political crisis for Macron's minority administration. In an effort to salvage the bill, Macron's government sent the draft legislation to a joint parliamentary committee: it resulted in a deal with the conservative-controlled Senate on a drastically hardened bill. On 19 December 2023, the French Parliament passed the piece of legislation thanks to support from the conservative LR and far-right RN parliamentary groups and in spite of a major rebellion from Macron's own coalition and ministers. Health Minister Aurélien Rousseau, whom Macron had appointed to the government only 6 months earlier, resigned shortly after the vote. On the 65th anniversary of the French Constitution on 4 October 2023, Macron unveiled avenues for constitutional reform: broadening the scope and relaxing rules for referenda; enshrining the right to abortion and climate protection in the Constitution; stepping up the level of territorial devolution; giving some form of political autonomy to Corsica and New Caledonia. On 4 March 2024, a joint session of the French Parliament passed a Macron-sponsored constitutional amendment to protect abortion as a 'guaranteed freedom' in the Constitution. It represented the first constitutional reform since 2008 and the first since Macron took office in 2017. In January 2024, in the wake of the government crisis produced by the passage of the 'controversial' immigration bill, Macron requested Prime minister Élisabeth Borne to resign and subsequently replaced her by Education minister Gabriel Attal, making him both the youngest head of government in French history and the first openly gay man ever to hold the job. The new Attal cabinet was widely described as the most right-leaning government since the start of the Macron Presidency: out of the 14 Cabinet ministers appointed on 11 January 2024 by Macron and Attal, 57% are former members of the conservative UMP/LR party, while prominent left-leaning ministers of the outgoing Borne government were sacked, moves described as indicating a notable tilt to the right. In February 2024, amid slowing economic growth and disappointing unemployment figures, Macron's government unveiled €10 billion in emergency spending cuts to hold to its 2024 deficit goal. A month later, Macron convened a 'crisis meeting' to discuss the state of France's public finances amid reports showing that the government had heavily missed its 2023 fiscal targets, with a bigger-than-forecasted deficit, putting the country's credit rating at risk of downgrade. On 16 June 2022, Macron visited Ukraine alongside German Chancellor Olaf Scholz and Italy's Prime Minister Mario Draghi. He met with Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and expressed "European Unity" for Ukraine. He said that the nations that remained neutral in the Russo-Ukrainian War made a historic mistake and were complicit in the new imperialism. In September 2022, Macron criticized the United States, Norway and other "friendly" natural gas supplier states for the extremely high prices of their supplies, saying in October 2022 that Europeans are "paying four times more than the price you sell to your industry. That is not exactly the meaning of friendship." Macron and his wife attended the state funeral of Queen Elizabeth II in Westminster Abbey, London, on 19 September 2022, and the coronation of King Charles III the following year. On 23 October 2022, Macron became the first foreign leader to meet new Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni, just a day after she and her ministers were sworn into office. During a summit to China with European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, which included a formal meeting with Xi Jinping, the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and President of China, Macron called for Europe to reduce its dependence on the United States in general and to stay neutral and avoid being drawn into any possible confrontation between the U.S. and China over Taiwan. Speaking after a three-day state visit to China, Macron emphasised his theory of strategic autonomy, suggesting that Europe could become a "third superpower". He argued that Europe should focus on boosting its own defence industries and additionally reduce its dependence on the United States dollar (USD). in a follow-up speech in The Hague to further outline his vision of strategic autonomy for Europe. On 7 June 2023, a report by the pan-European think tank European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFR) found that most Europeans agree with Macron's views on China and the United States. In February 2023, he welcomed Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed in Paris to normalize relations between France and Ethiopia, strained by the Tigray War between the Ethiopian government and Tigray rebels. On 31 May 2023 Macron visited the GLOBSEC forum in Bratislava, where he again delivered a speech on European sovereignty. During the question and answer session that followed the Bratislava speech, he said that negotiating with Putin may have to take priority over any war crimes tribunal which some others, including Zelensky, wish to see. On 12 June 2023, Macron promised to deliver more ammunition, weapons and armed vehicles to help Ukrainian forces with the ongoing counter-offensive to liberate Russian-occupied southeastern Ukraine. At the NATO Summit in Vilnius, he promised to supply Ukraine with Scalp long-range cruise missiles to hit Russian targets deep behind the front lines. On 10 November 2023, he said that what Russia is doing in Ukraine is "imperialism and colonialism" and it was the "duty" of France and other countries to help Ukraine defend itself, but added that maybe the time will come to hold fair peace negotiations and find a solution with Russia. In June 2023 Macron hosted a global climate finance conference described by many as the new Bretton Woods Conference. The purpose is to adjust the global economy to the contemporary threats of climate change and hunger. One of the proposition is to offer to low income countries help instead of credits so they can use their resource for stopping climate change and poverty instead of debt payments. Macron supported the idea, but a climate activist from Uganda remarked that the promises were meaningless if at the same time Macron supported projects like the East African Crude Oil Pipeline, a major threat to the climate and to the drinking water of 40 million people. At the summit Macron proposed an international taxation system and debt restructuring but stressed it can have an effect only with international cooperation. In July 2023, Macron postponed his planned state visit to Germany due to the ongoing Nahel M. riots. In October 2023, Macron condemned Hamas' actions during the Israel–Hamas war and expressed his support to Israel and its right to self-defense. He criticized Iran for its support of Hamas. On 24 October, Macron visited Israel to express solidarity with the country. He said that the anti-ISIL coalition should also fight against Hamas. On 10 November 2023, he called for a ceasefire and urged Israel to stop bombing Gaza and killing civilians. In January 2024, he accused Hamas of using Palestinian civilians as human shields and said Israel had the right to defend itself. In February 2024, during a meeting with other European states, Macron generated controversy by suggesting sending ground troops to Ukraine. In March 2024, Macron defended the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) between Canada and the EU, branding the agreement as a "very good deal", after the French Senate voted against its ratification. On 10 July 2022, The Guardian revealed that Macron had assisted Uber in lobbying during his term as the Minister of Economics and Industry, leading to calls from opposition lawmakers for a parliamentary inquiry. In his own defence, Macron expressed that he "did his job" and that he would "do it again tomorrow and the day after tomorrow". He stated, "I'm proud of it". As president of France, Macron also serves ex officio as one of the two co-princes of Andorra. His chief of staff Patrick Strzoda serves as his representative in this capacity. Joan Enric Vives i Sicília, appointed as the current Bishop of Urgell on 12 May 2003, serves as Macron's co-prince. Macron swore the Constitution of Andorra through Strzoda in an act that took place on 15 June 2017 in Casa de la Vall. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Andorran government asked France for economic aid, but Macron refused, arguing that the Bank of France could not offer loans to another country without the approval of the European Central Bank. Macron is married to Brigitte Trogneux, 24 years his senior, and his former La Providence high school teacher in Amiens. They met during a theatre workshop that she was giving when he was a 15-year-old student and she was a 39-year-old teacher. His parents initially attempted to separate the couple by sending him away to Paris to finish the final year of his schooling, as they felt his youth made this relationship inappropriate. The couple reunited after Macron graduated, and were married in 2007. She has three children from a previous marriage; he has no children of his own.[unreliable source?] Trogneux's role in Macron's 2017 presidential campaign has been considered pivotal, with close Macron allies stating that Trogneux helped Macron to develop skills like public speaking. His best man was Henry Hermand (1924–2016), a businessman who loaned €550,000 to Macron for the purchase of his first apartment in Paris when he was Inspector of Finances. Hermand also let Macron use some of his offices on the Avenue des Champs Élysées in Paris for his movement En Marche. In the 2002 French presidential election, Macron voted for souverainist Jean-Pierre Chevènement. In 2007, Macron voted for Ségolène Royal in the second round of the presidential election. During the Socialist Party primary in 2011, Macron voiced his support for François Hollande. Macron plays the piano, and studied piano for ten years in his youth. He especially enjoys the work of Robert Schumann and Franz Liszt. Macron also skis, plays tennis and enjoys boxing. In addition to his native French, Macron speaks fluent English. In August 2017, a photojournalist was arrested and detained by the police for six hours after he entered the private residence where Macron was vacationing in Marseille. Macron subsequently filed a complaint for "harassment". In September 2017, he dropped the complaint "as a gesture of appeasement". On 27 August 2017, Macron and his wife Brigitte adopted Nemo, a black Labrador Retriever-Griffon dog who lives with them in the Élysée Palace. As a schoolboy, Macron decided to be baptized as a Catholic. In June 2018, prior to meeting Pope Francis, he identified himself as an agnostic Catholic. In the same year he agreed to become an honorary canon of St John Lateran, the cathedral of Rome. A fan of football, Macron is a supporter of French club Olympique de Marseille. During the 2018 World Cup, he attended the semi-final between France and Belgium with the Belgian King Philippe and Queen Mathilde, and at the World Cup final against Croatia, he sat and celebrated alongside Croatian president Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović. Macron received widespread media attention for his celebrations and his interactions with the Croatian president. On 17 December 2020, Macron tested positive for COVID-19 leading to the cancellation of his scheduled trips for the following month, including a visit to Lebanon. Le Trombinoscope (2014, 2016) Charlemagne Prize (2018) Champion of the Earth (2018) Westfälischer Friedenspreis [de] (2024) Macron, Emmanuel; Goldberg, Jonathan; Scott, Juliette (2017). Revolution. Brunswick, Victoria, Australia: Scribe Publications. ISBN 978-1-925322-71-2. OCLC 992124322. ——; Fottorino, Éric (2017). Macron par Macron (in French). La Tour d'Aigues, France: Editions de l'Aube. ISBN 978-2-8159-2484-9. OCLC 1003593124. Ex-officio Co-Prince "Dans un livre, Anne Fulda raconte Macron côté intime" (in French). JDD à la Une. 21 April 2017. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2017. Badeau, Kevin (7 April 2017). "Le livre qui raconte l'intimité d'Emmanuel Macron". Les Echos. Archived from the original on 19 March 2018. Retrieved 20 May 2017. "Qui sont le frère et la sœur d'Emmanuel Macron? – Gala". Gala.fr (in French). Archived from the original on 16 May 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Boucher, Laurent (26 April 2017). "Sur les traces de l'arrière-grand-père d'Emmanuel Macron entre Amiens et Arras". La Voix. Archived from the original on 2 July 2018. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Le Big Mac: Emmanuel Macron's rise and rise" Archived 27 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Flandrin, Antoine (16 September 2017). "L'histoire de France selon Macron". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 5 August 2020. Retrieved 21 December 2017. "Sacrées mémés de Bagnères-de-Bigorre !". ladepeche.fr (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron en meeting à Pau devant 5 500 personnes". SudOuest.fr. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron, l'Elysée pied au plancher". Libération (in French). Archived from the original on 14 July 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "D'où vient Emmanuel Macron ?". Les Échos. France. 24 April 2017. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Gorce, Bernard (10 April 2017). "La jeunesse très catholique des candidats à la présidentielle". La Croix. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 7 May 2017. "Emmanuel Macron" Archived 9 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Gala France. Retrieved 3 March 2017. "Emmanuel Macron, un ex-banquier touche-à-tout à Bercy" (in French). France 24. 27 August 2014. Archived from the original on 15 March 2017. Retrieved 24 April 2017. Chrisafis, Angelique (11 July 2016). "Will France's young economy minister – with a volunteer army – launch presidential bid?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 26 July 2018. Retrieved 27 January 2017. 88 notes pour piano solo, Jean-Pierre Thiollet, Neva Editions, 2015, p.193. ISBN 978-2-3505-5192-0 "What Emmanuel Macron's home town says about him". The Economist. 4 May 2017. Archived from the original on 4 May 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017. Vincent de Féligonde, Emmanuel Macron, ancien conseiller du prince aux manettes de Bercy Archived 3 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine, La Croix, 26 August 2014 Christine Monin, RETRO : Emmanuel Macron, mon copain d'avant Archived 12 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Le Parisien (in French), 10 May 2017. Jordan Grevet, "Emmanuel Macron, un ministre pas si brillant..." Archived 27 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Closer (in French), 13 October 2014. De Jaeger, Jean-Marc (15 May 2017). "L'université de Nanterre félicite Emmanuel Macron, son ancien étudiant en philosophie". Le Figaro. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2017. Guélaud, Claire (16 May 2012). "Emmanuel Macron, un banquier d'affaires nommé secrétaire général adjoint de l'Elysée". Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 29 April 2017. Wüpper, Gesche (27 August 2014). "Junger Wirtschaftsminister darf Frankreich verführen". Die Welt (in German). Archived from the original on 3 January 2017. Retrieved 29 April 2017. "Emmanuel Macron, de la philosophie au ministère de l'Économie • Brèves, Emmanuel Macron, Paul Ricoeur, Politique, Socialisme, Libéralisme, François Hollande • Philosophie magazine". philomag.com (in French). 27 August 2014. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron, premier Président qui n'a pas fait son service militaire". L'Opinion (in French). 9 May 2017. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Chrisafis, Angelique (19 July 2017). "Head of French military quits after row with Emmanuel Macron". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 July 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2017. "Emmanuel Macron, le coup droit de Hollande – JeuneAfrique.com". JeuneAfrique.com (in French). 3 March 2015. Archived from the original on 27 March 2016. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Kaplan, Renée (2 September 2014). "Who is the hot new French Economy Minister". Frenchly. Archived from the original on 9 September 2016. Retrieved 14 April 2017. Coignard, Sophie (22 April 2016). "Coignard – Derrière Macron, l'ombre de Jouyet". Le Point (in French). Archived from the original on 7 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Ipesup, la prépa chérie des CSP+, est à vendre". Challenges (in French). Archived from the original on 9 January 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2017. "Ipesup change de main pour grandir". Challenges (in French). Archived from the original on 20 July 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2017. "Prépa ENA". Groupe Ipesup (in French). Archived from the original on 31 August 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2017. "Laurence Parisot dément se tenir "prête" pour Matignon en cas de victoire d'Emmanuel Macron". Le Figaro (in French). 27 April 2017. ISSN 0182-5852. Archived from the original on 22 August 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. Marnham, Patrick (4 February 2017). "Who's behind the mysterious rise of Emmanuel Macron?". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 6 May 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. "Biography of Emmanuel Jean-Michel Frédéric Macron of France". Biography.com. A&E Television Networks. 17 May 2017. Archived from the original on 13 May 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2017. "Emmanuel Macron s'explique sur ses anciens revenus de banquier". Le Point (in French). 19 February 2017. Archived from the original on 26 March 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. "Décret n° 2010-223 du 4 mars 2010 relatif à la commission pour la libération de la croissance française". 4 March 2010. Archived from the original on 7 August 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. "Au fait, il faisait quoi chez Rothschild, Emmanuel Macron ?". L'Obs (in French). Archived from the original on 27 July 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. Chaperon, Isabelle (10 May 2017). "Les années Rothschild d'Emmanuel Macron". Le Monde (in French). ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 7 August 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. Tricornot, Adrien de; Weisz, Johan (10 February 2017). "Comment Macron m'a séduit puis trahi" [How Macron seduced then betrayed me]. StreetPress (in French). Archived from the original on 2 June 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. "Rothschild & Cie coopte trois nouveaux associés". Les Échos. France. 16 December 2010. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. "Macron, ce chouchou des patrons qui succède à Montebourg". Challenges (in French). Archived from the original on 19 March 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. Brigaudeau, Anne (5 May 2017). "Quand Emmanuel Macron était banquier d'affaires : "Un élément prometteur, mais sans plus"". France Info (in French). Archived from the original on 12 September 2023. Retrieved 15 August 2023. "Macron, la première marche". Les Échos. France. 27 January 2017. Archived from the original on 7 August 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. "La bombe Macron". L'Express (in French). 2 September 2014. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "Macron dit ce qu'il a fait de ses trois millions d'euros de revenus". Lejdd.fr. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Emmanuel Macron's Rothschild years make him an easy election target". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 17 November 2019. Retrieved 10 December 2018. Tyler Durden (25 April 2017). "Meet The Real Emmanuel Macron: Consummate Banker Puppet, Bizarre Elitist Creation". CECE – POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS. Archived from the original on 1 June 2021. Retrieved 28 May 2021. "Macron, ce jeune chevènementiste". Marianne (in French). 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 18 May 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. Prissette, Nicholas (2016). Emmanuel Macron en marche vers l'Élysée. Plon. p. 79. "Avec Macron, l'Elysée décroche le poupon". Libération (in French). Archived from the original on 19 July 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron n'est plus encarté au Parti socialiste". Le Figaro (in French). 18 February 2015. ISSN 0182-5852. Archived from the original on 28 February 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron: l'homme du Président". Visions Mag (in French). 24 February 2014. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. Bourmaud, François-Xavier (2016). Emmanuel Macron: le banquier qui voulait être roi. l'Archipel. p. 224. ISBN 978-2-8098-1873-4. "Arrêté du 15 mai 2012 portant nomination à la présidence de la République". Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. Prissette, Nicolas (2016). Emmanuel Macron en marche vers l'Élysée. Plon. p. 144. "Pourquoi le gouvernement a cédé sur le salaire des patrons: les dessous d'un deal". L'Opinion (in French). 26 May 2013. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. Berretta, Emmanuel (10 June 2014). "Hollande remanie l'Élysée et recrute Laurence Boone". Le Point (in French). Archived from the original on 14 June 2014. Retrieved 2 August 2017. Visot, Marie (10 June 2014). "Laurence Boone, une forte tête à l'Élysée". Le Figaro (in French). ISSN 0182-5852. Archived from the original on 7 April 2019. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "INFO OBS. Emmanuel Macron prépare son départ de l'Elysée". L'Obs (in French). Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "Elysée: Hollande chamboule son cabinet". Les Échos. France. 10 June 2014. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "VIDEO. Le roman d'une ambition". Franceinfo (in French). 27 February 2015. Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "Les redoutables réseaux de Macron". Challenges (in French). Archived from the original on 14 January 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. Chabas, Charlotte (27 August 2014). "Emmanuel Macron, de " Mozart de l'Elysée " à ministre de l'économie". Le Monde (in French). ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 16 April 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. Corbet, Sylvie; Ganley, Elaine (26 August 2014). "French gov't reshuffle expels dissident ministers". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 31 August 2014. "Emmanuel Macron: son adversaire, c'est la défiance" (in French). Radio France Internationale. 29 August 2014. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. V.V. (26 August 2014). "Macron, l'anti-Montebourg". Le Journal de Dimanche (in French). Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. Revault d'Allonnes, David (17 February 2015). "Loi Macron: comment le 49-3 a été dégainé comme un dernier recours". Le Monde.fr (in French). Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 16 April 2017. Stothard, Michael (16 April 2015). "French companies fight back against Florange double-vote law". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. "Renault: la bataille entre Ghosn et Macron prend fin". L'Obs (in French). Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. Magnaudeix, Mathieu. "Macron rattrapé par son bilan à Bercy". Mediapart (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. Laurent, Samuel (8 December 2014). "Ce que prévoit (ou pas) la future loi Macron". Le Monde (in French). ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. Horobin, William; Meichtry, Stacy (9 March 2015). "5 Things About the Macron Law". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 21 July 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. "Pourquoi le marteau du 49-3 est un outil indispensable". Les Échos. France. 24 February 2015. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. "LOI n° 2015-990 du 6 août 2015 pour la croissance, l'activité et l'égalité des chances économiques | Legifrance". legifrance.gouv.fr (in French). Archived from the original on 7 July 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. Visot, Marie (18 September 2015). "La Loi Macron ne devrait créer que peu de croissance". Le Figaro (in French). ISSN 0182-5852. Archived from the original on 8 July 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. Pouchard, Anne-Aël Durand et Alexandre (30 August 2016). "Quel est le bilan d'Emmanuel Macron au gouvernement ?". Le Monde (in French). ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. "Des paroles et des actes. Invité : Emmanuel Macron". Franceinfo (in French). 5 March 2015. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. Magnaudeix, Mathieu. "A l'Assemblée, le pouvoir installe ses têtes". Mediapart (in French). Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Lelab Europe1 – le meilleur de l'actualité politique sur le web". lelab.europe1.fr. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Emmanuel Macron prend ses distances avec la déchéance de nationalité". Le Figaro. 9 February 2016. Archived from the original on 22 September 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Macron, VRP de la French Tech en Israël". Les Échos. France. 8 September 2015. Archived from the original on 9 March 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2023. Orange, Martine (12 June 2016). "Comment l'Europe a pesé sur la loi El Khomri". Mediapart (in French). Archived from the original on 10 June 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Emmanuel Macron, le dernier maillon fort qui pourrait lâcher". L'Opinion (in French). 16 February 2016. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Emmanuel Macron lance un " mouvement politique nouveau " baptisé " En marche ! "". Le Monde (in French). 6 April 2016. ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 6 August 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Emmanuel Macron, un banquier social-libéral à Bercy". Le Parisien (in French). 26 August 2014. Archived from the original on 9 March 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Macron veut voir son 'projet progressiste' défendu en 2017". Europe1. 27 June 2016. Archived from the original on 13 January 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2023. Roger, Patrick (20 August 2016). "Macron précise son projet " progressiste " pour 2017". Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on 5 August 2020. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "La folle séquence médiatique d'Emmanuel Macron – Le Lab Europe 1" (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Finalement, le parti d'Emmanuel Macron est "et de droite, et de gauche" (mais surtout progressiste) – Le Lab Europe 1" (in French). Archived from the original on 24 April 2016. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "France elections: Hollande slaps down ambitious minister Macron". BBC. 14 July 2016. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Macron et l'héritage de Jeanne d'Arc". Le Journal du Dimanche (in French). 8 May 2016. Archived from the original on 2 August 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. Gaël Brustier. "Macron ou la "révolution passive" des élites françaises". Slate (in French). Archived from the original on 23 June 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2023. Visot, Marie (16 June 2016). "Michel Sapin-Emmanuel Macron : les meilleurs ennemis de Bercy". Le Figaro (in French). ISSN 0182-5852. Archived from the original on 9 July 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. Prissette, Nicolas (2016). Emmanuel Macron en marche vers l'Élysée. Plon. p. 255. "Ces journaux qui en pincent pour Macron". Libération (in French). Archived from the original on 11 September 2016. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "La presse est unanime : Emmanuel Macron". Acrimed | Action Critique Médias (in French). Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "La macronite de l'Express". L'Humanité (in French). 27 October 2016. Archived from the original on 28 February 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Le " cas Macron " : un feuilleton médiatique à suspense". Acrimed | Action Critique Médias (in French). Archived from the original on 30 May 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "A Orléans, Emmanuel Macron a rendu hommage à Jeanne d'Arc qui " a su rassembler la France "". Le Monde (in French). 8 May 2016. ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 24 September 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Avec Jeanne d'Arc, Macron attend des voix". Libération (in French). Archived from the original on 13 April 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Macron à Orléans : c'est quoi les fêtes johanniques, si prisées des politiques?". LCI (in French). 26 July 2023. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Macron: "L'honnêteté m'oblige à vous dire que je ne suis pas socialiste"". Libération (in French). Archived from the original on 12 April 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Macron quits to clear way for French presidential bid". BBC News. 30 August 2016. Archived from the original on 17 July 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. Julien Licourt; Yohan Blavignat (30 August 2016). "Macron évite soigneusement d'évoquer sa candidature". Le Figaro (in French). Archived from the original on 29 March 2017. Retrieved 30 August 2016. Seibt, Sébastian (30 August 2016). "Emmanuel Macron démissionne pour se consacrer à son mouvement En Marche" (in French). France 24. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. Poussielgue, Grégoire (30 August 2016). "Macron démissionne avec l'Elysée en ligne de mire". Les Échos (in French). France. Archived from the original on 30 August 2016. Retrieved 5 August 2017. Pottier, Jean-Marie (30 August 2016). "Emmanuel Macron, la démission continue". Slate (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. "L'histoire secrète de la démission d'Emmanuel Macron". Franceinfo (in French). 31 August 2016. Archived from the original on 26 September 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron: "J'ai démissionné pour être libre"". Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. d'Allonnes, David Revault (31 August 2016). "Hollande: " Emmanuel Macron m'a trahi avec méthode "". Le Monde (in French). ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. "Ifop – Les Français et la démission d'Emmanuel Macron du gouvernement". ifop.com (in French). Archived from the original on 27 February 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. Wieder, Thomas (7 April 2016). "Le pari libéral d'Emmanuel Macron". Le Monde (in French). ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 24 June 2019. Retrieved 5 August 2017. Mourgue, Marion (18 May 2016). "Les levées de fonds au profit d'Emmanuel Macron se poursuivent". Le Figaro (in French). ISSN 0182-5852. Archived from the original on 9 December 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. Combis, Hélène (19 June 2017). "'Président jupitérien': comment Macron compte régner sur l'Olympe". France Inter (in French). Archived from the original on 31 July 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "France's Macron Joins Presidential Race to 'Unblock France'". BBC, UK. 16 November 2016. Archived from the original on 23 April 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2017. Boni, Marc de (16 March 2016). "2017 : Macron calme le jeu et se range derrière Hollande". Le Figaro (in French). ISSN 0182-5852. Archived from the original on 9 March 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Macron a une drôle de définition des mots "traître" et "loyauté"". Le Huffington Post. 22 November 2016. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2023. ""Révolution", le livre-programme de Macron se hisse dans le top des ventes". Challenges (in French). Archived from the original on 16 January 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Macron refuse toute participation à la primaire, une "querelle de clan"" (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Primaire à gauche: Emmanuel Macron rejette les appels de Valls et Cambadélis" (in French). BFMTV. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Cambadélis menace de sanction les soutiens de Macron". Le Point (in French). 2 September 2016. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Qui sont les trente proches d'Emmanuel Macron qui comptent au sein d'En marche ! ?". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 18 January 2018. Retrieved 20 January 2018. "Présidentielle: "On est vraiment entré dans la campagne", Macron montre les biceps à Paris". 20 Minutes (in French). 10 December 2016. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Vaudano, Maxime (22 December 2016). "Primaire de la droite: ce que les comptes racontent de la campagne". Le Monde (in French). ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Mathieu, Mathilde. "Macron et ses donateurs: et voilà le débat sur la transparence!". Mediapart (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Macron refuse de publier la liste de ses donateurs". Le Figaro (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Roger, Patrick (26 January 2017). "Emmanuel Macron assure qu'" aucun centime " de Bercy n'a été utilisé pour En Marche !". Le Monde (in French). ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Vaudano, Maxime (3 February 2017). "Emmanuel Macron peut-il être inquiété dans l'affaire des " frais de bouche " ?". Le Monde (in French). ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron et les 120.000 euros de Bercy". Le Journal du Dimanche (in French). 26 January 2017. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron, bulle médiatique et fantasme d'une gauche en recomposition". Le Huffington Post. 12 March 2016. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Huertas, Hubert. "Croquis. De Mélenchon à Macron, les ressorts d'un déséquilibre". Mediapart (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Michaela Wiegel: Seine Lehrerin, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 9 May 2017, p. 9. "Pour Claude Perdriel, propriétaire de Challenges, "c'est Macron!"". L'Opinion (in French). 17 October 2016. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron, "candidat des médias": autopsie d'un choix implicite". Libération (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron, le candidat des médias". Le Monde diplomatique (in French). 1 May 2017. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron est-il le candidat des médias ?". Le Point (in French). 1 March 2017. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Sgherri, Marie-Sandrine (15 February 2017). "Emmanuel Macron, le produit de l'année ?". Le Point (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Comment Macron est devenu un phénomène médiatique". Challenges (in French). Archived from the original on 9 January 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "De DSK à Macron, l'étonnant parcours d'Ismaël Emelien". L'Express (in French). 25 October 2016. Archived from the original on 8 May 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "BFMTV diffuse autant de Macron que de Fillon, Hamon, Mélenchon et Le Pen réunis !". Marianne (in French). 21 February 2017. Archived from the original on 22 February 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Bernard Mourad quitte Altice pour rejoindre l'équipe d'Emmanuel Macron". Challenges (in French). Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Présidentielle: polémique après une poignée de mains entre Emmanuel Macron et Ruth Elkrief". Franceinfo (in French). 27 April 2017. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Bayrou propose "une offre d'alliance" à Macron qui "accepte"". Libération (in French). Archived from the original on 23 September 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron et François Bayrou, l'alliance pour la présidentielle". L'Express (in French). 22 February 2017. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Sondage: Fillon s'effondre et serait éliminé dès le 1er tour". Challenges (in French). Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron président selon un nouveau sondage". RTL.fr (in French). Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Pauline De Saint-Rémy; Loïc Farge (16 February 2017). "Certains proches de Macron s'interrogent sur "l'absence de programme"". RTL. Archived from the original on 4 March 2017. Retrieved 3 March 2017. David Ponchelet (2 March 2017). "Programme d'Emmanuel Macron: que promet-il pour les Outre-mer ?". franceinfo. Archived from the original on 2 March 2017. Retrieved 3 March 2017. "Qui sont les soutiens d'Emmanuel Macron ?". Le Monde. 28 February 2017. Archived from the original on 2 March 2017. Retrieved 3 March 2017. "La grande mosquée de Paris appelle à voter "massivement" Macron". Le Figaro (in French). 24 April 2017. Archived from the original on 28 April 2017. Retrieved 27 April 2017. "Emmanuel Macron se voit en "président des patriotes face à la menace nationaliste"". Le Parisien. 23 April 2017. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Berdah, Arthur (24 April 2017). "François Hollande: "Pour ma part, je voterai Emmanuel Macron"". Le Figaro (in French). ISSN 0182-5852. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Juncker breaks tradition with support for Macron Archived 28 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine". EUobserver. 24 April 2017. "Obama wishes French presidential hopeful Macron good luck ahead of key vote Archived 21 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine". CNBC. 21 April 2017. "Débat Macron-Le Pen: la presse étrangère abasourdie par la violence des échanges". La Tribune (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Mark Stone (5 March 2017). "Is Russia interfering in the French election? One of Emmanuel Macron's aides claims so". Sky News. Archived from the original on 16 May 2017. Retrieved 6 May 2017. "En marche ! dénonce un piratage " massif et coordonné " de la campagne de Macron". Le Monde (in French). 6 May 2017. ISSN 1950-6244. Archived from the original on 18 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "Les 'Macron Leaks', itinéraire d'une opération de déstabilisation politique". rts.ch (in French). Archived from the original on 10 May 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. Eric Auchard and Bate Felix (5 May 2017). "Macron's French presidential campaign emails leaked online". Reuters. Frankfurt/Paris. Archived from the original on 7 May 2017. Retrieved 6 May 2017. "La campagne de Macron cible de tentatives de piratage de hackers russes". Le Point (in French). 25 April 2017. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "WikiLeaks releases thousands of hacked Macron campaign emails". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "French election: Macron takes action over offshore claims". BBC News. 4 May 2017. Archived from the original on 8 July 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "Résultats de l'élection présidentielle 2017". interieur.gouv.fr/Elections/Les-resultats/Presidentielles/elecresult__presidentielle-2017 (in French). Archived from the original on 10 July 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Macron va démissionner de la présidence d'En marche!". Le Figaro (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Les 577 candidats de "La République en marche" seront connus jeudi 11 mai". La Tribune (in French). Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Plowright, Adam (7 May 2017). "Emmanuel Macron: a 39-year-old political prodigy". MSN. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 20 February 2020. "En direct, Emmanuel Macron élu président: " Je défendrai la France, ses intérêts vitaux, son image "". Le Monde. 7 May 2017. Archived from the original on 7 May 2017. Retrieved 7 May 2017. Leicester, John; Corbet, Sylvie. "Emmanuel Macron becomes France's youngest president". Toronto Sun. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 14 May 2017. "Macron the mould-breaker – France's youngest leader since Napoleon". Reuters. 7 May 2017. Archived from the original on 6 July 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2017. C.Sa (8 May 2017). "Passation de pouvoir: François Hollande passera "le flambeau" à Macron dimanche 14 mai". Le Parisien (in French). Archived from the original on 8 May 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2017. Grammont, Stéphane (14 May 2017). "Patrick Strzoda, ancien préfet de Bretagne, directeur de cabinet d'Emmanuel Macron". France 3 Bretagne. Archived from the original on 9 July 2023. Retrieved 15 May 2017. Penicaud, Céline (14 May 2017). "Le parcours fulgurant d'Ismaël Emelien, le nouveau conseiller spécial d'Emmanuel Macron". BFM TV. Archived from the original on 16 May 2017. Retrieved 15 May 2017. "France's Macron names Republican Philippe as PM". BBC News. 15 May 2017. Archived from the original on 15 May 2017. Retrieved 15 May 2017. "Le premier ministre Philippe prépare " un gouvernement rassembleur de compétences "". Le Monde. 15 May 2017. Archived from the original on 15 May 2017. Retrieved 15 May 2017. Narayan, Chandrika (15 May 2017). "French President Macron heads to Berlin for his first official foreign visit". CNN. Archived from the original on 16 May 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2017. "Emmanuel Macron and Angela Merkel pledge to draw up 'common road map' for Europe". The Telegraph. 15 May 2017. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2017. "Résultats des élections législatives 2017". interieur.gouv.fr/Elections/Les-resultats/Legislatives/elecresult__legislatives-2017. Archived from the original on 19 July 2017. Retrieved 26 August 2019. "Macron's government admits French Senate elections a 'failure'". South China Morning Post. Associated Press. 25 September 2017. Archived from the original on 9 August 2022. Retrieved 8 August 2022. "France's Macron picks Jean Castex as PM after Philippe resigns". BBC News. 3 July 2020. Archived from the original on 3 July 2020. Retrieved 17 May 2021. Momtaz, Rym (3 July 2020). "Picking low-profile French PM, Macron bets big on himself". Politico. Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 17 May 2021. "France bans hiring of spouses by politicians in wake of Fillon scandal". Reuters. 27 July 2017. Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017. "French vote brings Macron's anti-sleaze law closer". Anadolu Agency. Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017. Masters, James. "Emmanuel Macron under fire over wife's 'First Lady' role". CNN. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017. "France: Macron to abandon plans for official first lady". BBC News. 8 August 2017. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017. "France's parliament approves bill to clean up politics". Reuters. 9 August 2017. Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 12 August 2017. Pierre Briacon, "Emmanuel Macron plunges head-first into labor reform: France's new president is counting on divisions in the labor movement and fast-track legislation", Politico (17 May 2017). Archived 2 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Liz Alderman, "In French Labor Overhaul, Union Leader Offers a Way to a Compromise", The New York Times (20 June 2017). Archived 31 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Vey, Jean-Baptiste; Kar-Gupta, Sudip (7 August 2017). Balmforth, Richard (ed.). "France's Macron, on Eastern Europe trip, to raise issue of cheap labor". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 December 2017. Retrieved 29 December 2017. Rubin, Alissa J. (31 August 2017). "France Unveils Contentious Labor Overhaul in Big Test for Macron". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 21 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017. Jennifer Thompson and Madison Marriage, "Macron's reform agenda faces resistance", Financial Times. Archived 3 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Corbet, Sylvie (23 May 2017). "Macron Tries to Sell Plan to Reform France's Labor Market". U.S. News & World Report. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. "French parliament approves Macron's labour reforms". France 24. 3 August 2017. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017. "Macron signs French labor reform decrees". Reuters. Archived from the original on 21 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017. "France sees big drop in unemployment rate in boost for Macron". 25 October 2017. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Willsher, Kim (16 January 2018). "France will not allow another refugee camp in Calais, says Macron". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 February 2018. Retrieved 11 February 2018. Chassany, Anne-Sylvaine (16 January 2018). "Macron tries to answer critics by striking a balance on migration". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 12 February 2018. Retrieved 11 February 2018. "Italy says 'arrogant' France could become main enemy on migration" Archived 24 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Reuters. "France to 'take back control' of immigration policy". Luxembourg Times. 6 November 2019. Archived from the original on 7 November 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2019. Chrisafis, Angelique (19 July 2017). "Head of French military quits after row with Emmanuel Macron". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 21 July 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2017. "French army chief resigns over Macron spat". Politico. 19 July 2017. Archived from the original on 19 July 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2017. "Macron names François Lecointre new armed forces chief". France 24. 19 July 2017. Archived from the original on 22 July 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2017. "French government sees EU credibility in reach with 2018 budget". Reuters. Archived from the original on 21 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017. "Macron fights 'president of the rich' tag after ending wealth tax". Reuters. Archived from the original on 21 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017. Dyson, Richard; Meadows, Sam (27 October 2017). "British expats among those benefiting as Macron slashes French wealth tax". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Samuel, Henry (2 February 2018). "Emmanuel Macron takes France by surprise by unveiling 'voluntary redundancy' plan for bloated state sector". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 11 February 2018. "France's Resistance to Change Grows as Macron Vows New Pension Plan". TrueNewsSource. Archived from the original on 9 December 2019. Retrieved 8 December 2019. "Will Macron's Compromise on Pension Plan Mellow Protests in France?". True News Source. Archived from the original on 15 January 2020. Retrieved 14 January 2020. Keohane, David (29 February 2020). "French government adopts pension reform by decree". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 29 February 2020. Elzas, Sarah (13 January 2021). "Macron to revive controversial pension overhaul once Covid is under control". RFI. Archived from the original on 25 August 2023. Retrieved 25 August 2023. "Macron urges French police to make full use of draconian anti-terror powers". 19 October 2017. Archived from the original on 24 May 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2018. "France to enshrine some state of emergency measures into law". Deutsche-Welle. Archived from the original on 21 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017. "French parliament passes controversial anti-terror law". Anadolu Agency. Archived from the original on 21 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017. "French parliament adopts controversial anti-terror bill". France 24. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017. "French parliament adopts controversial anti-terror bill". Deutsche-Welle. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 5 November 2017. "Macron rejects Corsican language demand". BBC News. 7 February 2018. Archived from the original on 10 February 2018. Retrieved 11 February 2018. "Macron backs Corsica mention in French constitution, rejects other dem". Reuters U.K. Archived from the original on 12 February 2018. Retrieved 11 February 2018. "Emmanuel Macron to propose reorganization of Islam in France". Politico. 11 February 2018. Archived from the original on 11 February 2018. Retrieved 11 February 2018. "'Their knuckles turned white': Donald Trump and Emmanuel Macron's awkward handshake". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2017. "Macron 'wins battle of the alphas' in handshake with Donald Trump". London Evening Standard. 25 May 2017. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 21 July 2017. "Macron slams Russian media 'lies' during muscular exchange with Putin at Versailles". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2017. "Macron denounces Russian media on Putin visit". BBC News. Archived from the original on 9 July 2017. Retrieved 21 July 2017. Chrisafis, Angelique (29 May 2017). "Macron warns over Syrian chemical weapons in frank meeting with Putin". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 21 July 2017. Retrieved 21 July 2017. Statements by Theresa May and Emmanuel Macron on the Syria Strike Archived 15 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times (13 April 2018). Helene Cooper, Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Ben Hubbard, U.S., Britain and France Strike Syria Over Suspected Chemical Weapons Attack Archived 14 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times (13 April 2018). "Emmanuel Macron: Fighting Islamist terror is France's top priority". Deutsche-Welle. Archived from the original on 21 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017. "France's Macron urges better long-term relations with Russia". BCNN1. 15 February 2020. Archived from the original on 20 May 2020. Retrieved 15 February 2020. "The Macron method". Politico. 16 October 2019. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Oliphant, Roland; Chazan, David (25 August 2019). "Iranian foreign minister Javad Zarif arrives in Biarritz in surprise visit to G7 leaders summit". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Pennetier, Marine; Irish, John (25 March 2019). "France seals multi-billion dollar deals with China, but questions Belt and Road project". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 May 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2022. Rym Momtaz, "Macron steals Trump's thunder with Chinese Airbus order: France lands €30B aviation deal with Beijing", POLITICO, March 25, 2019. Archived 26 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine. Irish, John (23 July 2020). "Macron seeks EU sanctions over Turkish 'violations' in Greek waters". Reuters. Archived from the original on 23 July 2020. Retrieved 14 August 2020. "France's Macron slams Turkey's 'criminal' role in Libya". Al Jazeera. 30 June 2020. Archived from the original on 23 August 2020. Retrieved 14 August 2020. "Turkey warns Egypt over Libya and lashes out at Macron's role". The Japan Times. 20 July 2020. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2020. "France-Turkey spat over Libya arms exposes NATO's limits". Associated Press. 5 July 2020. Archived from the original on 3 March 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2020. Riley-Smith, Ben (12 June 2021). "Boris Johnson infuriated after Emmanuel Macron suggested Northern Ireland was not part of UK". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 24 June 2021. "G7 summit: Northern Ireland part of one great indivisible UK, says PM". BBC News. 13 June 2021. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. Woodcock, Andrew (15 June 2021). "Brexit row deepens as Elysee Palace rejects claims of Macron confusion over Northern Ireland". Independent. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. "Explainer: Why is a submarine deal sparking a diplomatic crisis?". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 25 September 2021. Shields, Bevan (18 September 2021). "France recalls its ambassadors to Australia and United States amid submarine fury". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2021. Wadhams, Nick; Adghirni, Samy; Nussbaum, Ania (17 September 2021). "France Recalls Its Ambassador to U.S. for First Time Over Subs". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "Macron, Biden agree to soothe tensions after submarine row". France 24. 22 September 2021. Archived from the original on 23 September 2021. Retrieved 25 September 2021. Fung, Katherine (21 September 2021). "Read Joe Biden and Emmanuel Macron's Rare Joint Statement on Recent Rift". newsweek.com. Archived from the original on 25 September 2021. Retrieved 25 September 2021. "Trattato tra Italia e Francia: Draghi e Macron siglano l'intesa". rainews (in Italian). Archived from the original on 30 November 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2021. Quirinale treaty: Will a new French-Italian pact shift the balance of power in Europe? Archived 25 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine, EuroNews McGee, Luke (8 April 2022). "Emmanuel Macron has a grand vision for the West. Putin has exposed the limits of his influence". CNN. Archived from the original on 29 April 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2022. Gijs, Camille (22 April 2022). "Macron: Keep talking to Putin to avoid 'new world war'". Politico Europe. Archived from the original on 26 April 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2022. "Popularité: Macron fait un peu mieux que Hollande, un peu moins bien que Sarkozy, deux semaines après l'élection". LCI (in French). Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "Cote de popularité: 62% des Français satisfaits d'Emmanuel Macron président (sondage)" (in French). Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "French President Macron, PM Philippe approval ratings rise: poll". Reuters. 24 June 2017. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "Nouvelle forte baisse de la popularité d'Emmanuel Macron". Le Point (in French). 27 August 2017. Archived from the original on 31 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "French military chief quits after Macron clash". Sky News. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "Macron seizes French shipyards to block Italian take-over". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2017. Chrisafis, Angelique (24 July 2017). "Housing benefit cuts spark row as Emmanuel Macron's poll ratings fall". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "Regain de popularité pour Emmanuel Macron et Édouard Philippe" (in French). Archived from the original on 30 September 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "L'action d'Emmanuel Macron". ELABE (in French). 27 September 2017. Archived from the original on 30 September 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "Réformes: 69% des Français jugent "injuste" la politique menée par Macron". L'Express (in French). 27 September 2017. Archived from the original on 31 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Sharkov, Damien (24 September 2018). "In France, Macron's Popularity Hits Record Low". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 3 December 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2018. "Juillet 2020: la cote de confiance d'E. Macron atteint un niveau plus élevé qu'avant la crise". Elabe. 2 July 2020. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2021. "Macron's popularity climbs after signing EU pandemic stimulus, reshuffling gov't". France24. 30 July 2020. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 26 January 2021. "Enquête, profil du suspect, réactions politiques... ce que l'on sait de l'affaire Benalla". Le Monde. 19 July 2018. Archived from the original on 19 July 2018. Retrieved 20 July 2018. "Emmanuel Macron, premier président réélu depuis Jacques Chirac en 2002". L'Alsace (in French). 25 April 2022. Archived from the original on 18 August 2023. Retrieved 18 August 2023. "Macron wins French presidential election". Le Monde. 24 April 2022. Archived from the original on 29 September 2023. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "Extrême droite au plus haut, abstention record depuis 1969... Les enseignements du second tour". BFM TV. 25 April 2022. Archived from the original on 17 August 2023. Retrieved 17 August 2023. "Macron appeals for 'solid majority' ahead of legislative election run-offs". France 24. 14 June 2022. Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Retrieved 15 August 2023. Pineau, Elizabeth; Hummel, Tassilo (20 June 2022). "France risks gridlock after Macron handed hung parliament". Reuters. Archived from the original on 9 June 2023. Retrieved 9 June 2023. Marie-Leconte, Julie (23 June 2022). "Législatives: pourquoi Emmanuel Macron chiffre-t-il à 'une trentaine' les députés qui lui manquent pour la majorité absolue, et non à 44?". FranceInfo (in French). Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 9 June 2023. Deprieck, Matthieu (19 June 2022). "Castaner, Ferrand, Mignola... la majorité présidentielle décapitée". l'Opinion (in French). Archived from the original on 24 June 2023. Retrieved 24 June 2023. Robin, Julien (20 June 2022). "Ministres battus aux législatives: ce qu'a changé la règle de de voir démissionner après une défaite". Le JDD (in French). Archived from the original on 24 June 2023. Retrieved 24 June 2023. "Macron urges minority government to 'hang in there' after cabinet reshuffle". France 24. 4 July 2022. Archived from the original on 14 December 2022. Retrieved 9 June 2023. Nelken, Sacha (4 July 2022). "Damien Abad, de la prise de guerre au boulet gouvernemental en un mois". Libération (in French). Archived from the original on 10 June 2023. Retrieved 10 June 2023. "Incidents au Stade de France: comment la finale de la Ligue des champions s'est transformée en crise politique (et diplomatique)". FranceInfo (in French). 31 May 2022. Archived from the original on 10 June 2023. Retrieved 10 June 2023. "France's hung parliament passes 20-bn-euro inflation package". RFI. AFP. 22 July 2022. Archived from the original on 9 June 2023. Retrieved 9 June 2023. "French parliament votes to end Covid emergency measures, border control still possible". RFI. 27 July 2022. Archived from the original on 13 June 2023. Retrieved 13 June 2023. Mouterde, Perrine; Pécout, Adrien (17 May 2022). "French Parliament passes law to accelerate construction of new nuclear reactors". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 9 June 2023. Retrieved 9 June 2023. Baranger, Denis (16 November 2022). "Le nouveau visage de l'article 49-3". blog.juspoliticum.com. JP Blog. Archived from the original on 28 July 2023. Retrieved 29 July 2023. "French government overrules Parliament for tenth time to pass budget". Le Monde (in english). 16 December 2022. Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Retrieved 15 August 2023. Cohen, Roger; Breeden, Aurelien (20 March 2023) [16 March 2023]. "France's Pension Plan: Macron Pushes French Pension Bill Through Without Full Vote". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 June 2023. "" A neuf voix près ": La principale motion de censure a été rejetée à l'Assemblée nationale". Le Monde.fr. 21 March 2023. Archived from the original on 12 June 2023. Retrieved 17 June 2023. Gentilhomme, Célestine (12 June 2023). "Retraites: la motion de censure de la Nupes rejetée à l'Assemblée". Le Figaro (in French). Archived from the original on 12 June 2023. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "At least 150 arrests in protests across France over police killing of teen". France 24. 29 June 2023. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "What's behind the unrest in France?". The New York Times. 29 June 2023. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. Mestre, Abel (30 June 2023). "Violences urbaines: dans une circulaire, Eric Dupond-Moretti demande une réponse judiciaire " rapide, ferme et systématique " et vise notamment les parents". Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. Noor Haq, Sana; Berlinger, Joshua (1 July 2023). "Protests are sweeping France. Here's what you need to know". CNN. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. Michel Rose (20 July 2023), Macron reshuffles ministers after French riots "stunned" country Archived 22 July 2023 at the Wayback Machine Reuters. "Macron présente une loi de programmation militaire 2024–30 de «transformation des armées»". Le Figaro (in French). 20 January 2023. Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Retrieved 15 August 2023. "Que contient la nouvelle loi de programmation militaire, adoptée par le Parlement ?". France info (in French). 13 July 2023. Archived from the original on 30 July 2023. Retrieved 15 August 2023. "The immigration bill unites left and right against Macron". Courrier international (in French). 2 February 2023. Archived from the original on 24 August 2023. Retrieved 24 August 2023. "French PM delays immigration bill due to lack of parliamentary majority". France 24. 26 April 2023. Archived from the original on 24 August 2023. Retrieved 24 August 2023. "Emmanuel Macron wants to " significantly reduce immigration "". Le Parisien (in French). 23 August 2023. Archived from the original on 24 August 2023. Retrieved 24 August 2023. "French parliament rejects Macron's immigration bill in surprise vote". France 24. 11 December 2023. Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "'End of reign': Macron faces ungovernable France after shock immigration loss". Politico. 12 December 2023. Archived from the original on 13 December 2023. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "Tougher French immigration bill passes, Macron's parliament majority wobbles". Reuters. 20 December 2023. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 19 December 2023. "French health minister resigns over Macron's controversial immigration law". Le Monde. 20 December 2023. Archived from the original on 22 December 2023. Retrieved 22 December 2023. "France's Macron promises more referendums". France 24 (with AFP). 4 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 5 October 2023. "France enshrines abortion as a constitutional right in historic vote". France 24. 4 March 2024. Retrieved 16 March 2024. "Macron appoints rising star as PM, leaves presidential hopefuls stunned". Politico. 9 January 2024. Archived from the original on 10 January 2024. Retrieved 10 January 2024. "The reshuffle seen by the "left wing" of the macronie: "It's no longer pragmatism, it's prostitution"". Libération (in French). 12 January 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2024. "Attal government: macronism shifts to the right". Les Échos (in French). 11 January 2023. Archived from the original on 12 January 2024. Retrieved 12 January 2024. "France unveils €10 billion budget cuts as growth slows". Le Monde. 22 February 2024. Retrieved 21 March 2024. "Crisis meeting around Emmanuel Macron to talk about poor polls and finances in the red". Le Monde (in French). 21 March 2024. Retrieved 21 March 2024. "Macron, Scholz and Draghi arrive in Kyiv for historic visit". Politico. 16 June 2022. Archived from the original on 16 June 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2022. "Draghi, Scholz e Macron arrivano a Kiev. Prima tappa a Irpin". la Repubblica (in Italian). 15 June 2022. Archived from the original on 16 June 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2022. "French President Macron tells Jake Tapper Russia's invasion of Ukraine is a "post Covid-19 consequence" and countries that do not align with Ukraine are complicit in a new wave of imperialism". CNN. 22 September 2022. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Macron Pledges to Talk Tough on Gas When G-7 Meets". Bloomberg. 6 September 2022. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "Macron Accuses US of Trade 'Double Standard' Amid Energy Crunch". Bloomberg. 21 October 2022. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "Funérailles d'Elizabeth II : Emmanuel Macron rend un dernier hommage à la reine". Franceinfo (in French). 19 September 2022. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. Grylls, George (24 December 2023). "Bien sûr! President Macron will be at King's coronation". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. "Macron meets Meloni on her first day in office". Le Monde. 23 October 2022. Archived from the original on 21 June 2023. Retrieved 21 June 2023. Anderlini, Jamil; Caulcutt, Clea (9 April 2023). "Europe must resist pressure to become 'America's followers,' says Macron". politico.eu. POLITICO. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 10 April 2023. "Macron outlines vision for 'European sovereignty' at a Hague speech disrupted by hecklers". FRANCE 24. AFP. 11 April 2023. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 31 May 2023. Hanke Vela, Jakob; Camut, Nicolas (7 June 2023). "Most Europeans agree with Macron on China and US, report shows". politico.eu. Politico. Archived from the original on 8 June 2023. Retrieved 8 June 2023. "Ethiopia's prime minister wants Paris to invest". Le Monde. 8 February 2023. Archived from the original on 23 July 2023. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "REPLAY – En Slovaquie, Emmanuel Macron s'adresse aux Européens de l'Est • FRANCE 24". FRANCE 24. 31 May 2023. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 31 May 2023. misrepresented by Patrick Wintour of the Guardian as having occurred in Moldova at "an EU leaders conference" Wintour, Patrick (31 May 2023). "Negotiating with Putin may have to take priority over war crimes trial, says Macron". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. "France to intensify arms delivery to help Ukraine counter-offensive". Reuters. 12 June 2023. Archived from the original on 25 July 2023. Retrieved 14 July 2023. "France to send SCALP long-range missiles to Ukraine". Le Monde. 11 July 2023. Archived from the original on 14 July 2023. Retrieved 14 July 2023. Adler, Katya; Luckhurst, Toby (11 November 2023). "Macron calls on Israel to stop killing Gaza's women and babies". BBC News. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2023. Porter, Catherine (22 June 2023). "Countries on Front Lines of Climate Change Seek New Lifeline in Paris". The New York Times. The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 June 2023. Retrieved 23 June 2023. "Exclusive: Macron calls for international taxation system in push for climate solidarity". France24. 23 June 2023. Archived from the original on 10 July 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. "Émeutes: Emmanuel Macron reporte sa visite d'état en Allemagne" (in French). BFMTV (with AFP). 1 July 2023. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "Macron Urges French Unity in Response to Hamas Attack, Israeli Airstrikes". The Wall Street Journal. 14 October 2023. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "Alain Gresh: 'Macron's party has a strong anti-Palestinian position'". Al Jazeera. 18 October 2023. Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "France's Macron says Iran comments praising Hamas attack unacceptable". Reuters. 10 October 2023. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "Israel Launches New Strikes on Gaza Targets as Macron Visits Jerusalem". VOA News. 24 October 2024. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Macron says 'no justification' for bombing civilians as he calls for Gaza ceasefire". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. 10 November 2023. ISSN 1756-3224. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2023. "France Rejects Genocide Accusations Against Israel in Gaza". The New York Times. 17 January 2024. "Nato allies reject Emmanuel Macron idea of troops to Ukraine". BBC News. 28 January 2024. "CETA is a "very good deal" for French agriculture, says Macron in Brussels". Le Figaro (in French). 22 March 2024. Lewis, Paul; Davies, Harry; O'Carroll, Lisa; Goodley, Simon; Lawrence, Felicity (10 July 2022). "Uber broke laws, duped police and secretly lobbied governments, leak reveals". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 11 July 2022. Rankin, Jennifer; Chrisafis, Angelique. "'A state scandal': calls for inquiry into Macron's links to Uber lobbying". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 July 2022. Retrieved 11 July 2022. Chrisafis, Angelique (12 July 2022). "Emmanuel Macron 'proud' of supporting Uber's lobbying drive in France". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 July 2022. Retrieved 15 July 2022. Macron promet la Constitució a través del seu representant a Casa de la Vall Archived 8 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine (in Catalan) "Coronavirus: Face à la crise, l'Andorre demande de l'aide à la France, qui lui envoie une fin de non-recevoir". L'Indépendant. 14 May 2020. Archived from the original on 17 November 2022. Retrieved 17 November 2022. VIDEO. Les images du mariage d'Emmanuel Macron et de Brigitte Trogneux, diffusées Archived 9 February 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Le Parisien (in French)(22 November 2016). Druckerman, Pamela (2 February 2017). "Sex and the French Elections". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 August 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2017. "Emmanuel Macron – The new French minister of the economy". Cosmopolis. 27 August 2014. Archived from the original on 8 June 2020. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Serhan, Yasmeen (8 February 2017). "Emmanuel Macron's Unexpected Shot at the French Presidency". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 4 July 2018. Retrieved 8 February 2017. "Emmanuel Macron Enigmatic Aspirant". The Australian. Retrieved 25 April 2017. "Brigitte Macron – Trogneux: le rôle essentiel de la femme d'Emmanuel Macron". Linternaute (in French). Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 27 January 2017. "Emmanuel Macron and the Barren Elite of a Changing Continent". Washington Examiner. 14 May 2017. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 23 June 2018. "Macron, one year on: What's changed in France?". FRANCE 24 English. 4 May 2018. Archived from the original on 7 July 2019. Retrieved 31 August 2018 – via YouTube. Bacqué, Raphaëlle (6 November 2011). "Henry Hermand, acteur de la deuxième gauche et mentor d'Emmanuel Macron, est mort". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 16 April 2017. Retrieved 28 April 2017. Il avait enfin aidé Emmanuel Macron, personnellement d'abord par un prêt de 550 000 euros afin que le jeune inspecteur des finances acquière son premier appartement parisien, puis politiquement en abritant récemment dans ses bureaux les premiers militants d'En marche, l'association qui œuvre aujourd'hui à la candidature de l'ancien ministre de l'économie. Raulin, Nathalie (7 November 2016). "Décès de Henry Hermand, le bienfaiteur de Macron". Libération. Retrieved 28 April 2017. Quelques années plus tard, il accordera au jeune inspecteur des finances un prêt personnel de 550 000 euros pour financer l'achat de son premier appartement parisien. Enthousiasmé par le lancement d'En Marche, il héberge dans ses bureaux parisiens le mouvement naissant, avant que ce dernier ne déménage tour Montparnasse. Prissette, Nicolas (2016). Emmanuel Macron en marche vers l'Élysée. France: Plon. p. 240. ISBN 978-2-259-25153-2. Fulda, Anne (2017). Emmanuel Macron, un jeune homme si parfait. Plon. p. 193. Fulda, Anne (13 December 2012). "Emmanuel Macron: Le cerveau droit de Hollande". Le Figaro (in French). ISSN 0182-5852. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. "In France, a Stark Debate and a Stark Choice". The New York Times. 4 May 2017. Archived from the original on 21 May 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017. Tsioulcas, Anastasia (9 May 2017). "Something You Didn't Know About Emmanuel Macron: He's A Pianist". NPR. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017. "La Culture selon Emmanuel Macron. Grand entretien pour classiquenews". Classique News (in French). 1 April 2017. Archived from the original on 16 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017. "Pyrénées: Emmanuel Macron en marche sur les terres de son enfance". France 3 Occitanie. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Stade Bleu Présidentiel: JO 2024, politique sportive, l'OM... ce qu'il faut retenir de l'interview d'Emmanuel Macron". France Bleu (in French). 24 February 2017. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. Willsher, Kim (9 April 2016). "Emmanuel Macron: France's political prince eyeing the Elysée". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "Emmanuel Macron interview (English): Getting "tough" on Brexit". Archived from the original on 16 June 2017. Retrieved 21 July 2017 – via YouTube. "Emmanuel Macron: 'I'm not a naive optimist' BBC News". Archived from the original on 15 April 2017. Retrieved 21 July 2017 – via YouTube. "Emmanuel Macron porte plainte pour "harcèlement"". Valeurs actuelles. 15 August 2017. Archived from the original on 15 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "Macron retire sa plainte contre un photographe". L'Expansion. 15 September 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2017. Quinault Maupoil, Tristan (28 August 2017). "Un nouveau chien à l'Elysée: Nemo, adopté par les Macron à la SPA". Le Figaro. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. "France's new president is a 'zombie Catholic'". Catholic News Agency. Archived from the original on 26 August 2019. Retrieved 26 August 2019. "Meeting with Pope puts Macron's religious views in spotlight". The Local. AFP. 25 June 2018. Archived from the original on 26 June 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2018. "Emmanuel Macron: "OM made me dream, cry, vibrate"". Archived from the original on 2 April 2017. Retrieved 1 April 2017. "'France were lucky,' Belgian PM tells Macron". Reuters. 11 July 2018. Archived from the original on 15 July 2018. Retrieved 17 July 2018. Morrin, Siobhan (16 July 2018). "Controversy, Joy and Politics: 5 Takeaways From the World Cup Final". Time. Archived from the original on 20 July 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018. "Soaked but smiling, Croatian president wins admirers at World Cup..." Reuters. 15 July 2018. Archived from the original on 17 July 2018. Retrieved 17 July 2018. "French President Macron Has Plenty of Fun at World Cup Final". The New York Times. Associated Press. 17 July 2018. Archived from the original on 21 July 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2018. Ellison, Jo (16 July 2018). "Macron, Oprah and why we should embrace the hug". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 21 July 2018. Retrieved 19 July 2018. Hoffman, Ashley (18 July 2018). "Emmanuel Macron Knows How to Celebrate a World Cup Victory". Time. Archived from the original on 20 July 2018. Retrieved 20 July 2018. "COVID-19: French president Emmanuel Macron tests positive for coronavirus". Sky News. 17 December 2020. Archived from the original on 17 December 2020. Retrieved 17 December 2020. Smith, Patrick (17 December 2020). "French President Emmanuel Macron has contracted coronavirus". NBC News. Archived from the original on 17 December 2020. Retrieved 17 December 2020. "Honorary awards" (PDF). 2014. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 October 2016. Retrieved 7 October 2017. "ACUERDO por el que se otorga la Condecoración de la Orden Mexicana del Águila Azteca". DOF. Archived from the original on 1 December 2022. Retrieved 14 February 2023. "France's Macron calls for efforts to tackle climate change – Metro News". Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 7 September 2017. "Exposition-parcours "Décorations présidentielles & diplomatie" | La grande chancellerie". www.legiondhonneur.fr. Archived from the original on 24 September 2022. Retrieved 24 September 2022. "En photos, les moments forts de la visite de Macron à Tunis". 1 February 2018. Archived from the original on 1 February 2018. Retrieved 1 February 2018. "Modtagere af danske dekorationer". kongehuset.dk (in Danish). 12 December 2017. Archived from the original on 12 May 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2019. "Suomen Valkoisen Ruusun ritarikunnan suurristin ketjuineen ulkomaalaiset saajat". ritarikunnat.fi (in Finnish). Archived from the original on 28 November 2018. Retrieved 30 August 2018. "BTS becomes the youngest to receive Order of Cultural Merit". koreatimes.co.kr. 9 October 2018. Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 18 November 2020. "Légion d'honneur au président égyptien Sissi: l'écrivain italien Corrado Augias rend sa décoration" (in French). Archived from the original on 24 September 2022. Retrieved 24 September 2022. "Pranzo di Stato offerto dal Presidente della Repubblica Francese in onore del Presidente Mattarella". Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 6 July 2021. "UAE President meets with French Republic President". wam.ae. 18 July 2022. Archived from the original on 9 July 2023. Retrieved 18 December 2022. Twitter Staatsbezoek president Frankrijk: Dinsdag 11 april, Amsterdam en Den Haag Archived 12 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine – website of the Dutch royal house "Charles III à Paris : Cette grande décision prise pour protéger Brigitte Macron (ZAPTV) - Voici". 20 September 2023. "Statsbesök från Frankrike". "Maia Sandu i-a oferit lui Macron "Ordinul Republicii", iar liderul francez i-a acordat cea mai înaltă distincție a Franței". "Decreto". 19 December 2012. Archived from the original on 5 January 2018. Retrieved 1 February 2018. "Lula condecora Macron com a Ordem Nacional do Cruzeiro do Sul". Métropoles. "Westfälischer Friedenspreis für Macron". tagesschau.de (in German). 3 March 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2023. Chamorel, Patrick. "Macron versus the yellow vests". Journal of Democracy 30.4 (2019): 48–62. doi:10.1353/jod.2019.0068. Chopin, Thierry. "Emmanuel Macron, France and Europe 'France is back in Europe': on which terms". (Fondation Robert Schuman, 2018). Chopin, Thierry, and Samuel BH Faure. "Presidential Election 2022: A Euroclash Between a "Liberal" and a "Neo-Nationalist" France Is Coming". Intereconomics 2021.2 (2021): 75–81. Cole, Alistair. Emmanuel Macron and the two years that changed France. (Manchester University Press, 2020). Elgie, Robert. "The election of Emmanuel Macron and the new French party system: a return to the éternel marais?". Modern & Contemporary France 26.1 (2018): 15–29. Hewlett, Nick. "The phantom revolution. The presidential and parliamentary elections of 2017". Modern & Contemporary France 25.4 (2017): 377–390. Kutsenko, Andrii. "Emmanuel Macron and Franco-Russian relations at the present stage". Political Science and Security Studies Journal 1.1 (2020): 94–100. doi:10.5281/zenodo.4553586. Mayaffre, Damon (2021). Macron ou le mystère du verbe: Ses discours décryptés par la machine (in French). La tour d'Aigues: Les éditions de l'Aube. ISBN 978-2-8159-3746-7. Nougayrède, Natalie. "France's Gamble: As America Retreats, Macron Steps up". Foreign Affairs 96 (2017): 2+ Pedder, Sophie. Revolution Française: Emmanuel Macron and the quest to reinvent a nation (Bloomsbury, 2018). Perottino, Michel, and Guasti, Petra. "Technocratic populism à la française? The roots and mechanisms of Emmanuel Macron's success". Politics and Governance 8.4 (2020): 545–555. doi:10.17645/pag.v8i4.3412. Tiersky, Ronald. "Macron's World: How the New President Is Remaking France". Foreign Affairs. 97 (2018): 87+. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Emmanuel Macron. Wikiquote has quotations related to Emmanuel Macron. Appearances on C-SPAN Emmanuel Carrère (20 October 2017). "Orbiting Jupiter: My Week with Emmanuel Macron". The Guardian. "Is France's new president a political miracle, or a mirage that is already fading away?".