Utah (/ˈjuːtɑː/ YOO-tah, /ˈjuːtɔː/ YOO-taw; Navajo: Áshįįh Biiʼtó Hahoodzo[citation needed]) is a landlocked state in the Mountain West subregion of the Western United States. It borders Colorado to its east, Wyoming to its northeast, Idaho to its north, Arizona to its south, and Nevada to its west. Utah also touches a corner of New Mexico in the southeast. Of the fifty U.S. states, Utah is the 13th-largest by area; with a population over three million, it is the 30th-most-populous and 11th-least-densely populated. Urban development is mostly concentrated in two areas: the Wasatch Front in the north-central part of the state, which is home to roughly two-thirds of the population and includes the capital city, Salt Lake City; and Washington County in the southwest, with more than 180,000 residents. Most of the western half of Utah lies in the Great Basin. Utah has been inhabited for thousands of years by various indigenous groups such as the ancient Puebloans, Navajo, and Ute. The Spanish were the first Europeans to arrive in the mid-16th century, though the region's difficult geography and harsh climate made it a peripheral part of New Spain and later Mexico. Even while it was Mexican territory, many of Utah's earliest settlers were American, particularly Mormons fleeing marginalization and persecution from the United States via the Mormon Trail. Following the Mexican–American War in 1848, the region was annexed by the U.S., becoming part of the Utah Territory, which included what is now Colorado and Nevada. Disputes between the dominant Mormon community and the federal government delayed Utah's admission as a state; only after the outlawing of polygamy was it admitted in 1896 as the 45th. People from Utah are known as Utahns. Slightly over half of all Utahns are Mormons, the vast majority of whom are members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), which has its world headquarters in Salt Lake City; Utah is the only state where a majority of the population belongs to a single church. A 2023 paper challenged this perception (claiming only 42% of Utahns are Mormons) however most statistics still show a majority of Utah residents belong to the LDS church; estimates from the LDS church suggests 60.68% of Utah's population belongs to the church whilst some sources put the number as high as 68%. The paper replied that membership count done by the LDS Church is too high for several reasons. The LDS Church greatly influences Utahn culture, politics, and daily life, though since the 1990s the state has become more religiously diverse as well as secular. Utah has a highly diversified economy, with major sectors including transportation, education, information technology and research, government services, mining, multi-level marketing, and tourism. Utah has been one of the fastest growing states since 2000, with the 2020 U.S. census confirming the fastest population growth in the nation since 2010. St. George was the fastest-growing metropolitan area in the United States from 2000 to 2005. Utah ranks among the overall best states in metrics such as healthcare, governance, education, and infrastructure. It has the 12th-highest median average income and the least income inequality of any U.S. state. Over time and influenced by climate change, droughts in Utah have been increasing in frequency and severity, putting a further strain on Utah's water security and impacting the state's economy. The name Utah derives from the name of the Ute tribe, meaning 'people of the mountains'. However, no such word exists in the Utes' language, and the Utes refer to themselves as Noochee. The meaning of Utes as 'the mountain people' has been attributed to the neighboring Pueblo Indians, as well as to the Apache word Yuttahih, which means 'one that is higher up' or 'those that are higher up'. In Spanish, it was pronounced Yuta; subsequently, English-speaking people may have adapted the word as Utah. Thousands of years before the arrival of Europeans, the Ancestral Puebloans and the Fremont people lived in what is now known as Utah, some of which spoke languages of the Uto-Aztecan group. Ancestral Pueblo peoples built their homes through excavations in mountains, and the Fremont people built houses of straw before disappearing from the region around the 15th century. Another group of Native Americans, the Navajo, settled in the region around the 18th century. In the mid-18th century, other Uto-Aztecan tribes, including the Goshute, the Paiute, the Shoshone, and the Ute people, also settled in the region. These five groups were present when the first European explorers arrived. The southern Utah region was explored by the Spanish in 1540, led by Francisco Vázquez de Coronado while looking for the legendary Cíbola. A group led by two Catholic priests—sometimes called the Domínguez–Escalante expedition—left Santa Fe in 1776, hoping to find a route to the coast of California. The expedition traveled as far north as Utah Lake and encountered the native residents. The Spanish made further explorations in the region but were not interested in colonizing the area because of its desert nature. In 1821, the year Mexico achieved its independence from Spain, the region became known as part of its territory of Alta California. European trappers and fur traders explored some areas of Utah in the early 19th century from Canada and the United States. The city of Provo, Utah, was named for one Étienne Provost, who visited the area in 1825. The city of Ogden, Utah, was named after Peter Skene Ogden, a Canadian explorer who traded furs in the Weber Valley. In late 1824, Jim Bridger became the first known English-speaking person to sight the Great Salt Lake. Due to the high salinity of its waters, he thought he had found the Pacific Ocean; he subsequently learned this body of water was a giant salt lake. After the discovery of the lake, hundreds of American and Canadian traders and trappers established trading posts in the region. In the 1830s, thousands of migrants traveling from the Eastern United States to the American West began to make stops in the region of the Great Salt Lake, then known as Lake Youta.[citation needed] Following the death of Joseph Smith in 1844, Brigham Young, as president of the Quorum of the Twelve, became the leader of the LDS Church in Nauvoo, Illinois. To address the growing conflicts between his people and their neighbors, Young agreed with Illinois Governor Thomas Ford in October 1845 that the Mormons would leave by the following year. Young and the first group of Mormon pioneers reached the Salt Lake Valley on July 24, 1847. Over the next 22 years, more than 70,000 pioneers crossed the plains and settled in Utah. For the first few years, Brigham Young and the thousands of early settlers of Salt Lake City struggled to survive. The arid desert land was deemed desirable by the Mormons as a place where they could practice their religion without harassment. Settlers buried thirty-six Native Americans in one grave after an outbreak of measles occurred during the winter of 1847. The first group of settlers brought three African slaves with them, making Utah the only place in the western United States to have African slavery. The three slaves, Green Flake, Hark Lay, and Oscar Crosby, came west with the first group of settlers in 1847. Utah was a Mexican territory when the first pioneers arrived in 1847. Early in the Mexican–American War in late 1846, the United States had taken control of New Mexico and California. The entire Southwest became U.S. territory upon the signing of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, February 2, 1848. The treaty was ratified by the United States Senate on March 11. Learning that California and New Mexico were applying for statehood, the settlers of the Utah area (originally having planned to petition for territorial status) applied for statehood with an ambitious plan for a State of Deseret. The Mormon settlements provided pioneers for other settlements in the West. Salt Lake City became the hub of a "far-flung commonwealth" of Mormon settlements. With new church converts coming from the East and around the world, Church leaders often assigned groups of church members as missionaries to establish other settlements throughout the West. They developed irrigation to support fairly large pioneer populations along Utah's Wasatch front (Salt Lake City, Bountiful and Weber Valley, and Provo and Utah Valley). Throughout the remainder of the 19th century, Mormon pioneers established hundreds of other settlements in Utah, Idaho, Nevada, Arizona, Wyoming, California, Canada, and Mexico—including in Las Vegas, Nevada; Franklin, Idaho (the first European settlement in Idaho); San Bernardino, California; Mesa, Arizona; Star Valley, Wyoming; and Carson Valley, Nevada. Prominent settlements in Utah included St. George, Logan, and Manti (where settlers completed the LDS Church's first three temples in Utah, each started after but finished many years before the larger and better-known temple built in Salt Lake City was completed in 1893), as well as Parowan, Cedar City, Bluff, Moab, Vernal, Fillmore (which served as the territorial capital between 1850 and 1856), Nephi, Levan, Spanish Fork, Springville, Provo Bench (now Orem), Pleasant Grove, American Fork, Lehi, Sandy, Murray, Jordan, Centerville, Farmington, Huntsville, Kaysville, Grantsville, Tooele, Roy, Brigham City, and many other smaller towns and settlements. Young had an expansionist view of the territory that he and the Mormon pioneers were settling, calling it Deseret—which according to the Book of Mormon was an ancient word for "honeybee". This is symbolized by the beehive on the Utah flag, and the state's motto, "Industry". The Utah Territory was much smaller than the proposed state of Deseret, but it still contained all of the present states of Nevada and Utah as well as pieces of modern Wyoming and Colorado. It was created with the Compromise of 1850, and Fillmore, named after President Millard Fillmore, was designated the capital. The territory was given the name Utah after the Ute tribe of Native Americans. Salt Lake City replaced Fillmore as the territorial capital in 1856. By 1850, there were around 100 black people in the territory, the majority of whom were slaves. In Salt Lake County, 26 slaves were counted. In 1852, the territorial legislature passed the Act in Relation to Service and the Act for the relief of Indian Slaves and Prisoners formally legalizing slavery in the territory. Slavery was abolished in the territory during the Civil War. In 1850, Salt Lake City sent out a force known as the Nauvoo Legion and engaged the Timpanogos in the Battle at Fort Utah.: 71  Disputes between the Mormon inhabitants and the U.S. government intensified due to the practice of plural marriage, or polygamy, among members of the LDS Church. The Mormons were still pushing for the establishment of a State of Deseret with the new borders of the Utah Territory. Most, if not all, of the members of the U.S. government opposed the polygamous practices of the Mormons. Members of the LDS Church were viewed as un-American and rebellious when news of their polygamous practices spread. In 1857, particularly heinous accusations of abdication of government and general immorality were leveled by former associate justice William W. Drummond, among others. The detailed reports of life in Utah caused the administration of James Buchanan to send a secret military "expedition" to Utah. When the supposed rebellion should be quelled, Alfred Cumming would take the place of Brigham Young as territorial governor. The resulting conflict is known as the Utah War, nicknamed "Buchanan's Blunder" by the Mormon leaders. In September 1857, about 120 American settlers of the Baker–Fancher wagon train, en route to California from Arkansas, were murdered by Utah Territorial Militia and some Paiute Native Americans in the Mountain Meadows massacre. Before troops led by Albert Sidney Johnston entered the territory, Brigham Young ordered all residents of Salt Lake City to evacuate southward to Utah Valley and sent out the Nauvoo Legion to delay the government's advance. Although wagons and supplies were burned, eventually the troops arrived in 1858, and Young surrendered official control to Cumming, although most subsequent commentators claim that Young retained true power in the territory. A steady stream of governors appointed by the president quit the position, often citing the traditions of their supposed territorial government. By agreement with Young, Johnston established Camp Floyd, 40 miles (60 km) away from Salt Lake City to the southwest. Salt Lake City was the last link of the First Transcontinental Telegraph, completed in October 1861. Brigham Young was among the first to send a message, along with Abraham Lincoln and other officials. Because of the American Civil War, federal troops were pulled out of Utah Territory in 1861. This was a boon to the local economy as the army sold everything in camp for pennies on the dollar before marching back east to join the war. The territory was then left in LDS hands until Patrick E. Connor arrived with a regiment of California volunteers in 1862. Connor established Fort Douglas just 3 miles (4.8 km) east of Salt Lake City and encouraged his people to discover mineral deposits to bring more non-Mormons into the territory. Minerals were discovered in Tooele County and miners began to flock to the territory. Beginning in 1865, Utah's Black Hawk War developed into the deadliest conflict in the territory's history. Chief Antonga Black Hawk died in 1870, but fights continued to break out until additional federal troops were sent in to suppress the Ghost Dance of 1872. The war is unique among Indian Wars because it was a three-way conflict, with mounted Timpanogos Utes led by Antonga Black Hawk fighting federal and LDS authorities. On May 10, 1869, the First transcontinental railroad was completed at Promontory Summit, north of the Great Salt Lake. The railroad brought increasing numbers of people into the territory and several influential businesspeople made fortunes there. During the 1870s and 1880s laws were passed to punish polygamists due, in part, to stories from Utah. Notably, Ann Eliza Young—tenth wife to divorce Brigham Young, women's advocate, national lecturer, and author of Wife No. 19 or My Life of Bondage—and Fanny Stenhouse, author of Tell It All: My Life in Mormonism, testified to the happiness of the very early Church members before polygamy. They independently published their books in 1875. These books and the lectures of Ann Eliza Young have been credited with the United States Congress's passage of anti-polygamy laws by newspapers throughout the United States, as recorded in "The Ann Eliza Young Vindicator", a pamphlet which detailed Ms. Young's travels and warm reception throughout her lecture tour. T. B. H. Stenhouse, former Utah Mormon polygamist, a Mormon missionary for thirteen years, and a Salt Lake City newspaper owner, finally left Utah and wrote The Rocky Mountain Saints. His book gives a witnessed account of life in Utah, both the good and the bad. He finally left Utah and Mormonism after financial ruin occurred when Brigham Young sent Stenhouse to relocate to Ogden, Utah, according to Stenhouse, to take over his thriving pro-Mormon Salt Lake Telegraph newspaper. In addition to these testimonies, The Confessions of John D. Lee, written by John D. Lee—alleged "Scapegoat" for the Mountain Meadow Massacre—also came out in 1877. The corroborative testimonies coming out of Utah from Mormons and former Mormons influenced Congress and the people of the United States. In the 1890 Manifesto, the LDS Church banned polygamy. When Utah applied for statehood again, it was accepted. One of the conditions for granting Utah statehood was that a ban on polygamy be written into the state constitution. This was a condition required of other western states that were admitted into the Union later. Statehood was officially granted on January 4, 1896. Beginning in the early 20th century, with the establishment of such national parks as Bryce Canyon National Park and Zion National Park, Utah became known for its natural beauty. Southern Utah became a popular filming spot for arid, rugged scenes featured in the popular mid-century western film genre. From such films, most US residents recognize such natural landmarks as Delicate Arch and "the Mittens" of Monument Valley. During the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, with the construction of the Interstate highway system, accessibility to the southern scenic areas was made easier. Since the establishment of Alta Ski Area in 1939 and the subsequent development of several ski resorts in the state's mountains, Utah's skiing has become world-renowned. The dry, powdery snow of the Wasatch Range is considered some of the best skiing in the world (the state license plate once claimed "the Greatest Snow on Earth"). Salt Lake City won the bid for the 2002 Winter Olympic Games, and this served as a great boost to the economy. The ski resorts have increased in popularity, and many of the Olympic venues built along the Wasatch Front continue to be used for sporting events. Preparation for the Olympics spurred the development of the light-rail system in the Salt Lake Valley, known as TRAX, and the reconstruction of the freeway system around the city. In 1957, Utah created the Utah State Parks Commission with four parks. Today, Utah State Parks manages 43 parks and several undeveloped areas totaling over 95,000 acres (380 km2) of land and more than 1,000,000 acres (4,000 km2) of water. Utah's state parks are scattered throughout Utah, from Bear Lake State Park at the Utah/Idaho border to Edge of the Cedars State Park Museum deep in the Four Corners region and everywhere in between. Utah State Parks is also home to the state's off highway vehicle office, state boating office, and the trails program. During the late 20th century, the state grew quickly. In the 1970s growth was phenomenal in the suburbs of the Wasatch Front. Sandy was one of the fastest-growing cities in the country at that time. Today, many areas of Utah continue to see boom-time growth. Northern Davis, southern and western Salt Lake, Summit, eastern Tooele, Utah, Wasatch, and Washington counties are all growing very quickly. Management of transportation and urbanization are major issues in politics, as development consumes agricultural land and wilderness areas and transportation is a major reason for poor air quality in Utah. On March 18, 2020, Utah suffered a 5.7 magnitude earthquake originating 3.7 mi (6.0 km) northeast of Magna, near Salt Lake City. Utah is known for its natural diversity and is home to features ranging from arid deserts with dunes to thriving pine forests in mountain valleys. It is a rugged and geographically diverse state at the convergence of three distinct geological regions: the Rocky Mountains, the Great Basin, and the Colorado Plateau. Utah covers an area of 84,899 sq mi (219,890 km2). It is one of the Four Corners states and is bordered by Idaho in the north, Wyoming in the north and east, Colorado in the east, at a single point by New Mexico to the southeast, by Arizona in the south, and by Nevada in the west. Only three U.S. states (Utah, Colorado, and Wyoming) have exclusively latitude and longitude lines as boundaries. One of Utah's defining characteristics is the variety of its terrain. Running down the middle of the state's northern third is the Wasatch Range, which rises to heights of almost 12,000 ft (3,700 m) above sea level. Utah is home to world-renowned ski resorts made popular by light, fluffy snow and winter storms that regularly dump up to three feet of it overnight. In the state's northeastern section, running east to west, are the Uinta Mountains, which rise to heights of over 13,000 feet (4,000 m). The highest point in the state, Kings Peak, at 13,528 feet (4,123 m), lies within the Uinta Mountains. At the western base of the Wasatch Range is the Wasatch Front, a series of valleys and basins that are home to the most populous parts of the state. It stretches approximately from Brigham City at the north end to Nephi at the south end. Approximately 75 percent of the state's population lives in this corridor, and population growth is rapid. Western Utah is a mostly arid desert with a basin and range topography. Small mountain ranges and rugged terrain punctuate the landscape. The Bonneville Salt Flats are an exception, being comparatively flat as a result of once forming the bed of ancient Lake Bonneville. Great Salt Lake, Utah Lake, Sevier Lake, and Rush Lake are all remnants of this ancient freshwater lake, which once covered most of the eastern Great Basin. West of the Great Salt Lake, stretching to the Nevada border, lies the arid Great Salt Lake Desert. One exception to this aridity is Snake Valley, which is (relatively) lush due to large springs and wetlands fed from groundwater derived from snow melt in the Snake Range, Deep Creek Range, and other tall mountains to the west of Snake Valley. Great Basin National Park is just over the Nevada state line in the southern Snake Range. One of western Utah's most impressive, but least visited attractions is Notch Peak, the tallest limestone cliff in North America, located west of Delta. Much of the scenic southern and southeastern landscape (specifically the Colorado Plateau region) is sandstone, specifically Kayenta sandstone and Navajo sandstone. The Colorado River and its tributaries wind their way through the sandstone, creating some of the world's most striking and wild terrain (the area around the confluence of the Colorado and Green Rivers was the last to be mapped in the lower 48 United States). Wind and rain have also sculpted the soft sandstone over millions of years. Canyons, gullies, arches, pinnacles, buttes, bluffs, and mesas are common sights throughout south-central and southeast Utah. This terrain is the central feature of protected state and federal parks such as Arches, Bryce Canyon, Canyonlands, Capitol Reef, and Zion national parks, Cedar Breaks, Grand Staircase–Escalante, Hovenweep, and Natural Bridges national monuments, Glen Canyon National Recreation Area (site of the popular tourist destination, Lake Powell), Dead Horse Point and Goblin Valley state parks, and Monument Valley. The Navajo Nation also extends into southeastern Utah. Southeastern Utah is also punctuated by the remote, but lofty La Sal, Abajo, and Henry mountain ranges. Eastern (northern quarter) Utah is a high-elevation area covered mostly by plateaus and basins, particularly the Tavaputs Plateau and San Rafael Swell, which remain mostly inaccessible, and the Uinta Basin, where the majority of eastern Utah's population lives. Economies are dominated by mining, oil shale, oil, and natural gas-drilling, ranching, and recreation. Much of eastern Utah is part of the Uintah and Ouray Indian Reservation. The most popular destination within northeastern Utah is Dinosaur National Monument near Vernal. Southwestern Utah is the lowest and hottest spot in Utah. It is known as Utah's Dixie because early settlers were able to grow some cotton there. Beaverdam Wash in far southwestern Utah is the lowest point in the state, at 2,000 feet (610 m). The northernmost portion of the Mojave Desert is also located in this area. Dixie is quickly becoming a popular recreational and retirement destination, and the population is growing rapidly. Although the Wasatch Mountains end at Mount Nebo near Nephi, a complex series of mountain ranges extends south from the southern end of the range down the spine of Utah. Just north of Dixie and east of Cedar City is the state's highest ski resort, Brian Head. Like most of the western and southwestern states, the federal government owns much of the land in Utah. Over 70 percent of the land is either BLM land, Utah State Trustland, or U.S. National Forest, U.S. National Park, U.S. National Monument, National Recreation Area or U.S. Wilderness Area. Utah is the only state where every county contains some national forest. Arches National Park Pariette Wetlands Little Cottonwood Canyon Deer Creek Reservoir American Fork Canyon Kolob Canyons at Zion National Park Idaho (north) Wyoming (east and north) Colorado (east) Nevada (west) Arizona (south) Utah features a dry, semi-arid to desert climate, although its many mountains feature a large variety of climates, with the highest points in the Uinta Mountains being above the timberline. The dry weather is a result of the state's location in the rain shadow of the Sierra Nevada in California. The eastern half of the state lies in the rain shadow of the Wasatch Mountains. The primary source of precipitation for the state is the Pacific Ocean, with the state usually lying in the path of large Pacific storms from October to May. In summer, the state, especially southern and eastern Utah, lies in the path of monsoon moisture from the Gulf of California. Most of the lowland areas receive less than 12 inches (305 mm) of precipitation annually, although the I-15 corridor, including the densely populated Wasatch Front, receives approximately 15 inches (381 mm). The Great Salt Lake Desert is the driest area of the state, with less than 5 inches (127 mm). Snowfall is common in all but the far southern valleys. Although St. George receives only about 3 inches (76 mm) per year, Salt Lake City sees about 60 inches (1,524 mm), enhanced by the lake-effect snow from the Great Salt Lake, which increases snowfall totals to the south, southeast, and east of the lake. Some areas of the Wasatch Range in the path of the lake effect receive up to 500 inches (1,270 cm) per year. This micro climate of enhanced snowfall from the Great Salt Lake spans the entire proximity of the lake. The cottonwood canyons adjacent to Salt Lake City are located in the right position to receive more precipitation from the lake. The consistently deep powder snow led Utah's ski industry to adopt the slogan "the Greatest Snow on Earth" in the 1980s. In the winter, temperature inversions are a common phenomenon across Utah's low basins and valleys, leading to thick haze and fog that can last for weeks at a time, especially in the Uintah Basin. Although at other times of year, its air quality is good, winter inversions give Salt Lake City some of the worst wintertime pollution in the country. Previous studies have indicated a widespread decline in snowpack over Utah accompanied by a decline in the snow–snow-precipitation ratio while anecdotal evidence claims have been put forward that measured changes in Utah's snowpack are spurious and do not reflect actual change. A 2012 study found that the proportion of winter (January–March) precipitation falling as snow has decreased by nine percent during the last half century, a combined result of a significant increase in rainfall and a minor decrease in snowfall. Meanwhile, observed snow depth across Utah has decreased and is accompanied by consistent decreases in snow cover and surface albedo. Weather systems with the potential to produce precipitation in Utah have decreased in number with those producing snowfall decreasing at a considerably greater rate. Utah's temperatures are extreme, with cold temperatures in winter due to its elevation, and very hot summers statewide (except mountain areas and high mountain valleys). Utah is usually protected from major blasts of cold air by mountains lying north and east of the state, although major Arctic blasts can occasionally reach the state. Average January high temperatures range from around 30 °F (−1 °C) in some northern valleys to almost 55 °F (13 °C) in St. George. Temperatures dropping below 0 °F (−18 °C) should be expected on occasion in most areas of the state most years, although some areas see it often (for example, the town of Randolph averages about fifty days per year with temperatures that low). In July, average highs range from about 85 to 100 °F (29 to 38 °C). However, the low humidity and high elevation typically lead to large temperature variations, leading to cool nights on most summer days. The record high temperature in Utah was 118 °F (48 °C), recorded south of St. George on July 4, 2007, and the record low was −69 °F (−56 °C), recorded at Peter Sinks in the Bear River Mountains of northern Utah on February 1, 1985. However, the record low for an inhabited location is −49 °F (−45 °C) at Woodruff on December 12, 1932. Utah, like most of the western United States, has few days of thunderstorms. On average there are fewer than 40 days of thunderstorm activity during the year, although these storms can be briefly intense when they do occur. They are most likely to occur during monsoon season from about mid-July through mid-September, especially in southern and eastern Utah. Dry lightning strikes and the generally dry weather often spark wildfires in summer, while intense thunderstorms can lead to flash flooding, especially in the rugged terrain of southern Utah. Although spring is the wettest season in northern Utah, late summer is the wettest period for much of the south and east of the state. Tornadoes are uncommon in Utah, with an average of two striking the state yearly, rarely higher than EF1 intensity. One exception of note, however, was the unprecedented Salt Lake City Tornado that moved directly across downtown Salt Lake City on August 11, 1999. The F2 tornado killed one person, injured sixty others, and caused approximately $170 million in damage; it was the second strongest tornado in the state behind an F3 on August 11, 1993, in the Uinta Mountains. The only other reported tornado fatality in Utah's history was a 7-year-old girl who was killed while camping in Summit County on July 6, 1884. The last tornado of above (E)F0 intensity occurred on September 8, 2002, when an F2 tornado hit Manti. Utah is home to more than 600 vertebrate animals as well as numerous invertebrates and insects. Mammals are found in every area of Utah. Non-predatory larger mammals include the plains bison, elk, moose, mountain goat, mule deer, pronghorn, and multiple types of bighorn sheep. Non-predatory small mammals include muskrat, and nutria. Large and small predatory mammals include the black bear, cougar, Canada lynx, bobcat, fox (gray, red, and kit), coyote, badger, black-footed ferret, mink, stoat, long-tailed weasel, raccoon, and otter. The brown bear was formerly found within Utah, but has since been extirpated. There are no confirmed mating pairs of gray wolves in Utah, although there have been sightings in northeastern Utah along the Wyoming border. As of January 2020, there were 466 species included in the official list managed by the Utah Bird Records Committee (UBRC). Of these, 119 are classed as accidental, 29 are classed as occasional, 57 are classed as rare, and 10 have been introduced to Utah or North America. Eleven of the accidental species are also classed as provisional. Due to the "Miracle of the Gulls" incident in 1848, the most well-known bird in Utah is the California gull, which is also the Utah state bird. A monument in Salt Lake City commemorates the Miracle of the Gulls. Other gulls common to Utah include Bonaparte's gull, the ring-billed gull, and Franklin's gull. Other birds commonly found include the American robin, the common starling, finches (black rosy, Cassin's, and goldfinch), the black-billed magpie, mourning doves, sparrows (house, tree, black-chinned, black-throated, Brewer's, and chipping), Clark's grebe, the ferruginous hawk, geese (snow, cackling, and Canada), eagles (golden and bald), California quail, mountain bluebird, and hummingbirds (calliope, black-chinned, and broad-tailed). Utah is host to a wide variety of arachnids, insects, mollusks, and other invertebrates. Arachnids include the Arizona bark scorpion, Western black widow spiders, crab spiders, hobo spiders (Tegenaria agrestis), cellar spiders, American grass spiders, woodlouse spiders. Several spiders found in Utah are often mistaken for the brown recluse spider, including the desert recluse spider (found only in Washington County), the cellar spider, and crevice weaving spiders. The brown recluse spider has not been officially confirmed in Utah as of summer 2020[update]. One of the rarest insects in Utah is the Coral Pink Sand Dunes tiger beetle, found only in Coral Pink Sand Dunes State Park, near Kanab. It was proposed in 2012 to be listed as a threatened species, but the proposal was not accepted. Other insects include grasshoppers, green stink bugs, the Army cutworm, the monarch butterfly, and Mormon fritillary butterfly. The white-lined sphinx moth is common to most of the United States, but there have been reported outbreaks of large groups of their larvae damaging tomato, grape and garden crops in Utah. Four or five species of firefly are also found across the state. In February 2009, Africanized honeybees were found in southern Utah. The bees had spread into eight counties in Utah, as far north as Grand and Emery counties by May 2017. Several thousand plants are native to Utah, including a variety of trees, shrubs, cacti, herbaceous plants, and grasses. As of 2018[update], there are 3,930 species of plants in Utah, with 3,128 of those being indigenous and 792 being introduced through various means. Common trees include pines/piñons (white fir, Colorado, single-leaf, Great Basin bristlecone, ponderosa, Engelmann spruce, Rocky Mountain white), and Acer grandidentatum, quaking aspen, bigtooth maple, Utah juniper, speckled alder, red birch, Gambel oak, desert willow, blue spruce, and Joshua trees. Utah has a number of named trees, including the Jardine Juniper, Pando, and the Thousand Mile Tree. Shrubs include a number of different ephedras (pitamoreal, Navajo, Arizona, Nevada, Torrey's jointfir, and green Mormon tea), sagebrushes (little, Bigelow, silver, Michaux's wormwood, black, pygmy, bud, and Great Basin), blue elderberry, Utah serviceberry, chokecherry, and skunkbush sumac. Western poison oak, poison sumac, and western poison ivy are all found in Utah. There are many varieties of cacti in Utah's varied deserts, especially in the southern and western parts of the state. Some of these include desert prickly pear, California barrel cactus, fishhook cactus, cholla, beavertail prickly pear, and Uinta Basin hookless cactus. Despite the desert climate, many different grasses are found in Utah, including Mormon needlegrass, bluebunch wheatgrass, western alkali grass, squirreltail, desert saltgrass, and cheatgrass. Several invasive species of plants are considered noxious weeds by the state, including Bermuda grass, field bindweed, henbane, jointed goatgrass, Canada thistle, Balkan and common toadflax, giant cane, couch grass, St. John's wort, hemlock, sword grass, Russian olive, myrtle spurge, Japanese knotweed, salt cedar, and goat's head. At the 2020 U.S. census, Utah had a population of 3,271,616. The U.S. Census Bureau estimated that the population of Utah was 3,205,958 on July 1, 2019, a 16.00% increase since the 2010 U.S. census. The center of population of Utah is located in Utah County in the city of Lehi. Much of the population lives in cities and towns along the Wasatch Front, a metropolitan region that runs north–south with the Wasatch Mountains rising on the eastern side. Growth outside the Wasatch Front is also increasing. The St. George metropolitan area is currently the second fastest-growing in the country after the Las Vegas metropolitan area, while the Heber micropolitan area is also the second fastest-growing in the country (behind Palm Coast, Florida). Utah contains five metropolitan areas (Logan, Ogden-Clearfield, Salt Lake City, Provo-Orem, and St. George), and six micropolitan areas (Brigham City, Heber, Vernal, Price, Richfield, and Cedar City). According to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 3,557 homeless people in Utah. The majority of Utah's immigrants come from Mexico. Utah ranks among the highest in total fertility rate, 47th in teenage pregnancy, lowest in percentage of births out of wedlock, lowest in number of abortions per capita, and lowest in percentage of teen pregnancies terminated in abortion. However, statistics relating to pregnancies and abortions may also be artificially low from teenagers going out of state for abortions because of parental notification requirements. Utah has the lowest child poverty rate in the country, despite its young demographics. According to the Gallup-Healthways Global Well-Being Index as of 2012[update], Utahns ranked fourth in overall well-being in the United States. A 2002 national prescription drug study determined that antidepressant drugs were "prescribed in Utah more often than in any other state, at a rate nearly twice the national average". The data shows that depression rates in Utah are no higher than the national average. The largest ancestry groups in the state are: 26.0% English 11.9% German 11.8% Scandinavian (5.4% Danish, 4.0% Swedish, 2.4% Norwegian) 9.0% Mexican 6.6% American 6.2% Irish 4.6% Scottish 2.7% Italian 2.4% Dutch 2.2% French 2.2% Welsh 1.4% Scotch Irish 1.3% Swiss In 2011 one-third of Utah's workforce was reported to be bilingual, developed through a program of acquisition of second languages beginning in elementary school, and related to Mormonism's missionary goals for its young people. In 2011, 28.6% of Utah's population younger than the age of one were ethnic minorities, meaning they had at least one parent who was of a race other than non-Hispanic white. Mormons are the largest religious group in Utah. However, the percentage of Mormons in the overall population has been decreasing. In 2017, 62.8% of Utahns were members of the LDS Church. This declined to 61.2% in 2018 and to 60.7% in 2019. Members of the LDS Church currently make up between 34%–41% of the population within Salt Lake City. However, many of the other major population centers such as Provo, Logan, Tooele, and St. George tend to be predominantly LDS, along with many suburban and rural areas. The LDS Church has the largest number of congregations, numbering 4,815 wards. According to results from the 2010 U.S. census, combined with official LDS Church membership statistics, church members represented 62.1% of Utah's total population. The Utah county with the lowest percentage of church members was Grand County, at 26.5%, while the county with the highest percentage was Morgan County, at 86.1%. In addition, the result for the most populated county, Salt Lake County, was 51.4%. Though the LDS Church officially maintains a policy of neutrality in regard to political parties, the church's doctrine has a strong regional influence on politics. Another doctrine effect can be seen in Utah's high birth rate (25 percent higher than the national average; the highest for a state in the U.S.). Mormons in Utah tend to have conservative views when it comes to most political issues and the majority of voter-age Utahns are unaffiliated voters (60%) who vote overwhelmingly Republican. Mitt Romney received 72.8% of the Utahn votes in 2012, while John McCain polled 62.5% in the 2008 United States presidential election and 70.9% for George W. Bush in 2004. In 2010 the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) reported that the three largest denominational groups in Utah are the LDS Church with 1,910,504 adherents; the Catholic Church with 160,125 adherents, and the Southern Baptist Convention with 12,593 adherents. According to a Gallup poll, Utah had the third-highest number of people reporting as "Very Religious" in 2015, at 55% (trailing only Mississippi and Alabama). However, it was near the national average of people reporting as "Nonreligious" (31%), and featured the smallest percentage of people reporting as "Moderately Religious" (15%) of any state, being eight points lower than second-lowest state Vermont. In addition, it had the highest average weekly church attendance of any state, at 51%. According to a 2023 paper, since 2007, Mormons no longer represent the majority in Utah but still remain the largest religious body in the state. The official language in the state of Utah is English. Utah English is primarily a merger of Northern and Midland American dialects carried west by LDS Church members, whose original New York dialect later incorporated features from northeast Ohio and central Illinois. Conspicuous in the speech of some in the central valley, although less frequent now in Salt Lake City, is a cord-card merger, so that the vowels /ɑ/ an /ɔ/ are pronounced the same before an /ɹ/, such as in the words cord and card. In 2000, 87.5% of all state residents five years of age or older spoke only English at home, a decrease from 92.2% in 1990. Utah has the highest total birth rate and accordingly, the youngest population of any U.S. state. In 2010, the state's population was 50.2% male and 49.8% female. The life expectancy is 79.3 years. According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the gross state product of Utah in 2012 was US$130.5 billion, or 0.87% of the total United States GDP of US$14.991 trillion for the same year. The per capita personal income was $45,700 in 2012. Major industries of Utah include mining, cattle ranching, salt production, and government services. According to the 2007 State New Economy Index, Utah has ranked the top state in the nation for Economic Dynamism, determined by "the degree to which state economies are knowledge-based, globalized, entrepreneurial, information technology-driven and innovation-based". In 2014, Utah was ranked number one in Forbes' list of "Best States For Business". A November 2010 article in Newsweek magazine highlighted Utah and particularly the Salt Lake City area's economic outlook, calling it "the new economic Zion", and examined how the area has been able to bring in high-paying jobs and attract high-tech corporations to the area during a recession. As of September 2014[update], the state's unemployment rate was 3.5%. In terms of "small business friendliness", in 2014 Utah emerged as number one, based on a study drawing upon data from more than 12,000 small business owners. In eastern Utah petroleum production is a major industry. Near Salt Lake City, petroleum refining is done by several oil companies. In central Utah, coal production accounts for much of the mining activity. According to Internal Revenue Service tax returns, Utahns rank first among all U.S. states in the proportion of income given to charity by the wealthy. This is due to the standard ten percent of all earnings that Mormons give to the LDS Church. According to the Corporation for National and Community Service, Utah had an average of 884,000 volunteers between 2008 and 2010, each of whom contributed 89.2 hours per volunteer. This figure equates to $3.8 billion of service contributed, ranking Utah number one for volunteerism in the nation. Utah collects personal income tax; since 2008 the tax has been a flat five percent for all taxpayers. The state sales tax has a base rate of 6.45 percent, with cities and counties levying additional local sales taxes that vary among the municipalities. Property taxes are assessed and collected locally. Utah does not charge intangible property taxes and does not impose an inheritance tax. Tourism is a major industry in Utah. With five national parks (Arches, Bryce Canyon, Canyonlands, Capitol Reef, and Zion), Utah has the third most national parks of any state after Alaska and California. In addition, Utah features eight national monuments (Cedar Breaks, Dinosaur, Grand Staircase–Escalante, Hovenweep, Natural Bridges, Bears Ears, Rainbow Bridge, and Timpanogos Cave), two national recreation areas (Flaming Gorge and Glen Canyon), seven national forests (Ashley, Caribou-Targhee, Dixie, Fishlake, Manti-La Sal, Sawtooth, and Uinta-Wasatch-Cache), and numerous state parks and monuments. The Moab area, in the southeastern part of the state, is known for its challenging mountain biking trails, including Slickrock. Moab also hosts the famous Moab Jeep Safari semiannually. Utah has seen an increase in tourism since the 2002 Winter Olympics. Park City is home to the United States Ski Team. Utah's ski resorts are primarily located in northern Utah near Salt Lake City, Park City, Ogden, and Provo. Between 2007 and 2011 Deer Valley Park City, has been ranked the top ski resort in North America in a survey organized by Ski Magazine. Utah has many significant ski resorts. The 2009 Ski Magazine reader survey concluded that six of the top ten resorts deemed most "accessible", and six of the top ten with the best snow conditions, were located in Utah. In Southern Utah, Brian Head Ski Resort is located in the mountains near Cedar City. Former Olympic venues including Utah Olympic Park and Utah Olympic Oval are still in operation for training and competition and allow the public to participate in numerous activities including ski jumping, bobsleigh, and speed skating. Utah features many cultural attractions such as Temple Square, the Sundance Film Festival, the Red Rock Film Festival, the DOCUTAH Film Festival, the Utah Data Center, and the Utah Shakespeare Festival. Temple Square is ranked as the 16th most visited tourist attraction in the United States by Forbes magazine, with more than five million annual visitors. Other attractions include Monument Valley, the Great Salt Lake, the Bonneville Salt Flats, and Lake Powell. The state of Utah relies heavily on income from tourists and travelers visiting the state's parks and ski resorts, and thus the need to "brand" Utah and create an impression of the state throughout the world has led to several state slogans, the most famous of which is "The Greatest Snow on Earth", which has been in use in Utah officially since 1975 (although the slogan was in unofficial use as early as 1962) and now adorns nearly 50 percent of the state's license plates. In 2001, Utah Governor Mike Leavitt approved a new state slogan, "Utah! Where Ideas Connect", which lasted until March 10, 2006, when the Utah Travel Council and the office of Governor Jon Huntsman announced that "Life Elevated" would be the new state slogan. Beginning in the late 19th century with the state's mining boom (including the Bingham Canyon Mine, among the world's largest open pit mines), companies attracted large numbers of immigrants with job opportunities. Since the days of the Utah Territory mining has played a major role in Utah's economy. Historical mining towns include Mercur in Tooele County, Silver Reef in Washington County, Eureka in Juab County, Park City in Summit County and numerous coal mining camps throughout Carbon County such as Castle Gate, Spring Canyon, and Hiawatha. These settlements were characteristic of the boom and bust cycle that dominated mining towns of the American West. Park City, Utah, and Alta, Utah were boom towns in the early twentieth century. Rich silver mines in the mountains adjacent to the towns led to many people flocking to the towns in search of wealth. During the early part of the Cold War era, uranium was mined in eastern Utah. Today mining activity still plays a major role in the state's economy. Minerals mined in Utah include copper, gold, silver, molybdenum, zinc, lead, and beryllium. Fossil fuels including coal, petroleum, and natural gas continue to play a large role in Utah's economy, especially in the eastern part of the state in counties such as Carbon, Emery, Grand, and Uintah. In 2007, nine people were killed at the Crandall Canyon Mine collapse. On March 22, 2013, one miner died and another was injured after they became trapped in a cave-in at a part of the Castle Valley Mining Complex, about 16 kilometres (9.9 mi) west of the small mining town of Huntington in Emery County. Utah extracts more coal and generates more electricity than it consumes. The state has the potential to generate 31.6 TWh/year from 13.1 GW of wind power, and 10,290 TWh/year from solar power using 4,048 GW of photovoltaic (PV), including 5.6 GW of rooftop photovoltaic, and 1,638 GW of concentrated solar power. The Blue Castle Project is working toward building the state's first nuclear power plant near Green River, Utah, originally projected to be completed in 2030. Utah Associated Municipal Power Systems (UAMPS) is a subdivision of the State of Utah, providing non-profit wholesale electricity, transmission, and other energy services to community-owned power systems in the Intermountain West geographical area. I-15 and I-80 are the main interstate highways in the state, where they intersect and briefly merge near downtown Salt Lake City. I-15 traverses the state north-to-south, entering from Arizona near St. George, paralleling the Wasatch Front, and crossing into Idaho near Portage. I-80 spans northern Utah east-to-west, entering from Nevada at Wendover, crossing the Wasatch Mountains east of Salt Lake City, and entering Wyoming near Evanston. I-84 West enters from Idaho near Snowville (from Boise) and merges with I-15 from Tremonton to Ogden, then heads southeast through the Wasatch Mountains before terminating at I-80 near Echo Junction. I-70 splits from I-15 at Cove Fort in central Utah and heads east through mountains and rugged desert terrain, providing quick access to the many national parks and national monuments of southern Utah, and has been noted for its beauty. The 103 mi (166 km) stretch from Salina to Green River is the country's longest stretch of interstate without services and, when completed in 1970, was the longest stretch of entirely new highway constructed in the U.S. since the Alaska Highway was completed in 1943. Utah's Class I freight railroads are the BNSF Railway and the Union Pacific Railway. Interstate passenger rail is provided by Amtrak's daily California Zephyr train, which runs between Chicago Union Station and Emeryville, California, with stops in Utah at Green River, Helper, Provo, and the Salt Lake City Intermodal Hub. The state was previously served by Amtrak's Pioneer and Desert Wind trains. Heritage railroads include the Heber Valley Railroad and the Wild Kingdom Train. The Utah Transit Authority (UTA) operates public transport services throughout the Wasatch Front region. TRAX, the UTA's light rail system, consists of three lines. The Blue Line (formerly Salt Lake/Sandy Line) begins in the suburb of Draper and ends in Downtown Salt Lake City. The Red Line (Mid-Jordan/University Line) begins in the Daybreak Community of South Jordan, a southwestern valley suburb, and ends at the University of Utah. The Green Line begins in West Valley City, passes through downtown Salt Lake City, and ends at Salt Lake City International Airport. The UTA also operates FrontRunner, a commuter rail line running between Ogden and Provo via Salt Lake City. The UTA's bus system stretches from the Salt Lake Valley west to Grantsville and east to Park City. Beyond UTA, the cities of Cedar City, Logan, Park City, and St. George is served by local bus operators. In the winter, the UTA and several private bus companies operate shuttle routes to Utah's ski resorts. Salt Lake City International Airport is the only international airport in the state and serves as a hub for Delta Air Lines. The airport has consistently ranked first in on-time departures and had the fewest cancellations among U.S. airports. The airport has non-stop service to more than a hundred destinations throughout the United States, Canada, and Mexico, as well as to Amsterdam, London and Paris. Canyonlands Field (near Moab), Cedar City Regional Airport, Ogden-Hinckley Airport, Provo Municipal Airport, St. George Regional Airport, and Vernal Regional Airport all provide limited commercial air service. A new regional airport at St. George opened on January 12, 2011. SkyWest Airlines is also headquartered in St. George and maintains a hub in Salt Lake City. Utah government is divided into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial. The governor is the chief executive of the state and elected for a four-year term; a lieutenant governor is concurrently elected on a joint ticket with the governor. The current governor of Utah is Spencer Cox, who was sworn in on January 4, 2021. In addition to the governor and lieutenant governor, Utah has three other independently elected executive officers: a state auditor, a state treasurer, and an attorney general. The Utah State Legislature consists of a Senate and a House of Representatives. State senators serve four-year terms and representatives two-year terms. The Utah Legislature meets each year in January for an annual 45-day session. The Utah Supreme Court is the court of last resort in Utah. It consists of five justices, who are appointed by the governor, and then subject to retention election. The Utah Court of Appeals handles cases from the trial courts. Trial level courts are the district courts and justice courts. All justices and judges, like those on the Utah Supreme Court, are subject to retention election after appointment. In a 2020 study, Utah was ranked as the 3rd easiest state for citizens to vote in. Utah is divided into political jurisdictions designated as counties. Since 1918 there have been 29 counties in the state, ranging from 298 to 7,819 square miles (772 to 20,300 km2). Total Counties: 29 Total 2020 population: 3,271,616 Total state area: 82,154 sq mi (212,780 km2) Utah granted full voting rights to women in 1870, 26 years before becoming a state. Among all U.S. states, only Wyoming granted suffrage to women earlier. However, in 1887 the initial Edmunds-Tucker Act was passed by Congress to curtail Mormon influence in the territorial government. One of the provisions of the Act was the repeal of women's suffrage; full suffrage was not returned until Utah was admitted to the Union in 1896. Utah is one of the 15 states that have not ratified the U.S. Equal Rights Amendment. In March 2018, Utah passed the United States' first "free-range parenting" bill. The bill was signed into law by Republican Governor Gary Herbert and states that parents who allow their children to engage in certain activities without supervision are not considered neglectful. The constitution of Utah was enacted on May 8, 1895. Notably, the constitution outlawed polygamy, as requested by Congress when Utah had applied for statehood, and reestablished the territorial practice of women's suffrage. Utah's Constitution has been amended many times since its inception. Under Utah law, aggravated murder is the only crime subject to the penalty of death. Utah was the first state to resume executions after the 1972–1976 national moratorium on capital punishment ended with Gregg v. Georgia, when Gary Gilmore was executed by firing squad in 1977. Utah is one of only two states to have ever carried out executions by firing squad, and the only one to do so after the moratorium ended. Utah's laws regarding alcohol, tobacco and gambling are strict. Utah is an alcoholic beverage control state. The Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control regulates the sale of alcohol; wine and spirituous liquors may be purchased only at state liquor stores, and local laws may prohibit the sale of beer and other alcoholic beverages on Sundays. The state bans the sale of fruity alcoholic drinks at grocery stores and convenience stores. The law states that such drinks must now have new state-approved labels on the front of the products that contain capitalized letters in bold type telling consumers the drinks contain alcohol and at what percentage. Utah is the only state that imposes a maximum blood alcohol content (BAC) of 0.05% for drivers, as opposed to the 0.08% limit in other states. The Utah Indoor Clean Air Act is a statewide smoking ban that prohibits it in many public places. Utah and Hawaii are the only two states in the United States to outlaw all forms of gambling. Same-sex marriage became legal in Utah on December 20, 2013, when U.S. District Court Judge Robert J. Shelby issued a ruling in Kitchen v. Herbert. As of close of business December 26, more than 1,225 marriage licenses were issued, with at least 74 percent, or 905 licenses, issued to gay and lesbian couples. The Utah Attorney General's office was granted a stay of the ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court on January 6, 2014, while the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals considered the case. On October 6, 2014, the U.S. Supreme Court declined a writ of certiorari, and the 10th Circuit Court issued their mandate later that day, lifting their stay. Same-sex marriages commenced again in Utah that day. The rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people in the U.S. state of Utah have significantly evolved in the 21st century. Protective laws have become increasingly enacted since 2014, despite the state's reputation as socially conservative and highly religious. Same-sex marriage has been legal since the state's ban was ruled unconstitutional by federal courts in 2014. In addition, statewide anti-discrimination laws now cover sexual orientation and gender identity in employment and housing, and the use of conversion therapy on minors is prohibited. In spite of this, there are still a few differences between the treatment of LGBT people and the rest of the population, and the rights of transgender youth are restricted. Opinion polling has shown an increase in support for LGBT rights in the state. A 2017 Public Religion Research Institute poll showed that 44% of Utah residents supported same-sex marriage, a significant increase from the early 2000s. A 2019 survey by the same pollster showed that 74% of Utahns supported anti-discrimination legislation protecting LGBT people. In the late 19th century, the federal government took issue with polygamy in the LDS Church. The LDS Church discontinued plural marriage in 1890, and in 1896 Utah gained admission to the Union. Many new people settled in the area soon after the Mormon pioneers. Relations have often been strained between the LDS population and the non-LDS population. These tensions have played a large part in Utah's history (Liberal Party vs. People's Party). Utah votes predominantly Republican. Self-identified Latter-day Saints are more likely to vote for the Republican ticket than non-Mormons. Utah is one of the most Republican states in the nation. Utah was the single most Republican-leaning state in the country in every presidential election from 1976 to 2004, measured by the percentage point margin between the Republican and Democratic candidates. In 2008 Utah was only the third-most Republican state (after Wyoming and Oklahoma), but in 2012, with Mormon Mitt Romney atop the Republican ticket, Utah returned to its position as the most Republican state. However, the 2016 presidential election result saw Republican Donald Trump carry the state (marking the thirteenth consecutive win by the Republican presidential candidate) with only a plurality, the first time this happened since 1992. Both of Utah's U.S. Senators, Mitt Romney and Mike Lee, are Republican, as are all four of its U.S. Representatives. Ben McAdams is the most recent Democrat to represent Utah in Congress, representing the 4th congressional district, based in Salt Lake City, from 2019 to 2021. He lost re-election to Burgess Owens, a Republican, in 2020. After Jon Huntsman Jr. resigned to serve as U.S. Ambassador to China in 2009, Gary Herbert was sworn in as governor on August 11, 2009. Herbert was elected to serve out the remainder of the term in a special election in 2010, defeating Democratic nominee Salt Lake County Mayor Peter Corroon with 64% of the vote. He won election to a full four-year term in 2012, defeating the Democrat Peter Cooke with 68% of the vote. The LDS Church maintains an official policy of neutrality about political parties and candidates. In the 1970s, then-Apostle Ezra Taft Benson was quoted by the Associated Press that it would be difficult for a faithful Latter-day Saint to be a liberal Democrat. Although the LDS Church has officially repudiated such statements on many occasions, Democratic candidates—including LDS Democrats—believe Republicans capitalize on the perception that the Republican Party is doctrinally superior. Political scientist and pollster Dan Jones explains this disparity by noting that the national Democratic Party is associated with liberal positions on gay marriage and abortion, both of which the LDS Church is against. The Republican Party in heavily Mormon Utah County presents itself as the superior choice for Latter-day Saints. Even though Utah Democratic candidates are predominantly LDS, socially conservative, and pro-life, no Democrat has won in Utah County since 1994. David Magleby, dean of Social and Behavioral Sciences at Brigham Young University, a lifelong Democrat and a political analyst, asserts that the Republican Party has more conservative positions than the LDS Church. Magleby argues that the locally conservative Democrats are in better accord with LDS doctrine. For example, the Republican Party of Utah opposes almost all abortions while Utah Democrats take a more liberal approach, although more conservative than their national counterparts. On Second Amendment issues, the state GOP has been at odds with the LDS Church's position opposing concealed firearms in places of worship and public spaces. In 1998, the church expressed concern that Utahns perceived the Republican Party as an LDS institution and authorized lifelong Democrat and Seventy Marlin Jensen to promote LDS bipartisanship. Utah is much more conservative than the United States as a whole, primarily on social issues. Compared to other Republican-dominated states in the Mountain West such as Idaho and Wyoming, Utah politics have a more moralistic and less libertarian character, according to David Magleby. About 80% of Utah's Legislature are members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, while members account for 61 percent of the population. Since becoming a state in 1896, Utah has had only two non-Mormon governors. In 2006, the legislature passed legislation aimed at banning joint custody for a non-biological parent of a child. The custody measure passed the legislature and was vetoed by the governor, a reciprocal benefits supporter. Carbon County's Democrats are generally made up of members of the large Greek, Italian, and Southeastern European communities, whose ancestors migrated in the early 20th century to work in the extensive mining industry. The views common amongst this group are heavily influenced by labor politics, particularly of the New Deal Era. The state's most Republican areas tend to be Utah County, which is the home to Brigham Young University (BYU) in the city of Provo, and nearly all the rural counties. These areas generally hold socially conservative views in line with that of the national Religious Right. The most Democratic areas of the state lie currently in and around Salt Lake City proper. The state has not voted for a Democrat for president since 1964. Historically, Republican presidential nominees score one of their best margins of victory here. Utah was the Republicans' best state in the 1976, 1980, 1984, 1988, 1996, 2000, 2004 and 2012 elections. In 1992, Utah was the only state in the nation where Democratic candidate Bill Clinton finished behind both Republican candidate George HW Bush and Independent candidate Ross Perot. In 2004, Republican George W. Bush won every county in the state and Utah gave him his largest margin of victory of any state. He won the state's five electoral votes by a margin of 46 percentage points with 71.5% of the vote. In the 1996 Presidential elections the Republican candidate received a smaller 54% of the vote while the Democrat earned 34%. In 2020, the Associated Press wrote a piece profiling Utah's political culture during that year's presidential election. The article noted a more bipartisan and cooperative environment, along with conservative support of liberal causes such as LGBT rights and marijuana use, despite the Republican dominance in the state and the political polarization seen in other parts of the U.S. at the time. Utah's population is concentrated in two areas, the Wasatch Front in the north-central part of the state, with over 2.6 million residents; and Washington County, in southwestern Utah, locally known as "Dixie", with more than 175,000 residents in the metropolitan area. According to the 2010 census, Utah was the second fastest-growing state (at 23.8 percent) in the United States between 2000 and 2010 (behind Nevada). St. George, in the southwest, is the second fastest-growing metropolitan area in the United States, trailing Greeley, Colorado. The three fastest-growing counties from 2000 to 2010 were Wasatch County (54.7%), Washington County (52.9%), and Tooele County (42.9%). However, Utah County added the most people (148,028). Between 2000 and 2010, Saratoga Springs (1,673%), Herriman (1,330%), Eagle Mountain (893%), Cedar Hills (217%), South Willard (168%), Nibley (166%), Syracuse (159%), West Haven (158%), Lehi (149%), Washington (129%), and Stansbury Park (116%) all at least doubled in population. West Jordan (35,376), Lehi (28,379), St. George (23,234), South Jordan (20,981), West Valley City (20,584), and Herriman (20,262) all added at least 20,000 people. Until 2003, the Salt Lake City and Ogden-Clearfield metropolitan areas were considered as a single metropolitan area.[citation needed] Salt Lake City Logan Ogden Park City Provo Sandy St. George Layton Bridgerland Technical College in Logan Broadview College in West Jordan Brigham Young University in Provo (satellite campus in Salt Lake City) Davis Technical College in Kaysville Eagle Gate College in Murray and Layton Ensign College (formerly LDS Business College) in Salt Lake City Joyce University of Nursing and Health Sciences (formerly Ameritech College of Healthcare) in Draper Mountainland Technical College in Lehi Neumont College of Computer Science in South Jordan Noorda College of Osteopathic Medicine in Provo Ogden–Weber Technical College in Ogden Provo College in Provo Rocky Mountain University of Health Professions in Provo Roseman University in South Jordan, Utah Salt Lake Community College in Taylorsville Snow College in Ephraim and Richfield Southern Utah University in Cedar City Southwest Technical College in Cedar City Tooele Technical College in Tooele Uintah Basin Technical College in Roosevelt University of Phoenix at various locations statewide University of Utah in Salt Lake City Utah State University in Logan (satellite campuses at various state locations) Utah State University Eastern in Price Utah Tech University in St. George (formerly Dixie State University) as of May 2022, and legal effect in July 2022.) Utah Valley University in Orem Weber State University in Ogden Western Governors University an online only university, headquartered in Salt Lake City Westminster College in Salt Lake City Utah is the second-least populous U.S. state to have a major professional sports league franchise after the Vegas Golden Knights joined the National Hockey League in 2017. The Utah Jazz of the National Basketball Association play at the Delta Center in Salt Lake City. The team moved to the city from New Orleans in 1979 and has been one of the most consistently successful teams in the league (although they have yet to win a championship). Salt Lake City was previously host to the Utah Stars, who competed in the ABA from 1970 to 1976 and won one championship, and to the Utah Starzz of the WNBA from 1997 to 2003. Real Salt Lake of Major League Soccer was founded in 2005 and plays their home matches at Rio Tinto Stadium (now known as America First Field) in Sandy. RSL remains the only Utah major league sports team to have won a national championship, having won the MLS Cup in 2009. RSL currently operates three adult teams in addition to the MLS side. Real Monarchs, competing in the third-tier MLS Next Pro, is the official reserve side for RSL. The team began to play in the 2015 season at Rio Tinto Stadium, remaining there until moving to Zions Bank Stadium, located at RSL's training center in Herriman, for the 2018 season and beyond. Utah Royals FC will return to the National Women's Soccer League (NWSL), the top level of U.S. women's soccer, in 2024. The original team of that name, which shared ownership with RSL and also played at America First Field, started NWSL play in 2018. Due to fallout from controversies surrounding RSL's ownership, leading to the club's eventual sale, RSL shuttered the Royals after the 2020 season, selling its player-related assets to a new Kansas City franchise. The NWSL gave the new RSL owners an option for a new NWSL franchise, which was exercised in 2023 with the announcement that the Royals would return in 2024 and play at America First Field. Before the creation of the Royals, RSL's main women's side had been Real Salt Lake Women, which began play in the Women's Premier Soccer League in 2008 and moved to United Women's Soccer in 2016. RSL Women currently play at Utah Valley University in Orem. Utah's highest level Minor League Baseball team is the Triple-A Salt Lake Bees, who play at Smith's Ballpark in Salt Lake City as a part of the Pacific Coast League. Utah also has one minor league hockey team, the Utah Grizzlies, who play at the Maverik Center and compete in the ECHL. Utah has seven universities that compete in Division I of the NCAA. Three of the schools have football programs that participate in the top-level Football Bowl Subdivision: Utah in the Pac-12 Conference, Utah State in the Mountain West Conference, and BYU in the Big 12 Conference (although BYU competes in the non-football Mountain Pacific Sports Federation for men's volleyball). In addition, Weber State and Southern Utah (SUU) compete in the Big Sky Conference of the FCS. Utah Tech, with an FCS football program, and Utah Valley, with no football program, are members of the Western Athletic Conference (WAC). Salt Lake City hosted the 2002 Winter Olympics. After early financial struggles and scandals, the 2002 Olympics eventually became among the most successful Winter Olympics in history from a marketing and financial standpoint. Watched by more than two billion viewers, the Games ended up with a profit of $100 million. Utah has hosted professional golf tournaments such as the Uniting Fore Care Classic and currently the Utah Championship. Rugby has been growing quickly in the state of Utah, growing from 17 teams in 2009 to 70 as of 2013[update] with more than 3,000 players, and more than 55 high school varsity teams. The growth has been inspired in part by the 2008 movie Forever Strong. Utah fields two of the most competitive teams in the nation in college rugby—BYU and Utah. BYU has won the National Championship in 2009, 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015. Formed in 2017, the Utah Warriors are a Major League Rugby team based in Salt Lake City. Utah is the setting of or the filming location for many books, films, television series, music videos, and video games. Utah's capitol Salt Lake City is the final location in the video game The Last of Us. Monument Valley in southeastern Utah. This area was used to film many Hollywood Westerns. The otherworldly look of the Bonneville Salt Flats has been used in many movies and commercials. Utah portal United States portal Latter Day Saint movement portal Index of Utah-related articles Outline of Utah Elevation adjusted to North American Vertical Datum of 1988. Persons of Hispanic or Latino origin are not distinguished between total and partial ancestry.  This article incorporates public domain material from the website of the Utah Division of State Parks. "Kings Peak Target". NGS Data Sheet. National Geodetic Survey, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, United States Department of Commerce. Retrieved October 24, 2011. "Elevations and Distances in the United States". United States Geological Survey. 2001. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved October 24, 2011. Arave, Lynn (August 31, 2006). "Utah's basement—Beaver Dam Wash is state's lowest elevation". Deseret Morning News. Archived from the original on January 22, 2015. "2020 Census Apportionment Results". The United States Census Bureau. April 26, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021. "United States Median Household Income". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved April 27, 2021. "Utah", Merriam-Webster.com (Online Dictionary ed.), Merriam-Webster, archived from the original on November 4, 2014 Utah Code, Title 63G, Chapter 1, Part 6, Section 601(10) "Utah State Facts and Symbols". Utah.com. Archived from the original on April 14, 2021. Retrieved April 26, 2021. "Introduction: Urban Growth in Utah", QGET Databook, Quality Growth Efficiency Tools (QGET) Technical Committee, Governor's Office of Management & Budget, State of Utah, 1997, archived from the original on November 4, 2014, retrieved November 4, 2014; see also: "Figures: Population Growth, 1940–2020 (slide 3)", QGET Databook, 1997, archived from the original on November 4, 2014, retrieved November 4, 2014 Deseret News, Opinion: Utahns are highly taxed and not stressed. How is that even possible?, published 30 March 2022, accessed 1 April 2022 "Adults in Utah - Religion in America". Pew Research Center. Retrieved June 28, 2020. "American Religious Identification Survey (2001)". ISSSC. Archived from the original on November 3, 2011. Retrieved October 31, 2011. "Mormon Population by State 2024". Cragun, Ryan T.; Gull, Bethany; Phillips, Rick (2023). "Mormons Are No Longer a Majority in Utah: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Sociology of Religion". Journal of Religion and Demography. 10 (1–2): 162–184. doi:10.1163/2589742x-bja10019. ISSN 2589-7411. S2CID 267601458. Canham, Matt (April 17, 2012). "Census: Share of Utah's Mormon residents holds steady". The Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Lindsey, Daryl (September 8, 2016). "Follow the profit: How Mormon culture made Utah a hotbed for multi-level marketers". Retrieved March 28, 2023. The Fastest-Growing States in America (and Why They're Booming)—Jordan Weissmann Archived May 25, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. The Atlantic (December 22, 2012). Retrieved on July 12, 2013. "Appendix E.—Ranking Tables" (PDF). State and Metropolitan Area Data Book: 2006. U.S. Census Bureau. December 22, 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 25, 2009. Retrieved April 29, 2009. "Best States Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. 2021. Amy Joi O'Donoghue (February 14, 2022). "How bad is the Western drought? New study says worst in 1,200 years. You read that right". Deseret News. Retrieved February 18, 2022. "If we want growth, we need water solutions". www.utahbusiness.com. May 11, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022.[title missing] "Utah Quick Facts". Archived from the original on April 25, 2021. Retrieved August 31, 2023. "Utah: The Riddle Behind The Name". Deseret News. July 10, 1994. Archived from the original on October 13, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2019. Carvajal, Guillermo (January 13, 2014). "El desconocido origen español del nombre de ocho Estados de Norteamérica" [The unknown Spanish origin of the name of eight States of North America]. ABC. Archived from the original on June 3, 2016. Retrieved May 8, 2016. "Native Americans in Utah". historytogo.utah.gov. Archived from the original on June 25, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017. "Utah's American Indians". ilovehistory.utah.gov. Archived from the original on June 25, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017. Leonard J. Arrington and Davis Bitton: The Mormon Experience, page 22. Vintage/Random House, 1979. Richard N. Ostling and Joan K. Ostling: Mormon America, page 38–39. HarperCollins, 2000. William W. Slaughter and Michael Landon: Trail of Hope—The Story of the Mormon Trail. Shadow Mountain, 1997. Arave, Lynn (January 5, 2007). "Tidbits of history — Unusual highlights of Salt Lake County". Deseret News. Retrieved May 6, 2020. Negro Slaves in Utah by Jack Beller, Utah Historical Quarterly, vol. 2, no. 4, 1929, pp. 124–126 "Slavery in Utah Involved Blacks, Whites, Indians, and Mexicans". The History Blazer. No. April 1995. Utah State Historical Society. Retrieved May 6, 2020. Arrington and Bitton, p. 118 William Clayton, edited by George D. Smith: An Intimate Chronicle: The Journals of William Clayton, p. 300. Signature Books, 1991. Corporation of the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: "Church History in the Fullness of Times". 1989. Michael S. Durham: Desert between the Mountains, pages 162,163. University of Oklahoma Press, 1997. John David Smith (1997). Dictionary of Afro-American Slavery. Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 9780275957995. Farmer, Jared (2008). On Zion's Mount: Mormons, Indians, and the American Landscape. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674027671. Ravitz, Jessica (September 11, 2007). "LDS Church Apologizes for Mountain Meadows Massacre". The Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. "Ceremony at "Wedding of the Rails", May 10, 1869 at Promontory Point, Utah". World Digital Library. May 10, 1869. Archived from the original on October 18, 2013. Retrieved July 20, 2013. "Rock Climbing Monument Valley in Northern Arizona". Mountain Project. Archived from the original on October 29, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2015. SKI Magazine's Top 30 Resorts for 2008–09 Archived February 10, 2009, at the Wayback Machine "'Outside' magazine ranks the top ski resorts". USA Today. October 17, 2008. Archived from the original on May 26, 2010. Retrieved July 31, 2010. "Official Utah State Parks website". Stateparks.utah.gov. Archived from the original on April 7, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2015. ANSS, "Magna 2020", Comprehensive Catalog, U.S. Geological Survey, retrieved March 18, 2020 "Elevations and Distances in the United States". United States Geological Survey. April 29, 2005. Archived from the original on November 2, 2006. Retrieved November 8, 2006. Morgan, Dale L. (1947). The Great Salt Lake. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-87480-478-2. Farrell, Michael B. (March 4, 2014). "Utah fights for states' rights with land push". Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on October 20, 2014. Retrieved October 19, 2014. "The state of Utah outdoor recreation vision" (PDF). January 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 11, 2018. Retrieved October 13, 2018. "Why is Utah so dry? - 2022". The Flat. December 14, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Steenburgh, Jim (November 14, 2014). Secrets of the Greatest Snow on Earth (1 ed.). Utah State University Press. ISBN 978-0874219500. 2012 study Archived May 12, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, journals.ametsoc.org. Gillies et al. (2012) http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00084.1 Archived May 12, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Fidel, Steve (July 6, 2007). "Utahns feeling hot, hot, hot". Deseret Morning News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. "Utah Cold Weather Facts—Snow and Winter Storms". KSL-TV. Archived from the original on October 22, 2014. Retrieved October 19, 2014. "WOODRUFF, UTAH (429595)". wrcc.dri.edu. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2014. Annual Average Number of Tornadoes, 1953–2004 Archived October 16, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. NOAA National Climatic Data Center. Retrieved March 20, 2008. Brough, Clayton; Brown, Dan; James, David; Pope, Dan; Summy, Steve. "Salt Lake City Tornado - August 11, 1999". NOAA. Archived from the original on June 14, 2012. Dunn, Larry; Alder, William; McClung, Tim (June 21, 1994). "Western Region Technical Attachment No. 94-20: The High Uinta Tornado" (PDF). NOAA. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "Vertebrate Animals". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on May 2, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "Insects and Mollusks". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Stewart, Ron; Nielson, Allen (January 2011). "American Bison (Bison bison)". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 15, 2021. Retrieved December 7, 2020. "American bison". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Elk or Wapati". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Mammals of the Wasatch Front". Natural History Museum of Utah. August 29, 2012. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved July 19, 2020. "Pronghorn". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "California bighorn sheep". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Desert bighorn sheep". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on November 30, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Rocky Mountain bighorn sheep". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Nutriap". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved March 15, 2021. "Canada lynx". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on November 30, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Black-footed ferret". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Discover Utah". Loveland Living Planet Aquarium. Archived from the original on June 11, 2017. Retrieved May 21, 2017. "Brown bear". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Gray wolf". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. Podmore, Zak (June 3, 2020). "A gray wolf is in Utah for the first time in years. The state is setting traps". Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Birds of Utah". Utah Birds Records Committee. January 2020. Retrieved July 6, 2020. "Auxiliary Lists". Utah Birds Records Committee. May 2017. Retrieved July 6, 2020. "Utah State Bird". Utah.gov. Archived from the original on January 22, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2014. Ryser, Fred A. (1985). Birds of the Great Basin. Reno, NV, US: University of Nevada Press. p. 203. ISBN 0-87417-080-X. Retrieved August 11, 2014.[permanent dead link] "Larus philadelphia". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Turdus migratorius". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2017. "Leucosticte atrata". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Carpodacus cassinii". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 14, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2017. "Carduelis tristis". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2017. "Pica hudsonia". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Two Doves". ALPINE NATURE CENTER. Retrieved September 29, 2023. "Spizella arborea". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2017. "Spizella atrogularis". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Amphispiza bilineata". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Spizella breweri". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Spizella passerina". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 15, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2017. "Aechmophorus clarki". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 15, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2017. "Branta hutchinsii". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 14, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Branta canadensis". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 14, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Haliaeetus leucocephalus". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2017. "Callipepla californica". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 14, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Stellula calliope". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 14, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Archilochus alexandri". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Selasphorus platycercus". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on December 14, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Utah Pests Fact Sheet: Scorpions" (PDF). Utah State University Extension Service. Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved May 22, 2017. "Bugs of Utah". Natural History Museum of Utah. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved May 20, 2017. "The Spiders of the Arid Southwest - Taxonomic Section - Entelegynae (page 3)". New Mexico State University College of Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Sciences. Archived from the original on November 26, 2016. Retrieved May 22, 2017. "Top 20 Arachnids". Utah State University Extension Service. Archived from the original on May 21, 2017. Retrieved May 22, 2017. "Top 20 Arachnids". Utah State University Extension Office. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved March 15, 2021. Crofts, Natalie (October 10, 2015). "5 of the most common spiders in Utah". KSL-TV. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 15, 2021. Sagers, Larry A. (November 25, 1992). "Arachnophobia or not, Utahns should look upon spiders as friends". Deseret News. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 15, 2021. "Murder Hornet Madness" (PDF). Utah State University Extension Office. 2020. p. 7. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved March 15, 2021. And finally, false reports of brown recluse spiders incite fear in Utah residents (only the desert recluse spider, found in Washington County, exists in Utah). "Species Profile for Coral Pink Sand Dunes tiger beetle (Cicindela albissima)". United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Proposed Threatened Status for Coral Pink Sand Dunes Tiger Beetle and Designation of Critical Habitat; Proposed Rule" (PDF). National Archives and Records Administration. October 2, 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Withdrawal of the Proposed Rule To List Coral Pink Sand Dunes Tiger Beetle and Designate Critical Habitat; Proposed Rule" (PDF). National Archives and Records Administration. October 2, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 6, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "Grasshoppers". Utah State University Extension Services. Archived from the original on November 6, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2017. "Stink Bugs". Utah State University Extension Service. Archived from the original on November 6, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2017. "Cutworms". Utah State University Extension Services. Archived from the original on November 6, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2017. "List of Butterflies of Utah". The Butterfly Site. Archived from the original on June 15, 2017. Retrieved May 20, 2017. "White-lined Sphinx Hyles lineata (Fabricius, 1775) | Butterflies and Moths of North America". www.butterfliesandmoths.org. Archived from the original on August 21, 2017. Retrieved November 14, 2017. England, Katie (June 10, 2018). "Spanish Fork resident shows off fireflies for community". The Daily Herald. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2021. African bees found in Utah for the first time Archived September 12, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Associated Press. February 12, 2009 "Utah Department of Agriculture and Food". Ag.utah.gov. Archived from the original on October 20, 2010. Retrieved October 19, 2010. Wright, Becky (May 18, 2017). "Killer bees now documented in 8 Utah counties". KSL-TV. Archived from the original on May 20, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Mitton, Jeffry B.; Grant, Michael C. (1996). "Genetic Variation and the Natural History of Quaking Aspen". BioScience. 46 (1): 25–31. doi:10.2307/1312652. JSTOR 1312652. Mock, K. E.; Rowe, C. A.; Hooten, M. B.; Dewoody, J.; Hipkins, V. D. (November 2008). "Clonal dynamics in western North American aspen (Populus tremuloides)". Molecular Ecology. 17 (22): 4827–4844. Bibcode:2008MolEc..17.4827M. doi:10.1111/j.1365-294X.2008.03963.x. PMID 19140975. S2CID 1425039. "Plants". Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Maffly, Brian (May 7, 2018). "How a 'waterwise' ornamental plant has taken over Wasatch foothills". Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2020. University of Utah Health Office of Public Affairs (July 1, 2014). "Protect Yourself From Poisonous Plants". Archived from the original on October 3, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2021. "State of Utah Noxious Weed List". Utah Department of Agriculture and Food. June 6, 2019. Archived from the original on January 22, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2020. "QuickFacts Utah; UNITED STATES". 2019 Population Estimates. United States Census Bureau, Population Division. February 26, 2019. Archived from the original on January 11, 2019. Retrieved February 26, 2019. "Population and Population Centers by State". United States Census Bureau. 2000. Archived from the original on September 18, 2008. Retrieved December 6, 2008. Bulkeley, Deborah (September 22, 2005). "St. George growth 2nd fastest in US". Deseret Morning News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. "2007-2022 PIT Counts by State". "The 2022 Annual Homelessness Assessment Report (AHAR) to Congress" (PDF). https://www.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/sites/default/files/research/new_americans_in_utah.pdf "Immigrants in Utah". May 2015. "Teenage Abortion and Pregnancy Statistics by State, 1992". United States: AGI. May 30, 1997. Archived from the original on March 2, 2006. Retrieved July 31, 2010. "Contraception Counts: State-by-State Information". US: AGI. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008. Retrieved July 31, 2010. "Sampling of Latter-day Saint/Utah Demographics and Social Statistics from National Sources". Adherents.com. Archived from the original on May 8, 2010. Retrieved July 31, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Fourth year Hawai'i no wellbeing last". Gallup. Archived from the original on July 30, 2013. Retrieved August 15, 2013. "Study Finds Utah Leads Nation in Antidepressant Use". Los Angeles Times. February 20, 2002. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved July 12, 2013. O Gonzalez; JT Berry; et al. (October 1, 2010). "Current Depression Among Adults, United States, 2006 and 2008". Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 59 (38): 1229–1235. PMID 20881934. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. "Historical Population Change Data (1910–2020)". Census.gov. United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on April 29, 2021. Retrieved May 1, 2021. "Race and Ethnicity in the United States: 2010 Census and 2020 Census". census.gov. United States Census Bureau. August 12, 2021. Retrieved September 26, 2021. Gibson, Campbell; Jung, Kay (September 2002). "Historical Census Statistics on Population Totals By Race, 1790 to 1990, and By Hispanic Origin, 1970 to 1990, For The United States, Regions, Divisions, and States". United States Census Bureau. Section: "Utah—Race and Hispanic Origin: 1850 to 1990". Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. "Population of Utah: Census 2010 and 2000 Interactive Map, Demographics, Statistics, Quick Facts". Archived from the original on March 23, 2016. "2010 Census Data". United States Census Bureau. census.gov. Retrieved November 7, 2015. Search "Utah" in "2010 Census Demographic Profiles" (via U.S. Census website), or in "2010 Census Population Profiles Maps—Population Profiles Archived July 23, 2017, at the Wayback Machine". Sterling, Terry (July 23, 2012). "Utah: An Economy Powered by Multilingual Missionaries". The National Journal. Archived from the original on April 15, 2013. Exner, Rich (June 3, 2012). "Americans under age 1 now mostly minorities, but not in Ohio: Statistical Snapshot". The Plain Dealer. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved August 16, 2012. "Religious Landscape Study". May 11, 2015. Archived from the original on October 5, 2017. Retrieved October 5, 2017. Canham, Matt (July 16, 2017). "Salt Lake County is becoming less Mormon—Utah County is headed in the other direction". Retrieved February 12, 2020. Canham, Matt (November 18, 2007). "Utah less LDS than ever". The Salt Lake Tribune. Retrieved February 12, 2020. "Salt Lake County is now minority Mormon, and the impacts are far reaching". The Salt Lake Tribune. Retrieved December 29, 2019. "Utah sees Latter-day Saint slowdown and membership numbers drop in Salt Lake County". The Salt Lake Tribune. Retrieved April 3, 2020. "Facts and Statistics USA-Utah". Mormon newsroom. LDS. Archived from the original on June 30, 2019. Retrieved May 8, 2012. "Political Neutrality". The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Archived from the original on June 27, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2010. Campbell, David E; Monson, J Quin. "Dry Kindling: A Political Profile of American Mormons" (PDF). From Pews to Polling Places: Faith and Politics in the American Religious Mosaic. Georgetown University Press. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 15, 2012. Davidson, Lee (August 19, 2008). "Utah's birthrate highest in US". Deseret News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Davidson, Lee (January 28, 2008). "Utah Voters Shun Labels". Deseret Morning News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. "The Association of Religion Data Archives | State Membership Report". www.thearda.com. Archived from the original on February 9, 2014. Retrieved December 12, 2013. "State of the States". Gallup. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved July 6, 2016. "Frequent Church Attendance Highest in Utah, Lowest in Vermont". Gallup. February 17, 2015. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved July 6, 2016. "Utah Code Section". le.utah.gov. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Bowie, David (February 1, 2008). "Acoustic Characteristics of Utah's Card-Cord Merger". American Speech. 83 (1): 35–61. doi:10.1215/00031283-2008-002. ISSN 0003-1283. " "Utah—Languages". city-data.com. Retrieved November 7, 2015. Lee, Jasen (January 13, 2013). "Salt Lake metro becoming tech hub". Deseret News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. "GDP by State". Bureau of Economic Analysis. Archived from the original on April 13, 2013. Retrieved July 14, 2013. Badenhausen, Kurt (October 13, 2010). "The Best States For Business And Careers". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 4, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. Dokoupil, Tony (November 8, 2010). "How Utah Became an Economic Zion". Newsweek. Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2014. Economy at a Glance: Utah, Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor, archived from the original on November 4, 2014, retrieved November 4, 2014 "United States Small Business Friendliness: 2014". Thumbtack.com. Thumbtack and the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2014. Utah oil & gas production (map) as found at Utah.gov "Volunteering in Utah—Volunteering in America". Volunteeringinamerica.gov. August 9, 2011. Retrieved November 15, 2011. Bernick, Bob Jr. (January 30, 2010). "Utah Legislature: Most Utahns paying less under new 5% flat tax, study says". Deseret News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Utah Sales and Use Tax Rates Archived October 16, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, from utah.gov (the State of Utah's official website). Retrieved March 20, 2008. Gorrell, Mike (October 5, 2010). "Deer Valley maintains Ski ranking through downturn". The Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. "| SKI Magazine". Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Retrieved September 17, 2009. "Ski Magazine top 10 list: Reader Resort Survey Falk, Aaron (March 12, 2009). "Temple Square ranks 16th in visitors". Deseret News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. "Visit Utah". Office of Tourism. Archived from the original on November 7, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2015. Utah Department of Community and Culture, Mining Heritage Alliance, Highlights Archived January 17, 2013, at the Wayback Machine http://finance.utah.gov/highlights.html as found at Utah.gov http://finance.utah.gov/highlights.html "Officials: Miner dead, 1 rescued in Utah cave-in". CBS News. Archived from the original on March 23, 2013. Retrieved March 23, 2013. "Utah - State Energy Profile - Analysis". U.S. Energy Information Administration. Retrieved February 28, 2021. "Renewable Energy Technical Potential". Nrel.gov. October 17, 2013. Archived from the original on September 15, 2012. Retrieved December 31, 2013. Stoddard, Patsy (January 24, 2017). "Update on the Nuclear Power Plant for Green River". Emery County Progress. Castle Dale, Utah. Archived from the original on February 11, 2017. Retrieved February 9, 2017. "About UAMPS". Utah Associated Municipal Power Systems. Retrieved November 12, 2023. U.S. Department of Transportation Bureau of Statistics Archived October 12, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on March 5, 2008. "Article VII, Section 2, Utah Constitution". Utah Office of Legislative Research and General Counsel. Retrieved February 13, 2024. "Article VII, Section 5, Utah Constitution". Utah Office of Legislative Research and General Counsel. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Roche, Lisa Riley (November 3, 2020). "Spencer Cox says he'll be governor for all of Utah as Peterson concedes race". Deseret News. "Article VII, Section 1, Utah Constitution". Utah Office of Legislative Research and General Counsel. Retrieved February 13, 2024. "Article VII, Section 15, Utah Constitution". Utah Office of Legislative Research and General Counsel. Retrieved February 13, 2024. "Article VII, Section 16, Utah Constitution". Utah Office of Legislative Research and General Counsel. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Utah State Courts, Utah Court of Appeals Archived January 22, 2009, at the Wayback Machine J. Pomante II, Michael; Li, Quan (December 15, 2020). "Cost of Voting in the American States: 2020". Election Law Journal: Rules, Politics, and Policy. 19 (4): 503–509. doi:10.1089/elj.2020.0666. S2CID 225139517. "Resident Population Data: 2020 Census" (PDF). US Census Bureau. Retrieved January 18, 2022. National Constitution Center, Map: States grant women the right to vote Archived August 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine "Thirty-Five States Have Ratified the Equal Rights Amendment". equalrightsamendment.org. Archived from the original on March 25, 2012. Retrieved August 3, 2008. "Utah passes America's first 'free-range parenting' bill". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 2, 2018. Retrieved August 2, 2018. Purcell, Tom. "Tom Purcell: Time to return to free-range parenting". TribLIVE.com. Retrieved August 2, 2018. "Constitution of the State of Utah". archives.utah.gov. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Constitutional Amendments, Initiatives & Referendums. State of Utah Elections Office. Utah Code § 76-5-202 "Execution Database | Death Penalty Information Center". Archived from the original on April 21, 2008. "Oklahoma one of only two states that still allows inmate death by firing squad, another state seeks to be the 3rd". KFOR-TV. February 10, 2017. Retrieved March 20, 2023. "Utah's New Law Against Drinking and Driving". LLU Institute for Health Policy Leadership. February 25, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2021. "Utah State Legislature". Le.utah.gov. Archived from the original on February 9, 2014. Retrieved December 31, 2013. "Federal judge rules that Utah gay marriages may continue". USA Today. December 27, 2013. Archived from the original on December 27, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2013. Meyers, Donald W. (December 23, 2013). "Utah County refuses to issue same-sex marriage licenses". The Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Marissa Lang (December 28, 2013). "Same-sex Couples Shatter Marriage Records In Utah". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on January 1, 2014. Retrieved December 31, 2013. Williams, Pete & Connor, Tracy (January 6, 2014). "U.S. Supreme Court puts gay marriage in Utah on hold". Archived from the original on January 6, 2014. Retrieved January 6, 2014. Wetzstein, Cheryl (October 6, 2014). "Supreme Court Denies Gay Marriage Appeals". Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. "Utah Senate Bill 16, 68th Leg., Reg. Sess. (Utah 2022)". utah.gov. Retrieved April 7, 2023. "Utah Senate Bill 100, 68th Leg., Reg. Sess. (Utah 2022)". utah.gov. Retrieved April 7, 2023. Consulting, Epicenter. "PRRI – American Values Atlas". ava.prri.org. "Current Voter Registration Statistics". Retrieved February 28, 2024. Allen, James B. (1994), "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints", Utah History Encyclopedia, University of Utah Press, ISBN 9780874804256, archived from the original on December 7, 2023, retrieved March 29, 2024 Harrie, Dan (December 6, 2002). "Mormon, GOP Link Doomed Democrats: Religion statistics paint a bleak picture for party". The Salt Lake Tribune. NewsBank Archive Article ID: 100DFA0561F7801E. Bernick, Bob Jr. (July 28, 2006). "Utah No. 1 in approval of Bush". Deseret Morning News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Harrie, Dan (May 3, 1998). "GOP Dominance Troubles Church; It hurts Utah, says general authority, disavowing any perceived Republican-LDS Link; LDS Official Calls for More Political Diversity". Salt Lake Tribune. Henetz, Patty (May 17, 2003). "Utah's theocratic past colors church-state perceptions". Deseret Morning News. Archived from the original on April 25, 2011. Winters, Rosemary (August 14, 2006). "Pollster: Demos share blame for GOP lock on Utah". Salt Lake Tribune. Walsh, Tad (November 5, 2006). "A lonely place for Demos". Deseret Morning News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Rolly, Paul (April 28, 2002). "Far Right Wing of Utah GOP at Odds With LDS Positions". Salt Lake Tribune. Bernick, Bob Jr. (May 21, 2001). "Utah conservatives put U.S. peers to shame". Deseret Morning News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Bernick, Bob Jr. (March 15, 2006). "Letter by LDS leaders cheers Utah Democrats". Deseret Morning News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Canham, Matt (November 18, 2007). "Utah less Mormon than ever". Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. "The Church's Growth, Structure and Reach". The Mormons. PBS. 2007. Archived from the original on September 4, 2017. Retrieved September 3, 2017. Powell, Allan Kent (1994), "The United Mine Workers of America", Utah History Encyclopedia, University of Utah Press, ISBN 9780874804256, archived from the original on November 3, 2022, retrieved March 29, 2024 Roster of Utah State Legislators Archived November 17, 2006, at the Wayback Machine, Utah State Legislature 2001 Redistricting of Utah Archived September 24, 2006, at the Wayback Machine: Official maps of district boundaries, Utah State Legislature Leip, David. 1976 Presidential Election Data—National by State Archived September 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, uselectionatlas.org ("David Leip's Atlas of Presidential Elections"). Retrieved March 20, 2008. "1980 Presidential Election Data—National by State". US: Election atlas. Archived from the original on January 12, 2009. Retrieved July 31, 2010. "1984 Presidential Election Data—National by State". Uselectionatlas.org. Archived from the original on January 12, 2009. Retrieved July 31, 2010. "1988 Presidential Election Data—National by State". US: Election atlas. Archived from the original on January 12, 2009. Retrieved July 31, 2010. "1996 Presidential Election Data—National by State". US: Election atlas. Archived from the original on January 12, 2009. Retrieved July 31, 2010. "2000 Presidential Election Data—National by State". US: Election atlas. Archived from the original on January 12, 2009. Retrieved July 31, 2010. "2004 Presidential Election Data—National by State". US: Election atlas. Archived from the original on September 14, 2011. Retrieved July 31, 2010. "1992 Presidential Election Data—National by State". US: Election atlas. Archived from the original on January 12, 2009. Retrieved July 31, 2010. Whitson, James R. "Presidential Election 1996". The Unofficial Homepage of the Electoral College. Archived from the original on March 19, 2008. Retrieved March 20, 2008. Sullivan, Tim (December 17, 2020). "AP ROAD TRIP: Amid American rancor, a dash of Utah Nice". Associated Press. Retrieved March 6, 2021. "QuickFacts: Sandy city, Utah; Orem city, Utah; West Jordan city, Utah; Provo city, Utah; West Valley City city, Utah; Salt Lake City city, Utah". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on September 22, 2018. Retrieved September 24, 2018. "Dixie State University is changing its name, but what about other 'Dixie' schools in Utah?". ABC4 Utah. November 15, 2021. Retrieved November 16, 2021. Speckman, Stephen; Smeath, Doug (November 22, 2006). "What's in a name? Bit of a hassle". Deseret Morning News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Edward, James (November 23, 2009). "Real Salt Lake wins dramatic MLS Cup on penalty kicks". deseretnews.com. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 1, 2017. "Real Salt Lake announce that new USL PRO team will be called Real Monarchs". MLSsoccer.com. September 10, 2014. Archived from the original on September 11, 2014. Retrieved September 11, 2014. "Zions Bank Real Academy new home for Real Salt Lake development pyramid". Real Monarchs. May 24, 2017. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved November 17, 2017. "Utah Royals FC unveils name, identity for 2018 NWSL season" (Press release). Real Salt Lake. December 1, 2017. Archived from the original on December 2, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2017. "Kansas City Returns to the NWSL as Expansion Team in 2021". NWSL. December 7, 2020. Retrieved December 7, 2020. "National Women's Soccer League Awards Expansion Team Rights to Utah" (Press release). National Women's Soccer League. March 11, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2023. Lee, Jasen (February 8, 2012). "Economic impact of 2002 Olympics still felt". KSL-TV. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "Utah Youth Enjoying 7s Season, Continuing To Grow" Archived October 14, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, This Is American Rugby, October 8, 2014. "'Forever Strong' inspired change, growth for Utah rugby teams". KSL. March 8, 2013. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved March 12, 2013. "Home". Utah Warriors Rugby. Archived from the original on February 2, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2019. "Filming Locations". Internet Movie Database (IMDb). Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2018. "Real World Architecture and Locations in The Last of Us". Reality is a Game. July 30, 2013. Archived from the original on November 27, 2018. Retrieved September 24, 2018. Brown, Adam R. Utah politics and government: American democracy among a unique electorate (U of Nebraska Press, 2018). Ching, Jacqueline. Utah: Past and Present (Rosen, 2010). May, Dean L. Utah: A people's history (U of Utah Press, 1987). Peterson, Charles S. and Brian Q. Cannon. The Awkward State of Utah: Coming of Age in the Nation, 1896–1945. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 2015. ISBN 978-1-60781-421-4 Powell, Allan Kent, ed. (1994), Utah History Encyclopedia, Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press, ISBN 0874804256, OCLC 30473917 Utah at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Utah at Curlie Gannett, Henry (1888). "Utah" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. XXIV (9th ed.). "State of Utah" (official Web site). "Energy Data & Statistics for Utah". US: DoE. Archived from the original on June 20, 2008. Retrieved June 27, 2008. Utah: State Resource Guide, from the Library of Congress "National Guard". UT: Army. Archived from the original on June 20, 2011. Retrieved June 11, 2011. "Air National Guard". UT: Air Force. Retrieved November 7, 2015. "Hill Air Force Base". UT: Air Force. Retrieved May 4, 2017. Gamble, W. H.; Mitchell, S. Augustus (1875). County map of Utah and Nevada (Map). Texas Tech University."Utah State Facts". USDA. Retrieved November 7, 2015. "Real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of Utah". USGS. Archived from the original on October 21, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2015. "QuickFacts". The US: Census Bureau. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2015.. Geographic data related to Utah at OpenStreetMap Utah Office of Tourism Official Website Archived February 12, 2021, at the Wayback Machine Office of Tourism (requires Adobe Flash) Utah State Parks Utah Traffic and Road Conditions Utah State Chamber of Commerce Archived June 24, 2020, at the Wayback Machine 39°N 111°W﻿ / ﻿39°N 111°W﻿ / 39; -111﻿ (State of Utah)