Recep Tayyip Erdoğan (born 26 February 1954) is a Turkish politician who is the 12th and current president of Turkey. He previously served as prime minister from 2003 to 2014 as part of the Justice and Development Party (AKP), which he co-founded in 2001. He also served as mayor of Istanbul from 1994 to 1998. Erdoğan was born in Beyoğlu, Istanbul, and studied at the Aksaray Academy of Economic and Commercial Sciences, before working as a consultant and senior manager in the private sector. Becoming active in local politics, he was elected his party's Beyoğlu district chair in 1984 and Istanbul chair in 1985. Following the 1994 local elections, Erdoğan was elected mayor of Istanbul. In 1998 he was convicted for inciting religious hatred and banned from politics after reciting a poem by Ziya Gökalp that compared mosques to barracks and the faithful to an army. Erdoğan was released from prison in 1999 and formed the AKP, abandoning openly Islamist policies. Erdoğan led the AKP to a landslide victory in the election for the Grand National Assembly in 2002, and became prime minister after winning a by-election in Siirt in 2003. Erdoğan led the AKP to two more election victories in 2007 and 2011. His tenure consisted of economic recovery from the economic crisis of 2001, the start of EU membership negotiations, and the reduction of military influence on politics. In late 2012, his government began peace negotiations with the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) to end the Kurdish–Turkish conflict, negotiations which ended three years later. In 2014, Erdoğan became the country's first directly elected president. Erdoğan's presidency has been marked by democratic backsliding and a shift towards a more authoritarian style of government. Notably events of his presidency include the 2013 Gezi Park protests, the 2016 failed coup attempt, his economic policies have led to high inflation rates and the depreciation of the value of the Turkish lira, and he has overseen ongoing conflict in Syria. He also oversaw the transformation of Turkey's parliamentary system into a presidential system, introducing term limits and expanding executive powers. He's also expanded the role of Turkey into becoming the world's largest refugee host, and launched operations against the Islamic State, Syrian Democratic Forces and Assad's forces. He responded to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine by closing the Bosphorus to Russian naval reinforcements, brokering a deal between Russia and Ukraine regarding export of grain, and mediating a prisoner exchange. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan was born on 26 February 1954 in a poor conservative Muslim family. Erdoğan's family is originally from Adjara, a region in Georgia. Although Erdoğan was reported to have said in 2003 that he was of Georgian origin and that his origins were in Batumi, he later denied this. His parents were Ahmet Erdoğan (1905–1988) and Tenzile Erdoğan (née Mutlu; 1924–2011). While Erdoğan attended school in Istanbul, his summer holidays were mostly spent in Güneysu, Rize, where his family originates from. Throughout his life he often returned to this spiritual home, and in 2015 he opened a vast mosque on a mountaintop near this village. The family returned to Istanbul when Erdoğan was 13 years old. As a teenager, Erdoğan's father provided him with a weekly allowance of 2.5 Turkish lira, less than a dollar. With it, Erdoğan bought postcards and resold them on the street. He sold bottles of water to drivers stuck in traffic. Erdoğan also worked as a street vendor selling simit (sesame bread rings), wearing a white gown and selling the simit from a red three-wheel cart with the rolls stacked behind glass. In his youth, Erdoğan played semi-professional football in Camialtıspor FC, a local club. Fenerbahçe wanted him to transfer to the club[clarification needed] but his father prevented it. The stadium of the local football club in the district where he grew up, Kasımpaşa S.K. is named after him. Erdoğan is a member of the Community of İskenderpaşa, a Turkish Sufistic community of Naqshbandi tariqah. Erdoğan graduated from Kasımpaşa Piyale Primary School in 1965, and the Istanbul İmam Hatip High School, a religious vocational high school, in 1973. The same educational path was followed by other co-founders of the AK Party. One quarter of the curriculum of İmam Hatip schools involves study of the Quran, the life of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, and the Arabic language. Erdoğan studied the Quran at the İmam Hatip, where his classmates began calling him hoca ("teacher" or "religious official"). Erdoğan attended a meeting of the nationalist student group National Turkish Student Union (Milli Türk Talebe Birliği), who sought to raise a conservative cohort of young people to counter the rising movement of leftists in Turkey. Within the group, Erdoğan was distinguished by his oratorical skills, developing a penchant for public speaking and excelling in front of an audience. He won first place in a poetry-reading competition organized by the Community of Turkish Technical Painters, and began preparing for speeches through reading and research. Erdoğan would later comment on these competitions as "enhancing our courage to speak in front of the masses". Erdoğan wanted to pursue advanced studies at the Ankara University Faculty of Political Science, commonly known as Mülkiye, but only students with regular high school diplomas were eligible to apply, thereby excluding Imam Hatip graduates. Mülkiye was known for its political science department, which trained many statesmen and politicians in Turkey. Erdoğan was then admitted to Eyüp High School, a regular state school. That he eventually received a high school diploma from this school is a subject of debate. According to his official biography, Erdoğan subsequently studied business administration at the Aksaray School of Economics and Commercial Sciences (Turkish: Aksaray İktisat ve Ticaret Yüksekokulu), now known as Marmara University's Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences. Both the authenticity and status of his degree have been the subject of disputes and controversy over whether the diploma is legitimate and ought to be considered sufficient to make him eligible as a candidate for the presidency. In 1976, Erdoğan engaged in politics by joining the National Turkish Student Union, an anti-communist action group. In the same year, he became head of the Beyoğlu youth branch of the Islamist National Salvation Party (MSP), and was later promoted to chair of the Istanbul youth branch. He held this position until the 1980 military coup which dissolved all major political parties. He went on to be a consultant and senior executive in the private sector in the aftermath of the coup. Three years later, in 1983, Erdoğan followed most of Necmettin Erbakan's followers into the newly founded Welfare Party (RP). The new party, like its predecessors subscribed to Erbakan's strain of Islamism, the National view. He became the party's Beyoğlu district chair in 1984, and head of its Istanbul branch in 1985. Erdoğan entered the parliamentary by-elections of 1986 as a candidate in Istanbul's 6th electoral district, but failed to get elected. Three years later, Erdoğan ran for the district mayoralty of Beyoğlu, finishing in second place with 22.8% of the vote. In the 1991 Parliamentary Election, The Welfare Party more than doubled its share of the vote in Istanbul compared to four years prior, reaching 16.7%. At first, Erdoğan, who lead his party's district list, was thought to have been elected to parliament. However, as a product of the open-list proportional representation system adopted during the previous term, after all votes expressing a candidate preference were tabulated, it was Mustafa Baş instead who earned the seat allocated to the Welfare Party. A difference of about 4,000 preferential votes separated the two, with Baş's ~13,000 to Erdoğan's ~9,000. In the local elections of 1994, Erdoğan ran as a candidate for Mayor of Istanbul. He was a young, dark horse candidate in a crowded field. Over the course of the campaign, he was mocked by the mainstream media and treated as a country bumpkin by his opponents. In an upset, he won with 25.19% of the popular vote, making it the first time a mayor of Istanbul got elected from his political party. His win coincided with a wave of Welfare Party victories nationwide, as they won 28 provincial mayoralties - most out of any party - and numerous metropolitan seats, including the capital, Ankara. Erdoğan governed pragmatically, focusing on bread-and-butter issues. He aimed to tackle the chronic problems plaguing the metropolis, such as water shortage, pollution – waste collection issues in particular – and severely congested traffic. He undertook an infrastructure overhaul: expanding and modernizing the water grid with hundreds of kilometers of new water pipes being laid, and constructing more than fifty bridges, viaducts, and stretches of highway to mitigate traffic. State-of-the-art recycling facilities were built and air pollution was reduced through a plan to switch to natural gas. He changed the public buses to environmentally friendly ones. He took precautions to prevent corruption, using measures to ensure that municipal funds were used prudently. He paid back a major portion of Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality's two-billion-dollar debt and invested four billion dollars in the city. He also opened up City Hall to the people, gave out his e-mail address and established municipal hot lines. Erdoğan initiated the first roundtable of mayors during the Istanbul conference, which led to a global, organized movement of mayors. A seven-member international jury from the United Nations unanimously awarded Erdoğan the UN-Habitat award. In December 1997 in Siirt, Erdoğan recited a modified version of the "Soldier's prayer" poem written by Ziya Gökalp, a pan-Turkish activist of the early 20th century. This version included an additional stanza in the beginning, its first two verses reading "The mosques are our barracks, the domes our helmets / The minarets our bayonets and the faithful our soldiers...." Under article 312/2 of the Turkish penal code his recitation was regarded by the judge as an incitement to violence and religious or racial hatred. In his defense, Erdoğan said that the poem was published in state-approved books. How this version of the poem ended up in a book published by the Turkish Standards Institution remained a topic of discussion. Erdoğan was given a ten-month prison sentence. He was forced to give up his mayoral position due to his conviction. The conviction also stipulated a political ban, which prevented him from participating in elections. He had appealed for the sentence to be converted to a monetary fine, but it was reduced to four months instead (24 March 1999 to 27 July 1999). He was transferred to Pınarhisar prison in Kırklareli. The day Erdoğan went to prison, he released an album called This Song Doesn't End Here. The album features a tracklist of seven poems and became the best-selling album of Turkey in 1999, selling over one million copies. In 2013, Erdoğan visited the Pınarhisar prison again for the first time in fourteen years. After the visit, he said "For me, Pınarhisar is a symbol of rebirth, where we prepared the establishment of the Justice and Development Party". Erdoğan was member of political parties that kept getting banned by the army or judges. Within his Virtue Party, there was a dispute about the appropriate discourse of the party between traditional politicians and pro-reform politicians. The latter envisioned a party that could operate within the limits of the system, and thus not getting banned as its predecessors like National Order Party, National Salvation Party and Welfare Party. They wanted to give the group the character of an ordinary conservative party with its members being Muslim Democrats following the example of the Europe's Christian Democrats. When the Virtue Party was also banned in 2001, a definitive split took place: the followers of Necmettin Erbakan founded the Felicity Party (SP) and the reformers founded the Justice and Development Party (AKP) under the leadership of Abdullah Gül and Erdoğan. The pro-reform politicians realized that a strictly Islamic party would never be accepted as a governing party by the state apparatus and they believed that an Islamic party did not appeal to more than about 20 percent of the Turkish electorate. The AK party emphatically placed itself as a broad democratic conservative party with new politicians from the political center (like Ali Babacan and Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu), while respecting Islamic norms and values, but without an explicit religious program. This turned out to be successful as the new party won 34% of the vote in the general elections of 2002. Erdoğan became prime minister in March 2003 after the Gül government ended his political ban. The elections of 2002 were the first elections in which Erdoğan participated as a party leader. All parties previously elected to parliament failed to win enough votes to re-enter the parliament. The AKP won 34.3% of the national vote and formed the new government. Turkish stocks rose more than 7% on Monday morning. Politicians of the previous generation, such as Ecevit, Bahceli, Yılmaz and Çiller, resigned. The second largest party, the CHP, received 19.4% of the votes. The AKP won a landslide victory in the parliament, taking nearly two-thirds of the seats. Erdoğan could not become Prime Minister as he was still banned from politics by the judiciary for his speech in Siirt. Gül became the Prime Minister instead. In December 2002, the Supreme Election Board canceled the general election results from Siirt due to voting irregularities and scheduled a new election for 9 February 2003. By this time, party leader Erdoğan was able to run for parliament due to a legal change made possible by the opposition Republican People's Party. The AKP duly listed Erdoğan as a candidate for the rescheduled election, which he won, becoming Prime Minister after Gül handed over the post. On 14 April 2007, an estimated 300,000 people marched in Ankara to protest against the possible candidacy of Erdoğan in the 2007 presidential election, afraid that if elected as president, he would alter the secular nature of the Turkish state. Erdoğan announced on 24 April 2007 that the party had nominated Abdullah Gül as the AKP candidate in the presidential election. The protests continued over the next several weeks, with over one million people reported to have turned out at a 29 April rally in Istanbul, tens of thousands at separate protests on 4 May in Manisa and Çanakkale, and one million in İzmir on 13 May. The stage of the elections of 2007 was set for a fight for legitimacy in the eyes of voters between his government and the CHP. Erdoğan used the event that took place during the ill-fated Presidential elections a few months earlier as a part of the general election campaign of his party. On 22 July 2007, the AKP won an important victory over the opposition, garnering 46.7% of the popular vote. 22 July elections marked only the second time in the Republic of Turkey's history whereby an incumbent governing party won an election by increasing its share of popular support. On 14 March 2008, Turkey's Chief Prosecutor asked the country's Constitutional Court to ban Erdoğan's governing party. The party escaped a ban on 30 July 2008, a year after winning 46.7% of the vote in national elections, although judges did cut the party's public funding by 50%. In the June 2011 elections, Erdoğan's governing party won 327 seats (49.83% of the popular vote) making Erdoğan the only prime minister in Turkey's history to win three consecutive general elections, each time receiving more votes than the previous election. The second party, the Republican People's Party (CHP), received 135 seats (25.94%), the nationalist MHP received 53 seats (13.01%), and the Independents received 35 seats (6.58%). A US$100 billion corruption scandal in 2013 led to the arrests of Erdoğan's close allies, and incriminated Erdoğan. After the opposition parties deadlocked the 2007 presidential election by boycotting the parliament, the ruling AKP proposed a constitutional reform package. The reform package was first vetoed by President Ahmet Necdet Sezer. Then he applied to the Turkish constitutional court about the reform package, because the president is unable to veto amendments for the second time. The Turkish constitutional court did not find any problems in the packet and 68.95% of the voters supported the constitutional changes. The reforms consisted of electing the president by popular vote instead of by parliament; reducing the presidential term from seven years to five; allowing the president to stand for re-election for a second term; holding general elections every four years instead of five; and reducing from 367 to 184 the quorum of lawmakers needed for parliamentary decisions. Reforming the Constitution was one of the main pledges of the AKP during the 2007 election campaign. The main opposition party CHP was not interested in altering the Constitution on a big scale, making it impossible to form a Constitutional Commission (Anayasa Uzlaşma Komisyonu). The amendments lacked the two-thirds majority needed to become law instantly, but secured 336 votes in the 550-seat parliament – enough to put the proposals to a referendum. The reform package included a number of issues such as the right of individuals to appeal to the highest court, the creation of the ombudsman's office; the possibility to negotiate a nationwide labour contract; gender equality; the ability of civilian courts to convict members of the military; the right of civil servants to go on strike; a privacy law; and the structure of the Constitutional Court. The referendum was agreed by a majority of 58%. In 2009, Prime Minister Erdoğan's government announced a plan to help end the quarter-century-long Turkey–Kurdistan Workers' Party conflict that had cost more than 40,000 lives. The government's plan, supported by the European Union, intended to allow the Kurdish language to be used in all broadcast media and political campaigns, and restored Kurdish names to cities and towns that had been given Turkish ones. Erdoğan said, "We took a courageous step to resolve chronic issues that constitute an obstacle along Turkey's development, progression and empowerment." Erdoğan passed a partial amnesty to reduce penalties faced by many members of the Kurdish guerrilla movement PKK who had surrendered to the government. On 23 November 2011, during a televised meeting of his party in Ankara, he apologized on behalf of the state for the Dersim massacre, where many Alevis and Zazas were killed. In 2013 the government of Erdoğan began a peace process between the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) and the Turkish Government, mediated by parliamentarians of the Peoples' Democratic party (HDP). In 2015, following AKP electoral defeat, the rise of a social democrat, pro-Kurdish rights opposition party, and the minor Ceylanpınar incident, he decided that the peace process was over and supported the revocation of the parliamentary immunity of the HDP parliamentarians. Violent confrontation resumed in 2015–2017, mainly in the South East of Turkey, resulting in higher death tolls and several external operations on the part of the Turkish military. Representatives and elected HDP have been systematically arrested, removed, and replaced in their offices, this tendency being confirmed after the 2016 Turkish coup attempt and the following purges. Six thousand additional deaths occurred in Turkey alone for 2015–2022. Yet, as of 2022 the intensity of the PKK-Turkey conflict did decrease in recent years. In the previous decade, Erdogan and the AKP government used anti-PKK, martial rhetoric and external operations to raise Turkish nationalist votes before elections. Erdoğan has said multiple times that Turkey would acknowledge the mass killings of Armenians during World War I as genocide only after a thorough investigation by a joint Turkish-Armenian commission consisting of historians, archaeologists, political scientists and other experts. In 2005, Erdoğan and the main opposition party leader Deniz Baykal wrote a letter to President of Armenia Robert Kocharyan, proposing the creation of a joint Turkish-Armenian commission. Armenian Foreign Minister Vartan Oskanian rejected the offer because he asserted that the proposal itself was "insincere and not serious". He added: "This issue cannot be considered at historical level with Turks, who themselves politicized the problem." In December 2008, Erdoğan criticized the I Apologize campaign by Turkish intellectuals to recognize the Armenian genocide, saying, "I neither accept nor support this campaign. We did not commit a crime, therefore we do not need to apologise ... It will not have any benefit other than stirring up trouble, disturbing our peace and undoing the steps which have been taken." In 2011, Erdoğan ordered the tearing-down of the 33-meter-tall (108 ft) Monument to Humanity, a Turkish–Armenian friendship monument in Kars, which was commissioned in 2006 and represented a metaphor of the rapprochement of the two countries after many years of dispute over the events of 1915. Erdoğan justified the removal by stating that the monument was offensively close to the tomb of an 11th-century Islamic scholar, and that its shadow ruined the view of that site, while Kars municipality officials said it was illegally erected in a protected area. However, the former mayor of Kars who approved the original construction of the monument said the municipality was destroying not just a "monument to humanity" but "humanity itself". The demolition was not unopposed; among its detractors were several Turkish artists. Two of them, the painter Bedri Baykam and his associate, Pyramid Art Gallery general coordinator Tugba Kurtulmus, were stabbed after a meeting with other artists at the Istanbul Akatlar cultural center. On 23 April 2014, Erdoğan's office issued a statement in nine languages (including two dialects of Armenian), offering condolences for the mass killings of Armenians and stating that the events of 1915 had inhumane consequences. The statement described the mass killings as the two nations' shared pain and said: "Having experienced events which had inhumane consequences – such as relocation – during the First World War, (it) should not prevent Turks and Armenians from establishing compassion and mutually humane attitudes among one another." Pope Francis in April 2015, at a special mass in St. Peter's Basilica marking the centenary of the events, described atrocities against Armenian civilians in 1915–1922 as "the first genocide of the 20th century". In protest, Erdoğan recalled the Turkish ambassador from the Vatican, and summoned the Vatican's ambassador, to express "disappointment" at what he called a discriminatory message. He later stated "we don't carry a stain or a shadow like genocide". US President Barack Obama called for a "full, frank and just acknowledgement of the facts", but again stopped short of labelling it "genocide", despite his campaign promise to do so. During Erdoğan's time as Prime Minister, the far-reaching powers of the 1991 Anti-Terror Law were reduced. In 2004, the death penalty was abolished for all circumstances. The Democratic initiative process was initiated, with the goal to improve democratic standards in general and the rights of ethnic and religious minorities in particular. In 2012, the Human Rights and Equality Institution of Turkey and the Ombudsman Institution were established. The UN Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture was ratified. Children are no longer prosecuted under terrorism legislation. The Jewish community were allowed to celebrate Hanukkah publicly for the first time in modern Turkish history in 2015. The Turkish government approved a law in 2008 to return properties confiscated in the past by the state to non-Muslim foundations. It also paved the way for the free allocation of worship places such as synagogues and churches to non-Muslim foundations. However, European officials noted a return to more authoritarian ways after the stalling of Turkey's bid to join the European Union notably on freedom of speech, freedom of the press and Kurdish minority rights. Demands by activists for the recognition of LGBT rights were publicly rejected by government members. Reporters Without Borders reported a continuous decrease in Freedom of the Press during Erdoğan's later terms, with a rank of around 100 on its Press Freedom Index during his first term and a rank of 153 out of a total of 179 countries in 2021. Freedom House reported a slight recovery in later years and awarded Turkey a Press Freedom Score of 55/100 in 2012 after a low point of 48/100 in 2006. In 2011, Erdoğan's government made legal reforms to return properties of Christian and Jewish minorities which were seized by the Turkish government in the 1930s. The total value of the properties returned reached $2 billion (USD). Under Erdoğan, the Turkish government tightened the laws on the sale and consumption of alcohol, banning all advertising and increasing the tax on alcoholic beverages. In 2002, Erdoğan inherited a Turkish economy that was beginning to recover from a recession as a result of reforms implemented by Kemal Derviş. Erdoğan supported Finance Minister Ali Babacan in enforcing macro-economic policies. Erdoğan tried to attract more foreign investors to Turkey and lifted many government regulations. The cash-flow into the Turkish economy between 2002 and 2012 caused a growth of 64% in real GDP and a 43% increase in GDP per capita; considerably higher numbers were commonly advertised but these did not account for the inflation of the US dollar between 2002 and 2012. The average annual growth in GDP per capita was 3.6%. The growth in real GDP between 2002 and 2012 was higher than the values from developed countries, but was close to average when developing countries are also taken into account. The ranking of the Turkish economy in terms of GDP moved slightly from 17 to 16 during this decade. A major consequence of the policies between 2002 and 2012 was the widening of the current account deficit from US$600 million to US$58 billion (2013 est.) Since 1961, Turkey has signed 19 IMF loan accords. Erdoğan's government satisfied the budgetary and market requirements of the two during his administration and received every loan installment, the only time any Turkish government has done so. Erdoğan inherited a debt of $23.5 billion to the IMF, which was reduced to $0.9 billion in 2012. He decided not to sign a new deal. Turkey's debt to the IMF was thus declared to be completely paid and he announced that the IMF could borrow from Turkey. In 2010, five-year credit default swaps for Turkey's sovereign debt were trading at a record low of 1.17%, below those of nine EU member countries and Russia. In 2002, the Turkish Central Bank had $26.5 billion in reserves. This amount reached $92.2 billion in 2011. During Erdoğan's leadership, inflation fell from 32% to 9.0% in 2004. Since then, Turkish inflation has continued to fluctuate around 9% and is still one of the highest inflation rates in the world. The Turkish public debt as a percentage of annual GDP declined from 74% in 2002 to 39% in 2009. In 2012, Turkey had a lower ratio of public debt to GDP than 21 of 27 members of the European Union and a lower budget deficit to GDP ratio than 23 of them. In 2003, Erdoğan's government pushed through the Labor Act, a comprehensive reform of Turkey's labor laws. The law greatly expanded the rights of employees, establishing a 45-hour workweek and limiting overtime work to 270 hours a year, provided legal protection against discrimination due to sex, religion, or political affiliation, prohibited discrimination between permanent and temporary workers, entitled employees terminated without "valid cause" to compensation, and mandated written contracts for employment arrangements lasting a year or more. Erdoğan increased the budget of the Ministry of Education from 7.5 billion lira in 2002 to 34 billion lira in 2011, the highest share of the national budget given to one ministry. Before his prime ministership the military received the highest share of the national budget. Compulsory education was increased from eight years to twelve. In 2003, the Turkish government, together with UNICEF, initiated a campaign called "Come on girls, [let's go] to school!" (Turkish: Haydi Kızlar Okula!). The goal of this campaign was to close the gender gap in primary school enrollment through the provision of a quality basic education for all girls, especially in southeast Turkey. In 2005, the parliament granted amnesty to students expelled from universities before 2003. The amnesty applied to students dismissed on academic or disciplinary grounds. In 2004, textbooks became free of charge and since 2008 every province in Turkey has its own university. During Erdoğan's Premiership, the number of universities in Turkey nearly doubled, from 98 in 2002 to 186 in October 2012. The Prime Minister kept his campaign promises by starting the Fatih project in which all state schools, from preschool to high school level, received a total of 620,000 smart boards, while tablet computers were distributed to 17 million students and approximately one million teachers and administrators. In June 2017 a draft proposal by the ministry of education was approved by Erdoğan, in which the curriculum for schools excluded the teaching of the theory of evolution of Charles Darwin by 2019. From then on the teaching will be postponed and start at undergraduate level. Under Erdoğan's government, the number of airports in Turkey increased from 26 to 50 in the period of 10 years. Between the founding of the Republic of Turkey in 1923 and 2002, there had been 6,000 km of dual carriageway roads created. Between 2002 and 2011, another 13,500 km of expressway were built. Due to these measures, the number of motor accidents fell by 50 percent. For the first time in Turkish history, high speed railway lines were constructed, and the country's high-speed train service began in 2009. In 8 years, 1,076 km of railway were built and 5,449 km of railway renewed. The construction of Marmaray, an undersea rail tunnel under the Bosphorus strait, started in 2004. It was inaugurated on the 90th anniversary of the Turkish Republic 29 October 2013. The inauguration of the Yavuz Sultan Selim Bridge, the third bridge over the Bosphorus, was on 26 August 2016. In March 2006, the Supreme Board of Judges and Prosecutors (HSYK) held a press conference to publicly protest the obstruction of the appointment of judges to the high courts for over 10 months. The HSYK said Erdoğan wanted to fill the vacant posts with his own appointees. Erdoğan was accused of creating a rift with Turkey's highest court of appeal, the Yargıtay, and high administrative court, the Danıştay. Erdoğan stated that the constitution gave the power to assign these posts to his elected party. In May 2007, the head of Turkey's High Court asked prosecutors to consider whether Erdoğan should be charged over critical comments regarding the election of Abdullah Gül as president. Erdoğan said the ruling was "a disgrace to the justice system", and criticized the Constitutional Court which had invalidated a presidential vote because a boycott by other parties meant there was no quorum. Prosecutors investigated his earlier comments, including saying it had fired a "bullet at democracy". Tülay Tuğcu, head of the Constitutional Court, condemned Erdoğan for "threats, insults and hostility" towards the justice system. The Turkish military has had a record of intervening in politics, having removed elected governments four times in the past. During the Erdoğan government, civil–military relationship moved towards normalization in which the influence of the military in politics was significantly reduced. The ruling Justice and Development Party has often faced off against the military, gaining political power by challenging a pillar of the country's laicistic establishment. The most significant issue that caused deep fissures between the army and the government was the midnight e-memorandum posted on the military's website objecting to the selection of Foreign Minister Abdullah Gül as the ruling party's candidate for the Presidency in 2007. The military argued that the election of Gül, whose wife wears an Islamic headscarf, could undermine the laicistic order of the country. Contrary to expectations, the government responded harshly to former Chief of General Staff Gen. Yaşar Büyükanıt's e-memorandum, stating the military had nothing to do with the selection of the presidential candidate. After assuming power in 2003, Erdoğan's government embarked on a sweeping reform program of the Turkish healthcare system, called the Health Transformation Program (HTP), to greatly increase the quality of healthcare and protect all citizens from financial risks. Its introduction coincided with the period of sustained economic growth, allowing the Turkish government to put greater investments into the healthcare system. As part of the reforms, the "Green Card" program, which provides health benefits to the poor, was expanded in 2004. The reform program aimed at increasing the ratio of private to state-run healthcare, which, along with long queues in state-run hospitals, resulted in the rise of private medical care in Turkey, forcing state-run hospitals to compete by increasing quality. In April 2006, Erdoğan unveiled a social security reform package demanded by the International Monetary Fund under a loan deal. The move, which Erdoğan called one of the most radical reforms ever, was passed with fierce opposition. Turkey's three social security bodies were united under one roof, bringing equal health services and retirement benefits for members of all three bodies. The previous system had been criticized for reserving the best healthcare for civil servants and relegating others to wait in long queues. Under the second bill, everyone under the age of 18 years was entitled to free health services, irrespective of whether they pay premiums to any social security organization. The bill also envisages a gradual increase in the retirement age: starting from 2036, the retirement age will increase to 65 by 2048 for both women and men. In January 2008, the Turkish Parliament adopted a law to prohibit smoking in most public places. Erdoğan is outspokenly anti-smoking. Turkish foreign policy during Erdoğan's tenure as prime minister has been associated with the name of Ahmet Davutoğlu. Davutoğlu was the chief foreign policy advisor of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan before he was appointed foreign minister in 2009. The basis of Erdoğan's foreign policy is based on the principle of "don't make enemies, make friends" and the pursuit of "zero problems" with neighboring countries. Erdoğan is co-founder of United Nations Alliance of Civilizations (AOC). The initiative seeks to galvanize international action against extremism through the forging of international, intercultural and inter-religious dialogue and cooperation. When Erdoğan came to power, he continued Turkey's long ambition of joining the European Union. Turkey, under Erdoğan, made many strides in its laws that would qualify for EU membership. On 3 October 2005 negotiations began for Turkey's accession to the European Union. Erdoğan was named "The European of the Year 2004" by the newspaper European Voice for the reforms in his country in order to accomplish the accession of Turkey to the European Union. He said in a comment that "Turkey's accession shows that Europe is a continent where civilisations reconcile and not clash." On 3 October 2005, the negotiations for Turkey's accession to the EU formally started during Erdoğan's tenure as Prime Minister. The European Commission generally supports Erdoğan's reforms, but it remains critical of his policies. Negotiations about a possible EU membership came to a standstill in 2009 and 2010, when Turkish ports were closed to Cypriot ships. The Turkish government continues its refusal to recognize EU member state Cyprus. Relations between Greece and Turkey were normalized during Erdoğan's tenure as prime minister. In May 2004, Erdoğan became the first Turkish Prime Minister to visit Greece since 1988, and the first to visit the Turkish minority of Thrace since 1952. In 2007, Erdoğan and Greek Prime Minister Kostas Karamanlis inaugurated the Greek-Turkish natural gas pipeline giving Caspian gas its first direct Western outlet. Turkey and Greece signed an agreement to create a Combined Joint Operational Unit within the framework of NATO to participate in Peace Support Operations. Erdoğan and his party strongly supported the EU-backed referendum to reunify Cyprus in 2004. Negotiations about a possible EU membership came to a standstill in 2009 and 2010, when Turkish ports were closed to Cypriot ships as a consequence of the economic isolation of the internationally unrecognized Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and the failure of the EU to end the isolation, as it had promised in 2004. The Turkish government continues its refusal to recognize the Republic of Cyprus. Armenia is Turkey's only neighbor which Erdoğan has not visited during his premiership. The Turkish-Armenian border has been closed since 1993 because of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict with Turkey's close ally Azerbaijan. Diplomatic efforts resulted in the signing of protocols between Turkish and Armenian Foreign Ministers in Switzerland to improve relations between the two countries. One of the points of the agreement was the creation of a joint commission on the issue. The Armenian Constitutional Court decided that the commission contradicts the Armenian constitution. Turkey responded saying that Armenian court's ruling on the protocols is not acceptable, resulting in a suspension of the rectification process by the Turkish side. Erdoğan has said that Armenian President Serzh Sargsyan should apologize for calling on school children to re-occupy eastern Turkey. When asked by a student at a literature contest ceremony if Armenians will be able to get back their "western territories" along with Mt. Ararat, Sarksyan said, "This is the task of your generation". In December 2004, President Putin visited Turkey, making it the first presidential visit in the history of Turkish-Russian relations besides that of the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Nikolai Podgorny in 1972. In November 2005, Putin attended the inauguration of a jointly constructed Blue Stream natural gas pipeline in Turkey. This sequence of top-level visits has brought several important bilateral issues to the forefront. The two countries consider it their strategic goal to achieve "multidimensional co-operation", especially in the fields of energy, transport and the military. Specifically, Russia aims to invest in Turkey's fuel and energy industries, and it also expects to participate in tenders for the modernization of Turkey's military. The relations during this time are described by President Medvedev as "Turkey is one of our most important partners with respect to regional and international issues. We can confidently say that Russian-Turkish relations have advanced to the level of a multidimensional strategic partnership". In May 2010, Turkey and Russia signed 17 agreements to enhance cooperation in energy and other fields, including pacts to build Turkey's first nuclear power plant and further plans for an oil pipeline from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean Sea. The leaders of both countries also signed an agreement on visa-free travel, enabling tourists to get into the other country for free and stay there for up to 30 days.[citation needed] When Barack Obama became President of United States, he made his first overseas bilateral meeting to Turkey in April 2009. At a joint news conference in Turkey, Obama said: "I'm trying to make a statement about the importance of Turkey, not just to the United States but to the world. I think that where there's the most promise of building stronger U.S.-Turkish relations is in the recognition that Turkey and the United States can build a model partnership in which a predominantly Christian nation, a predominantly Muslim nation – a Western nation and a nation that straddles two continents," he continued, "that we can create a modern international community that is respectful, that is secure, that is prosperous, that there are not tensions – inevitable tensions between cultures – which I think is extraordinarily important." Turkey under Erdoğan was named by the Bush Administration as a part of the "coalition of the willing" that was central to the 2003 invasion of Iraq. On 1 March 2003, a motion allowing Turkish military to participate in the U.S-led coalition's invasion of Iraq, along with the permission for foreign troops to be stationed in Turkey for this purpose, was overruled by the Turkish Parliament. After the fall of Saddam Hussein, Iraq and Turkey signed 48 trade agreements on issues including security, energy, and water. The Turkish government attempted to mend relations with Iraqi Kurdistan by opening a Turkish university in Erbil, and a Turkish consulate in Mosul. Erdoğan's government fostered economic and political relations with Irbil, and Turkey began to consider the Kurdistan Regional Government in northern Iraq as an ally against Maliki's government. Erdoğan visited Israel on 1 May 2005, a gesture unusual for a leader of a Muslim majority country. During his trip, Erdoğan visited the Yad Vashem, Israel's official memorial to the victims of the Holocaust. The President of Israel Shimon Peres addressed the Turkish parliament during a visit in 2007, the first time an Israeli leader had addressed the legislature of a predominantly Muslim nation. Their relationship worsened at the 2009 World Economic Forum conference over Israel's actions during the Gaza War. Erdoğan was interrupted by the moderator while he was responding to Peres. Erdoğan stated: "Mister Peres, you are older than I am. Maybe you are feeling guilty and that is why you are raising your voice. When it comes to killing you know it too well. I remember how you killed the children on beaches..." Upon the moderator's reminder that they needed to adjourn for dinner, Erdoğan left the panel, accusing the moderator of giving Peres more time than all the other panelists combined. Tensions increased further following the Gaza flotilla raid in May 2010. Erdoğan strongly condemned the raid, describing it as "state terrorism", and demanded an Israeli apology. In February 2013, Erdoğan called Zionism a "crime against humanity", comparing it to Islamophobia, antisemitism, and fascism. He later retracted the statement, saying he had been misinterpreted. He said "everyone should know" that his comments were directed at "Israeli policies", especially as regards to "Gaza and the settlements". Erdoğan's statements were criticized by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, among others. In August 2013, the Hürriyet reported that Erdoğan had claimed to have evidence of Israel's responsibility for the removal of Morsi from office in Egypt. The Israeli and Egyptian governments dismissed the suggestion. In response to the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict, Erdoğan accused Israel of conducting "state terrorism" and a "genocide attempt" against the Palestinians. He also stated that "If Israel continues with this attitude, it will definitely be tried at international courts." During Erdoğan's term of office, diplomatic relations between Turkey and Syria significantly deteriorated. In 2004, President Bashar al-Assad arrived in Turkey for the first official visit by a Syrian President in 57 years. In late 2004, Erdoğan signed a free trade agreement with Syria. Visa restrictions between the two countries were lifted in 2009, which caused an economic boom in the regions near the Syrian border. However, in 2011 the relationship between the two countries was strained following the outbreak of conflict in Syria. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said he was trying to "cultivate a favorable relationship with whatever government would take the place of Assad". However, he began to support the opposition in Syria, after demonstrations turned violent, creating a serious Syrian refugee problem in Turkey. Erdoğan's policy of providing military training for anti-Damascus fighters has also created conflict with Syria's ally and a neighbour of Turkey, Iran. In August 2006, King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz as-Saud made a visit to Turkey. This was the first visit by a Saudi monarch to Turkey in the last four decades. The monarch made a second visit, on 9 November 2007. Turk-Saudi trade volume has exceeded US$ 3.2 billion in 2006, almost double the figure achieved in 2003. In 2009, this amount reached US$ 5.5 billion and the goal for the year 2010 was US$ 10 billion. Erdoğan condemned the Saudi-led intervention in Bahrain and characterized the Saudi movement as "a new Karbala". He demanded withdrawal of Saudi forces from Bahrain. Erdoğan had made his first official visit to Egypt on 12 September 2011, accompanied by six ministers and 200 businessmen. This visit was made very soon after Turkey had ejected Israeli ambassadors, cutting off all diplomatic relations with Israel because Israel refused to apologize for the Gaza flotilla raid which killed eight Turkish and one Turco-American. Erdoğan's visit to Egypt was met with much enthusiasm by Egyptians. CNN reported some Egyptians saying "We consider him as the Islamic leader in the Middle East", while others were appreciative of his role in supporting Gaza. Erdoğan was later honoured in Tahrir Square by members of the Egyptian Revolution Youth Union, and members of the Turkish embassy were presented with a coat of arms in acknowledgment of the Prime Minister's support of the Egyptian Revolution. Erdoğan stated in a 2011 interview that he supported secularism for Egypt, which generated an angry reaction among Islamic movements, especially the Freedom and Justice Party, which was the political wing of the Muslim Brotherhood. However, commentators suggest that by forming an alliance with the military junta during Egypt's transition to democracy, Erdoğan may have tipped the balance in favor of an authoritarian government. Erdoğan condemned the sit-in dispersals conducted by Egyptian police on 14 August 2013 at the Rabaa al-Adawiya and al-Nahda squares, where violent clashes between police officers and pro-Morsi Islamist protesters led to hundreds of deaths, mostly protesters. In July 2014, one year after the removal of Mohamed Morsi from office, Erdoğan described Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi as an "illegitimate tyrant". Erdoğan's administration maintains strong ties with the Somali government. During the drought of 2011, Erdoğan's government contributed over $201 million to humanitarian relief efforts in the impacted parts of Somalia. Following a greatly improved security situation in Mogadishu in mid-2011, the Turkish government also re-opened its foreign embassy with the intention of more effectively assisting in the post-conflict development process. It was among the first foreign governments to resume formal diplomatic relations with Somalia after the civil war. In May 2010, the Turkish and Somali governments signed a military training agreement, in keeping with the provisions outlined in the Djibouti Peace Process. Turkish Airlines became the first long-distance international commercial airline in two decades to resume flights to and from Mogadishu's Aden Adde International Airport. Turkey also launched various development and infrastructure projects in Somalia including building several hospitals and helping renovate the National Assembly building. The 2013 Gezi Park protests were held against the perceived authoritarianism of Erdoğan and his policies, starting from a small sit-in in Istanbul in defense of a city park. After the police's intense reaction with tear gas, the protests grew each day. Faced by the largest mass protest in a decade, Erdoğan made this controversial remark in a televised speech: "The police were there yesterday, they are there today, and they will be there tomorrow". After weeks of clashes in the streets of Istanbul, his government at first apologized to the protestors and called for a plebiscite, but then ordered a crackdown on the protesters. Erdoğan took the oath of office on 28 August 2014 and became the 12th president of Turkey. He administered the new Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu's oath on 29 August. When asked about his lower-than-expected 51.79% share of the vote, he allegedly responded, "there were even those who did not like the Prophet. I, however, won 52%". Assuming the role of President, Erdoğan was criticized for openly stating that he would not maintain the tradition of presidential neutrality. Erdoğan has also stated his intention to pursue a more active role as president, such as utilizing the President's rarely used cabinet-calling powers. The political opposition has argued that Erdoğan will continue to pursue his own political agenda, controlling the government, while his new Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu would be docile and submissive. Furthermore, the domination of loyal Erdoğan supporters in Davutoğlu's cabinet fuelled speculation that Erdoğan intended to exercise substantial control over the government. On 1 July 2014, Erdoğan was named the AKP's presidential candidate in the Turkish presidential election. His candidacy was announced by the Deputy President of the AKP, Mehmet Ali Şahin. Erdoğan made a speech after the announcement and used the 'Erdoğan logo' for the first time. The logo was criticized because it was very similar to the logo that U.S. President Barack Obama used in the 2008 presidential election. Erdoğan was elected as the President of Turkey in the first round of the election with 51.79% of the vote, obviating the need for a run-off by winning over 50%. The joint candidate of the CHP, MHP and 13 other opposition parties, former Organisation of Islamic Co-operation general secretary Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu won 38.44% of the vote. The pro-Kurdish HDP candidate Selahattin Demirtaş won 9.76%. The 2018 Turkish presidential election took place as part of the 2018 general election, alongside parliamentary elections on the same day. Following the approval of constitutional changes in a referendum held in 2017, the elected President will be both the head of state and head of government of Turkey, taking over the latter role from the to-be-abolished office of the Prime Minister. Incumbent president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan declared his candidacy for the People's Alliance (Turkish: Cumhur İttifakı) on 27 April 2018,[citation needed] being supported by the MHP. Erdoğan's main opposition, the Republican People's Party, nominated Muharrem İnce, a member of the parliament known for his combative opposition and spirited speeches against Erdoğan. Besides these candidates, Meral Akşener, the founder and leader of Good Party, Temel Karamollaoğlu, the leader of the Felicity Party and Doğu Perinçek, the leader of the Patriotic Party, have announced their candidacies and collected the 100,000 signatures required for nomination. The alliance which Erdoğan was candidate for won 52.59% of the popular vote. For the presidential election 2023 his candidacy is in dispute as he has launched his campaign in June 2022, but the opposition contends a third presidential term would violate the constitution. During the first round of ballots in the 2023 Presidential Election, Erdoğan failed to cross the 50% threshold, resulting in a second runoff election against Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu. On 28 May 2023 Erdoğan won the second round with 52.14% of the vote, with over 99% of the total vote counted. On March 8, 2024, he declared that he would retire once his presidential term ended. In April 2017, a constitutional referendum was held, where the voters in Turkey (and Turkish citizens abroad) approved a set of 18 proposed amendments to the Constitution of Turkey. The amendments included the replacement of the existing parliamentary system with a presidential system. The post of Prime Minister would be abolished, and the presidency would become an executive post vested with broad executive powers. The parliament seats would be increased from 550 to 600 and the age of candidacy to the parliament was lowered from 25 to 18. The referendum also called for changes to the Supreme Board of Judges and Prosecutors. In the 2019 local elections, the ruling party AKP lost control of Istanbul and Ankara for the first time in 25 years, as well as 5 of Turkey's 6 largest cities. The loss has been widely attributed to Erdoğan's mismanagement of the Turkish economic crisis, rising authoritarianism as well as the alleged government inaction on the Syrian refugee crisis. Soon after the elections, Supreme Electoral Council of Turkey ordered a re-election in Istanbul, cancelling Ekrem İmamoğlu's mayoral certificate. The decision led to a significant decrease of Erdoğan's and AKP's popularity and his party lost the elections again in June with a greater margin. The result was seen as a huge blow to Erdoğan, who had once said that if his party 'lost Istanbul, we would lose Turkey. The opposition's victory was characterised as 'the beginning of the end' for Erdoğan', with international commentators calling the re-run a huge government miscalculation that led to a potential İmamoğlu candidacy in the next scheduled presidential election. It is suspected that the scale of the government's defeat could provoke a cabinet reshuffle and early general elections, currently scheduled for June 2023. The New Zealand and Australian governments and opposition CHP party have criticized Erdoğan after he repeatedly showed video taken by the Christchurch mosque shooter to his supporters at campaign rallies for 31 March local elections and said Australians and New Zealanders who came to Turkey with anti-Muslim sentiments "would be sent back in coffins like their grandfathers" at Gallipoli. Erdoğan has also received criticism for the construction of a new official residence called the Presidential Complex, which takes up approximately 50 acres of Atatürk Forest Farm (AOÇ) in Ankara. Since the AOÇ is protected land, several court orders were issued to halt the construction of the new palace, though building work went on nonetheless. The opposition described the move as a clear disregard for the rule of law. The project was subject to heavy criticism and allegations were made; of corruption during the construction process, wildlife destruction and the complete obliteration of the zoo in the AOÇ in order to make way for the new compound. The fact that the palace is technically illegal has led to it being branded as the 'Kaç-Ak Saray', the word kaçak in Turkish meaning 'illegal'. Ak Saray was originally designed as a new office for the Prime Minister. However, upon assuming the presidency, Erdoğan announced that the palace would become the new Presidential Palace, while the Çankaya Mansion will be used by the Prime Minister instead. The move was seen as a historic change since the Çankaya Mansion had been used as the iconic office of the presidency ever since its inception. The Presidential Complex has almost 1,000 rooms and cost $350 million (€270 million), leading to huge criticism at a time when mining accidents and workers' rights had been dominating the agenda. On 29 October 2014, Erdoğan was due to hold a Republic Day reception in the new palace to commemorate the 91st anniversary of the Republic of Turkey and to officially inaugurate the Presidential Palace. However, after most invited participants announced that they would boycott the event and a mining accident occurred in the district of Ermenek in Karaman, the reception was cancelled. President Erdoğan and his government continue to press for court action against the remaining free press in Turkey. The latest newspaper that has been seized is Zaman, in March 2016. After the seizure Morton Abramowitz and Eric Edelman, former U.S. ambassadors to Turkey, condemned President Erdoğan's actions in an opinion piece published by The Washington Post: "Clearly, democracy cannot flourish under Erdoğan now". "The overall pace of reforms in Turkey has not only slowed down but in some key areas, such as freedom of expression and the independence of the judiciary, there has been a regression, which is particularly worrying", rapporteur Kati Piri said in April 2016 after the European Parliament passed its annual progress report on Turkey. On 22 June 2016, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said that he considered himself successful in "destroying" Turkish civil groups "working against the state", a conclusion that had been confirmed some days earlier by Sedat Laçiner, Professor of International Relations and rector of the Çanakkale Onsekiz Mart University: "Outlawing unarmed and peaceful opposition, sentencing people to unfair punishment under erroneous terror accusations, will feed genuine terrorism in Erdoğan's Turkey. Guns and violence will become the sole alternative for legally expressing free thought". After the coup attempt, over 200 journalists were arrested and over 120 media outlets were closed. Cumhuriyet journalists were detained in November 2016 after a long-standing crackdown on the newspaper. Subsequently, Reporters Without Borders called Erdoğan an "enemy of press freedom" and said that he "hides his aggressive dictatorship under a veneer of democracy". In 2014, Turkey temporarily blocked access to Twitter. In April 2017, Turkey blocked all access to Wikipedia over a content dispute. The Turkish government lifted a two-and-a-half-year ban on Wikipedia on 15 January 2020, restoring access to the online encyclopedia a month after Turkey's top court ruled that blocking Wikipedia was unconstitutional. On 1 July 2020, in a statement made to his party members, Erdoğan announced that the government would introduce new measures and regulations to control or shut down social media platforms such as YouTube, Twitter and Netflix. Through these new measures, each company would be required to appoint an official representative in the country to respond to legal concerns. The decision came after a number of Twitter users insulted his daughter Esra after she gave birth to her fourth child. On 20 July 2016, President Erdoğan declared the state of emergency, citing the coup d'état attempt as justification. It was first scheduled to last three months. The Turkish parliament approved this measure. The state of emergency was later continuously extended until 2018 amidst the ongoing 2016 Turkish purges including comprehensive purges of independent media and detention of tens of thousands of Turkish citizens politically opposed to Erdoğan. More than 50,000 people have been arrested and over 160,000 fired from their jobs by March 2018. In August 2016, Erdoğan began rounding up journalists who had been publishing, or who were about to publish articles questioning corruption within the Erdoğan administration, and incarcerating them. The number of Turkish journalists jailed by Turkey is higher than any other country, including all of those journalists currently jailed in North Korea, Cuba, Russia, and China combined. In the wake of the coup attempt of July 2016 the Erdoğan administration began rounding up tens of thousands of individuals, both from within the government, and from the public sector, and incarcerating them on charges of alleged "terrorism". As a result of these arrests, many in the international community complained about the lack of proper judicial process in the incarceration of Erdoğan's opposition.  In April 2017 Erdoğan successfully sponsored legislation effectively making it illegal for the Turkish legislative branch to investigate his executive branch of government. Without the checks and balances of freedom of speech, and the freedom of the Turkish legislature to hold him accountable for his actions, many have likened Turkey's current form of government to a dictatorship with only nominal forms of democracy in practice. At the time of Erdoğan's successful passing of the most recent legislation silencing his opposition, United States President Donald Trump called Erdoğan to congratulate him for his "recent referendum victory". On 29 April 2017 Erdoğan's administration began an internal Internet block of all of the Wikipedia online encyclopedia site via Turkey's domestic Internet filtering system. This blocking action took place after the government had first made a request for Wikipedia to remove what it referred to as "offensive content". In response, Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales replied via a post on Twitter stating, "Access to information is a fundamental human right. Turkish people, I will always stand with you and fight for this right." In January 2016, more than a thousand academics signed a petition criticizing Turkey's military crackdown on ethnic Kurdish towns and neighborhoods in the east of the country, such as Sur (a district of Diyarbakır), Silvan, Nusaybin, Cizre and Silopi, and asking an end to violence. Erdoğan accused those who signed the petition of "terrorist propaganda", calling them "the darkest of people". He called for action by institutions and universities, stating, "Everyone who benefits from this state but is now an enemy of the state must be punished without further delay". Within days, over 30 of the signatories were arrested, many in dawn-time raids on their homes. Although all were quickly released, nearly half were fired from their jobs, eliciting a denunciation from Turkey's Science Academy for such "wrong and disturbing" treatment. Erdoğan vowed that the academics would pay the price for "falling into a pit of treachery". On 8 July 2018, Erdoğan sacked 18,000 officials for alleged ties to US based cleric Fethullah Gülen, shortly before renewing his term as an executive president. Of those removed, 9000 were police officers with 5000 from the armed forces with the addition of hundreds of academics. Under his presidency, Erdoğan has decreased the independence of the Central Bank and pushed it to pursue a highly unorthodox monetary policy, decreasing interest rates even with high inflation. He has pushed the theory that inflation is caused by high interest rates, an idea universally rejected by economists. This, along with other factors such as excessive current account deficit and foreign-currency debt, in combination with Erdoğan's increasing authoritarianism, caused an economic crisis starting from 2018, leading to large depreciation of the Turkish lira and very high inflation. Economist Paul Krugman described the unfolding crisis as "a classic currency-and-debt crisis, of a kind we've seen many times", adding: "At such a time, the quality of leadership suddenly matters a great deal. You need officials who understand what's happening, can devise a response and have enough credibility that markets give them the benefit of the doubt. Some emerging markets have those things, and they are riding out the turmoil fairly well. The Erdoğan regime has none of that". In February 2016, Erdoğan threatened to send the millions of refugees in Turkey to EU member states, saying: "We can open the doors to Greece and Bulgaria anytime and we can put the refugees on buses ... So how will you deal with refugees if you don't get a deal?" In an interview to the news magazine Der Spiegel, German minister of defence Ursula von der Leyen said on 11 March 2016 that the refugee crisis had made good cooperation between EU and Turkey an "existentially important" issue. "Therefore it is right to advance now negotiations on Turkey's EU accession". In its resolution "The functioning of democratic institutions in Turkey" from 22 June 2016, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe warned that "recent developments in Turkey pertaining to freedom of the media and of expression, erosion of the rule of law and the human rights violations in relation to anti-terrorism security operations in south-east Turkey have ... raised serious questions about the functioning of its democratic institutions". In January 2017, Erdoğan said that the withdrawal of Turkish troops from Northern Cyprus is "out of the question" and Turkey will be in Cyprus "forever". In September 2020, Erdoğan declared his government's support for Azerbaijan following a major conflict between Armenian and Azeri forces over a disputed region of Nagorno-Karabakh. He dismissed demands for a ceasefire. In 2022, Erdoğan and Russian President Vladimir Putin planned for Turkey to become an energy hub for all of Europe through the TurkStream and Blue Stream gas pipelines. In October 2023 Erdoğan canceled attendance at the third European Political Community (EPC) meeting. In May 2022, Erdoğan voiced his opposition to Finland and Sweden joining NATO, accusing the two countries of tolerating groups which Turkey classifies as terrorist organizations, including the Kurdish militant groups PKK, PYD and YPG and the supporters of Fethullah Gülen. Following a protest in Sweden where a Quran was burned, Erdogan re-iterated that he would not support Sweden's bid to join NATO. President of Finland Sauli Niinistö visited Erdogan in Istanbul and Ankara in March 2023. During the visit, Erdogan confirmed that he supported Finnish NATO membership and declared that the Turkish parliament would confirm Finnish membership before the Turkish Presidential elections in May 2023. On 23 March 2023, the Turkish parliament's foreign relations committee confirmed the Finnish NATO membership application and sent the process to the Turkish Parliament's plenary session. On 1 April 2023, Erdoğan confirmed and signed the Turkish Grand National Assembly's ratification of Finnish NATO membership. This decision sealed Finland's entry to NATO. In June 2023, Erdoğan again voiced his opposition to Sweden joining NATO. Just prior to the NATO summit in Vilnius in July 2023, Erdoğan linked Sweden's accession to NATO membership to Turkey's application for EU membership. Turkey had applied for EU membership in 1999, but talks made little progress since 2016. In September 2023, Erdoğan announced that the European Union was well into a rupture in its relations with Turkey and that they would part ways during Turkey's European Union membership process. However, on 23 October 2023, Erdoğan approved Sweden's pending NATO membership bid and sent the accession protocol to the Turkish Parliament for ratification. Two days later, Turkey's parliamentary speaker, Numan Kurtulmuş, sent a bill approving Sweden's NATO membership bid to parliament's foreign affairs committee. The committee discussed the ratification on 16 November 2023, but a decision was deferred, with a request for Sweden to produce a written roadmap to implement its anti-terrorism commitments. On 26 December 2023, the Turkish parliament's foreign relations committee confirmed the Swedish NATO membership application and sent the process to the Turkish Parliament's plenary session. On 25 January 2024, Erdoğan formally signed and approved the Turkish parliament's decision to ratify Swedish NATO membership. There is a long-standing dispute between Turkey and Greece in the Aegean Sea. Erdoğan warned that Greece will pay a "heavy price" if Turkey's gas exploration vessel – in what Turkey said are disputed waters – is attacked. He deemed the readmission of Greece into the military alliance NATO a mistake, claiming they were collaborating with terrorists. In March 2017, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan stated to the Turks in Europe, "Make not three, but five children. Because you are the future of Europe. That will be the best response to the injustices against you." This has been interpreted as an imperialist call for demographic warfare. According to The Economist, Erdoğan is the first Turkish leader to take the Turkish diaspora seriously, which has created friction within these diaspora communities and between the Turkish government and several of its European counterparts. In February 2018, President Erdoğan expressed Turkish support of the Republic of Macedonia's position during negotiations over the Macedonia naming dispute saying that Greece's position is wrong. In March 2018, President Erdoğan criticized the Kosovan Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj for dismissing his Interior Minister and Intelligence Chief for failing to inform him of an unauthorized and illegal secret operation conducted by the National Intelligence Organization of Turkey on Kosovo's territory that led to the arrest of six people allegedly associated with the Gülen movement. On 26 November 2019, an earthquake struck the Durrës region of Albania. President Erdoğan expressed his condolences. and citing close Albanian-Turkish relations, he committed Turkey to reconstructing 500 earthquake destroyed homes and other civic structures in Laç, Albania. In Istanbul, Erdoğan organised and attended a donors conference (8 December) to assist Albania that included Turkish businessmen, investors and Albanian Prime Minister Edi Rama. In September 2023, Azerbaijan launched a large-scale military offensive to recapture the Armenian-populated Nagorno-Karabakh. Addressing the United Nations General Assembly, Erdoğan stated "As everyone now acknowledges, Karabakh is Azerbaijani territory. Imposition of another status [to the region] will never be accepted," and that "[Turkey] support[s] the steps taken by Azerbaijan—with whom we act together with the motto of one nation, two states—to defend its territorial integrity." Erdoğan also met with Azerbaijan's President Ilham Aliyev in the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic. In May 2018, British Prime Minister Theresa May welcomed Erdoğan to the United Kingdom for a three-day state visit. Erdoğan declared that the United Kingdom is "an ally and a strategic partner, but also a real friend. The cooperation we have is well beyond any mechanism that we have established with other partners." Relations between Turkey and Israel began to normalize after Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu officially apologized for the death of the nine Turkish activists during the Gaza flotilla raid. However, in response to the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict, Erdoğan accused Israel of being "more barbaric than Hitler", and conducting "state terrorism" and a "genocide attempt" against the Palestinians. In December 2017, President Erdoğan issued a warning to Donald Trump, after the U.S. President acknowledged Jerusalem as Israel's capital. Erdoğan stated, "Jerusalem is a red line for Muslims", indicating that naming Jerusalem as Israel's capital would alienate Palestinians and other Muslims from the city, undermining hopes at a future capital of a Palestinian State. Erdoğan called Israel a "terrorist state". Naftali Bennett dismissed the threats, claiming "Erdoğan does not miss an opportunity to attack Israel". In April 2019, Erdoğan said the West Bank belongs to Palestinians, after Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said he would annex Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories if he is re-elected. Erdoğan condemned the Israel–UAE peace agreement, stating that Turkey was considering suspending or cutting off diplomatic relations with the United Arab Emirates in retaliation. The relations shifted back to normality since 2021, when the two countries started improving relations. In March 2022, Israeli president Isaac Herzog visited Turkey, meeting Erdoğan. The two countries agreed to restore diplomatic relations in August 2022. Erdoğan condemned the Israeli attacks in the Gaza strip during 2023 Israel–Hamas war, saying they are a violation of human rights, what led to accusations of hypocrisy as Turkey itself severely bombed Kurdish areas at the same time, including many civilian targets. Erdoğan said that Israel's bombing and blockade of the Gaza Strip in retaliation for Hamas’ attack was a disproportionate response amounting to a "massacre." On 25 October 2023, Erdoğan said that Hamas was not a terrorist organisation but a liberation group fighting to protect Palestinian lands and people. On 15 November 2023, he condemned Israel as a "terrorist state" and accused it of committing genocide against the Palestinians. Diplomatic relations between Turkey and Syria significantly deteriorated due to the Syrian civil war. Initially, while tens of thousand of Syrian refugees already crossed the border to Turkey, Turkish officials tried to convince Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to make significant reforms to alleviate the conflict and calm down the protests. The last of such meetings happened on 9 August 2011, during a seven-hour meeting between Assad and Turkey's Ahmet Davutoğlu, giving the latter the title of 'the last European leader who visited Assad'. Turkey got involved in a violent conflict with Islamic State (IS) as part of the spillover of the Syrian Civil War. IS executed a series of attacks against Turkish soldiers and civilians. In an ISIS-video, where two Turkish soldiers were burned alive, Turkish President Erdoğan was verbally attacked by ISIS and threatened with the destruction of Turkey. Turkey joined the international military intervention against the Islamic State in 2015. The Turkish Armed Forces' Operation Euphrates Shield was aimed at IS, and areas around Jarabulus and al-Bab were conquered from IS. In January 2018, the Turkish military and its allies Syrian National Army and Sham Legion began Operation Olive Branch in Afrin in Northern Syria, against the Kurdish armed group YPG. In October 2019, the United States gave the go-ahead to the 2019 Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria, despite recently agreeing to a Northern Syria Buffer Zone. U.S. troops in northern Syria were withdrawn from the border to avoid interference with the Turkish operation. After the U.S. pullout, Turkey proceeded to attack the Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria. Rejecting criticism of the invasion, Erdoğan claimed that NATO and European Union countries "sided with terrorists, and all of them attacked us". Erdoğan then filed a criminal complaint against French magazine Le Point after it accused him of conducting ethnic cleansing in the area. With Erdogan's control of the media fanning local nationalism, a poll by Metropoll Research found that 79% of Turkish respondents expressed support for the operation. Bilateral trade between Turkey and China increased from $1 billion a year in 2002 to $27 billion annually in 2017. Erdoğan has stated that Turkey might consider joining the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation instead of the European Union. In 2009, Erdoğan accused China of "genocide" against the Uyghurs in Xinjiang. In 2019, the Turkish Foreign Ministry issued a statement condemning what it described as China's "reintroduction of concentration camps in the 21st century" and "a great cause of shame for humanity". Later that year, while visiting China, Erdoğan said that there were those who "exploited" the Uyghur issue to strain relations between China and Turkey. Since then the Turkish government has largely toned down its criticisms of China's treatment of Uyghurs, and cracked down on Uyghur activists at China's behest, and has expanded deportations of Uyghurs to China. In June 2017 during a speech, Erdoğan called the isolation of Qatar as "inhumane and against Islamic values" and that "victimising Qatar through smear campaigns serves no purpose". In September 2017, Erdoğan condemned the persecution of Muslims in Myanmar and accused Myanmar of "genocide" against the Muslim minority. Over time, Turkey began to look for ways to buy its own missile defense system and also to use that procurement to build up its own capacity to manufacture and sell an air and missile defense system. Turkey got serious about acquiring a missile defense system early in the first Obama administration when it opened a competition between the Raytheon Patriot PAC 2 system and systems from Europe, Russia, and even China. Taking advantage of the new low in U.S.-Turkish relations, Putin saw his chance to use an S-400 sale to Turkey, so in July 2017, he offered the air defense system to Turkey. In the months that followed, the United States warned Turkey that a S-400 purchase jeopardized Turkey's F-35 purchase. Integration of the Russian system into the NATO air defense net was also out of the question. Administration officials, including Mark Esper, warned that Turkey had to choose between the S-400 and the F-35, that they could not have both. The S-400 deliveries to Turkey began on 12 July. On 16 July, Trump mentioned to reporters that withholding the F-35 from Turkey was unfair. Said the president, "So what happens is we have a situation where Turkey is very good with us, very good, and we are now telling Turkey that because you have really been forced to buy another missile system, we're not going to sell you the F-35 fighter jets". The U.S. Congress made clear on a bipartisan basis that it expected the president to sanction Turkey for buying Russian equipment. Out of the F-35, Turkey considered buying Russian fifth-generation jet fighter Su-57. On 1 August 2018, the U.S. Department of Treasury sanctioned two senior Turkish government ministers who were involved in the detention of American pastor Andrew Brunson. Erdoğan said that U.S. behavior would force Turkey to look for new friends and allies. The U.S.–Turkey tensions appeared to be the most serious diplomatic crisis between the NATO allies in years. Trump's former national security adviser John Bolton claimed that President Donald Trump told Erdoğan he would 'take care' of the investigation against Turkey's state-owned bank Halkbank, accused of bank fraud charges and laundering up to $20 billion on behalf of Iranian entities. Turkey criticized Bolton's book, saying it included misleading accounts of conversations between Trump and Erdoğan. In August 2020, the former vice president and presidential candidate Joe Biden called for a new U.S. approach to the "autocrat" President Erdoğan and support for Turkish opposition parties. In September 2020, Biden demanded that Erdoğan "stay out" of the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War between Azerbaijan and Armenia, in which Turkey supported the Azeris. Meanwhile, Erdoğan wants to realize the Zangezur corridor land route in the southern Caucasus, a geopolitical corridor from Europe through Central Asia, all the way to China. Relations with Venezuela were strengthened with recent developments and high level mutual visits. The first official visit between the two countries at presidential level was in October 2017 when Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro visited Turkey. In December 2018, Erdoğan visited Venezuela for the first time and expressed his will to build strong relations with Venezuela and expressed hope that high-level visits "will increasingly continue". Reuters reported that in 2018 23 tons of mined gold were taken from Venezuela to Istanbul. In the first nine months of 2018, Venezuela's gold exports to Turkey rose from zero in the previous year to US$900 million. During the Venezuelan presidential crisis, Erdoğan voiced solidarity with Venezuela's President Nicolás Maduro and criticized U.S. sanctions against Venezuela, saying that "political problems cannot be resolved by punishing an entire nation." Following the 2019 Venezuelan uprising attempt, Erdoğan condemned the actions of lawmaker Juan Guaidó, tweeting "Those who are in an effort to appoint a postmodern colonial governor to Venezuela, where the President was appointed by elections and where the people rule, should know that only democratic elections can determine how a country is governed". In 2016, Erdoğan told his Ukrainian counterpart Petro Poroshenko that Turkey would not recognize the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea; calling it "Crimea's occupation". During the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Erdoğan functioned as a mediator and peace broker. On 10 March 2022, Turkey hosted a trilateral meeting with Ukraine and Russia on the margins of Antalya Diplomacy Forum, making it the first high-level talks since the invasion. Following the peace talks in Istanbul on 29 March 2022, Russia decided to leave areas around Kyiv and Chernihiv. On 22 July 2022, together with United Nations, Turkey brokered a deal between Russia and Ukraine about clearing the way for the export of grain from Ukrainian ports, following the 2022 food crises. On 21 September 2022, a record-high of 215 Ukrainian soldiers, including fighters who led the defence of the Azovstal steelworks in Mariupol, had been released in a prisoner exchange with Russia after mediation by Turkish President Erdoğan. As part of the agreement, the freed captives stay in Turkey until the war is over. While Turkey has closed the Bosphorus to Russian naval reinforcements, enforced United Nations sanctions and supplied Ukraine with military equipment such as Bayraktar TB2 drones and BMC Kirpi vehicles, it didn't participate in certain sanctions like closing the Turkish airspace for Russian civilians and continued the dialogue with Russian President Vladimir Putin. Erdoğan reiterated his stance on Crimea in 2022 saying that international law requires that Russia must return Crimea to Ukraine. On 15 July 2016, a coup d'état was attempted by the military, with aims to remove Erdoğan from government. By the next day, Erdoğan's government managed to reassert effective control in the country. Reportedly, no government official was arrested or harmed, which, among other factors, raised the suspicion of a false flag event staged by the government itself. Erdoğan, as well as other government officials, has blamed an exiled cleric, and a former ally of Erdoğan, Fethullah Gülen, for staging the coup attempt. Süleyman Soylu, Minister of Labor in Erdoğan's government, accused the US of planning a coup to oust Erdoğan. Erdoğan, as well as other high-ranking Turkish government officials, has issued repeated demands to the US to extradite Gülen. Following the coup attempt, there has been a significant deterioration in Turkey-US relations. European and other world leaders have expressed their concerns over the situation in Turkey, with many of them warning Erdoğan not to use the coup attempt as an excuse to crack down on his opponents. The rise of ISIS and the collapse of the Kurdish peace process had led to a sharp rise in terror incidents in Turkey until 2016. Erdoğan was accused by his critics of having a 'soft corner' for ISIS. However, after the attempted coup, Erdoğan ordered the Turkish military into Syria to combat ISIS and Kurdish militant groups. Erdoğan's critics have decried purges in the education system and judiciary as undermining the rule of law however Erdoğan supporters argue this is a necessary measure as Gulen-linked schools cheated on entrance exams, requiring a purge in the education system and of the Gulen followers who then entered the judiciary. Erdoğan's plan is "to reconstitute Turkey as a presidential system. The plan would create a centralized system that would enable him to better tackle Turkey's internal and external threats. One of the main hurdles allegedly standing in his way is Fethullah Gulen's movement ..." In the aftermath of the 2016 Turkish coup d'état attempt, a groundswell of national unity and consensus emerged for cracking down on the coup plotters with a National Unity rally held in Turkey that included Islamists, secularists, liberals and nationalists. Erdoğan has used this consensus to remove Gulen's followers from the bureaucracy, curtail their role in NGOs, Turkey's Ministry of Religious Affairs and the Turkish military, with 149 Generals discharged. In a foreign policy shift Erdoğan ordered the Turkish Armed Forces into battle in Syria and has liberated towns from IS control. As relations with Europe soured over in the aftermath of the attempted coup, Erdoğan developed alternative relationships with Russia, Saudi Arabia and a "strategic partnership" with Pakistan, with plans to cultivate relations through free trade agreements and deepening military relations for mutual co-operation with Turkey's regional allies. On 6 February 2023, a catastrophic earthquake occurred during his administration in southeastern Turkey and northwestern Syria, killing more than 50,000 people. Early during his premiership, Erdoğan was praised as a role model for emerging Middle Eastern nations due to several reform packages initiated by his government which expanded religious freedoms and minority rights as part of accession negotiations with the European Union. However, his government underwent several crises including the Sledgehammer coup and the Ergenekon trials, corruption scandals, accusations of media intimidation, as well as the pursuit of an increasingly polarizing political agenda; the opposition accused the government of inciting political hatred throughout the country. He has also been described as having "long championed Islamist causes". In 2019, Erdoğan once again publicly recited Ziya Gökalp's Soldier's Prayer poem, as he had done in 1997. According to Hans-Lukas Kieser, these recitations betray Erdoğan's desire to create Gökalp's pre-1923 ideal, that is, "a modern, leader-led Islamic-Turkish state extending beyond the boundaries of the Treaty of Lausanne". As President, Erdoğan has overseen a revival of Ottoman tradition, greeting Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas with an Ottoman-style ceremony in the new presidential palace, with guards dressed in costumes representing founders of 16 Great Turkish Empires in history. While Prime Minister of Turkey, Erdoğan's AKP made references to the Ottoman era during election campaigns, such as calling their supporters 'grandsons of Ottomans' (Osmanlı torunu). This proved controversial, since it was perceived to be an open attack against the republican nature of modern Turkey founded by Mustafa Kemal Atatürk. In 2015, Erdoğan made a statement in which he endorsed the old Ottoman term külliye to refer to university campuses rather than the standard Turkish word kampüs. Many critics have thus accused Erdoğan of wanting to become an Ottoman sultan and abandon the secular and democratic credentials of the Republic. One of the most cited scholars alive, Noam Chomsky, said that "Erdogan in Turkey is basically trying to create something like the Ottoman Caliphate, with him as caliph, supreme leader, throwing his weight around all over the place, and destroying the remnants of democracy in Turkey at the same time". When pressed on this issue in January 2015, Erdoğan denied these claims and said that he would aim to be more like Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom rather than like an Ottoman sultan. In July 2020, after the Council of State annulled the Cabinet's 1934 decision to establish the Hagia Sophia as museum and revoking the monument's status, Erdoğan ordered its reclassification as a mosque. The 1934 decree was ruled to be unlawful under both Ottoman and Turkish law as Hagia Sophia's waqf, endowed by Sultan Mehmed II, had designated the site a mosque; proponents of the decision argued the Hagia Sophia was the personal property of the sultan. This redesignation is controversial, invoking condemnation from the Turkish opposition, UNESCO, the World Council of Churches, the Holy See, and many other international leaders. In August 2020, he also signed the order that transferred the administration of the Chora Church to the Directorate of Religious Affairs to open it for worship as a mosque. Initially converted to a mosque by the Ottomans, the building had then been designated as a museum by the government since 1934. In August 2020, Erdoğan gave a speech saying that "in our civilization, conquest is not occupation or looting. It is establishing the dominance of the justice that Allah commanded in the region. First of all, our nation removed the oppression from the areas that it conquered. It established justice. This is why our civilization is one of conquest. Turkey will take what is its right in the Mediterranean Sea, in the Aegean Sea, and in the Black Sea." In October 2020, he made a statement before the Grand National Assembly that "Jerusalem is ours", referring to the period of Ottoman rule over the city and the rebuilding of its Old City by Suleiman the Magnificent. In October 2023 the first church built with government backing in Turkey's 100-year history as a post-Ottoman state was inaugurated. Erdoğan has been the de facto leader of Turkey since 2002. In the more recent years of Erdoğan's rule, Turkey has experienced increasing authoritarianism, democratic backsliding, and corruption, as well as expansionism, censorship, and banning of parties or dissent. In response to criticism, Erdoğan made a speech in May 2014 denouncing allegations of dictatorship, saying that the leader of the opposition, Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, who was there at the speech, would not be able to "roam the streets" freely if he were a dictator. Kılıçdaroğlu responded that political tensions would cease to exist if Erdoğan stopped making his polarizing speeches for three days. One observer said it was a measure of the state of Turkish democracy that Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu could openly threaten, on 20 December 2015, that, if his party did not win the election, Turkish Kurds would endure a repeat of the era of the "white Toros", the Turkish name for the Renault 12, "a car associated with the gendarmarie's fearsome intelligence agents, who carried out thousands of extrajudicial executions of Kurdish nationalists during the 1990s". In April 2014, the President of the Constitutional Court, Haşim Kılıç, accused Erdoğan of damaging the credibility of the judiciary, labelling Erdoğan's attempts to increase political control over the courts as 'desperate'. During the chaotic 2007 presidential election, the military issued an E-memorandum warning the government to keep within the boundaries of secularism when choosing a candidate. Regardless, Erdoğan's close relations with Fethullah Gülen and his Cemaat Movement allowed his government to maintain a degree of influence within the judiciary through Gülen's supporters in high judicial and bureaucratic offices. Shortly after, an alleged coup plot codenamed Sledgehammer became public and resulted in the imprisonment of 300 military officers including İbrahim Fırtına, Çetin Doğan and Engin Alan. Several opposition politicians, journalists and military officers also went on trial for allegedly being part of an ultra-nationalist organization called Ergenekon. Both cases were marred by irregularities and were condemned as a joint attempt by Erdoğan and Gülen to curb opposition to the AKP. The original Sledgehammer document containing the coup plans, allegedly written in 2003, was found to have been written using Microsoft Word 2007. Despite both domestic and international calls for these irregularities to be addressed in order to guarantee a fair trial, Erdoğan instead praised his government for bringing the coup plots to light. When Gülen publicly withdrew support and openly attacked Erdoğan in late 2013, several imprisoned military officers and journalists were released, with the government admitting that the judicial proceedings were unfair. When Gülen withdrew support from the AKP government in late 2013, a government corruption scandal broke out, leading to the arrest of several family members of cabinet ministers. Erdoğan accused Gülen of co-ordinating a "parallel state" within the judiciary in an attempt to topple him from power. He then removed or reassigned several judicial officials in an attempt to remove Gülen's supporters from office. Erdoğan's 'purge' was widely questioned and criticized by the European Union. In early 2014, a new law was passed by parliament giving the government greater control over the judiciary, which sparked public protest throughout the country. International organizations perceived the law to be a danger to the separation of powers. Several judicial officials removed from their posts said that they had been removed due to their secularist credentials. The political opposition accused Erdoğan of not only attempting to remove Gülen supporters, but supporters of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk's principles as well, in order to pave the way for increased politicization of the judiciary. Several family members of Erdoğan's ministers who had been arrested as a result of the 2013 corruption scandal were released, and a judicial order to question Erdoğan's son Bilal Erdoğan was annulled. Controversy erupted when it emerged that many of the newly appointed judicial officials were actually AKP supporters. İslam Çiçek, a judge who ejected the cases of five ministers' relatives accused of corruption, was accused of being an AKP supporter and an official investigation was launched into his political affiliations. On 1 September 2014, the courts dissolved the cases of 96 suspects, which included Bilal Erdoğan. Erdoğan has been criticized for his politicization of the media, especially after the 2013 protests. The opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) alleged that over 1,863 journalists lost their jobs due to their anti-government views in 12 years of AKP rule. Opposition politicians have also alleged that intimidation in the media is due to the government's attempt to restructure the ownership of private media corporations. Journalists from the Cihan News Agency and the Gülenist Zaman newspaper were repeatedly barred from attending government press conferences or asking questions. Several opposition journalists such as Soner Yalçın were controversially arrested as part of the Ergenekon trials and Sledgehammer coup investigation. Veli Ağbaba, a CHP politician, has called the AKP the 'biggest media boss in Turkey.' In 2015, 74 US senators sent a letter to US Secretary of State, John Kerry, to state their concern over what they saw as deviations from the basic principles of democracy in Turkey and oppressions of Erdoğan over media. Notable cases of media censorship occurred during the 2013 anti-government protests, when the mainstream media did not broadcast any news regarding the demonstrations for three days after they began. The lack of media coverage was symbolised by CNN International covering the protests while CNN Türk broadcast a documentary about penguins at the same time. The Radio and Television Supreme Council (RTÜK) controversially issued a fine to pro-opposition news channels including Halk TV and Ulusal Kanal for their coverage of the protests, accusing them of broadcasting footage that could be morally, physically and mentally destabilizing to children. Erdoğan was criticized for not responding to the accusations of media intimidation, and caused international outrage after telling a female journalist (Amberin Zaman of The Economist) to know her place and calling her a 'shameless militant' during his 2014 presidential election campaign. While the 2014 presidential election was not subject to substantial electoral fraud, Erdoğan was again criticized for receiving disproportionate media attention in comparison to his rivals. The British newspaper The Times commented that between 2 and 4 July, the state-owned media channel TRT gave 204 minutes of coverage to Erdoğan's campaign and less than a total of 3 minutes to both his rivals. Erdoğan also tightened controls over the Internet, signing into law a bill which allows the government to block websites without prior court order on 12 September 2014. His government blocked Twitter and YouTube in late March 2014 following the release of a recording of a conversation between him and his son Bilal, where Erdoğan allegedly warned his family to 'nullify' all cash reserves at their home amid the 2013 corruption scandal. Erdoğan has undertaken a media campaign that attempts to portray the presidential family as frugal and simple-living; their palace electricity-bill is estimated at $500,000 per month. In November 2016, the Turkish government blocked access to social media in all of Turkey as well as sought to completely block Internet access for the citizens in the southeast of the country. Since the 2016 coup attempt, authorities arrested or imprisoned more than 90,000 Turkish citizens. In February 2015, a 13-year-old was charged by a prosecutor after allegedly insulting Erdoğan on Facebook. In 2016, a waiter was arrested for insulting Erdoğan by allegedly saying "If Erdoğan comes here, I will not even serve tea to him.". Between 2016 and 2023 there were trials for insulting the president for having compared Erdogan to Gollum, a fictional character of J. R. R. Tolkien's Lord of the Rings. In May 2016, former Miss Turkey model Merve Büyüksaraç was sentenced to more than a year in prison for allegedly insulting the president. Between 2014 and 2019, 128,872 investigations were launched for insulting the president and prosecutors opened 27,717 criminal cases. In 2009, Turkish sculptor Mehmet Aksoy created the Statue of Humanity in Kars to promote reconciliation between Turkey and Armenia. When visiting the city in 2011, Erdoğan deemed the statue a "freak", and months later it was demolished. Aksoy sued Erdoğan for "moral indemnities", although his lawyer said that his statement was a critique rather than an insult. In March 2015, a judge ordered Erdoğan to pay 10,000 liras. The term Erdoğanism first emerged shortly after Erdoğan's 2011 general election victory, where it was predominantly described as the AKP's liberal economic and conservative democratic ideals fused with Erdoğan's demagoguery and cult of personality. In 2002, Erdoğan said that "homosexuals must be legally protected within the framework of their rights and freedoms. From time to time, we do not find the treatment they get on some television screens humane", he said. However, in 2017 Erdoğan has said that empowering LGBT people in Turkey was "against the values of our nation". In 2020, amid the COVID-19 pandemic, Turkey's top Muslim scholar and President of Religious Affairs, Ali Erbaş, said in a Friday Ramadan announcement that the country condemns homosexuality because it "brings illness", insinuating that same sex relations are responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan backed Erbaş, saying that what Erbaş "said was totally right." Starting from 2023, Erdoğan began openly speaking against LGBT people, openly saying that his Coalition "are against the LGBT", and accusing the Turkish opposition of being LGBT. In 2023, Erdogan blamed LGBTQ+ people for "undermining family values" in Turkey and called his political opponents "gays" in a derogatory manner. Third-party sources have criticized this; seeing it as a bid to distract the public from the ruling party's failings—particularly on the country's economy; according to these sources, by targeting Turkey's minority groups, he rallies his base amid the country's ongoing economic troubles to raise the prospects of winning the 2023 general elections in his country, which are seen as critical for his nearly 20-year rule. While Erdoğan has declared several times that he is against antisemitism, he has been accused of invoking antisemitic stereotypes in public statements. Erdoğan married Emine Erdoğan (née Gülbaran; b. 1955, Siirt) on 4 July 1978. They have two sons, Ahmet Burak (b. 1979) and Necmettin Bilal (b. 1981), and two daughters, Esra (b. 1983) and Sümeyye (b. 1985). His father, Ahmet Erdoğan, died in 1988 and his mother, Tenzile Erdoğan, died in 2011 at the age of 87. Erdoğan has a brother, Mustafa (b. 1958), and a sister, Vesile (b. 1965). From his father's first marriage to Havuli Erdoğan (d. 1980), he had two half-brothers: Mehmet (1926–1988) and Hasan (1929–2006). Russia: Medal "In Commemoration of the 1000th Anniversary of Kazan" (1 June 2006) Pakistan: Nishan-e-Pakistan, the highest civilian award in Pakistan (26 October 2009) Georgia: Recipient of the Order of Golden Fleece, awarded for his contribution to development of bilateral relations (17 May 2010) Kosovo: Golden Medal of the Order of Independence (4 November 2010) Kyrgyzstan: Recipient of the Danaker Order in Bishkek (2 February 2011) Kazakhstan: Recipient of the Order of the Golden Eagle (11 October 2012) Niger: Grand Commander of the Order of the Federal Republic (9 January 2013) Azerbaijan: Recipient of the Heydar Aliyev Order (3 September 2014) Afghanistan: Amir Amanullah Khan Award (18 October 2014) Somalia: Recipient of the Order of the Somali Star, awarded for his contributions to Somalia (25 January 2015). Albania: National Flag Decoration (13 May 2015) Belgium: Grand Cordon of the Order of Leopold (5 October 2015) Ivory Coast: Grand Cordon of the National Order of the Ivory Coast (29 February 2016) Guinea: Grand Cross of the National Order of Merit (3 March 2016) Madagascar: Grand Cross of the National Order of Madagascar (25 January 2017) Bahrain: Member Exceptional Class of the Order of Sheikh Isa bin Salman Al Khalifa (12 February 2017) Kuwait: Collar of the Order of Mubarak the Great (21 March 2017) Sudan: Collar of Honour of Sudan (24 December 2017) Tunisia: Grand Cordon of the Order of the Republic (27 December 2017) Senegal: Grand Cross of the National Order of the Lion (1 March 2018) Mali: Grand Cordon of the National Order of Mali (2 March 2018) Gagauzia: Recipient of the Order of Gagauz-Yeri in Comrat (17 October 2018) Moldova: Recipient of the Order of the Republic (18 October 2018) Paraguay: Recipient of the Order of State (2 December 2018) Venezuela: Grand Cordon of the Order of the Liberator (3 December 2018) Ukraine: Member 1st Degree of the Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise (16 October 2020) Turkmenistan: Recipient of the Order for Contribution to the Development of Cooperation (27 November 2021) Malaysia: Recipient of the Order of the Crown of the Realm (16 August 2022) Kazakhstan: Member 1st Class of the Order of Friendship (12 October 2022) United Arab Emirates: Collar of the Order of Zayed (19 July 2023) Organization of Turkic States: Supreme Order of Turkic World (11 November 2022) 29 January 2004: Profile of Courage Award from the American Jewish Congress, for promoting peace between cultures. Returned at the request of the A.J.C. in July 2014. 13 June 2004: Golden Plate award from the Academy of Achievement during the conference in Chicago. 3 October 2004: German Quadriga prize for improving relationships between different cultures. 2 September 2005: Mediterranean Award for Institutions (Italian: Premio Mediterraneo Istituzioni). This was awarded by the Fondazione Mediterraneo. 8 August 2006: Caspian Energy Integration Award from the Caspian Integration Business Club. 1 November 2006: Outstanding Service award from the Turkish humanitarian organization Red Crescent. 2 February 2007: Dialogue Between Cultures Award from the President of Tatarstan Mintimer Shaimiev. 15 April 2007: Crystal Hermes Award from the German Chancellor Angela Merkel at the opening of the Hannover Industrial Fair. 11 July 2007: Agricola Medal, the highest award of the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, in recognition of his contribution to agricultural and social development in Turkey. 11 May 2009: Avicenna award from the Avicenna Foundation in Frankfurt, Germany. 9 June 2009: Prix de la Fondation and guest of honour at the 20th Crans Montana Forum in Brussels, for democracy and freedom. 25 June 2009: Key to the City of Tirana on the occasion of his state visit to Albania. 29 December 2009: Award for Contribution to World Peace from the Turgut Özal Thought and Move Association. 12 January 2010: King Faisal International Prize for "service to Islam" from the King Faisal Foundation. 23 February 2010: Nodo Culture Award from the mayor of Seville for his efforts to launch the Alliance of Civilizations initiative. 1 March 2010: United Nations–HABITAT award in memorial of Rafik Hariri. A seven-member international jury unanimously found Erdoğan deserving of the award because of his "excellent achievement and commendable conduct in the area of leadership, statesmanship and good governance. Erdoğan also initiated the first roundtable of mayors during the Istanbul conference, which led to a global, organized movement of mayors." 27 May 2010: Medal of honour from the Brazilian Federation of Industry for the State of São Paulo (FIESP) for his contributions to industry 31 May 2010: World Health Organization 2010 World No Tobacco Award for "his dedicated leadership on tobacco control in Turkey." 29 June 2010: 2010 World Family Award from the World Family Organization which operates under the umbrella of the United Nations. 4 November 2010: Golden Medal of Independence, an award conferred upon Kosovo citizens and foreigners that have contributed to the independence of Kosovo. 25 November 2010: Leader of the Year award presented by the Union of Arab Banks in Lebanon. 11 January 2011: Outstanding Personality in the Islamic World Award of the Sheikh Fahad al-Ahmad International Award for Charity in Kuwait. 25 October 2011: Palestinian International Award for Excellence and Creativity (PIA) 2011 for his support to the Palestinian people and cause. 21 January 2012: Gold Statue 2012 Special Award by the Polish Business Center Club (BCC). Erdoğan was awarded for his systematic effort to clear barriers on the way to economic growth, striving to build democracy and free market relations. Erdoğan, Recep Tayyip (17 November 2012). Küresel barış vizyonu. Medeniyetler İttifakı Enstitüsü. ISBN 978-6055952389. Erdoğan, Recep Tayyip (27 October 2021). A Fairer World is Possible: A Proposed Model for a United Nations Reform. Turkuvaz Kitap. Erdogan, Recep Tayyip (10 October 2011). "The Tears of Somalia". Foreign Policy. ——————— (26 September 2018). "How to Fix the U.N.—and Why We Should". Foreign Policy. ——————— (10 November 2018). "À l'heure du centenaire de l'Armistice, la Turquie continue à oeuvrer pour la paix et la stabilité". Le Figaro (in French). ——————— (29 September 2019). "Turkey will continue its efforts to shed light on the Khashoggi murder". Washington Post. ——————— (14 October 2019). "Turkey Is Stepping Up Where Others Fail to Act". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. ——————— (18 January 2020). "Road to peace in Libya goes through Turkey". Politico. ——————— (14 March 2021). "The West Should Help Turkey End Syria's Civil War". Opinion. Bloomberg. ——————— (15 January 2022). "Relations between Turkey and Albania". Panorama (in Albanian). Biography portal Turkey portal Politics portal List of international prime ministerial trips made by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan List of international presidential trips made by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Various claims are made about his degree. See Recep Tayyip Erdoğan university diploma controversy. Pronunciation: UK: /ˈɛərdəwæn/ AIR-də-wan, US: /-wɑːn/ -⁠wahn, Turkish: [ɾeˈdʒep tajˈjip ˈæɾdoan] . Erdoğan won the elections in 2002, but was prevented from becoming prime minister until the by-election in 2003. In the meanwhile, Abdullah Gül was chairholder. "Profile: Recep Tayyip Erdogan". BBC News. 18 July 2007. Archived from the original on 14 March 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2008. "Erdoğan". Collins English Dictionary. HarperCollins. Archived from the original on 19 October 2019. Retrieved 19 September 2019. "Erdoǧan". Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary. Retrieved 19 September 2019. Bayer, Lili (3 April 2023). "Turkey is the headache NATO needs". Politico. Archived from the original on 1 June 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "R.Tayyip Erdoğan'ın Hayatı". memurlar.ne (in Turkish). Retrieved 24 April 2023. "Erdogan plays to base by slighting Armenians". Al Monitor. 7 August 2014. Archived from the original on 19 February 2015. Retrieved 1 January 2022. "'Benim için Gürcü dediler' diye yakınan Erdoğan 2004'te 'Ben de Gürcü'yüm' demiş". T24 (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2022. Sarıoğlu, Bülent (2005). "Kimlik değişimi!". Milliyet. Archived from the original on 15 December 2005. Retrieved 1 January 2022. "Recep Tayyip Erdoğan'ın hayatı" (in Turkish). Ensonhaber. 1 July 2014. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 22 September 2017. Kıble Dağı Cami'nin inşaatı bitti, açılışı Erdoğan yapacak Archived 3 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine Hürriyet Daily News, 5 August 2015 "Turkey's charismatic pro-Islamic leader". BBC News. 4 November 2002. Archived from the original on 30 October 2019. Retrieved 23 July 2006. Yalçın, Soner; pp. 43 "Life story". AK Parti Official Web Site. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2008. "Recep Tayyip Erdoğan". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 15 April 2010. Retrieved 29 August 2008. "Fenerbahçe Erdoğan'ı transfer etmek istemiş" [Fenerbahçe wanted to transfer Erdoğan]. Milliyet (in Turkish). 1 April 2013. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2013. Klaiber, Timo. "Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Stadyumu". Europlan-Online. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 30 October 2020. "Turkey's 'Imam Beckenbauer,' Recep Tayyip Erdogan, applies for Euro 2024". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 4 November 2020. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Eurasia Review: "The Naqshbandi-Khalidi Order And Political Islam In Turkey – Analysis" By Hudson Institute Archived 25 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine 5 September 2015 Insight Turkey: "Islam, Conservatism, and Democracy in Turkey: Comparing Turgut Özal and Recep Tayyip Erdoğan" by METİN HEPER Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine 15 February 2013 "Who's who in Politics in Turkey" (PDF). Heinrich Böll Stiftung. p. 215. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 November 2019. Retrieved 27 November 2022. Martin van Bruinessen (2018). "The Governance of Islam in Two Secular Polities: Turkey's Diyanet and Indonesia's Ministry of Religious Affairs". European Journal of Turkish Studies (27). doi:10.4000/ejts.5964. ISSN 1773-0546. OCLC 7999641981. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019. on Revues.org website (at n. 55 of the paper). Phillips, David (20 April 2017). An uncertain ally : Turkey under Erdoğan's dictatorship. New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4128-6545-6. "Cumhurbaşkanımız Sayın Recep Tayyip Erdoğan'ın da Mezun Olduğu, 107 Yıllık Tarihi Eyüp Anadolu Lisesi, Yeni Yüzüyle Eğitim Hayatına Devam Ediyor". www.eyupsultan.gov.tr. Retrieved 12 November 2023. ""Erdoğan Eyüp Lisesi'ne hiç gitmedi!"". Toplumsal Haber (in Turkish). Retrieved 12 November 2023. Erzeren, Ömer (8 June 2022). "Recep Tayyip Erdogan: Hat er sein Diplom gefälscht?". Der Spiegel. Archived from the original on 8 June 2022. Retrieved 27 November 2022. Mustafa Akyol (31 October 2010). "The making of Turkey's prime minister". Hürriyet Daily News. Archived from the original on 2 November 2010. Retrieved 31 October 2010. "Recep Tayyip Erdoğan". www.biyografya.com. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 31 March 2022. Beaumont, Peter (4 June 2011). "Recep Tayyip Erdogan: Is 'Papa' still a father figure to Turks?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 3 August 2019. Retrieved 3 August 2019. Akdogan, Yalcin (27 February 2018). Political leadership and Erdoğan. Cambridge Scholars Publishing; Unabridged edition. p. 9. ISBN 978-1-5275-0627-5. "Recep Tayyip Erdoğan participated in the World Leaders Forum event, Turkey's Role in Shaping the Future, in November 2008". Columbia University. 12 November 2008. Archived from the original on 9 June 2010. Retrieved 12 November 2008. Sontag, Deborah (11 May 2003). "The Erdogan Experiment". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Turkish premier is winner of Rafik Hariri Memorial Award". 1 March 2010. Archived from the original on 8 March 2010. Retrieved 1 March 2010. Walter Mayr (16 July 2007). "Turkey's Powerful Prime Minister: Who Can Challenge Erdogan?". Der Spiegel. Archived from the original on 4 March 2012. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Erdoğan'a ceza şoku" [Erdoğan's punishment shock]. Zaman (in Turkish). 22 April 1998. Archived from the original on 31 May 2009. Retrieved 3 February 2007. Shambayati, Hootan (May 2004). "A Tale of Two Mayors: Courts and Politics in Iran and Turkey". International Journal of Middle East Studies. 36 (2). Cambridge University Press: 253–275. doi:10.1017/S0020743804362057. hdl:11693/24287. S2CID 153768860. Bardakçı, Murat (22 September 2002). "Şiiri böyle montajlamışlar". Hürriyet (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 19 June 2014. Retrieved 15 October 2022. "Profile: Recep Tayyip Erdogan". Al Jazeera. 27 May 2011. Archived from the original on 5 June 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017. "Erdogan goes to prison". Hürriyet Daily News. 27 March 1999. Archived from the original on 20 April 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017. Caglayan, Selin (7 October 2019). "Who is Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president of Turkey". InsideOver. Archived from the original on 14 October 2022. Retrieved 14 October 2022. "Tiraj paniği". Milliyet (in Turkish). 16 July 1999. Archived from the original on 21 July 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2022. "Erdoğan returns to Pinarhisar 14 years later as Prime Minister". Daily Sabah. 7 December 2013. Archived from the original on 15 October 2022. Retrieved 15 October 2022. "Erdogan's Towering Role in the AKP". turkeyanalyst.org. 12 March 2008. Archived from the original on 11 January 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2020. "Turkish PM quits for Erdogan". CNN. 11 March 2003. Archived from the original on 28 November 2013. Retrieved 28 July 2012. "Secular rally targets Turkish PM". BBC News. 14 April 2007. Archived from the original on 18 December 2008. Retrieved 6 December 2014. "Turkish foreign minister to stand for presidency". Al Jazeera. 25 April 2007. Archived from the original on 7 December 2014. Retrieved 6 December 2014. Arda Can Kumbaracibasi (24 July 2009). Turkish Politics and the Rise of the AKP: Dilemmas of Institutionalization and Leadership Strategy. Routledge. pp. 1–2. ISBN 978-0-203-87629-9. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2015. De Bendern, Paul (29 April 2007). "One million Turks rally against government". Reuters. Archived from the original on 2 May 2007. Retrieved 30 April 2007. Avci, Ümran (4 May 2007). "Saylan: Manisa mitingi önemli" [Saylan: Important rally in Manisa]. Milliyet (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 8 May 2007. Retrieved 4 May 2007. De Bendern, Paul (13 May 2007). "Turks protest ahead of early elections". Swissinfo. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 13 May 2007. Turan Yılmaz (23 July 2007). "Mesajı anladık" [Message understood]. Hürriyet Daily News (in Turkish). Ankara. Archived from the original on 25 February 2014. Retrieved 30 July 2012. "Turkish ruling party put on trial". BBC News. 1 July 2008. Archived from the original on 3 February 2009. Retrieved 1 February 2009. "Turkey's ruling party escapes ban". BBC News. 30 July 2008. Archived from the original on 15 January 2009. Retrieved 1 February 2009. "Turkey's Ruling AK Party Wins Elections with 49.83 Percent Vote". The journal of Turkish Weekly. 13 June 2011. Archived from the original on 9 December 2014. Retrieved 6 December 2014. Genç, Göksel; Esit, Elif (27 December 2013). "Yeni yolsuzluk dosyasının ekonomik boyutu 100 milyar dolar" [New economic corruption files valued at $100 billion]. Zaman (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 17 December 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "100 milyar dolarlık yolsuzluk" [$100 billion dollar corruption]. Sözcü (in Turkish). 26 December 2013. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Yolsuzluk operasyonunun maliyeti 100 milyar Euro" [Corruption operation costs 100 billion euros]. Milliyet (in Turkish). 17 December 2013. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Official Results – 21 October 2007 Constitutional Referendum" (PDF) (in Turkish). Supreme Election Board (YSK). Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 August 2010. Retrieved 12 September 2010. "AKP'nin Anayasa hedefi 15 madde" [AKP targets article 15 of the Constitution]. NTVMSNBC (in Turkish). 17 February 2009. Archived from the original on 18 February 2009. Retrieved 17 February 2009. Government of Turkey, Supreme Election Board (YSK) (12 September 2010). "Official Results – 12 September 2010 Constitutional Referendum" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 September 2011. Retrieved 10 February 2012. Arsu, Sebnem (13 November 2009). "Turkey Plans to Ease Restrictions on Kurds and Help End Decades of Conflict". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 May 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2009. "Attempts to Improve the Government". infoplease.com. Archived from the original on 11 May 2013. Retrieved 28 July 2012. "Turkey apologises for 1930s killing of thousands of Kurds". The Telegraph. London. 24 November 2011. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 24 November 2011. Ozkahraman, Cemal (1 March 2017). "Failure of Peace Talks between Turkey and the PKK: Victim of Traditional Turkish Policy or of Geopolitical Shifts in the Middle East?". Contemporary Review of the Middle East. 4 (1): 50–66. doi:10.1177/2347798916681332. ISSN 2347-7989. S2CID 157316669. Basaran, Ezgi (22 September 2017). Frontline Turkey: The Conflict at the Heart of the Middle East. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 129. ISBN 978-1-83860-858-3. "Turkey's Erdogan: peace process with Kurdish militants impossible". Reuters. 28 July 2015. Archived from the original on 10 August 2020. Retrieved 14 May 2020. "Turkey's PKK Conflict: A Visual Explainer". www.crisisgroup.org. 18 July 2022. Archived from the original on 15 November 2022. Retrieved 16 November 2022. Bilginsoy, Zeynep. "EXPLAINER: Why Istanbul blast has political implications". ABC News. Archived from the original on 26 November 2022. Retrieved 15 November 2022. "Acquittal of nine Ceylanpinar murder suspects upheld". IPA NEWS. 16 April 2019. Archived from the original on 15 November 2022. Retrieved 15 November 2022. "Can Erdoğan Survive Without the Kurdish Question?". Middle East Institute. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2022. "A Conversation with Recep Tayyip Erdogan". Council on Foreign Relations. 27 September 2007. Archived from the original on 30 May 2012. Retrieved 29 July 2012. "Turkish Prime Minister talks about Armenian genocide". 9 February 2008. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 – via YouTube. "Turkey to boost efforts to fight defamation campaign". Daily Sabah. 9 December 2019. Archived from the original on 11 January 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2020. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan (10 April 2005). "Letter sent by H.E. Recep Tayyip Erdogan". Turkish Embassy. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 29 July 2013. "Yerevan Rejects Turkish PM Erdogan's Dialogue Letter". The Journal of Turkish Weekly. 14 April 2005. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 29 July 2013. "Peaceful Co-Existence of Armenia and Turkey Possible". PanArmenian. 16 October 2006. Archived from the original on 3 June 2016. Retrieved 8 February 2016. Tait, Robert (18 November 2008). "Turkish PM dismisses apology for alleged Armenian genocide". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2011. "Turkish painter stabbed in Istanbul after 'humanity monument' meeting". Hürriyet Daily News. 18 April 2011. Archived from the original on 9 December 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Turkey offers condolences to Armenia over WWI killings". BBC. 23 April 2014. Archived from the original on 4 June 2014. Retrieved 3 June 2014. Rome, Ian Black Rosie Scammell in (12 April 2015). "Pope boosts Armenia's efforts to have Ottoman killings recognised as genocide". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 10 July 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2019. "Turkey cannot accept Armenian genocide label, says Erdoğan". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. 15 April 2015. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 26 April 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2019. "Barack Obama will not label 1915 massacre of Armenians a genocide". The Guardian. Associated Press. 22 April 2015. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 1 January 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2019. "Turkey agrees death penalty ban". BBC News. 9 January 2004. Archived from the original on 19 September 2019. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "Democratic initiative's first law passes in Parliament". Today's Zaman. 23 July 2010. Archived from the original on 26 July 2010. Retrieved 22 September 2022. "In first, Turkish Jews light public menorah". Times of Israel. 14 December 2015. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2020. "Turkey approves asset return to Jewish minority foundations". The Jerusalem Post. 20 February 2008. Archived from the original on 28 September 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2020. "Turkey". United States Department of State. Archived from the original on 25 April 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2020. In July the assembly of the GDF passed a decision that allowed allocation of places of worship under GDF ownership to different religious minorities free of charge. With the decision, previously expropriated churches and synagogues could be reopened for use by religious minorities. Vogel, Toby (19 January 2012). "Inching away from democracy?". European Voice. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 26 January 2012. Tapan, Berivan (16 December 2010). "Students Stay 5 more Months in Prison for Posting Banner". Bianet. Archived from the original on 5 December 2011. Retrieved 26 January 2012. "Hopa Demonstrations: Stones Considered as Weapons". Bianet. 19 January 2012. Archived from the original on 3 February 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012. Belge, Berçin (16 December 2010). "Two-Year Prison Threat for Egg Throwing". Bianet. Archived from the original on 19 December 2010. Retrieved 26 January 2012. Bilefsky, Dan; Arsu, Sebnem (4 January 2012). "Charges Against Journalists Dim the Democratic Glow in Turkey". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 April 2019. Retrieved 26 January 2012. Söylemez, Ayça (23 January 2012). "Journalists are in Prison Because of their Writings". Bianet. Archived from the original on 25 January 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012. Söylemez, Ayça (16 January 2012). "First Hearing of Journalists after 13 Months of Pre-Trial Detention". Bianet. Archived from the original on 1 February 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012. Kingsley, Patrick (29 June 2017). "Amid Turkey's Purge, a Renewed Attack on Kurdish Culture". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 30 May 2022. Retrieved 1 June 2022. Genc, Kaya (22 January 2011). "Turkish crackdown on Kurdish Journalists". Index on Censorship. Archived from the original on 29 January 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012. Önderoğlu, Erol (21 May 2010). "Kurdish Artist Faces 15 Years in Jail". Bianet. Archived from the original on 12 August 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012. "31 People Arrested". Bianet. 17 January 2012. Archived from the original on 24 January 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012. Essentials, Law. "TURKEY'S WITHDRAWAL FROM ISTANBUL CONVENTION". Law Essentials. Archived from the original on 18 October 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2022. Çolak, Saliha; Karakus, Abdullah (29 January 2008). "Eşcinseller de eşitlik istiyor, verecek miyiz?" [Homosexuals can keep demanding rights as they never going to get any]. Milliyet (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 17 September 2015. Retrieved 26 January 2012. "Turkey : Subjugated media". Reports Without Borders. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022. "Freedom of the Press 2012". Freedom House. Archived from the original on 26 June 2013. Retrieved 15 June 2013. "Freedom House Critic of Press Freedom in Turkey". Bianet. 17 March 2011. Archived from the original on 13 June 2013. Retrieved 26 January 2012. "Turkey Loses Ground again in World Press Freedom Index". Bianet. 26 January 2012. Archived from the original on 28 January 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012. "Press Freedom 'Terrible' in Turkey: Watch Group". Journal of Turkish Weekly. 23 January 2012. Archived from the original on 28 February 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012. Arsu, Sebnem (28 August 2011). "Turkish Government to Return Seized Property to Religious Minorities". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2014. Bağış, Egemen (31 May 2013). "Azınlıklara 2 milyar dolarlık mülk verdik" [Minorities have $2 billion in property] (in Turkish). Hristiyan Gazete. Archived from the original on 10 May 2015. Retrieved 3 December 2014. Ozbilgin, Ozbe (24 May 2013). "Turkey bans alcohol advertising and curbs sales". Reuters. Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 27 May 2013. "The Turkish Model of Government". Canadians for Justice and Peace in the Middle East. March 2012. Archived from the original on 24 March 2012. Retrieved 28 July 2012. Rodrik, Dani. "How well did the Turkish economy do over the last decade?". Dani Rodrik's weblog Unconventional thoughts on economic development and globalization. Archived from the original on 9 October 2018. Retrieved 2 July 2020. Central Intelligence Agency. "The CIA World Factbook 2015", Skyhorse Publishing, p. 753. Holland, Ben; Bryant, Steve (10 November 2008). "Erdogan's IMF Aversion, Budget Raise Business Qualms". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 1 February 2009. "Turkey's flirting with IMF comes to an end". Hürriyet Daily News. 10 March 2010. Archived from the original on 14 March 2010. Retrieved 10 March 2010. Karatas, Nilgün (5 January 2010). "Enflasyon 2009'u 39 yılın 'dibinde' bitirdi" [2009 inflation finished at 39-year low]. Hürriyet Daily News (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 5 January 2010. Benjamin Harvey (27 June 2012). "Erdogan Proving Right as Debt Ratings Go Unheeded: Turkey Credit". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 18 January 2013. Retrieved 30 July 2012. De Monte, Roland (28 November 2012). "Turkey Continues Its Reform of Labor And Employment Laws Despite Waning Enthusiasm For EU Membership". Fisher Philips. Archived from the original on 3 June 2023. Retrieved 3 June 2023. "Terms of Employment – Invest in Turkey". invest.gov.tr. Archived from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 4 January 2016. Haberi Yazdir (31 August 2008). "Bir numaralı bütçe Eğitim'e" [The number one budget to education]. Yeni Şafak (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 7 December 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2010. "Compulsory education to be increased to 12 years in Turkey". Today's Zaman. 5 January 2012. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "Haydi Kızlar Okula! The Girls' Education Campaign in Turkey" (PDF). UNICEF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 April 2009. Retrieved 28 July 2012. "Amnesty For University Students". The New York Times. 24 February 2005. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 30 July 2012. "Üniversitesiz il kalmadı" [University in last province]. Milliyet (in Turkish). 23 May 2008. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "Şahin: Üniversite Sayısı 186'ya Ulaştı haberi" [Şahin: Number of universities reaches 186] (in Turkish). Haberler.com. 3 October 2012. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 10 December 2012. "PM Erdoğan realizes a world's first in education". Sabah. 8 February 2012. Archived from the original on 19 December 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Sanchez, Raf (23 June 2017). "Turkey will stop teaching evolution in schools, education ministry says". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 24 June 2017. Tim Gibson (11 May 2022). "Turkey Has Built the World's Longest Suspension Bridge". The B1M. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 7 May 2023. "Why Turkey Built the World's Longest Suspension Bridge". The B1M. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2022. "Başbakan Erdoğan'dan gece yarısı mesajı" [Prime Minister Erdogan's midnight message]. Bugun (in Turkish). 7 July 2013. Archived from the original on 19 July 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2013. Kiliç, Yasin (17 January 2011). "Duble yollar uzadı; kaza ve ölümler yüzde 50 azaldı" [Dual roads extended: accidents and deaths decreased by 50 percent]. Zaman (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2013. "High-speed train begins its first travel btw Ankara-Eskişehir". Today's Zaman. 13 March 2009. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2013. "Turkey tunnel links Europe and Asia". BBC News. 29 October 2013. Archived from the original on 4 August 2020. Retrieved 8 March 2020. "Turkey opens new bridge over the Bosporus". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 8 March 2020. "Rift deepens between government, top court with PM's heavy criticism". Today's Zaman. 13 April 2014. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Turkish court condemns PM Erdoğan". BBC News. 30 May 2007. Archived from the original on 26 February 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014. Edroos, Faisal (5 June 2018). "Why Turkey's military is not what it used to be". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 10 January 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "Turkish govt slams army threat". ABC News. Reuters. 28 April 2007. Retrieved 26 May 2011. Atun, Rifat (2015). "Transforming Turkey's Health System – Lessons for Universal Coverage". New England Journal of Medicine. 373 (14). Waltham, Massachusetts: Massachusetts Medical Society: 1285–1289. doi:10.1056/NEJMp1410433. PMID 26422719. S2CID 11495611. "Social security law finally passes in Parliament". Today's Zaman. 19 April 2008. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Erdoğan: "Sigara terörden tehlikeli"" [Erdoğan: Smoking is more dangerous than terror]. CNNTürk (in Turkish). 4 February 2010. Archived from the original on 20 May 2013. Retrieved 24 October 2011. "Erdoğan'dan dış politika dersi". Milliyet. 3 February 2010. Archived from the original on 11 January 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "Turkish foreign policy: from status quo to soft power". esiweb.org. Archived from the original on 12 January 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "EU agrees to Turkey entry talks". CNN. 16 December 2004. Archived from the original on 19 March 2022. Retrieved 19 March 2022. "EU enlargement past, present and future". BBC News. 6 November 2008. Archived from the original on 27 August 2010. Retrieved 1 February 2009. Piccoli, Wolfango (2005). "Ankara's Push for Reforms and EU Membership: The Transformation of Turkey's Democracy". www.iemed.org. University of Wales. Archived from the original on 7 March 2023. Retrieved 19 March 2022. "Erdoğan named European of the Year". NTV-MSNBC. 1 December 2004. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Retrieved 2 December 2004. Carassava, Anthee (19 November 2007). "Greece and Turkey Open Gas Pipeline". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 1 February 2009. "Turkish Foreign Minister's visit to Athens – Greek-Turkish agreement on confidence-building measures". greekembassy.org. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 4 December 2007. Dymond, Jonny (25 April 2004). "Analysis: Turkey's Cyprus gamble". BBC News. Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 1 February 2009. Bogdani, Mirela (2010). "Turkey and the Dilemma of EU Accession: When Religion Meets Politics". I.B. Tauris: 32–33. "EU pays the price for admitting Cyprus: Turkish Prime Minister Erdoğan". Hürriyet Daily News. 5 February 2013. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Turkey says Armenian top court's ruling on protocols not acceptable". Yeni Şafak (in Turkish). 20 January 2010. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "Erdoğan urges Sarksyan to apologize for occupation remarks". asbarez.com. 27 July 2011. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 20 December 2021. "Turkey-Russia relations". euractiv.com. 17 November 2005. Archived from the original on 15 July 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2011. "Turkey, Russia eye strategic partnership in Medvedev visit". Today's Zaman. 11 May 2010. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. "Obama in Turkey". CNN. 6 April 2006. Archived from the original on 4 April 2018. Retrieved 1 February 2009. "US names 'coalition of the willing'". BBC News. 18 March 2003. Archived from the original on 26 February 2008. Retrieved 29 August 2015. "Turkey rejects U.S. troop proposal – Mar. 1, 2003". CNN. 2 March 2003. Archived from the original on 11 January 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "Towards a new era in ties with Northern Iraq". Today's Zaman. 2 November 2009. Archived from the original on 5 November 2009. Retrieved 3 December 2014. Salem, Paul (29 November 2012). "INSIGHT: Iraq's Tensions Heightened by Syria Conflict". Middle East Voices. Archived from the original on 19 June 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2012. Myre, Greg (2 May 2005). "Turkish Leader Visits Israel, Restoring Friendly Ties". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "Peres addresses Turkish Parliament". Brisbane Times. 14 November 2007. Archived from the original on 27 November 2013. Retrieved 3 September 2011. "WEF 2009 Turkish leader storms out of debate with Israeli PM". The Telegraph. 30 January 2009. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 23 February 2011. "Turkish PM storms out of Davos' Gaza session, slams moderator". Hürriyet Daily News. 30 January 2009. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 1 February 2009. "Turkish PM: Israel is the main threat to Mideast peace". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 8 September 2010. Kalman, Aaron (28 February 2013). "Erdogan calls Zionism a 'crime against humanity'". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 22 May 2013. Retrieved 3 June 2013. "Erdogan says comments on Zionism 'misunderstood'". The Lebanon Daily Star. Agence Presse France. 20 March 2013. Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014. Fiske, Gavriel (20 March 2013). "Turkish PM says Zionism comments misinterpreted". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2014. Gordon, Michael (1 March 2013). "Kerry Comes to Turkey With Rebuke of Its Leader Over Zionism Remark". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 July 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Zionismus ist Verbrechen: Außenamt rügt Erdogan" ["Zionism is a crime": Foreign Ministry criticises Erdogan]. Die Presse (in German). 1 March 2013. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Israel behind coup to oust Morsi, Turkish PM Erdoğan says". Hürriyet Daily News. 20 August 2013. Archived from the original on 4 November 2014. Retrieved 4 December 2014. "Turkey has evidence that Israel was behind Egypt coup: Erdoğan". The Journal of Turkish Weekly. 20 August 2013. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2014. "Erdogan accuses Israel of 'using terrorism' in its operations against Hamas in Gaza". The Jerusalem Post. 14 July 2014. Archived from the original on 18 July 2014. Retrieved 18 July 2014. "Turkey's Erdogan says Israel should face trial over Gaza assault". Reuters. 24 July 2014. Archived from the original on 17 May 2021. Retrieved 5 July 2021. "Türkiye, Suriye ile İsrail arasında kolaylaştırıcı rol üstlenebilir" [Turkey could play a role in facilitating Syria and Israel]. Milliyet (in Turkish). 6 January 1990. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 8 September 2010. Epatko, Larisa (15 November 2012). "Syria and Turkey: A Complex Relationship". PBS NEWSHOUR. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 15 November 2012. "Turks Concerned with Erdogan's Syria Policy". 24 October 2014. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2014 – via YouTube. "Senior MP Raps Erdogan's Policies on Syria". FARS News. 7 January 2013. Archived from the original on 29 March 2015. Retrieved 4 December 2014. "Turkey, Saudi Arabia increase cooperation". New Europe. 16 February 2009. Retrieved 14 June 2011.[dead link] Bhadrakumar, M.K. "Middle East News, Iraq, Iran current affairs". Asia Times. Archived from the original on 2 June 2011. "Turkish prime minister arrives for visit to Egypt as role widens". CNN. 14 September 2011. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 15 September 2011. "Egypt and Turkey, an Axis against Democracy?". democrati.net. 30 September 2011. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 30 September 2011. "U.S. condemns killings of Egypt protesters, Turkey wants U.N. action". Reuters. 14 August 2013. Archived from the original on 28 June 2020. Retrieved 12 July 2020. "Turkey PM slams Egypt's 'illegitimate tyrant' Sisi Archived 30 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine". Yahoo News. 18 July 2014. "Turkey raises $201 million for Somalia". Hürriyet Daily News. 26 August 2011. Archived from the original on 8 September 2011. Retrieved 31 October 2011. "From Rep. of Turkey Ministry of Foreign Affairs". Republic of Turkey Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 28 October 2020. Rasna Warah (1 April 2012). "Why Turkish aid model is proving to be a success in Somalia and elsewhere". Saturday Nation. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2014. "Turkey-Somalia military agreement approved". Today's Zaman. 9 May 2012. Archived from the original on 27 October 2014. Retrieved 13 August 2013. Gökay, Bülent; Xypolia, Ilia (2013). Reflections on Taksim – Gezi Park Protests in Turkey (PDF). Journal of Global Faultlines. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 18 September 2013. Arsu, Sebnem (4 June 2013). "Turkish Official Apologizes for Force Used at Start of Riots". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 January 2019. Retrieved 4 June 2013. Arango, Tim; Arsu, Sebnem; Yeginsu, Ceylan (15 June 2013). "Police Storm Park in Istanbul, Setting Off a Night of Chaos". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 5 December 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2013. "Erdogan set for victory in presidential poll". Al Jazeera. 10 August 2014. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2022. "Düşük oy eleştirilerine "Peygamber"li yanıt iddiası". nediyor.com. Archived from the original on 12 February 2015. "Erdoğan: "Seçilirsem tarafsız olmayacağım"" [Erdoğan: "I will not be impartial if selected"]. CNNTürk (in Turkish). 7 August 2014. Archived from the original on 13 October 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014. Ozerkan, Fulya; Williams, Stuart (11 August 2014). "Turkey's Erdogan prepares for strongman president role". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014. Retrieved 27 November 2014. "Turkey's Davutoglu expected to be a docile Prime Minister with Erdogan calling the shots". Fox News. Associated Press. 21 August 2014. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 27 November 2014. Yeliz Candemir (29 August 2014). "New Turkish Cabinet Shows Continuity With Erdogan Legacy". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 10 October 2014. Retrieved 27 November 2014. Zeynep Gürcanlı (1 July 2014). "Erdoğan'ın seçim logosu sosyal medyayı karıştırdı" [Erdoğan's logo stirs social media]. Hürriyet Daily News. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 26 March 2015. "Yurt içi, yurt dışı ve gümrük sandıkları dahil cumhurbaşkanı seçim sonucu" [Presidential election results including domestic, foreign and customs ballot boxes] (PDF). Supreme Electoral Council of Turkey. 15 August 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2015. "Turkey referendum: Erdoğan wins vote amid dispute over ballots – as it happened". The Guardian. 16 April 2017. Archived from the original on 27 December 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017. Ganioglu, Ayla (2 July 2018). "How long can Erdogan's alliance survive? – Al-Monitor: The Pulse of the Middle East". al-monitor.com. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2022. Solaker, Gulsen (4 May 2018). "Turkey's main opposition nominates combative former teacher to challenge Erdogan". Reuters. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 6 May 2018. "100 bin imzayla Cumhurbaşkanı adayı olacağım". NTV. 18 April 2018. Archived from the original on 18 April 2018. Retrieved 19 April 2018. "Turkish leader Erdogan says he will run for reelection next year". Los Angeles Times. 10 June 2022. Archived from the original on 10 June 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2023. "Table of Six: Legally Erdoğan cannot run for a third term on May 14". Bianet. 27 January 2023. Archived from the original on 7 March 2023. Retrieved 28 January 2023. Bland, Archie; Michaelson, Ruth (15 May 2023). "Turkey election: what can we expect from Erdoğan v Kılıçdaroğlu runoff?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 May 2023. Retrieved 29 May 2023. Michaelson, Ruth; Narli, Deniz Baris (28 May 2023). "Recep Tayyip Erdoğan wins Turkish presidential election". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023. Retrieved 29 May 2023. [1] "Turkey's powerful new executive presidency". Reuters.com. Reuters. 22 June 2018. Archived from the original on 13 February 2023. Retrieved 11 February 2019. "Why did Turkey hold a referendum?". BBC News. 10 February 2017. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 17 September 2021. Gall, Carlotta (23 June 2019). "Turkey's President Suffers Stinging Defeat in Istanbul Election Redo". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 6 August 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. "Turkey's ruling party loses Istanbul election". BBC News. 23 June 2019. Archived from the original on 8 September 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. Isil Sariyuce and Ivana Kottasová (23 June 2019). "Istanbul election rerun set to be won by opposition, in blow to Erdogan". CNN. Archived from the original on 29 August 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. Gauthier-Villars, David (23 June 2019). "In Setback for Erdogan, Opposition Candidate Wins Istanbul Mayor Seat". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 15 May 2023. Retrieved 20 August 2019. "Son dakika… Financial Times'tan şok İstanbul seçimi yorumu". sozcu.com.tr. 27 June 2019. Archived from the original on 24 June 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. Lowen, Mark (24 June 2019). "Can Erdogan bounce back from big Turkey defeat?". Archived from the original on 30 June 2019. Retrieved 6 August 2019. "The beginning of the end for Erdogan?". The National. 24 June 2019. Archived from the original on 24 June 2019. Retrieved 6 August 2019. "Could Imamoglu victory in Istanbul be 'beginning of the end' for Erdogan?". euronews. 24 June 2019. Archived from the original on 8 July 2019. Retrieved 6 August 2019. Ellyatt, Holly (24 June 2019). "Turkey's Erdogan suffers election blow, sparking hope for change". CNBC. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 28 October 2020. Gall, Carlotta (23 June 2019). "Turkey's President Suffers Stinging Defeat in Istanbul Election Redo". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 6 August 2019. Retrieved 6 August 2019. "Turkey's Recep Tayyip Erdogan uses New Zealand attack video at campaign rally". Deutsche Welle. 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "'Deeply offended' PM demands Turkey's Erdogan withdraws Gallipoli 'coffins' comment". SBS News. 20 March 2019. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Erdoğan's 'Ak Saray' likened to Alamut Castle, Ceausescu's Palace Archived 16 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine (hurriyetdailynews.com. Retrieved 9 April 2016) Tim Arango (31 October 2014). "Turkis Leader, Using Conflicts, Cements Power". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 November 2014. Retrieved 27 November 2014. Christopher Cameron (1 November 2014). "Turkish President drops $350m on new palace". The Real Deal: New York Real Estate News. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2014. "Erdoğan'dan 'Kaç-Ak Saray' için yorum" [How Erdoğan's 'illegal palace' looks]. Cumhuriyet (in Turkish). 1 November 2014. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Critical media block imposed on 'Ak Saray' amid opening graft concerns". Today's Zaman. 29 October 2014. Archived from the original on 25 November 2014. Retrieved 27 November 2014. "Kaç-Ak Saray'a mehterli tanıtım" ["Illegal" palace promotional material]. Cumhuriyet (in Turkish). 31 October 2014. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "'Ak-Saray' Alman basınında" [Ak Saray in the German press]. Zaman (in Turkish). 30 October 2014. Archived from the original on 1 December 2014. Retrieved 3 December 2014. Kadri Gursel (17 September 2014). "Erdogan's $350m presidential palace". Al-Monitor. Archived from the original on 21 March 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2014. "29 Ekim resepsiyonu iptal" [29 October reception cancelled] (in Turkish). 30 October 2014. Archived from the original on 2 March 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2014. Timur, Safak; Arango, Tim (4 March 2016). "Turkey Seizes Newspaper, Zaman, as Press Crackdown Continues". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 March 2022. Retrieved 16 April 2022. Abramowitz, Mort; Edelman, Eric (10 March 2016). "Turkey's Erdogan must reform or resign". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 17 April 2022. "European Parliament slams Turkey over deterioration of rights and democracy". Deutsche Welle. 14 April 2016. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 6 June 2015. "Erdoğan says 'civil society groups working against Turkish state' largely destroyed". Hürriyet Daily News. 22 June 2016. Archived from the original on 23 June 2016. Retrieved 23 June 2016. "Opponent or Terrorist? The dramatically changing nature of Turkish democracy". The Turkish Sun. 16 June 2016. Archived from the original on 19 June 2016. Retrieved 23 June 2016. "Reporters Without Borders labels Erdogan as 'enemy of press freedom'". Deutsche Welle. 2 November 2016. Archived from the original on 14 November 2016. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "Turkey Blocks Twitter". The Washington Post. 21 March 2014. Archived from the original on 21 March 2014. Retrieved 27 November 2014. Shieber, Jonathan (29 April 2017). "Wikipedia has been blocked in Turkey". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 August 2017. Retrieved 29 April 2017. "Turkey determined to control social media platforms, Erdogan says". Reuters. 1 July 2020. Archived from the original on 1 July 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2020. Morris, Loveday; Naylor, Hugh (20 July 2016). "Turkey declares a state of emergency for three months". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 9 April 2017. Retrieved 18 October 2022. Turkey's parliament approves state of emergency Archived 3 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine (21 July 2016, wilx.com) "Turkey ends state of emergency after two years". BBC News. 18 July 2018. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "Turkey's failed coup attempt: All you need to know". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 19 May 2019. Dyier, Gwinne (8 November 2016). "Erdogan derailing Turkey's promising future". The Japan Times. Archived from the original on 26 March 2017. Retrieved 10 November 2016. "Turkey orders 70 army officers detained over Gulen links". Reuters. 29 March 2018. Archived from the original on 1 May 2018. Retrieved 15 May 2018. Erdoğan wants to silence all opposition media Archived 20 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine Deutsche Welle. 3 August 2016. Downloaded 19 April 2017. Record number of journalists jailed as Turkey, China, Egypt pay scant price for repression Archived 29 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine, Committee to Protect Journalists (13 December 2017). Morris, Loveday (19 July 2016). "Turkey suspends more than 15,000 education workers in widening purge". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 22 July 2016. Retrieved 19 July 2016. After the coup, the counter-coup Archived 28 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine, 23 July 2016, The Economist "The Counter-Coup in Turkey". The New York Times. 16 July 2016. Archived from the original on 16 July 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2016. "Turkey's bleak media scene: Arrests, closures and closed trials". Los Angeles Times. 3 March 2017. Archived from the original on 28 October 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2022. Richardson, Ryan (4 April 2017). "Erdoğan referendum threatens democracy in Turkey". American Magazine. Archived from the original on 2 July 2022. Retrieved 20 April 2022. Filkins, Dexter (17 April 2017). "Turkey's Vote Makes Erdoğan Effectively a Dictator". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 21 May 2022. Retrieved 17 April 2022. Ertug Tombus, "The Fall of Turkish Democracy" Archived 12 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine, Publicseminar.org, 3 March 2017. Downloaded 19 April 2017. Trump to Erdoğan: Congrats On Your Dictatorship! Archived 20 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine The Nation. By John Nichols. 18 April 2017. Downloaded 19 April 2017. Turkey Purges 4,000 More Officials, and Blocks Wikipedia Archived 1 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine The New York Times. By Patrick Kingsley. 30 April 2017 Wales, Jimmy [@jimmy_wales] (29 April 2017). "Access to information is a fundamental human right. Turkish people, I will always stand with you and fight for this right. #turkey" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 2 May 2017 – via Twitter. Samim Akgönül (8 January 2016). "Scholars for Peace: we will not be a party to this crime". Today's Zaman. Archived from the original on 22 January 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2016. Brendan O'Malley (15 January 2016). "Lecturers detained, threatened for opposing military action". University World News (396). Archived from the original on 24 January 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2016. Bohannon, John (19 January 2016). "Turkish academics pay price for speaking out on Kurds". Science Magazine. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2016. "Turkish president vows 'treasonous' academics will pay the price". Hürriyet Daily News. 20 January 2016. Archived from the original on 22 January 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2016. Polianskaya, Alina (9 July 2018). "Turkey suddenly sacks 18,000 officials in emergency decree, days before Erdogan is sworn in again". The Independent. Archived from the original on 30 June 2019. Retrieved 29 October 2023. "Is Recep Tayyip Erdogan's monetary policy as mad as it seems?". The Economist. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 10 March 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2023. Bilginsoy, Zeynep (17 March 2022). "Turkish central bank doesn't change rates as inflation soars". AP NEWS. Archived from the original on 16 May 2023. Retrieved 16 May 2023. "Represi Turki terhadap Minoritas Kurdi Akhirnya Meluas ke Suriah". Tirto.id. 25 January 2018. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. Borzou Daragahi (25 May 2018). "Erdogan Is Failing Economics 101". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 14 July 2018. "Inflation rise poses challenge to Erdogan as election looms". Financial Times. 5 June 2018. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Matt O'Brien (13 July 2018). "Turkey's economy looks like it's headed for a big crash". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 8 April 2019. Retrieved 14 July 2018. "Turkey's Erdogan faces tough election amid quake, inflation". AP NEWS. 5 May 2023. Archived from the original on 16 May 2023. Retrieved 16 May 2023. Paul Krugman (24 May 2018). "Turmoil for Turkey's Trump". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 November 2018. Retrieved 14 July 2018. "Erdogan to EU: 'We're not idiots', threatens to send refugees". EUobserver. 11 February 2016. Archived from the original on 2 June 2016. Retrieved 30 April 2016. "Turkey's Erdogan threatened to flood Europe with migrants: Greek website". Reuters. 8 February 2016. Archived from the original on 26 June 2017. Retrieved 1 July 2017. Germany voices support for accelerating Turkey-EU talks Archived 13 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine (trtworld.com, 12 March 2016) "Venice Commission Declaration on Interference with Judicial Independence in Turkey. Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, Resolution 2121 (2016)" (PDF). 22 June 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 August 2016. Retrieved 20 July 2016. "Rights violations, terror ops threaten Turkey's democratic institutions: PACE". Hürriyet Daily News. 23 June 2016. Archived from the original on 16 July 2016. Retrieved 23 June 2016. "Erdogan Vows to Keep Turkish Troops in Cyprus as Talks Stall". Bloomberg L.P. 13 January 2017. Archived from the original on 15 January 2017. Retrieved 13 January 2017. "Azerbaijan President Aliyev thanks Turkey's Erdogan for support". Reuters. 30 September 2020. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 2 October 2020. "US, Russia, France condemn fighting in Nagorno-Karabakh". Deutsche Welle. 1 September 2020. Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 2 October 2020. "Erdogan Agrees to Putin's Plan for Turkey to Be Russian Gas Hub". VOA News. 20 October 2022. Archived from the original on 10 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Erdoğan plays energy card in Turkish election—with Putin's help". Politico. 4 May 2023. Archived from the original on 10 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Erdoğan cancels Granada summit trip after falling ill". POLITICO. 4 October 2023. Archived from the original on 5 October 2023. Retrieved 5 October 2023. "Erdogan cancels scheduled commitments due to illness". Ekathimerini. 4 October 2023. Archived from the original on 5 October 2023. Retrieved 5 October 2023. "Nato member Turkey hits out at Finland and Sweden membership bids". The Independent. 13 May 2022. Archived from the original on 1 June 2022. Retrieved 1 June 2022. "Erdogan says Turkey not supportive of Finland, Sweden joining NATO". Reuters. 13 May 2022. Archived from the original on 13 May 2022. Retrieved 18 May 2022. "Erdogan tells Sweden not to expect Nato bid support". BBC News. 23 January 2023. Archived from the original on 23 January 2023. Retrieved 24 January 2023. "Nato: Erdoğan ilmoitti Turkin ratifioivan Suomen Nato-jäsenyyden, Valkoinen talo antoi kehotuksen myös Ruotsin hyväksymisestä – HS seurasi Niinistön Turkin-vierailua". Helsingin Sanomat (in Finnish). 17 March 2023. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023. "Nato: Turkin parlamentin ulkoasiainvaliokunta hyväksyi Suomen Nato-jäsenyyden". Helsingin Sanomat (in Finnish). 23 March 2023. Archived from the original on 24 March 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023. "Erdogan has signed ratification of Finland's NATO membership". News. 1 April 2023. Archived from the original on 1 April 2023. Retrieved 1 April 2023. "Erdogan tells NATO chief Sweden must stop Kurdish protests". Al Jazeera. 26 June 2023. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. Hayatsever, Huseyin; Toksabay, Ece (10 July 2023). "Erdogan links Sweden's NATO membership to Turkey's EU accession". Reuters. Archived from the original on 1 August 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. Alam, Hande Atay; Edwards, Christian (10 July 2023). "Erdogan links Sweden's NATO bid to Turkey joining the EU". CNN. Archived from the original on 16 July 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. "Turkey could part ways with EU if necessary, Erdogan says". Reuters. 16 September 2023. Archived from the original on 18 September 2023. Retrieved 18 September 2023. "Turkey's Erdogan initiates Sweden NATO ratification in parliament – Al-Monitor: Independent, trusted coverage of the Middle East". www.al-monitor.com. 23 October 2023. Archived from the original on 23 October 2023. Retrieved 23 October 2023. "Turkish parliament set to discuss ratifying Sweden's NATO membership". Reuters. 25 October 2023. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. YetkinReport (16 November 2023). "Turkish parliament postponed Sweden's NATO accession deliberations". Yetkin Report. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "Turkish Parliament Signals New Delay in Sweden's NATO Bid". Bloomberg News. 16 November 2023. Archived from the original on 4 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. Bryant, Miranda. "Sweden must join Nato soon to ward off Russian threat, says defence minister". Music. The Guardian. ISSN 1756-3224. OCLC 60623878. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Sweden moves one step closer to NATO membership after Turkish parliamentary committee gives approval". Washington Post. 26 December 2023. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 26 December 2023. Retrieved 26 December 2023. "Cumhurbaşkanı Erdoğan, İsveç'in NATO üyeliği kararını onayladı" (in Turkish). ntv.com.tr. 25 January 2024. Archived from the original on 6 February 2024. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Erdogan says Greece will pay a 'heavy price' if it attacks Turkish ships in Mediterranean". Euronews. 14 August 2020. Archived from the original on 18 September 2020. Retrieved 10 September 2020. Murphy, Matt (24 May 2022). "Erdogan blanks Greek prime minister over US remarks". BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2022. Goldman, Russell (17 March 2017). "'You Are the Future of Europe,' Erdogan Tells Turks". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 August 2021. Retrieved 17 March 2017. "How Recep Tayyip Erdogan seduces Turkish migrants in Europe". The Economist. 31 August 2017. Archived from the original on 2 September 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2017. Neos Kosmos (5 February 2018). "Turkey's president claims Greece's stance over 'Macedonia' name dispute is wrong". Neos Kosmos. Retrieved 11 February 2018. "Erdogan slams Kosovo PM over sackings after Gulen-linked deportations". Euronews. 31 March 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2018. "Kosovo Minister and Spy Chief Sacked Over Turkish Arrests". BIRN. 30 March 2018. Retrieved 30 March 2018. "Erdoğan calls for support to Albania amid quake". Hürriyet Daily News. 27 November 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2019. "Erdogan: Në Shqipërinë e goditur nga tërmeti do të ndërtojmë 500 banesa (i plotësuar)" (in Albanian). TRT. 29 November 2019. Retrieved 29 November 2019. "Turqia nis punën për ngritjen e 500 apartamenteve pas tërmetit, ja ku do ndërtohen" (in Albanian). Lajme.al. 3 December 2019. Retrieved 2 December 2019. "Turqia krahas 500 banesave parashikon ndërtimin edhe të objekteve të tjera përcjellëse" (in Albanian). Koha. 10 December 2019. Retrieved 25 December 2019. "Konferenca e Donatorëve në Turqi, Rama- Erdogan takojnë biznesmenët turq" (in Albanian). Radio Televizioni Shqiptar (RTSH). 8 December 2019. Retrieved 27 December 2019.[permanent dead link] "Turkey's Erdogan backs Azerbaijan's offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh, as US, Russia urge restraint". Al-Monitor. 19 September 2023. Archived from the original on 20 September 2023. Retrieved 19 September 2023. "Erdogan visits Azerbaijan after Nagorno-Karabakh cease-fire – DW – 09/25/2023". DW. Archived from the original on 25 September 2023. Retrieved 25 September 2023. "Post-Brexit, the UK will need Turkey for trade – and Erdogan is using that to his advantage". The Independent. 14 May 2018. Keinon, Herb (22 March 2014). "Netanyahu apologizes to Turkey over Gaza flotilla". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Turkish Prime Minister says Israel is 'more barbaric than Hitler'". The Independent. 20 July 2014. Retrieved 4 December 2014. Ben Solomon, Ariel (14 July 2014). "Erdogan accuses Israel of 'using terrorism' in its operations against Hamas in Gaza". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 18 July 2014. "How The World Is Reacting To Trump Recognizing Jerusalem As Israel's Capital". NPR. 6 December 2017. "Jerusalem: Turkey warns Trump against crossing 'red line'". BBC News. 5 December 2017. "Erdogan: Israel is a terrorist state". Al Jazeera. 11 December 2017. "Turkey's Erdogan says West Bank belongs to Palestinians". Reuters. 8 April 2019. Butler, Daren; Gumrukcu, Tuvan (14 August 2020). "Turkey may suspend ties with UAE over Israel deal, Erdogan says". Reuters. Wilks, Andrew. "Turkey 'playing a balancing act' between Tel Aviv and Tehran". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Herzog advances Israel-Turkey ties in meeting with Erdogan". The Jerusalem Post | Jpost.com. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Turkey, Israel to restore full diplomatic relations". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Erdoğan's criticism of Israeli airstrikes branded as hypocrisy over Turkish bombing of Kurds in Syria". TURKISH MINUTE. 11 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Turkey's Erdogan calls Israeli siege and bombing of Gaza a 'massacre'". Al Jazeera. 11 October 2023. "Turkey's Erdogan says Hamas is not terrorist organisation, cancels trip to Israel". Reuters. 25 October 2023. "Türkiye to ensure those responsible for Gaza massacre face trial in international courts: Turkish president". Anadolu Agency. 15 November 2023. "Ahmet Davutoğlu 8 yıl sonra konuştu 3 saat baş başa görüştüm". Internethaber (in Turkish). 20 May 2020. Retrieved 22 September 2022. Aydin, Enis (15 August 2022). "Former Head of AKP Davutoğlu on Erdogan's Syria U-turn: "Putin is coercing Turkey" -". Middle East Transparent. Retrieved 22 September 2022. "ISIS video shows Turkish troops 'burned alive'". Al Arabiya English. 23 December 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2022. Bailey-Hoover, Jeremiah; McDonnell, Patrick J. (29 July 2015). "Turkey steps up bombing – but on Kurds, not Islamic State". Los Angeles Times. "Erdogan: Operation in Syria's Afrin has begun". Al Jazeera. Turkish army hit village in Syria's Afrin with suspected gas: Kurdish YPG, Observatory. Reuters. 16 February 2018. Chappell, Bill; Neuman, Scott (7 October 2019). "In Major Policy Shift, U.S. Will Stand Aside As Turkish Forces Extend Reach in Syria". NPR. "Pence heads to Turkey as Erdogan rejects calls for ceasefire in Syria". Deutsche Welle. 16 October 2019. "Erdogan Criticizes Western Allies Over Syrian Operation Ahead of Putin Meeting". VOA News. 21 October 2019. "Turkey's Erdogan sues French magazine over 'eradicator' cover". Al Jazeera. 25 October 2019. "Erdogan files complaint against French magazine over ethnic cleansing comment". Reuters. 25 October 2019. Retrieved 1 June 2022. Kasapoglu, Cagil (15 October 2019). "Turkey-Syria offensive: Turks embrace nationalist mood". BBC. Retrieved 15 February 2023. "Public support for Turkey's Syria offensive at 79 percent: Poll". Gazete Duvar. 18 November 2019. Taylor, Adam (16 May 2017). "U.S. ally Turkey may have a new best friend in Beijing". The Washington Post. Retrieved 17 May 2017. "China says would consider Turkish membership of security bloc". Reuters. 21 November 2016. Retrieved 17 May 2017. "Why Erdogan Has Abandoned the Uyghurs". Foreign Policy. 2 March 2021. Qin, Amy (10 February 2019). "Turkey Urges China to End Mass Detention of Muslims". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 February 2019. "'Shame for humanity': Turkey urges China to close Uighur camps". Al Jazeera. 10 February 2019. Retrieved 12 April 2021. Westcott, Ben (5 July 2019). "Erdogan says Xinjiang camps shouldn't spoil Turkey-China relationship". CNN. Retrieved 20 May 2023. "Turkish Opposition Challenge Erdogan Over Uighur Silence". VOA News. 28 January 2021. Basu, Zachary; Allen-Ebrahimian, Bethany (1 March 2022). "Turkey rejected Uyghur citizenship applications over "national security" risks". Axios. Retrieved 30 May 2023. Browne, Gareth (26 July 2020). "How Turkey is sending Muslim Uighurs back to China without breaking its promise". The Telegraph. Retrieved 30 May 2023. "Turkey's Erdogan decries Qatar's 'inhumane' isolation". BBC News. 13 June 2017. "Erdoğan accuses Myanmar of 'genocide' as thousands of Rohingya flee to Bangladesh". The Guardian. 2 September 2017. "Turkey Cancels T-Loramids Program After Eight Years". defense-aerospace.com. 16 November 2015. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "Lawmakers say Trump is locked into Turkey sanctions". Defense News. 19 July 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2020. Townsend, Jim (22 July 2019). "The Tale of Turkey and the Patriots". War on the Rocks. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "US sanctions Turkish officials over detained pastor". Politico. 1 August 2018. "US changing strategic NATO partner with pastor, Turkish President Erdoğan says". Hürriyet Daily News. 11 August 2018. "US sanctions Turkey over Pastor Brunson detention". The National. 1 August 2018. "Turkey, US in diplomatic crisis after ministers hit by sanctions". The Times of India. 2 August 2018. McKernan, Bethan (18 June 2020). "John Bolton urged to elaborate on Trump-Erdoğan claims". The Guardian. "Turkey says Bolton's book 'misleading' on Erdogan-Trump conversations". Reuters. 25 June 2020. "Turkey slams Biden's past call for U.S. to back Erdogan opponents". Reuters. 15 August 2020. "How will a Biden presidency affect Turkey?". Al Jazeera. 8 November 2020. Laura Kelly, Biden says Turkey must stay out of Azerbaijan-Armenia conflict, The Hill (29 September 2020). "President Erdogan says Türkiye wants to realize Zengezur corridor 'as soon as possible'". Anadolu Ajansi. 27 September 2023. "We Just Saw What the World Is About to Become". The New York Times. 9 October 2023. "Turkey's Erdogan visits Venezuela, vows to enhance ties". 4 December 2018. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Pons, Corina; Armas, Mayela (27 February 2019). "Exclusive: Venezuela removed 8 tons of central bank gold last week – legislator". Reuters. Archived from the original on 11 June 2022. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Rampton, Roberta; Holland, Steve (1 November 2018). "Trump signs sanctions order targeting Venezuela's gold exports". CNBC. Reuters. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 2 April 2018. "Turkey's Erdogan slams Venezuela sanctions, Maduro defends gold exports". Reuters. 4 December 2018. "Turkey's Erdogan offers support for Venezuela's Maduro". Reuters. 24 January 2019. "Maduro ally Turkey berates Venezuelan opposition for uprising call". Yahoo News. 30 April 2019. Retrieved 30 April 2019. "Recep Tayyip Erdoğan". 30 April 2019. Retrieved 30 April 2019 – via Twitter. Erdogan Tells Poroshenko Turkey Won't Recognize Crimea As Russian, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (20 August 2016) Idiz, Semih (31 March 2022). "Ukraine war boosts Erdogan's 'new Atlanticism,' but for how long? - Al-Monitor: Independent, trusted coverage of the Middle East". www.al-monitor.com. Retrieved 22 September 2022. Osterlund, Paul Benjamin (30 March 2022). "Turkey, a mediator in Ukraine, mends its own ties with neighbours". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 22 September 2022. "Turkey hosts first meeting of top Russian, Ukrainian diplomats since invasion". www.euractiv.com. 10 March 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2022. "Russia pledges to scale down military activity near Kyiv, Chernihiv—as it happened". DW.COM. 29 March 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2022. Wieting, Ayse (22 July 2022). "'A beacon of hope': Ukraine, Russia sign grain export deal". Washington Post. Retrieved 2 August 2022. "Ukraine Announces Exchange Of 215 Prisoners Of War". www.barrons.com. AFP. Retrieved 22 September 2022. Swaminathan, Sneha (22 September 2022). "Ukraine announces the exchange of 215 prisoners of war". WION. Retrieved 22 September 2022. "International report - Turkey's ambiguous application of United Nations' sanctions on Russia". RFI. 4 April 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2022. "Erdoğan walks a fine line as the Ukraine war's double agent". POLITICO. 17 August 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2022. Mogul, Rhea; Guy, Jack; Vogt, Adrienne; Sangal, Aditi (23 August 2022). "Turkey's Erdogan says return of Crimea to Ukraine is a requirement of international law". CNN. Retrieved 23 August 2022. Levin, Ned; Candemir, Yeliz (16 July 2016). "Turkey's Erdogan Reasserts Control After Attempted Coup". The Wall Street Journal. Istanbul. Archived from the original on 16 July 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2016. "Critics Raise False Flag After Failed Military Coup in Turkey". Vocativ. 16 July 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2016. Fontanella-Khan, Amana (16 July 2016). "Fethullah Gülen: Turkey coup may have been 'staged' by Erdoğan regime". The Guardian. Saylorsburg, Pennsylvania. Archived from the original on 16 July 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2016. "This U.S.-Based Cleric Is Being Blamed for Coup Attempt". NBC News. 16 July 2016. "US government behind Turkish coup attempt, Turkish minister says". Arutz Sheva. 16 July 2016. Euan McKirdy and Hande Atay Alam (11 August 2016). "Turkey's Erdogan demands US hand over cleric". CNN. Patrick Wintour (28 July 2016). "Turkey officials to demand extradition of Fethullah Gülen from US". The Guardian. Bodkin, Henry; Millward, David; Ensor, Josie; Rothwell, James (17 July 2016). "Turkey coup attempt: World leaders warn President Erdogan not to use uprising as excuse for crackdown as more than 6,000 arrested". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 28 October 2020. Simon Tisdall. "Turkey paying a price for Erdoğan's wilful blindness to Isis threat". The Guardian. Retrieved 15 July 2016. Kareem Shaheen (24 August 2016). "Turkey sends tanks into Syria in operation aimed at Isis and Kurds". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 April 2017. Macdonald, Alastair (18 July 2016). "'No excuse' for Turkey to abandon rule of law: EU's Mogherini". Reuters. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "Fethullah Gulen's Race to the Top Is Over". Foreign Policy. 5 August 2016. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "Turkey: 21 suspects detained in civil service exam cheating scandal". Daily Sabah. 15 June 2015. Retrieved 16 April 2017. Salman, Rafi (20 November 2016). "Erdogan's global anti-Gulen drive hits Pakistan". Asia Times. Retrieved 22 November 2016. McKirdy, Euan (8 August 2016). "Turkey's Erdogan tells million-strong unity rally: I support death penalty". CNN. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "President Erdogan and opposition unite in Turkey rally". Al Jazeera. 7 August 2016. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "Turkish generals resign as government prepares to overhaul armed forces". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. 28 July 2016. Retrieved 16 April 2017. Coskun, Orhan; Tattersall, Nick (16 October 2016). "Turkish operations in Syria to continue after Dabiq liberated: Erdogan's spokesman". Reuters. Retrieved 16 April 2017. Shaun Walker in Moscow and Jennifer Rankin in Brussels (9 August 2016). "Erdoğan and Putin discuss closer ties in first meeting since jet downing". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "One-year halt in Turkey, Russia ties 'over': Turkish PM". Hürriyet Daily News. 6 December 2016. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "KSA welcomes Erdogan's success against coup attempt". Arab News. 21 November 2016. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "Turkey, Pakistan vow to strengthen ties further". Aa.com.tr. 17 November 2016. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "Pakistan, Turkey reaffirm commitment to intensify mutual cooperation". Radio.gov.pk. 27 November 2016. Archived from the original on 20 April 2017. Retrieved 16 April 2017. Yusuf Hati̇p (15 November 2016). "Turkey, Pakistan free trade deal to be ready in Dec". Anadolu Agency. Retrieved 16 April 2017. David Rider (31 October 2016). "Pakistan, Turkey in navy drills | Maritime Security Review". Marsecreview.com. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "Pakistan to sell 52 Super Mushshak aircraft to Turkey | Top Story". The News International. 24 November 2016. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "Erdogan's earthquake: how years of bad government made a disaster worse". The Guardian. 4 May 2023. "Erdogan again? Amid rubble of Turkey's quake, voters demand to be heard". Reuters. 9 May 2023. Fisk, Robert (10 April 2014). "Has Recep Tayyip Erdogan gone from model Middle East 'strongman' to tin-pot dictator?". The Independent. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Gülen acquitted of trying to overthrow secular government". Hürriyet Daily News. Associated Press. 6 May 2006. Retrieved 22 January 2016. Kirby, Paul (11 May 2023). "Turkey's Erdogan fighting to stay in power after 20 years". BBC News. Retrieved 12 May 2023. Mr Erdogan has long championed Islamist causes - and was known to give the four-finger salute of Egypt's repressed Muslim Brotherhood. Kieser, Hans-Lukas (2021). "Europe's Seminal Proto-Fascist? Historically Approaching Ziya Gökalp, Mentor of Turkish Nationalism". Die Welt des Islams. 61 (4): 415. doi:10.1163/15700607-61020008. S2CID 241148959. Calian, Florin George (25 March 2021). "The Hagia Sophia and Turkey's Neo-Ottomanism". The Armenian Weekly. Retrieved 28 May 2021. "Europe must wake up to Erdogan's neo-Ottoman ambition". CapX. 10 October 2020. Retrieved 28 May 2021. cumhurbaskanligi@tccb.gov.tr. "T.C. CUMHURBAŞKANLIĞI : Cumhurbaşkanlığı". tccb.gov.tr. Archived from the original on 4 October 2011. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Oktay Özilhan. "AKP'nin şarkısında 'Uzun adam' gitti 'Osmanlı torunu' geldi ! – Taraf Gazetesi". Taraf Gazetesi. Archived from the original on 8 February 2015. "Erdoğan: Kampus değil, külliye". ilk-kursun.com. Archived from the original on 3 June 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2015. "Recep Tayyip Erdogan: The 'new sultan' now has a new palace – and it has cost Turkish taxpayers £400m". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 10 September 2017. "Erdogan Is Turkey's New Sultan". The Wall Street Journal. 13 August 2014. "The next sultan?". The Economist. 16 August 2014. Akkoc, Raziye (2 February 2015). "'Turkey's president is not acting like the Queen – he is acting like a sultan'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Barsamian, David (10 October 2020). "Noam Chomsky Discusses Azeri Aggression on Artsakh". Chomsky.info. Retrieved 10 January 2021. Erdogan in Turkey is basically trying to create something like the Ottoman Caliphate, with him as caliph, supreme leader, throwing his weight around all over the place, and destroying the remnants of democracy in Turkey at the same time, Chomsky said Akkoc, Raziye (30 January 2015). "Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdogan: I want to be like Queen of UK". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Bethan McKernan (25 July 2020). "Erdoğan leads first prayers at Hagia Sophia museum reverted to mosque". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 February 2021. "Presidential Decree on the opening of Hagia Sophia to worship promulgated on the Official Gazette". Presidency of the Republic of Turkey: Directorate of Communications. 10 July 2020. Retrieved 17 July 2020. "Turkey's Erdogan says Hagia Sophia becomes mosque after court ruling". CNBC. 10 July 2020. Retrieved 24 July 2020. "Church body wants Hagia Sophia decision reversed". BBC News. 11 July 2020. Retrieved 13 July 2020. "Pope 'pained' by Hagia Sophia mosque decision". BBC News. 12 July 2020. Retrieved 13 July 2020. "World reacts to Turkey reconverting Hagia Sophia into a mosque". Al Jazeera. 10 July 2020. Retrieved 10 July 2020. "Kariye Camii ibadete açılıyor". Sözcü. 21 August 2020. Archived from the original on 21 August 2020. Yackley, Ayla (3 December 2019). "Court Ruling Converting Turkish Museum to Mosque Could Set Precedent for Hagia Sophia". The Art Newspaper. Retrieved 9 December 2019. "WATCH: Turkish conquest is spreading the justice of Allah, Erdogan says". World Israel News. 6 September 2020. Retrieved 18 November 2022. Bar'el, Zvi (9 October 2020). "'Jerusalem Is Ours': Behind Erdogan's Remarkable Claim". Haaretz. Retrieved 9 May 2023. "Erdogan to open modern Turkish state's first new church". France 24. 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Erdogan eröffnet erste Kirche seit Republiksgründung". ORF (in German). 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Une nouvelle église pour Istanbul, la première en 100 ans de république". TV5MONDE (in French). 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023.[permanent dead link] Ben-Meir, Alon (12 May 2016). "How Turkey Became a De Facto Dictatorship". HuffPost. Retrieved 22 June 2018. "Erdogan: Turkey's pugnacious president". BBC News. 17 April 2017. Retrieved 22 June 2018. "How Turkey's Erdogan First Came to Power". Time. Retrieved 22 June 2018. Yildirim, A. Kadir; Lynch, Marc (8 December 2016). "Is there still hope for Turkish democracy?". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 27 June 2018. Esen, Berk; Gumuscu, Sebnem (2016). "Rising competitive authoritarianism in Turkey" (PDF). Third World Quarterly. 37 (9): 1581–1606. doi:10.1080/01436597.2015.1135732. hdl:11693/36632. S2CID 155983134. "Turkey". Freedom House. 5 January 2018. Archived from the original on 7 July 2019. Retrieved 27 June 2018. Meakem, Allison (25 December 2020). "Turkey's President Erdogan Spent 2020 Bolstering His Neo-Ottoman Foreign Policy". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 27 December 2020. Cook, Steven A. (8 April 2021). "How Erdogan Got His Groove Back". Foreign Policy. "Democratic decay and uncertainty in Turkey". Democracy in Europe Movement 2025. 25 March 2021. Goodman, Peter S. (18 August 2018). "The West Hoped for Democracy in Turkey. Erdogan Had Other Ideas". The New York Times. Aytaç, Selim Erdem (2021). "Effectiveness of Incumbent's Strategic Communication during Economic Crisis under Electoral Authoritarianism: Evidence from Turkey". American Political Science Review. 115 (4): 1517–1523. doi:10.1017/S0003055421000587. ISSN 0003-0554. "Kılıçdaroğlu: Üç gün sussa huzur olur" [Kılıçdaroğlu: Three days peace is suspect] (in Turkish). 27 May 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Genel Başkan Kılıçdaroğlu, 'Diktatörlerin ortak özelliği çok korkak olmalarıdır' dedi ve 'Diktatör değilim' diyen Erdoğan'a, o zaman diktatör bozuntususun" diye seslendi" [President to 'The common features of dictators is that they are too cowardly'] (in Turkish). 27 May 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. de Bellaigue, Christopher (2015). "The Sultan of Turkey". The New York Review of Books. 62 (20): 85–87. Retrieved 28 January 2016. Dombey, Daniel (25 April 2014). "Turkey's top judge accuses Erdogan of damaging rule of law". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2014. Franks, Tim (27 January 2014). "Fethullah Gulen: Powerful but reclusive Turkish cleric". BBC. Retrieved 5 December 2014. Ozbilgin, Ozbe; Butler, Daren (1 September 2014). "Battle lines drawn in struggle for influence over Turkish judiciary". Yahoo News. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Yargıtay 'koşulsuz kaos' dedi" [Supreme Court in "unconditional chaos"]. ilkehaber (in Turkish). 4 December 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. Schleifer, Yigal (25 September 2012). "Turkey: What happens after the "Sledgehammer" Verdict". eurasianet. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "AKP'li Mustafa Elitaş'ın Ergenekon tertibinde rol aldığı ortaya çıktı! Ses kaydıyla" [AKP'li Mustafa Elitaş'ın Ergenekon's scheme stars in voice recording] (in Turkish). 25 January 2013. Archived from the original on 13 November 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "İlker Başbuğ serbest bırakıldı" [İlker Başbuğ released]. Anadolu Ajansi (in Turkish). 7 March 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. Traynor, Ian; Letsch, Constanze (22 January 2014). "Brussels urges Turkish PM Erdogan to redraft law purging police and judiciary". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Türkiye'deki yargı sistemi, HSYK 'nın yapısı ve 17 Aralık sürecinde paralel devlet ve yolsuzluk iddiaları masaya yatırıldı" [The judicial system in Turkey]. CNN Türk (in Turkish). 16 January 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Bilal Erdoğan artık 'yakalanmayacak'" [Bilal Erdogan is no longer under arrest]. haberfedai (in Turkish). 16 January 2014. Archived from the original on 11 October 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Hakim ve savcılar AKP'li çıktı!" [Judges and prosecutors outed as AKP]. cumhuriyet (in Turkish). 5 February 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Tahliye kararı veren hakim İslam Çiçek, Facebook'ta Uzun Adam hayranı çıktı!" [Judge Islam Çiçek's decisions vacated, Facebook claims links to Uzun Adam]. amanyolu haber (in Turkish). 1 May 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "25 Aralık Yolsuzluk Soruşturması Kapatıldı" [Corruption investigation closed on 25 December]. ilkelihaber (in Turkish). 1 September 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "1,863 Turkish journalists fired during AKP rule, opposition report says". Hürriyet Daily News. 27 October 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. Baydar, Yavuz (10 November 2014). "Barring Coverage, Assaults and Fear: New Reports Signal SOS for Turkish Media". HuffPost. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Soner Yalçın, Imprisoned Journalist, Released". bianet. 27 December 2012. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "U.S. Senators urge Kerry to speak against Turkey media crackdown". Al Arabiya. 19 March 2015. Retrieved 19 March 2015. Oktem, Kerem (10 June 2013). "Why Turkey's mainstream media chose to show penguins rather than protests". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 December 2014. Özgenç, Meltem (12 June 2013). "RTÜK'ten Halk TV ve Ulusal Kanal'a ceza" [Penalties for public TV and national channel RTUK]. Hürriyet Daily News (in Turkish). Retrieved 5 December 2014. Dearden, Lizzie (8 August 2014). "Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan tells female journalist: 'Know your place, you shameless militant'". The Independent. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Times: TRT'den Erdoğan'a 204, rakiplerine 3 dakika" [TIMES: TRT gave Erdogan 204, 3 to his opponent]. BBC Turkey (in Turkish). 31 July 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Erdogan approves law tightening Turkey's Internet controls". Reuters. 12 September 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. Letsch, Constanze; Rushe, Dominic (28 March 2014). "Erdogan approves law tightening Turkey's Internet controls". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 December 2014. Tremblay, Pinar (2 April 2015). "The Erdogans' lavish lifestyle". Al-Monitor. Archived from the original on 4 April 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2015. "Facebook, Twitter and WhatsApp blocked in Turkey after arrest of opposition leaders". The Independent. 4 November 2016. "CHP deputy Tanrıkulu slams internet cuts in eastern, southeastern Turkey". Hürriyet Daily News. 28 October 2016. "2020 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Turkey". United States Department of State. "13 yaşındaki çocuk, Erdoğan'a hakaretten ifade verdi – İlk Kurşun Gazetesi". ilk-kursun.com. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. "Küçük çocuk Erdoğan'a hakaretten ifade verdi." sacitaslan.com. 3 January 2015. "'Erdoğan'a çay vermem' dediği için tutuklanan kantin sorumlumuz Şenol Buran TBMM gündeminde". Cumhuriyet. 26 December 2016. Shaheen, Kareem (2 December 2015). "Turkish court asks 'Gollum experts' if Erdoğan comparison is insult". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 9 February 2023. "Verdict for Şansal for 'insulting President with Gollum' overturned by Regional Court". Bianet. 9 January 2023. "Ex-Miss Turkey sentenced for insulting Erdogan". BBC. 31 May 2016. Retrieved 31 May 2016. ...Merve Buyuksarac, 27, was found guilty of insulting a public official for postings she made on social media. She denied insulting Mr Erdogan.... "Ex-Miss Turkey sentenced 'for insulting Erdogan'". France 24. 31 May 2016. Archived from the original on 1 June 2016. Retrieved 31 May 2016. ...The Istanbul court sentenced model Merve Buyuksarac, 27, to one year and two months in prison ... Agence France-Presse in Ankara (16 June 2015). "Turkish newspaper editor sentenced for insulting president Recep Erdoğan: Ankara court hands down 21-month suspended jail sentence to editor of English-language newspaper after convicting him of insulting the president in a tweet". The Guardian. Retrieved 31 May 2016. ...In another case that has garnered huge attention, model and former Miss Turkey beauty queen Merve Buyuksarac went on trial in May on charges of insulting Erdoğan.... "Nearly 129,000 people probed for "insulting" Erdoğan in 5 years". www.duvarenglish.com. 29 March 2021. Archived from the original on 29 March 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2021. "Turkey-Armenia friendship symbol being demolished". BBC News. 26 April 2011. Retrieved 5 March 2015. Erdem, Umut (5 March 2015). "Artist 'to party with' Erdoğan's money". Hürriyet Daily News. Retrieved 5 March 2015. Awiti, Alex (2 October 2011). "Erdoganism: A Word of Caution". Intpolicydigest.org. Retrieved 30 July 2016. "LGBT Initiative from Prime Minister Erdoğan!". KAOS GL. 28 May 2012. Retrieved 21 May 2020. Lepeska, David (30 April 2020). "Turkish officials bash gays to counter rising LGBT support". Ahval. Retrieved 21 May 2020. Notaro, Pier Cesare (16 December 2019). "Turkey: What Erdoğan's Homophobia Shows Us about His Power". Il Grande Colibrì. Retrieved 21 May 2020. "'It's just the start': LGBT community in Turkey fears government crackdown". The Guardian. 23 November 2017. "With New COVID-19 Outbreak Linked To Gay Man, Homophobia On Rise In South Korea". Forbes. 12 May 2020. Archived from the original on 25 June 2020. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "Erdogan defends Turkey religious chief's anti-gay sermon". France 24. 27 April 2020. Archived from the original on 21 June 2020. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Michaelson, Ruth; Narlı, Deniz Barış (12 May 2023). "'We're against LGBT': Erdoğan targets gay and trans people ahead of critical Turkish election". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 13 May 2023. Retrieved 13 May 2023. "Erdogan slams Turkey's LGBTQ community, weaponizes homophobia ahead of vote". Al-Monitor. 4 May 2023. Retrieved 18 May 2023. "Erdoğan finds a scapegoat in Turkey's election: LGBTQ+ people". Politico.eu. 13 May 2023. Retrieved 18 May 2023. "'We're against LGBT': Erdoğan targets gay and trans people ahead of critical Turkish election". The Guardian. 12 May 2023. Retrieved 18 May 2023. "Erdoğan: 'Some of the EU member states are not acting honestly'". euronews. 30 January 2010. Archived from the original on 3 December 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2020. I am a leader who has wholeheartedly condemned anti-semitism "Erdogan: 'Anti-Semitism is a crime'". The Times of Israel. 4 April 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2020. "AKP Government's Policies Toward Anti-Semitism May Not Be Enough". The Jamestown Foundation. 3 February 2009. Retrieved 21 May 2020. "Erdogan's travels". The Economist. 5 May 2005. Archived from the original on 25 April 2016. Retrieved 17 April 2016. Mr Erdogan assured Israel's prime minister, Ariel Sharon, that his Justice and Development (AK) party saw anti-Semitism as 'a crime against humanity'. Congress (5 February 2009). "Erdogan: "No place for anti-Semitism in Turkey"". World Jewish Congress. Retrieved 21 May 2020. "'Spawn of Israel': Erdogan's anti-Semitic obsessions". Haaretz. Rosenfeld, Alvin H., ed. (2013). Resurgent antisemitism global perspectives. Bloomington [u.a.]: Indiana Univ. Press. p. 318. ISBN 978-0-253-00890-9. "Turkey's Erdogan: 'Jewish Capital' Is Behind New York Times". Haaretz. 7 June 2015. "US condemns Erdogan 'anti-Semitic' remarks". France24. 19 May 2021. "Bakanlar Kurulu'nun özgeçmişi" [Ministers of the Board's CV]. Milliyet (in Turkish). 29 August 2007. Retrieved 22 April 2011. "Erdogan's Mother Tenzile Erdogan Dies of Acute Cholecystitis". Turkish Weekly. 7 October 2011. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 21 March 2014. "İşte Ahmet Kaptan'ın bilinmeyen hikayesi" (in Turkish). Odatv. 4 December 2016. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2017. Yalçın, Soner (June 2014). Kayıp Sicil: Erdoğan'ın Çalınan Dosyası. Vol. 1. Istanbul: Kırmızı Kedi Publishing House. p. 19. ISBN 978-605-4927-40-1. Yilmaz, Turan (1 June 2006). "Putin'den Tatar madalyası" [Putin's Tatar medal]. Hürriyet Daily News (in Turkish). Retrieved 1 June 2006. "Pakistan, Turkey can together bring peace to region: Erdogan". Associated Press of Pakistan. 26 October 2009. Archived from the original on 4 March 2012. Retrieved 26 October 2009. "Saakashvili hails Georgia-Turkish ties as exemplary". Civil.ge. 17 May 2010. Retrieved 17 May 2010. "The Acting President of the Republic of Kosovo Dr. Jakup Krasniqi receives the Prime Minister of Turkey Recep Tayip Erdogan". President of the Republic of Kosovo. 4 November 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "Kyrgyzstan decorates Turkish PM with Danaker Order". World Bulletin. 2 February 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2011. "Erdoğan'a 'Altın Kıran Nişanı' verildi". Yeni Şafak (in Turkish). 11 October 2012. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "Niger President: Turkey a role model". www.aa.com.tr. 9 January 2013. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "Azerbaijani President awards Turkish counterpart with the 'Heydar Aliyev' Order". 3 September 2014. "Afghanistan's contribution to the birth of Turkey in 1920 is unforgettable". Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey. No. 18 October 2014. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "We have served our Somali brothers as required by our brotherhood; our solidarity will continue". Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey. 25 January 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "Cumhurbaşkanı Erdoğan'a Arnavutluk'ta Ulusal Bayrak Nişanı Tevcih Edildi". www.tccb.gov.tr. 13 May 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "King Philippe of Belgium presents Order of Leopold to President Erdogan". Presidency of the Republic of Turkey. 5 October 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015. "Le président Tayyip Erdogan, Grand-croix de l'Ordre national ivoirien - Abidjan.net News". news.abidjan.net (in French). AIP. 29 February 2016. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "Cumhurbaşkanı Erdoğan'a şeref madalyası verildi". Ensonhaber (in Turkish). 3 March 2016. Retrieved 12 October 2022. cumhurbaskanligi@tccb.gov.tr. "Presidency of the Republic of Turkey : President Erdoğan Decorated with National Order of Madagascar". tccb.gov.tr. "Turkey will Continue to Stand By Bahrain in Its Good and Bad Days". 12 February 2017. Guder, Ilkay (21 March 2017). "Erdogan confers Kuwaiti emir with Order of State". www.aa.com.tr. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "Cumhurbaşkanı Erdoğan Sudan'da". www.ntv.com.tr (in Turkish). 24 December 2017. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "Erdoğan'a Tunus'ta devlet nişanı takdim edildi". www.aa.com.tr. 27 December 2017. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "Senegal is a valuable friend and a strategic partner of ours". tccb.gov.tr. Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "Primary targets of organizations such as DAESH, Al-Qaeda and Boko Haram have always been Muslims". Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey. No. 2 March 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "Kültürel ırkçılık, dünyanın dört bir ucunda veba salgını gibi yayılıyor". Presidency of Turkey. Livadari, Arina (18 October 2018). "President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, decorated by Igor Dodon with "The Order of the Republic"". Moldova.org. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey : President Erdoğan at the Lopez Palace in Paraguay". www.tccb.gov.tr. 2 December 2018. Retrieved 19 March 2022. Güldoğan, Diyar (4 December 2018). "Turkey determined to enhance ties with Venezuela". Anadolu Agency. Maduro also conferred the country's highest distinction, the Order of the Liberator, on Erdogan, who said it was a symbol of the friendship between Ankara and Caracas. (in Ukrainian) Zelensky awarded the President of Turkey a state order, Ukrayinska Pravda (16 October 2020) "The President of Turkey was awarded the Order of Turkmenistan". Turkmenistan, an Internet portal on cultural, business and entertainment life in Turkmenistan. Retrieved 19 March 2022. "Malezya Kralı Sultan Abdullah Şah'a Devlet Nişanı tevcih edildi". www.tccb.gov.tr. 16 August 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022. Guldogan, Diyar (12 October 2022). "Türkiye continues to support Kazakhstan's territorial integrity: President Erdogan". Anadolu Agency. Retrieved 12 October 2022. Khitam Al Amir (19 July 2023). "UAE President awards Order of Zayed to Turkish President Erdogan". Gulf News. Retrieved 20 July 2023. "Türkiye's president receives Supreme Order of Turkic World in Uzbekistan". Anadolu Agency. 11 November 2022. Gorvett, Jon (9 April 2004). "Erdogan's Third U.S. Visit Comes Closest To Being a Charm". Washington Report on Middle East Affairs. Retrieved 6 December 2014. "Turkey PM Erdogan returns US Jewish award in Israel row". BBC News. 29 July 2014. Retrieved 30 July 2014. "2004 International Summit Highlights". Academy of Achievement. 13 June 2004. Archived from the original on 5 December 2014. Retrieved 6 December 2014. "Schroeder hails Turkish reforms". BBC News. 3 October 2004. Retrieved 6 December 2014. "The Mediterranean Award for Institutions 2005 to Turkish Prime Minister Erdoğan". euromedi.com. 2 September 2005. Retrieved 2 September 2005. "Erdogan to receive Caspian award for 'Reformer of the Year'". Refereans. 5 August 2006. Archived from the original on 27 November 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2006. "Kızılay'dan Erdoğan'a 'Üstün İnsani Hizmet Nişanı'" [Erdogan awarded Crescent's outstanding humanitarian service medal]. Zaman (in Turkish). 2 November 2006. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014. Retrieved 6 December 2014. "Tatarlar'dan Erdoğan'a ödül" [Erdogan award from the Tartars] (in Turkish). Haber. 15 April 2007. Retrieved 15 April 2007. "Başbakan Erdoğan'a kristal hermes ödülü verildi". Anadolu Ajansi (in Turkish). 15 April 2007. Archived from the original on 23 December 2011. Retrieved 15 April 2007. "Turkish Prime Minister receives Agricola Medal". 11 July 2007. Archived from the original on 16 July 2007. Retrieved 11 July 2007. "Almanya'dan Erdoğan'a İbn-i Sina ödülü". CNN Türk (in Turkish). 11 May 2009. Retrieved 11 May 2009. "Democracy award from the Crans Montana Forum". Hürriyet Daily News. 9 June 2009. Retrieved 9 June 2009. "Kryebashkiaku Rama i dhuron "Çelësin e Qytetit", Kryeministrit turk Erdogan". Tirana.gov.al (in Albanian). 25 June 2009. Archived from the original on 6 April 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2009. "Turgut Özal Ödülü aldı, onun gibi konuştu: Allah'ın verdiği ömrü O'ndan başka alacak yoktur". Zaman. 29 December 2009. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 29 December 2009. "King Faisal International Prize". 12 January 2010. Archived from the original on 15 January 2010. Retrieved 22 January 2010. "Turkey's Erdogan awarded for peace efforts in Spain". 23 February 2010. Archived from the original on 22 February 2013. Retrieved 23 February 2010. "Turkey's PM hails "new era" in Brazil ties on first visit". worldbulletin.net. 27 May 2010. Archived from the original on 3 May 2012. Retrieved 27 May 2010. "World No Tobacco Day 2010 Awards – the winners". World Health Organization. 31 May 2010. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 31 May 2010. "ECOSOC High-Level Segment 2010". World Family Organization. 29 June 2010. Archived from the original on 9 October 2011. Retrieved 29 June 2010. "The Acting President of the Republic of Kosovo Dr. Jakup Krasniqi receives the Prime Minister of Turkey Recep Tayip Erdogan". President of the Republic of Kosovo. 4 November 2010. Retrieved 4 November 2010. "Turkish PM presented 'Leader of the Year' award in Lebanon". World Bulletin. 25 November 2010. Archived from the original on 26 November 2010. Retrieved 25 November 2010. "Turkish PM to receive Libyan rights award". Agence France-Presse. 26 November 2010. Retrieved 27 November 2010. "Prime Minister Erdoğan receives Palestinian excellence award". Today's Zaman. 25 October 2011. Archived from the original on 25 October 2011. Retrieved 25 October 2011. "Turkish PM receives Polish business award". Polskie Radio. 23 January 2012. Retrieved 25 January 2012. Akyol, Çiğdem (2015). Generation Erdoğan (1. ed.). Kremayr & Scheriau. ISBN 978-3-218-00969-0. Akdoğan, Yalçın (2018). Political leadership and Erdoğan. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 978-1-5275-0627-5. Bechev, Dimitar (2022). Turkey Under Erdogan. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-26501-9. Cagaptay, Soner. The new sultan: Erdogan and the crisis of modern Turkey (2nd ed. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2020). online review Cagaptay, Soner. "Making Turkey Great Again." Fletcher Forum of World Affairs 43 (2019): 169–78. online Archived 12 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine Kirişci, Kemal, and Amanda Sloat. "The rise and fall of liberal democracy in Turkey: Implications for the West" Foreign Policy at Brookings (2019) online Tziarras, Zenonas. "Erdoganist authoritarianism and the 'new' Turkey." Southeast European and Black Sea Studies 18.4 (2018): 593–598. online[dead link] Yavuz, M. Hakan. "A framework for understanding the Intra-Islamist conflict between the AK party and the Gülen movement." Politics, Religion & Ideology 19.1 (2018): 11–32. online[dead link] Yesil, Bilge. Media in New Turkey: The Origins of an Authoritarian Neoliberal State (University of Illinois Press, 2016) online review Recep Tayyip Erdoğan at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Official website of President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Recep Tayyip Erdoğan on Twitter Recep Tayyip Erdoğan on Facebook Appearances on C-SPAN Recep Tayyip Erdoğan collected news and commentary at The New York Times Welcome to demokrasi: how Erdoğan got more popular than ever by The Guardian