Igor Dodon (pronounced [ˈiɡor doˈdon]; born 18 February 1975) is a Moldovan politician who previously served as the President of Moldova from 23 December 2016 to 24 December 2020. He currently serves as the leader of the Party of Socialists of the Republic of Moldova. He served as Minister of Economy and Trade in the governments of Vasile Tarlev and Zinaida Greceanîi from September 2006 to September 2009 and was a member of the Parliament of Moldova from 2009 to 2016. He lost his bid for re-election in 2020 to Maia Sandu, whom he had defeated four years earlier in the 2016 Moldovan presidential election. On 24 May 2022, Dodon was arrested by the Moldovan authorities on charges of passive corruption, illegal financing of a political party by a criminal organization, illicit enrichment, and high treason against Moldova through receiving funds from fugitive Moldovan politician Vladimir Plahotniuc in order to intercede on Plahotniuc's behalf regarding criminal cases filed in Russia. He was placed under house arrest on 26 May in order to allow prosecutors to investigate the allegations further. The United States Department of the Treasury has also accused Dodon of corruption and conspiring with Russia through his political aides to interfere with the Moldovan elections and rig the media in his favour. He was released from house arrest on 18 November 2022 pending a court trial on all charges. Igor Dodon was born on 18 February 1975 in Sadova village in the Călărași District of the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic (now Moldova) to Nicolae (died 2012) and Galina Dodon, a Romanian language teacher in his native village. He graduated from the Faculty of Economics at the State Agrarian University of Moldova in 1997, then the Faculty of Management at the Academy of Economic Studies of Moldova in 1998. He later graduated from the Faculty of Law in economics at the International Management Institute.[when?] He obtained the scientific title of Doctor in Economic Sciences at the Academy of Economic Studies of Moldova, the Department of Banks and Stock Exchanges. From 1997 to 2005, Dodon also carried out pedagogical activities. This is where he would meet his wife Galina in May 1995. Thus, he holds the positions of assistant lecturer at the Academy of Economic Studies of Moldova (Banks and Stock Exchanges Department), senior lecturer at the Free International University of Moldova (Banks and Stock Exchanges Department), the International Institute of Management (Finance Department) and the State University of Moldova. Igor Dodon is also a member Examination Committees at the university graduation exams within ULIM and IIM.[citation needed] After graduating from educational institutions, since July 1997 Igor Dodon has been employed at the Moldovan Stock Exchange. Thus, between 1997 and 2001 he worked as a senior specialist of the Clearing Department, of the Listing Department, administrator of the Electronic Trading Systems and then, Director of the Marketing, Listing Department within the Moldovan Stock Exchange. Between November 2001 and May 2005, he served as chairman and member of the Board of Directors of the National Depository of Securities of Moldova SA. From September 2002 to May 2005 he was the chairman of the Universal Commodity Exchange of Moldova. Between February 2003 – May 2005, Igor Dodon is a member of the expert committee to the National Securities Commission of Moldova. Also, between March 2004 – May 2005, he is also a member of the Arbitration Commission of the Stock Exchange. He was an editor of the Newsletter "Stock Exchange of Moldova" and of the Stock Market Bulletin of the Universal Commodities Exchange "Stock Exchange – Stock market quotations". Dodon was appointed to the post of Associate Minister of Trade and Economics in May 2005, during the second Tarlev Cabinet. He assumed the position of Minister of Trade and Economics in September 2006. He held the position until September 2009, when the government of Zinaida Greceanîi ended. Dodon also held the post of Associate Prime Minister under Greceanîi from 2008 until 2009. In 2005, the PCRM also had won the elections having an open pro-European platform, with a pro-European slogan "I Vote", where the European stars surrendered the hammer and sickle on the red Communist wallpaper. In 2007, a trend for all political forces was to adopt a pro-European platform for the elections in 2009. In this regard, Igor Dodon, during his work trips to Brussels, had assured the high rank European officials on how he and an entire Communist party were pro-European. In September 2009, after 8 years of governing, the Communist Party came into opposition. Igor Dodon had lost his ministerial position. He became an MP in the Parliament, which was reelected in November 2010. He had the 6th position in the PCRM list of the candidates. The Communists has changed the European vector, and in 2010 they drifted to east, and self-declared as pro-Russians. Igor Dodon, in only a year, since 2009 by 2010, became a convinced pro Moldovan – no Europe, neither Russia. "Moldova can become a contact point for different countries; an area where first of all will interfere the economic interests of our neighbors and partners. We are in a very advantageous position in terms of the common interest of CIS and EU and this objective shall become an issue of the external policy." In June 2011, Dodon lost to Dorin Chirtoacă at the elections for mayor of Chișinău. He took 49.4% of the votes. The local elections have been an occasion for the Communist Party to return to power, at the least at the local authority level. During the election campaign, Igor Dodon went to Brussels where he had meetings with the European officials in order to establish the potential partnerships: "I am at the working trip in Brussels, where I have several meetings in my agenda, including with the Mayors of some big towns of Belgium, with the acting Prime Minister of Belgium and some high rank officials of the European Commission". Inside the PCRM, an internal fight had existed between Igor Dodon and Mark Tkaciuk. Dodon has had some separate opinion on some policy issues. This independence had raised some fears from the Tkaciuk side, and Dodon was considered a social threat. Dodon has shown that he had an internal support, from some rayon committees of the party. An independent position of Igor Dodon, his rating within the party and in the society, his political ambitions in overtaking the power, first of the Mayor Office and then, in PCRM – all this were interpreted by Tkaciuk as a threat, the fact that made him to speed up and force the actions that led to marginalization of Dodon in PCRM, by misinforming methods in order to prevent him to be delegated at the position of the Mayor of the Capital. In November 2011, Dodon left the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova (PCRM) citing hopes that a deal could be worked out with the ruling Alliance for European Integration to elect a president and end a constitutional crisis that had dragged on since the resignation of Vladimir Voronin in 2009. Greceanîi and Veronica Abramciuc left at the same time. "Our decision has a common and complex goal: to avoid early elections, the elections of the president of the country, reshaping of the government and political and social stability. This is the society wish, and this is what the Republic of Moldova is needed – a stability and the economic development once and for all... We left the PCRM in order to cut the 'Gordian knot' of the hate and distrust which for the last two years made impossible any constitutional decision needed for the Republic of Moldova stability" Igor Dodon has declared. On 18 December 2011, Dodon joined the Party of Socialists of the Republic of Moldova (PSRM) and, at the Xth Congress of PSRM, he was elected chairman of the party. On 16 March 2012, three former communists (Dodon, Greceanîi and Abramciuc) voted for the Alliance for European Integration (AIE) candidate Nicolae Timofti as president of Moldova. Later, Dodon stated that he regretted his vote for Timofti. After he was elected as the president of Moldova, due to specifics of Moldovan law, Dodon resigned as PSRM chairman and left the party, being replaced by Zinaida Greceanîi as interim leader. Dodon was sworn in on 23 December 2016 in the Palace of the Republic. Three days later, the flag of Europe that had flown next to the Moldovan flag from the building of the Moldovan presidential administration was removed. On 4 January 2017, in the Dodon met with the president of the breakaway republic of Transnistria Vadim Krasnoselsky. This meeting was the first meeting of the leaders of Moldova and Transnistria in 8 years. In October 2017, Dodon signed a law that provides for the reform of the Academy of Sciences of Moldova. After being elected president, in an interview with Deutsche Welle, Dodon said: "I believe that we have many problems that need to be addressed together with Russia, this is true. But at the same time, I am not a pro-Russian, not pro-Western, but a pro-Moldavian politician, a supporter of our statehood. I believe that the most important thing is to respect the interests of our own country. My "pro-Russian, is a cliche that my political opponents are trying to introduce into the consciousness of citizens." In 2018, Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko was the first foreign head of state to meet Dodon in Moldova. Dodon has also acted to make the Russian language mandatory in Moldovan schools. On 5 May 2018, Dodon announced a campaign, which would bring legislation into parliament, which would transition Moldova from a parliamentary republic to a presidential republic. According to polls carried out in 2019 on the topic of respect for politicians of the Republic of Moldova, Igor Dodon enjoyed the highest trust, ranking first among politicians in which Moldovans. In the early years of his presidency, steps were taken to renovate the Presidential Palace in Condrița with the help of the Turkish government. Some of the renovations included a play ground for Dodon's young children and a wine cellar. The renovated palace was opened on 17 October 2018 by Dodon and Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdogan. On 16 October 2018, Dodon declared that his country would be prepared to host a Pan-Orthodox Council, where the situation with the Ukraine autocephaly and the Moscow–Constantinople schism should be discussed. He also said that "Moldova will remain a canonical territory of the Moscow Patriarchate." He strongly opposed the pro-Romanian Metropolis of Bessarabia. In early 2019, President Dodon ordered a National Coordination Committee to plan national events and celebrations dedicated to the 75th anniversary of the Liberation of Moldova in the Second Jassy–Kishinev Offensive. The events would include the restoration or reconstruction of monuments and military graves and the filming of a documentary on the offensive. At the same time, Dodon presided over the celebrations of the 660th anniversary of Moldovan statehood in early February. During the 2019 Moldovan constitutional crisis, Dodon was temporarily relieved of the powers and duties of the presidency by a Moldovan court because of the reluctance to dissolve the parliament as mandated by the Constitutional Court of Moldova in a previous ruling and replaced by the former prime minister Pavel Filip as the acting president of the country. In late October, he met with Transnistrian President Krasnoselsky at his residence in Holercani ahead of the Bavaria Conference, scheduled for 4–5 November. In 2020, he ordered the creation of a National Heraldic Commission that would look into the concept of awarding medals to war veterans in honor of the 75th anniversary of the end of World War II. On 15 April, he ordered the postponement of the Victory Day celebrations to 24 August (Liberation Day) due to the coronavirus pandemic in Moldova. Dodon announced his candidacy for another term on 9 September, saying he is doing it "on behalf of the people". In his campaign message, he pledged to dissolve the parliament after the elections. On 17 October 2017, the Constitutional Court of Moldova decided that Dodon was temporarily unable to perform his duties for failing to swear in proposed Defence Minister Eugen Sturza. On 2 January 2018, the Constitutional Court of Moldova decided that Dodon was temporarily unable to perform his duties for failing to swear in a number of seven ministers. Several days later the Constitutional Court once again temporarily suspended Dodon, due to his veto on a bill on restricting Russian news broadcasts. This allowed the parliament to bypass his veto and enact a law restricting Russian television broadcasts. The law bans television channels from broadcasting news and analytical programs from countries that have not signed the regional agreement for the European Broadcasting Area, such as Russia. On 24 September 2018, he was again suspended from his duties for not approving the candidate for Minister of Health. On 9 June 2019, the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Moldova decided to temporarily suspend Igor Dodon as president, and Prime Minister Pavel Filip was appointed the interim president, who signed the decree on the dissolving parliament and holding early elections on September the 6th. The document was cancelled on 11 June 2019 on the ground that it did not comply with the constitutional standards. In January 2017, Dodon stated that Moldova would not officially recognize Crimea as Russian, stressing that "we need to build friendships with Ukraine, we need to solve the Transnistrian problem." In September of that year, Ambassador of Ukraine to Moldova Ivan Hnatyshyn stated that he does not expect a visit to (Ukrainian capital) Kyiv by Dodon because he "doesn't respect the territorial integrity of my country". During a meeting with Bulgarian President Rumen Radev, Dodon reiterated that the Gagauz city of Taraclia, which is inhabited by ethnic Bulgarians, will not be affected his government's planned territorial administrative reform. Throughout his presidency, Dodon never undertook an official visit to the Romanian capital of Bucharest. In March, he announced his belief that Romanians who support the Unification of Moldova and Romania as the country's "number one enemy", going further in an interview with Radio Free Europe by saying that the Bucharest government supports any attempt at unionism. During a meeting with President Klaus Iohannis in New York City, Dodon told his Romanian counterpart that the development of Romanian relations was a "key priority" for his government. Igor Dodon is considered a pro-Russian politician and in favor of the federalization of Moldova, which is in line with the views of Deputy Prime Minister of Russia Dmitry Kozak and his 2003 Kozak memorandum. In late September 2019, months after the constitutional crisis, Dodon stated that the country had abandoned its anti-Russian stance through its partnership with the Party of Action and Solidarity led by Prime Minister Maia Sandu. In late August 2020, he announced his plans to take the Russian COVID-19 vaccine during a visit to Russia in September–October, justifying this by saying that he has "more trust in a Russian vaccine than in an American one". During a 2020 speech to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, he stated that "we support the idea of creating a united Europe from Lisbon to Vladivostok." Speaking in Comrat in August 2018 when referencing the country's allies, Dodon said "we have friends who are close to Gagauzia, and I believe to Moldova, as well, they are Russia and Turkey." In December 2018, following his state visit to Israel, he reportedly said that he is considering moving the Moldovan embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. In July 2017, he was criticized by pro-EU politicians for welcoming an official delegation of the Workers' Party of Korea led by former Foreign Minister Ri Su-yong to participate in the 20th anniversary of the Moldovan Socialist Party. MP Iurie Leanca wrote, "Comrade Dodon, please stop! It's time to become civilized and think maturely!", saying that "We are in Europe, we're supposed to be Europeans, where the values of democracy are at the basis of all states." Dodon said in his meeting that he thinks that North Korea "has a huge potential for developing commercial ties, being interested in several categories of agricultural products from the Republic of Moldova, especially about the Moldovan wines". Dodon has regularly changed his stance on the future of Transnistria. At the beginning of his presidency, he suggested that Moldova be federalized. Currently, Dodon believes that the region should receive autonomous status like Gagauzia. In relation to this, he has said the following: "Pro-Russian president Igor Dodon, elected in December 2016, has indicated that Transnistria's attempts to gain independence have failed: 'They either have Moldova or Ukraine to unite with. Nobody else [...].'" In regards to the withdrawal of Russian peacekeepers, Dodon supports the Moldovan parliament on this issue. On 3 October 2017, Dodon became the first Moldovan leader to ever hold a working meeting with commanders of units in the National Army. During this meeting, he laid out his vision for the armed forces, according to his foreign policy doctrine he instituted the previous month. The doctrine he outlined had called for a complete ban of the participation of servicement from the Moldovan National Army in overseas exercises without his consent. His first two international visits were to Moscow, and Brussels. Since he took office in December 2016, he has made 47 foreign visits to 19 countries, with 20 of those visits being to Russia. In late October 2019, he visited Istanbul to attend the opening ceremony of Istanbul Airport as well as the ceremony for the Turkish Republic's 95th anniversary. In February and September 2019 respectively, he attended the Munich Security Conference in Germany and the Seventy-fourth session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York City both for the first time. During the UN visit, he referred to his attendance as "a successful one" during which he and his delegation "were able to promote the interests and aspirations of the Republic of Moldova on the international arena". He attended the 2018 FIFA World Cup opening ceremony in Moscow in June 2018 and the 2019 European Games in Minsk just over a year later. In October 2018, he attended a summit of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie in Yerevan where he delivered a speech in the French language. After the first round, he criticized the Moldovan diaspora as being out of touch with the Moldovan mainland when the polls showed their preference for Maia Sandu, referring to them as "in a real way, a parallel electorate for Moldova. On 3 November, during the second round of the elections, while Dodon was talking about his opponent Sandu, he modified a proverb and said nu schimbați porumbelul din mână pe coțofana de pe gard (do not change the pigeon on your hand by the magpie on the fence), referring to himself as the "pigeon". This resulted in an outbreak of memes on social media in Moldova. This has also been used as an insult by citizens opposing Dodon, including members of the diaspora, who were attacked by him earlier. Sandu responded to this by declaring that "an injured pigeon came out to the press and began to chant songs of mourning" and later uploaded a video to her TikTok account feeding pigeons, saying that "they are not at fault". The day after the elections, Dodon met with the parliamentary faction of the PSRM, thanking them for their support in campaign. During the meeting, the Socialist deputies proposed the idea of Dodon to returning to the helm of the PSRM. He came under fire for not allocating to president-elect Sandu a guard from the State Protection and Guard Service, which is traditionally given to the incoming president at the instructions of the incumbent president. After Sandu was sworn in on 24 December 2020 in the Palace of the Republic, she met Dodon at the Presidential Palace, for a ceremony in which Dodon officially transferred power to her. In a telephone conversation with Deputy Kremlin Chief of Staff Dmitry Kozak, he announced that he would be visiting Russia as head of the PSRM. During his visit, he negotiated the extension of the tariff-free preferential exports from Moldova to Russia. Dodon said in an interview with TASS in Moscow that he had discouraged people from pouring into the streets after the election in order to prevent a "Maidan" scenario in the country. He also said commenting on the election results that "there will be a sobering up of a very large number of people who will understand that they were wrong". He also accused Sandu of trying to usurp power in the country. He would later declare the composition of her Supreme Security Council to be a threat to national security. During the 2021 Russian protests, he accused "Western geopolitical players" of "trying to destabilize the situation around Russia", adding that he did not believe footage released by Russian opposition leader Alexey Navalny about "Putin's Palace" to be authentic. On 6 May 2021, he visited Minsk with Zinaida Greceanîi to unveil a monument to Moldovan Hero of the Soviet Union Ion Soltys. During the visit, he met with President Lukashenko at his private home in the capital. In May, he, alongside former President Vladimir Voronin, formed an electoral alliance known as the Electoral Bloc of Communists and Socialists, which will contest in the 2021 Moldovan parliamentary election. The announcement came as a surprise as Dodon and Voronin have accused each other of treason and political corruption. In 2010, the Party of Communists (PCRM) started promoting a new official flag for Moldova. In March 2012, Igor Dodon and the Party of Socialists (PSRM) invited PCRM to initiate a referendum to change the national flag of Moldova from the original tricolour (similar to Romania's, except charged with Moldova's coat of arms) to a red-blue bicolor flag. The Academy of Sciences of Moldova called the flag proposal a "pure political invention". In November 2012, Dodon posted on his Facebook profile a photo that shows him wearing clothes printed with a patch of the Russian flag, which was criticized as a sign of Dodon's alleged Russophilia. In October 2016, during the presidential election campaign, Igor Dodon affirmed that Crimea, the subject of a territorial dispute between Russia and Ukraine, "is a territory of the Russian Federation". In September 2018, seven Turkish teachers, from the "Orizont" High School administration were declared undesirable by the government and expelled from the country. Due to this, on 11 June 2019, the European Court of Human Rights condemned the Republic of Moldova, and imposed the Republic of Moldova's government to pay 25,000 Euros to five of the seven Turkish citizens. Opposition leaders accused President Igor Dodon and the Democratic Party of Moldova, the ruling party, of intentional violations of law and human rights in order to gain benefits from Ankara authorities, including the renovation of the Presidency building from Turkey's money. The "Our Party" municipal councilor Ilan Cașu considered that this SIS's operation was the President Dodon payment for the renovation of the Presidency building that was renovated with Turkish money. Previously, before coming to power, the ACUM's block position was based on the fact that behind the Turkish teachers "expel" would be Igor Dodon. The PAS's statement, published on the party's Facebook page, was mentioned, "For money designed to the renovation of the Presidency building and for the other goods procurement, the human rights are violated in Moldova and this is inadmissible". The leader of the Dignity and Truth Platform Party, Andrei Năstase, the former Deputy Prime Minister and former Minister of Internal Affairs compared the SIS with the NKVD. In his opinion, the workers of this institution have acted on the command of the leader of the Democratic Party Vladimir Plahotniuc and of the president Dodon. However, their position changed after the establishment of the Parliamentary majority with PSRM. The chairman of the National Security Commission and the MP of the Dignity and Truth Platform, Chiril Moțpan, who is investigating the expulsion of Turkish teachers, claimed that the president had no attribution to this case. On 7 June 2019, at the Democratic Party headquarter, according to Andrian Candu, President Igor Dodon negotiated with Vladimir Plahotniuc the conditions of establishing the coalition between PSRM and DP. Andrian Candu announced only some "criteria for creating the coalition". According to him, the socialists asked for federalization of the Republic of Moldova and providing the special statute to the Transnistrian region, launching the negotiation among Republic of Moldova, European Union and Russian Federation on trade policy, changing the Constitution of the Republic of Moldova, and the election of the President of the Republic of Moldova by the Parliament. On 8 June 2019, before the Meeting of Parliament of the Republic of Moldova, the temporary coalition ACUM-PSRM was established, Dodon has declared that there were some pressure on him to tender the resignation, anticipating the appearance of some compromising videos. Later, after the statements made by Andrian Candu, deputy head of the DPM, some videos have appeared at the Publika TV, one of the TV posts owned by the democratic party leader, where Igor Dodon has confirmed to Vlad Plahotniuc, that he has received the money from the Russian Federation on a monthly basis for PSRM maintenance, and also about presentation of federalisation plan of the Republic of Moldova coordinated with Russian Federation. The President Igor Dodon had recognized that the negotiations took place to establishing the majority, the discussion at which had included the participation of the businessman Serghei Iaralov. Regarding the videos that have appeared in public space he has declared that "All these, and some of them are ripped out of context or were montages." Vladimir Plahotniuc has confirmed the fact that negotiated with Igor Dodon within 3 months period: "The coalition DP+PSRM was almost made, but failed, because I refused to sign for the country federalization". In November 2014, the socialist politician of Russian ethnicity Valentin Crîlov [ro] accused Igor Dodon of being an "instrument of scenarios that would cause 'bloodshed' in Moldova", and labeled the Party of Socialists as "being in the service of another country" such as Russia. He also accused the party of becoming a threat to the "stability, peace and the very existence" of the Republic of Moldova and its extraordinarily large base of financial resources — the origin of which bear "reasonable doubt". On 29 August 2017, the criminal complaint against Igor Dodon was submitted by Maia Sandu at the General Prosecutor's Office, by which was requested the criminal liability for Igor Dodon for committing the offense of Treason against the State and for the crime related to Instigation to hate, differentiating and division by national, ethnical, racial and religious criteria. The Party of National Unity had filed a criminal complaint at the General Prosecutor's Office against President Igor Dodon. On 8 August 2019, at the press conference with the topic "Presentation of the criminal complaint against Igor Dodon. Arguments and facts" the criminal complaint was presented by Anatol Șalaru, the executive president of the party, an MP in the first Parliament of the Republic of Moldova and the deputy-president of the Liberal Party. The reason serves the video tape that reflected the discussions held among Igor Dodon and former PD leader Vladimir Plahotniuc, which appeared in the press in June 2019. In October 2019, Octavian Țîcu requested to be established the investigation Committee "to investigate the acts of treason committed by Igor Dodon". The Bloc "ACUM"s MPs, Iurie Reniță and Lilian Carp, have joined these initiative. The MP Iurie Reniță at the press conference has accused the socialists of money laundering in the large proportions, requesting the Prosecutor General to hold the involved persons liable. According to the documents, to which the MP has referred, the money have been transferred to Moldova through Exclusive Media Ltd., that belonges to Corneliu Furcutliță, who is the MP from PSRM side. Based on some loan contracts, the billions of Moldovan lei have been transferred from this company to the party's sponsors. In the document published by Reniță, the reporter officer has mentioned that the money came from offshore have been used in the presidential electoral campaign, that at the end has been won by Igor Dodon, the PSRM leader at that time. In March 2020, the MPs Iurie Reniță, Octavian Țîcu and Lilian Carp have presented the documents that would confirm the PSRМ's MPs implication. According to the documents at least 30 MPs affiliated to the Socialist Party, have received from Russia, through an off-shore account in the Bahamas some funds, whose main beneficiary is Igor Dodon. Later, the MP Iurie Renița has published a document that demonstrated the First Lady of the Republic of Moldova, Galina Dodon has a right for the banking signature on behalf of the "Exclusiv-Media" LLC. The MP has mentioned that: "one of the sources for illegal financing of the presidential campaign of Igor Dodon held in 2016 was from the Russian Federation through Bahamas, via laundering of about 1,5 million Euros. Further these money were "lend" through the "Exlusiv-Media" LLC to several PSRM." In May 2020, the former head of the Anticorruption Prosecutor's Office Viorel Morari declared, during the show Cabinetul din Umbră on Jurnal TV, that in the bag that Ilan Shor has shown to the public at the press conference at the beginning of 2019, sending a message to President Igor Dodon, it would have been 1.5 million Euros. According to Viorel Morari, the Dodon family would have accepted the payment of the flights and luxury trips from the money coming from the economic agents managed by Ilan Shor. According to the 4 July 2020 article published by The Brussels Times, several voices in the Republic of Moldova believe that the pro-Russian government crosses all red lines in order to maintain power in Chișinău in the interest of Russia. The source mentions that "the case of Dr. Gațcan shows how far President Igor Dodon can go, who actually controls power in Chișinău." The source also refers to the increasingly frequent accusations regarding the establishment of the dictatorship in the Republic of Moldova, but also to the efforts of opposition politicians to mobilize their forces to reduce the influence of Igor Dodon and the administrative resources he can benefit from at the election campaign in autumn. Following the 2020 Belarusian presidential election, Dodon congratulated President Alexander Lukashenko on his controversial victory. After this, a group of protesters demonstrated in front of the Belarusian embassy in Chișinău, coming with banners saying "Down with dictatorship!", "Down with censorship!", and "Belarus will be free!". The protesters particularly criticized Dodon for allowing himself to congratulate Lukashenko on behalf of the Moldovan people, in spite of the negative feelings towards the Belarusian leader at the time. On 24 May 2022, Dodon was detained by the Moldovan authorities. On 24 May 2022, Dodon was arrested by the Moldovan authorities on charges of corruption for the receipt of bribes, illegal financing of his political party, and high treason against Moldova through receiving funds to fugitive Moldovan politician Vladimir Plahotniuc in order to intercede on Plahotniuc's behalf regarding criminal cases filed in Russia. Investigators searched his home. He was then put under house arrest for 30 days. It was discovered he had an airline ticket for leaving Moldova at 9:00am on 26 May and large sums of foreign currency, which raised suspicion about his actions. The United States Department of the Treasury has also accused Dodon of corruption and conspiring with Russia through his political aides to interfere with the Moldovan elections and rig the media in his favour. Dodon has accused Sandu of having politicized judicial cases against him. The Deputy Foreign Minister of Russia Andrei Rudenko said that Russia would assure the rights of Dodon and that any prosecution would respect international practice. Dodon's brother-in-law, Petru Merineanu, was also put under preventive detention for 30 days. After searching his house, prosecutors found evidence of transactions worth €700,000, and €73,000 in cash in the possession of Petru Merineanu. Anticorruption agencies have seized assets worth $100,000. Petru Merineanu was released from house arrest in October 2022. Igor Dodon was released from house arrest on 18 November 2022 pending a court trial on all charges and was instructed not to leave the country. In the year to September 2023 25 hearings have been scheduled, but only 3 held, with 11 postponed and 11 interrupted. Dodon is accused of providing an opinion during his tenure as Minister of Economy, which led to the signing of a contract in May 2008 for the procurement of electricity at an inflated price for the Republic of Moldova. The damage inflicted is estimated at 123 million lei. Igor Dodon, is also targeted in two other cases, he denies the accusations. Dodon married Galina Dodon in 1999 and together they have three children: Bogdan, Vlad, and Nicolae. His oldest son, Vlad, is a passionate player of water polo. His brother Aleksander is a co-owner alongside Igor Chaika (son of Yuri Chaika, Prosecutor General of Russia) of the Industrial Ecological Operator company which deals with waste. Aside from his native Romanian (which he considers Moldovan), he also speaks Russian, French, and English. However, he has only used the latter two in public speeches. He is considered to be good friends with Colonel General Victor Gaiciuc, who is currently one of his advisers. Dodon had proposed Gaiciuc for the position of defense minister after rejecting Eugen Sturza's candidacy. He is a supporter of the Union of Officers of Moldova, where he holds the honorary rank of Major of the Reserve. On 9 September 2018, Dodon was involved in a car accident on the Chișinău-Călărași highway. Although Dodon wasn't injured himself, his mother and his middle son Nicolae sustained serious injuries. Order of Work Glory (25 March 2008) Order of the Holy Sepulchre (Holy See) Order of St. Sergius of Radonezh (Russian Orthodox Church) Medal "75 Years of Victory in the Great War for the Defense of the Fatherland" (Belarus) "Dodon, căruia nu îi mai place dubla cetățenie, are și cetățenia rusă". 3 November 2020. "Igor Dodon ar fi obţinut cetăţenia Federaţiei Ruse. Renato Usatîi face noi dezvăluiri". adevarul.ro. 22 April 2020. Retrieved 21 March 2022. "Dezvăluiri explozive din veceul Dumei de la Moscova: Igor Dodon are cetățenie RUSEASCĂ! Un deputat rus, în fața pisoarului: "Putin i-a dat cetățenia rusă prin decretul său secret!"". 3 November 2020. "Moldova: Freedom in the World 2023 Country Report". Freedom House. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Moldovan ex-president detained in treason, corruption probe". AP News. 24 May 2022. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Moldova's pro-Russian former president Dodon detained, says he is innocent". Reuters. 24 May 2022. Retrieved 5 July 2023. Seddon, Max (24 May 2022). "Moldova's former pro-Russia leader detained as part of treason probe". Financial Times. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Moldova places former President Dodon under house arrest". Reuters. 26 May 2022. Retrieved 5 July 2023. "Moldovan ex-president detained for alleged graft, treason – DW – 05/24/2022". Deutsche Welle. 24 May 2022. Retrieved 5 July 2023. "Treasury Targets Corruption and the Kremlin's Malign Influence Operations in Moldova". United States Department of the Treasury. 27 June 2023. Retrieved 5 July 2023. Tanas, Alexander (18 November 2022). "Former Moldovan president released, vows new protests". Reuters. Retrieved 5 July 2023. PUBLIKA.MD – AICI SUNT ȘTIRILE (14 November 2016). "Great joy in Sadova, native village of newly elected president Dodon | PUBLIKA .MD – AICI SUNT ȘTIRILE". en.publika.md. Retrieved 24 September 2018. "VIDEO // Casa părintească a lui Igor Dodon, văzută de la înălțime". Deschide.MD (in Romanian). Retrieved 13 November 2020. "Обо мне « Igor Dodon". 31 December 2010. Archived from the original on 31 December 2010. Retrieved 3 July 2017. "BIOGRAFIE: Igor Dodon, un politician prorus care se declară promotor al valorilor tradiţionale". Mediafax.ro. Retrieved 20 November 2016. "FOTO Cum arăta Igor Dodon la 24 de ani, în ziua nunţii sale". m.adevarul.ro. 29 August 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Igor Dodon (PSRM) – date biografice", Radio Europa Liberă, 22 October 2016, retrieved 24 August 2019 "Профессия « Igor Dodon". Archived from the original on 31 December 2010. Retrieved 3 July 2017. "Biography of President of the Republic of Moldova Igor Dodon", Presedinte.md/eng/biography, retrieved 8 July 2019 "Informaţii generale despre alegerile parlamentare 2005 în Moldova / Alegeri 2005", E-democracy.md/elections/parliamentary/2005/info/, retrieved 8 July 2019 "Partidul Comuniştilor din Republica Moldova (PCRM) (45.98%, 56 mandate) / Alegeri 2005", E-democracy.md/elections/parliamentary/2005/opponents/pcrm/, retrieved 8 July 2019 "Ministrul Igor Dodon va avea un sir de intrevederi cu oficiali ai Comisiei Europene — Moldova.org", Moldova.org, 23 March 2007, retrieved 8 July 2019 "Lista candidaţilor PCRM pentru alegerile parlamentare 2010 / Alegeri 2010", E-democracy.md/elections/parliamentary/2010/opponents/pcrm/list/, retrieved 8 July 2019 E-democracy.md/files/elections/parliamentary2010/electoral-program-pcrm-2010-ro.pdf http://www.e-democracy.md/files/elections/parliamentary2010/electoral-program-pcrm-2010-ro.pdf, retrieved 8 July 2019 {{citation}}: Missing or empty |title= (help) "Moldova – moldoveni – moldovenesc", Dodon.md/moldova-moldoveni-moldovenesc/, archived from the original on 8 July 2019, retrieved 8 July 2019 Politic Versiune pentru tipar. "CEC a anunţat rezultatele finala la Chişinău – Moldova Azi". Azi.md. Archived from the original on 24 July 2019. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "Igor Dodon se intilneste astazi cu prim-ministrul Belgiei", Point.md, retrieved 8 July 2019 "DECLARATIA LUI IGOR DODON FACUTA IN CADRUL VIZITEI SALE LA BRUXELLES", YouTube, retrieved 8 July 2019 "Tkaciuk îl sabotează pe DODON ?", Timpul – Ştiri din Moldova, 14 May 2011, retrieved 8 July 2019 "INTERNATIONAL:Cine este Igor Dodon, posibilul nou primar al Chisinăului", Ziaruldevrancea.ro, retrieved 8 July 2019 "Трое на выход". Interfax.ru. 4 November 2011. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "Party defections could let Moldova name president – World". Reuters. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "(video) Dodon, Greceanîi și Abramciuc părăsesc fracțiunea PCRM și sunt gata să voteze președintele țării". Unimedia.md. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "Dodon și Zinaida Greceanîi pleacă din PCRM", Adevărul, 4 November 2011, retrieved 8 July 2019 "Игорь Додон стал членом Партии социалистов". News.mail.ru. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "(UPDATE) Игорь Додон избран председателем Партии социалистов". Ru.publika.md. 18 December 2011. Retrieved 13 November 2016. 62 de deputați l-au votat pe N. Timofti. Urmează decizia de VALIDARE a Curții Constituționale. TIMPUL. 16 martie 2012 Dodon regretă că l-a votat pe Timofti în calitate de președinte. UNIMEDIA.info. 22 martie 2013 Decis! Igor Dodon nu mai este președinte al PSRM. Zinaida Greceanîi va deține interimatul, unimedia.info "Молдова: выиграл Додон, победил Плахотнюк – Рабкор.ру". Rabkor.ru. 17 November 2016. Retrieved 28 January 2018. "Впервые за восемь лет состоялась встреча лидеров Молдавии и Приднестровья. Новости. Первый канал". 1tv.ru. Retrieved 28 January 2018. Академия наук Молдовы будет реформирована Семенова, Юлия. (29 November 2016). "Игорь Додон: В геополитических баталиях Молдавия не должна быть ни на стороне России, ни на стороне Запада". dw.com. Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 1 January 2017. Додон сбрасывает «пророссийскую» шкуру: Россия должна уйти из Приднестровья Moldova, Europa Liberă (11 April 2018). "Igor Dodon îl așteaptă în vizită pe președintele din Belarus, Aliaxandr Lukașenka". Radio Europa Liberă. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Russian should be mandatory in schools, says Moldovan president". www.euractiv.com. 27 March 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Transition to presidential republic to be initiated in Moldova soon". Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Top trei politicieni în care moldovenii au cea mai mare încredere – sondaj", noi.md, retrieved 13 February 2019 "Sondaj BOP: Cei mai apreciați politicieni din Republica Moldova", UNIMEDIA, 7 February 2019, retrieved 13 February 2019 "Sondaj: Cine sunt politicienii în care moldovenii au cea mai mare încredere", stiri.md, retrieved 13 February 2019 "SONDAJ: Igor Dodon şi Pavel Filip se bucură de cea mai mare încredere din partea populaţiei", TVR MOLDOVA, retrieved 13 February 2019 "SONDAJ // Câte mandate de deputat ar obține PSRM, "ACUM" și PD în cricumscripția națională: Partidul Șor, la limită. Cei mai mulți respondenți optează pentru vectorul "Pro Moldova"", Ziarulnational.md/sondaj-cate-mandate-de-deputat-ar-obtine-psrm-acum-si-pd-in-cricumscriptia-nationala-partidul-sor-la-limita/, retrieved 13 February 2019 "Partidele care ar ajunge in legislativ daca duminica viitoare ar avea loc alegeri parlamentare. Top trei politicieni care se bucura de cea mai mare incredere. Sondaj iData", protv.md, retrieved 13 February 2019 "Moldova President Gives Tour of Summer Residence". 27 July 2017. "Erdogan to Visit Moldova after Turkish Professors Expelled". 25 September 2018. "Moldova's president says his country is ready to host Pan-Orthodox Council". TASS. Retrieved 28 October 2018. "President Dodon proposes holding pan-Orthodox Council in Moldova". OrthoChristian.Com. Retrieved 15 November 2018. Додон предложил провести Всеправославный собор на территории Молдавии. РИА Новости (in Russian). 16 October 2018. Retrieved 15 November 2018. "Dodon reia lupta împotriva Mitropoliei Basarabiei". 29 March 2012. "Index of /Md". Williams, Matthias (9 June 2019). "Pro-Russian Candidate Leads Moldova Presidential Vote but Faces Runoff". Reuters. Retrieved 9 June 2019. "Igor Dodon a avut o întrevedere cu Vadim Krasnoselski". "'Soviet' Celebration Resurrects Familiar Dispute in Moldova". 26 March 2020. "Moldovan President Igor Dodon Postpones Victory Day Celebrations to August 24 Due to Coronavirus – President". "Marșul Victoriei s-a transferat de pe 9 mai pentru data de 24 august". 15 April 2020. "Moldova's President Dodon to run for second term". 10 September 2020. "Moldova president may be suspended for not naming minister". ABC News. 17 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017. Moldova, Constitutional Court of the Republic of (2 January 2018). "News /". Constcourt.md. Retrieved 28 January 2018. "Moldovan leader's powers suspended to enact Russian TV curbs". Reuters. 5 January 2017. Retrieved 5 January 2017. "Moldova strips country's pro-Russia president of his powers". The Independent. 24 September 2018. Retrieved 24 September 2018. "Igor Dodon, deconectat a patra oară din funcția de președinte", DW.COM, retrieved 27 August 2019 "R. Moldova: Curtea Constitutionala l-a suspendat pe Dodon. Pavel Filip, numit presedinte interimar, a dizolvat parlamentul si a convocat alegeri anticipate", Ziare.com, retrieved 25 April 2020 "Igor Dodon a anulat decretul semnat de Pavel Filip cu privire la dizolvarea Legislativului și organizarea alegerilor parlamentare anticipate", UNIMEDIA, 11 June 2019, retrieved 25 April 2020 (in Ukrainian) In Moldova, now no one will go to Russian recognition of Crimea – Dodon, Ukrayinska Pravda (17 January 2017) "Ukrainian Envoy to Moldova tells why President Dodon's visit not expected in Kyiv | UNIAN". "UAWire – Ukrainian Ambassador to Moldova: President Dodon is not welcome to visit Ukraine due to his anti-Ukrainian position". "Igor Dodon Reassured President Radev that the Status of Taraclia District Won't Be Affected by the Territorial-Administrative Reform – Novinite.com – Sofia News Agency". M.novinite.com. 24 September 2019. Retrieved 21 March 2022. Ursu, Valentina (20 March 2018). "Igor Dodon: "Există riscul major ca dușmanul numărul unu al R. Moldova, al moldovenilor, să fie românii!" (III)". Radio Europa Liberă. "Moldovan president: Romanians supporting unionist movement may become Moldova's enemies | Romania Insider". 20 March 2018. "Romanian Leader Calls On Dodon To Prevent Federal Solution To Moldovas Transnistria Issue – UrduPoint". "Romania Opposes Federal Solution to Moldova's Transnistria Problem | Balkan Insight". 26 September 2019. Higgins, Andrew (30 October 2016). "Pro-Russian Candidate Leads Moldova Presidential Vote but Faces Runoff". The New York Times. Retrieved 28 January 2018. "Moldova presidential election appears headed to runoff". Usatoday.com. Retrieved 28 January 2018. "Dodon Says Moldova Has Abandoned its Anti-Russian Stance | Balkan Insight". 23 September 2019. "Moldovan leader plans to be vaccinated against coronavirus during trip to Russia". TASS. Retrieved 4 September 2020. "S P e E C H delivered by Mr. Igor DODON, President of the Republic of Moldova, at the ordinary session of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe". 29 January 2020. Dodon Denounces Romania Reunification Idea In Rare Visit To Gagauzia rferl.org 20 August 2017 "Moldova president said to 'very seriously consider' moving embassy to Jerusalem | the Times of Israel". The Times of Israel. "Moldova President Criticised for Welcoming North Koreans". Balkan Insight. 3 July 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Vlas, Cristi (2 July 2017). "Igor Dodon welcomes North Korean delegation: Korea has huge potential for developing commercial ties - Moldova.org". Retrieved 25 October 2020. "Igor Dodon a avut o întrevedere cu o delegaţie din Republica Populară Democrată Coreeană". presedinte.md. Retrieved 25 October 2020. "Igor Dodon: Reintegration of the country would start in 2019-2020 - Moldova.org". www.moldova.org. 22 June 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2018. "Is it worthy ceding Transnistria to "neutral" Moldova?: EADaily". 5 April 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Igor Dodon will initiate return of the social package for servicemen". 3 October 2017. "The Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces of the Republic of Moldova has banned the participation of the Armed Forces of the country in exercises and any other type of activity deployed abroad without his consent". 8 September 2017. "17 января состоятся переговоры Владимира Путина с Президентом Молдовы Игорем Додоном". Kremlin.ru. 16 January 2017. Retrieved 28 January 2018. "Moldovan president meets European Commission Vice President". Prm.md. 7 February 2017. Retrieved 28 January 2018. "Moscow's Man Eyes Second Term as Moldova's President | Balkan Insight". 24 July 2019. "Igor Dodon în Turcia, de Ziua Naţională a acestei ţări". 29 October 2018. "Moldovan president presents balanced foreign policy concept in Munich". "Президент Республики Молдова отправляется в США с рабочим визитом". 22 September 2019. "Președintele Republicii Moldova si-a incheiat vizita la New York". 27 September 2019. "Kremlin: Donald Trump welcome guest at FIFA World Cup". "Игорь Додон пожелал удачи Национальной Олимпийской сборной Республики Молдова на Европейских играх в Минске". 21 June 2019. "Dodon invites Armenia PM to visit Moldova". 24 May 2023. "Главная". January 2015. "Информационна Агенция "Фокус"". "Government – The Prime Minister – News". www.kormany.hu. Archived from the original on 28 March 2020. "Moldovan President Slams Diaspora for Voting for Rival". Balkan Insight. 3 November 2020. Retrieved 20 November 2020. "Dodon, atac la Maia Sandu: Nu schimbaţi porumbelul din mână pe coţofana de pe gard / Val de ironii pe internet în Modova, meme-uri cu Putin și porumbei". G4Media.ro (in Romanian). 3 November 2020. Slobodchikova, Darya (3 November 2020). ""Порумбел" Додон и "сорока на заборе". Как Игорь Додон в кампанию вступил (ВИДЕО)". NewsMaker (in Russian). "Febra campaniei electorale se incheie astazi, iar duminica cetatenii sunt asteptati la urne ca sa-si aleaga presedintele. In satele de bastina ale celor doi candidati se fac deja pronosticuri – VIDEO". ProTV Chișinău (in Romanian). 14 November 2020. Dulea, Cristina (5 November 2020). "VIDEO/ Moldoveni din diasporă condamnă declarațiile lui Igor Dodon: "Am plâns amar căci am ajuns să fiu acuzată că sunt în străinătate", "Ne vedem pe 15 noiembrie, iar, aduși organizat de voința de a scăpa de porumbel"". Ziarul de Gardă (in Romanian). "/VIDEO/ Dodon instigă la ură? Avocatul Poporului: "Mesajele transmise de Igor Dodon sunt ofensatoare și instigatoare la ură"". TV8 (in Romanian). 4 November 2020. ""Un porumbel ranit canta cantece de jale". Ce spune Maia Sandu, despre acuzatiile aduse de Igor Dodon – VIDEO". ProTV Chișinău (in Romanian). 4 November 2020. "(NO COMMENT) Maia Sandu hrănește porumbeii: "N-au nicio vină"". Cotidianul.md (in Romanian). 14 November 2020. "Președintele Republicii Moldova s-a întâlnit cu fracțiunea parlamentară a PSRM". 16 November 2020. Victoria, Borodin (16 November 2020). "Igor Dodon a lăsat-o pe Maia Sandu fără protecție de stat". Ziarul de Gardă (in Romanian). Retrieved 20 November 2020. "Pro-EU Maia Sandu sworn in as Moldova's president". Macau Business. 24 December 2020. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "Igor Dodon a avut o discuție telefonică cu Dmitrii Kozak". president.md. 19 November 2020. Retrieved 20 November 2020. "Dodon says he will visit Russia as leader of Moldova's largest political party". TASS. Retrieved 20 November 2020. "Tariff-free exports from Moldova extended following ex-leader Dodon's Russia visit". "We foiled a 'Moldovan Maidan': Dodon on why he dissuaded people from taking to the streets". "Экс-президент Молдовы Додон после отставки поехал в Москву и назвал россиян "братьями"". 27 December 2020. "Додон обвинил Санду в попытке узурпации власти в стране". 18 January 2021. "Dodon Says New Composition Of Moldovas Security Council Threatens Country's Security – UrduPoint". "West Trying To Destabilize Situation In Russia Ahead Of Parliamentary Election – Dodon – UrduPoint". "Monument to Hero of the Soviet Union Ion Soltys unveiled in Minsk". eng.belta.by. 6 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Lukashenko describes meeting with Dodon as heart-to-heart conversation". eng.belta.by. 5 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Неформальная встреча с экс-президентом Молдовы Игорем Додоном | Официальный интернет-портал Президента Республики Беларусь". president.gov.by (in Russian). Retrieved 8 May 2021. Welle (www.dw.com), Deutsche. "Moscova i-a unit pe Dodon și Voronin – doi lideri eșuați, care se urăsc și se tem de electorat | DW | 13 May 2021". DW.COM (in Romanian). Retrieved 21 May 2021. „Steagul lui Ştefan ce Mare”, o nouă invenţie propagandistică promovată de PCRM Archived 2 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine (in Romanian) Socialiștii doresc referendum pentru a schimba „tricolorul românesc” și așteaptă susținerea comuniștilor (in Romanian) "Igor Dodon vrea REFERENDUM pentru a SCHIMBA steagul tricolor al R. Moldova". Timpul – Știri din Moldova. 29 March 2012. "HotNews.md / Istorii din MD / FOTO – Igor Dodon în ipostaze ȘOCANTE". hotnews.md. Dodon: Crimeea este teritoriu al Federației Ruse at timpul.md (in Romanian) "Moldovan presidential race leader says Crimea "Russian"". Unian.info. Retrieved 28 January 2018. Moldova, Europa Liberă (11 June 2019), "CEDO condamnă R.Moldova pentru expulzarea profesorilor turci", Radio Europa Liberă, retrieved 27 August 2019 "CtEDO a condamnat R. Moldova în cazul celor șapte profesori turci expulzaţi. Guvernul, obligat să achite despăgubiri — Moldova.org", Moldova.org, 11 June 2019, retrieved 27 August 2019 "Doi dintre profesorii turci expulzați din R. Moldova, condamnați la închisoare în Turcia", AGORA, 15 March 2019, retrieved 27 August 2019 "Schimb de ipoteze. Moțpan declară că Dodon nu a fost implicat în "expulzarea" profesorilor turci", Ziarul de Gardă, 2 August 2019, retrieved 27 August 2019 ""Imediat dupa ce cetatenii turci au fost expulzati, PAS si PPDA ziceau ca acest lucru s-a facut la indicatia presedinteleui Igor Dodon in schimbul reparatiei presedintiei, de ce nu a fost audiat pana acum presedintele Igor Dodon?" Chiril Motpan: "In acea perioada unicul care putea sa ia decizii in tara asta, era Vladimir Plahotniuc" – VIDEO". protv.md. Retrieved 27 August 2019. "LIVE/ Reglare de conturi între PDM și socialiști: Igor Dodon a discutat ieri la sediul PDM cu Plahotniuc", Ziarul de Gardă, 8 June 2019, retrieved 11 June 2019 LIVE pe-care-le-ar-fi-inaintat-dodon-lui-plahotniuc "Lista condițiilor pe care le-ar fi înaintat Dodon lui Plahotniuc", Ziarul de Gardă, 8 June 2019, retrieved 11 June 2019 {{citation}}: Check |url= value (help) https://www. Facebook. Com/felicianedzelschi, "Candu: Dodon a fost ieri la sediul PD și a discutat cu Plahotniuc. Ce condiții a pus (DOC)", AGORA, retrieved 11 June 2019 {{citation}}: |author= has generic name (help) Iurii Botnarenco (8 June 2019), ""Este o zi decisivă". Blocul ACUM încă speră la formarea unei majorități și așteaptă PSRM și astăzi la negocieri, deși CC a decis că timpul a expirat", Adevărul, retrieved 11 June 2019 "Declarațiile lui Igor Dodon înainte de Ședința Parlamentului Republicii Moldova din 8 iunie 2019", Privesc.Eu, retrieved 11 June 2019 "Dodon anticipează apariția unor imagini compromițătoare la adresa sa", Ziarul de Gardă, 8 June 2019, retrieved 11 June 2019 "VIDEO/ Discuția dintre Plahotniuc și Dodon. Cum, de fapt, se duc negocierile în politică", Ziarul de Gardă, 11 June 2019, retrieved 11 June 2019 "VIDEO. Dodon în discuții private cu Plahotniuc – explică care e bugetul PSRM și de unde ia bani", Evenimentul, archived from the original on 1 July 2019, retrieved 11 June 2019 "Publika.md a publicat inca un video in care Igor Dodon i-ar dicta lui Vlad Plahotniuc planul de Federalizare a tarii – VIDEO", Pro TV, retrieved 11 June 2019 "VIDEO/ Dodon și Iaralov negociau înlocuirea termenului "federalizare" în acordul ce urma a fi semnat între PDM-PSRM", Ziarul de Gardă, 11 June 2019, retrieved 11 June 2019 Publika. Md (9 June 2019), "PROBĂ VIDEO: Igor Dodon a insistat pe federalizarea Republicii Moldova", PUBLIKA.MD – AICI SUNT ȘTIRILE, retrieved 11 June 2019 N. O. (8 June 2019), "VIDEO Televiziunea lui Plahotniuc a publicat imagini video cu Dodon și liderul PD care discută despre federalizarea Republicii Moldova / Dodon: Propunerile au fost din partea lui Plahotniuc și trimise în Rusia pentru a i se închide dosarele – International", HotNews.ro, retrieved 11 June 2019 "VIDEO EVIDENCE: Igor Dodon insisted on the federalization of the Republic of Moldova", YouTube, retrieved 11 June 2019 "Igor Dodon, primele comentarii la înregistrările video de la negocierile de ieri cu Plahotniuc, de la sediul PD-ului", Tv8.md/2019/06/08/igor-dodon-primele-comentarii-la-inregistrarile-video-de-la-negocierile-de-ieri-cu-plahotniuc-de-la-sediul-pd-ului/, retrieved 11 June 2019 "Dodon, despre înregistrările cu bani de la Putin și federalizare: "Discuții au avut loc, evident că au avut loc"", Ziarulnational.md/dodon-despre-inregistrarile-cu-bani-de-la-putin-si-federalizare-discutii-au-avut-loc-evident-ca-au-avut-loc/, retrieved 11 June 2019 "Dodon acuza o inscenare: Ce tine de federalizarea R. Moldova este propunerea lui Plahotniuc catre rusi", Ziare.com, 11 June 2019, retrieved 11 June 2019 "/VIDEO/ Vlad Plahotniuc: Timp de trei luni, am avut multe discuții cu Igor Dodon. Coaliția PD-PSRM era aproape făcută", Tv8.md/2019/06/08/vlad-plahotniuc-timp-de-trei-luni-am-avut-multe-discutii-cu-igor-dodon-coalitia-pd-psrm-era-aproape-facuta/, retrieved 11 June 2019 "(video) Plahotniuc: "Ceea ce a făcut astăzi Igor Dodon, PSRM și ACUM – o evidentă lovitură de stat"", UNIMEDIA, 8 June 2019, retrieved 11 June 2019 ""A pus "Partidul Socialiștilor", accentuez, "din R. Moldova", nu în relații de parteneriat, ci în serviciul altei țări"". Ziarul de Gardă. 24 November 2014. Igor Dodon prezintă pericol mare pentru pacea și stabilitatea din Moldova, Valentin Crîlov. Alegeri 2014, ipn.md "VIDEO // PAS a depus la Procuratura Generală un denunț penal împotriva președintelui Republicii Moldova, Igor Dodon.", BreakingNews.md, archived from the original on 20 August 2019, retrieved 20 August 2019 "PAS A DEPUS LA PROCURATURA GENERALĂ UN DENUNŢ ÎMPOTRIVA ACŢIUNILOR PREŞEDINTELUI IGOR DODON", Infotag.md, 30 August 2017, retrieved 20 August 2019 "Denunt impotriva lui Igor Dodon" (PDF), Unpaspentru.md/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/denunt-procuratura-generala-impotriva-lui-igor-dodon.pdf, retrieved 20 August 2019 "Partidul Unitatii Nationale, intr-o conferinta de presa cu tema "Prezentarea denuntului penal contra lui Igor Dodon. Argumente si fapte" – VIDEO", Pro TV, retrieved 20 August 2019 "(video) PUN a depus la Procuratură un denunț penal contra președintelui Igor Dodon. De ce îl acuză", UNIMEDIA, 8 August 2019, retrieved 20 August 2019 "Denunț penal împotriva lui Igor Dodon, depus de Partidul Unității Naționale", Anticoruptie.md/ro/dosare-de-coruptie/denunt-penal-impotriva-lui-igor-dodon-depus-de-partidul-unitatii-nationale, retrieved 20 August 2019 "(video) Octavian Țîcu cere crearea unei Comisii de anchetă "pentru investigarea acțiunilor de trădare de patrie comise de Igor Dodon"", UNIMEDIA, 11 October 2019, retrieved 16 October 2019 "DOC // Crește numărul deputaților care cer ANCHETAREA lui Igor Dodon pentru "TRĂDARE de patrie"", Ziarulnational.md/doc-creste-numarul-deputatilor-care-cer-anchetarea-lui-igor-dodon-pentru-tradare-de-patrie/, retrieved 16 October 2019 "(video) Iurie Reniță: "Igor Dodon nu a semnat cererea de rechemare a patru ambasadori, nici după patru luni de la solicitarea Guvernului"", UNIMEDIA, 23 October 2019, retrieved 20 November 2019 "DOC // PA a deschis o cauză penală pe finanțarea campaniei lui Dodon din 2016", Deschide.MD, retrieved 20 November 2019 ""Afacerea Bahamas" și finanțarea campaniei electorale a lui Dodon, obiectul unei cauze penale pe faptul spălării banilor (DOC)", AGORA, 13 November 2019, retrieved 20 November 2019 "DOC // Actele care ar confirma implicarea deputaților PSRM în schema de SPĂLARE de bani din Bahamas, avându-l ca principal beneficiar pe Dodon: "Dovezile incontestabile trebuie să devină un test pentru Stoianoglo"", Ziarulnational.md/doc-actele-care-ar-confirma-implicarea-deputatilor-psrm-in-schema-de-spalare-de-bani-din-bahamas-avandu-l-ca-principal-beneficiar-pe-igor-dodon-dovezile-incontestabile-trebuie-sa-devina-un-test-stoianoglo/, retrieved 21 March 2020 "VIDEO // Instituirea STĂRII DE URGENȚĂ, motiv pentru a clasa dosarul privind finanțarea PSRM din Rusia via Bahamas? "Avem dovezi CLARE, avem dispozițiile de PLATĂ în original"", Ziarulnational.md/ultima-ora-video-instituirea-starii-de-urgenta-motiv-pentru-a-clasa-dosarul-privind-finantarea-psrm-din-rusia-via-bahamas-avem-dovezi-clare-avem-dispozitiile-de-plata-in-original/, retrieved 21 March 2020 "Dezvăluiri noi în dosarul Bahamas! Cine sunt socialiștii care au beneficiat de împrumuturi fără dobândă prin intermediul "Exclusiv Media"", Tv8.md/2020/03/17/dezvaluiri-noi-in-dosarul-bahamas-cine-sunt-socialistii-care-au-beneficiat-de-imprumuturi-fara-dobanda-prin-intermediul-exclusiv-media/, retrieved 21 March 2020 Iurie Reniță a publicat un document care ar demonstra că Galina Dodon are dreptul la semnătură bancară, retrieved 17 May 2020 "Morari: În geanta lui Shor erau 1,5 milioane de euro pentru Dodon. Președintele în 2009 trebuia condamnat — Cotidianul", Cotidianul, 1 May 2020, retrieved 23 June 2020 "How deputies in Eastern European countries are stolen to strengthen Russia's influence", The Brussels Times, 4 July 2020, retrieved 23 July 2020 "Cazul Gațcan, în presa internațională: "Cum sunt furați deputații în Europa de Est și cât de departe poate ajunge Dodon"", JurnalTV.md, retrieved 23 July 2020 "Deputatul Ștefan Gațcan a aderat la Pro Moldova", YouTube, retrieved 23 July 2020 "DOC/ Cine este și ce avere declară Ștefan Gațcan, cel mai mediatizat deputat din ultimele zile", Ziarul de Gardă, 2 July 2020, retrieved 23 July 2020 "Cazul Gațcan și abuzurile nemaiîntâlnite ale guvernării, în atenția presei de la Bruxelles", Timpul – Ştiri din Moldova, retrieved 23 July 2020 "Igor Dodon l-a felicitat pe Alexandr Lukașenko pentru victoria în alegerile prezidențiale. Mesajul transmis". tv8.md (in Romanian). 10 August 2020. Retrieved 10 August 2020. "Protest la Ambasada Republicii Belarus". Jurnal.md (in Romanian). 11 August 2020. Retrieved 13 August 2020. "Moldova's pro-Russian former president Dodon detained, state television reports". Reuters. 24 May 2022. Retrieved 24 May 2022. "Pro-Russian ex-president of Moldova placed under house arrest". Al Arabiya. 26 May 2022. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Igor Dodon, plasat în arest la domiciliu pentru 30 de zile". HotNews (in Romanian). 26 May 2022. Viorica, Rusica (10 October 2022). "Petru Merineanu, the former head of state's brother-in-law, was released from house arrest". TeleRadio-Moldova. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "The Energocom case in which Igor Dodon is being investigated stalls. A new court hearing was postponed". 13 October 2023. "Dupa 3 baieti, mai vrea si... fete. Igor Dodon si-a adus baietelul si sotia acasa" (in Romanian). PRO TV. "Ce frumos! Uite ce DECLARATIE de DRAGOSTE i-a facut Igor Dodon sotiei" (in Romanian). Actualitati.md. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "Fiul președintelui țării, Vladislav Dodon: "Tata m-a îndrumat să fac polo pe apă"". 27 September 2017. Archived from the original on 25 June 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2018. https://en.crimerussia.com/oligarchs/brother-of-moldavia-s-president-becomes-igor-chaika-s-partner-at-dumping-business/ Archived 20 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine[bare URL] Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "Discurs". YouTube. "Biography of President of the Republic of Moldova Igor Dodon". presedinte.md. "Victor Gaiciuc, propunerea nepotistă a lui Dodon pentru șefia Ministerului Apărării ~ InfoPrut". Infoprut.ro. 13 September 2017. Retrieved 29 September 2018. "Igor Dodon Surrounds Himself with Anti-EU Forces". 30 December 2018. Moldovan President Igor Dodon hurt after being run off road in crash with truck, Associated Press/ ABC News Online, 10 September 2018 ȘTIRILE, PUBLIKA.MD – AICI SUNT (9 September 2018). "Președintele Igor Dodon, implicat într-un grav accident de circulație. Imaginile cu MOMENTUL ACCIDENTULUI". PUBLIKA.MD – AICI SUNT ȘTIRILE (in Romanian). Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Додон госпитализирован после ДТП". Retrieved 9 September 2018. Указ Президента Республики Молдова от 25 марта 2008 года No. 1579 «О награждении государственными наградами» "Президента Молдовы наградили в Израиле "Орденом Рыцарей Святого Гроба Господня". Додон теперь рыцарь?". 18 December 2018. "Патриарх Кирилл наградил Додона орденом Сергия Радонежского". "Președintele Republicii Moldova a avut o întrevedere cu Ambasadorul Republicii Belarus — Președinția Republicii Moldova". President.md. 8 December 2020. Retrieved 21 March 2022. Media related to Igor Dodon at Wikimedia Commons Official web site of Igor Dodon Official Youtube channel of Igor Dodon Igor Dodon