The International Tennis Hall of Fame is located in Newport, Rhode Island, United States. It honors both players and other contributors to the sport of tennis. The complex, the former Newport Casino, includes a museum, 13 grass tennis courts, an indoor tennis facility with three courts, three outdoor hard courts, one green clay court, a court tennis facility, and a theatre. The International Tennis Hall of Fame is a non-profit organization with the goal of preserving, celebrating, and inspiring the sport of tennis around the world. The hall of fame and museum are located in the Newport Casino, which was commissioned in 1879 by James Gordon Bennett Jr. as part of an exclusive resort for wealthy Newport summer residents. It was designed by Charles McKim along with Stanford White, who did the interiors. It is an example of Victorian Shingle Style architecture. In 1881, the Real Tennis Court (housing the National Tennis Club) and the Casino Theatre were constructed at the east end of the campus. The club was opened on July 1, 1880, after a six-month construction period and quickly became a fashionable venue for Newport summer residents. The United States Lawn Tennis Association held its first championships at the Newport Casino in 1881. The event was held annually through 1914, by which time tennis had become the key attraction at the resort. The championship was suspended during World War I. But by the 1950s, the retreat was struggling financially, as tourism preferences changed. It was at risk of being demolished for redevelopment of modern retail space, but the building was purchased and saved by Jimmy and Candy Van Alen, wealthy Newport summer residents. A sportsman himself, in 1954, Jimmy Van Alen established the National Tennis Hall of Fame and Museum in the Casino. The combination of tennis matches and the museum allowed the building to be saved. Van Alen intended the facility to be "a shrine to the ideals of the game", and was elected president of the hall in 1957. The International Tennis Hall of Fame was officially sanctioned by the United States Tennis Association at its foundation in 1954. In 1975, with the induction of England's Fred Perry, the organization officially became the International Tennis Hall of Fame. It was recognized by the International Tennis Federation in 1986. The first Hall of Fame members were inducted in 1955; as of 2023, a total of 262 inductees from 27 countries have been recognized. In 2015, Martina Hingis was appointed as the first Global Ambassador for the International Tennis Hall of Fame. In 2016, Guga Kuerten was appointed a Global Ambassador, and in 2017 Michael Chang was appointed a Global Ambassador. The current Board of Governors includes former professional tennis players Kim Clijsters (Honorary President), Patrick McEnroe (President), Gigi Fernández, Katrina Adams, and Vijay Amritraj. TeamFAME is the International Tennis Hall of Fame's National Junior Tennis & Learning (NJTL) Chapter that began in 2018 and is housed in the historic Canfield House building (now owned by the ITHF). TeamFAME: Future Aces Modeling Excellence, provides out-of-school activities to help the underserved community reach their goals, learn new skills, and change lives on and off the court. TeamFAME works to inspire future leaders through character, education, academic, enrichment, and healthy living. There are year long programs for kids, such as after school programs and summer tennis programs that run for 10 weeks in local neighborhoods. To learn more about TeamFAME visit the International Tennis Hall of Fame. The museum chronicles the history of the sport from the 12th century through the modern day. The museum's permanent collection contains approximately 30,000 objects, including modern and historic tennis equipment, fine art, decorative arts, artifacts from Hall of Famers and other significant figures within the sport, trophies, textiles and clothing, ephemera, and furnishings. The mseum's Information Research Center (IRC) houses 5,000 books, 3,000+ audio-visual materials, 1 million plus photographic images, and a comprehensive collection of magazines, programs, periodicals, blueprints and archival materials. The collection is displayed year-round in the museum's 13,000 square feet (1,200 m2) of exhibit space. The museum also offers several digital exhibits. The museum reopened in May 2015 following a nearly complete renovation of its exhibition spaces. The redesigned and reinterpreted galleries encompass more than 12,000 square feet of interactive exhibits, videos, and approximately 2,000 artifacts related to tennis' history and champions past and present.  The museum was initially accredited by the American Alliance of Museums in 2013, and subsequently reaccredited in 2022. The museum became a Smithsonian Affiliate in 2017. The museum is also a partner of the Google Arts & Culture initiative. For a description of each award and a list of its recipients, see footnote Chairman's Award Davis Cup Award of Excellence Eugene L. Scott Award Fed Cup Award of Excellence Golden Achievement Award Joseph F. Cullman 3rd Award Samuel Hardy Award Tennis Educational Merit Award The Hall of Fame hosts several tournaments, including the Infosys Hall of Fame Open in July. The Infosys Hall of Fame Open is a part of the US Open Series, as well as being part of the men's ATP World Tour, the tournament is the only grass court event in North America. Top male players come to Newport directly from Wimbledon to compete for the Van Alen Cup at the International Tennis Hall of Fame. Past champions include Americans John Isner (4× Hall of Fame Open Champion) and Mardy Fish, two-time champion Fabrice Santoro of France, and Australia's Lleyton Hewitt. During the tournament, Tennis Hall of Famers are officially inducted in front of family, friends, fans, and fellow members of the Tennis Hall of Fame. Being inducted into the Tennis Hall of Fame is the ultimate honor in tennis. It represents the sum of one's achievements and contributions as being among the most important and transformative in tennis history. There is a seven-step process to be inducted into the Tennis Hall of Fame. A player or contributor must be nominated to be inducted, and then the national enshrinement committee reviews their eligibility. Once it is decided if they are eligible, the committee reviews if the nominee will be considered by voters. After review, the voting begins; both group and fan voting takes place. A nominee must receive at least 75% from the Official Voting Group result or a combined total of 75% or more from the Official Voting Group result and any bonus percentage points they earn through the Fan Vote. Votes are tallied by an independent accounting firm. The class induction is announced in January, and the new class is inducted into the Tennis Hall of Fame in July at the International Tennis Hall of Fame. For further details, see footnote For a list of inductees—alphabetically, by country, and by year of induction—see footnote Note: Inductees are listed below in two categories (Player category and Contributor category).   Men's player   Women's player *note - Bob Hewitt of South Africa was inducted into the Tennis Hall of Fame in 1992, but he was suspended indefinitely in 2012 and expelled from the Hall in 2016 after being convicted of child sexual offences. Tennis portal Tenniseum List of sports awards honoring women Cheryl Hackett, Newport Shingle Style (Frances Lincoln, ltd., 2010) pg. 11 "General Information". International Tennis Hall of Fame & Museum. Retrieved October 23, 2011. "Obituaries: James Van Alen, 88, Innovator Who Changed Scoring in Tennis". The New York Times. Associated Press. July 5, 1991. Retrieved March 29, 2009. "International Tennis Hall of Fame". Eligibility Process for the International Tennis Hall of Fame. Martina Hingis named Global Ambassador for the International Tennis Hall of Fame. Retrieved on September 11, 2015. ""Guga Kuerten Named Global Ambassador for International Tennis Hall of Fame"". www.tennisfame.com. 2016-06-01. Retrieved 2023-06-02. ""Michael Chang Named Hall of Fame Global Ambassador"". www.tennisfame.com. 2017-10-05. Retrieved 2023-06-02. "Leadership". www.tennisfame.com. International Tennis Hall of Fame. Retrieved 2023-06-02. ""Introducing NJTL Newport: TeamFAME"". www.tennisfame.com. 2018-10-24. Retrieved 2023-06-02. "Permanent Collections". International Tennis Hall of Fame & Museum. Archived from the original on November 8, 2011. Retrieved October 23, 2011. "Digital Exhibits". International Tennis Hall of Fame. 2018-05-01. Retrieved August 16, 2022. ""ITHF Reaccreditated by the American Alliance of Museum"". www.tennisfame.com. 2022-12-07. Retrieved 2023-06-02. ""International Tennis Hall of Fame Earns Prestigious Smithsonian Institution Affiliation"". www.tennisfame.com. 2017-05-18. Retrieved 2023-06-02. "International Tennis Hall of Fame, Newport, United States". Google Arts & Culture. Retrieved 2023-06-02. "Awards". International Tennis Hall of Fame & Museum. Retrieved October 23, 2011. International Tennis Hall of Fame "Hall of Famers". International Tennis Hall of Fame & Museum. Retrieved October 23, 2011. "Andre Agassi". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Daphne Akhurst". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Fred Alexander". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Wilmer Allison". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Manuel Alonso". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "James Anderson "J.O."". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Malcolm Anderson". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. "Arthur Ashe". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Juliette Atkinson". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Henry Austin "Bunny"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Tracy Austin". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Wilfred Baddeley". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Maud Barger-Wallach". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Boris Becker". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Karl Behr". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Pauline Betz Addie". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. "Blanche Bingley Hillyard". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Molla Bjurstedt Mallory". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Björn Borg". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Jean Borotra "Bounding Basque"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "John Bromwich". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Norman Brookes". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. "Louise Brough Clapp". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. "Mary K. Browne". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Jacques Brugnon "Toto"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Don Budge". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Maria Bueno". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Dorothy Bundy Cheney "Dodo"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. "Mabel Cahill". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Oliver Campbell". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Jennifer Capriati". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Rosie Casals "Rosebud"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Malcolm Chance". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. "Michael Chang". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Clarence Clark". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Joseph Clark". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on August 13, 2010. "Kim Clijsters". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "William Clothier". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. "Henri Cochet". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Maureen Connolly Brinker "Little Mo"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Jimmy Connors". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. "Ashley Cooper". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Charlotte Cooper Sterry". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Jim Courier". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Thelma Coyne Long". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. Retrieved September 22, 2014. "Jack Crawford". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Lindsay Davenport". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Owen Davidson "Davo"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Sven Davidson". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Dwight Davis". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on March 30, 2010. "Lottie Dod "The Little Wonder"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "John Doeg". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. "Laurence Doherty "Little Do"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. "Reginald Doherty". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. "Dorothea Douglass Chambers". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on March 1, 2014. "Rick Draney". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Jaroslav Drobny". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Françoise Dürr". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "James Dwight "Father of American Lawn Tennis"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. "Stefan Edberg". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Roy Emerson "Emmo"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Pierre Etchebaster". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. Retrieved September 22, 2014. "Chris Evert "Chrissie"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Bob Falkenburg". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Gigi Fernández". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on May 14, 2011. "Neale Fraser". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Shirley Fry-Irvin". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. "Chuck Garland". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Althea Gibson". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Andrés Gimeno". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Richard Gonzales "Pancho"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. "Evonne Goolagong". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Arthur Gore". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Steffi Graf". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Bryan Grant "Bitsy"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Harold Hackett". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "David Hall". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ellen Hansell". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Darlene Hard". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Doris Hart". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ann Haydon-Jones". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Justine Henin". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Lleyton Hewitt". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Martina Hingis". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Lew Hoad". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Harry Hopman". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Hazel Hotchkiss Wightman". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. "Fred Hovey". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Joe Hunt". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Frank Hunter". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Helen Hull Jacobs". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Goran Ivanišević". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Bill Johnston". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Marion Jones Farquhar". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Yevgeny Kafelnikov". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Billie Jean King". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Monique Kalkman". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Jan Kodeš". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Karel Koželuh". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Hilde Krahwinkel Sperling". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Jack Kramer". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Gustavo Kuerten "Guga"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "René Lacoste "The Crocodile"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Bill Larned". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Art Larsen". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Rod Laver". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Herbert Lawford". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ivan Lendl". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Suzanne Lenglen". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Li Na". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "George Lott". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Gene Mako". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Hana Mandlíková". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Alice Marble". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Conchita Martínez". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Simonne Mathieu". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Amélie Mauresmo". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "John McEnroe". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ken McGregor". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Kitty McKane Godfree". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Chuck McKinley". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Maurice McLoughlin". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Frew McMillan". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Don McNeill". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Elisabeth Moore". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Angela Mortimer Barrett". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Gardnar Mulloy". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "R. Lindley Murray". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ilie Nastase". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Martina Navratilova". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "John Newcombe". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Yannick Noah". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Jana Novotna". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Hans Nusslein". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Betty Nuthall Shoemaker". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Alex Olmedo". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Manuel Orantes". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Margaret Osborne DuPont". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Rafael Osuna". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Sarah Palfrey Danzig". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. "Frank Parker". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Gerald Patterson". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "John Edward Patty "Budge"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Theodore Pell". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Fred Perry". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Yvon Petra". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Tom Pettitt". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Mary Pierce". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Nicola Pietrangeli". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Adrian Quist". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Patrick Rafter". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Dennis Ralston". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ernest Renshaw". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "William Renshaw". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Vinnie Richards". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Nancy Richey". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Bobby Riggs". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Tony Roche". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Andy Roddick". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ellen Roosevelt". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Mervyn Rose". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ken Rosewall". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Dorothy Round Little". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Elizabeth Ryan". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Gabriela Sabatini". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Marat Safin". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Pete Sampras". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Arantxa Sánchez -Vicario". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Manuel Santana". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Dick Savitt". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ted Schroeder". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Margaret Scriven". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Eleonora Sears". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Richard Sears". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Frank Sedgman". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Pancho Segura". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Vic Seixas". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Monica Seles". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Frank Shields". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Pam Shriver". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Henry Slocum". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. "Stan Smith". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Margaret Smith Court "The Arm"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Randy Snow". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2014. "Michael Stich". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Fred Stolle". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Helena Suková". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "May Sutton Bundy". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Bill Talbert". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Bill Tilden". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Bertha Townsend Toulmin". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Tony Trabert". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Lesley Turner Bowrey". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "John Van Ryn". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Chantal Vandierendonck". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Esther Vergeer". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Guillermo Vilas". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ellsworth Vines". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Gottfried Von Cramm". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on June 1, 2015. "Virginia Wade". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Marie Wagner". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Holcombe Ward". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Watson Washburn". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Malcolm Whitman". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Mats Wilander". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Tony Wilding". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. "Richard N. Williams". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Helen Wills Moody Roark". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Sidney Wood". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Todd Woodbridge". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Mark Woodforde". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Bob Wrenn". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Beals Wright". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Nancye Wynne Bolton". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Natasha Zvereva". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "The Australian: Abuse claims". Retrieved September 10, 2015. Schlink, Leo (April 7, 2016) Bob Hewitt expelled from Tennis Hall of Fame. news.com.au "Original 9". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Retrieved 2022-09-06. "Russ Adams". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "George Adee". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Lawrence Baker". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "John Barrett". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Nick Bollettieri". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Vic Braden". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Jane Browne Grimes". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Butch Buchholz". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Philippe Chatrier". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Gianni Clerici". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Arthur W. Collins Jr. "Bud"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Joseph F. Cullman, 3rd". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Allison Danzig". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Michael Davies". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on August 28, 2018. "Herman David". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Donald Dell". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Cliff Drysdale". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Steve Flink". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Gray David". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. "Clarence Griffin". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. "King Gustav V of Sweden". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on August 15, 2018. "Derek Hardwick". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Gladys Heldman". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "W. E. Hester "Slew"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Lamar Hunt". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Nancy Jeffett". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Dr. Robert Johnson". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Perry Jones". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Bob Kelleher". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Fern Lee "Peachy" Kellmeyer". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Al Laney". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Alastair Martin". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Dan Maskell". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "William McChesney Martin". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Mark McCormack". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Julian Myrick". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Arthur Nielsen". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Mary Outerbridge". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Brad Parks". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Charlie Pasarell". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Gene Scott". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. "Lance Tingay "The Dean"". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ted Tinling". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Ion Țiriac". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Brian Tobin". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Jimmy Van Alen". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Dennis Van der Meer". International Tennis Hall of Fame. Retrieved 2022-09-06. "Major Walter Clopton Wingfield". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Martina Hingis named Global Ambassador for the International Tennis Hall of Fame". International Tennis Hall of Fame. "Kuerten named Global Ambassador for Hall of Fame". International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original on 2017-11-13. Retrieved 2016-09-10. Wikimedia Commons has media related to International Tennis Hall of Fame. Official website 11 Intriguing Items at the International Tennis Hall of Fame article International Tennis Hall of Fame article International Tennis Hall of Fame digital exhibits Hall of Fame Open Archived 2018-04-02 at the Wayback Machine