Pezinok (Slovak pronunciation: [ˈpezinɔk]; in the local dialect Pezinek; Hungarian: Bazin; German: Bösing; Latin: Bazinium) is a town in southwestern Slovakia. It is roughly 20 km (12.43 mi) northeast of Bratislava and, as of December 2018, had a population of 23,002. Pezinok lies near the Little Carpathians and thrives mainly on viticulture and agriculture, as well as on brick-making and ceramic(s) production. From the second half of the 10th century until 1918, it was part of the Kingdom of Hungary. Pezinok, or at least its surroundings, was for the first time mentioned in 1208 under name "terra Bozin". During the next few centuries, the town changed from a mining settlement to a vineyard town. It gained the status of a free royal town on 14 June 1647. Pezinok had its most glorious era of wealth and prosperity in the 17th and 18th centuries when it was also one of the richest towns in the Kingdom of Hungary. Its wealth was based on the production of quality wines. In the 19th century, the town slowly began to industrialize: the first sulphuric acid factory in Hungary or the known brickworks were established here. It boomed further after it was connected to the railway. After the breakup of Austria-Hungary in 1918/1920, the town became part of the newly created Czechoslovakia. In the first half of the 20th century, it was declining, vineyard production was declining, forcing many inhabitants to emigrate. It is growing again after the end of World War II. Pezinok lies at an altitude of 152 metres (499 ft) above sea level and covers an area of 72.555 square kilometres (28.0 sq mi). It is located in the Danubian Lowland at the foothills of the Little Carpathians, around 20 km (12.43 mi) north-east of Bratislava. Another major city, Trnava, is located around 25 km (15.53 mi) to the east. A ski resort is situated on the Baba mountain. The neighbouring Little Carpathians offer numerous hiking paths. All of the city forests are part of the Little Carpathians Protected Landscape Area. The Little Carpathians Museum (Malokarpatské múzeum), which is in a typical wine merchant's house in the centre of the town, was undergoing a major renovation in 2008 and promises to be one of the best small museums in Slovakia. It has the biggest collection of wine presses in central Europe, some of them gigantic wooden affairs dating from the early seventeenth century; the atmospheric old cellars of the building are partly given over to an exhibition of them. But Martin Hrubala, the deputy director of the museum, is keen to make the museum not just about the old but also the new: the entrance fee includes a wine tasting, accompanied by a sommelier. And the museum promises interactivity at a level unusual for Slovak museums. Visitors, for instance, as well as tasting wine will also get the opportunity to make their own. Pezinok seems to have been investing heavily in public facilities lately: the city museum, in a building opposite the Little Carpathians Museum, opened in 2003. It features a range of attractively presented local archaeological finds and a selection of stonework salvaged from nearby churches; labelling, however, is in Slovak only. And at the northern end of the city centre, next to a park which once formed its landscaped grounds, is Pezinok Castle. Originally a moated fortress which was later turned into a chateau for the aristocratic Pálffy family, the cellars of the castle are now home to the National Wine Salon. Little Carpathians Museum (Malokarpatské múzeum) is situated in Pezinok. Historical suburb Grinava Town center Historical suburb Cajla Sídliská: Sever (English: North) Juh (English: South) Muškát Záhradná (originally Stred) Za hradbami and 1. mája (originally Stred II.) Moyzesova (originally Prednádražie) Starý dvor (English: Old yard) Sahara Unigal Panholec Glejovka Čikošňa Turie brehy (English: Shores of cattles) Talihov dvor (English: Talih's yard; originally Nataliin majer) Recreation areas Kučišdorfská dolina (English: Kučišdorf Valley) Leitne Reisinger Slnečné údolie (English: Sun Valley) Stupy February Ethnofestival March Selection of the Queen of wine PAFF – alternative (amateur) film festival in House of Culture April Wine markets - international competition, exhibition and wine tasting May Ad Una Corda - International church choir festival {every even year} Sponsorship march in support if UNICEF June Cibulák - theater festival Competition of ancient cars July Slovakia Matador - competition of cars driving in The mountain {to the hill of Baba} July - August Promenade concerts take place as a part of Cultural sumer {every Sunday late afternoon} Flamenco Verano summer flamenco school in Pezinok August Pezinský Permoník - Small Carpathian exhibition and bourse of minerals, fossils and precious stones connected with gold washing on the streets Dychovky v preši - International festival of brass music September Vinobranie - celebrations of wine including rich cultural program and tasting of regional specialties{food and wine} in the streets of the city center October Pezinský strapec - International competition in ballroom dancing November St. Martin's blessings of wine includes tasting of young wine Day of Open Cellars regional promotional wine tasting in private cellars December Christmas Inspirations - sell of Christmas goods Including cultural program on Radničné square and at Old Town hall According to the 2001 census, the town had 21,083 inhabitants. 96.51% of inhabitants were Slovaks, 1.21% Czechs and 0.52% Hungarians. The religious makeup was 64.83% Roman Catholics, 21.02% people with no religious affiliation, and 8.22% Lutherans. Katarína Aulitisová Bekim Aziri Ján Bahýľ Juraj Bindzár Zuzana Čaputová Roman Féder Katarína Franklová Moritz Fuerst Eduard Chmelár Jaroslav Knil Ján Kupecký František Meissl Milan Mlsna Ján Baptista Najmar Karol Pekník Rudolf Pepucha Filip Polc Štefan Prokop Ľudovít Rajter Richard Réti Štefan Sandtner Lajo Slimák Dušan Slobodník František Srna Eugen Suchoň Ondrej Šteberl Ján Štohl Ján Štrba Emil Venkov Pezinok is twinned with: Neusiedl am See, Austria Mosonmagyaróvár, Hungary Mladá Boleslav, Czech Republic Kyjov, Czech Republic Izola, Slovenia Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic (www.statistics.sk). "Hustota obyvateľstva - obce". www.statistics.sk. Retrieved 2024-02-08. "Základná charakteristika". www.statistics.sk (in Slovak). Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic. 2015-04-17. Retrieved 2022-03-31. Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic (www.statistics.sk). "Počet obyvateľov podľa pohlavia - obce (ročne)". www.statistics.sk. Retrieved 2024-02-08. Pezinok antimony deposits at Mindat.org "Municipal Statistics". Statistical Office of the Slovak republic. Archived from the original on 2007-12-17. Retrieved 2007-12-19. "Partnerské mestá" (in Slovak). Pezinok. Retrieved 2019-09-03. Media related to Pezinok at Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Pezinok. Official Website Panoramaaussicht von Pezinok (Lutheranischer Kirchenturm) Pezinok - Spectacular Slovakia