Look up felix, Felix, Félix, or FELIX in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Felix may refer to: Felix (name), people and fictional characters with the name Arabia Felix is the ancient Latin name of Yemen Felix, Spain, a municipality of the province Almería, in the autonomous community of Andalusia, Spain St. Felix, Prince Edward Island, a rural community in Prince County, Prince Edward Island, Canada. Felix, Ontario, an unincorporated place and railway point in Northeastern Ontario, Canada St. Felix, South Tyrol, a village in South Tyrol, in northern Italy. Felix, California, an unincorporated community in Calaveras County Felix Township, Grundy County, Illinois Felix Township, Grundy County, Iowa Felix (band), a British band Felix (musician), British DJ Felix (Korean musician), Korean musical artist Félix Award, a Quebec music award named after Félix Leclerc Felix (pet food), a brand of cat food sold in most European countries AB Felix, a Swedish food company Felix Bus Services of Derbyshire, England Felix Airways, an airline based in Yemen Apache Felix, an open source OSGi framework by Apache Software Foundation 1664 Felix, an asteroid Free-electron laser for infrared experiments (FELIX), a type of laser FELIX (experiment), a Roger Penrose proposal for evaluating whether macroscopic systems can be in superposition states Operation Felix, a German World War II project to conquer Gibraltar VB-6 Felix, an infrared-guided bomb Dieter Gerhardt (born 1935), South African navy commander convicted of treason, code named Felix Felix (newspaper), the weekly students' newspaper of Imperial College, London Felix (ship, 1993), a passenger ship operating on Lake Zurich in Switzerland Hurricane Felix (disambiguation), various storms Venus Felix (sculpture), a sculpture of Venus and her son Cupid Felix (Hewlett-Packard), a codename for the HP 200LX palmtop PC Felix (1921 film), a Norwegian silent drama film Felix (1996 film), a Slovene film Felix Media, film company resident at Carriageworks arts centre in Sydney, Australia Search for "felix" on Wikipedia. Felix the Cat (disambiguation) St. Felix's flood, a flood disaster that struck the Netherlands in 1530 Saint-Félix (disambiguation), the name or part of the name of several communes in France San Félix (disambiguation), the name of two places in South America Church of St. Felix (disambiguation) All pages with titles beginning with Felix All pages with titles containing Felix Felicia (disambiguation) Felicity (disambiguation) This disambiguation page lists articles associated with the title Felix. If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.