The 1965 Ice Hockey World Championships took place in Hakametsä, Tampere, Finland, 3–15 March. Eight teams took part, each playing each other once. The Soviets became world champions for the fifth time, winning all of their games. This also counted as their ninth European title, with the Czechs finishing second and the Swedes third. For the third straight year Canada finished fourth. The tournament employed new tie-breaking rules, which some believed were supposed to be in place for the Innsbruck Olympics. To decide medals priority would be given to the team who won the head-to-head game, unless they tied, or more than two teams were tied. In those two cases goal differential would be used, but only the goal differential between the top four teams. Fifteen nations played in two groups, with qualification games used to establish the tier for closely ranked teams. From now on, the last place team in group 'A' would be relegated, with the group 'B' champion being promoted to replace them. Poland went undefeated to earn promotion, defeating the Swiss, and tying the West Germans. The event was the first Ice Hockey World Championships hosted by Finland, and was organized by Harry Lindblad, president of the Finnish Ice Hockey Association. Source:[citation needed] Norway was relegated to 1966 Group B. Source:[citation needed] Poland earned promotion to the 1966 Group A. Romania joined France and Italy in the following year's qualification for Group B. Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goaltender: Vladimír Dzurilla Best Defenceman: František Tikal Best Forward: Vyacheslav Starshinov Media All-Star Team: Goaltender: Vladimír Dzurilla Defence: Alexander Ragulin, František Tikal Forwards: Alexander Almetov, Jaroslav Jiřík, Konstantin Loktev The final standings of the tournament according to IIHF: The final standings of the European championships according to IIHF: Duplacey, James (1998). Total Hockey: The official encyclopedia of the National Hockey League. Total Sports. p. 505. ISBN 0-8362-7114-9. "2.75 Harry Lindblad". Legends of Hockey. Hockey Hall of Fame. Retrieved 28 February 2019. "Milestones of Finnish Ice Hockey". Leijonat. Archived from the original on 2 March 2019. Retrieved 1 March 2019. Wikimedia Commons has media related to 1965 IIHF World Championship. Summary (in french) Podnieks, Andrew (2010). IIHF Media Guide & Record Book 2011. Moydart Press. p. 139.