Villány (German: Wieland; Croatian: Viljan, Biljan or Vilanje; Serbian: Виљан, romanized: Viljan) is a town in Baranya County, Hungary that is famous for its wine. Residents are Hungarians, with minority of Croats, Serbs and Germans of Hungary. Until the end of World War II, the inhabitants were Danube Swabians, also called locally as Stifolder, because their ancestors arrived around 1720 from Fulda (district). Most of the former German settlers were expelled to Allied-occupied Germany and Allied-occupied Austria in 1945–1948, pursuant to the Potsdam Agreement. Only a few Germans of Hungary live there, the majority today are descendant of Hungarians from the Czechoslovak–Hungarian population exchange. They received the houses of the former Danube Swabians inhabitants. The name derives from the Hungarian word for lightning, villám. Formerly (centuries ago), the settlement was recorded under this form of name. After the Ottoman occupation until 1918, VILLÁNY was part of the Austrian monarchy, province of Hungary; in Transleithania after the compromise of 1867 in the Kingdom of Hungary. A post-office was opened end of 1867 (depending on from Oedenburg Post Directorate). The city is located in the encounter of three large geographical regions: the Great Hungarian Plain from the south, Baranya Hills from the north, and finally Villány Mountains border it from the west. On the plain, agricultural activity is common. The mountains and the hills provide a suitable place for wine producing. A fossil site known as "Villány locality 6" or "Villány-Kalkberg Süd" has yielded many vertebrate fossils from Lower Pleistocene. The settlement's population, divided to age groups: Villány is twinned with: Eislingen, Germany Stainz, Austria Vețca, Romania Zamárdi, Hungary Villány is the most famous red wine region in Hungary. The southernmost wine region has the highest number of sunshine hours. Hungary's climate is continental. However, the Villány wine region is characterized by its sub-Mediterranean climate because of its location. Here's a great, full-bodied Bordeaux-style red wine cuvee. French varieties Cabernet Sauvignon, Cabernet Franc, Merlot had a great time here. There is also Portugieser, Kékfrankos, but we can also meet Kadarka and Syrah grapes. White grapes are also cultivated by winemakers such as Italian Riesling, Chardonnay, Sauvignon Blanc and Green Veltelini. "Folia onomastica croatica 14/2005" (in Croatian). (462 KB) Živko Mandić: Hrvatska imena naseljenih mjesta u Madžarskoj, "Feked - Stifolder_tortenet.pdf" (PDF). feked.hu. "Die Vertreibung – Landsmannschaft der Deutschen aus Ungarn". Handbook of Austria and Lombardy-Venetia Cancellations on the Postage Stamp Issues 1850-1864, by Edwin MUELLER, 1961. Die Poststempel auf der Freimarken-Ausgabe 1867 von Österreich und Ungarn, Edwin Mueller, 1930 (in German) "Villany locality 6 (Pleistocene of Hungary)". Paleobiology Database. Fossilworks. Retrieved 17 December 2021. "Testvértelepülések". villany.hu (in Hungarian). Villány. Retrieved 2021-03-31. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Villány. Official website in Hungarian