Madonna Louise Ciccone (/tʃɪˈkoʊni/; born August 16, 1958) is an American singer, songwriter, record producer, and actress. Known as the "Queen of Pop", she has been widely recognized for her continual reinvention and versatility in music production, songwriting and visual presentation. Madonna's works, which incorporate social, political, sexual, and religious themes, have generated both controversy and critical acclaim. A prominent cultural pop icon spanning both the 20th and 21st centuries, she remains one of the most "well-documented figures of the modern age", with a broad array of scholarly reviews, literature, and art works about her, as well as an academic mini subdiscipline devoted to her called Madonna studies. She rose to stardom with her 1983 eponymous debut studio album. Madonna followed it with a series of successful albums, including all-time bestsellers Like a Virgin (1984), True Blue (1986), and The Immaculate Collection (1990), as well as acclaimed Grammy Award winners Ray of Light (1998) and Confessions on a Dance Floor (2005). Throughout her career, she has amassed many chart-topping singles, including "Like a Virgin", "Papa Don't Preach", "Like a Prayer", "Vogue", "Take a Bow", "Frozen", "Music", "Hung Up" and "4 Minutes". Madonna's popularity was enhanced by roles in films such as Desperately Seeking Susan (1985), Dick Tracy (1990), A League of Their Own (1992) and Evita (1996). While the lattermost won her a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress, many of her other films were not as well received. As a businesswoman, she founded the company Maverick in 1992, which included Maverick Records, one of the most successful artist-run labels in history. Madonna's other ventures include fashion brands, written works, health clubs and filmmaking. She contributes to various charities, having founded the Ray of Light Foundation in 1998 and Raising Malawi in 2006, and advocates for gender equality and LGBT rights. With sales of over 300 million records worldwide, Madonna is the best-selling female recording artist of all time. She is the most successful solo artist in the history of the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and has achieved the most number-one singles by a woman in Australia (11), Canada (24), Italy (23), Spain (21), and the UK (13). One of the highest-grossing touring artists in history, she became the first ever woman to accumulate US$1 billion in concert revenue. Forbes has named her the annual top-earning female musician a record 11 times across four separate decades (1980s–2010s). Madonna was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2008, her first year of eligibility. She was ranked as the greatest woman in music by VH1, and as the greatest music video artist ever by MTV and Billboard. She was also listed among Rolling Stone's greatest artists and greatest songwriters of all time. Madonna Louise Ciccone was born on August 16, 1958, in Bay City, Michigan, to Catholic parents Madonna Louise (née Fortin) and Silvio Anthony "Tony" Ciccone. Her father's parents were Italian emigrants from Pacentro while her mother was of French-Canadian descent. Tony Ciccone worked as an optics engineer for Chrysler Defense and its successor, General Dynamics Land Systems, on military projects. Since Madonna had the same name as her mother, family members called her "Little Nonnie". Her mother died of breast cancer on December 1, 1963. Madonna later adopted Veronica as a confirmation name when getting confirmed in the Catholic Church in 1966. Madonna was raised in the Detroit suburbs of Pontiac and Avon Township (now Rochester Hills), alongside her two older brothers—Anthony and Martin—and three younger siblings; Paula, Christopher, and Melanie. In 1966, Tony married the family's housekeeper Joan Gustafson. They had two children, Jennifer and Mario. Madonna resented her father for getting remarried and began to rebel against him, which strained their relationship for many years afterward. Madonna attended St. Frederick's and St. Andrew's Catholic Elementary Schools, and West Middle School. She was known for her high grade point average and achieved notoriety for her unconventional behavior. Madonna would perform cartwheels and handstands in the hallways between classes, dangle by her knees from the monkey bars during recess, and pull up her skirt during class—all so that the boys could see her underwear. She later admitted to seeing herself in her youth as a "lonely girl who was searching for something. I wasn't rebellious in a certain way. I cared about being good at something. I didn't shave my underarms or legs, and I didn't wear make-up like normal girls do. But I studied and I got good grades... I wanted to be somebody." Madonna's father put her in classical piano lessons, but she later convinced him to allow her to take ballet lessons. Christopher Flynn, her ballet teacher, persuaded her to pursue a career in dance. Madonna later attended Rochester Adams High School and became a straight-A student as well as a member of its cheerleading squad. After graduating in January 1976, she received a dance scholarship to the University of Michigan and studied over the summer at the American Dance Festival in Durham, North Carolina. In 1978, Madonna dropped out of college and relocated to New York City. She said of her move to New York, "It was the first time I'd ever taken a plane, the first time I'd ever gotten a taxi cab. I came here with $35 in my pocket. It was the bravest thing I'd ever done." Madonna soon found an apartment in the Alphabet City neighborhood of the East Village and had little money while working at Dunkin' Donuts and with modern dance troupes, taking classes at the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, and eventually performing with Pearl Lang Dance Theater. She also studied dance under the tutelage of the noted American dancer and choreographer Martha Graham. Madonna started to work as a backup dancer for other established artists. One night, while returning from a rehearsal, a pair of men held her at knifepoint and forced her to perform fellatio. She later found the incident to be "a taste of my weakness, it showed me that I still could not save myself in spite of all the strong-girl show. I could never forget it." In 1979, Madonna became romantically involved with musician Dan Gilroy. Shortly after meeting him, she successfully auditioned to perform in Paris with French disco artist Patrick Hernandez as his backup singer and dancer. During her three months with Hernandez's troupe, she also traveled to Tunisia before returning to New York in August 1979. Madonna moved into an abandoned synagogue where Gilroy lived and rehearsed in Corona, Queens. Together they formed her first band, the Breakfast Club, for which Madonna sang and played drums and guitar. While with the band, Madonna briefly worked as a coat-check girl at the Russian Tea Room, and she made her acting debut in the low-budget indie film A Certain Sacrifice, which was not released until 1985. In 1980, Madonna left the Breakfast Club with drummer Stephen Bray, who was her boyfriend in Michigan, and they formed the band Emmy and the Emmys. They rekindled their romance and moved into the Music Building in Manhattan. The two began writing songs together and they recorded a four-song demo tape in November 1980, but soon after, Madonna decided to promote herself as a solo artist. In March 1981, Camille Barbone, who ran Gotham Records in the Music Building, signed Madonna to a contract with Gotham and worked as her manager until February 1982. Madonna frequented nightclubs to get disc jockeys to play her demo. DJ Mark Kamins at Danceteria took an interest in her music and they began dating. Kamins arranged a meeting with Madonna and Seymour Stein, the president of Sire Records, a subsidiary of Warner Bros. Records. Madonna signed a deal for a total of three singles, with an option for an album. Kamins produced her debut single, "Everybody", which was released in October 1982. In December 1982, Madonna performed the song live for the first time at Danceteria. She made her first television appearance performing "Everybody" on Dancin' On Air in January 1983. In February 1983, she promoted the single with nightclub performances in the United Kingdom. Her second single, the double a-side "Burning Up" / "Physical Attraction", was released in March 1983. Both this single and "Everybody" reached number three on Billboard magazine's Hot Dance Club Songs chart. During this period, Madonna was in a relationship with artist Jean-Michel Basquiat and living at his loft in SoHo. Basquiat introduced her to art curator Diego Cortez, who had managed some punk bands and co-founded the Mudd Club. Madonna invited Cortez to be her manager, but he declined. Following the success of the singles, Warner hired Reggie Lucas to produce her debut album, Madonna. However, Madonna was dissatisfied with the completed tracks and disagreed with Lucas' production techniques, so she decided to seek additional help. She asked John "Jellybean" Benitez, the resident DJ at Fun House, to help finish the album's production and a romance ensued. Benitez remixed most of the tracks and produced "Holiday", which was her first international top-ten song. The album was released in July 1983, and peaked at number eight on the Billboard 200. It yielded two top-ten singles on the Billboard Hot 100, "Borderline" and "Lucky Star". In late 1983, Madonna's new manager, Freddy DeMann, secured a meeting for her with film producer Jon Peters, who asked her to play the part of a club singer in the romantic drama Vision Quest. In January 1984, Madonna gained more exposure by performing on American Bandstand and Top of the Pops. Her image, performances and music videos influenced many young girls and women. Madonna's style became one of the female fashion trends of the 1980s. Created by stylist and jewelry designer Maripol, the look consisted of lace tops, skirts over capri pants, fishnet stockings, jewelry bearing the crucifix, bracelets and bleached hair. Madonna's popularity continued to rise globally with the release of her second studio album, Like a Virgin, in November 1984. It became her first number-one album in Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain, the UK and the US. Like a Virgin became the first album by a female to sell over five million copies in the US. It was later certified diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and has sold over 21 million copies worldwide. The album's title track served as its first single, and topped the Hot 100 chart for six consecutive weeks. It attracted the attention of conservative organizations who complained that the song and its accompanying video promoted premarital sex and undermined family values, and moralists sought to have the song and video banned. Madonna received huge media coverage for her performance of "Like a Virgin" at the first 1984 MTV Video Music Awards. Wearing a wedding dress and white gloves, Madonna appeared on stage atop a giant wedding cake and then rolled around suggestively on the floor. MTV retrospectively considered it one of the "most iconic" pop performances of all time. The second single, "Material Girl", reached number two on the Hot 100. While filming the single's music video, Madonna started dating actor Sean Penn. They married on her birthday in 1985. Madonna entered mainstream films in February 1985, beginning with her cameo in Vision Quest. The soundtrack contained two new singles, her US number-one single, "Crazy for You", and another track "Gambler". She also played the title role in the 1985 comedy Desperately Seeking Susan, a film which introduced the song "Into the Groove", her first number-one single in the UK. Her popularity caused the film to be perceived as a Madonna vehicle, despite how she was not billed as a lead actress. The New York Times film critic Vincent Canby named it one of the ten best films of 1985. Beginning in April 1985, Madonna embarked on her first concert tour in North America, the Virgin Tour, with the Beastie Boys as her opening act. The tour saw the peak of Madonna wannabe phenomenon, with many female attendees dressing like her. At that time, she released two more hits, "Angel" and "Dress You Up", making all four singles from the album peak inside the top five on the Hot 100 chart. In July, Penthouse and Playboy magazines published a number of nude photos of Madonna, taken when she moonlighted as an art model in 1978. She had posed for the photographs because she needed money at the time, and was paid as little as $25 a session. The publication of the photos caused a media uproar, but Madonna remained "unapologetic and defiant". The photographs were ultimately sold for up to $100,000. She referred to these events at the 1985 outdoor Live Aid charity concert, saying that she would not take her jacket off because "[the media] might hold it against me ten years from now." In June 1986, Madonna released her third studio album, True Blue, which was inspired by and dedicated to her husband Penn. Rolling Stone was impressed with the effort, writing that the album "sound[s] as if it comes from the heart". Five singles were released—"Live to Tell", "Papa Don't Preach", "True Blue", "Open Your Heart", and "La Isla Bonita"—all of which reached number one in the US or the UK. The album topped the charts in 28 countries worldwide, an unprecedented achievement at the time, and remains Madonna's bestselling studio album, with sales of 25 million copies. True Blue was featured in the 1992 edition of Guinness World Records as the bestselling album by a woman of all time. Madonna starred in the critically panned film Shanghai Surprise in 1986, for which she received her first Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress. She made her theatrical debut in a production of David Rabe's Goose and Tom-Tom; the film and play both co-starred Penn. The next year, Madonna was featured in the film Who's That Girl. She contributed four songs to its soundtrack, including the title track and "Causing a Commotion". Madonna embarked on the Who's That Girl World Tour in June 1987, which continued until September. It broke several attendance records, including over 130,000 people in a show near Paris, which was then a record for the highest-attended female concert of all time. Later that year, she released a remix album of past hits, You Can Dance, which reached number 14 on the Billboard 200. After a tumultuous two years' marriage, Madonna filed for divorce from Penn on December 4, 1987, but withdrew the petition a few weeks later. She made her Broadway debut in the production of Speed-the-Plow at the Royale Theatre from May to August 1988. According to the Associated Press, Madonna filed an assault report against Penn after an alleged incident at their Malibu home during the New Year's weekend. Madonna filed for divorce on January 5, 1989, and the following week she reportedly asked that no criminal charges be pressed. In January 1989, Madonna signed an endorsement deal with soft-drink manufacturer Pepsi. In one Pepsi commercial, she debuted "Like a Prayer", the lead single and title track from her fourth studio album. The music video featured Catholic symbols such as stigmata and cross burning, and a dream of making love to a saint, leading the Vatican to condemn the video. Religious groups sought to ban the commercial and boycott Pepsi products. Pepsi revoked the commercial and canceled her sponsorship contract. "Like a Prayer" topped the charts in many countries, becoming her seventh number-one on the Hot 100. Madonna co-wrote and co-produced the album Like a Prayer with Patrick Leonard, Stephen Bray, and Prince. Music critic J. D. Considine from Rolling Stone praised it "as close to art as pop music gets ... proof not only that Madonna should be taken seriously as an artist but that hers is one of the most compelling voices of the Eighties." Like a Prayer peaked at number one on the Billboard 200 and sold 15 million copies worldwide. Other successful singles from the album were "Express Yourself" and "Cherish", which both peaked at number two in the US, as well as the UK top-five "Dear Jessie" and the US top-ten "Keep It Together". By the end of the 1980s, Madonna was named as the "Artist of the Decade" by MTV, Billboard and Musician magazine. Madonna starred as Breathless Mahoney in the film Dick Tracy (1990), with Warren Beatty playing the title role. The film went to number one on the US box office for two weeks and Madonna received a Saturn Award nomination for Best Actress. To accompany the film, she released the soundtrack album, I'm Breathless, which included songs inspired by the film's 1930s setting. It also featured the US number-one song "Vogue" and "Sooner or Later". While shooting the film, Madonna began a relationship with Beatty, which dissolved shortly after the premiere. In April 1990, Madonna began her Blond Ambition World Tour, which ended in August. Rolling Stone called it an "elaborately choreographed, sexually provocative extravaganza" and proclaimed it "the best tour of 1990". The tour generated strong negative reaction from religious groups for her performance of "Like a Virgin", during which two male dancers caressed her body before she simulated masturbation. In response, Madonna said, "The tour in no way hurts anybody's sentiments. It's for open minds and gets them to see sexuality in a different way. Their own and others". The live recording of the tour won Madonna her first Grammy Award, in the category of Best Long Form Music Video. In October 1990, Madonna lent her voice to a Public Service Announcement (PSA) supporting Rock the Vote's efforts in voter registration. The Immaculate Collection, Madonna's first greatest-hits compilation album, was released in November 1990. It included two new songs, "Justify My Love" and "Rescue Me". The album was certified diamond by RIAA and sold over 30 million copies worldwide, becoming the best-selling compilation album by a solo artist in history. "Justify My Love" reached number one in the US becoming her ninth number-one on the Hot 100. Her then-boyfriend model Tony Ward co-starred in the music video, which featured scenes of sadomasochism, bondage, same-sex kissing, and brief nudity. The video was deemed too sexually explicit for MTV and was banned from the network. Her first documentary film, Truth or Dare (known as In Bed with Madonna outside North America), was released in May 1991. Chronicling her Blond Ambition World Tour, it became the highest-grossing documentary of all time (surpassed eleven years later by Michael Moore's Bowling for Columbine). In 1992, Madonna starred in A League of Their Own as Mae Mordabito, a baseball player on an all-women's team. It reached number one on the box-office and became the tenth-highest-grossing film of the year in the US. She recorded the film's theme song, "This Used to Be My Playground", which became her tenth number-one on the Billboard Hot 100, the most by any female artist at the time. In April, Madonna founded her own entertainment company, Maverick, consisting of a record company (Maverick Records), a film production company (Maverick Films), and associated music publishing, television broadcasting, book publishing and merchandising divisions. The deal was a joint venture with Time Warner and paid Madonna an advance of $60 million. It gave her 20% royalties from the music proceedings, the highest rate in the industry at the time, equaled only by Michael Jackson's royalty rate established a year earlier with Sony. Her company later went on to become one of the most successful artist-run labels in history, producing multi-platinum artists such as Alanis Morissette and Michelle Branch. Later that year, Madonna co-sponsored the first museum retrospective for her former boyfriend artist Jean-Michel Basquiat at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York. In October 1992, Madonna simultaneously released her fifth studio album, Erotica, and her coffee table book, Sex. Consisting of sexually provocative and explicit images, photographed by Steven Meisel, the book received strong negative reaction from the media and the general public, but sold 1.5 million copies at $50 each in a matter of days. The widespread backlash overshadowed Erotica, which ended up as her lowest selling album at the time. Despite positive reviews, it became her first studio album since her debut album not to score any chart-topper in the US. The album entered the Billboard 200 at number two and yielded the Hot 100 top-ten hits "Erotica" and "Deeper and Deeper". At the time Madonna had been dating rapper Vanilla Ice and she at one point proposed to him; they broke up following the release of Sex, with Ice claiming that he was included in the book without his consent. Madonna continued her provocative imagery in the 1993 erotic thriller, Body of Evidence, a film which contained scenes of sadomasochism and bondage. It was poorly received by critics. She also starred in the film Dangerous Game, which was released straight to video in North America. The New York Times described the film as "angry and painful, and the pain feels real." In September 1993, Madonna embarked on The Girlie Show, in which she dressed as a whip-cracking dominatrix surrounded by topless dancers. In Puerto Rico she rubbed the island's flag between her legs on stage, resulting in outrage among the audience. In March 1994, she appeared as a guest on the Late Show with David Letterman, using profanity that required censorship on television, and handing Letterman a pair of her panties and asking him to smell it. The releases of her sexually explicit book, album, and film, and the aggressive appearance on Letterman all made critics question Madonna as a sexual renegade. Critics and fans reacted negatively, who commented that "she had gone too far" and that her career was over. Around this time, Madonna briefly dated rapper Tupac Shakur and basketball player Dennis Rodman. Biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli described her ballad "I'll Remember" (1994) as an attempt to tone down her provocative image. The song was recorded for Alek Keshishian's 1994 film With Honors. She made a subdued appearance with Letterman at an awards show and appeared on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno after realizing that she needed to change her musical direction in order to sustain her popularity. With her sixth studio album, Bedtime Stories (1994), Madonna employed a softer image to try to improve the public perception. The album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 and generated two US top-five hits, "Secret" and "Take a Bow", the latter topping the Hot 100 for seven weeks, the longest period of any Madonna single. Something to Remember, a collection of ballads, was released in November 1995. The album featured three new songs: "You'll See", "One More Chance", and a cover of Marvin Gaye's "I Want You". An enthusiastic collector of modern art, Madonna sponsored the first major retrospective of Tina Modotti's work at the Philadelphia Museum of Art in 1995. The following year, she sponsored an exhibition of Basquiat's paintings at the Serpentine Gallery in London. The following year, she sponsored artist Cindy Sherman's retrospective at the MoMA in New York. This is the role I was born to play. I put everything of me into this because it was much more than a role in a movie. It was exhilarating and intimidating at the same time. And I am prouder of Evita than anything else I have done. —Madonna talking about her role in Evita In February 1996, Madonna began filming the musical Evita in Argentina. For a long time, Madonna had desired to play Argentine political leader Eva Perón and wrote to director Alan Parker to explain why she would be perfect for the part. After securing the title role, she received vocal coaching and learned about the history of Argentina and Perón. During filming Madonna became ill several times, after finding out that she was pregnant, and from the intense emotional effort required with the scenes. Upon Evita's release in December 1996, Madonna's performance received praise from film critics. Zach Conner of Time magazine remarked, "It's a relief to say that Evita is pretty damn fine, well cast and handsomely visualized. Madonna once again confounds our expectations." For the role, she won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. The Evita soundtrack, containing songs mostly performed by Madonna, was released as a double album. It included "You Must Love Me" and "Don't Cry for Me Argentina"; the latter reached number one in countries across Europe. Madonna was presented with the Artist Achievement Award by Tony Bennett at the 1996 Billboard Music Awards. On October 14, 1996, she gave birth to Lourdes "Lola" Maria Ciccone Leon, her daughter with fitness trainer Carlos Leon. Biographer Mary Cross writes that although Madonna often worried that her pregnancy would harm Evita, she reached some important personal goals: "Now 38 years old, Madonna had at last triumphed on screen and achieved her dream of having a child, both in the same year. She had reached another turning point in her career, reinventing herself and her image with the public." Her relationship with Carlos Leon ended in May 1997 and she declared that they were "better off as best friends". After Lourdes's birth, Madonna became involved in Eastern mysticism and Kabbalah, introduced to her by actress Sandra Bernhard. Her seventh studio album, Ray of Light, (1998) reflected this change in her perception and image. She collaborated with electronica producer William Orbit and wanted to create a sound that could blend dance music with pop and British rock. American music critic Ann Powers explained that what Madonna searched for with Orbit "was a kind of a lushness that she wanted for this record. Techno and rave were happening in the 90s and had a lot of different forms. There was very experimental, more hard stuff like Aphex Twin. There was party stuff like Fatboy Slim. That's not what Madonna wanted for this. She wanted something more like a singer-songwriter, really. And William Orbit provided her with that." The album garnered critical acclaim, with Slant Magazine calling it "one of the great pop masterpieces of the '90s" Ray of Light was honored with four Grammy Awards—including Best Pop Album and Best Dance Recording—and was nominated for both Album of the Year and Record of the Year. Rolling Stone listed it among "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time". Commercially, the album peaked at number-one in numerous countries and sold more than 16 million copies worldwide. The album's lead single, "Frozen", became Madonna's first single to debut at number one in the UK, while in the US, it became her sixth number-two single, setting another record for Madonna as the artist with the most number-two hits. The second single, "Ray of Light", debuted at number five on the Billboard Hot 100. The 1998 edition of Guinness Book of World Records documented that "no female artist has sold more records than Madonna around the world". Madonna founded Ray of Light Foundation which focused on women, education, global development and humanitarian. She recorded the single "Beautiful Stranger" for the 1999 film Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me, which earned her a Grammy Award for Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media. Madonna starred in the 2000 comedy-drama film The Next Best Thing, directed by John Schlesinger. The film opened at number two on the US box office with $5.9 million grossed in its first week, but this quickly diminished. She also contributed two songs to the film's soundtrack—a cover of Don McLean's 1971 song "American Pie" and an original song "Time Stood Still"—the former became her ninth UK number-one single. Madonna released her eighth studio album, Music, in September 2000. It featured elements from the electronica-inspired Ray of Light era, and like its predecessor, received acclaim from critics. Collaborating with French producer Mirwais Ahmadzaï, Madonna commented: "I love to work with the weirdos that no one knows about—the people who have raw talent and who are making music unlike anyone else out there. Music is the future of sound." Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic felt that "Music blows by in a kaleidoscopic rush of color, technique, style and substance. It has so many depth and layers that it's easily as self-aware and earnest as Ray of Light." The album took the number-one position in more than 20 countries worldwide and sold four million copies in the first ten days. In the US, Music debuted at the top, and became her first number-one album in eleven years since Like a Prayer. It produced three singles: the Hot 100 number-one "Music", "Don't Tell Me", and "What It Feels Like for a Girl". The music video of "What It Feels Like for a Girl" depicted Madonna committing acts of crime and vandalism, and was banned by MTV and VH1. Madonna met director Guy Ritchie in mid-1998, and gave birth to their son Rocco John Ritchie in Los Angeles on August 11, 2000. Rocco and Madonna suffered complications from the birth due to her experiencing placenta praevia. He was christened at Dornoch Cathedral in Dornoch, Scotland, on December 21, 2000. Madonna married Ritchie the following day at nearby Skibo Castle. After an eight-year absence from touring, Madonna started her Drowned World Tour in June 2001. The tour visited cities in the US and Europe and was the highest-grossing concert tour of the year by a solo artist, earning $75 million from 47 sold-out shows. She also released her second greatest-hits collection, GHV2, which compiled 15 singles during the second decade of her recording career. The album debuted at number seven on the Billboard 200 and sold seven million units worldwide. Madonna starred in the film Swept Away, directed by Ritchie. Released direct-to-video in the UK, the film was a commercial and critical failure. In May 2002 she appeared in London in the West End play Up for Grabs at the Wyndhams Theatre (billed as 'Madonna Ritchie'), to universally bad reviews and was described as "the evening's biggest disappointment" by one. That October, she released "Die Another Day", the title song of the James Bond film Die Another Day, in which she also had a cameo role, described by Peter Bradshaw from The Guardian as "incredibly wooden". The song reached number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 and was nominated for both a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song and a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Original Song. In 2003, Madonna collaborated with fashion photographer Steven Klein for an exhibition installation named X-STaTIC Pro=CeSS, which ran from March to May in New York's Deitch Projects gallery, and also travelled the world in an edited form. The same year, Madonna released her ninth studio album, American Life, which was based on her observations of American society. She explained that the record was "like a trip down memory lane, looking back at everything I've accomplished and all the things I once valued and all the things that were important to me." Larry Flick from The Advocate felt that "American Life is an album that is among her most adventurous and lyrically intelligent", while also condemning it as "a lazy, half-arsed effort to sound and take her seriously." The original music video of its title track caused controversy due to its violence and anti-war imagery, and was withdrawn after the 2003 invasion of Iraq started. Madonna voluntarily censored herself for the first time in her career due to the political climate of the country, saying that "there was a lynch mob mentality that was going on that wasn't pretty and I have children to protect." The song stalled at number 37 on the Hot 100, while the album became her lowest-selling album at that point with four million copies worldwide. Madonna gave another provocative performance later that year at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards, when she kissed singers Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera while singing the track "Hollywood". In October 2003, she provided guest vocals on Spears' single "Me Against the Music". It was followed with the release of Remixed & Revisited. The EP contained remixed versions of songs from American Life and included "Your Honesty", a previously unreleased track from the Bedtime Stories recording sessions. Madonna also signed a contract with Callaway Arts & Entertainment to be the author of five children's books. The first of these books, titled The English Roses, was published in September 2003. The story was about four English schoolgirls and their envy and jealousy of each other. The book debuted at the top of The New York Times Best Seller list, and became the fastest-selling children's picture book of all time. Madonna donated all of its proceeds to a children's charity. The next year Madonna and Maverick sued Warner Music Group and its former parent company Time Warner, claiming that mismanagement of resources and poor bookkeeping had cost the company millions of dollars. In return, Warner filed a countersuit alleging that Maverick had lost tens of millions of dollars on its own. The dispute was resolved when the Maverick shares, owned by Madonna and Ronnie Dashev, were purchased by Warner. Madonna and Dashev's company became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Warner Music, but Madonna was still signed to Warner under a separate recording contract. In mid-2004, Madonna embarked on the Re-Invention World Tour in the US, Canada and Europe. It became the highest-grossing tour of 2004, earning around $120 million and became the subject of her documentary I'm Going to Tell You a Secret. In November 2004, she was inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame as one of its five founding members, along with the Beatles, Elvis Presley, Bob Marley and U2. Rolling Stone ranked her at number 36 on its special issue of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time, featuring an article about her written by Britney Spears. In January 2005, Madonna performed a cover version of the John Lennon song "Imagine" at Tsunami Aid. She also performed at the Live 8 benefit concert in London in July 2005. When I wrote American Life, I was very agitated by what was going on in the world around me, ... I was angry. I had a lot to get off my chest. I made a lot of political statements. But now, I feel that I just want to have fun; I want to dance; I want to feel buoyant. And I want to give other people the same feeling. There's a lot of madness in the world around us, and I want people to be happy. —Madonna talking about Confessions on a Dance Floor. Her tenth studio album, Confessions on a Dance Floor, was released in November 2005. Musically the album was structured like a club set composed by a DJ. It was acclaimed by critics, with Keith Caulfield from Billboard commenting that the album was a "welcome return to form for the Queen of Pop." The album won a Grammy Award for Best Electronic/Dance Album. Confessions on a Dance Floor and its lead single, "Hung Up", went on to reach number one in 40 and 41 countries respectively, earning a place in Guinness World Records. The song contained a sample of ABBA's "Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)", only the second time that ABBA has allowed their work to be used. ABBA songwriter Björn Ulvaeus remarked "It is a wonderful track—100 per cent solid pop music." "Sorry", the second single, became Madonna's twelfth number-one single in the UK. Madonna embarked on the Confessions Tour in May 2006, which had a global audience of 1.2 million and grossed over $193.7 million, becoming the highest-grossing tour to that date for a female artist. Madonna used religious symbols, such as the crucifix and Crown of Thorns, in the performance of "Live to Tell". It caused the Russian Orthodox Church and the Federation of Jewish Communities of Russia to urge all their members to boycott her concert. At the same time, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) announced officially that Madonna had sold over 200 million copies of her albums alone worldwide. While on tour, Madonna founded the charitable organization Raising Malawi, and partially funded an orphanage in and traveling to that country. While there, she decided to adopt a boy named David Banda in October 2006. The adoption raised strong public reaction, because Malawian law requires would-be parents to reside in Malawi for one year before adopting, which Madonna did not do. She addressed this on The Oprah Winfrey Show, saying that there were no written adoption laws in Malawi that regulated foreign adoption. Madonna described how Banda had been suffering from pneumonia after surviving malaria and tuberculosis when they first met. Banda's biological father, Yohane, commented: "These so-called human rights activists are harassing me every day, threatening me that I am not aware of what I am doing ... They want me to support their court case, a thing I cannot do for I know what I agreed with Madonna and her husband." The adoption was finalized in May 2008. Madonna released and performed the song "Hey You" at the London Live Earth concert in July 2007. She announced her departure from Warner Bros. Records, and declared a new $120 million, ten-year 360 deal with Live Nation. In 2008, Madonna produced and wrote I Am Because We Are, a documentary on the problems faced by Malawians; it was directed by Nathan Rissman, who worked as Madonna's gardener. She also directed her first film, Filth and Wisdom. The plot of the film revolved around three friends and their aspirations. The Times said she had "done herself proud" while The Daily Telegraph described the film as "not an entirely unpromising first effort [but] Madonna would do well to hang on to her day job." On March 10, 2008, Madonna was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in her first year of eligibility. She did not sing at the ceremony but asked fellow Hall of Fame inductees and Michigan natives the Stooges to perform her songs "Burning Up" and "Ray of Light". Madonna released her eleventh studio album, Hard Candy, in April 2008. Containing R&B and urban pop influences, the songs on Hard Candy were autobiographical in nature and saw Madonna collaborating with Justin Timberlake, Timbaland, Pharrell Williams and Nate "Danja" Hills. The album debuted at number one in 37 countries and on the Billboard 200. Caryn Ganz from Rolling Stone complimented it as an "impressive taste of her upcoming tour", while BBC correspondent Mark Savage panned it as "an attempt to harness the urban market". "4 Minutes" was released as the album's lead single and peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100. It was Madonna's 37th top-ten hit on the chart and pushed her past Elvis Presley as the artist with the most top-ten hits. In the UK she retained her record for the most number-one singles for a female artist; "4 Minutes" becoming her thirteenth. At the 23rd Japan Gold Disc Awards, Madonna received her fifth Artist of the Year trophy from Recording Industry Association of Japan, the most for any artist. To further promote the album, she embarked on the Sticky & Sweet Tour, her first major venture with Live Nation. With a total gross of $408 million, it ended up as the second highest-grossing tour of all time, behind the Rolling Stones's A Bigger Bang Tour. It remained the highest-grossing tour by a solo artist until Roger Waters' the Wall Live surpassed it in 2013. In July 2008, Christopher Ciccone released a book titled Life with My Sister Madonna, which caused a rift between Madonna and him, because of unsolicited publication. By fall, Madonna filed for divorce from Ritchie, citing irreconcilable differences. In December 2008, Madonna's spokesperson announced that Madonna had agreed to a divorce settlement with Ritchie, the terms of which granted him between £50–60 million ($68.49–82.19 million), a figure that included the couple's London pub and residence and Wiltshire estate in England. The marriage was dissolved by District Judge Reid by decree nisi at the clinical Principal Registry of the Family Division in High Holborn, London. They entered a compromise agreement for Rocco and David, then aged eight and three respectively, and divided the children's time between Ritchie's London home and Madonna's in New York, where the two were joined by Lourdes. Soon after, Madonna applied to adopt Chifundo "Mercy" James from Malawi in May 2009, but the country's High Court rejected the application because Madonna was not a resident there. She re-appealed, and on June 12, 2009, the Supreme Court of Malawi granted her the right to adopt Mercy. Madonna concluded her contract with Warner by releasing her third greatest-hits album, Celebration, in September 2009. It contained the new songs "Celebration" and "Revolver" along with 34 hits spanning her musical career with the label. Celebration reached number one in several countries, including Canada, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom. She appeared at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards to speak in tribute to deceased pop singer Michael Jackson. Madonna ended the 2000s as the bestselling single artist of the decade in the US and the most-played artist of the decade in the UK. Billboard also announced her as the third top-touring artist of the decade—behind only the Rolling Stones and U2—with a gross of over $801 million, 6.3 million attendance and 244 sell-outs of 248 shows. Madonna performed at the Hope for Haiti Now: A Global Benefit for Earthquake Relief concert in January 2010. Her third live album, Sticky & Sweet Tour, was released in April, debuting at number ten on the Billboard 200. It also became her 20th top-ten on the Oricon Albums Chart, breaking the Beatles' record for the most top-ten album by an international act in Japan. Madonna granted American television show, Glee, the rights to her entire catalog of music, and the producers created an episode featuring her songs exclusively. She also collaborated with Lourdes and released the Material Girl clothing line, inspired by her punk-girl style when she rose to fame in the 1980s. In October, she opened a series of fitness centers around the world named Hard Candy Fitness, and three months later unveiled a second fashion brand called Truth or Dare which included footwear, perfumes, underclothing, and accessories. Madonna directed her second feature film, W.E., a biographical account about the affair between King Edward VIII and Wallis Simpson. Co-written with Alek Keshishian, the film was premiered at the 68th Venice International Film Festival in September 2011. Critical and commercial response to the film was negative. Madonna contributed the ballad "Masterpiece" for the film's soundtrack, which won her a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song. In February 2012, Madonna headlined the Super Bowl XLVI halftime show at the Lucas Oil Stadium in Indianapolis, Indiana. Her performance was visualized by Cirque Du Soleil and Jamie King, and featured special guests LMFAO, Nicki Minaj, M.I.A. and CeeLo Green. It became the then most-watched Super Bowl halftime show in history with 114 million viewers, higher than the game itself. During the event, she performed "Give Me All Your Luvin'", the lead single from her twelfth studio album, MDNA. It became her record-extending 38th top-ten single on the Billboard Hot 100. MDNA was released in March 2012 and saw collaboration with various producers, including William Orbit and Martin Solveig. It was her first release under her three-album deal with Interscope Records, which she signed as a part of her 360 deal with Live Nation. She was signed to the record label since Live Nation was unable to distribute music recordings. MDNA became Madonna's fifth consecutive studio record to debut at the top of the Billboard 200. The album was mostly promoted by the MDNA Tour, which lasted from May to December 2012. The tour featured controversial subjects such as violence, firearms, human rights, nudity and politics. With a gross of $305.2 million from 88 sold-out shows, it became the highest-grossing tour of 2012 and then-tenth highest-grossing tour of all time. Madonna was named the top-earning celebrity of the year by Forbes, earning an estimated $125 million. Madonna collaborated with Steven Klein and directed a 17-minute film, secretprojectrevolution, which was released on BitTorrent in September 2013. With the film she launched the Art for Freedom initiative, which helped to promote "art and free speech as a means to address persecution and injustice across the globe". The website for the project included over 3,000 art related submissions since its inception, with Madonna regularly monitoring and enlisting other artists like David Blaine and Katy Perry as guest curators. By 2013, Madonna's Raising Malawi had built ten schools to educate 4,000 children in Malawi at a value of $400,000. When Madonna visited the schools in April 2013, President of Malawi Joyce Banda accused her of exaggerating the charity's contribution. Madonna was saddened by Banda's statement, but clarified that she had "no intention of being distracted by these ridiculous allegations". It was later confirmed that Banda had not approved the statement released by her press team. Madonna also visited her hometown Detroit during May 2014, and donated funds to help with the city's bankruptcy. The same year, her business ventures extended to skin care products with the launch of MDNA Skin in Tokyo, Japan. Madonna's thirteenth studio album, Rebel Heart, was released in March 2015, three months after its thirteen demos leaked onto the internet. Unlike her previous efforts, which involved only a few people, Madonna worked with a large number of collaborators, including Avicii, Diplo and Kanye West. Introspection was listed as one of the foundational themes prevalent on the record, along with "genuine statements of personal and careerist reflection". Madonna explained to Jon Pareles of The New York Times that, although she has never looked back at her past endeavors, reminiscing about it felt right for Rebel Heart. Music critics responded positively towards the album, calling it her best effort in a decade. From September 2015 to March 2016, Madonna embarked on the Rebel Heart Tour to promote the album. The tour traveled throughout North America, Europe and Asia and was Madonna's first visit to Australia in 23 years, where she also performed a one-off show for her fans. The Rebel Heart Tour grossed a total of $169.8 million from the 82 shows, with over 1.045 million ticket sales. While on tour, Madonna became engaged in a legal battle with Ritchie, over the custody of their son Rocco. The dispute started when Rocco decided to continue living in England with Ritchie when the tour had visited there, while Madonna wanted him to travel with her. Court hearings took place in both New York and London. After multiple deliberations, Madonna withdrew her application for custody and decided to resolve the matter privately. In October 2016, Billboard named Madonna its Woman of the Year. Her "blunt and brutally honest" speech about ageism and sexism at the ceremony received widespread coverage in the media. The next month Madonna, who actively supported Hillary Clinton during the 2016 US presidential election, performed an impromptu acoustic concert at Washington Square Park in support of Clinton's campaign. Upset that Donald Trump won the election, Madonna spoke out against him at the Women's March on Washington, a day after his inauguration. She sparked controversy when she said that she "thought a lot about blowing up the White House". The following day, Madonna asserted she was "not a violent person" and that her words had been "taken wildly out of context". In February 2017, Madonna adopted four-year-old twin sisters from Malawi named Estere and Stella, and she moved to live in Lisbon, Portugal, in mid-2017 with her adoptive children. In July, she opened the Mercy James Institute for Pediatric Surgery and Intensive Care in Malawi, a children's hospital built by her Raising Malawi charity. The live album chronicling the Rebel Heart Tour was released in September 2017, and won Best Music Video for Western Artists at the 32nd Japan Gold Disc Award. That month, Madonna launched MDNA Skin in select stores in the United States. A few months earlier, the auction house Gotta Have Rock and Roll had put up Madonna's personal items like love letters from Tupac Shakur, cassettes, underwear and a hairbrush for sale. Darlene Lutz, an art dealer who had initiated the auction, was sued by Madonna's representatives to stop the proceedings. Madonna clarified that her celebrity status "does not obviate my right to maintain my privacy, including with regard to highly personal items". Madonna lost the case and the presiding judge ruled in favor of Lutz who was able to prove that in 2004 Madonna made a legal agreement with her for selling the items. While living in Lisbon, Madonna met Dino D'Santiago, who introduced her to many local musicians playing fado, morna and samba music. They regularly invited her to their "living room sessions", thus she was inspired to make her 14th studio album, Madame X. Madonna produced the album with several musicians, primarily her longtime collaborator Mirwais and Mike Dean. The album was critically well received, with NME deeming it "bold, bizarre, self-referential and unlike anything Madonna has ever done before." Released in June 2019, Madame X debuted atop the Billboard 200, becoming her ninth number-one album there. All four of its singles—"Medellín", "Crave", "I Rise" and "I Don't Search I Find"—topped the Billboard Dance Club Songs chart, extending her record for most number-one entries on the chart. The previous month, Madonna appeared as the interval act at the Eurovision Song Contest 2019 and performed "Like a Prayer", and then "Future" with rapper Quavo. Her Madame X Tour, an all-theatre tour in select cities across North America and Europe, began on September 17, 2019. In addition to much smaller venues compared to her previous tours, she implemented a no-phone policy in order to maximize the intimacy of the concert. According to Pollstar, the tour earned $51.4 million in ticket sales. That December, Madonna started dating Ahlamalik Williams, a dancer who began accompanying her on the Rebel Heart Tour in 2015. However, the Madame X Tour faced several cancellations due to her recurring knee injury, and eventually ended abruptly on March 8, 2020, three days before its planned final date, after the French government banned gatherings of more than 1,000 people due to COVID-19 pandemic. She later revealed she had tested positive for coronavirus antibodies. In April 2020, Madonna announced her financial support for the COVID-19 Therapeutics Accelerator led by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Wellcome Trust and Mastercard, and donated an additional $1 million to the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to help fund research creating a new vaccine. Madonna and Missy Elliott provided guest vocals on Dua Lipa's single "Levitating", from Lipa's 2020 remix album Club Future Nostalgia. She also started work on a film biopic about her life, which she intended to direct. Erin Cressida Wilson and Diablo Cody worked on the script at various points and Julia Garner was cast as Madonna before the project was postponed. Madonna released Madame X, a documentary film chronicling the tour of the same name, on Paramount+ in October 2021. On her 63rd birthday, she officially announced her return to Warner in a global partnership which grants the label her entire recorded music catalog, including the last three albums released under Interscope. Under the contract, Madonna launched a series of catalog reissues beginning in 2022, to commemorate the 40th anniversary of her recording career. A remix album titled Finally Enough Love: 50 Number Ones was released on August 19, with an 16-track abridged edition being available for streaming since June 24. Consisting of her 50 number-one songs on Billboard's Dance Club Songs chart, the remix album highlighted "how meaningful dance music has always been" to Madonna's career, and became her 23rd top-ten album on the Billboard 200. In September 2022, Madonna released "Hung Up on Tokischa", a remix of "Hung Up", featuring rapper Tokischa. The song utilizes dembow. On December 29, 2022, Madonna released the demo version of "Back That Up to the Beat" to all digital outlets. The song was recorded in 2015 sessions, with an alternative version being released on the deluxe 2-CD version of her 2019 Madame X album. In January 2023, Madonna announced the Celebration Tour, her first greatest hits concert tour, which will run from July 2023 to January 2024 with special guest Bob the Drag Queen. The following March, it was announced that she would collaborate on three songs of the Christine and the Queens album Paranoïa, Angels, True Love. On June 2, 2023, Madonna collaborated with The Weeknd and Playboi Carti on the single "Popular", which was taken from the soundtrack to the drama series The Idol. On June 24, 2023, Madonna was hospitalized after being found unresponsive in her New York City apartment. She was treated in the intensive care unit and was intubated. Madonna spent five days in the hospital to receive treatment for a "serious bacterial infection" following a low-grade fever. As a result, the initial North American leg of her Celebration Tour was postponed. In December 2023, Madonna stated that she had been in a medically induced coma for 48 hours during her hospitalization. On September 12, 2023, the commercial Madonna made in collaboration with Pepsi in 1989 aired during the commercial break of the 2023 MTV Video Music Awards. The commercial had been banned due to Madonna's music video for "Like A Prayer", showing her kissing a black saint and burning crosses. In a statement, Madonna said: "34 years ago I made a commercial with Pepsi to celebrate the release of my song [...] The commercial was immediately canceled when I refused to change any scenes in the video where I was kissing a black saint or burning crosses. So began my illustrious career as an artist refusing to compromise my artistic integrity [...] artists are here to disturb the peace." The Celebration Tour began on October 14, 2023 at The O2 Arena in London. It was greeted with critical acclaim. Madonna has called Nancy Sinatra one of her idols. She said Sinatra's "These Boots Are Made for Walkin'" made a major impression on her. As a young woman, she attempted to broaden her taste in literature, art, and music, and during this time became interested in classical music. She noted that her favorite style was baroque, and loved Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Frédéric Chopin because she liked their "feminine quality". Madonna's major influences include Debbie Harry, Chrissie Hynde, Patti Smith, Karen Carpenter, the Supremes, Joni Mitchell, Aretha Franklin and Led Zeppelin, as well as dancers Martha Graham and Rudolf Nureyev. She also grew up listening to David Bowie, whose show was the first rock concert she ever attended. Historians, musicians, and anthropologists trace her influences—from African American gospel music to Japanese fashion, Middle Eastern spirituality to feminist art history—and the ways she borrows, adapts, and interprets them. —National Geographic Society on Madonna's influences. During her childhood, Madonna was inspired by actors, later saying, "I loved Carole Lombard and Judy Holliday and Marilyn Monroe. They were all incredibly funny, and they were silly and sweet and they were girls and  they were feminine and sexy. I just saw myself in them, my funniness and my need to boss people around and at the same time be taken care of. My girlishness. My knowingness and my innocence. Both." Her "Material Girl" music video recreated Monroe's look in the song "Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend", from the film Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1953). She studied the screwball comedies of the 1930s, particularly those of Lombard, in preparation for the film Who's That Girl. The video for "Express Yourself" (1989) was inspired by Fritz Lang's silent film Metropolis (1927). The video for "Vogue" recreated the style of Hollywood glamour photographs, in particular those by Horst P. Horst, and imitated the poses of Marlene Dietrich, Carole Lombard, and Rita Hayworth, while the lyrics referred to many of the stars who had inspired her, including Bette Davis, described by Madonna as an idol. Influences also came to her from the art world, such as through the works of Mexican artist Frida Kahlo. The music video of the song "Bedtime Story" featured images inspired by the paintings of Kahlo and Remedios Varo. Madonna is also a collector of Tamara de Lempicka's Art Deco paintings and has included them in her music videos and tours. Her video for "Hollywood" (2003) was an homage to the work of photographer Guy Bourdin; Bourdin's son subsequently filed a lawsuit for unauthorized use of his father's work. Pop artist Andy Warhol's use of sadomasochistic imagery in his underground films were reflected in the music videos for "Erotica" and "Deeper and Deeper". Madonna's Catholic background has been reflected throughout her career, from her fashion use of rosary to her musical outputs, including on Like a Prayer (1989). Her album MDNA (2012) has also drawn many influences from her Catholic upbringing, and since 2011 she has been attending meetings and services at an Opus Dei center, a Catholic institution that encourages spirituality through everyday life. In a 2016 interview, she commented: "I always feel some kind of inexplicable connection with Catholicism. It kind of shows up in all of my work, as you may have noticed." Her study of the Kabbalah was also observed in Madonna's music, especially albums like Ray of Light and Music. Speaking of religion in a 2019 interview with Harry Smith of Today Madonna stated, "The God that I believe in, created the world ... He/Her/They [sic] isn't a God to fear, it's a God to give thanks to." In an appearance on Andrew Denton's Interview she added, "The idea that in any church you go, you see a man on a cross and everyone genuflects and prays to him ... in a way it's paganism/idolatry because people are worshipping a thing." [Madonna] is a brilliant pop melodist and lyricist. I was knocked out by the quality of the writing [during Ray of Light sessions]... I know she grew up on Joni Mitchell and Motown, and to my ears she embodies the best of both worlds. She is a wonderful confessional songwriter, as well as being a superb hit chorus pop writer. —Rick Nowels, on co-writing with Madonna. Madonna's music has been the subject of much analysis and scrutiny. Robert M. Grant, author of Contemporary Strategy Analysis (2005), commented that Madonna's musical career has been a continuous experimentation with new musical ideas and new images and a constant quest for new heights of fame and acclaim. Thomas Harrison in the book Pop Goes the Decade: The Eighties deemed Madonna "an artist who pushed the boundaries" of what a female singer could do, both visually and lyrically. Professor Santiago Fouz-Hernández asserted, "While not gifted with an especially powerful or wide-ranging voice, Madonna has worked to expand her artistic palette to encompass diverse musical, textual and visual styles and various vocal guises, all with the intention of presenting herself as a mature musician." Madonna has remained in charge in every aspect of her career, including as a writer and producer in most of her own music. Her desire for control had already been seen during the making of her debut album, where she fought Reggie Lucas over his production output. However, it was not until her third album that Warner allowed Madonna to produce her own album. Stan Hawkins, author of Settling the Pop Score explained, "it is as musician and producer that Madonna is one of the few female artists to have broken into the male domain of the recording studio. Undoubtedly, Madonna is fully aware that women have been excluded from the musical workplace on most levels, and has set out to change this." Producer Stuart Price stated: "You don't produce Madonna, you collaborate with her... She has her vision and knows how to get it." Despite being labeled a "control freak", Madonna has said that she valued input from her collaborators. She further explained: I like to have control over most of the things in my career but I'm not a tyrant. I don't have to have it on my album that it's written, arranged, produced, directed, and stars Madonna. To me, to have total control means you can lose objectivity. What I like is to be surrounded by really, talented intelligent people that you can trust. And ask them for their advice and get their input. Madonna's early songwriting skill was developed during her time with the Breakfast Club in 1979. She subsequently became the sole writer of five songs on her debut album, including "Lucky Star" which she composed on synthesizer. As a songwriter, Madonna has registered more than 300 tracks to ASCAP, including 18 songs written entirely by herself. Rolling Stone has named her "an exemplary songwriter with a gift for hooks and indelible lyrics." Despite having worked with producers across many genres, the magazine noted that Madonna's compositions have been "consistently stamped with her own sensibility and inflected with autobiographical detail." Patrick Leonard, who co-wrote many of her hit songs, called Madonna "a helluva songwriter", explaining: "Her sensibility about melodic line—from the beginning of the verse to the end of the verse and how the verse and the chorus influence each other—is very deep. Many times she's singing notes that no one would've thought of but her." Barry Walters from Spin credited her songwriting as the reason of her musical consistency. Madonna has been nominated for being inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame three times. In 2015, Rolling Stone ranked Madonna at number 56 on the "100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time" list. "Live to Tell" (1986) Madonna wrote all the lyrics and partial melodies of "Live to Tell", an adult contemporary ballad, which was noted as her first musical reinvention. "Ray of Light" (1998) An uptempo electronic dance song, "Ray of Light" showcases Madonna's post-Evita upper vocal register. Problems playing these files? See media help. Madonna's discography is generally categorized as pop, electronica, and dance. Nevertheless, Madonna's first foray into the music industry was dabbling in rock music with Breakfast Club and Emmy. As the frontwoman of Emmy, Madonna recorded about 12–14 songs that resemble the punk rock of that period. Madonna soon abandoned playing rock songs by the time she signed to Gotham Records, which eventually dropped her since they were unhappy with her new funk direction. According to Erlewine, Madonna began her career as a disco diva, in an era that did not have any such divas to speak of. In the beginning of the 1980s, disco was an anathema to the mainstream pop, and Madonna had a huge role in popularizing dance music as mainstream music. Arie Kaplan in the book American Pop: Hit Makers, Superstars, and Dance Revolutionaries referred to Madonna as "a pioneer" of dance-pop. According to Fouz-Hernández, "Madonna's frequent use of dance idioms and subsequent association with gay or sexually liberated audiences, is seen as somehow inferior to 'real' rock and roll. But Madonna's music refuses to be defined by narrow boundaries of gender, sexuality or anything else." The "cold and emotional" ballad "Live to Tell", as well as its parent album True Blue (1986), is noted as Madonna's first musical reinvention. PopMatters writer Peter Piatkowski described it as a "very deliberate effort to present Madonna as a mature and serious artist." She continued producing ballads in between her upbeat material, although albums such as Madonna (1983) and Confessions on a Dance Floor (2005) consist of entirely dance tracks. With Ray of Light (1998), critics acknowledged Madonna for bringing electronica from its underground status into massive popularity in mainstream music scene. Her other sonically drastic ventures include the 1930s big-band jazz on I'm Breathless (1990); lush R&B on Bedtime Stories (1994); operatic show tunes on Evita (1996); guitar-driven folk music on American Life (2003); as well as multilingual world music on Madame X (2019). Possessing a mezzo-soprano vocal range, Madonna has always been self-conscious about her voice. Mark Bego, author of Madonna: Blonde Ambition, called her "the perfect vocalist for lighter-than-air songs", despite not being a "heavyweight talent". According to Tony Sclafani from MSNBC, "Madonna's vocals are the key to her rock roots. Pop vocalists usually sing songs 'straight', but Madonna employs subtext, irony, aggression and all sorts of vocal idiosyncrasies in the ways John Lennon and Bob Dylan did." Madonna used a bright, girlish vocal timbre in her early albums which became passé in her later works. The change was deliberate since she was constantly reminded of how the critics had once labeled her as "Minnie Mouse on helium". During the filming of Evita (1996), Madonna had to take vocal lessons, which increased her range further. Of this experience she commented, "I studied with a vocal coach for Evita and I realized there was a whole piece of my voice I wasn't using. Before, I just believed I had a really limited range and was going to make the most of it." Besides singing, Madonna has the ability to play several musical instruments. Piano was the first instrument taught to her as a child. In the late 1970s, she learned to play drum and guitar from her then-boyfriend Dan Gilroy, before joining the Breakfast Club lineup as the drummer. She later played guitar with the band Emmy as well as on her own demo recordings. After her career breakthrough, Madonna was absent performing with guitar for years, but she is credited for playing cowbell on Madonna (1983) and synthesizer on Like a Prayer (1989). In 1999, Madonna had studied for three months to play the violin for the role as a violin teacher in the film Music of the Heart, but she eventually left the project before filming began. Madonna decided to perform with guitar again during the promotion of Music (2000) and recruited guitarist Monte Pittman to help improve her skill. Since then, Madonna has played guitar on every tour, as well as her studio albums. She received a nomination for Les Paul Horizon Award at the 2002 Orville H. Gibson Guitar Awards. In The Madonna Companion, biographers Allen Metz and Carol Benson noted that Madonna had used MTV and music videos to establish her popularity and enhance her recorded work more than any other recent pop artist. According to them, many of her songs have the imagery of the music video in strong context, while referring to the music. Cultural critic Mark C. Taylor in his book Nots (1993) felt that the postmodern art form par excellence is the video and the reigning "queen of video" is Madonna. He further asserted that "the most remarkable creation of MTV is Madonna. The responses to Madonna's excessively provocative videos have been predictably contradictory." The media and public reaction towards her most-discussed songs such as "Papa Don't Preach", "Like a Prayer", or "Justify My Love" had to do with the music videos created to promote the songs and their impact, rather than the songs themselves. Morton felt that "artistically, Madonna's songwriting is often overshadowed by her striking pop videos." In 2003, MTV named her "The Greatest Music Video Star Ever" and said that "Madonna's innovation, creativity, and contribution to the music video art form is what won her the award." In 2020, Billboard ranked her atop the 100 Greatest Music Video Artists of All Time. Madonna's initial music videos reflected her American and Hispanic mixed street style combined with a flamboyant glamour. She was able to transmit her avant-garde Downtown Manhattan fashion sense to the American audience. The imagery and incorporation of Hispanic culture and Catholic symbolism continued with the music videos from the True Blue era. Author Douglas Kellner noted, "such 'multiculturalism' and her culturally transgressive moves turned out to be highly successful moves that endeared her to large and varied youth audiences." Madonna's Spanish look in the videos became the fashion trend of that time, in the form of boleros and layered skirts, accessorizing with rosary beads and a crucifix as in the video of "La Isla Bonita". Academics noted that with her videos, Madonna was subtly reversing the usual role of male as the dominant sex. This symbolism and imagery was probably the most prevalent in the music video for "Like a Prayer". The video included scenes of an African-American church choir, Madonna being attracted to a black saint statue, and singing in front of burning crosses. Madonna's acting performances in films have frequently received poor reviews from film critics. Stephanie Zacharek stated in Time that, "[Madonna] seems wooden and unnatural as an actress, and it's tough to watch because she's clearly trying her damnedest." According to biographer Andrew Morton, "Madonna puts a brave face on the criticism, but privately she is deeply hurt." After the critically panned box-office bomb Swept Away (2002), Madonna vowed never to act again in a film. While reviewing her career retrospective titled Body of Work (2016) at New York's Metrograph hall, The Guardian's Nigel M. Smith wrote that Madonna's film career suffered mostly due to lack of proper material supplied to her, and she otherwise "could steal a scene for all the right reasons". Metz noted that Madonna represents a paradox as she is often perceived as living her whole life as a performance. While her big-screen performances are panned, her live performances are critical successes. Madonna was the first artist to have her concert tours as reenactments of her music videos. Author Elin Diamond explained that reciprocally, the fact that images from Madonna's videos can be recreated in a live setting enhances the original videos' realism. She believed that "her live performances have become the means by which mediatized representations are naturalized". Taraborrelli said that encompassing multimedia, latest technology and sound systems, Madonna's concerts and live performances are "extravagant show piece[s], [and] walking art show[s]." Chris Nelson from The New York Times commented that "artists like Madonna and Janet Jackson set new standards for showmanship, with concerts that included not only elaborate costumes and precision-timed pyrotechnics but also highly athletic dancing. These effects came at the expense of live singing." Thor Christensen of The Dallas Morning News commented that while Madonna earned a reputation for lip-syncing during her 1990 Blond Ambition World Tour, she has subsequently reorganized her performances by "stay[ing] mostly still during her toughest singing parts and [leaves] the dance routines to her backup troupe ... [r]ather than try to croon and dance up a storm at the same time." To allow for greater movement while dancing and singing, Madonna was one of the earliest adopters of hands-free radio-frequency headset microphones, with the headset fastened over the ears or the top of the head, and the microphone capsule on a boom arm that extended to the mouth. Because of her prominent usage, the microphone design came to be known as the "Madonna mic". She's a major historical figure and when she passes, the retrospectives will loom larger and larger in history. —Academic Camille Paglia on Madonna (2017). Madonna has built a legacy that transcends music and has been studied by sociologists, historians, and other scholars, contributing to the rise of Madonna studies, a subfield of American cultural studies. According to Rodrigo Fresán, "saying that Madonna is just a pop star is as inappropriate as saying that Coca-Cola is just a soda. Madonna is one of the classic symbols of Made in USA." Rolling Stone Spain wrote, "She became the first master of viral pop in history, years before the internet was massively used. Madonna was everywhere; in the almighty music television channels, 'radio formulas', magazine covers and even in bookstores. A pop dialectic, never seen since the Beatles's reign, which allowed her to keep on the edge of trend and commerciality." William Langley from The Daily Telegraph felt that "Madonna has changed the world's social history, has done more things as more different people than anyone else is ever likely to." Professor Diane Pecknold noted that "nearly any poll of the biggest, greatest, or best in popular culture includes [Madonna's] name". In 2012, VH1 ranked Madonna as the greatest woman in music. Spin writer Bianca Gracie stated that "the 'Queen of Pop' isn't enough to describe Madonna—she is Pop. [She] formulated the blueprint of what a pop star should be." According to Sclafani, "It's worth noting that before Madonna, most music mega-stars were guy rockers; after her, almost all would be female singers ... When the Beatles hit America, they changed the paradigm of performer from solo act to band. Madonna changed it back—with an emphasis on the female." Howard Kramer, curatorial director of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, asserted that "Madonna and the career she carved out for herself made possible virtually every other female pop singer to follow ... She certainly raised the standards of all of them ... She redefined what the parameters were for female performers." Andy Bennett and Steve Waksman, authors of The SAGE Handbook of Popular Music (2014), noted that "almost all female pop stars of recent years—Britney Spears, Beyoncé, Rihanna, Katy Perry, Lady Gaga, and others—acknowledge the important influence of Madonna on their own careers." Madonna has also influenced male artists, inspiring rock frontmen Liam Gallagher of Oasis and Chester Bennington of Linkin Park to become musicians. Madonna's use of sexual imagery has benefited her career and catalyzed public discourse on sexuality and feminism. The Times wrote that she had "started a revolution amongst women in music ... Her attitudes and opinions on sex, nudity, style, and sexuality forced the public to sit up and take notice." Professor John Fiske noted that the sense of empowerment that Madonna offers is inextricably connected with the pleasure of exerting some control over the meanings of self, of sexuality, and of one's social relations. In Doing Gender in Media, Art and Culture (2009), the authors noted that Madonna, as a female celebrity, performer, and pop icon, can unsettle standing feminist reflections and debates. According to lesbian feminist Sheila Jeffreys, Madonna represents woman's occupancy of what Monique Wittig calls the category of sex, as powerful, and appears to gleefully embrace the performance of the sexual corvée allotted to women. Professor Sut Jhally has referred to her as "an almost sacred feminist icon". Writing for The Guardian, Matt Cain stated that Madonna has "broke[n] down social barriers" and brought marginalized groups to the forefront, by frequently featuring LGBT, Latino, and black culture in her works. An author said that "by making culture generally available, Madonna becomes the culture of all social classes". Canadian professor Karlene Faith gave her point of view saying that Madonna's peculiarity is that "she has cruised so freely through so many cultural terrains" and she "has been a 'cult figure' within self-propelling subcultures just as she became a major." GLAAD president Sarah Kate Ellis stated that Madonna "always has and always will be the LGBTQ community's greatest ally", while The Advocate dubbed her as "the greatest gay icon". Madonna has received acclaim as a role model for businesswomen, "achieving the kind of financial control that women had long fought for within the industry", and generating over $1.2 billion in sales within the first decade of her career. According to Gini Gorlinski in the book The 100 Most Influential Musicians of All Time (2010), Madonna's levels of power and control were "unprecedented" for a woman in the entertainment industry. London Business School academics called her a "dynamic entrepreneur" worth copying; they identified her vision of success, her understanding of the music industry, her ability to recognize her own performance limits (and thus bring in help), her willingness to work hard and her ability to adapt as the keys to her commercial success. Morton wrote that "Madonna is opportunistic, manipulative, and ruthless—somebody who won't stop until she gets what she wants—and that's something you can get at the expense of maybe losing your close ones. But that hardly mattered to her." Madonna's net worth is estimated between US$590 million to $800 million. Forbes has named her the annual top-earning female musician 11 times across the 1980s, 1990s, 2000s, and 2010s. She has sold over 300 million records worldwide. The Guinness World Records acknowledged her as the bestselling female music artist of all time. According to the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), she is the bestselling female rock artist of the 20th century and the third highest-certified female albums artist in the United States, with 65.5 million certified album units. She is tied with Barbra Streisand for the most RIAA multi-platinum albums by a female artist. Madonna had generated over US$1.5 billion from ticket sales of her concert tours throughout her career, becoming the first woman to accumulate US$1 billion in concert revenue. According to Pollstar, she is the 3rd highest-grossing female touring artist of all time behind Taylor Swift and Beyonce. Madonna also remains the only woman in history to have two solo concerts with 100,000 sold tickets; her Who's That Girl World Tour's concert in Parc de Sceaux, Paris, drew over 130,000 audience, while her Girlie Show's concert in Maracanã Stadium, Rio de Janeiro, drew over 120,000 audience. She has also won seven Grammy Awards and twenty MTV Video Music Awards, including the 1986 Video Vanguard Award for which she became the first female recipient. According to Billboard, Madonna is the most successful solo artist in the Hot 100 chart history (second overall behind the Beatles) and the most successful dance club artist of all time. With a total of 50 Dance Club Songs chart-toppers, Madonna became the artist with the most number ones on any singular Billboard chart, pulling ahead of George Strait with 44 number-one songs on the Hot Country Songs chart. She has also scored 38 top-ten singles on the Hot 100; she held the record among all artists for nearly two decades (between 2002 and 2020), before being overtaken by Drake and by Taylor Swift in 2022 among females. Internationally, Madonna holds the record for the most number-one singles by a female artist in Australia (11), Canada (24), Italy (23), Finland (7), Spain (21), and the United Kingdom (13). At the 40th anniversary of the GfK Media Control Charts, Madonna was ranked as the most successful singles artist in German chart history. Madonna (1983) Like a Virgin (1984) True Blue (1986) Like a Prayer (1989) Erotica (1992) Bedtime Stories (1994) Ray of Light (1998) Music (2000) American Life (2003) Confessions on a Dance Floor (2005) Hard Candy (2008) MDNA (2012) Rebel Heart (2015) Madame X (2019) Films starred Desperately Seeking Susan (1985) A Certain Sacrifice (1985) Shanghai Surprise (1986) Who's That Girl (1987) Bloodhounds of Broadway (1989) Dick Tracy (1990) Madonna: Truth or Dare (1991) A League of Their Own (1992) Body of Evidence (1993) Dangerous Game (1993) Four Rooms (1995) Evita (1996) The Next Best Thing (2000) Swept Away (2002) I'm Going to Tell You a Secret (2005) Arthur and the Invisibles (2006) Madame X (2021) Films directed Filth and Wisdom (2008) W.E. (2011) The Virgin Tour (1985) Who's That Girl World Tour (1987) Blond Ambition World Tour (1990) The Girlie Show (1993) Drowned World Tour (2001) Re-Invention World Tour (2004) Confessions Tour (2006) Sticky & Sweet Tour (2008–2009) The MDNA Tour (2012) Rebel Heart Tour (2015–2016) Madame X Tour (2019–2020) The Celebration Tour (2023–2024) Maverick (1992–2004) Ray of Light Foundation (1998) Raising Malawi (2006) Hard Candy Fitness (2010–2019) Truth or Dare by Madonna (2011–2018) Biography portal Pop music portal United States portal Forbes Celebrity 100 Forbes Top 40 List of dancers List of most expensive divorces List of largest music deals List of organisms named after famous people (born 1950–present) List of Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees Philanthropy and activism of Madonna Madonna goes by her first name, and has used the name and trademark since 1979 according to the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). Madonna has more number-one singles than any other act in Canadian music history, with 18 singles during the RPM era, 2 singles during the Hot 100 era, and 4 singles between 2000 and 2007 on the Canadian Singles Chart. Madonna has more number-one singles than any other female artist in Italian music history, with 11 singles during the Musica e dischi era and 12 during the FIMI era. Geneva (October 16, 2000). "Madonna wins domain name battle". CNN. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved July 30, 2022. "Madonna Biography". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. 2008. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010. Retrieved April 15, 2015. Leonard & D'Acierno 1998, p. 492. Taraborrelli 2002, pp. 11–13 Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Madonna Biography". AllMusic. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2015. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 10. Cross 2007, p. 2 Guilbert 2002, p. 92 "The Child Who Became a Star: Madonna Timeline". The Daily Telegraph. July 26, 2006. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2008. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 23 Cross 2007, p. 10. Taraborrelli 2002, pp. 26–29 Claro 1994, pp. 24, 27 Cross 2007, p. 9 Tilden, Imogen (July 4, 2001). "Madonna". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2008. Menconi, David (June 7, 2015). "Madonna before she was Madonna – dancing at American Dance Festival". The Charlotte Observer. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2015. Hosted by Paula Zahn (2004). "A Star with Staying Power". People in the News. CNN. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved April 22, 2015. Rettenmund 1995, p. 45 Taraborrelli 2002, p. 37 Anderson, Christopher (October 14, 1991). "Madonna Rising". New York Magazine. pp. 40–51. Archived from the original on July 27, 2023. Retrieved May 15, 2021. Hosted by Jim Wallasky. "Madonna: Queen of Pop". Biography. 5 minutes in. The History Channel. Polk, Milan (April 22, 2019). "Everything We Know About Madonna's New Album Madame X". Vulture. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2019. O'Brien 2007, p. 56 Connelly, Christopher (November 22, 1984). "Madonna Goes All the Way". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 10, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021. Bego 2000, p. 52 Morton 2001, p. 47. Palmer, Landon (June 30, 2020). Rock Star/Movie Star: Power and Performance in Cinematic Rock Stardom. Oxford University Press. p. 184. ISBN 978-0-19-088842-8. Bessman, Jim (August 3, 1985). "Madonna's 'Sacrifice' Hits Home Market". Billboard. p. 30. Graff, Gary (April 25, 1987). "Bray's Loyalty To Madonna Pays Off". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on June 3, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2021. Runtagh, Jordan (September 7, 2019). "30 Fascinating Early Bands of Future Music Legends". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021. Morton 2001, p. 94. Morton 2001, p. 105. Cihak, Lennon (April 27, 2020). "Madonna's former manager Camille Barbone on filtering out bullsh*t". Lennon Cihak. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Cross 2007, p. 25. "Mark Kamins Dead: DJ-Producer Who Dated And Discovered Madonna Dies At 57". HuffPost. February 16, 2013. Archived from the original on August 4, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2021. "How I Met Madonna, by Seymour Stein, the Man Who Signed Her". Variety. June 14, 2018. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2021. Morton 2001, p. 211. Bickford, Malina (September 8, 2014). ""It Was a Beautiful Thing:" Danceteria and the Birth of Madonna". Vice. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2021. Fiorillo, Victor (April 10, 2016). "Facebook Flame Wars, Legal Action, and "Death Threats": Dancin' on Air's Family Feud Boils Over". Philadelphia Magazine. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021. Morton 2001, p. 118. Orzeck, Kurt (September 23, 2007). "Madonna, Beastie Boys Nominated For Rock And Roll Hall Of Fame". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 3, 2008. Retrieved May 29, 2008. Fretz, Eric (2010). Jean-Michel Basquiat: A Biography. ABC-CLIO. p. 105. ISBN 978-0-313-38056-3. Aniftos, Rania (December 6, 2018). "Madonna Posts Throwback Photo With Ex-Boyfriend Jean-Michel Basquiat". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2020. "Diego Cortez obituary". The Guardian. July 14, 2021. Archived from the original on July 25, 2021. Retrieved August 3, 2021. Howe, Sean (July 29, 2013). "How Madonna Became Madonna: An Oral History". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved April 27, 2021. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 43 "Jellybean Benitez Remembers NYC Clubs of Yesteryear". Redbull Music Academy. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2021. "Madonna Chart History (Hot 100)". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved March 12, 2009. Morton 2001, p. 121. Myers, Justin (February 7, 2014). "Official Charts Flashback: 30 years of Holiday, Madonna's first Top 10 hit". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021. Archive-John-Mitchell (April 19, 2012). "Dick Clark, Thank You For Introducing Madonna to The World". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021. "First Appearance on Top of the Pops". Top of The Pops Archive. Archived from the original on September 5, 2023. Retrieved September 5, 2023. "90 Years, 140 TIME Cover Stars: The Celebs Who Defined a Century of Entertainment". Time. February 27, 2013. ISSN 0040-781X. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021. Barr, Sabrina (August 16, 2020). "How Madonna has shaped modern fashion trends over the last four decades". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 21, 2020. Retrieved April 27, 2021. "Dress you up: Meet Maripol, the woman behind Madonna's early, iconic look". Yahoo!. July 26, 2018. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021. Clerk 2002, p. 20 Voller 1999, p. 22 "Madonna – Charts & Awards – Billboard Albums". AllMusic. Retrieved February 24, 2010. Rettenmund 1995, p. 67 Grein, Paul (August 10, 1985). "Hot Madonna: July Fills Her Coffers With RIAA Metal". Billboard. Vol. 97, no. 32. p. 7. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved September 27, 2016. "Contrasting fortunes as Madonna and Jacko turn 50". ABC News. August 15, 2008. Archived from the original on October 22, 2013. Retrieved August 24, 2009. "Ask Billboard: A Lot To 'Like' About Far*East Movement". Billboard. October 22, 2010. Archived from the original on April 3, 2017. Retrieved September 2, 2012. Cross 2007, p. 31 Voller 1999, p. 18 Garibaldi, Christina (October 28, 2014). "Here's The Wardrobe Malfunction That Made Madonna's 'Like A Virgin' VMA Performance Legendary". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved September 4, 2017. Greig, Geordie (November 6, 2005). "Geordie Greig Meets Madonna: Secret Life of a Contented Wife". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on September 6, 2008. Retrieved March 30, 2021. "Madonna Scores 12th Chart Topper in the UK". BBC News. February 26, 2006. Archived from the original on September 15, 2017. Retrieved June 9, 2008. "Desperately Seeking Madonna". Film Journal International. Vol. 10. 1984. p. 20. ISSN 1536-3155. Van Gelder, Lawrence (March 2, 1986). "Critic's Choices". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved April 25, 2012. Voller 1999, p. 21 George-Warren, Romanowski & Pareles 2001, pp. 23–25 Farber, M. A. (August 2, 1985). "From Marilyn To Madonna, The Unglamorous Business Of Posing In The Nude". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Morton 2001, p. 135. Dion, Richard. "Madonna Biography". Musicomania. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2012. Metz & Benson 1999, p. 67 Clerk 2002, p. 77 Sigerson, David (July 7, 1986). "Madonna: True Blue". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved May 28, 2008. "Madonna: Artist Discography". Official Charts Company. January 14, 1984. Archived from the original on March 18, 2018. Retrieved May 25, 2009. Bohem 1990, p. 78 Kaufman, Gil (March 29, 2012). "Madonna And Lionel Richie To Reunite On Billboard Charts?". MTV (MTV Networks). Archived from the original on March 31, 2012. Retrieved April 7, 2012. McFarlan 1992, p. 186 "Sizzle or Fizzle? Real-Life Couples On Screen". Entertainment Weekly. February 14, 2014. Archived from the original on April 6, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2014. "Madonna Biography". Tribune Entertainment Media Group. Archived from the original on October 2, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2008. "Madonna – Charts & Awards – Billboard Singles". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 21, 2010. Retrieved February 24, 2010. Smith, Neil (May 24, 2004). "Show Stealer Madonna on Tour". BBC. Archived from the original on August 4, 2017. Retrieved February 12, 2008. Voller 1999, p. 29 Bassets, Luis (August 31, 1987). "Madonna convocó en París a 130.000 personas". El País (in Spanish). Madrid: Jesús de Polanco. Archived from the original on November 18, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2009. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (December 2, 1987). "Madonna – You Can Dance". AllMusic. Retrieved May 18, 2010. "Madonna Halts Divorce". Los Angeles Times. December 17, 1987. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. Kaufman, Joanne (December 14, 1987). "Everyone Said It Wouldn't Last..." People. Archived from the original on January 30, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. Winship, Frederic M. (May 4, 1988). "Madonna makes unimpressive Broadway debut in Mamet play". United Press International. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 1, 2022. "'Speed-the-Plow' Cast to Be Changed". The New York Times. August 8, 1988. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. Wilson, Jeff (January 11, 1989). "Madonna Withdraws Assault Complaint Against Sean Penn". Associated Press. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. "The Incident Behind Those Sean Penn Domestic Abuse Allegations". Yahoo!. September 22, 2015. Archived from the original on January 30, 2022. Retrieved February 1, 2022. "Madonna files for divorce from Sean Penn". United Press International. January 5, 1989. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 1, 2022. Stefan, Fatsis (January 25, 1989). "Pepsi Signs Madonna As Cola Ad Wars Intensify". Associated Press. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. "Madonna Biography, Discography, Filmography". Fox News Channel. January 3, 2008. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved June 5, 2008. "Pepsi cancels Madonna ad". The New York Times. April 5, 1989. Archived from the original on September 24, 2017. Retrieved September 2, 2012. Madonna (1989). Like a Prayer (Audio CD). Sire Records. Considine, J.D. (April 6, 1989). "Madonna: Like A Prayer: Review". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 8, 2012. Retrieved January 21, 2007. "100 WOMEN OF THE YEAR, 1989: Madonna". Time. March 5, 2020. Archived from the original on March 4, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2021. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 217 "Michael, Madonna Top 'Billboard' Poll". Dayton Daily News. May 25, 1990. p. 23. ISSN 0897-0920. Bego 2000, p. 232 Morton 2001, p. 163. "Dick Tracy". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 28, 2009. Retrieved April 11, 2014. Herrera, Monica (September 15, 2000). "Poll: 'Vogue' Is Fave Madonna Chart-Topper". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 10, 2011. Retrieved December 14, 2007. Pitts 2004, p. 40 Sporkin, Elizabeth (July 2, 1990). "He Still Leaves 'Em Breathless". People. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved July 30, 2009. Calderone, Ana (November 21, 2016). "Warren Beatty Opens Up About Dating Madonna". People. Archived from the original on August 4, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2021. "Madonna.com > Tours > Blond Ambition Tour". Madonna.com. Archived from the original on November 7, 2014. Retrieved September 3, 2012. Walters, Barry (June 1, 2006). "Crucifixes, Leather and Hits". Rolling Stone. Vol. 1067, no. 56. ISSN 0035-791X. Fisher, Carrie (August 1991). "True Confessions: The Rolling Stone Interview With Madonna". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 21, 2017. Retrieved November 9, 2017. "Grammy Award Winners – Madonna". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on July 11, 2011. Retrieved May 27, 2008. "Rock The Vote". Today In Madonna History. Archived from the original on May 15, 2023. Retrieved May 15, 2023. Cross 2007, p. 128 "Gold & Platinum: Diamond Awards". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved January 3, 2010. Mitchell, John (August 16, 2011). "Happy Birthday, Madonna!". MTV (MTV Networks). Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved August 18, 2011. Mackie, Drew (November 2, 2015). "Justify My Love Turns 25: 20 Things You Didn't Know". People. Archived from the original on August 10, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2021. Lippens, Nate (2007). "Making Madonna: 10 Moments That Created an Icon". MSN. Archived from the original on June 10, 2011. Retrieved January 4, 2008. Rich, Joshua (November 20, 1998). "Madonna Banned". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved May 27, 2008. "In Bed With Madonna – BBFC rating". British Board of Film Classification. Retrieved September 6, 2012. Munoz, Lorenza (January 3, 2003). "Little pictures have a big year". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 3, 2012. Retrieved August 12, 2017. Bergren, Joe (July 1, 2022). "Tom Hanks on 'A League of Their Own's Madonna Casting (Flashback)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on January 12, 2024. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "A League of Their Own". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 11, 2014. Retrieved April 11, 2014. Holden, Stephen (April 20, 1992). "Madonna Makes a $60 Million Deal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2008. "Madonna's label sues record giant". BBC. March 26, 2004. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved June 7, 2008. Susman, Gary (June 15, 2004). "Madonna sells her record label". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 10, 2021. Retrieved December 30, 2020. D'Arcy, David (November 1, 1992). "Whitney compares Basquiat to Leonardo da Vinci in new retrospective". The Art Newspaper - International Art News and Events. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. Larson, Kay (November 9, 1992). "Wild Child". New York Magazine. p. 74. Holden, Stephen (October 18, 1992). "Recordings View; Selling Sex and (Oh, Yes) a Record". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 1, 2022. Morton 2001, p. 183. Kirschling, Gregory (October 25, 2002). "The Naked Launch". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 15, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2008. "Vanilla Ice Reflects On Crazy Madonna Relationship". www.iheartradio.ca. Retrieved March 30, 2024. Kaufman, Gil (January 31, 2023). "Vanilla Ice Describes His Reaction to Surprise 1990s Madonna Marriage Proposal: 'This Is Too Fast!'". Billboard. Retrieved March 30, 2024. Metz & Benson 1999, pp. 17–20 "Body of Evidence". Rotten Tomatoes. Rotten Tomatoes. December 3, 2002. Archived from the original on June 23, 2008. Retrieved June 9, 2008. Maslin, Janet (November 19, 1993). "A Movie Within a Movie, With a Demure Madonna". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 19, 2012. Retrieved June 10, 2008. Glass, Joshua (March 28, 2019). "Madonna's Iconic Cursing on David Lettermen". CR Fashion Book. Archived from the original on February 16, 2022. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Taraborrelli 2002, pp. 232–235 Igoe, Katherine J. (July 19, 2020). "The Dennis Rodman-Madonna Relationship Was a Whirlwind". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2020. "Madonna Talks Her Rise to the Top, Dating Tupac, and Her Infamous VMAs Performance During Her First Interview With Howard". Howard Stern. March 12, 2015. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2020. Smith, Candace C. (July 6, 2017). "Tupac Shakur letter reveals he split from Madonna because she's white". ABC News. Archived from the original on July 11, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 242 Taraborrelli 2002, p. 235 "Madonna's 40 Biggest Billboard Hits". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 6, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2012. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (November 17, 1995). "Something to Remember". AllMusic. Archived from the original on November 7, 2023. Retrieved July 30, 2009. Outwater, Myra Y. (November 12, 1995). "Modotti Photos Capture Mexican Life". The Morning Call. Archived from the original on April 4, 2021. Retrieved February 1, 2022. "Madonna Sponsors Show". The Guardian. February 17, 1996. p. 5. Vogel, Carol (February 16, 2012). "Cindy Sherman Unmasked". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 1, 2022. Retrieved February 1, 2022. Michael 2004, p. 67 "Madonna's role as Evita angers many Argentines". Tampa Bay Times. Archived from the original on February 1, 2022. Retrieved February 1, 2022. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 276 Maslin, Janet (December 6, 1996). "Madonna, Chic Pop Star, As Chic Political Leader". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 24, 2011. Retrieved May 26, 2009. Gleiberman, Owen (December 20, 1996). "Evita (1997)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved June 9, 2008. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 285 Corliss, Richard (December 16, 1996). "Cinema: Madonna and Eva Peron: You Must Love Her". Time. Archived from the original on July 17, 2007. Retrieved May 26, 2010. Busari, Stephanie (March 24, 2008). "Hey Madonna, Don't Give Up the Day Job!". CNN. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved March 21, 2008. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (September 23, 1997). "Madonna – Evita (Original Soundtrack) Overview". AllMusic. Archived from the original on November 7, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2010. "Hits of the World: Eurochart Hot 100". Billboard. Vol. 109, no. 6. February 8, 1997. p. 41. ISSN 0006-2510. Archived from the original on November 7, 2023. Retrieved August 4, 2015. "Performers, Presenters Add Spark To Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. Vol. 108, no. 51. December 21, 1996. p. 12. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved March 20, 2014. Voller 1999, p. 221 Lacher, Irne; Malnic, Eric (October 15, 1996). "Madonna Gives Birth to Daughter". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 15, 2015. Retrieved August 1, 2015. Cross 2007, p. 71 Taraborrelli 2002, p. 288 Cross 2007, p. 134 Barnes, Anthony (July 9, 2006). "Kabbalah: is Madonna losing her religion?". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved May 26, 2010. Rooksby 2004, p. 50 Michael 2004, p. 46 Powers, Ann (September 13, 2013). "'Ray Of Light' Was Madonna's 'Mid-Life Enlightenment' Record". Soundcheck. Archived from the original on February 10, 2014. Retrieved February 14, 2014. Cinquemani, Sal (March 9, 2003). "Madonna: Ray Of Light | Album Review". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on June 2, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2009. "Madonna's secret to making 'Music'". CNN. November 10, 2000. Archived from the original on August 8, 2012. Retrieved February 9, 2008. "500 Greatest Albums of All Time". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 1, 2014. Retrieved June 6, 2008. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 303 Metz & Benson 1999, p. 167 "Madonna.com > Discography > Ray of Light". Madonna.com. Archived from the original on January 2, 2010. Retrieved September 2, 2012. Glenday 1998, p. 228 "Madonna". Inside Philanthropy. Archived from the original on August 27, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2018. "The Next Best Thing". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 1, 2014. Retrieved April 11, 2014. "Top 100 47: American Pie". BBC Radio 2. Archived from the original on May 21, 2008. Retrieved June 9, 2008. Hé, Kristen S. (March 24, 2020). "Madonna in 2000: Reinventing Pop 'Music'". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Bronson 2002, p. 989 Erlewine, Bogdanov & Woodstra 2002, p. 245 Caulfield, Keith (September 28, 2000). "After 11 Year Absence, Madonna's Back At No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 10, 2011. Retrieved January 20, 2009. Lee, Hann C. (March 23, 2001). "Controversial new Madonna video airs on the Web". CNN. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved June 9, 2008. "Madonna Gives Birth to Baby Boy". ABC News. August 11, 2000. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. Cross 2007, p. 88. "Madonna's Son Baptized". ABC News. December 21, 2000. Archived from the original on October 7, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2022. Cross 2007, pp. xix, 88–89 Davies, Hugh; Aldrick, Philip (December 8, 2000). "Madonna's wedding will be the Highlands' biggest fling". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on August 5, 2017. Retrieved May 8, 2014. Caulfield, Keith (December 29, 2001). "The Year in Touring". Billboard. Vol. 113, no. 52. p. 44. ISSN 0006-2510. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (November 12, 2001). "Madonna – GHV2". AllMusic. Archived from the original on November 7, 2023. Retrieved May 26, 2009. Arthington, Mirra (October 7, 2007). "Warner finds solace in farewell CD". Music Week: 21. Archived from the original on December 24, 2015. Retrieved February 5, 2016. "Madonna flop goes straight to video". BBC. November 8, 2002. Archived from the original on September 15, 2017. Retrieved June 3, 2008. Billington, Michael (May 25, 2002). "Up for Grabs, Wyndham's Theatre, London Stage". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 16, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2012. "Theatre review: Up for Grabs at Wyndham's". Britishtheatreguide.info. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved December 7, 2012. Bradshaw, Peter (September 13, 2006). "Film: Die Another Day". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2012. Lieberman, Rhonda (May 9, 2003). "Weighty Madonna: Rhonda Lieberman on 'X-STaTIC PRo=CeSS'". Artforum International. BNET. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved January 5, 2017. "American Life by Madonna: Review". Metacritic. Archived from the original on April 5, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2007. Norris, John (April 9, 2003). "Madonna: Her American Life". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 5, 2003. Retrieved May 26, 2010. Flick, Larry (March 2003). "All-American Girl". The Advocate. No. 887. p. 45. ISSN 0001-8996. "EXCLUSIVE: Madonna's Latest Makeover". ABC News. January 6, 2006. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Hastings, Chris (October 16, 2005). "Thank You For the Music! How Madonna's New Single Will Give Abba Their Greatest-Ever Hit". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2008. Moss, Corey (August 28, 2003). "Madonna Smooches With Britney And Christina". MTV. Archived from the original on July 4, 2017. Retrieved January 5, 2017. Gardner, Elysa (August 28, 2003). "Madonna, Spears, Aguilera shock at MTV Awards". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved January 5, 2017. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 233 Brackett & Hoard 2004, p. 304 Cross 2007, p. 97 Horton & Simmons 2007, pp. 196–198 Schwartz, Missy (September 26, 2003). "Why Madonna's new book is worth checking out". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 14, 2020. Retrieved June 14, 2020. "Madonna sells record company". NME. August 26, 2007. Archived from the original on November 19, 2007. Retrieved January 5, 2017. "Madonna Heads List Of Year's Top Tours". Billboard. January 2, 2005. Archived from the original on August 23, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2014. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (June 12, 2006). "Madonna – I'm Going to Tell You a Secret". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 22, 2010. Retrieved October 30, 2009. Jury, Louise (November 12, 2004). "Cliff Richard and Robbie Williams join British music's Hall of Fame". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved March 12, 2014. "The Immortals: The First Fifty". Rolling Stone. Vol. 1092, no. 22. November 9, 2006. ISSN 0035-791X. "Hollywood, music stars join forces in tsunami telethon". Australian Broadcasting Company. January 16, 2005. Archived from the original on September 20, 2011. Retrieved June 14, 2008. "The Live 8 Event". BBC. Archived from the original on June 13, 2005. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Vineyard, Jennifer (November 7, 2005). "Madonna: Dancing Queen". MTV News. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved July 1, 2010. Caulfield, Keith (November 19, 2005). "Albums: Confessions on a Dance Floor". Billboard. Vol. 117, no. 47. p. 45. ISSN 0006-2510. Archived from the original on November 7, 2023. Retrieved July 27, 2009. Glenday 2007, p. 187 "Madonna 'begged' Abba for sample". BBC. October 18, 2005. Archived from the original on August 5, 2017. Retrieved September 2, 2012. Caulfield, Keith (September 4, 2006). "Madonna's 'Confessions' Tour Sets Record". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved February 24, 2010. Khyam, Omar (August 18, 2006). "Boycott of Madonna Moscow concert urged". J. The Jewish News of Northern California. The Emanu-El. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved January 21, 2008. "Keane, Shakira, Coldplay and Madonna scoop summer Platinum Awards" (Press release). International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. September 13, 2006. Archived from the original on November 4, 2006. Retrieved November 10, 2017. "Madonna In Malawi". CBS News. October 9, 2006. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021. "Madonna 'adopts child in Africa'". BBC. October 11, 2006. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved December 31, 2014. "Madonna's adoption appeal begins in Malawi". CNN. April 4, 2009. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 24, 2010. Pilkington, Ed (October 26, 2006). "Confessions on a TV show: Oprah hears Madonna's side of the story". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved June 9, 2008. Thomas, Karen (October 26, 2006). "Madonna speaks out over furor". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 27, 2014. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Itzkoff, David (June 12, 2009). "Court Rules That Madonna May Adopt Malawi Girl". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 12, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2014. Sutherland, Mark (July 7, 2007). "Live Earth London Wraps With Madonna Spectacular". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 16, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2016. Caulfield, Keith (October 16, 2007). "Update: Madonna Confirms Deal With Live Nation". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 11, 2013. Retrieved February 25, 2010. Brown, Mark (May 23, 2008). "Acclaim for Madonna's Malawi documentary". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved December 31, 2016. Christopher, James (February 14, 2008). "Review: Madonna's Filth and Wisdom". The Times. London. Archived from the original on May 10, 2008. Retrieved December 31, 2016. Johnston, Sheila (February 14, 2008). "Filth and Wisdom: Don't give up the day job, Madonna". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Cohen, Jonathan (September 27, 2007). "Madonna, Beasties, Mellencamp Up For Rock Hall". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 16, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2016. "Madonna Has Her Say At Rock Hall Ceremony". CBS News. March 10, 2008. Archived from the original on December 23, 2015. Retrieved December 31, 2016. Reid, Shaheem (August 8, 2007). "Timbaland Talks About His And Justin Timberlake's 'Hot' Collabo With Madonna". MTV. Archived from the original on October 1, 2007. Retrieved December 31, 2016. McFadden, Cynthia; Sherwood, Roxanna; Escherich, Katie (May 23, 2008). "Madonna's Latest Transformation: Crusading Filmmaker". ABC News. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved March 6, 2021. Hasty, Katie (May 7, 2008). "Madonna Leads Busy Billboard 200 with 7th #1". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 23, 2013. Retrieved January 1, 2017. Ganz, Caryn (May 1, 2008). "Madonna Debuts Hard Candy With Justin Timberlake at New York Club Show". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 22, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2016. Savage, Mark (April 8, 2008). "Review: Madonna's Hard Candy". BBC. Archived from the original on April 14, 2018. Retrieved January 1, 2017. Pietroluongo, Silvio (April 2, 2008). "Mariah, Madonna Make Billboard Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 29, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2016. Schmidt, Veronica (April 21, 2008). "Madonna Goes to No. 1 For the 13th Time". The Times. London. Archived from the original on July 19, 2008. Retrieved December 31, 2016. 第２３回日本ゴールドディスク大賞で"アーティスト・オブ・ザ・イヤー"を受賞！ (in Japanese). Warner Music Japan. March 3, 2009. Archived from the original on August 12, 2017. Retrieved March 4, 2009. Waddell, Ray (January 30, 2009). "Madonna Resuming Sticky & Sweet Tour This Summer". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 16, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2016. Allen, Bob (October 4, 2013). "Roger Waters Passes Madonna For Solo Boxscore Record With 459 m Wall Live". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 14, 2019. Retrieved December 31, 2016. "Madonna's brother's book explores Guy Ritchie marriage". The Daily Telegraph. London. July 10, 2008. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2017. "Madonna and Ritchie Confirm Split". BBC News. October 16, 2008. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017. Retrieved November 15, 2008. "Madonna gives Guy £50m in divorce". BBC News. December 15, 2008. Archived from the original on February 15, 2009. Retrieved March 19, 2010. Adetunji, Jo (November 22, 2008). "Madonna and Ritchie granted quickie divorce". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2010. "Madonna, Ritchie granted quick divorce". CNN. December 15, 2008. Archived from the original on May 22, 2011. Retrieved March 19, 2010. Banda, Mabvuto; Georgy, Michael (May 25, 2009). Ireland, Louise (ed.). "Madonna Loses Adoption Bid in Malawi". Billboard. Reuters. Archived from the original on December 16, 2016. Retrieved January 1, 2017. "Madonna Wins Adoption Battle". CBS News. June 12, 2009. Archived from the original on January 25, 2017. Retrieved January 1, 2017. Caulfield, Keith (July 23, 2009). "Madonna's Celebration Hits Collection to Feature Two New Songs". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 29, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2009. Sexton, Paul (October 2, 2009). "Madonna's Celebration Tops Euro Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2016. Crosley, Hillary; Kaufman, Gil (September 13, 2009). "Madonna Pays Tearful Tribute To Michael Jackson At 2009 VMAs". MTV News. Archived from the original on October 4, 2009. Retrieved January 1, 2017. "Decade End Charts: Singles Sales Artists". Billboard. 2009. Archived from the original on December 27, 2012. Retrieved January 1, 2017. "Madonna 'most played' artist of decade". BBC News. April 5, 2010. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved November 13, 2010. "Top Touring Artists of the Decade". Billboard. December 11, 2009. Archived from the original on March 16, 2013. Retrieved January 1, 2017. Johnston, Maura (January 22, 2010). "Madonna Brings Classic 'Like A Prayer' To Hope for Haiti Now Telethon". MTV News. Archived from the original on September 23, 2017. Retrieved January 1, 2017. "マドンナ、TOP10入り獲得数20作でザ・ビートルズ抜き歴代単独1位" (in Japanese). Oricon. April 6, 2010. Archived from the original on May 21, 2016. Retrieved January 1, 2017. Stack, Tim (October 21, 2009). "Glee Exclusive: Madonna is on board! Is Adam Lambert next?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 23, 2015. Retrieved January 1, 2017. Serjeant, Jill (August 20, 2010). Tourtellotte, Bob (ed.). "Madonna sued over 'Material Girl' clothing line". Reuters. Archived from the original on January 2, 2017. Retrieved January 1, 2017. Lee, Joyce (October 26, 2010). "Madonna to Open Hard Candy Gym Chain". CBS News. Archived from the original on September 16, 2017. Retrieved January 1, 2017. "Madonna And MG Icon Announce The Launch of The 'Truth or Dare by Madonna' Brand". Madonna.com. November 3, 2011. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved January 1, 2017. Jafaar, Ali (February 13, 2010). "Madonna directing 'W.E.'". Variety. Archived from the original on November 26, 2010. Retrieved February 15, 2010. "W.E. Reviews, Ratings, Credits, and More at Metacritic". Metacritic. December 9, 2011. Archived from the original on May 14, 2012. Retrieved May 13, 2012. "W.E." Rotten Tomatoes. May 2, 2012. Archived from the original on May 7, 2012. Retrieved May 13, 2012. Vena, Jocelyn (January 15, 2012). "Madonna's 'Masterpiece' Wins The Golden Globe". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 19, 2013. Retrieved January 16, 2012. "Super Bowl XLVI Halftime show featured Madonna". National Football League. December 4, 2011. Archived from the original on January 7, 2012. Retrieved December 5, 2011. Bauder, David (February 6, 2012). "Super Bowl most watched TV show in U.S. history, draws record 111.3 million viewers". The Vancouver Sun. Archived from the original on February 8, 2012. "Madonna Scores Record-Extending 38th Hot 100 Top 10". Billboard. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on March 29, 2013. Retrieved February 26, 2012. "The Material Girl is Back on the Dance Floor" (Press release). Interscope Records. PR Newswire. January 29, 2012. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved January 29, 2012. Halperin, Shirley (December 15, 2011). "Madonna's Interscope-Live Nation Deal Worth $40 Million; Album Due Out in March". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 7, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2011. "Live Nation's Michael Rapino Wants to Upsell You, Talks Streaming and Madonna-Like 360 Deals". Billboard. May 26, 2016. Archived from the original on May 29, 2018. Retrieved May 28, 2018. Caulfield, Keith (September 14, 2009). "Madonna Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200, Lionel Richie at No. 2". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 30, 2013. Retrieved April 7, 2012. Cadan, Dan (June 1, 2012). "Madonna Kicks Off 'MDNA' Tour in Tel Aviv". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 25, 2017. Retrieved June 7, 2012. Waddell, Ray (January 24, 2013). "Madonna's 'MDNA' Tour Makes Billboard Boxscore's All-Time Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 1, 2013. Retrieved May 19, 2013. Saad, Nardine (August 28, 2013). "Madonna is Forbes' top-earning celebrity thanks to MDNA tour". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 31, 2013. Retrieved August 31, 2013. McGarry, Caitlin (September 17, 2013). "BitTorrent and Madonna join forces for free speech". PC World. Archived from the original on January 24, 2016. Retrieved September 23, 2013. Blistein, John (January 7, 2014). "Madonna Names Katy Perry Art for Freedom Guest Curator". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved May 23, 2014. Goldstein, Sasha (April 7, 2013). "Madonna sends Malawi president an error-filled handwritten letter, leaves the country without meeting Joyce Banda". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved March 22, 2021. "Malawi labels Madonna a 'bully' after recent visit". BBC. April 11, 2013. Archived from the original on April 11, 2013. Retrieved April 11, 2013. Mapondera, Godfrey; Smith, David (April 12, 2013). "Malawi president's attack on Madonna said to be a 'goof'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 27, 2013. Retrieved April 15, 2013. Grow, Kory (June 30, 2014). "Madonna Aims to Help Detroit Hometown by Funding Charities". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 4, 2017. Retrieved July 1, 2014. Rutherford, Kevin (February 14, 2014). "Madonna Premiering Skin Care Brand in Japan". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. Retrieved February 14, 2014. Petridis, Alexis (December 21, 2014). "Madonna: I did not say, 'Hey, here's my music, and it's finished.' It was theft". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014. Retrieved December 22, 2014. Hampson, Sarah (February 14, 2014). "My seven-minute, speed-date interview with Madonna". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Archived from the original on March 17, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2014. "Madonna hits studio with Kills". The Belfast Telegraph. November 4, 2014. Archived from the original on April 16, 2014. Retrieved April 15, 2014. Mac, Sam C. (February 9, 2015). "Madonna Releases Three More Songs from Rebel Heart: 'Joan of Arc', 'Iconic', & 'Hold Tight'". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on February 11, 2015. Retrieved February 26, 2015. Pareles, Jon (March 6, 2015). "Madonna Talks About 'Rebel Heart,' Her Fall and More". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 6, 2015. Retrieved March 7, 2015. "Reviews for Rebel Heart". Metacritic. Archived from the original on March 15, 2015. Retrieved March 20, 2015. Spanos, Brittany (March 2, 2015). "Madonna Plots Rebel Heart Tour for North America, Europe". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 4, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2015. Bhandari, Subel (March 22, 2015). "Madonna completes her Rebel Heart tour in Sydney amid criticism". Borneo Bulletin. Archived from the original on February 27, 2017. Retrieved March 22, 2015. Allen, Bob (March 24, 2016). "Madonna Extends Record as Highest-Grossing Solo Touring Artist: $1.31 Billion Earned". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 4, 2018. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Savage, Mark (March 21, 2016). "Judge rules on Madonna custody dispute". BBC News. Archived from the original on March 21, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2016. "Madonna Is Billboard's 2016 Woman of the Year". Billboard. October 14, 2016. Archived from the original on October 14, 2016. Retrieved October 14, 2016. Lynch, Joe (December 9, 2016). "Madonna Delivers Her Blunt Truth During Fiery, Teary Billboard Women In Music Speech". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 24, 2017. Shouneyia, Alexa (November 7, 2016). "Madonna Gives Surprise Performance in New York's Washington Square Park in Support of Hillary Clinton". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 8, 2016. Retrieved November 8, 2016. "Watch Madonna Drop F-Bomb on Live TV at Women's March on Washington". Billboard. January 20, 2017. Archived from the original on January 23, 2017. Retrieved January 21, 2017. Levenson, Eric (January 21, 2017). "In R-rated anti-Trump rant, Madonna muses about 'blowing up White House'". CNN. Archived from the original on January 23, 2017. Retrieved January 22, 2017. Krepps, Daniel (January 22, 2017). "Madonna Clarifies 'Out of Context' Remark From Women's March". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 27, 2018. Retrieved January 22, 2017. Mponda, Félix (February 7, 2017). "Madonna Adopts 4-year-old Twin Girls in Malawi". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on February 7, 2017. Retrieved February 7, 2017. Stutz, Colin (February 20, 2017). "Madonna Shares Video of New Twins Singing 'Twinkle Twinkle Little Star'". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 20, 2017. Retrieved February 20, 2017. Respers, Lisa (September 5, 2017). "Madonna is happy she moved". CNN. Archived from the original on September 5, 2017. Retrieved September 6, 2017. Phiri, Frank (July 11, 2017). "Malawi hails Madonna's 'motherly spirit' at opening of new hospital". Reuters. Archived from the original on June 24, 2018. Retrieved May 28, 2018. "The 32nd Japan Gold Disc Award" (in Japanese). Japan Gold Disc Award. Archived from the original on October 4, 2018. Retrieved February 27, 2018. "Rebel Heart Tour > Madonna". AllMusic. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved May 13, 2018. Gray, Yasmin (September 26, 2017). "Everything You Need to Know About Madonna's Newest Venture, MDNA Skin". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 23, 2018. Retrieved May 13, 2018. "Madonna loses legal battle to prevent auction of Tupac letter and other personal items". The Daily Telegraph. London. April 24, 2018. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved May 13, 2018. Smirke, Richard (April 24, 2019). "Madonna Talks Giving 'Zero You-Know-Whats' on New 'Madame X' Album at London 'Medellin' Video Premiere". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved September 11, 2019. "Madonna's 'Madame X' Is Here: Stream It Now". Billboard. June 14, 2019. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Hunt, El (June 5, 2019). "Madonna – 'Madame X' review". NME. Archived from the original on June 5, 2019. Retrieved June 6, 2019. Caulfield, Keith (June 23, 2019). "Madonna Achieves Ninth No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Madame X'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 22, 2019. Retrieved June 23, 2019. Murray, Gordon (February 13, 2020). "Madonna Achieves Milestone 50th No. 1 on Dance Club Songs Chart With 'I Don't Search I Find'". Billboard. Retrieved February 19, 2020. Belam, Martin (May 18, 2019). "Madonna was excruciating: what we learned from Eurovision 2019". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 29, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Stern, Bradley (September 20, 2019). "Madonna X-periments With the 'Madame X Tour'". Paper. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved November 12, 2019. Allen, Bob (March 23, 2021). "Women At The Top: Boxoffice Stars In Pre-Pandemic 2020". Pollstar. Retrieved July 11, 2021. Asian News International (ANI) (August 22, 202). "Madonna packs on some PDA with boyfriend Ahlamalik Williams while celebrating her 63rd birthday". The Times of India. Retrieved August 22, 2021. Léger, Marie (August 20, 2021). "Who is Ahlamalik Williams, Madonna's boyfriend?". Vogue France. Retrieved August 22, 2021. "Madonna Cancels Paris Tour Date After Stage Fall". Spin. March 2, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Michallon, Clémence (March 9, 2020). "Madonna forced to end Madame X Tour early due to coronavirus restrictions". The Independent. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Nolfi, Joey. "Madonna reveals she tested positive for coronavirus antibodies, but is 'not currently sick'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Au-Yeung, Angel (April 3, 2020). "A Bill Gates-Backed Accelerator For COVID-19 Therapeutics Treatment Partners With Madonna And Mark Zuckerberg's Chan Zuckerberg Initiative". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2023. Richards, Will (April 4, 2020). "Madonna donates $1 million to fund hoping to create coronavirus vaccine". NME. Retrieved September 11, 2020. White, Jack (July 27, 2020). "Dua Lipa announces new single ft. Madonna and Missy Elliott". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on August 1, 2020. Retrieved August 1, 2020. Grobar, Matt (January 24, 2023). "Madonna Biopic At Universal Not Moving Forward". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Nolfi, Joey (September 11, 2020). "Madonna reveals plot details for biopic movie: Andy Warhol, 'Vogue' dancers, Evita, more". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Sun, Michael (January 25, 2023). "Madonna biopic scrapped after singer's world tour announced". The Guardian. Retrieved January 25, 2023. "Madonna, il film sul tour di 'Madame X' uscirà in ottobre". Rolling Stone Italy (in Italian). July 8, 2021. Retrieved July 9, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (August 16, 2021). "Madonna Partners With Warner Music for Career-Spanning Reissue Campaign". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 16, 2021. Irvin, Jack (August 19, 2022). "Madonna Unveils 'Finally Enough Love: 50 Number Ones', an Epic Career-Spanning Remix Compilation". People. Retrieved August 27, 2022. Caulfield, Keith (August 29, 2022). "Madonna Becomes First Woman to Earn Billboard 200 Top 10 Albums Each Decade Since the '80s". Billboard. Retrieved September 12, 2022. Villa, Lucas (September 20, 2022). "Madonna Makes Out With Tokischa In Their 'Hung Up' Remix Video". Uproxx. Retrieved December 10, 2022. Del Rosario, Alexander (October 10, 2022). "'Madonna is gay?' Fans and critics are hung up on the pop icon's cryptic TikTok". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 10, 2022. "Madonna - Back That Up To The Beat". Apple Music. December 23, 2022. Retrieved December 23, 2022. Paul, Larisha (January 17, 2023). "Madonna Unveils Ultimate Greatest Hits Show 'The Celebration Tour'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Curto, Justin (March 8, 2023). "Madonna Is Christine's Newest Queen". Vulture. Retrieved March 8, 2023. Mamo, Heran (June 2, 2023). "The Weeknd, Madonna & Playboi Carti Come Together on 'Popular' Track: Stream It Now". Billboard. Retrieved June 2, 2023. Dunworth, Liberty (June 2, 2023). "The Weeknd teams up with Madonna and Playboi Carti for 'Popular'". NME. Retrieved June 2, 2023. "Popular". Spotify. June 2, 2023. Retrieved June 2, 2023. Denis, Kyle (May 31, 2023). "The Weeknd Teases New Madonna & Playboi Carti Single for 'The Idol' Soundtrack". Billboard. Retrieved May 31, 2023. Cruz, Brandon (July 10, 2023). "Madonna's tour postponed after long days at Coliseum". Nassau Herald. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Cooper, Alex (July 10, 2023). "Madonna Speaks Out After Health Scare Left Her Unresponsive". Yahoo News. Retrieved September 15, 2023. "Madonna Home From The Hospital After Being Intubated For Serious Bacterial Infection". Yahoo. June 29, 2023. Sisario, Ben (July 10, 2023). "Madonna Officially Postpones Celebration Tour". The New York Times. Retrieved July 19, 2023. "Madonna opens up about health scare, says she was in coma for 48 hours". NBC News. December 20, 2023. "Madonna reveals she was in 'an induced coma' this summer, thanks friend who 'saved' her life". ABC7 Chicago. December 20, 2023. "Madonna Says She Was in an 'Induced Coma for 48 Hours' Due to Bacterial Infection". Peoplemag. Nolfi, Joey (September 13, 2023). "Madonna 'finally' celebrates release of canceled 1989 Pepsi commercial after 'Like a Prayer' controversy". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Kaufman, Gil (September 13, 2023). "Madonna Thanks Pepsi For Realizing the 'Genius of Our Collaboration' After Canned 1989 Ad Airs During 2023 MTV VMAs". Billboard. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Hodgkinson, Will (October 15, 2023). "Madonna Celebration Tour review - a nightclub performance on arena scale". The Times. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Savage, Mark (October 15, 2023). "Madonna's Celebration Tour reviewed: The Queen of pop brings out her crown jewels". BBC. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Petridis, Alexis (October 15, 2023). "Madonna review – queen of pop dazzles with her greatest hits". The Guardian. Retrieved October 15, 2023. "Madonna Celebrates Four Decades of Hits With Career-Spanning Spectacle". The New York Times. October 14, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Worrell, Denise (May 27, 1985). "Now: Madonna On Madonna". Time. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Michael 2004, p. 199 O'Brien, Lucy (September 1, 2007). "Madonna: For the first time, her friends and lovers speak out". The Independent. Retrieved September 24, 2017. King, Larry (January 19, 1999). "Interview: Madonna reviews life on Larry King Live". CNN. Retrieved June 9, 2008. Q, #99, December 1994. Madonna interview by Paul Du Noyer "Patti Smith's Gloria inspired Madonna". Yahoo! News. April 17, 2012. Archived from the original on June 27, 2012. Retrieved June 10, 2012. "Madonna inspired by Patti Smith". The Standard. April 16, 2012. Retrieved November 24, 2023. "How Joni Mitchell influenced Madonna". Far Out. December 29, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Lynch, Joe (December 9, 2016). "Madonna Delivers Her Blunt Truth During Fiery, Teary Billboard Women In Music Speech". Billboard. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Madonna accepts for David Bowie". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on March 4, 2010. Retrieved March 24, 2014. "Aug 16, 1958 CE: Happy Birthday, Madonna". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Victor 2001, p. 78 Voller 1999, p. 170 Guralnick & Wolk 2000, p. 149 Cross 2007, p. 47 Susman, Gary (September 30, 2003). "Madonna faces copyright suit over video images". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Guilbert 2002, p. 69 O'Brien 2007, pp. 126–131 Fouz-Hernández & Jarman-Ivens 2004, pp. 67–70 Michael De Groote (May 10, 2011). "Spiritual girl: Madonna's shifting beliefs". Deseret News. Retrieved March 11, 2016. Parke, Caleb (June 21, 2019). "Madonna wants the Pope to know that Jesus supports abortion". Fox News. Archived from the original on January 10, 2021. Friskics-Warren 2006, p. 72 "Madonna shares what motherhood taught her". Today. Halfpenny, Kate (June 18, 2019). "Madonna tells Andrew Denton about her bizarre eye patch". The New Daily. Retrieved November 24, 2023. Sears, Stephen (March 4, 2013). "Madonna's 'Ray Of Light' Turns 15: Backtracking". Idolator. Retrieved January 29, 2014. Grant 2005, p. 3 Harrison 2017, p. 213 Fouz-Hernández & Jarman-Ivens 2004, pp. 55–58 Ganz, Caryn (2004). "Biography – Madonna". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 15, 2011. Retrieved April 29, 2008. "Madonna > Credits". AllMusic. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved March 22, 2014. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 85 Hawkins 2017, p. 59 "Stuart Price interview". Popjustice. November 16, 2005. Archived from the original on November 5, 2016. Retrieved November 5, 2016. "Madonna: 'I'm not a control freak'". NME. March 17, 2012. Retrieved January 18, 2020. Michael 2004, p. 106 Baron, Bruce (July 2, 1999). "Madonna – From Genesis to Revelations". Goldmine. Vol. 25, no. 494. ISSN 1055-2685. Zollo 2003, p. 616 "ACE Repertory: Madonna L. Ciccone". American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. Retrieved November 11, 2017. "Madonna: Album Guide". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 5, 2011. Retrieved January 7, 2012. "The 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 13, 2015. Retrieved April 17, 2016. Walters, Barry (February 22, 2018). "Madonna's 'Ray of Light': 6 Things You Didn't Know". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 18, 2020. "The Ten That Matter Most: Madonna". April 19, 1995 – via Google Books. Nilles, Billy (August 16, 2020). "60 Crazy Facts About Madonna You Probably Didn't Know". E! Online. Retrieved January 18, 2020. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 122 Lamsweerde, Inez van; Walters, Barry (April 1998). "Madonna Chooses Dare". Spin. Vol. 14, no. 4. pp. 70–76. ISSN 0886-3032. Retrieved February 26, 2010. Bennett & Waksman 2014, p. 568 Levine, Nick (June 14, 2019). "The Guide to Getting Into Madonna, Holy Mother of Modern Pop". Vice. Retrieved January 18, 2020. Sclafani, Tony (March 7, 2008). "Madonna: A true blue rock star". MSNBC. Archived from the original on March 10, 2008. Retrieved January 14, 2011. Rooksby 2004, p. 4 "Madonna – Madonna > Overview". AllMusic. Retrieved March 22, 2014. Kaplan, Arie (January 1, 2017). American Pop: Hit Makers, Superstars, and Dance Revolutionaries. Millbrook Press. ISBN 978-1-5124-5649-3 – via Google Books. Piatkowski, Peter (June 29, 2021). "35 years ago Madonna staged on her (first) bid for artistic credibility with 'True Blue'". PopMatters. Archived from the original on June 29, 2021. Retrieved May 14, 2022. "Madonna's 50 Greatest Songs". Rolling Stone. July 27, 2016. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved August 8, 2017. Inskeep, Thomas (November 21, 2005). "Madonna – Confessions on a Dance Floor". Stylus Magazine. Archived from the original on October 10, 2009. Retrieved October 21, 2011. Taraborrelli 2002, p. 301 O'Brien 2007, p. 207 "All 82 Madonna Singles Ranked". Slant Magazine. April 14, 2020. Retrieved June 1, 2020. O'Brien 2007, p. 307 Cinquemani, Sal (July 11, 2008). "Madonna: American Life". Slant Magazine. Retrieved August 11, 2011. Juzwiak, Rich (June 18, 2019). "Madonna: Madame X Album Review". Pitchfork. Retrieved January 7, 2020. "That Time Monte Pittman Taught Madonna a Pantera Riff". Decibel. January 20, 2014. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Dean 2003, p. 34 Johnston, Maura (August 16, 2017). "Madonna: Like a Prayer". Pitchfork. Retrieved November 19, 2017. Fouz-Hernández & Jarman-Ivens 2004, pp. 59–61 Bego 2000, p. 122 Gnojewski 2007, p. 57 Madonna (1997). Pre-Madonna (CD, VHS). Soultone. 83332-2. Kuklenski, Valerie (November 1, 1999). "'Slashmeister' Craven tackles different genre with 'Music'". Las Vegas Sun. Retrieved March 22, 2014. Crane, Kelly (June 3, 2012). "Monte Pittman reveals what it's like on tour with Madonna". Gulf News. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved March 22, 2014. Goodman, Abbey (February 15, 2002). "Madonna: The Next Guitar God?". MTV News. Retrieved March 14, 2014. Metz & Benson 1999, p. 161 Taylor 1993, p. 191 Morton 2001, p. 15. Landrum 2007, p. 258 Morrow, Terry (April 25, 2003). "Madonna tops list of 'Greatest Video Stars' on MTV". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. p. 99. Retrieved June 3, 2021. "The 100 Greatest Music Video Artists of All Time: Staff List". Billboard. August 27, 2020. Archived from the original on August 27, 2020. Retrieved August 28, 2020. Metz & Benson 1999, p. 163 Fouz-Hernández & Jarman-Ivens 2004, p. 145 Kellner 1995, p. 271 Clerk 2002, p. 44 Rettenmund 1995, p. 34 Welton 1998, p. 234 Cross 2007, p. 70 Morton 2001, p. 218. Busari, Stephanie (March 24, 2008). "Hey Madonna, don't give up the day job!". CNN. Retrieved August 4, 2021. Smith, Nigel M. (August 21, 2016). "Is Madonna's acting really that bad? A career retrospective lets you be the judge". The Guardian. Retrieved August 25, 2016. Metz & Benson 1999, p. 290 Diamond 1996, p. 202 Taraborrelli 2002, p. 90 Nelson, Chris (February 1, 2004). "Lip-Synching Gets Real". The New York Times. Retrieved February 25, 2010. Christensen, Thor (September 15, 2001). "Loose Lips: Pop Singers' Lip-Syncing In Concert Is An Open Secret". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. p. B.8. ISSN 1068-624X. Retrieved August 4, 2018. Harada, Kai (September 1, 2007). "Kai Harada, sound designer and sound handbook author, writes about 'The Feeding and Care of RF Microphones'". Harada-Sound.com. Retrieved March 17, 2010. Castle, Andrew (July 2, 2007). "Wimbledon's No 1 seat". The Independent. London. Retrieved March 17, 2010. Boesveld, Sarah (June 27, 2017). "Camille Paglia cuts the 'malarkey': Women just need to toughen up". Chatelaine. Archived from the original on May 25, 2018. Retrieved April 4, 2021. Hughes, Hilary (October 14, 2016). "Madonna Is the Queen of Pop (And Also 2016, According to Billboard)". MTV. Archived from the original on July 25, 2020. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Stewart, Barbara (January 6, 1991). "The Madonna Thesis Is Madonna Just A Well-toned Rock Star, Or Is She Affecting Your View of the World? Graduate Student Chip Wells Thinks His Master's Thesis Holds The Answer". Orlando Sentinel. pp. 1–3. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2015. Hall 2006, pp. 445–446 Aguilar Guzmán 2010, p. 88 "Mujeres que cambiaron las reglas del rock". Rolling Stone Spain (in Spanish). April 14, 2012. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved April 14, 2013. Langley, William (August 9, 2008). "Madonna, mistress of metamorphosis". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved April 6, 2013. Graham, Mark (February 13, 2012). "VH1's 100 Greatest Women in Music". VH1. Viacom. Archived from the original on April 18, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2012. Gracie, Bianca (December 4, 2020). "The Most Influential Artists: #3 Madonna". Spin. Archived from the original on December 20, 2020. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Sclafani, Tony (August 12, 2008). "At 50, has Madonna surpassed the Beatles?". MSNBC. NBCUniversal. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011. Retrieved April 29, 2012. Gormly, Kellie B. (November 1, 2012). "Flamboyant Divas Can Thank Madonna". Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2012. "Madonna inspired Liam Gallagher to become a musician". Business Standard. Press Trust of India. September 1, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017. "Remembering Our Time with Chester Bennington". Elvis Duran and the Morning Show. February 21, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017. Fouz-Hernández & Jarman-Ivens 2004, p. 168 Fouz-Hernández & Jarman-Ivens 2004, p. 162 Fiske 1989, p. 102 Buikema & van der Tuin 2009, p. 119 Jeffreys 2005, p. 96 Jhally 2006, p. 194 Cain, Matt (July 15, 2018). "Matt Cain on Madonna: 'She opened up gay culture to the mainstream'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 15, 2018. Retrieved February 12, 2022. Madonna: The Politics of Sex. India: Macmillan Publishers. 2008. p. 143. ISBN 978-1-4039-2988-4 – via Google Books. Faith, Karlene (1997). Madonna, Bawdy & Soul. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 1-4426-7688-4. JSTOR 10.3138/j.ctt2tv4xw#. Latimer, Brian (May 5, 2019). "'A duty and an honor': Madonna reflects on decades of LGBTQ activism". NBC News. Archived from the original on June 6, 2019. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Karpel, Ari (February 2, 2012). "Madonna: The Truth Is She Never Left You". The Advocate. Archived from the original on February 3, 2012. Retrieved February 3, 2012. Kramarae & Spender 2000, p. 459 Gorlinski 2010, p. 330 Anderson, Jamie; Kupp, Martin (January 18, 2007). "Case Study: Madonna". The Times. Retrieved August 3, 2009. Morton, Andrew (2002). Madonna. New York: St. Martin's Paperbacks. p. 89. ISBN 978-0-312-98310-9. OCLC 49701778. "Madonna gets first Wembley honour". BBC News. August 2, 2006. Retrieved December 7, 2010. "2018 America's Self-Made Women Net Worth". Forbes. July 10, 2018. Retrieved July 12, 2018. Vasel, Kathryn (December 2, 2014). "The world's 10 richest recording artists". CNN Business. Retrieved December 10, 2017. Annual earning list: 1987: "Of the Show Biz Rich, Bill Cosby Is Top Star". Los Angeles Times. September 7, 1987. Retrieved July 27, 2022. 1988: "Michael Jackson Overtakes Cosby as Highest-Paid Entertainer". Associated Press. September 19, 1988. Retrieved July 27, 2022. 1989: Barty, Billy (November 30, 1989). "Tickertape: Million Dollar Bash" (PDF). Cash Box. p. 6. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Annual earning list: 1990: "Cosby Heads Forbes List of Highest Paid in Show Biz: The 'Forbes' Top 40". Jet. Vol. 78, no. 25. October 1, 1990. p. 54. Retrieved July 27, 2022. 1991: "High Life : A Weekly Forum for High School Students: Foothill Teen Wins Poster Prize". Los Angeles Times. September 26, 1991. Retrieved July 27, 2022. 1992: Brewington, Ron (October 1992). "Hollywood Grapevine: The 44th Annual Emmy Awards: Disaster". The Crisis. Vol. 99, no. 7. p. 13. Retrieved July 27, 2022. 1993: "Oprah Tops Forbes List of Highest Grossing Celebs". Jet. Vol. 84, no. 22. September 27, 1993. p. 13. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Annual earning list: 2005: "The Celebrity 100 > Musicians". Forbes. March 7, 2006. Archived from the original on March 7, 2006. 2007: "The Top-Earning Musicians". Forbes. September 19, 2007. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 28, 2022.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) 2009: "In Pictures: The Year's Top-Earning Musicians". Forbes. June 22, 2009. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Lane, Dan (March 29, 2012). "Madonna's Top 40 most downloaded tracks revealed!". Official Charts Company. Retrieved January 27, 2013. Egan, Barry (January 3, 2010). "U2 strike a chord in the best albums from 2009". The Independent. Retrieved July 23, 2010. "Best-Selling Female Recording Artist of All Time". Guinness World Records. Retrieved October 3, 2014. "Top Selling Artists". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved June 9, 2008. "The American Recording Industry Announces Its Artists of the Century". Recording Industry Association of America. November 10, 1999. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved January 30, 2008. Grein, Paul (April 24, 2017). "Barbra Streisand and the Other 19 Top-Selling Female Recording Artists of All Time". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on May 2, 2020. Retrieved December 24, 2020. Murrian, Samuel R. (August 16, 2021). "Happy Birthday, Madonna! Find Out the Queen of Pop's Royal Net Worth and How She Earned It". Parade. Retrieved August 30, 2021. Terry, Josh (May 27, 2014). "These Five Artists Have Made Over a Billion Dollars Touring". Consequence. Archived from the original on August 5, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2022. "Madonna Concert Draws 120,000". The Buffalo News. November 8, 1993. Archived from the original on November 29, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2017. "Madonna". Grammy Award. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved August 26, 2018. "Who has won the most MTV Video Music Awards?". Vibe. Vol. 16, no. 2. March 2008. p. 58. ISSN 1070-4701. "Greatest of All Time Hot 100 Artists Chart". Billboard. November 12, 2015. Retrieved March 20, 2020. Murray, Gordon (November 30, 2016). "Greatest of All Time: Madonna Is Billboard's No. 1 Dance Club Songs Artist". Billboard. Retrieved December 1, 2016. "Women With the Most Billboard Hot 100 Top 10s". Billboard. November 16, 2016. Archived from the original on May 24, 2020. Retrieved December 17, 2020. Savage, Mark (July 28, 2020). "Drake overtakes Madonna and The Beatles to break US Billboard chart record". BBC. Retrieved December 24, 2020. Trust, Gary (October 31, 2022). "Taylor Swift Makes History as First Artist With Entire Top 10 on Billboard Hot 100, Led by 'Anti-Hero' at No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved October 31, 2022. Ryan, Gavin (2011). Australia's Music Charts 1988–2010 (PDF ed.). Mt Martha, Victoria, Australia: Moonlight Publishing. p. 174. "Madonna – Canada Top Singles". RPM. Archived from the original on December 6, 2010. Retrieved October 8, 2009. "Madonna – Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved September 26, 2019. Spinetoli, John Joseph (January 2000). Artisti In Classifica Singoli: 1960–1999. Milan: Musica e dischi. pp. 217–222. "Madonna Discography: Italy". Italiancharts.com at Hung Medien. Retrieved December 2, 2009. "Madonna at Finnish Charts". Finnishcharts.com at Hung Medien. Archived from the original on December 28, 2020. Retrieved December 27, 2020. Salaverri 2005. "Madonna discography". Productores de Música de España Spanishcharts.com at Hung Medien. Retrieved November 14, 2010. Myers, Justin (January 3, 2020). "Artists with the most Number 1 singles on the UK chart". Official Charts Company. Retrieved March 22, 2020. Spahr, Wolfgang (August 28, 2017). "Germany's Music Charts Turn 40: Facts and Milestones in the 4th Biggest Music Market". Billboard. Retrieved August 28, 2017. Aguilar Guzmán, Marcela (2010). Domadores de historias. Conversaciones con grandes cronistas de América Latina (in Spanish). RIL Editores. ISBN 978-956-284-782-7. Bego, Mark (2000). Madonna: Blonde Ambition. Cooper Square Press. ISBN 978-0-8154-1051-5. Bennett, Andy; Waksman, Steve (2014). The SAGE Handbook of Popular Music. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-1-4739-1440-7. Bohem, David A. (1990). Guinness World Records 1990. Sterling Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8069-5791-3. Bronson, Fred (2002). The Billboard Book of Number 1 Hits. Billboard books. ISBN 978-0-8230-7677-2. Brackett, Nathan; Hoard, Christian (2004). The New Rolling Stone Album Guide. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-0169-8. Buikema, Rosemarie; van der Tuin, Iris (2009). Doing Gender in Media, Art and Culture. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-203-87680-0. Claro, Nicole (1994). Madonna. Chelsea House Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7910-2330-3. Clerk, Carol (2002). Madonnastyle. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-7119-8874-3. Cross, Mary (2007). Madonna: A Biography. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-33811-3. Dean, Maury (2003). Rock 'n' Roll Gold Rush: A Singles Un-Cyclopedia. Algora Publishing. ISBN 978-0-87586-207-1. Diamond, Elin (1996). Performance and Cultural Politics. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-12767-7. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas; Bogdanov, Vladimir; Woodstra, Chris (2002). AllMusic Guide to Rock: The Definitive Guide to Rock, Pop, and Soul. Hal Leonard Corporation. p. 1399. ISBN 978-0-87930-653-3. Jeffreys, Sheila (2005). Beauty and Misogyny: Harmful Cultural Practices In The West. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-35183-6. Fiske, John (1989). Reading the popular. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-07875-7. Fouz-Hernández, Santiago; Jarman-Ivens, Freya (2004). Madonna's Drowned Worlds. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-3372-3. Friskics-Warren, Bill (2006). I'll Take You There: Pop Music and the Urge for Transcendence. Continuum International Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-8264-1921-7. George-Warren, Holly; Romanowski, Patricia; Pareles, Jon, eds. (2001). The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll. Fireside. ISBN 978-0-7432-0120-9. Glenday, Craig (1998). Guinness World Records 1998. Jim Pattison Group. ISBN 978-0-85112-070-6. Glenday, Craig (2007). Guinness World Records 2007. Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-553-58992-4. Gnojewski, Carol (2007). Madonna: Express Yourself. Enslow Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7660-2442-7. Gorlinski, Gini (2010). The 100 Most Influential Musicians of All Time. Rosen Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-61530-056-3. Grant, Robert M. (2005). Contemporary Strategy Analysis. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-1999-3. Guilbert, Georges-Claude (2002). Madonna as Postmodern Myth. McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-1408-6. Guralnick, Peter; Wolk, Douglas (2000). Best Music Writing. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-80999-6. Hall, Dennis (2006). American Icons. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0-313-02767-6. Harrison, Thomas (2017). Pop Goes the Decade: The Eighties. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-4408-3667-1. Hawkins, Stan (2017). Settling the Pop Score: Pop Texts and Identity Politics. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-351-54910-3. Horton, Ros; Simmons, Sally (2007). Women Who Changed the World. Quercus. ISBN 978-1-84724-026-2. Jhally, Sut (2006). The Spectacle of Accumulation: Essays in Culture, Media, And Politics. Peter Lang. ISBN 978-0-8204-7904-0. Kellner, Douglas (1995). Media Culture: Cultural Studies, Identity, and Politics Between the Modern and the Postmodern. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-10570-5. Kramarae, Cheris; Spender, Dale (2000). Routledge International Encyclopedia of Women: Global Women's Issues and Knowledge. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-92091-9. Landrum, Gene N. (2007). Paranoia & Power: Fear & Fame of Entertainment Icons. Morgan James Publishing. ISBN 978-1-60037-273-5. Leonard, George J.; D'Acierno, Pellegrino (1998). The Italian American Heritage: A Companion to Literature and Arts. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-8153-0380-0. McFarlan, Donald (1992). The Guinness Book of Records 1992. Guinness. ISBN 978-0-85112-378-3. Metz, Allen; Benson, Carol (1999). The Madonna Companion: Two Decades of Commentary. Music Sales Group. ISBN 978-0-8256-7194-4. Morton, Andrew (2001). Madonna. London: Michael O'Mara Books. ISBN 978-1-85479-888-6. O'Brien, Lucy (2007). Madonna: Like an Icon. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-593-05547-2. Pitts, Michael (2004). Famous Movie Detectives. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-3690-7. Rettenmund, Matthew (1995). Madonnica: The Woman & The Icon From A To Z. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-11782-5. Michael, Mick St. (2004). Madonna talking: Madonna in Her Own Words. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-1-84449-418-7. Rooksby, Rikky (2004). The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-7119-9883-4. Salaverri, Fernando (September 2005). Sólo éxitos: año a año, 1959–2002 (1st ed.). Spain: Fundación Autor-SGAE. ISBN 84-8048-639-2. Taraborrelli, J. Randy (2002). Madonna: An Intimate Biography. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-2880-0. Taylor, Mark C. (1993). Nots. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-79131-9. Tetzlaff, David (1993). Metatextual Girl. Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-1396-2. Victor, Barbara (2001). Goddess, Inside Madonna. Cliff Street Books. ISBN 978-0-06-019930-2. Voller, Debbie (1999). Madonna: The Style Book. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-7119-7511-8. Welton, Donn (1998). Body and Flesh: A Philosophical Reader. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-57718-126-2. Zollo, Paul (2003), Songwriters on Songwriting, Da Capo Press, ISBN 978-0-306-81265-1 Madonna at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Madonna at AllMovie Madonna at AllMusic Madonna at Curlie Madonna at IMDb "Madonna". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Madonna at the TCM Movie Database