Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif (Urdu, Punjabi: میاں محمد نواز شریف; born 25 December 1949) is a Pakistani businessman and politician who served as the Prime Minister of Pakistan for three non-consecutive terms. He is the longest-serving prime minister of Pakistan, having served a total of more than 9 years across three tenures. Each term has ended in his ousting. Born into the upper-middle-class Sharif family in Lahore, Nawaz is the son of Muhammad Sharif, the founder of Ittefaq and Sharif groups. He is the elder brother of Shehbaz Sharif, who also served as prime minister of Pakistan from 2022 to 2023 and from 2024 to present. According to the Election Commission of Pakistan, Nawaz is one of the wealthiest men in Pakistan, with an estimated net worth of at least Rs. 1.75 billion (equivalent to Rs. 8.9 billion or US$31 million in 2021). Most of his wealth originates from his businesses in steel construction. Before entering politics in the mid-1980s, Nawaz studied business at Government College and law at the University of Punjab. In 1981, Nawaz was appointed by President Zia as the minister of finance for the province of Punjab. Backed by a loose coalition of conservatives, Nawaz was elected as the Chief Minister of Punjab in 1985 and re-elected after the end of martial law in 1988. In 1990, Nawaz led the conservative Islamic Democratic Alliance and became the 12th prime minister of Pakistan. After being ousted in 1993, when President Ghulam Ishaq Khan dissolved the National Assembly, Nawaz served as the leader of the opposition to the government of Benazir Bhutto from 1993 to 1996. He returned to the premiership after the Pakistan Muslim League (N) (PML-N) was elected in 1997, and served until his removal in 1999 by military takeover and was tried in a plane hijacking case which was argued by Barrister Ijaz Husain Batalvi, assisted by Khawaja Sultan senior Advocate, Sher Afghan Asdi and Akhtar Aly Kureshy Advocate. After being imprisoned and later exiled for more than a decade, he returned to politics in 2011 and led his party to victory for the third time in 2013. In 2017, Nawaz was removed from office by the Supreme Court of Pakistan regarding revelations from the Panama Papers case. In 2018, the Pakistani Supreme Court disqualified Nawaz from holding public office, and he was also sentenced to ten years in prison by an accountability court. Since 2019, Nawaz was in London for medical treatment on bail. He was also declared an absconder by a Pakistani court, however, the Islamabad High Court (IHC) granted him protective bail till October 24 in the Avenfield and Al-Aziza cases. In 2023, after four years of exile, he returned to Pakistan. In a legal proceeding, a division bench, consisting of Islamabad High Court (IHC) Chief Justice Aamir Farooq and Justice Miangul Hasan Aurangzeb, adjudicated Nawaz Sharif's appeals challenging his sentences in the Avenfield and Al-Azizia Steel Mills cases. The outcome of these proceedings resulted in the acquittal of PML-N leader Nawaz Sharif on 29 November 2023 from charges related to the Avenfield Apartments references by the IHC. Nawaz was born in Lahore, Punjab, on 25 December 1949. The Sharif family are Punjabi-speaking Kashmiris. His father, Muhammad Sharif, was an upper-middle-class businessman and industrialist whose family had emigrated from Anantnag in Kashmir for business. They settled in the village of Jati Umra in Amritsar district, Punjab, at the beginning of the twentieth century. His mother's family came from Pulwama. After the creation of Pakistan in 1947, Nawaz's parents migrated from Amritsar to Lahore. His father followed the teachings of the Ahl-i Hadith. His family owns Ittefaq Group, a multimillion-dollar steel conglomerate, and Sharif Group, a conglomerate with holdings in agriculture, transport and sugar mills. He has two younger brothers: Shehbaz Sharif and the late Abbas Sharif, both politicians by profession. Nawaz went to Saint Anthony High School. He graduated from the Government College University (GCU) with an art and business degree and then received a law degree from the Law College of Punjab University in Lahore. Nawaz was a cricketer in his early years, playing as an opening batsman. Peter Oborne noted that he had success at club level and that "he was proud of his first-class record", having been part of the highly rated Pakistan Railways team in 1973–1974. Years later, when he was a well-known politician, he'd play in warm-up matches, for Lahore Gymkhana against England and as temporary captain of the national team against the West Indies, both just before the 1987 World Cup. Due to the West Indies match he'd surprise Imran Khan, then the regular captain, because Nawaz opened the innings with minimal protection against one of the most feared fast bowling attack. Nawaz Sharif's wife Kulsoom had two sisters and a brother. From her maternal side, she was the maternal granddaughter of the wrestler The Great Gama (Ghulam Mohammad Baksh Butt). She married Nawaz Sharif in April 1970. The couple have four children: Maryam, Asma, Hassan and Hussain. Nawaz suffered financial losses when his family's steel business was appropriated under the nationalisation policies of former prime minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. Nawaz entered politics as a result, initially focused on regaining control of the steel plants. In 1976, Nawaz joined the Pakistan Muslim League (PML), a conservative front rooted in the Punjab province. In May 1980, Ghulam Jilani Khan, the recently appointed military governor of Punjab and a former Director-General of the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), was seeking new urban leaders; he quickly promoted Nawaz, making him finance minister. In 1981, Nawaz joined the Punjab Advisory Council under Khan. During the 1980s, Nawaz gained influence as a supporter of General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq's military government. Zia-ul-Haq agreed to return the steel industry to Nawaz, who convinced the general to denationalise and deregulate industries to improve the economy. Within Punjab, Nawaz privatised government-owned industries and presented development-oriented budgets to the military government. These policies raised financial capital and helped increase the standard of living and purchasing power in the province, which in turn improved law and order and extended Khan's rule. Punjab was the richest province and received more federal funding than the other provinces of Pakistan, contributing to economical inequality. Nawaz invested his wealth in Saudi Arabia and other oil-rich Arab countries to rebuild his steel empire. According to personal accounts and his time spent with Nawaz, American historian Stephen P. Cohen states in his 2004 book Idea of Pakistan: "Nawaz Sharif never forgave Bhutto after his steel empire was lost [...] even after [Bhutto's] terrible end, Nawaz publicly refused to forgive the soul of Bhutto or the Pakistan Peoples Party." In 1985, Khan nominated Nawaz as Chief Minister of Punjab, against the wishes of Prime Minister Muhammad Khan Junejo. With the backing of the army, Nawaz secured a landslide victory in the 1985 elections. Because of his popularity, he received the nickname "Lion of the Punjab". Nawaz built ties with the senior army generals who sponsored his government. He maintained an alliance with General Rahimuddin Khan, Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee. Nawaz also had close ties with Lieutenant-General (retired) Hamid Gul, the Director-General of ISI. As chief minister, Nawaz stressed welfare and development activities and the maintenance of law and order. Khan beautified Lahore, extended military infrastructure, and silenced political opposition, while Nawaz expanded economic infrastructure to benefit the army, his own business interests, and the people of Punjab. In 1988, General Zia dismissed the government of Junejo and called for new elections. However, Zia retained Nawaz as the Chief Minister of Punjab, and until his death, continued to support Nawaz. After General Zia's death in August 1988, his political party – Pakistan Muslim League (Pagara Group) – split into two factions. Nawaz led the Zia-loyalist Fida Group against the Prime Minister's Junejo's Pakistan Muslim League (J). The Fida Group later took on the mantle of the PML while the Junejo Group became known as the JIP. The two parties along with seven other right-wing conservative and religious parties united with encouragement and funding from the ISI to form the Islami Jamhoori Ittehad (IJI). (The IJI received PRs. 15 million from Zia loyalists in the ISI, with a substantial role played by Nawaz's ally Gul.) The alliance was led by Nawaz and Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi and opposed Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) in the elections. The IJI gained a majority in Punjab, and Nawaz was re-elected as the chief minister. In December 1989, Nawaz decided to remain in the provincial Punjab Assembly rather than hold a seat in the National Assembly. In early 1989, the PPP government attempted to unseat Nawaz through a no-confidence motion in the Punjab Assembly, which they lost by a vote of 152 to 106. The conservatives first came to power in a democratic Pakistan under Nawaz's leadership. Nawaz Sharif became the 12th prime minister of Pakistan on 1 November 1990, succeeding Benazir Bhutto. He also became head of IJI. Sharif had a majority in the assembly and ruled with considerable confidence, having disputes with three successive army chiefs. Nawaz had campaigned on a conservative platform and vowed to reduce government corruption. Nawaz introduced an economy based on privatisation and economic liberalisation to reverse the nationalisation by Zulfikar Bhutto, notably for banks and industries. He legalised foreign money exchange to be transacted through private money exchangers. His privatisation policies were continued by both Benazir Bhutto in the mid-1990s and Shaukat Aziz in the 2000s. He also improved the nation's infrastructure and spurred the growth of digital telecommunication. Nawaz continued the simultaneous Islamization and conservatism of Pakistan society, a policy begun by Zia. Reforms were made to introduce fiscal conservatism, supply-side economics, bioconservatism and religious conservatism in Pakistan. Nawaz intensified Zia's controversial Islamization policies, and introduced Islamic laws such as the Shariat Ordinance and Bait-ul-Maal (to help poor orphans, widows, etc.) to drive the country on the model of an Islamic welfare state. Moreover, he gave tasks to the Ministry of Religion to prepare reports and recommendations for steps taken toward Islamization. He ensured the establishment of three committees: Ittehad-e-bain-ul-Muslemeen (English: Unity of Muslims Bloc) Nifaz-e-Shariat Committee (English: Sharia Establishment Committee) Islamic Welfare Committee Nawaz extended membership of the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) to all Central Asian countries to unite them into a Muslim bloc. Nawaz included environmentalism in his government platform, and established the Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency in 1997. Following the imposition and passing of Resolution 660, 661, and 665, Nawaz sided with the United Nations on the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Nawaz's government criticised Iraq for invading the fellow Muslim country, which strained Pakistan's relationships with Iraq. This continued as Pakistan sought to strengthen its relations with Iran. This policy continued under Benazir Bhutto and Pervez Musharraf until the removal of Saddam Hussein in 2003. Nawaz raised the issue of Kashmir in international forums[citation needed] and worked toward a peaceful transfer of power in Afghanistan[citation needed] to curb the rampant trading of illicit drugs and weapons across the border.[citation needed] Nawaz challenged former Chief of Army Staff General Mirza Aslam Beg over the 1991 Gulf War. Under the direction of Beg, Pakistan Armed Forces participated in Operation Desert Storm and the Army Special Service Group and the Naval Special Service Group were deployed to Saudi Arabia to provide security for the Saudi royal family. Nawaz faced difficulty working with the PPP and the Mutahidda Qaumi Movement (MQM), a potent force in Karachi. The MQM and the PPP opposed Nawaz due to his focus on beautifying Punjab and Kashmir while neglecting Sindh, and the MQM also opposed Nawaz's conservatism. Although the MQM had formed the government with Nawaz, the political tensions between liberalism and conservatism erupted into conflict by renegade factions in 1992. To end the fighting between PML-N and MQM, Nawaz's party passed a resolution to launch a paramilitary operation under command of Chief of Army Staff General Asif Nawaz Janjua. Violence erupted in Karachi in 1992 and brought the economy to a halt. During this time, Benazir Bhutto and the centre-left PPP remained neutral, but her brother Murtaza Bhutto exerted pressure which suspended the operation. The period of 1992–1994 is considered[by whom?] the bloodiest in the history of the city, with many people missing.[citation needed] Nawaz had campaigned on a conservative platform and after assuming office announced his economic policy under the National Economic Reconstruction Programme (NERP). This programme introduced an extreme level of the Western-styled capitalist economics. Unemployment had limited Pakistan's economic growth and Nawaz believed that only privatisation could solve this problem. Nawaz introduced an economy based on privatisation and economic liberalisation, notably for banks and industries. According to the US Department of State, this followed a vision of "turning Pakistan into a [South] Korea by encouraging greater private saving and investment to accelerate economic growth." The privatisation programme reversed the nationalisation by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and the PPP in the 1970s. By 1993, around 115 nationalised industries were opened to private ownership, including the National Development Finance Corporation, Pakistan National Shipping Corporation, National Electric Power Regulatory Authority, Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Pakistan Telecommunication Corporation, and Pakistan State Oil. This boosted the economy but a lack of competition in bidding allowed the rise of business oligarchs and further widened the wealth gap, contributing to political instability. Former science advisor Dr. Mubashir Hassan called Nawaz's privatisation "unconstitutional". The PPP held that nationalisation policy was given constitutional status by parliament, and that privatisation policies were illegal and had taken place without parliamentary approval. Nawaz initiated several large-scale projects to stimulate the economy, such as the Ghazi-Barotha Hydropower Project. However, unemployment remained a challenge. In an attempt to counter this, Nawaz imported thousands of privatised Yellow-cab taxis for young Pakistanis, but few of the loans were repaid and Nawaz was forced to pay for them through his steel industry. Nawaz's projects were not evenly distributed, focusing on Punjab and Kashmir Provinces, the base of his support, with lesser efforts in Khyber and Balochistan provinces, and no benefits from industrialization in Sindh Province. After intense criticism from the PPP and MQM, Nawaz completed the Orangi Cottage Industrial Zone but this did not repair his reputation in Sindh. Opponents accused Nawaz of using political influence to build factories for himself and his business, for expanding the Armed Forces' secretive industrial conglomerate and bribing generals. While privatising industry, Nawaz took steps for intense government control of science in Pakistan, and placed projects under his authorisation. In 1991, Nawaz founded and authorised the Pakistan Antarctic Programme under the scientific directions of National Institute of Oceanography (NIO), with the Pakistan Navy's Weapons Engineering Division, and first established the Jinnah Antarctic Station and Polar Research Cell. In 1992, Pakistan became an associate member of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research. On 28 July 1997, Nawaz declared 1997 a year of science in Pakistan and personally allotted funds for the 22nd INSC College on Theoretical Physics. In 1999, Nawaz signed the executive decree, declaring 28 May as the National Science Day in Pakistan. Nawaz made the nuclear weapons and energy programme one of his top priorities. He expanded the nuclear energy program, and continued an atomic programme while following a policy of deliberate nuclear ambiguity. This resulted in a nuclear crisis with the United States which tightened its embargo on Pakistan in December 1990 and reportedly offered substantial economic aid to halt the country's uranium enrichment programme. Responding to US embargo, Nawaz announced that Pakistan had no atomic bomb, and would sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty if India did as well. The embargo blocked plans for a French-built nuclear power plant, so Nawaz's advisors intensively lobbied the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which allowed China to establish CHASNUPP-I nuclear power plant and upgrade KANUPP-I. Nawaz's nuclear policy was considered less aggressive towards India with its focus on public usage through nuclear power and medicine, viewed as a continuation of the US Atoms for Peace programme.[by whom?] In 1993, Nawaz established the Institute of Nuclear Engineering (INE) to promote his policy for the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Nawaz suffered a major loss of political support from the co-operatives societies scandal. These societies accept deposits from members and can legally make loans only to members for purposes to the benefit of the membership. However, mismanagement led to a collapse affecting millions of Pakistanis in 1992. In Punjab and Kashmir, around 700,000 people lost their savings, and it was discovered that billions of rupees had been granted to the Ittefaq Group of Industries – Nawaz's steel mill. Although the loans were hurriedly repaid, Nawaz's reputation was severely damaged. Nawaz had developed serious issues of authority with conservative President Ghulam Ishaq Khan, who had raised Nawaz to prominence during the Zia dictatorship. On 18 April, ahead of the 1993 Parliamentary election, Khan used his reserve powers (58-2b) to dissolve the National Assembly, and with the support of the army appointed Mir Balakh Sher as interim prime minister. Nawaz refused to accept this act and raised a challenge at the Supreme Court of Pakistan. On 26 May, the Supreme Court ruled 10–1 that the presidential order was unconstitutional, that the president could dissolve the assembly only if a constitutional breakdown had occurred and that the government's incompetence or corruption was irrelevant. (Justice Sajjad Ali Shah was the only dissenting judge; he later became 13th Chief Justice of Pakistan.[relevant?]) Issues of authority continued. In July 1993, under pressure from the armed forces, Nawaz resigned under an agreement that also removed President Khan from power. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee General Shamim Allam and the Chief of Army Staff General Abdul Vahied Kakar forced Khan to resign from the presidency and ended the political standoff. Under the close scrutiny of the Pakistan Armed Forces, an interim and transitional government was formed and new parliamentary election was held after three months. Following 1993 elections, the PPP returned to power under Benazir Bhutto. Nawaz offered his full co-operation as Leader of the Opposition but soon the PPP and PML-N held parliament locked in dispute. Bhutto found it difficult to act effectively in the face of opposition from Nawaz, and also faced problems in her political stronghold of Sindh Province from her younger brother Murtaza Bhutto. Nawaz and Murtaza Bhutto formed the Nawaz-Bhutto axis and worked to undermine Benazir Bhutto's government, tapping an anti-corruption wave in Pakistan. They accused the government of corruption with major state corporations and slowing economic progress. In 1994 and 1995 they made a "train march" from Karachi to Peshawar, making critical speeches to huge crowds. Nawaz organised strikes throughout Pakistan in September and October 1994. The death of Murtaza Bhutto in 1996, which allegedly involved Benazir's spouse, led to demonstrations in Sindh and the government lost control of the province. Benazir Bhutto became widely unpopular across the country and was ousted in October 1996. By 1996, continuous large-scale corruption by the government of Benazir Bhutto had deteriorated the country's economy, which was nearing failure. In the 1997 parliamentary elections, Nawaz and the PML-N won an overwhelming victory, with an exclusive mandate from across Pakistan. It was hoped that Nawaz would deliver on promises to provide a stable conservative government and improve overall conditions. Nawaz was sworn as prime minister on 17 February. Nawaz had formed an alliance with Altaf Hussain of the MQM which fell apart following the assassination of Hakim Said. Nawaz then removed the MQM from parliament and assumed control of Karachi while MQM was forced underground. This led Nawaz to claim an exclusive mandate, and for the first time Nawaz and the PML-N had the control of Sindh, Balochistan, Northwest Frontier, Kashmir and Punjab. With a supermajority, Nawaz's new government amended the constitution to restrict the powers of the president to dismiss governments. With the passing of the 14th amendment, Nawaz emerged as the most powerful elected prime minister in the country. Nawaz's popularity peaked in May 1998 after conducting the country's first nuclear weapons tests in response to tests by India. When Western countries suspended foreign aid, Nawaz froze the country's foreign currency reserves and economic conditions worsened. The country became embroiled in conflicts on two borders and Nawaz's long-standing relationships with the military establishment fell apart, so that by mid-1999 few approved of his policies. During the 1997 elections, Nawaz promised to follow his policy of nuclear ambiguity while using nuclear energy to stimulate the economy. However, on 7 September, before a state visit to the US, Nawaz acknowledged in a STN News interview that the country had had an atomic bomb since 1978. Nawaz maintained that: The issue of [atomic] capability is an established fact. [H]ence the debate on this [atomic] [i]ssue should come to an end [...] Since 1972, [P]akistan had progressed significantly, and we have left that [developmental] stage far behind. Pakistan will not be made a "hostage" to India by signing the CTBT before [India]. — Nawaz Sharif, 7 September 1997 On 1 December, Nawaz told the Daily Jang and The News International that Pakistan would immediately become a party of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) if India signed and ratified it first. Under his leadership, the nuclear program had become a vital part of Pakistan's economic policy. In May 1998, soon after Indian nuclear tests, Nawaz vowed that his country would make a suitable reply. On 14 May, Leader of the Opposition Benazir Bhutto and MQM called for nuclear tests, followed by calls from the public. When India tested its nuclear weapons the second time, it caused a great alarm in Pakistan and pressure mounted on Nawaz. On 15 May, Nawaz put the armed forces on high-alert and called a National Security Council meeting, discussing the financial, diplomatic, military, strategic and national security concerns. Only Treasure Minister Sartaj Aziz opposed the tests, due to the economic recession, low foreign exchange reserves, and economic sanctions. Nawaz was initially hesitant of the economic impact of nuclear testing, and observed the international reaction to India's tests, where an embargo had no economic effect. Failure to conduct the tests would put the credibility of Pakistan's nuclear deterrence in doubt, which was emphasized when Indian Home Minister Lal Kishanchand Advani and Defence Minister George Fernandes gloated and belittled Pakistan, angering Nawaz. On 18 May, Nawaz ordered the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) to make preparation for the tests, and put military forces on high alert to provide support. On 21 May, Nawaz authorised nuclear weapon tests in Balochistan. On 27 May, the day before testing, the ISI detected Israeli F-16 fighters conducting exercises and received intelligence that they had orders to attack Pakistan's nuclear facilities on behalf of India. Nawaz scrambled the Pakistan Air Force and had nuclear bombs prepared for deployment. According to political scientist Shafik H. Hashmi, the US and other nations assured Nawaz that Pakistan was safe; the Israeli attack never materialized. On 28 and 30 May 1998, Pakistan successfully carried out its nuclear tests, codenamed Chagai-I and Chagai-II. Following these test, Nawaz appeared on national television and stated: If [Pakistan] had wanted, she would have conducted nuclear tests 15–20 years ago [...] but the abject poverty of the people of the region dissuaded [... Pakistan] from doing so. But the [w]orld, instead of putting pressure on [India ...] not to take the destructive road [...] imposed all kinds of sanctions on [Pakistan] for no fault [...] If [Japan] had its own nuclear capability [...] Hiroshima and Nagasaki would not have suffered atomic destruction at the hands of the [United States.] — Nawaz Sharif, 30 May 1998, televised on PTV Nawaz's political prestige reached its peak when the country went nuclear. Despite the intense international criticism and decline in foreign investment and trade, Nawaz's domestic popularity increased, as the tests made Pakistan the first Muslim country and seventh nation to become a nuclear power. Editorials were full of praise for the country's leadership and advocated the development of nuclear deterrence. Leader of the Opposition Benazir Bhutto congratulated Nawaz for his "bold decision" in spite of the economic outcomes, and felt that the tests erased doubts and fears which troubled the nation since the Indo-Pakistani war of 1971. In India, opposition leaders in parliament blamed the government for starting a nuclear arms race. Nawaz was awarded an Ig Nobel prize for his "aggressively peaceful explosions of atomic bombs".[relevant?] Nawaz built Pakistan's first major motorway, the M2 Motorway (3MM), called the Autobahn of South Asia. This public-private project was completed in November 1997 at a cost of US$989.12 million. His critics questioned the layout of the highway, its excessive length, its distance from important cities, and the absence of link roads with important towns. It also appropriated funds designated for the Peshawar–Karachi Indus Highway, benefiting Punjab and Kashmir at the cost of other provinces. There was particular dissatisfaction in Sindh and Balochistan Provinces, and Nawaz faced a lack of capital investment to finance additional projects. Nawaz loosened foreign exchange restrictions and opened Karachi Stock Exchange to foreign capital, but the government remained short of funds for investments. Due to economic pressures, Nawaz halted the national space programme. This forced the Space Research Commission to delay the launch of its satellite, Badr-II(B), which was completed in 1997. This caused frustration among the scientific community who criticised Nawaz's inability to promote science. Senior scientists and engineers attributed this to "Nawaz's personal corruption" that affected national security. By the end of Nawaz's second term, the economy was in turmoil. The government faced serious structural issues and financial problems; inflation and foreign debt stood at an all-time high, and unemployment in Pakistan had reached its highest point. Pakistan had debts of US$32bn against reserves of little more than $1bn. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) had suspended aid, demanding the country's finances be resolved. Nawaz continued to meddle with the stock exchange markets with devastating effects. By the time he was deposed, the country was heading for financial default. Nawaz strengthened Pakistan's relations with the Muslim world and Europe. In February 1997, Nawaz met with Chinese President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng to discuss economic cooperation. Two conferences were organised in Beijing and Hong Kong to promote Chinese investment in Pakistan. In 1997, Nawaz signed a trilateral free trade agreement with Malaysia and Singapore, which was followed by collaboration in defence. One of the core issues was Malaysia's agreement on sharing its space technology with Pakistan. Both Malaysia and Singapore assured their support for Pakistan to join Asia–Europe Meeting, though Pakistan and India were not parties to the treaty until 2008. In January 1998, Nawaz signed bilateral economic agreements with South Korean President Kim Young-sam. Nawaz urged North Korea to make peace and improve its ties with South Korea; causing a division in Pakistan–North Korean relations. In April 1998, Nawaz went on to visit Italy, Germany, Poland, and Belgium to promote economic ties. He signed a number of agreements to enlarge economic co-operation with Italy and Belgium, and an agreement with the European Union (EU) for the protection of intellectual, industrial and commercial property rights. However, Nawaz's diplomatic efforts seemed to have gone to waste after conducting nuclear tests in May 1998. Widespread international criticism brought Pakistan's reputation to a low since the Indo-Pakistani war of 1971. Pakistan failed to gather any support from its allies at the UN, and trade agreements were repealed by the US, Europe, and Asian bloc. Pakistan was accused of allowing nuclear proliferation. In June 1998, Nawaz authorised a secret meeting between Pakistan and Israel's ambassadors to the UN and US, and assured Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu that Pakistan would not transfer nuclear technology or materials to Iran or other Middle Eastern countries. Israel responded with concerns that Iranian Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi's visit to Pakistan shortly after the May 1998 nuclear weapons tests was a sign that Pakistan was preparing to sell nuclear technology to Iran. In 1998, India and Pakistan made an agreement recognising the principle of building an environment of peace and security and resolving all bilateral conflicts. On 19 February 1999, Indian Premier Atal Bihari Vajpayee paid a historic state visit to Pakistan, travelling on the inaugural Delhi–Lahore Bus connecting the Indian capital with Pakistan's major cultural city of Lahore. On 21 February, the prime ministers signed a bilateral agreement with a memorandum of understanding to ensure nuclear-free safety in South Asia, which became known as the Lahore Declaration. The agreement was widely popular in both countries, where it was felt that development of nuclear weapons brought added responsibility and promoted the importance of confidence-building measures to avoid accidental or unauthorised use of nuclear weapons. Some Western observers compared the treaty to the cold war Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. In late August 1998, Nawaz proposed a law to establish a legal system based on Islamic principles. His proposal came a week after the 10-year commemorations of the late president Zia ul-Haq. After his cabinet removed some of its controversial aspects, the National Assembly approved and passed the bill on 10 October 1998 by a vote of 151 to 16. With a majority in parliament, Nawaz reverted the semi-presidential system in favour of a more parliamentary system. With these amendments, Nawaz became the country's strongest freely elected prime minister. However, these amendments failed to achieve a two-thirds majority in the Senate, which remained under the control of the PPP. Weeks later, parliament was suspended by a military coup and Legal Framework Order, 2002 (2002 LFO) returned the country to a semi-presidential system for another decade. Nawaz's Fourteenth Amendment consolidated his power by preventing legislators and lawmakers from dissenting or voting against their own parties, and prohibited judicial appeal for offenders. Legislators from different parties challenged this with the Supreme Court, infuriating Nawaz. He openly criticised Chief Justice Sajad Alishah, inviting a notice of contempt. At the urging of the military and president, Nawaz agreed the solve the conflict amicably but remained determined to oust Alishah. Nawaz manipulated the ranks of senior judges, deposing two judges close to Alishah. The deposed judges challenged Nawaz's orders on procedural grounds by filing a petition at Quetta High Court on 26 November 1997. Alishah was restrained by his fellow judges from adjudicating in the case against the prime minister. On 28 November, Nawaz appeared in the Supreme Court and justified his actions, citing evidence against the two deposed judges. Alishah suspended the decision of Quetta High Court, but soon the Peshawar High Court issued similar orders removing Alishah's closest judges. The associate chief justice of Peshawar High Court, Justice Saeeduzzaman Siddiqui, declared himself acting chief justice. Alishah continued to assert his authority and persisted in hearing Nawaz's case. On 30 November, Nawaz's cabinet ministers and a large number of supporters entered the Supreme Court building, disrupting the proceedings. The chief justice requested the military police, and subsequently struck down the Thirteenth Amendment, restoring the power of the president. However, the military-backed Nawaz refused to obey the president's orders to remove him. Nawaz forced President Farooq Leghari to resign, and appointed Wasim Sajjad as acting president, then ousted Alishah to end the constitutional crisis. On 29 November 2006, Nawaz and the PML-N issued a formal apology for their actions to Alishah and Leghari. A written apology was presented to Alishah at his residence and later, his party issued a white paper in Parliament formally apologising for their wrongdoing. Nawaz passed the controversial Anti-Terrorist Act on 17 August 1997, which established Anti-Terrorism Courts. The Supreme Court later rendered the Act unconstitutional. However, Nawaz made amendments and received the permission of the Supreme Court to establish these courts. From 1981 until 1999, Nawaz enjoyed extremely cordial relations with the Pakistan Armed Forces, and was the only senior civilian leader to have friendly relations with the military establishment during that period. However, when Chief of Army Staff General Jehangir Karamat advocated for a National Security Council, Nawaz interpreted this as a conspiracy to return the military to an active political role.[clarification needed] In October 1998, three months before the end of his term, Karamat was forced to resign. This was controversial even within Nawaz's cabinet and was seen as the least-popular moment of Nawaz's administration. Military lawyers and civilian law experts saw this as unconstitutional and a violation of military justice code. However, Media Minister Syed Mushahid Hussain felt that Pakistan was "finally becoming a normal democratic society", not beholden to its military. Nawaz promoted General Pervez Musharraf to replace Karamat, also making Musharraf Chairman of the Joint Chiefs despite his lack of seniority. Admiral Fasih Bokhari resigned as Chief of Naval Staff in protest. Bokhari lodged a protest against the Kargil debacle and called for the court-martial of Musharraf, who Nawaz said acted alone.[further explanation needed] In August, India shot down a Pakistan Navy reconnaissance aircraft in the Atlantique Incident, killing 16 naval officers,[citation needed] the greatest number of combat casualties for the navy since the Indo-Pakistani Naval War of 1971. Nawaz failed to gain foreign support against India for the incident, which newly appointed Chief of Naval Staff Admiral Abdul Aziz Mirza viewed as a lack of support for the navy in wartime. Nawaz further lost the confidence of the Marines for failing to defend the navy at the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in September. Relations with the Air Force likewise deteriorated, when Chief of Air Staff General Parvaiz Mehdi Qureshi accused the prime minister of not consulting the air force in matters critical to national security. Two months later, after steadily worsening relations with the Armed Forces, Nawaz was deposed by Musharraf and martial law was established throughout the country. The simultaneous conflicts in the Kargil war with India and Afghanistan's civil war, along with economical turmoil, turned public opinion against Nawaz and his policies. On 12 October 1999, Nawaz attempted to remove Musharraf for military failures and replace him with General Ziauddin Butt. Nawaz's mindset was to remove the Chairman Joint Chiefs and the Chief of Army Staff first, then depose the other armed forces chiefs who had destroyed his credibility. Musharraf, who was in Sri Lanka, attempted to return on a PIA commercial flight. Nawaz ordered the Sindh Police Force to arrest Musharraf. Fearing a coup d'état, he further ordered the Jinnah Terminal to be sealed to prevent the landing of the airliner. The A300 aircraft was ordered to land at Nawabshah Airport (now Shaheed Benazirabad Airport). There, Musharraf contacted top Pakistan Army generals who took over the country and ousted Nawaz's administration. Nawaz was taken to Adiala Jail for trial by a military judge. Musharraf later assumed control of the government as chief executive. A single protest was held by Sardar Mohsin Abbasi in front of the Supreme Court on 17 October on the first hearing of Nawaz. Raja Zafar-ul-Haq, Sir Anjam Khan, Zafer Ali Shah and Sardar Mohsin Abbasi were the only supporters left after the first six months. Many of Nawaz's cabinet ministers and his constituents were divided during the court proceedings and remained neutral. Dissidents such as Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain remained quiet and later formed Pakistan Muslim League (Q) (PML-Q), splitting Nawaz's party into small factions. The military police initiated massive arrests of the PML workers and party leaders, who were held in Sindh and Punjab police prisons. The military placed Nawaz on trial for "kidnapping, attempted murder, hijacking and terrorism and corruption". In a speedy trial, the military court convicted Nawaz and gave him a life sentence. Reports surfaced that Nawaz had nearly been sentenced to execution. His leading defence lawyer, Iqbal Raad, was gunned down in Karachi in mid-March. Nawaz's defence team blamed the military for providing inadequate protection. The military court proceedings were widely accused of being a show trial. Nawaz was also tried for tax evasion on the purchase of a helicopter worth US$1 million. The Lahore High Court agreed to acquit him if he could prove his innocence, but Nawaz was unable to cite any substantial evidence. He was ordered to pay a fine of US$400,000 on grounds of tax evasion, and he was sentenced to 14 years of imprisonment. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, under Nawaz and King Fahd, had enjoyed extremely close business and cultural relations that is sometimes attributed as a special relationship. Saudi Arabia was shocked at the news of the coup. Amid pressure by Fahd and US President Bill Clinton, the military court avoided a death sentence for Sharif. Fahd had expressed concern that the death sentence would provoke intense ethnic violence in Pakistan as had happened in the 1980s following the execution of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. Under an agreement facilitated by Saudi Arabia, Nawaz was placed in exile for the next 10 years, and agreed not to take part in politics in Pakistan for 21 years. He also forfeited property worth US$8.3 million (£5.7 million) and paid a fine of US$500,000. Musharraf wrote in his memoirs that, without the intervention of Fahd, Sharif would have been executed. Nawaz travelled to Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, where he was taken to a residence managed and controlled by the Saudi government, and provided a Saudi loan to establish a steel mill. The Supreme Court of Pakistan ruled on 23 August 2007 that Nawaz and his brother, Shehbaz Sharif, were free to return to Pakistan. Both vowed to return soon. On 8 September, Lebanese politician Saad Hariri and Saudi intelligence chief Prince Muqrin bin Abdul-Aziz held an unprecedented joint press conference at Army Combatant Generals Headquarters (GHQ) to discuss how Nawaz's return would affect relations. Muqrin expressed hope that Nawaz would continue with the agreement to not return for 10 years, but said "these little things do not affect relations". Two days later, Nawaz returned from exile in London to Islamabad. He was prevented from leaving the aeroplane and he was deported to Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, within hours. His political career appeared to be over. Musharraf went to Saudi Arabia on 20 November 2007, the first time he left Pakistan since implementing the emergency rule.[contradictory] He attempted to convince Saudi Arabia to prevent Nawaz from returning until after the January 2008 elections. Nawaz had become more politically relevant after the return to Pakistan of Benazir Bhutto, who had also been exiled. Saudi Arabia suggested that if Pakistan had allowed a democratic-socialist woman leader, Bhutto, to return to the country, then the conservative Nawaz should be permitted to return as well. Nawaz returned to Pakistan five days later. Thousands of supporters whistled and cheered as they hoisted Nawaz and his brother on their shoulders. After an 11-hour procession from the airport, he reached a mosque where he offered prayers as well as criticism against Musharraf. His return to Pakistan allowed only one day to register for elections, setting the stage for an overnight shift of the political scene. Nawaz called for the boycott of the January 2008 elections because he believed the poll would not be fair, given a state of emergency imposed by Musharraf. Nawaz and the PML-N decided to participate in the parliamentary elections after 33 opposition groups, including Bhutto's PPP, met in Lahore but failed to reach a joint position. He campaigned for the restoration of the independent judges removed by emergency government decree and Musharraf's departure. Bhutto's assassination led to the postponement of the elections to 18 February 2008. Nawaz condemned Bhutto's assassination and called it the "gloomiest day in Pakistan's history". As the elections approached, the country faced a rise in attacks by militants. Nawaz accused Musharraf of ordering anti-terror operations that had left the country "drowned in blood". Pakistan's government urged opposition leaders to refrain from holding rallies ahead of the elections, citing an escalating terrorist threat. The PML-N rejected this, accusing officials of campaign interference. On 25 January, Musharraf attempted British mediation to reconcile with the Nawaz brothers but failed. The elections were dominated[clarification needed] by the PPP, boosted by the death of Bhutto, and PML-N. In the 342-seat National Assembly, PPP received 86 seats; the PML-N, 66; and the PML-Q, which backed Musharraf, 40. Nawaz's party had joined a coalition with the PPP, led by its new leader Asif Ali Zardari, but the alliance was strained by differences. Nawaz won much public support for his uncompromising stand, and the coalition successfully forced Musharraf's resignation from the presidency. After the coalition's collapse, Nawaz pressured Zardari to reinstate the judges Musharraf removed during emergency rule. This led to the courts absolving Nawaz's criminal record so that he could re-enter parliament. In the June 2008 by-elections, Nawaz's party won 91 National Assembly seats and 180 provincial assembly seats in the Punjab. Election for the Lahore seat was postponed due to questions of Nawaz's eligibility to contest. The coalition government agreed on 7 August 2008 to impeach Musharraf. Zardari and Nawaz sent a formal request for him to step down. A charge sheet had been drafted and was to be presented to parliament. It included Musharraf's first seizure of power in 1999 and his second in November 2007, when he declared an emergency as a means of being re-elected president. The charge-sheet also listed some of Musharraf's contributions to the "war on terror". The National Assembly was summoned four days later to discuss impeachment proceedings. On 18 August, Musharraf resigned as President of Pakistan due to mounting political pressure. On 19 August, Musharraf defended his nine-year rule in an hour-long speech. Nawaz claimed that Musharraf was responsible for the crisis in the nation. "Musharraf pushed the country's economy 20 years back after imposing martial law in the country and ousting the democratic government". Musharraf had dismissed 60 judges and Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry under the state of emergency in March 2007, in a failed bid to remain in power. Sharif had championed the cause of the judges since their dismissal, and he and Zardari had supported the reinstatement of judges in their campaigns. However, the new coalition government had failed to restore the judges, leading to its collapse in late 2008. Zardari feared that Chaudhry would undo all edicts instated by Musharraf including an amnesty that Zardari had received from corruption charges. On 25 February 2009, the Supreme Court disqualified Nawaz Sharif and his brother Shehbaz Sharif, the Chief Minister of Punjab, from holding public office. Zardari attempted to place Nawaz under house arrest, but the Punjab police left his residence after an angry crowd gathered outside. The police decision to lift his confinement was very likely in response to an army command.[according to whom?] Nawaz, with a large contingent of SUVs, began leading a march to Islamabad but ended the march in Gujranwala. In a televised speech on 16 March, Prime Minister Yusuf Raza Gilani promised to reinstate Chaudhry after receiving pressure from Pakistan's army, American and British envoys, and internal protests. PPP made a secret agreement to restore the PML government in the Punjab. Nawaz then called off the "long march". The PPP-led government continued to survive. A senior PML-N leader said "95% of the members of the PML(N) were against becoming part of the lawyers' movement, but after the [Supreme Court] verdict, the PML(N) had no other choice". The 18th Amendment passed in Parliament on 8 April 2010, removing the bar which allowed prime ministers to serve a maximum of two terms in office. This made Nawaz eligible to again become prime minister, which he did in 2013. Between 2011 and 2013, Nawaz and Imran Khan began to engage each other in a bitter feud. The rivalry between the two leaders grew in late 2011 when Khan addressed a large crowd at Minar-e-Pakistan in Lahore. The two began to blame each other for many political reasons. From 26 April 2013, in the run up to the 2013 elections, both the PML-N and the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) vehemently criticised each other. Khan was accused of personally attacking Nawaz and was given notice by the Election Commission of Pakistan, though Khan denied it. It is only through your vote that you can bring change for prosperity, to strengthen the country's borders, end terrorism, improve education, and get land reforms and put Sindh and Pakistan on a path to progress. — Nawaz Sharif Nawaz campaigned on a promise to end loadshedding, construct motorways and Peshawar–Karachi high-speed rail. He also promised to construct a third port in Keti Bandar on the southern coast of Thatta District. Just prior to the election, Nawaz confirmed he had a long telephone conversation with Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, suggesting a desire to improve diplomatic relations. The Election Commission of Pakistan announced that the PML-N had won 124 seats in Parliament. Needing 13 additional seats to form a majority, Sharif held talks with elected independent candidates to form a coalition. Eight days later, 18 independent candidates joined the party, allowing PML-N to form the government without the agreement of another political party. Nawaz stated that he wanted to take his oath as prime minister on 28 May, the fifteenth anniversary of the Chagai-I nuclear tests.[needs update] On 27 June 2014, Khan announced that PTI would march on 14 August in protest of the government, alleging that the 2013 elections had been rigged. On 6 August 2014, Khan demanded the assemblies be dissolved and the resignations of the election commission and prime minister, claiming that the march would be the "biggest political protest in the history of the country." PTI began their march from Lahore on 14 August and reached Islamabad on 16 August. Khan accused Nawaz of plundering the national wealth, and called on the public to withhold taxes and payment of utility bills to force the government to resign. In protest of alleged election rigging, the PTI's lawmakers announced their resignation from the National Assembly, and the Punjab and Sindh assemblies. PML-N attempted to negotiate a settlement with Khan and his party's backers to break the political deadlock. On 22 August 2014, Khan and his fellow 33 PTI lawmakers resigned from the National Assembly. He called for a caretaker government to be formed of non-politicians, and for fresh elections. Nawaz was sworn in for an unprecedented third term as prime minister on 7 June 2013. He faced numerous challenges, including bringing an end to US drone strikes and Taliban attacks while also tackling a crippled economy. Speculation was rife that the new government would need a bailout from the International Monetary Fund to restore economic stability. Nawaz's third term moved from social conservatism to social centrism. In 2016, he called the future of Pakistan as one underpinned as an "educated, progressive, forward looking and an enterprising nation". In January 2016 he backed the Punjab government policy of banning Tablighi Jamaat from preaching in educational institutions and in February he enacted a law to provide a helpline for women to report domestic abuse, despite the criticism of conservative religious parties. Nawaz's government hanged Mumtaz Qadri on 29 February 2016. Qadri had fatally shot Salman Taseer over his opposition to blasphemy laws. According to BBC News, the move to hang Qadri was an indication of the government's growing confidence in taming the street power of religious groups. To the disliking of religious conservatives, Nawaz promised that the perpetrators of honour killings would be 'punished very severely'. In March 2016, The Washington Post reported that Nawaz was defying Pakistan's powerful clergy by unblocking access to YouTube, pushing to end child marriage, enacting a landmark domestic violence bill, and overseeing the execution of Qadri. Sunni Tehreek led protests of nearly 2,000 Islamic fundamentist on 28 March 2016, staging a three-day sit-in at the D-Chowk in Islamabad, demanding that Nawaz implement Shariah and declare Qadri a martyr. In response, Nawaz addressed the nation, stating that those "fanning the fire of hatred" would be dealt with under the law. Nation's future lies in democratic, liberal Pakistan where the private sector thrives and no one is left behind — Nawaz Sharif Nawaz's government declared that the Hindu festivals Diwali and Holi, and the Christian festival of Easter, were officially public holidays. Time Magazine called this a "significant step for the country's beleaguered religious minorities." On 6 December 2016, Nawaz approved the renaming of Quaid-i-Azam University's (QAU) physics centre to the Professor Abdus Salam Center for Physics. Nawaz also established the Professor Abdus Salam Fellowship to fully fund five Pakistani doctoral students in physics. In response, the Council of Islamic Ideology criticised Nawaz's move claiming that "changing the department's name would not set the right precedent."[further explanation needed] Nawaz stressed the need for operation Zarb-e-Qalam to fight societal extremism and intolerance through the power of "writers, poets and intellectuals". Addressing the Pakistan Academy of Literature, Nawaz said that "in a society where flowers of poetry and literature bloom, the diseases of extremism, intolerance, disunity and sectarianism are not born". Nawaz also announced a PRs. 500 million endowment fund for the promotion of art and literary activities in Pakistan. On 9 January 2017, the government denied visas for international preachers for the Tablighi Jamaat conference in Lahore. Jamia Binoria criticised the government's decisions. Nawaz, in a March 2017 address at Jamia Naeemia, urged Islamic scholars to spread the true teachings of Islam and take a firm stand against those who are causing disunity among Muslims. Nawaz called for a "progressive and prosperous Muslim world", and asked the "religious scholars to [...] take the war against these terrorists to its logical end." The country's economy faced many challenges including energy shortages, hyperinflation, mild economic growth, high debt and a large budget deficit. Shortly after taking power in 2013, Nawaz received a US$6.6 billion loan from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to avoid a balance-of-payments crisis. Lower oil prices, higher remittances and increased consumer spending pushed growth toward a seven-year high of 4.3 percent in FY2014–15. Asian Development Bank attributed gradual growth in economy to the continued low prices for oil and other commodities, the expected pick-up in growth in the advanced economies, and some alleviation of power shortages. However, the sovereign debt of Pakistan increased dramatically, with total debts and liabilities swelled to PRs. 22.5 trillion (or US$73 billion) by August 2016. Nawaz's administration issued a five-year $500-million Eurobond in 2015 at 8.25% interest and in September 2016, it also raised $1 billion by floating Sukuk (Islamic bonds) at 5.5%. The Sharif administration negotiated free trade agreements (FTAs) to expand trade liberalisation, notably with Turkey, South Korea, Iran, and Thailand, and an expansion of the FTA with Malaysia. According to the Pakistan Institute of Legislative Development and Transparency (PILDAT), the quality of governance had 'marginally improved' during Nawaz's first year in power within an overall score of 44%. It scored highest in disaster-preparedness, merit-based recruitment, and foreign policy management, while it received the lowest scores on poverty alleviation and transparency. On 4 July 2013, the IMF and Pakistan reached a provisional agreement on a US$5.3 billion bailout package to bolster Pakistan's flagging economy and its perilously low foreign exchange reserves, which was contrary to an election promise not to take any more loans. On 4 September, IMF approved another $6.7 billion loan package over a three-year period. IMF demanded Pakistan conduct economic reforms, including privatising 31 state-owned companies. Business confidence in Pakistan reached a three-year high in May 2014 backed by increasing foreign reserves which crossed US$15 billion by mid-2014. In May 2014, IMF stated that inflation had dropped to 13% (compared to 25% in 2008), foreign reserves were in a better position and that the current account deficit had come down to 3% of GDP. Standard & Poor's and Moody's Corporation changed Pakistan's long-term rating to 'stable outlook'. The World Bank stated on 9 April 2014 that Pakistan's economy was at a turning point, with projected GDP growth approaching 4%, driven by manufacturing and service sectors, better energy availability, and early revival of investor confidence. In FY2015, industrial growth slowed due to power shortages, as Sharif's administration failed to make adequate reforms in energy, taxation, and public sector enterprises. On 3 May, The Economist gave Sharif's administration partial credit for the economy's new stability, having upheld its agreements with the IMF. Standard & Poor revised Pakistan's credit rating from 'stable' to 'positive', noting the government's efforts towards fiscal consolidation, improvement in external financing conditions, and stronger capital inflows. During a trip to Pakistan on 10 February 2016, World Bank Group's president Jim Yong Kim applauded the economic policies of Nawaz's government. He claimed that Pakistan's economic outlook had become more stable. On 19 March, Nawaz approved tax incentives in an attempt to attract new automotive manufacturing plants to the country. In November 2016, the government announced that Renault was expected to start assembling cars in Pakistan by 2018. On 8 April 2016, following lobbying by international development groups, the government changed its methodology for measuring poverty. The poverty line was moved from PRs. 2,350 to PRs. 3,030 per adult per month, which increased the poverty ratio from 9.3% to 29.5%. A PILDAT survey claimed that the quality of governance had improved, though it was still weak for transparency. Fred Hochberg, head of the Export–Import Bank of the United States visited Pakistan on 14 April and said that he "sees a lot of opportunities to expand its exposure to Pakistan." On 9 May, the World Bank's Pakistan Development Report stated that the current account was in a healthy position, but that Pakistan's export competitiveness has diminished due to protectionist policies, poor infrastructure, and high transaction costs for trade. Consequently, Pakistan's exports-to-GDP ratio had been declining for the last two decades. On 15 December 2016, Pakistan became a signatory of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's (OECD) Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters, aimed at curbing tax evasion. In his 2016 book, The Rise and Fall of Nations, Ruchir Sharma stated that Pakistan's economy was at a 'take-off' stage and the future outlook to 2020 was 'very good'. On 24 October 2016, months after the Sharif government concluded a US$6.4 billion three-year programmes, IMF managing director Christine Lagarde visited Pakistan, during which she maintained Pakistan was "out of the economic crisis". She added that continued efforts were needed to bring more people under taxation and to ensure that all paid their fair share. The 2017 Ease of doing business index recognised Pakistan as one of the ten countries making the biggest improvements to business regulations. Hundreds of Chinese trucks loaded with goods rolled into the Sost dry port in Gilgit-Baltistan on 1 November as the first shipment of the China–Pakistan Economic Corridor.[relevant?] The government announced plans to restructure PIA, which sought to become more competitive by leasing newer and more efficient aircraft. PIA was split into two companies: a holding group would retain some PRs. 250 billion in debt and excess personnel, and a "new" PIA would hold the lucrative landing rights and new aircraft. The government planned to sell a 26% stake in the new PIA to a strategic partner. In February 2016, Pakistan International Airlines Corporation (PIAC) is to be converted into a public limited company as Pakistan International Airlines Company Limited (PIACL) to make way for privatisation, however, this trigged an eight-day union strike.[needs update] On 23 December 2016, a Chinese consortium won the bid for a 40% stake in the PSX with an offer of US$85.5 million. Upon assuming office, Nawaz launched the Public Sector Development Programme (PSDP) which constructed major projects to stimulate the economy. This included Diamer-Bhasha Dam, Dasu Dam, Faisalabad-Khanewal M-4 Motorway, Rawalpindi-Islamabad Metrobus Service and Lahore-Karachi Motorway. Nawaz also approved feasibility studies for numerous other projects. During FY2014–15, Nawaz's government announced additional PSDP funding from PRs. 425 to PRs. 525 billion. The government allocated PRs. 73 billion of PSDP funds for the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, including the Lahore-Karachi Motorway. On 24 April 2014, mobile companies Mobilink, Telenor, Ufone and Zong won auctions for 3G and 4G mobile spectrum licenses, raising US$1.112 billion. Nawaz stated that PRs. 260 billion will be collected in annual revenue from the licenses, while the technology would create millions of jobs in the service sector. Nawaz also launched the Prime Minister's Youth Programme, providing a PRs. 20 billion fund for interest-free loans, skills development and provision of laptop computers. In August 2014, the Sharif administration unveiled an ambitious programme to enhance exports to US$150 billion by 2025. According to the Daily Times, the Vision 2025 is based on seven pillars: putting people first; developing human and social capital; achieving sustained, indigenous and inclusive growth; governance, institutional reform and modernisation of the public sector; energy, water and food security; private-sector-led growth and entrepreneurship, developing a competitive knowledge economy through value addition and modernisation of transportation infrastructure and greater regional connectivity.[clarification needed] Considering the existing political challenges faced by Sharif and shaky democratic process in the country, ownership of the rather flawed Vision 2025 is another major concern. The question is will future political setups continue to work on this plan to make it a reality, in case of any change of guard at the center? Each successive government in Pakistan has historically made a U-turn from its predecessor's policies. If this trend prevails, then the Vision 2025 will fail to translate into action. — Arab News, 18 August 2014 In November 2013, Nawaz broke ground on a US$9.59 billion nuclear power complex in Karachi, designed to produce 2200 MW of electricity. During the groundbreaking ceremony, Nawaz stated that Pakistan would construct six nuclear power plants during his term in office. He went on to say that Pakistan has plans to construct a total of 32 nuclear power plants by 2050, which will generate more than 40,000 MW. In February 2014, Nawaz confirmed to the IAEA that all future civilian nuclear power plants and research reactors will voluntarily be put under IAEA safeguards. Nawaz attended the 2014 Nuclear Security Summit, and stated that Pakistan was giving nuclear security the highest importance. On 3 March 2017, Nawaz's cabinet approved a set of steps to be taken for the proposed merger of the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) with Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, along with a 10-year PRs. 110 billion development-reform package. Under the reform project, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the Peshawar High Court will be extended to the FATA region. On 9 September 2013, Nawaz proposed a civil-military partnership, and immediately reestablished the National Security Council with Sartaj Aziz as his National Security Advisor (NSA). Nawaz also reconstituted the Cabinet Committee on National Security (C2NS), with military representation in the political body. According to political scientist and civic-military relations expert Aqil Shah, Nawaz finally did exactly what former chairman joint chiefs Jehangir Karamat had called for in 1998. In September 2013, Nawaz announced that Pakistan would open unconditional talks with the Taliban, declaring them stakeholders rather than terrorists. The PML-N's conservative hardliners also chose to blame the US and NATO for causing terrorism in Pakistan. However, Pakistani Taliban's Supreme Council demanded a cease-fire, to also include the release of all imprisoned militants and the withdrawal of the Pakistani military from all tribal regions. Former and current government officials criticised Nawaz for not providing clear leadership on how to handle the more than 40 militant groups, many of them comprising violent Islamic extremists. On 15 September, just six days after Nawaz's proposal for talks with the Taliban, a roadside bomb killed Major-General Sanaullah Khan, a lieutenant colonel and another soldier in the Upper Dir district near the Afghanistan border. Taliban spokesman Shahidullah Shahid claimed responsibility for the bombing. On the same day, seven more soldiers were killed in four separate attacks. In a press release, Chairman joint chiefs General Khalid Shameem Wynne and chief of army staff General Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, who had earlier warned Nawaz not to adopt a surrender strategy, publicly warned the government that the military would not allow the Taliban to set conditions for peace. General Kayani stated: "No-one should have any misgivings that we would let terrorists coerce us into accepting their terms." Pakistan desires peace and tranquility both within and outside its borders so that the much needed socio-economic development goals are achieved. We cannot afford to be distracted in fulfilling our national objectives. At the same [time] Pakistan will never compromise on its sovereignty and independence. — Nawaz Sharif, addressing the Pakistan Naval War College Seven members of the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan conducted a terrorist attack on a public school in the city of Peshawar on 16 December, killing over 130 children in Pakistan's deadliest terrorist attack. In response to the attack, Nawaz – with consultation from all political parties – devised a 20-point National Action Plan which included continued execution of convicted terrorists, establishment of special military courts for two years and regulation of madrasas. Based on the National Action Plan, the government made 32,347 arrests in 28,826 operations conducted across the country from 24 December 2014 to 25 March 2015. During the same period, Pakistan deported 18,855 Afghan refugees while the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) registered 64 cases for money transfer through Hawala, arrested 83 people and recovered PRs. 101.7 million. In total, 351 actionable calls were received on the anti-terror helpline and National Database and Registration Authority verified 59.47 million SIMs. On 28 March 2016, a suicide attack by the Jamaat-ul-Ahrar at a park in Lahore killed 70 people on the evening of Easter Sunday. Analysts believed that Nawaz's desire to maintain stability in Punjab led him to turn a blind eye towards groups operating there. Following the attack, Pakistan detained more than 5,000 suspects and made 216 arrests. The Sharif government launched a ranger-led operation on 5 September 2013 in Karachi, aimed at removing crime and terrorism from the metropolis. During the first phase, which lasted until 10 August 2015, rangers reported to have conducted 5,795 raids during which they had apprehended 10,353 suspects and recovered 7,312 weapons. Prominent among the raids were the 11 March raid on the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM) headquarters Nine Zero and the offices of Sindh Building Control Authority (SBCA). The first phase also saw a total of 826 terrorists, 334 target killers, and 296 extortionists arrested. The Rangers expanded their mandate to kidnappers, and arrested 82 abductors and secured the release of 49 captives. The report stated that targeted killing in the city had dropped by over 80%. On 23 August 2016, officials claimed that they had arrested 654 target killers affiliated with the Muttahida Qaumi Movement's (MQM) armed wing since 4 September 2013. Karachi will be made a crime-free city and the operation will continue to achieve the objective. We are going ahead without being deterred by the incidents happening there. The crime rate of extortion and kidnapping is falling down in the city. — Nawaz Sharif Negotiations with the Taliban collapsed after the execution of 23 Frontier Corps by the Taliban on 17 February 2014, and relations worsened with the Taliban's 2014 Jinnah International Airport attack. Operation Zarb-e-Azb was formally launched on 15 June 2014 after the Sharif administration prepared for a three-front offensive: isolating targeted militant groups, obtaining support from the political parties, and protecting civilians from reprisals. The 2014 Wagah border suicide attack has been the deadliest retaliation against the operation so far. Nawaz launched 'peaceful neighbourhood' initiative to improve Pakistan's ties with India, Afghanistan, Iran and China. On 12 May 2014, Nawaz met Iranian President Hassan Rouhani amid tensions over the February kidnapping of five Iranian soldiers by extremists who took them into Pakistan. The cultural affinity among our peoples is a huge asset. Shared geography and history have culminated in a unique synthesis of cultures and traditions. We must therefore, place our people at the centre of the SAARC processes. SAARC must capture the imagination of our peoples and contribute to creating strong and mutually beneficial bonds. — Nawaz Sharif, addressing the 18th South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation summit On 27 October 2016, Nawaz hosted the 15th ministerial meeting of Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Program (CAREC), and proposed an Open Skies Agreement between the countries. Chinese Premier Li Keqiang was the first world leader to visit Pakistan and congratulate Nawaz on his 2013 electoral victory. Upon return to Beijing, Li announced investment of US$31.5 billion in Pakistan, mainly in energy, infrastructure and a port expansion for Gwadar, the terminus of the China–Pakistan Economic Corridor. According to The Express Tribune, Sharif's government had charged the army with providing fool-proof security to Chinese officials in Balochistan to address Beijing's concerns regarding investment in the province, which was to receive 38% of the funds. On 8 November 2014, Nawaz led a delegation to Beijing and signed agreements for Chinese investment reportedly worth about $46 billion. Nawaz also announced Pakistan would aid China it its fight against the East Turkestan Islamic Movement. On 24 June 2015 and again on 1 April 2016 China blocked India's move in the UN to ban Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar; the Chinese action was in "consultation" with Pakistan.[further explanation needed] On 25 June 2016, Pakistan became a full member of Shanghai Cooperation Organisation. On 4 September 2016, Pakistan's cabinet was given approval to negotiate a long-term defence agreement with China. Nawaz launched talks with India to liberalize their trade relationship, and gained and an agreement of Non-Discriminatory Market Access on Reciprocal Basis (NDMARB) status for the two countries on 26 March 2014. However, The Times of India reported that Pakistan's military pressured Nawaz to stop trade liberalisation with India. Nawaz attended the 26 May 2014 inauguration of Narendra Modi as prime minister, the first time that a prime minister from one state attended the inauguration of their counterpart. They agreed to further cooperate on trade. In October 2014, 20 civilians were killed and thousands forced to flee their homes when Pakistani and Indian security forces began shelling in Kashmir, each side blaming the other for the incident. The following month, Nawaz blamed India for an inflexible approach towards resolving the Kashmir dispute. According to Barkha Dutt during the 2015 SAARC Summit, Nawaz and Modi held a secret meeting. On 10 December 2015, during the Heart of Asia conference, Pakistan and India announced that they were resuming dialogue on outstanding issues, ending a two-year stalemate. On 1 April 2015, Modi made his first visit to Pakistan in a surprise stopover in Lahore to meet Nawaz on his birthday. Modi and Nawaz held a brief meeting at Raiwind Palace. Modi also attended the wedding ceremony of Nawaz's granddaughter. Balochistan's Home Minister Sarfraz Bugti announced on 25 March 2016 that they had arrested an Indian naval intelligence officer working for Research and Analysis Wing (RAW). Kulbushan Yadav was allegedly involved in financially supporting terrorists and also confessed to his involvement in unrest in Karachi. The same day, India's Ministry of External Affairs stated that Yadav had had no involvement with the government since his early retirement from the Indian Navy. India also demanded consular access for him. On 29 March 2016, Sharif's government released a six-minute video of Jadhav apparently confessing to the RAW's involvement in the country. On 1 April, Pakistan confirmed that security agencies had arrested several suspects believed to be working for RAW.[relevant?] Relations between India and Pakistan escalated with the killing of Burhan Wani[who?] by Indian security forces on 8 July 2016. Anti-Indian protests started in all 10 districts of the Kashmir Valley. Protesters defied curfew with attacks on security forces and public properties.[20][21][attribution needed] The unrest led to a standstill in bilateral relations. Indian Home Minister Rajnath Singh accused Pakistan of backing unrest in Kashmir. Tensions reached a boiling point when militants attacked an army base in the Indian-controlled side of Kashmir and killed 18 soldiers. Indian army military operations head Lieutenant-General Ranbir Singh claimed that there was evidence the attackers were members of an Islamist militant group in Pakistan. Addressing the UN General Assembly on 22 September 2016, Nawaz demanded an independent inquiry and a UN fact-finding mission to investigate extrajudicial killing and human rights abuses in Jammu and Kashmir. We demand immediate release of all Kashmiri political prisoners; an end to the curfew; freedom for the Kashmiris to demonstrate peacefully; urgent medical help for the injured; and abrogation of India's draconian laws — Nawaz Sharif India's junior foreign minister M. J. Akbar criticised Nawaz for glorifying Wani. Tensions further escalated with reports suggesting moblisation of military equipment by both sides.[needs update] Nawaz greeted Afghan President Ashraf Ghani on 15 November 2014 and pledged his support to the Afghan president over his attempt to bring the Taliban to the negotiating table. Al Jazeera reported that "the leaders also pledged to begin a new era of economic co-operation, with Ghani saying three days of talks had ended 13 years of testy relations". The two countries also signed a trade deal aimed at doubling trade between the Kabul and Islamabad to US$5 billion by 2017, while also pledging to work together on a power import project and Trans-Afghanistan Pipeline. During the visit Nawaz and Ghani also watched a cricket match between the two countries.[relevant?] During June 2016, cross-border shootings between Afghan and Pakistani forces left three people dead after tensions escalated over Pakistan's construction of fences across the Durand Line. On 20 June, Pakistan completed the construction of a 1,100-kilometre-long (680 mi) trench along the border in Balochistan. Nawaz paid an official visit to Washington, D.C. from 20 to 23 October 2013. He and Barack Obama committed to strengthening relations and advancing shared interests for a prosperous Pakistan. Voice of America reported that the US released more than US$1.6 billion in military and economic aid that was suspended when relations suffered over the covert raid that killed Osama bin Laden in 2011. On Pakistan's request the United States temporarily stopped drone strikes in north-western Pakistan. In March 2016, as one of his[who?] foreign policy successes, the United States Senate blocked a bid to derail the sale of F-16 Falcons to Pakistan by Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Corker, who continued to vow to block the use of US funds to finance the deal. We will extend every help to Pakistan so that it can eliminate terror from its soil. — President Barack Obama, following the 2016 Lahore suicide bombing US Senator John McCain travelled to Pakistan on 26 July 2016 to discuss counterterrorism efforts in the region. In the Financial Times, McCain called upon the US and Pakistani leaders not to "allow ambivalence and suspicion to fester", adding that "common interests in counterterrorism, nuclear security and regional stability are too important and too urgent". He also called upon the Obama administration to "make clear its enduring commitment to Pakistan's stability and economic growth." McCain also visited Miramshah in North Waziristan.[relevant?] Republican Congressmen Ted Poe and Dana Rohrabacher moved a bill in the US Congress on 21 September to designate Pakistan as a state sponsor of terrorism. McCain assured former Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari that the bill would not pass, and that its sponsors represented a small minority.[relevant?] Nawaz called president-elect Donald Trump on 1 December 2016 to congratulate him. The statement released by Nawaz's office quoted Trump calling Nawaz a "terrific guy", adding that Pakistan is a "fantastic country, fantastic place". Trump Tower put out a statement saying that they "had a productive conversation about how the United States and Pakistan will have a strong working relationship in the future." On 3 December, Dawn reported that a US National Defence Authorisation Act was set to be approved by the US Congress which would recognise Pakistan as a key strategic partner and pledge more than US$900 million in economic and other assistance to the country; half of that would be dependent on Pakistan's commitment to fighting all terrorist groups, including the Haqqani network. Nawaz visited London on 30 April 2014 and met David Cameron and other officials, and delivered a keynote address at the Pakistan Investment Conference. According to Cameron's staff, the leaders agreed to work together to support critical economic reforms for Pakistan, particularly to increase the tax-to-GDP ratio towards 15%, and welcomed the developing relationship between the Federal Board of Revenue and HM Revenue and Customs to support this. On 11 November 2014, Nawaz visited Berlin where he met with German Chancellor Angela Merkel. According to Deutsche Welle, during the meeting Nawaz argued for more German investment, particularly in the energy sector, but Merkel expressed wariness over the security situation in Pakistan. In 2014, during the visit of Russian Defence Minister Sergey Shoygu, Pakistan and Russia signed an agreement on military cooperation. Shoygu held in-depth talks with Nawaz, who promised to promote multi-dimensional relations with Russia. The meeting came months after Russia had lifted an embargo on supplying weapons and military hardware to Pakistan, starting with Mil Mi-24 helicopters.[citation needed] As a sign of improving ties, Russian forces arrived in Pakistan on 23 September 2016 to participate in joint military exercises. Nawaz is said to enjoy exceptionally close ties with senior members of the Saudi royal family. Pakistan Today reported on 2 April 2014 that Pakistan will sell JF-17 Thunder jets to Saudi Arabia, after the kingdom had given a grant of US$1.5 billion to Pakistan in early 2014. Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Salman bin Abdulaziz al-Saud arrived in Pakistan on 15 February to meet Nawaz and vowed to enhance work between the two countries. Sharif travelled to Saudi Arabia for the last 10 days of Ramadan. King Abdullah said on 26 July that Saudi Arabia would always stand by Pakistan, its leadership and people, after an hour-long meeting with Nawaz at his Riyadh. Nawaz also met Muqrin bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, while Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud referred to Pakistan as his second home. Al-Monitor reported on 15 March 2015 that the Salman of Saudi Arabia wanted firm assurances from Nawaz that Pakistan would align itself with Saudi Arabia and its Sunni Arab allies against Iran, especially in the proxy war underway in Yemen. Salman specifically wanted a Pakistani military contingent to deploy to the kingdom to defend the borders. Nawaz promised closer counter-terrorism and military co-operation but no troops for the immediate future. On 11 January 2016, Time stated that a high-level Iranian delegation including Adel al-Jubeir and Mohammad bin Salman Al Saud had travelled to Islamabad to seek Pakistan's inclusion in the 34-country "Islamic military alliance". However, Nawaz struck a more conciliatory tone, suggesting that Islamabad would mediate between Saudi Arabia and Iran. On 19 January 2016, Nawaz and Chief of Army Staff Raheel Sharif embarked on a peace mission to Riyadh and Tehran to reduce tensions which had escalated with the execution of Sheikh Nimr. On 16 March 2016, Zee News claimed that Saudi Arabia was creating a military alliance of Islamic countries along the lines of the NATO, and wished Pakistan to lead it. Nawaz supported the Saudi-led intervention in Bahrain and in his visit to Saudi Arabia he reassured that he would "help devise a new battle plan for Saudi intervention in the country." Nawaz married Kulsoom Nawaz, who was also of Kashmiri descent, in April 1971. His brother Shehbaz Sharif served as Chief Minister of Punjab province four times and served as prime minister of Pakistan from 2022 to 2023, while his nephew Hamza Shahbaz Sharif is currently Leader of the Opposition in the Provincial Assembly of the Punjab. Nawaz's daughter Maryam Nawaz is the current Central Vice President of PML-N. Maryam is married to politician Muhammad Safdar Awan. His other daughter, Asma Nawaz, is married to Ali Dar, son of Ishaq Dar, the former finance minister of Pakistan. The personal residence of the Sharif family, Raiwind Palace, is located in Jati Umra, Raiwind, on the outskirts of Lahore. He also has a residence in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, known as the Sharif Villa, where he lived during his years in exile. His elder son, Hussain Nawaz, is a businessman based in Saudi Arabia and currently resides in Jeddah. His younger son, Hassan Nawaz, is also a businessman and lives in London. Nawaz underwent open heart surgery in May 2016 in London. It was his second open-heart operation. His deteriorating health forced him to undergo an open heart surgery only three days before the presentation of the country's annual budget. Many opposition leaders and the legal fraternity, including former Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, raised questions about a possible constitutional crisis in Pakistan. Chaudhry called for electing a new interim prime minister to avoid the crisis. Jon Boone wrote in The Guardian in 2013, that following his attempts to enact Sharia Law in the late 1990s, Nawaz had adopted a more centrist position by seeking diplomatic and trade relations with India which encouraged support from left-leaning Pakistanis. In another column, The Guardian described Nawaz's first two terms in the 1990s as authoritarian and clouded by allegations of corruption, but that "old foes and longstanding friends say Nawaz is a changed man" from when he originally entered politics "to defend family [business] interests". Tim Craig, writing in March 2016 for The Washington Post, described Nawaz's move away from social conservatism as "traced to Sharif's ambitious economic agenda, the influence his 42-year-old daughter has over him, and his awareness that Pakistan remains the butt of jokes". Afrasiab Khattak summarized the shift by stating "[Nawaz] knows extremism is not good for business". Nawaz's advisor Miftah Ismail described him as "a very religious guy", adding however "he is perfectly okay with other people not being religious". Writing for The Express Tribune in 2016, Fahd Hussain stated that Nawaz will likely will face "blowback from its natural allies among the clergy", adding that with "the bulk of the Punjab conservative voter[s] [remaining] in the Nawaz camp", that Nawaz is eyeing the "liberal, progressive, left-of-centre voters". Leftist Senator Raza Rabbani claimed that Nawaz "has always had these rightwing leanings", adding that "the temptation was there in the past to appease his rightwing Islamist constituency". Mushahid Hussain Syed, a former member of Nawaz's cabinet, described Nawaz's religious leanings: "he is quite a good Muslim in terms of belief and basic rituals like prayer and going to Mecca" adding however, "in cultural terms he is quite relaxed. He likes music and movies and has a good sense of humour. He is not your average type of serious, sulking fundo." Mohammed Hanif, writing in 2013, claimed that "if Nawaz weren't from the dominant province Punjab, where most of the army elite comes from, if he didn't represent the trading and business classes of Punjab, he would still be begging forgiveness for his sins in Saudi". Author Edward A. Gargan, writing in November 1991, described Nawaz's government as "bedeviled by gossip, barraged by accusations of venality, castigated by the opposition and threatened by a final rupture of cordiality with the United States". The same year Najam Sethi described Nawaz's government as "corrupt, absolutely, astronomically corrupt, including the prime minister". In 2009, The New York Times wrote that "Bhutto and her Pakistan Peoples Party were considered more amenable allies for Washington" adding that "more nationalistic and religiously oriented, [Nawaz] and his party, the Pakistan Muslim League-N, have traditionally found common cause with the religious parties". Pervez Hoodbhoy described Nawaz as "a reflection of Pakistani society" adding that "he is silent on what matters most: the insurgency. What we need is a leader." Celia W. Dugger, writing in 1999, described Sharif's Raiwind Palace as "walls paneled in silken fabrics and rococo chairs laden with so much gold leaf they looked like they belonged in the court of Louis XIV or a bordello", drawing comparison between Nawaz's lifestyle and that of the "Mughals". After his return to power in 2013, a protest movement led by Imran Khan, Tahir-ul-Qadri and supported by rival factions of the Muslim League, such as the Pakistan Muslim League-Q (PLM-Q) and Awami Muslim League (AML), mounted pressure on the Sharif government. Khan demanded Nawaz's resignation over allegations that the 2013 general election was rigged. Nawaz claimed to have support from the majority of the parties in Parliament. PML-N claimed that the elections had been the most free and fair in the country's history. Nawaz was also criticised by his opponents for running a system of patronage in which relatives were appointed to key state positions such as his brother as Chief Minister, and other relatives[who?] as cabinet ministers. The Express Tribune claimed on 20 April 2015 that Sharif's administration misled the International Monetary Fund (IMF) over the tax charged on the issuance of bonus shares, as what should have been the largest source of income tax stood at a mere PRs. 1 billion. The government had told the IMF that it levied a 10% tax, which would generate revenue equal to 0.1% of GDP or PRs. 29 billion.[relevant?] Human rights activist Sabeen Mahmud was shot dead on 24 April 2015 in Karachi minutes after she attended a talk she had organised on Human rights violations in Balochistan. Activists and investigators alleged that she was killed for her activism and for being outspoken on various contentious topics, from extremism to state-sponsored abuses. The talk that Mahmud organised that night was to have been held at the Lahore University of Management Sciences, but the university cancelled it the day before under alleged pressure from government authorities. Nawaz officially condemned the killing but Dawn noted that there was a little chance her murderers would be brought to justice given the recent history of impunity among those who target the country's marginalised liberals.[relevant?] Around 2,000 far-right protesters led by Sunni Tehreek staged a sit-in at D-Chowk in front of the parliament in Islamabad on 27 March 2016, causing a partial shutdown of the capital. The protestors demanded the implementation of Sharia in the country and declaring Mumtaz Qadri a martyr. The protestors burned cars and a public transit station and injured journalists and bystanders. The government called in the army to enforce order. By 29 March the crowd had shrunk to 700 protestors, and the protest ended on 30 March after the government promised not to amend the blasphemy laws.[relevant?] On 7 April 2016, The Express Tribune claimed that Nawaz's multibillion-rupee health insurance plan seemed to be failing because of poor planning, claiming that the basic health infrastructure doesn't allow for such a plan.[relevant?] Imran Khan began mobilising workers on 29 October 2016 to lockdown Islamabad, demanding Nawaz's resignation and a corruption inquiry. In response, the Sharif government placed a citywide ban on gatherings and arrested hundreds of opposition activists. The government also arrested scores of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf workers and closed the motorway leading from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. On 1 November, Khan ceased protests after the Supreme Court said it would form a judicial commission to probe allegations stemming from the "Panama Papers" leaks about the Sharif family's offshore wealth. In the first week of January, four Pakistani activists known on social media for their secular leftist views went missing.[relevant?] The Economist, writing in January 2017, criticised Nawaz's spending on infrastructure, explaining that it sat unused as "the economic boom it was meant to trigger has never arrived." Regarding the China–Pakistan Economic Corridor, the magazine wrote that "critics fear the country will struggle to pay back the debt, especially if foreign-exchange earnings from exports continue to dwindle" further adding that "It may not concern Mr. Sharif unduly if the next generation of roads is as deserted as the last." The growth of Pakistan's industry, which occurred under President Ayub Khan during the 1960s, was destroyed by the nationalisation program instituted by Prime Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, to halt capital flight from the country to Eastern Europe. This program included nationalisation of Ittefaq Group and many other large enterprises.[relevant?] Although the steel mill was returned to the Sharif family in 1980, havoc had already wrought. In 2011, Nawaz's assets were worth Rs 166 million, which increased to Rs 1.82 billion by 2013. In 2012 his net income was Rs. 12.4 million ($1.24 million). He was one of five billionaires elected to Pakistan's National Assembly in 2013. In 2015, his declared assets slightly decreased to PRs. 1.75 billion ($17.5 Million). As of 2017 his net worth is over PRs. 1 billion.[relevant?] According to the Panama Papers, documents leaked in 2016 from law firm Mossack Fonseca, Nawaz's family holds millions of dollars worth of property and companies in the UK and around the world. Although they do not name Nawaz Sharif or his younger brother Shehbaz Sharif, they link in-laws of Shehbaz Sharif and children of Nawaz Sharif to numerous offshore companies. On 15 April 2016, the government announced an investigation by an inquiry commission of all Pakistanis named in the documents. Opposition politicians said a judge, not a retired judge, should investigate. Various judges recused themselves. In addition, on 19 April, army chief General Raheel Sharif warned that across-the-board accountability was needed. The court announced its decision on 28 July 2017 and disqualified Nawaz from holding public office, stating that he had been dishonest in not disclosing his employment in the Dubai-based Capital FZE company in his nomination papers. The court also ordered National Accountability Bureau to file a reference against Nawaz and his family on corruption charges. In 2018, the Pakistani Supreme Court ruled in Sami Ullah Baloch v. Abdul Karim Nousherwani that Nawaz would be disqualified from holding public office for life due to his involvement in the Panama Papers case of 2017. On 6 July 2018, the Federal Judicial Complex of Pakistan sentenced Nawaz to ten years in prison. Nawaz's daughter Maryam Nawaz and her husband Safdar Awan were given prison sentences of seven years and one year, respectively. The two were subsequently arrested on their arrival in Lahore on 13 July and imprisoned in the Adiala Jail. Nawaz and Maryam were also fined £2 million and £8 million, respectively. Reports claimed that Nawaz suffered four angina attacks and his family complained that the Imran Khan government was not allowing him time for medical treatment. The Islamabad High Court (IHC) granted him bail on humanitarian grounds in October 2019, and Nawaz went to London for medical treatment. Later in March, he was granted bail for a period of six weeks by the Supreme Court to continue pursuing his health treatment. After failing to return to Pakistan when his bail expired, the IHC declared him an absconder. He currently faces non-bailable arrest warrants for the Al-Azizia corruption case. However, soon after his brother Shehbaz Sharif came to power as prime minister after a vote of no confidence was brought against former premier Imran Khan, there were changes in the senior leadership of the National Accountability Bureau, and Nawaz Sharif was acquitted in some 40-year old cases and declared a "political victim" in others. Nawaz has published the following books: Model Town Ka Beta [The Son of Model Town], Model Town Publications, 2000, 298 p. Autobiography Ghaddar Kaun? Nawaz Sharif Ki Kahani Un Ki Zabani [The Traitor Within: The Nawaz Sharif Story In His Own Words], Sagar Publications, 2006, 456 p. Muhammad Nawaz Sharif University of Agriculture Muhammad Nawaz Sharif University of Engineering & Technology Nawaz Sharif Medical College List of international prime ministerial trips made by Nawaz Sharif Portals:  Pakistan  Punjab "Just how much does Nawaz Sharif own, according to himself?". Dawn. 7 October 2017. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "PML-N papers: How the Gulf Steel Mills were born". Dawn. 25 November 2016. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Houreld, Katharine; Zahra-Malik, Mehreen (11 May 2013). "UPDATE 13-Pakistan's Sharif declares victory in landmark election". Reuters. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "Pakistan's prime minister is pushed out by the Supreme Court". The Economist. 29 July 2017. Retrieved 1 August 2017. Sayeed, Saad; Hassan, Syed Raza (13 April 2018). "Pakistan bars former PM Sharif from holding office for life". Reuters. Retrieved 13 April 2018. Haider, Kamran; Dilawar, Ismail (13 April 2018). "Pakistan Court Orders Lifetime Political Ban Against Sharif". Bloomberg News. Retrieved 13 April 2018. Amir, Amina; Yousafzai, Ayaz Akbar; Khan, Azam; Shah, Murtaza Ali; Zaidi, Qamber (6 July 2018). "Nawaz Sharif sentenced to 10 years, Maryam 7 in Avenfield reference". Geo News. Retrieved 6 July 2018. Rashid, Sohail (3 December 2020). "Avenfield, Al-Azizia cases: Nawaz declared absconder, surety money forfeited". Samaa TV. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "Sharif declared absconder in another case". The Express Tribune. 10 November 2020. Retrieved 9 August 2023. "Nawaz granted protective bail till Oct 24 in graft references". The Express Tribune. 19 October 2023. Retrieved 19 October 2023. "Pakistan's self-exiled former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif returns home ahead of a parliamentary vote". AP News. 21 October 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Ali, Shehzad (29 November 2023). "Nawaz Sharif acquitted of charges in Avenfield Apartments case". Samaa. "Nawaz Sharif". www.britannica.com. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Lieven, Anatol (2011). Pakistan: A Hard Country (1st ed.). New York: PublicAffairs. p. 244. ISBN 9781610390217. OCLC 787850771. Jaleel, Muzamil (6 June 2013). "As Nawaz Sharif becomes PM, Kashmir gets voice in Pakistan power circuit". The Indian Express. Retrieved 14 June 2013. Lieven, Anatol (2011). Pakistan: A Hard Country. PublicAffairs. p. 275. ISBN 978-1-61039-021-7.[permanent dead link] Baker, Raymond (2005). Capitalism's Achilles heel: Dirty Money and How to Renew the Free-market System. John Wiley and Sons. pp. 82–83. ISBN 978-0-471-64488-0. Retrieved 20 October 2011. "About Us". www.sharifgroupn.com. Retrieved 13 April 2018. "Abbas Sharif passes away". Dawn. 11 January 2013. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Pakistan A Country Study. Kessinger Publishing. 2004. p. 250. ISBN 978-1-4191-3994-9. Retrieved 20 October 2011. Ghauri, Irfan (6 June 2013). "Nawaz Sharif: A political history". The Express Tribune. Retrieved 13 June 2013. Oborne, Peter (2015). Wounded Tiger: A History of Cricket in Pakistan. Simon and Schuster. p. 334. Chaudry, Aminullah (2009). The Army in Pakistan's Politics. AuthorHouse. p. 14. ISBN 9781467897624. Cohen, Stephen Philips; Wolpert, Stanley (2004). "The State of Pakistan: Bhutto's Economic Experiments". The Idea of Pakistan. Massachusetts, United States: The Brooklyn Institution. pp. 82–86. ISBN 0-8157-1502-1. Retrieved 6 September 2012. Phadnis, Aditi (1 January 2016). "Aditi Phadnis: Inside the Sharif family". Business Standard India. Retrieved 13 April 2018. "The lion unleashed". The Economist. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 12 August 2022. The Far East and Australasia, 2003. London: Europa Publications. 2003. p. 1166. ISBN 978-1-85743-133-9. Retrieved 19 October 2011. IJI was made & Funded By ISI on YouTube (24 July 2009). Retrieved 5 August 2012. Weintraub, Richard (1 December 1988). "Bhutto Likely To Be Named Premier Today; Pakistani Opponent Drops Out of Race". The Washington Post. Retrieved 18 October 2011.[permanent dead link] John, Wilson; Vikram Sood and Akmal Hussain (2009). "§Pakistan's economy in historical perspective: The Growth, Power and Poverty". Pakistan: the struggle within. New Delhi and Washington, D.C.: Dorling Kindersley (Pvt) Limited, India and the Library of Congress. p. 220. ISBN 978-81-317-2504-7. "Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency" (PDF). Electronic Government of Pakistan. Electronic Government of Pakistan and EPA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2011. Retrieved 28 October 2011. Shah, Mehtab Ali (1997). "Pakistan and Gulf Region". The foreign policy of Pakistan: ethnic impacts on diplomac. New York City, United States: I.B Taurus and Corporation Ltd. p. 280. ISBN 1-86064-169-5. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Mir, Amir (2 September 2009). "MQM shifts blame for 1992 operation from military to Nawaz". The News International. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2011. "The Government of Nawaz Sharif". United States Government – US Department of State. April 1994. Retrieved 1 June 2012. Benazir and the PPP, criticized Sharif's efforts at privatization, calling them the "loot and plunder" of Pakistan and saying his plan favored large investors and ran roughshod over labor "Mian Mohammad Mansha and Nawaz Sharif-". Tripod nucleus. Retrieved 1 June 2012. "Nawaz has derailed politically: Mubashar". Parliament Media Lounge. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2011. Atta-oul-Kasmie. "Nuclear History: Zulfikar Bhutto's Programme under Nawaz, Benazir, Musharraf and Gillani; an overview". Atta-oul-Kasmie at the Jang News Cell. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |url= (help) "Nuclear Chronology". NTI Publications. 1990. Archived from the original on 8 November 2010. Retrieved 2 December 2011. The peaceful [atomic] programme of which... it would be accelerated to accommodate growing [nuclear] [e]nergy needs and to make up for rising [oil] prices. And, of course, (Pakistan) will to construct new nuclear power plants. Dutt, Sanjay (2009). "1993 Elections". Inside Pakistan: 52 years oulook. New Delhi: A.P.H. Publishing Corporation. ISBN 978-81-7648-157-1. Judges & Generals in Pakistan Vol-I by Inam R Sehri, [2012] pp. 153–54; GHP Ltd UK Akbar, M.K (1 January 1998). "Pakistan Under Nawaz Sharif". Pakistan Today. New Delhi, India: Mittal Publications. p. 230. ISBN 81-7099-700-3. "Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif [Born 1949] (Part-III)". Story of Pakistan Directorate. Story of Pakistan (Part III). Archived from the original on 26 January 2012. Retrieved 7 February 2012. "Profile: Nawaz Sharif". BBC News. 12 March 2009. Retrieved 13 June 2009. Omar, Imtiaz (28 March 2002). Emergency Powers and the Courts in India and Pakistan. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 904111775X. Qureshi, Natalya. "Pakistan goes nuclear". BBC. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |url= (help) Schaffer, Howard B.; Schaffer, Teresita C. (2011). "§Pakistan's politicians". How Pakistan negotiates with the United States: riding the roller coaster. Washington, D.C.: United States Institute of Peace. ISBN 978-1601270757. Retrieved 7 January 2015. Sublette, Carey. "Pakistan's Nuclear Weapons Program:1998: The Year of Testing". Nuclear weapon archive and the Federation of Pakistan Atomic Scientists and Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, United States. Retrieved 1 November 2011. "Pakistan: A Nuclear power". Story of Pakistan. Archived from the original on 4 November 2011. Shahid Masood. "former Army intelligence officer and general for making an example of Musharraf". GEO Television. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |url= (help) Shahid Ahmed Khan. "Nuclear Chronology". NTI publications. Archived from the original on 8 November 2010. Retrieved 2 December 2011. Nawaz Sharif acknowledged his country's nuclear capability on 7 September 1997[year missing] Bureau Report (16 May 1998). "All aspects of N-test evaluated". Dawn Media's Dawn Wire Service. Retrieved 8 November 2014. Azam, Rai Muhammad Saleh (June 2000). "When Mountains Move: The Story of Chagai". The Nation. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 8 November 2014. Hoodbhoy, Pervez Amerali (23 January 2011). "Pakistan's nuclear bayonet". Dawn. Retrieved 9 September 2011. Shafik H. Hashmi (6 March 2006). "The Nuclear Danger in South Asia". Pakistan Link. Retrieved 1 November 2012. "Politicians hail N-explosions". Dawn. 30 May 1998. Retrieved 16 November 2011. Bhutto, Benazir. "Pakistan's nuclear tests in 1998". GEO Television. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |url= (help) "The 1998 Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony". Annals of Improbable Research. 27 November 1998. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Edward, Job. "Nawaz Sharif: Foreign Policy of Pakistan". Current Social. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011. The Lahore Declaration Archived 21 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine. (PDF) usip.org. Retrieved 5 August 2012. Vajpayee drives across the border into Pakistan and history. Rediff.com (20 February 1999). Retrieved 5 August 2012. Pakistan Premier Proposes an Islamic Society Based on Koran – NYTimes.com. The New York Times (29 August 1998). Retrieved 15 January 2011. Sharif goes ahead with Shariat; 2 more generals quit[permanent dead link]. The Indian Express. (9 October 1998). Retrieved 15 January 2011. Nawaz to go ahead with Islamisation Bill Archived 6 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine. The Indian Express. (6 September 1998). Retrieved 15 January 2011. "South Asia Pakistan parliament approves Islamic law". BBC News South Asia. 9 October 1998. Retrieved 8 July 2010. Ravi Shekhar Narain Singh Singh (2008). The Military Factor in Pakistan Nawaz Sharif and Military. Frankfort, Illinois, United States: Lancer Publishers. pp. 80–89. ISBN 978-0-9815378-9-4. "Nawaz Sharif apologizes to Supreme Court". Pakistan Herald. 2006. Archived from the original on 1 January 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2011. "PML-N apologizes the nation on attack at the SCP". Pakistan Tribune. 26 November 2006. Retrieved 8 December 2011. Aziz, Sartaj (2009). Between Dreams and Realities: Some Milestones in Pakistan's History. Karachi, Pakistan: Oxford University Press. p. 408. ISBN 978-0-19-547718-4. Daniel E. Harmon (2008). Pervez Musharraf: President of Pakistan. United Kingdom: Rosen Publications. pp. 65–66. ISBN 978-1-4270-9208-3. Dugger, Celia W. (20 October 1998). "Pakistani Premier Prevails in Clash With General". The New York Times. Retrieved 8 December 2011. "Admiral Bokhari might accepted by PML-N as NAB chief". 13 October 2011. Retrieved 18 May 2012. "Sharif admits he let down Vajpayee on Kargil conflict". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 10 September 2007. Archived from the original on 16 September 2007. Retrieved 6 October 2007. Sethi, Najam. "Nawaz Sharif: A man between enemies". News Intelligence Unit. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |url= (help) Tufail, Major Kaisar (28 January 2009). "Kargil Conflict and Pakistan Air Force". The Pakistan Air Force Directorate for Civil-Military cooperation. Retrieved 27 October 2011. "Coup in Pakistan". 12 October 1999. Archived from the original on 26 December 2008. Retrieved 13 June 2009. "Sharif may face death penalty for hijacking". The Independent. 20 January 2000. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. "Pakistan after the coup: Special report". BBC. 12 October 2000. Retrieved 17 November 2011. "We [Saudi Arabia] are not the observers, but are the main players of Pakistan's politics...". Geo Television Network. WikiLeaks: United States Diplomatic Cables Leak: Pakistan-Saudi Arabia relations. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |url= (help) McCarthy, Rory (11 March 2000). Gunmen Shoot Dead Lawyer of Deposed Pakistani Leader Sharif. Guardian News. Smith, Alex Duval (12 November 1999). Cook Warning over Show Trial for Sharif. The Independent. Cook Warns against Pakistan 'show Trial. Guardian (12 November 1999). Show Trial in Pakistan. Guardian News (22 November 1999). "Sharif convicted of corruption". BBC. 22 June 2000. Harding, Luke (11 December 2000). "Pakistan frees Sharif to exile in Saudi Arabia". The Guardian. London. Musharraf, Pervez (2006). In The Line of Fire: A Memoir. Pakistan: Free Press. pp. 268–290. ISBN 0-7432-8344-9. Pakistan court orders arrest of Sharif's brother. Channel NewsAsia (7 September 2007). Retrieved 15 January 2011. FACTBOX-Five Facts on Nawaz Sharif. Reuters.co.uk. (30 August 2007). Leading News Resource of Pakistan. Daily Times (9 September 2007). Retrieved 15 January 2011. Haider, Kamran (16 September 2007). Opposition to resign over Musharraf re-election bid. Reuters.com. Perlez, Jane (20 November 2007). Musharraf in Saudi Arabia for Talks on Rival Sharif. The New York Times. Gall, Carlotta (25 November 2007). Former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif Returns to Pakistan. The New York Times. Nawaz Sharif's Homecoming Puts Heat on Pervez Musharraf. Herald Sun (27 November 2007). McGivering, Jill. (7 December 2007) South Asia | Sharif not to fight election ban. BBC News. Retrieved 15 January 2011. South Asia | Sharif's party 'to contest polls'. BBC News (9 December 2007). Retrieved 15 January 2011. Sharif Seeks to Lead Pakistan Opposition. UPI.com (4 January 2008). Bowring, Philip (7 January 2008). Bowring: Pakistan's Way Forward. The New York Times. South Asia | Reactions to Bhutto assassination. BBC News (27 December 2007). Retrieved 15 January 2011. Militants Overrun Pakistan Army Base. CBS News (16 January 2008). Asia Times Online :: South Asia news, business and economy from India and Pakistan. Asia Times Online. (19 January 2008). Retrieved 5 August 2012. Pakistan leaders agree on coalition. CNN (21 February 2008). Retrieved 5 August 2012. Sharif's party does well in Pakistani by-elections. Reuters (27 June 2008). Retrieved 5 August 2012. James, Astill (13 November 2009). "Pakistan has a chance to become more stable. Don't bet on it". The Economist. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Election 2008 Results Archived 19 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine. app.com.pk An Lu, ed. (27 June 2008). "Pakistan ruling coalition sweeps by-elections". Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on 18 September 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Pakistan: President Musharraf faces impeachment | guardian.co.uk. The Guardian. Retrieved 15 January 2011. Pakistan: Exit the president. The Economist. Retrieved 5 August 2012. Haider, Kamran (8 August 2008). "Pakistan coalition to move for Musharraf impeachment". Reuters. Retrieved 15 September 2012. Pakistan coalition to pursue Musharraf impeachment. CNN (7 August 2008). Retrieved 15 January 2011. Pakistan has become a beggar state: Nawaz. The News (29 May 2012). Retrieved 29 May 2012. Imtiaz Hussain (4 November 2011). Mirza says PTI's rally an indicator of change. The News International. Retrieved 5 August 2012. "The 18th Amendment and Pakistan's Political Transitions". Center for American Progress. 19 April 2010. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "Nawaz Sharif says Imran, Zardari are on the same side". Geo TV. 16 April 2013. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Ali, Z.; Manan, Abdul (17 January 2013). "Votes bring real change, not dharna: Nawaz Sharif". The Express Tribune. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "ECP takes notice of Imran Khan's 'Personal attack' on Nawaz Sharif". The Express Tribune. 27 April 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2013. "Imran throws down gauntlet to Nawaz, invites him to debate". Geo News. 23 April 2013. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Ansari (13 May 2013). "Nawaz Sharif and bullet train". Dawn. Retrieved 24 May 2013. "Nawaz promises construction of port, preferential development of Thatta". Associated Press of Pakistan (APP). 13 May 2013. Archived from the original on 13 April 2014. Retrieved 24 May 2013. "Building a normal relationship with India should be Nawaz Sharif's priority". The Economist. 18 May 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Cross, Tony (13 May 2013). "Nawaz Sharif to recruit independents to avoid new Pakistan coalition government". Lahore: Radio France Internationale (rfi). Retrieved 24 May 2013. "Nawaz Sharif's party gets majority in Pakistan Parliament". The Times of India. 19 May 2013. Archived from the original on 9 June 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Ali, Shafqat (16 May 2013). "Nawaz Sharif to be nuclear PM". Deccan Chronicle (DC). Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Awan, Jawad R (10 July 2014). "PTI to go for Azadi March". The Nation. Retrieved 4 September 2014. Mohammad, Peer (6 August 2014). "Build-up to Azadi March: Throwing down the gauntlet, Imran asks PM to quit". The Express Tribune. Retrieved 4 September 2014. "Live Updates (Day 3): Imran says Tsunami can storm into PM House". The News International. 16 August 2014. Retrieved 17 August 2014. "Mass civil disobedience call issued by Imran Khan's party to unseat government". Pakistan Telegraph. 18 August 2014. Retrieved 19 August 2014. "Islamabad sit-in updates: New 'Awami parliament' to convene at 5pm on Tuesday, announces Qadri". The Express Tribune. 18 August 2014. Retrieved 18 August 2014. "Parliament backs embattled Pakistan PM Sharif". Pakistan Telegraph. 2 September 2014. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "Imran Khan resigns from National Assembly with party members to intensify pressure on Sharif government". Pakistan News.Net. 22 August 2014. Retrieved 22 August 2014. "Pakistan cabinet led by PM Nawaz Sharif sworn in". BBC News. 7 June 2013. "Nawaz Sharif's shift to the centre – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 22 November 2015. Retrieved 29 February 2016. Kakakhel, Suhail (13 November 2015). "Religious leaders criticise PM for calling Pakistan 'liberal'". Dawn. Pakistan. Retrieved 29 February 2016. "Nawaz Sharif the liberal? – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 5 March 2016. Retrieved 6 March 2016. "Will stand by you against injustice, PM tells Hindu community – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 11 November 2015. Retrieved 29 February 2016. "Women protection bill will cause divisions within families and increase divorce rate: JUI-F chief – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 28 February 2016. Retrieved 29 February 2016. "Salmaan Taseer's killer Mumtaz Qadri executed – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 28 February 2016. Retrieved 29 February 2016. "Salman Taseer murder: Pakistan hangs Mumtaz Qadri". BBC News. Retrieved 29 February 2016. Boone, Jon (22 February 2016). "Pakistan PM promises tougher stance on 'honour' killings". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 29 February 2016. Craig, Tim (8 March 2016). "Pakistan's prime minister is defying the clerics – very carefully". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 10 March 2016. "The Significance of Some Recent Developments in Pakistan". The Wire. Archived from the original on 11 March 2016. Retrieved 17 March 2016. "Nearly 2,000 pro-Qadri protesters continue sit-in outside Parliament". Dawn. Pakistan. 27 March 2016. Retrieved 5 January 2017. "Red Zone sit-in by pro-Qadri demonstrators ends after successful negotiations". Dawn. Pakistan. 30 March 2016. Retrieved 5 January 2017. "Nation's future lies in democratic, liberal Pakistan, says Nawaz". Liberal Sharif. Retrieved 1 March 2016. Iyengar, Rishi. "Pakistan to Make Hindu, Christian Festivals Public Holidays". Time. Retrieved 17 March 2016. "PM Nawaz orders QAU's physics centre to be renamed after Dr Abdus Salam". Dawn. Pakistan. 5 December 2016. Retrieved 20 December 2016. "CII decries naming QAU physics centre after Dr Abdus Salam". Dawn. Pakistan. 10 December 2016. Retrieved 5 January 2017. "PM calls for operation Zarb-e-Qalam against extremism, intolerance". The News International. Retrieved 5 January 2017. "PM Nawaz announces Rs 500m 'Zarb-i-Qalam' endowment fund to counter extremism". Dawn. Pakistan. 5 January 2017. Retrieved 5 January 2017. "Tableeghi Jamat gathering: Govt accused of denying visas to 5,000 preachers – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 9 January 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2017. "PM Nawaz urges religious scholars to spread 'true teachings' of Islam – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 11 March 2017. Retrieved 12 March 2017. "Dar's 2013 budget speech – the highs and the very low lows". The Express Tribune. 25 May 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "HIGHLIGHTS OF PAKISTAN ECONOMIC SURVEY 2013–14" (PDF). "FY14: FDI clocks in at $1.63 billion, up 11.99%". The Express Tribune. 16 July 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Economic Survey 2014–15: Ishaq Dar touts economic growth amidst missed targets". The Express Tribune. 4 June 2015. "Pakistan: Economy". Asian Development Bank. 29 January 2020. "Warning signs emerge despite 5.2pc economic growth: WB". The Nation. Retrieved 21 May 2017. "Articles". strategicforesight.com. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Pakistan: Economy". Asian Development Bank. Retrieved 11 February 2016. "Pakistan's debt pile soars to Rs 22.5tr – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 31 August 2016. Retrieved 24 December 2016. "Expensive Eurobond issue has no early return clause – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 23 December 2016. Retrieved 24 December 2016. "Pakistan eyes free trade pact with Iran". Dawn. Pakistan. 20 January 2016. Retrieved 24 December 2016. "PML-N's first year: Governance ratings up slightly, says PILDAT". The Express Tribune. 8 May 2015. Retrieved 8 January 2016. Walsh, Declan; Masood, Salman (4 July 2013). "I.M.F. and Pakistan Agree to a $5.3 Billion Bailout". The New York Times. "Pakistan accepts tough IMF conditions for $6.6 billion bailout package". Paktribune. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Pakistan's economy improving: IMF". The Express Tribune. 25 May 2010. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Foreign currency reserves cross $10b mark". The Express Tribune. 2 April 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Outlook stable: S&P affirms Pakistan's ratings at 'B-/B'". The Express Tribune. 1 April 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Improving inflows: Moody's changes Pakistan's rating outlook to 'stable'". The Express Tribune. 14 July 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Pakistan Development Update: Economy Gradually Improving". World Bank. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Do more: Modest economic expansion likely this year too". The Express Tribune. 25 March 2015. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "S&P improves Pakistan's credit-rating outlook, GDP growth projections". Dawn. Pakistan. 5 May 2015. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "World Bank chief pushes Pakistan to keep up momentum – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 9 February 2016. Retrieved 11 February 2016. "Auto policy approved, door wide open for new entrant – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 18 March 2016. Retrieved 19 March 2016. "Renault to start assembling cars in Pakistan by 2018, says Board of Investment". Dawn. Pakistan. 3 November 2016. Retrieved 3 November 2016. "Pakistan woos Renault and Nissan in push for auto investment". Dawn. Pakistan. Reuters. 6 May 2016. Retrieved 3 November 2016. "Three of every 10 Pakistanis officially poor – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 7 April 2016. Retrieved 8 April 2016. "PILDAT scorecard 2014–15: Quality of governance improves at federal level – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 11 April 2016. Retrieved 14 April 2016. "Exim Bank of US has renewed interest in Pakistan – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 13 April 2016. Retrieved 14 April 2016. "'Pakistan is world's seventh most restrictive and protected economy' – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 9 May 2016. Retrieved 9 May 2016. "Tax matters: Pakistan officially becomes signatory of OECD Convention – The Express Tribune". 15 September 2016. Retrieved 15 September 2016. "Pakistan's economy ready for takeoff". The News International. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 19 September 2016. Khan, Sanaullah (24 October 2016). "Pakistan out of economic crisis but needs to widen tax net, says IMF's Lagarde". Dawn. Pakistan. Retrieved 26 October 2016. "Pakistan up 4 places in Ease of Doing Business index – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 26 October 2016. Retrieved 26 October 2016. Nagri, Jamil (1 November 2016). "First trade activity under CPEC kicks off". Dawn. Pakistan. Retrieved 3 November 2016. "First Chinese shipment rolls into Sost dry port in Gilgit-Baltistan – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 1 November 2016. Retrieved 3 November 2016. "PIA employees end strike, resume flight operations nationwide". Dawn. Pakistan. 9 February 2016. Retrieved 11 February 2016. "Chinese consortium wins bid for 40% stake in PSX – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 23 December 2016. Retrieved 24 December 2016. "Associated Press of Pakistan ( Pakistan's Premier NEWS Agency )". app.com.pk. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Govt prioritises mega development projects in PSDP". The Nation. 24 May 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Info: What is the Public Sector Development Programme?". The Express Tribune. 2 June 2012. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Budget 2014–15: PSDP size increased to Rs 525 billion". The Express Tribune. 3 June 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "The News International: Latest News Breaking, Pakistan News". The News International. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "3G, 4G service: Rs260b tax will be collected in treasury every year, says Nawaz". The Express Tribune. 22 May 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Pakistan launches Visions 2025 program for fast-track development". timesofindia-economictimes. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "NEC approves seven-pillar 'Pakistan Vision 2025'". Daily Times. Pakistan. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "A reality check on Vision 2025". arabnews.com. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Fata's merger". Dawn. Pakistan. 4 March 2017. Retrieved 7 March 2017. Masood, Salman; Buckley, Chris (26 November 2013). "Pakistan breaks ground on nuclear power plant project with China". The New York Times. Retrieved 28 September 2014. "Pakistan to build six n-power plants: Nawaz Sharif". Oneindia.in. 26 November 2013. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Retrieved 28 September 2014. Haider, Mehtab (27 February 2014). "Nuclear plants to produce 40000MW PAEC". The News International. Retrieved 28 September 2014. "Pakistan's nuclear plants, reactors under IAEA safeguards, PM tells IAEA chief". Xinhua News Agency. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 28 September 2014. "Prime Minister's Office, Islamabad, Pakistan". pmo.gov.pk. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Cabinet approves steps for Fata's merger with Khyber Pakhtunkhwa". Dawn. Pakistan. 3 March 2017. Retrieved 7 March 2017. "Nawaz Sharif chairs All Party Meeting". Business Standard. Press Trust of India. 9 September 2013. Retrieved 8 January 2016. Harris, Hanif (7 June 2013). "Cabinet appointed by Sharif". Bloomberg, 2013. Bloomberg. Retrieved 10 January 2015. Shah, Aqil (2014). "Conclusion". The Armed Forces and Democracy. Harvard, U.S: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0674419773. Retrieved 7 January 2015. Craig, Tim (19 September 2013). "Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's effort to seek peace with Pakistani Taliban off to rocky start". The Washington Post. "Taliban bomb kills Pakistani general, two other soldiers". Reuters. 15 September 2013. "How it went wrong for Nawaz Sharif". BBC News. 25 September 2013. "Quest for peace: Fitting rejoinder to Taliban dictates". The Express Tribune. 17 September 2013. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Prime Minister's Office, Islamabad, Pakistan". pmo.gov.pk. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Fight against terrorism: Defining moment". The Express Tribune. 1 April 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "32,347 arrested, 28,826 operations conducted under NAP: report". The Express Tribune. 28 March 2015. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Lahore bombing: Outpouring of grief and solidarity". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 30 March 2016. "Pakistan conducts sweeping raids after Lahore bombing". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 30 March 2016. "Come what may: Karachi operation will continue, says Nawaz". The Express Tribune. 21 March 2015. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "First stage of Karachi security operation complete: Rangers – The Express Tribune". 9 August 2015. Retrieved 4 September 2016. "Rangers vow to follow rules in Karachi operation". 7 May 2016. Retrieved 4 September 2016. "Rangers launch 'next phase' of Karachi operation". 3 November 2015. Retrieved 4 September 2016. Ali, Imtiaz (23 August 2016). "Rangers claim arrest of 654 MQM-affiliated target killers involved in 5,863 incidents". Retrieved 4 September 2016. "Heavy fighting reported at Karachi airport". Al Jazeera. 8 June 2014. Archived from the original on 6 July 2014. Retrieved 8 June 2014. آصف فاروقی بی بی سی اردو ڈاٹ کام، اسلام آباد (1 January 1970). "پاکستان – BBC Urdu – 'حکومت نے آپریشن کے لیے 3 محاذوں پر تیاری کی'". BBC. Archived from the original on 17 June 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2014. Wearing thin: Nawaz Sharif is weakening, and looks unable to improve relations with India, The Economist. "A peaceful neighbourhood". The Nation. 26 May 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Nawaz Sharif visits Iran amid tensions". arabnews.com. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Prime Minister's Office, Islamabad, Pakistan". pmo.gov.pk. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "PM stresses cooperation for poverty reduction". Dawn. Pakistan. 27 October 2016. Retrieved 29 October 2016. "The News International: Latest News Breaking, Pakistan News". The News International. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Balochistan to receive big slice of Chinese funds". The Express Tribune. 16 March 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "China, Pakistan ink 20 pacts, boost ties". The Times of India. 8 November 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Pakistan says will help China fight Xinjiang militants". Yahoo News. 8 November 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "China again blocks India's move at UN to ban JeM chief Masood Azhar – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. April 2016. Retrieved 1 April 2016. "China blocks India's anti-Pakistan move in UN – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 24 June 2015. Retrieved 1 April 2016. "Pakistan joins SCO as full member at Tashkent". 25 June 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2016. "Pakistan's cabinet gives nod for security pact with China – The Express Tribune". 4 September 2016. Retrieved 4 September 2016. Ankit Panda, The Diplomat. "India-Pakistan Relations: A 2013 Retrospective and 2014 Prospectus". The Diplomat. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Pak army stopped Nawaz Sharif govt from trade deal: India". The Times of India. 26 March 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Pakistan PM Sharif to go to Modi inauguration in India". BBC News. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Terror dominates Narendra Modi-Nawaz Sharif talks in Delhi". The Times of India. 27 May 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "India and Pakistan Trade Blame in Kashmir Deaths". The New York Times. 7 October 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Kashmir issue: PM Nawaz accuses India of inflexibility". The Express Tribune. 20 November 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Sharif, Modi had deniable secret meeting in Kathmandu: book". Dawn. Pakistan. 2 December 2015. Retrieved 19 March 2016. Syed, Baqir Sajjad (10 December 2015). "Breakthrough at 'Heart of Asia': Pakistan, India to resume 'comprehensive' talks". Dawn. Pakistan. Retrieved 19 March 2016. "India PM Modi makes surprise Pakistan visit". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 19 March 2016. Haider, Irfan (25 December 2015). "Modi returns to India after surprise Pakistan visit". Dawn. Pakistan. Retrieved 19 March 2016. "India PM Modi in surprise Pakistan visit". BBC News. Retrieved 19 March 2016. "'RAW officer' arrested in Balochistan – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 24 March 2016. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "'RAW officer' arrested in Balochistan – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 24 March 2016. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "Official Spokesperson's response to a query regarding purported arrest of an Indian in Balochistan". mea.gov.in. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "Detained 'RAW' officer retired prematurely from Indian navy, says New Delhi – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 25 March 2016. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "Pakistan summons Indian envoy over 'RAW officer' nabbed in Balochistan – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 25 March 2016. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "Detained Indian spy confesses to RAW's involvement in Balochistan – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 29 March 2016. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "Govt airs video of Indian spy admitting involvement in Balochistan insurgency". Dawn. Pakistan. 29 March 2016. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "Yadav's confession: Fresh spy suspects detained amid diplomatic offensive – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 31 March 2016. Retrieved 1 April 2016. "Pakistan fomenting trouble, but Modi will solve Kashmir issue: Mehbooba Mufti". The Times of India. 27 August 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Jacob, Happymon (14 July 2016). "Living in denial on Kashmir". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Anand, Geeta; Kumar, Hari (21 September 2016). "Kashmir Crisis Poses Major Test for India's Leader, Narendra Modi". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 22 September 2016. "World leaders condemn IHK attack". The News International. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Chandran, Nyshka (21 September 2016). "As India-Pakistan tensions mount after Kashmir attack, what's next?". CNBC. Retrieved 22 September 2016. "Nawaz demands UN-led probe into Kashmir abuses – The Express Tribune". 22 September 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. "Kashmir dispute: Chinese premier endorses Pakistan's stance – The Express Tribune". 22 September 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Rana, Aamir Ilyas (21 September 2016). "Nawaz demands UN-led probe into Kashmir abuses". tribune.com.pk. The Tribune. Retrieved 8 February 2019. "Glorification of Burhan Wani self incrimination by Pak: MJ Akbar on Nawaz Sharif's speech". 22 September 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2016. "India vexed by Nawaz hailing of Wani – The Express Tribune". 23 September 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2016. Agrawal, Ravi. "Could India and Pakistan go to war?". CNN. Retrieved 23 September 2016. Anand, Geeta; Kumar, Hari (21 September 2016). "Kashmir Crisis Poses Major Test for India's Leader, Narendra Modi". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 23 September 2016. "Pakistan PM backs Afghan talks with Taliban". www.aljazeera.com. Al Jazeera. Retrieved 8 February 2019. "Pakistan PM backs Afghan talks with Taliban". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "PM Nawaz envisions strong, comprehensive partnership with Afghanistan". The Express Tribune. 15 November 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Tension prevails at Pakistan-Afghanistan border". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 27 June 2016. "1,100km trench built alongside Pak-Afghan border in Balochistan – The Express Tribune". 20 June 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2016. "Pakistani PM Sharif Starts US Visit". VOA. 20 October 2013. Retrieved 8 January 2016. DeYoung, Karen (4 February 2014). "U.S. curtails drone strikes in Pakistan as officials there seek peace talks with Taliban". The Washington Post. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Lockheed staves off F-16 production line closure as it waits on Pakistan's orders". Dawn. Pakistan. Reuters. 16 March 2016. Retrieved 17 March 2016. "India should not be concerned over F-16 sale to Pakistan, says Pentagon". Dawn. Pakistan. 17 February 2016. Retrieved 17 March 2016. "Obama believes Pakistan will win terror war". The Express Tribune. 31 March 2016. "Ignoring Pakistan will be dangerous for US: John McCain – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 28 July 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2016. "America ignores Pakistan at its peril". Financial Times. 26 July 2016. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 3 December 2016. "US lawmakers move bill to designate Pakistan a terrorist state – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 21 September 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2016. "Small minority behind anti-Pakistan bill". Dawn. Pakistan. 25 September 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2016. "That 'tremendous' call between Trump and Pakistan's PM Nawaz Sharif". BBC News. 1 December 2016. Retrieved 1 December 2016. Joshua Berlinger; Sophia Saifi. "Donald Trump reportedly praises Pakistan's 'terrific' PM". CNN. Retrieved 1 December 2016. "US bill pledges $900m to Pakistan, links half of amount to certification". Dawn. Pakistan. 3 December 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2016. "Pakistan's Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif visited the UK this week". gov.uk. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Pakistan PM Sharif and Merkel talk trade, terrorism". DW.COM. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Pakistan, Russia sign 'milestone' military cooperation pact". The Express Tribune. 20 November 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Russian forces arrive in Pakistan for first-ever joint military exercise – The Express Tribune". 23 September 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2016. "Pakistan to return Saudi favor with arms, combat aircrafts [sic]". Pakistan Today. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Revealed: It was Saudi Arabia that loaned Pakistan $1.5 billion to shore up reserves". The Express Tribune. 13 March 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Saudi crown prince visits Pakistan, meets president". Al Arabiya. 14 February 2014. "Saudi Arabia will always stand by Pakistan, says King Abdullah". arabnews.com. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Pakistan declines to join Saudi Arabia's anti-Iran alliance – Al-Monitor: the Pulse of the Middle East". Al-Monitor. 15 March 2015. Retrieved 8 January 2016. Waraich, Omar. "Pakistan Caught Between Iran and Saudi Arabia". Time. Retrieved 19 March 2016. "PM Nawaz, COAS Raheel leaves for Tehran, after Saudi Arabia". thenewsteller.com. Retrieved 19 January 2016. "Saudi Arabia mulls NATO-like military alliance of Muslim countries, asks Pakistan to lead". Zee News. 16 March 2016. Retrieved 19 March 2016. "Pakistan joins 'Thunder of the North' military exercise in Saudi Arabia". Dawn. Pakistan. AFP. 14 February 2016. Retrieved 19 March 2016. Alam, Kamal. "Saudi Arabia Has Devastated Pakistan's History of Religious Tolerance and Diversity". Muftah. Archived from the original on 15 July 2018. Retrieved 14 July 2018. "Nawaz Sharif's wife operated in Delhi". The Times of India. 30 October 2007. Retrieved 4 January 2011. "Kulsoom Nawaz: Ex-Pakistan PM's wife dies in London". BBC News. 11 September 2018. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "Hamza the new deputy Chief Minister of Punjab". Dawn. 26 September 2013. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "Another key assignment planned for Maryam". The News International. 12 August 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "PM Appoints Daughter as Chairperson of Youth Program". The News International. 23 November 2013. Archived from the original on 26 November 2013. Retrieved 12 December 2013. Iqbal, Abdullah (29 May 2004). "Wedding bells for Nawaz son, daughter". Gulf News. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 23 November 2013. Burke, Jason (29 October 1999). "Army throws open first family's palace". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Almotawa, Abdul Rahman (7 August 2002). "Sharif surfs the Net to catch up on news". Arab News. Retrieved 5 August 2013. Shah, Murtaza Ali (27 April 2022). "Nawaz Sharif's sons deny Saudi travel news". The News International. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Malik, Hasnaat (10 January 2017). "SC questions where Hassan Nawaz got money from to establish business right after completing studies". The Express Tribune. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Masood, Salman (27 May 2016). "Pakistan Leader Will Undergo Open-Heart Surgery for 2nd Time". The New York Times. Retrieved 30 May 2016. Bokhari, Farhan (30 May 2016). "Pakistan PM Nawaz Sharif to undergo heart surgery in London". Financial Times. Retrieved 30 May 2016. "Former CJP Iftikhar Chaudhry calls for appointment of acting PM to avoid crisis". Geo News. 28 May 2016. Retrieved 30 May 2016. Boone, Jon (19 March 2013). "Nawaz Sharif in the driving seat in battle to be Pakistan's PM". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 20 January 2017. Boone, Jon (17 May 2013). "Nawaz Sharif: rightwing tycoon who has won over liberals – for now". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 20 January 2017. "Pakistan's prime minister is defying the clerics – very carefully". The Washington Post. Retrieved 20 January 2017. "Nawaz Sharif the liberal? – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 5 March 2016. Retrieved 20 January 2017. Hanif, Mohammed (13 May 2013). "Pakistan elections: how Nawaz Sharif beat Imran Khan and what happens next". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 20 January 2017. Gargan, Edward A. (19 November 1991). "Divided Pakistan Torn by Lawlessness and Scandal". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 20 January 2017. Perlez, Jane (24 March 2009). "U.S. Weighs Sharif as Partner in Pakistan". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 20 January 2017. Dugger, Celia W. (31 October 1999). "Amid Pakistani Poverty, Opulent Palace of Ex-Premier". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 20 January 2017. Masood, Salman (28 June 2014). "Khan's call for long march". The Nation. Archived from the original on 16 August 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2014. "Spilling the beans: 2013 polls massively rigged, claims former ECP official". The Express Tribune. 25 August 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Afzal Khan reveals rigging in 2013 elections – Pakistan – Dunya News". dunyanews.tv. 14 February 2008. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Bonus shares: Government misleads IMF on tax rate". The Express Tribune. 20 April 2015. Retrieved 8 January 2016. "Shooting the messenger in Pakistan". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 8 January 2016. Haseeb Bhatti; Imtiaz Ali; Irfan Haider (27 March 2016). "Nearly 2,000 pro-Qadri protesters continue sit-in outside Parliament". Dawn. Pakistan. Retrieved 29 March 2016. Kashif Abbasi; Ikram Junaidi (28 March 2016). "Violent mobs catch law enforcers off guard". Dawn. Pakistan. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "Around 700 pro-Qadri protesters remain in Islamabad's Red Zone". Dawn. Pakistan. 29 March 2016. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "D-Chowk protesters call off sit-in after 'successful negotiations' with govt – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 30 March 2016. Retrieved 30 March 2016. "Health insurance plan – unimplemented". The Express Tribune. 7 April 2016. Retrieved 8 April 2016. "PM's health scheme beset by serious setbacks – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 5 April 2016. Retrieved 8 April 2016. "Pakistan's Imran Khan backs off from threat to shut down capital". Reuters. 1 November 2016. Retrieved 1 November 2016. "Pakistan: 4 Leftist social media activists go missing in a week, according to NGO, relatives". The Indian Express. 9 January 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2017. "Pakistan's misguided obsession with infrastructure". The Economist. 21 January 2017. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 20 January 2017. Web Edition (20 June 2011). "Nawaz spoke Bal Thakeray's language". The News International. Retrieved 15 September 2012. "Nawaz received heated criticism for remarking the legendary Prime minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto". The News Intelligence Unit. The News Intelligence (1989 report). {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |url= (help) KHAN, IFTIKHAR A.; ALI, KALBE (3 January 2014). "The mystery of Raiwind palace ownership". Dawn. Pakistan. Retrieved 8 January 2016. Khan, Iftikhar A. (31 May 2013). "Leaders' wealth – Shahbaz richer than Nawaz". Dawn. Pakistan. Retrieved 6 March 2016. Iftikhar A. Khan – Kalbe Ali (26 December 2013). "PM Sharif among billionaire lawmakers". Dawn. Pakistan. Retrieved 8 January 2016. Akbar, Ali (8 January 2015). "ECP releases Parliamentarians' list of assets". Dawn. Pakistan. Retrieved 6 March 2016. Hassan Faisal Saidi (17 July 2017). "Game of Throes". The News International. Retrieved 23 August 2017. "Here are the famous politicos in 'the Wikileaks of the mega-rich'". Fusion. Archived from the original on 3 April 2016. Retrieved 3 April 2016. "Panama Papers: List of Pakistani politicians, businessmen who own companies abroad". Pakistan Today. 4 April 2016. Archived from the original on 31 July 2021. Retrieved 17 April 2016. Cheema, Umar (4 April 2016). "The Panama Papers: Pages From Pakistan". Archived from the original on 6 April 2016. Retrieved 6 April 2016. Ghauri, Irfan (15 April 2016). "All Pakistanis named in Panama Papers face probe". The Express Tribune. Retrieved 18 April 2016. Bhatti, Haseeb (28 July 2017). "Nawaz Sharif steps down as PM after SC's disqualification verdict". Dawn. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "Panama Case verdict: Pakistan Supreme Court disqualifies PM Nawaz Sharif". Daily Pakistan. 28 July 2017. Retrieved 28 July 2017. Rasmussen, Sune Engel (28 July 2017). "Pakistani court removes PM Nawaz Sharif from office in Panama Papers case". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 July 2017. "Supreme Court's complete order in Panama Papers case". DAWN.COM. 28 July 2017. Retrieved 28 July 2017. "Panama Papers hearing highlights: Pakistan PM Nawaz Sharif steps down after SC ruling". The Indian Express. 28 July 2017. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "Pakistan ex-PM given 10-year jail term". BBC News. 6 July 2018. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "Pakistan's top court grants bail to former PM Sharif on medical grounds". Reuters. 26 March 2019. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "IHC issues non-bailable arrest warrants for Nawaz Sharif". Geo News. 15 September 2020. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "Pakistan court acquits former PM Nawaz Sharif in 37-year-old 'bribe' case". The Times of India. 24 June 2023. ISSN 0971-8257. Retrieved 9 August 2023. "Plot Allotment Case: Court verdict reveals Nawaz was 'victim of political vendetta'". 6 July 2023. Retrieved 9 August 2023. "Profile". Open Library. Archived from the original on 1 April 2024. Boone, Jon (17 May 2013). "Nawaz Sharif: A rightwing tycoon who has won over leftist liberals – for now". Editorial and special report published by American journalist Jon Boone. Islamabad: The Guardian, Pakistan Bureau. The Guardian, Pakistan Bureau. Retrieved 11 January 2015. "BBC: Profile of Nawaz Sharif". BBC News. 11 December 2000. Retrieved 15 September 2012. "BBC, Timeline: Pakistan's political rivals". BBC News. 26 September 2007. Retrieved 15 September 2012. "Nawaz Sharif becomes Prime Minister". Story of Pakistan. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012. Retrieved 15 September 2012. "Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz Group) Pakistan". PML-N. Archived from the original on 8 June 2012. Retrieved 15 September 2012. "PML N – Nawaz Sharif's Profile". elections.com.pk. Archived from the original on 20 September 2012. Retrieved 15 September 2012. "Nawaz Sharif in 2008". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 18 August 2008. Retrieved 15 September 2012. Cooper, Helene; Mazzetti, Mark (20 July 2009). "Nawaz Sharif". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 September 2012. Williamson, Martin (28 November 2007). "Cricket tragics: Eleven politicians who would have preferred to have been watching cricket instead". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 15 September 2012. Nawaz Sharif at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews PML(N) at the Library of Congress Web Archives (archived 8 July 2011) "Profile of Nawaz Sharif". ESPNcricinfo. Appearances on C-SPAN