The 2017 Wimbledon Championships was a Grand Slam tennis tournament that took place at the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club in Wimbledon, London, United Kingdom. The main draw matches commenced on 3 July 2017 and concluded on 16 July 2017. Roger Federer won the gentlemen's singles title for a record eighth time, surpassing Pete Sampras and William Renshaw, who both won the gentlemen's singles title seven times. Garbiñe Muguruza won the ladies' singles title. The 2017 tournament was the 131st edition of the championships, the 50th in the Open Era and the third Grand Slam tournament of the year. It is played on grass courts, organised by the All England Lawn Tennis Club and the International Tennis Federation and is part of the ATP World Tour, the WTA Tour, the ITF Junior tour and the NEC Tour. Andy Murray was the defending champion in the Gentlemen's singles but lost to Sam Querrey in the quarterfinals. Two-time defending Ladies' singles champion Serena Williams did not defend her title, as she ended her season in April due to pregnancy. The 2017 Wimbledon Championships was the 131st edition of the tournament and was held at the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club in London. The tournament was run by the International Tennis Federation (ITF) and was included in the 2017 ATP World Tour and the 2017 WTA Tour calendars under the Grand Slam category. The tournament consisted of men's (singles and doubles), women's (singles and doubles), mixed doubles, boys (under 18 – singles and doubles) and girls (under 18 – singles and doubles), which is also a part of the Grade A category of tournaments for under 18, and singles and doubles events for men's and women's wheelchair tennis players as part of the UNIQLO Tour under the Grand Slam category. The tournament was played only on grass courts; main draw matches were played at the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club, Wimbledon; qualifying matches were played at the Bank of England Sports Ground, in Roehampton. Below are the tables with the point distribution for each discipline of the tournament.