The 2017 US Open was the 137th edition of tennis' US Open and the fourth and final Grand Slam event of the year. It was held on outdoor hard courts at the USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center in New York City. Experimental rules featured in qualifying for the main draw as well as in the junior, wheelchair and exhibition events. Stan Wawrinka and Angelique Kerber were the previous year's men's and women's singles champions. Neither managed to defend their title as Wawrinka withdrew before the start of the tournament due to a knee injury that ended his season, while Kerber lost in the first round to Naomi Osaka. The men's singles tournament concluded with Rafael Nadal defeating Kevin Anderson in the final, while the women's singles tournament concluded with Sloane Stephens defeating Madison Keys in the final. The 2017 US Open was the 137th edition of the tournament and took place at the USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows–Corona Park of Queens in New York City, New York, United States. The tournament was held on 15 DecoTurf hard courts. The tournament was an event run by the International Tennis Federation (ITF) and was part of the 2017 ATP World Tour and the 2017 WTA Tour calendars under the Grand Slam category. The tournament consisted of both men's and women's singles and doubles draws as well as a mixed doubles event. There were also singles and doubles events for both boys and girls (players under 18), which were part of the Grade A category of tournaments. Additionally, there were singles and doubles wheelchair tennis events for men, women and quads. The 2017 tournament saw the USTA try out two experimental rules. Firstly, the USTA introduced a shot clock to combat slow play and to address players going over the allotted time for warm ups and medical time outs. Secondly, coaching was allowed from the side of the court. Whilst a player was at the same end as their box they could verbally communicate, if they were at the opposite end then sign language would be allowed. This meant that coaching incidents involving Victoria Azarenka and Caroline Garcia at Wimbledon would have been allowed. The rules only applied in qualifying matches for the main draw, junior, wheelchair and legends matches. The tournament was played on hard courts and took place over a series of 15 courts with DecoTurf surface, including the two existing main showcourts – Arthur Ashe Stadium and the new Grandstand. Louis Armstrong Stadium, one of the main stadiums used in the previous tournament, was demolished after the 2016 tournament and was replaced for the 2017 edition by a temporary stadium located next to parking lot B near the construction of the previous Louis Armstrong Stadium site. In the United States, the 2017 US Open will be the third year in a row under an 11-year, $825 million contract with ESPN, in which the broadcaster holds exclusive rights to the entire tournament and the US Open Series. This means that the tournament is not available on broadcast television. This also makes ESPN the exclusive U.S. broadcaster for three of the four tennis majors. In Australia, SBS won the rights to broadcast the US Open with the free to air coverage starting from the quarter finals. Latin America: ESPN  Argentina: ESPN and TyC Sports  Brazil: ESPN and SporTV  Paraguay: ESPN and Tigo Sports  Uruguay: ESPN and VTV [es] Below is a series of tables for each of the competitions showing the ranking points on offer for each event. The total prize-money compensation for the 2017 US Open is $50.4 million, a 3.7% increase on the same total last year. Of that total, a record $3.7 million goes to both the men's and women's singles champions, which is increased to 7.5 percent from last year. This made the US Open the most lucrative and highest paying tennis grand slam in the world, leapfrogging Wimbledon in total prize money fund. Prize money for the US Open qualifying tournament is also up 49.2 percent, to $2.9 million. The total prize money for the wheelchair tennis events was $200,000. Men's singles Women's singles 1Rankings as of August 21, 2017. Rafael Nadal def. Kevin Anderson, 6–3, 6–3, 6–4 Sloane Stephens def. Madison Keys, 6–3, 6–0 Jean-Julien Rojer / Horia Tecău def. Feliciano López / Marc López, 6–4, 6–3 Chan Yung-jan / Martina Hingis def. Lucie Hradecká / Kateřina Siniaková, 6–3, 6–2 Martina Hingis / Jamie Murray def. Chan Hao-ching / Michael Venus, 6–1, 4–6, [10–8] Wu Yibing def. Axel Geller, 6–4, 6–4 Amanda Anisimova def. Coco Gauff, 6–0, 6–2 Hsu Yu-hsiou / Wu Yibing def. Toru Horie / Yuta Shimizu, 6–4, 5–7, [11–9] Olga Danilović / Marta Kostyuk def. Lea Bošković / Wang Xiyu, 6–1, 7–5 John McEnroe / Patrick McEnroe def. Pat Cash / Henri Leconte, 6–2, 6–4 Kim Clijsters / Martina Navratilova def. Lindsay Davenport / Mary Joe Fernández, 4–6, 6–2, [10–4] Stéphane Houdet def. Alfie Hewett, 6–2, 4–6, 6–3 Yui Kamiji def. Diede de Groot, 7–5, 6–2 David Wagner def. Andrew Lapthorne, 7–5, 3–6, 6–4 Alfie Hewett / Gordon Reid def. Stéphane Houdet / Nicolas Peifer, 7–5, 6–4 Marjolein Buis / Diede de Groot def. Dana Mathewson / Aniek van Koot, 6–4, 6–3 Andrew Lapthorne / David Wagner def. Dylan Alcott / Bryan Barten, 7–5, 6–2 The following players were given wildcards to the main draw based on internal selection and recent performances.