The Lost World: Jurassic Park is a 1997 American science fiction action film. It is the second installment in the Jurassic Park franchise and the second film in the original Jurassic Park trilogy. A sequel to 1993's Jurassic Park and loosely based on Michael Crichton's 1995 novel The Lost World, the film was directed by Steven Spielberg from a screenplay by David Koepp. Jeff Goldblum, Richard Attenborough, Joseph Mazzello, and Ariana Richards[undue weight? – discuss] reprise their roles from the original film with Julianne Moore, Pete Postlethwaite, and Arliss Howard joining the cast. Four years after the original film, John Hammond (Attenborough) loses control of his company InGen to his nephew, Peter Ludlow (Howard). On the verge of bankruptcy, Ludlow intends to exploit dinosaurs from InGen's second island, Isla Sorna, with plans for a new dinosaur theme park in San Diego. Hammond sends a team, led by the eccentric chaos theorist and mathematician Ian Malcolm (Goldblum), to the island to document the dinosaurs and encourage non-interference, although the two groups eventually come into conflict. After the original novel's release and the first film's success, fans pressured Crichton for a sequel. Following the book's publication in 1995, production began on a film sequel. Filming took place from September to December 1996, primarily in California, with a shoot in Kauai, Hawaii, where the first film was shot. The Lost World's plot and imagery is substantially darker than Jurassic Park. It makes more extensive use of CGI to depict the dinosaurs, along with life-sized animatronics. The Lost World was among the most anticipated films of 1997. It was accompanied by a $250 million marketing campaign, which included video games, comic books, and toys. Released on May 23, 1997, the film received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the visual effects but criticized the character development. Spielberg also expressed disappointment with the film, stating he had become increasingly disenchanted with it during production. The film grossed $618.6 million worldwide, becoming the second-highest-grossing film of 1997. It earned an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects. A sequel, Jurassic Park III, was released in 2001. Goldblum would later reprise his role as Ian Malcom in both Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom (2018) and Jurassic World Dominion (2022) Four years after the events on Isla Nublar, a British family anchored their yacht offshore at the nearby Isla Sorna, unaware that the island contains genetically engineered dinosaurs. Their daughter wanders off and is attacked by a group of Compsognathus. An ailing Dr. John Hammond invites mathematician Dr. Ian Malcolm to his residence to discuss the incident. Hammond's company InGen, which created the dinosaurs, is now headed by Hammond's nephew Peter Ludlow, who used the incident to take control of the company from Hammond. Besides Isla Nublar, Ian learns that InGen had another facility, "Site B", on Isla Sorna, where the company's dinosaurs were cloned. However, the island was abandoned during a hurricane, and the animals were released into the wild to fend for themselves. Ludlow wants to exploit the island's creatures to save InGen from bankruptcy. Hammond asks Ian to join a team who will document the dinosaurs in their natural habitat, to encourage a policy of non-interference. Ian's girlfriend, paleontologist Dr. Sarah Harding, was hired and is already on Isla Sorna. Upon hearing this, Ian reluctantly agrees to go to the island, but only to retrieve Sarah. Ian travels there with Eddie Carr, an equipment specialist and engineer, and Nick Van Owen, a video documentarian and activist. They find Sarah, but she insists on staying to continue her research. Ian is shocked when he discovers that his daughter Kelly has stowed away with the team in a trailer, which serves as their mobile base. Ludlow and a mercenary team arrive on the island to capture dinosaurs, with help from big-game hunters Roland Tembo and Ajay Sidhu, Roland's second-in-command Dieter Stark, and paleontologist Dr. Robert Burke. Malcolm's group realizes Ludlow intends to ship the captured specimens to San Diego, to revive an unfinished Jurassic Park amphitheater which Hammond had abandoned in favor of the park on Isla Nublar. Nick and Sarah free the captured dinosaurs, and the animals wreak havoc on the InGen team's camp. On the way back to the trailer, Nick rescues an injured Tyrannosaurus rex infant that Roland used as bait to hunt its father. Nick and Sarah treat the infant's broken leg, but the Tyrannosaurus parents arrive, having tracked the infant's scent. They reclaim their infant, destroy the trailer, and devour Eddie splitting him in half during his attempt to save the group. Ian, Sarah, Nick, and Kelly are rescued by Ludlow's team and are forced to work together, both groups having lost all their communications equipment. They decide to travel to an abandoned InGen base to call for help. During a break, Stark goes into the wilderness alone to relieve himself and is killed by a group of Compsognathus. After the team sets up a camp for the night, they are ambushed by the Tyrannosaurus adults: Burke is devoured, and others flee into a field of long grass where a pack of Velociraptors ambush them, killing Ajay and most of the mercenary team. Ian, Sarah, Kelly, and Nick reach the InGen base, fight off Velociraptors, and successfully radio for helicopter extraction. After being rescued, Nick reveals that he stole Roland's ammunition to prevent him from killing his trophy. However, they learn Roland has sedated the male Tyrannosaurus with tranquilizers instead. As more InGen personnel arrive on the island to secure the male and infant, Roland declines Ludlow's job offer at the San Diego park, reflecting on Ajay's death and the morality of Ludlow's scheme. At the Port of San Diego, Ian and Sarah attempt to convince Ludlow to abandon his plans, but the ship carrying the male Tyrannosaurus suddenly crashes into the docks. The crew is found dead, and the Tyrannosaurus is accidentally released and begins rampaging through the city, devouring a dog and a civilian. Ian and Sarah locate the infant Tyrannosaurus at the planned park and use it to lure the adult back to the docks. Ludlow tries to retrieve the infant within the cargo hold but is injured by the adult before being mauled to death by the infant. Sarah uses a tranquilizer gun to sedate the male before intervening government forces can use lethal force on it, while Ian seals the cargo hold doors. In the aftermath, the dinosaurs are shipped back to Isla Sorna accompanied by the United States Navy, while Ian, Sarah, and Kelly watch Hammond in a televised interview announcing that the American and Costa Rican governments have declared the island a nature reserve. Jeff Goldblum as Dr. Ian Malcolm: A mathematician and chaos theorist. Julianne Moore as Dr. Sarah Harding: Ian's girlfriend and a behavioral paleontologist. Pete Postlethwaite as Roland Tembo: A big-game hunter who adheres to his own strict moral code. Arliss Howard as Peter Ludlow: Hammond's greedy nephew who has been appointed CEO of InGen, the main villain of the film Richard Attenborough as Dr. John Hammond: The former billionaire CEO of InGen who takes steps to redeem himself after the 1993 Isla Nublar incident and preserve Isla Sorna. Vince Vaughn as Nick Van Owen: An experienced documentarian, photojournalist and environmentalist. Vanessa Lee Chester as Kelly Curtis: Ian's daughter who stows away in the support trailer to be with him. Peter Stormare as Dieter Stark: The second-in-command of the InGen group under the control of Roland Tembo. Harvey Jason as Ajay Sidhu: Roland Tembo's best friend and hunting partner. Richard Schiff as Eddie Carr: A field equipment expert. Thomas F. Duffy as Dr. Robert Burke: The InGen hunters' paleontologist. Joseph Mazzello as Tim Murphy: Lex's younger brother and Hammond's grandson. Ariana Richards as Lex Murphy: Tim's older sister and Hammond's granddaughter. Camilla Belle as Cathy Bowman: The daughter of a wealthy family that stumbles upon Isla Sorna. After the release of the novel, Jurassic Park in 1990, Michael Crichton was pressured by fans for a sequel. Having never written one, he initially refused. While shooting the novel's film adaptation, director Steven Spielberg believed that if a sequel were made, it would involve the retrieval of the canister that contained dinosaur DNA lost during the events of the first film. Talk of a sequel film began after the 1993 release of Jurassic Park, which was a financial success. Spielberg held discussions with David Koepp and Crichton, who wrote the previous film, to talk about possible ideas for a sequel. The production schedule for a second Jurassic Park film was dependent on whether Crichton would write a sequel to the first novel. In March 1994, Crichton said there would probably be a sequel to both the novel and film, saying he had a story idea for another novel, which would then be adapted into a film. At the time, Spielberg had not committed to directing the new novel's film adaptation, as he planned to take a year off from directing. In March 1995, Crichton said that he was nearly finished writing the sequel, scheduled for release later that year, although he declined to specify its title or plot. At the time of this announcement, Spielberg had signed on to produce the film adaptation, with filming to begin in summer 1996 for release in 1997. Spielberg was busy with his new DreamWorks studio and had not decided if he would direct the film, saying, "I'd love to direct it, but I just have to see. My life is changing". A production team was assembled in spring 1995, as Crichton was finishing the second novel, titled The Lost World; simultaneously, Spielberg and Koepp were developing ideas for the screenplay. Crichton's novel was published that September, while Spielberg was announced as director for the film adaptation in November. Spielberg and Crichton agreed to forego upfront fees for a share of the back-end. Koepp's deal was said to be the most lucrative for an adaptation at the time, with a fee in the region of $1.5 to $2 million. Joe Johnston, who offered to direct the film adaptation, eventually directed the following film, Jurassic Park III (2001). The Lost World: Jurassic Park had nearly 1,500 storyboards, which aided in the precise planning needed to shoot scenes involving action, dinosaurs, and special-effects. The plot for Crichton's Lost World novel involves a second island with dinosaurs but no reference to the canister of dinosaur DNA, which was later used as a plot aspect in a rejected early draft for Jurassic Park IV. After the film adaptation of The Lost World was announced, Koepp received letters of advice from children who were interested in the film. According to Koepp, one letter read: "As long as you have the T. rex and the Velociraptor, everything else is fine. But, whatever you do, don't have a long boring part at the beginning that has nothing to do with the island". Koepp retained the letter as "sort of a reminder". Koepp also took a suggestion from the letter to add Stegosaurus into the script. After the novel was finished, Crichton was not consulted about the sequel film, and it was not until he declined to approve certain merchandising rights that he received a copy of the script. Kathleen Kennedy, the film's executive producer, and producer of Jurassic Park, said: "In the same way Michael doesn't see writing as a collaboration, Steven went off and did his own movie. When Michael turned the book over to Steven, he knew his work was finished". By the time Crichton had finished his novel, Spielberg and Koepp had already been discussing ideas for the film for more than a year. For the adaptation, Koepp attempted to combine the ideas that he and Spielberg devised along with those from Crichton's novel. Spielberg said that the middle portion of the novel was lacking in story narrative, but that Crichton's set-up was excellent, and he put Spielberg and his crew on the right road. Koepp had a year to write the script before the start of filming. To prepare before writing the script, Spielberg was more insistent that Koepp watch the 1925 film, The Lost World, than he was on having him read Crichton's novel, which Koepp also did. During an early meeting with Koepp, Spielberg determined that while the primary conflict of the original film involved herbivorous dinosaurs vs. carnivorous dinosaurs, the script for the new film should involve humans who are "gatherers" (observers of the dinosaurs) and "hunters" (who capture the dinosaurs for a zoo). Koepp said the plot of the 1962 film Hatari! – about African animals being captured for zoos – had "a big influence" on The Lost World's script. Spielberg and Koepp discarded many of the novel's scenes and ideas, choosing instead to devise a new story while including the two ideas from the novel that Spielberg liked: a second island populated with dinosaurs, and a scene where half of a two-part trailer dangles from a cliff after being attacked by T. rexes. Also retained was the idea of parenting and nurturing behavior among dinosaurs, as well as a baby T. rex and a child who stows away in the trailer. The character of Robert Burke is based on paleontologist Robert Bakker, who believes that T. rex was a predator. Rival paleontologist Jack Horner, the film's technical advisor, viewed the dinosaur as being protective and not inherently aggressive. Horner requested that the character of Burke be eaten by the T. rex, although Bakker enjoyed the scene and believed that it vindicated his theory that T. rex was a predator. Crichton's novel revolves around Malcolm's team and a rival team led by InGen's corporate rival, Biosyn, which was written out of the film adaptation in favor of two competing InGen teams. Several characters from the novel were excluded from the film adaptation, including Lewis Dodgson, the leader of the Biosyn team, and field equipment engineer Doc Thorne, whose characteristics were partially implemented in the film's version of Eddie. Two new characters not featured in the novel were Nick and Roland. For these characters, Koepp chose the surnames Tembo and Van Owen as a reference to one of his favorite songs, "Roland the Headless Thompson Gunner", by Warren Zevon. Koepp said "since Roland is a mercenary in the song, that seemed like a good name for the hunter-for-hire in our movie. While I was at it, I thought it would be fun to make his nemesis' last name Van Owen, like in the song". Spielberg regretted excluding a scene from the script that would have depicted characters on motorcycles attempting to flee raptors, similar to a sequence in the novel. An alternate version of the scene was added to the 2015 film, Jurassic World. While Crichton's novel featured two child characters, Kelly and Arby, Koepp combined them into a single character also named Kelly. Arby is a black character, and black actress Vanessa Lee Chester was chosen to play Kelly in the film. Initially, Kelly was to be a student of Ian Malcolm's, although Koepp had difficulty making this idea work, saying that Malcolm "would never teach grade school, so I thought maybe he was tutoring her. Why? Maybe he got a drunk driving ticket, and he had to do community service, so he's tutoring at this inner-city high school". Koepp scrapped this idea because of its similarity to the 1995 film Dangerous Minds. Because the film would deal with dinosaur nurturing, Koepp realized that the parenting element should also extend to the human characters. Spielberg approved Koepp's idea to have Kelly as Malcolm's daughter, although they initially were unsure about a black actress playing the daughter of a white parent. Spielberg has two adopted black children, and he and Koepp soon decided to retain the idea. Koepp wanted to write an explanation into the script about the discrepancy in skin color, but he dropped this idea as he could not think of a way to address it in a simple manner. Koepp referred to Crichton's original Jurassic Park novel for some scenes that would be added into the film adaptation of The Lost World. Dieter's death scene was inspired by John Hammond's death in the first novel, where Procompsognathus kill him. The film's opening scene came from an early chapter in the first novel that was not used in the film adaptation, where a Procompsognathus bites a girl on a beach. The first novel also included a scene where characters hide behind a waterfall from a T. rex; this scene was not used in the first film but was added into The Lost World: Jurassic Park, for the scene in which the T. rex eats Burke. Early scripts had featured two Pteranodon sequences, including one in which Malcolm and his group would escape raptors by hang-gliding off a cliff, only to encounter a Pteranodon. Another sequence, once planned as the film's ending, involved an aerial battle where Pteranodons attack the helicopter trying to escape Isla Sorna. Spielberg also considered having the Pteranodons swoop down and carry off humans and animals in their large beaks, an idea that was rejected by Horner. This version of the story featured a larger worker's village on the island, whereas the final version of the village was only a quarter of what was initially designed. For more than a year, Spielberg and Koepp were unsure whether to include a scene involving a dinosaur in a city. Koepp believed that such a scene would only work for a short period of time before becoming unbelievable. Weeks before filming began, Spielberg decided to change the ending to have the T. rex rampage through San Diego. He was interested in seeing dinosaurs attacking the mainland, and he believed that audiences would enjoy the San Diego rampage. Initially, Spielberg wanted such a scene to be saved for a third film but later decided to add it to the second one when he realized he would probably not direct another film in the series. The sequence is similar to an attack scene involving a Brontosaurus in London in the 1925 version of The Lost World, adapted from Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's 1912 novel of the same name, both of which inspired the title for Crichton's novel. For the rampage sequence, Spielberg referenced monster films such as The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms and Gorgo. Koepp's first draft of the new third act was completed a week after talking with Spielberg, although it would continue to go through revisions. Koepp wrote a total of nine drafts for the film. Producers Colin Wilson and Gerald Molen wanted the Pteranodons to remain in the story, but the creatures ultimately received only a small appearance in the film's ending shot. In November 1994, Richard Attenborough said he would reprise his role as John Hammond from the first film. In 1995, Spielberg met Vanessa Lee Chester at the premiere of A Little Princess, in which she appeared. Chester later recalled: "As I was signing an autograph for him, he told me one day he'd put me in a film". Spielberg met with Chester the following year to discuss The Lost World: Jurassic Park before ultimately casting her as Malcolm's daughter, Kelly. Pete Postlethwaite was cast after Spielberg saw his performance in the 1993 film In the Name of the Father. Art Malik turned down a role in the film. In April 1996, Julianne Moore was in discussions to star in the film alongside Jeff Goldblum. Spielberg had admired Moore's performance in The Fugitive. Two months later, Peter Stormare was in final negotiations to join the cast. Later in August, Vince Vaughn joined the cast. Spielberg was impressed with Vaughn's performance in the film Swingers, which he saw after the filmmakers asked his permission to use music from his earlier film, Jaws. After meeting with Spielberg, Vaughn was cast without having to do a screen test. Indian actor M. R. Gopakumar was initially cast as Ajay Sidhu in August 1996, but was unable to participate in the project because of trouble acquiring a work visa in time for filming. He was one of six people considered for the role, which ultimately went to actor Harvey Jason. Production designer Rick Carter traveled to Hawaii, then Puerto Rico, New Zealand, and Australia to scout possible filming locations. Costa Rica and South America were never considered, as filming would have taken place during the local area's rainy season. However, the film ultimately did use tropical sound effects that were recorded in Costa Rica. By February 1996, northern New Zealand had been chosen as a filming location. While the first film had been shot in Kauai, Hawaii, the filmmakers wanted to shoot the sequel in a different location with new scenery. New Zealand was also chosen because it was believed to better represent a real dinosaur environment, although Crichton wanted the film to be shot on Kauai. In August 1996, Humboldt County, California was chosen instead of New Zealand, where filming would have been too costly. Humboldt County offered financial incentives that would keep the film's production costs lower. Oregon had been considered before Humboldt County was chosen. Filming locations in Humboldt County would include the redwood forests of Eureka, California. This location was picked because research indicated dinosaurs did not inhabit tropical habitats, but forests like the ones in Eureka. Filming began on September 5, 1996, at Fern Canyon, part of California's Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park. Production continued in northern California for two weeks at locations such as Eureka, Sue-meg State Park, and private property in Fieldbrook. Filming in Humboldt County concluded on September 19. Throughout the fall of 1996, filming continued on sound stages at Universal Studios Hollywood. The Site B workers village was also constructed there and left intact after filming to become a part of the theme park tour. Because of limited stage space in Hollywood, the production crew had to alternate between the different stages at Universal, with stages being redecorated when not in use to prepare for future filming. A 1997 Fleetwood Southwind Storm RV was used to depict the mobile trailer lab. Several trailers were created for filming. Scenes involving the trailer lab were shot in Eureka, followed by filming at Universal. For shots in which half of the trailer dangles from a cliff, a whole mountainside was built over the structure of Universal's parking garage, and the trailer was dangled against the mountainside using a 95-ton crane. Before the trailer is shoved off the cliff, it is attacked by the T. rex adults who slam their heads into the vehicle. Animatronic versions of the adults were used for this scene, and the damage to the trailer was authentically caused by the animatronics rather than through computer effects. Shots involving both the animatronic T. rexes and the trailer together were filmed on Universal's Stage 24. Other shots involving the trailer were filmed on Stage 27. A portion of the trailer scene was filmed in a continuous take using a 26-foot (7.9 m) crane arm. The camera would track actor Richard Schiff as his character travels through part of the trailer to throw rope down to the other characters, who are stuck in the other portion of the trailer as it dangles over the side of the cliff. This shot required precise timing to get right, and a dolly track also had to be built into the stage. While filming inside the trailer, the camera would lose focus because of interference from some piece of the electronic equipment inside the vehicle. After 15 failed takes, the film crew was close to giving up on the shot, until a remote-focus mechanism was mounted onto the camera. Ultimately, the film crew managed to get three good takes over the course of nine hours. Another issue resulted from the scene taking place during a storm, as the artificial rain fogged the camera lens, and the camera's rain deflectors failed. Spielberg did not allow for cast rehearsals: "You want to capture the actors when they taste the words for the first time, when they look at each other for the first time – that's the sort of magic you can only get on a first or second take". Spielberg wanted his long-time cinematographer Dean Cundey to return for The Lost World after working on the previous film, although Cundey was busy preparing to direct Honey, We Shrunk Ourselves, so Spielberg chose Janusz Kamiński instead. Kamiński had worked with Spielberg on Schindler's List, and he gave The Lost World a darker, more artistic look over its predecessor, leading to a "more elegant and rich" approach focused on contrast and shadow. Much of the film takes place at night, and Kamiński looked at the films Alien and Blade Runner for visual reference. Koepp was the film's second unit director, having volunteered for the position in hopes of gaining more directorial experience. Second unit work consisted of establishing shots, such as people marching across Isla Sorna, and helicopter shots. When Spielberg was unavailable for filming because of a family commitment in New York, Koepp also took over the first unit for eight days of filming, during the shoot at Universal's sound stages. Spielberg monitored the filming process through satellite video in New York during his week off. The InGen hunters' base camp was constructed on Stage 12. On Stage 23, a large ravine was constructed for a scene in which a T. rex chases characters into a small cave hidden behind a waterfall. Special-effects expert Michael Lantieri constructed the artificial waterfall, and the scene was shot using a Steadicam. Spielberg estimated that nearly half of the film was shot using Steadicam, as it was useful for the film's abundance of chase scenes. For the scene in which raptors attack the InGen team in a field of long grass, Lantieri and a team started growing real grass a year earlier on eight acres, located in Newhall, California. The acreage allowed for any potential reshoots to be done, as any grass that was flattened during filming would not come back up. The scene was filmed in early November 1996. The T. rex rampage through San Diego was also filmed during November. Although the sequence takes place in San Diego, only one scene was shot there. In it, an InGen helicopter flies over the wharf and banks towards the city. The other sequences were all shot in Burbank, California. An eight-scale dock and miniature ship were created for the scene in which the T. rex arrives in San Diego. One scene has the T. rex ramming into a driving bus which then crashes into a Blockbuster Video. The video store was built as a set on an empty lot in Burbank. The San Diego scenes were shot behind barricades to maintain secrecy; Spielberg noted that "it looked like road-repair work was going on". Various members of the film crew were featured running from the Tyrannosaurus, with Koepp credited as the "Unlucky Bastard" who is eaten during a scene set in San Diego. Scenes involving Hammond's residence were shot during the final week of filming, at Mayfield Senior School in Pasadena, California. A scene where Vaughn's character emerges from a lake was also shot in Pasadena. Originally, filming was to take place over five days in December at New Zealand's Fiordland National Park, where the film's opening sequence was to be shot. In early December, plans to film in Fiordland were abruptly cancelled. Principal photography concluded ahead of schedule on December 11. However, in mid-December 1996, plans were approved to shoot the opening sequence on a beach in Kauai after the cancellation of the New Zealand shoot. Filming in Kauai was underway on December 20, with plans to finish two days later. Although Spielberg was in Kauai at the time, and had visited the production, the opening sequence was filmed by a second unit crew. The film was shot on a budget of $73 million. While Jurassic Park featured mostly the animatronic dinosaurs built by Stan Winston's team, The Lost World relied more on the computer-generated imagery (CGI) of Industrial Light & Magic (ILM). This meant the film featured larger shots that offered plenty of space for the digital artists to add the dinosaurs. The film features 75 computer-generated shots. A scene in which the hunters round up a group of dinosaurs was made almost entirely with computer-generated creatures. An exception was a handful of Pachycephalosaurus shots. Spielberg followed Horner's advice to help keep the dinosaurs scientifically accurate for the most part, with some exceptions. The Winston design team closely modelled the dinosaurs based on paleontological facts, or theories in certain cases where facts were not definitively known. In addition to animatronics, Winston's team also painted maquettes of dinosaurs that would subsequently be created through CGI. ILM animators went to Six Flags Discovery Kingdom, then known as Marine World/Africa USA to videotape elephants, reptiles, and rhinos, to determine how to make the dinosaurs appear more like living animals. Although technology had not advanced much since the release of the first film, Spielberg noted that "the artistry of the creative computer people" had advanced: "There's better detail, much better lighting, better muscle tone and movement in the animals. When a dinosaur transfers weight from his left side to his right, the whole movement of fat and sinew is smoother, more physiologically correct". All of the dinosaurs used servo control for facial movements. While the first film showed that dinosaurs could be adequately recreated through special effects, the sequel raised the question of what could be done with the dinosaurs. Winston said: "I wanted to show the world what they didn't see in Jurassic Park: more dinosaurs and more dinosaur action. 'More, bigger, better' was our motto". Some of the animatronics cost $1 million and weighed nine and a half tons. Lantieri, the special effects supervisor, said: "The big T. rex robot can pull two Gs of force when it's moving from right to left. If you hit someone with that, you'd kill them. So, in a sense, we did treat the dinosaurs as living, dangerous creatures". Compsognathus, nicknamed "Compies" by Winston's crew, are a small carnivorous theropod which attacks in packs. Visual effects supervisor Dennis Muren considered them the most complex digital dinosaur. Their small size meant the Compys had their whole body visible and thus needed a higher sense of gravity and weight. A simple puppet Compsognathus is featured in the opening scene, and the part where Dieter Stark was killed by the pack had Peter Stormare wearing a jacket onto which various rubber Compies were attached. In the film, Burke identifies the dinosaur as Compsognathus triassicus, which in reality is a non-existent species. The name is a combination of Compsognathus longipes and Procompsognathus triassicus. Gallimimus is shown fleeing from the InGen Hunters. Mamenchisaurus is shown on the game trail scene. The Brachiosaurus model from the first film was altered to portray the Mamenchisaurus, which was fully computer-generated. Pachycephalosaurus, a dinosaur standing five feet tall and measuring eight feet long. Three versions of the creature were created for filming: a full hydraulic puppet, a head, and a head-butter. The latter was built to withstand high impact for a scene in which the dinosaur head-butts one of the hunter vehicles. The Pachycephalosaurus puppet, one of the most complex, was used for a scene in which the dinosaur is captured. The legs of the puppet were controlled through pneumatics. Parasaurolophus is shown being hunted down by the InGen hunters. Winston's team was to create a puppet version of the animal for this scene, but ILM ultimately created the animal through CGI instead, basing the design off of a miniature sculpture that Winston's team had created. In addition, an earlier opening scene that was scrapped would have featured a Japanese fishing trawler acquiring a partially decomposed Parasaurolophus in its net, which would break from the weight, allowing the body to sink back into the ocean. Winston's team created a practical Parasaurolophus for the scene before it was scrapped, although the carcass was still used for a scene set in a T. rex nest. Stegosaurus was, according to Spielberg, included "by popular demand". Winston's team built full-sized versions of both the infant and adult Stegosaurus, but Spielberg eventually opted to employ a digital version for the adults so they could be more mobile. The baby Stegosaurus was 8 feet (2.4 m) long and weighed 400 pounds (180 kg). It was shipped to the redwood forest for on-site filming. The adult stegosaurs were 26 feet (7.9 m) long and 16 feet (4.9 m) tall. Although they were also brought to the forest for filming, they ultimately were not used because of mobility issues and safety concerns. A full-sized Stegosaurus is only shown in a brief shot, in which the animal is caged. Triceratops is shown being hunted down by the InGen hunters. A baby Triceratops was also created by Winston's team, for a shot depicting the animal in a cage. A baby Triceratops had previously been planned for the first film, before being scrapped. Tyrannosaurus is featured as a family, with two adults and an infant. The T. rex animatronic from the first film was used for The Lost World as well, and Winston and his team also built a second adult T. rex for the sequel. Featuring two practical T. rexes required double the work and puppeteers. The adult T. rex animatronics were built from head to mid-body, while full body shots were created through CGI. The animatronics weighed nine tons each and cost $1 million apiece. For the mobile trailer sequence, an 80-foot (24 m) track was built into the sound stage floor, allowing the T. rexes to be moved backward and forward. The adult T. rexes could not be moved from their location at Stage 24, so new sets had to be built around the animatronics as filming progressed. Animatronics were primarily used for the scene in which the T. rexes kill Eddie, with the exception of two CGI shots: when the animals emerge from the forest and when they tear Eddie's body in half. Otherwise, the animatronics were used for shots in which the animals tear the vehicle apart to get to Eddie. Filming the scene with the animatronics required close collaboration with a stunt coordinator. An animatronic T. rex was also used in scenes depicting the deaths of Burke and Ludlow. The baby T. rex had two different practical versions, a "fully contained" remote controlled version the actors could carry, and a hybrid operated by both hydraulics and cables which lay on the operating table, and had the added complexity of moving as Vince Vaughn held its head. Velociraptor had a mechanical version which depicted the upper half of its body, and a digital full-motion computer raptor. A "super-raptor" had also been considered for the film, but Spielberg rejected it, saying it was "a little too much out of a horror movie. I didn't want to create an alien". Pteranodon makes an appearance at the film's end. For the sequel, composer John Williams avoided using most of the previous film's main themes, writing a more action-oriented score. The soundtrack was released on May 20, 1997. It, along with the soundtrack to the first movie, was re-released and remastered on November 29, 2016. In February 1997, Universal announced a $250 million marketing campaign with 70 promotional partners. It was even more extensive than that of Jurassic Park. The leading partners were Burger King, whose promotion was concurrent with one for another Universal dinosaur-based franchise, The Land Before Time; JVC and Mercedes-Benz, whose products are featured in the movie; and Timberland Co., making its first film tie-in. Another partner was a then-sister company of Universal under Seagram, Tropicana Products. Other promotional partners included Hamburger Helper and Betty Crocker, while General Mills introduced Jurassic Park Crunch cereal. Derivative works included various video games, including both a pinball machine and an arcade game by Sega, and a four-part comic series released by Topps Comics. Other promotional items included a toy line of action figures by Kenner and remote-controlled vehicles by Tyco, as well as a board game by Milton Bradley Company. Also produced were Hershey's chocolate bars that featured holographic dinosaur patterns. Universal hoped for promotional profits to exceed $1 billion. Inspired by how Jurassic Park featured the Ford Explorer, Mercedes-Benz signed an endorsement deal to use the film to introduce its first sports utility vehicle, the W163. On December 13, 1996, a special version of the film's teaser trailer debuted at 42 theaters in the United States and Canada, at a cost of $14,000 for each theater; the trailer used synchronized strobe lights that mimicked lightning during a rain scene. The film's first trailer was aired on January 26, 1997, during Super Bowl XXXI. A travelling exhibition, The Lost World: The Life and Death of Dinosaurs, went on tour in May 1997, coinciding with the film's release. The exhibit was produced in connection with the film, and its centerpiece was a 70-foot-long recreation of a Mamenchisaurus. A detailed website for the film was also created, and provided backstory for characters and events not referenced in the film. Shortly after the film's release, hackers broke into the website and briefly changed the film's logo to feature a duck instead of a T. rex. The film's title in the logo was also changed to The Duck World: Jurassic Pond. Universal denied that the hacking was a publicity stunt to promote the film, stating that it was traced to a "16-year-old hacker kid from back East". The website was still online as of 2017. The Lost World: Jurassic Park premiered on May 19, 1997, at the Cineplex Odeon theater in Universal City, California. The Los Angeles Times called the premiere "low-key". The film opened on May 23, 1997, receiving the widest release for a film to date opening in 3,281 theaters with previews commencing at 10 p.m. the night before. The film expanded to 3,565 theaters in its fourth weekend. It was also the first film to use the 1997-2012 Universal Pictures logo, accompanied by its fanfare by Jerry Goldsmith. It was the first US film to be widely distributed in India, being released in 155 cinemas on September 5, 1997. The Lost World: Jurassic Park made its home video debut on THX certified VHS and LaserDisc releases on November 4, 1997, accompanied by a $50 million promotional campaign. Fox paid $80 million for the broadcasting rights of The Lost World: Jurassic Park, which debuted on November 1, 1998. The television version was expanded with deleted scenes, that included John Hammond's ouster by InGen executives. The Lost World: Jurassic Park was released on a Collector's Edition DVD on October 10, 2000, in both Widescreen (1.85:1) and Full Screen (1.33:1) versions, in a box set with its predecessor Jurassic Park. The films were also featured in a deluxe limited edition box set featuring both DVDs, soundtrack albums, two lenticulars, stills from both films, and a certificate of authenticity signed by the set's producers, inside a collector case. After the release of sequel Jurassic Park III, box sets including all three movies were also made available, as Jurassic Park Trilogy on December 11, 2001, and as the Jurassic Park Adventure Pack on November 29, 2005. The Lost World was first made available on Blu-ray on October 25, 2011, as part of a trilogy release. The entire Jurassic Park film series was released on 4K UHD Blu-Ray on May 22, 2018. The Lost World took in $72.1 million on its opening weekend ($92.7 million for the four-day Memorial Day holiday, including $2.6 million from Thursday night previews) in the U.S., which was the biggest opening weekend up to that point, beating Batman Forever. This made it the first film to reach the $70 million mark during an opening weekend. For four and a half years, the film held that record until the release of Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone in November 2001. The film also had the biggest May opening weekend, surpassing the previous records held by Twister and Mission: Impossible. It would hold this record until 2002 when Spider-Man took it. Additionally, it surpassed Mission: Impossible for having the largest Memorial Day weekend gross, as well as three opening records held by Independence Day. In 2004, Shrek 2 broke The Lost World's record for having the biggest Memorial Day weekend gross. That film would hold this record for two years until it was given to X-Men: The Last Stand in 2006, which also took The Lost World's record for having the highest Memorial Day opening weekend. Furthermore, it had the highest opening weekend for a Steven Spielberg film, lasting this record for a decade before being dethroned by Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull in 2008. Then in 2009, Fast & Furious surpassed The Lost World to have the largest opening weekend for any Universal film. The Lost World broke several other box office records as well. The film made $21.6 million on its Friday opening and $24.4 million on its second day, making it the highest Friday and Saturday grosses. While the Friday record was taken by Toy Story 2 in 1999, the film continued to hold the Saturday record for two more years until The Mummy Returns surpassed it. It also took the record for highest single-day box office take of $26.1 million on May 25, a record held until the release of Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace in 1999. It became the fastest film to pass the $100 million mark, achieving the feat in just six days. This was also Spielberg's fastest film to cross this mark, holding that record until War of the Worlds overtook it in 2005, taking five days to do so. When the film first debuted on May 23, it had the largest number of screenings, playing at 3,281 theaters. This broke the record also held by Mission: Impossible. However, despite these records, its total box office gross fell below the total of the original film. Ticket sales dropped 62% by its second weekend. The film made $34.1 million during its second weekend, making it the fourth-highest-grossing second weekend of all time, after its predecessor Jurassic Park, Twister and Independence Day. Over the next few weeks, The Lost World would go on to compete against other blockbuster films released during that summer such as Hercules, Face/Off, Men in Black, Con Air, George of the Jungle, Batman & Robin and Speed 2: Cruise Control. In Thailand, The Lost World became the country's highest-grossing film of all time. It ultimately grossed $229.1 million in the U.S. and $389.5 million internationally, for a total of $618.6 million worldwide, becoming the second highest-grossing film of 1997 behind Titanic. The film sold an estimated 49,910,000 tickets in North America. The Lost World: Jurassic Park was released to mixed reviews. On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 53% based on 83 reviews and an average rating of 5.70/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "The Lost World demonstrates how far CG effects have come in the four years since Jurassic Park; unfortunately, it also proves how difficult it can be to put together a truly compelling sequel." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average rating of 59 out of 100, based on 18 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale. Roger Ebert, who gave the first film three stars, gave The Lost World only two, writing: "It can be said that the creatures in this film transcend any visible signs of special effects and seem to walk the earth, but the same realism isn't brought to the human characters, who are bound by plot conventions and action formulas". Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune also gave the film two stars and said: "I was disappointed as much as I was thrilled because 'The Lost World' lacks a staple of Steven Spielberg's adventure films: exciting characters. [...] Even in the original 'Jurassic Park', the dinosaurs – not to mention the human beings – had more distinct personalities than they have here. Save for superior special effects, 'The Lost World' comes off as recycled material". Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times saw improved character development over the original: "It seemed such a mistake in Jurassic Park to sideline early on its most interesting character, the brilliant, free-thinking and outspoken theorist Ian Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum) with a broken leg, but in its most inspired stroke, The Lost World brings back Malcolm and places him front and center", calling it "a pleasure to watch such wily pros as Goldblum and Attenborough spar with each other with wit and assurance". Stephen Holden of The New York Times saying, "The Lost World, unlike Jurassic Park, humanizes its monsters in a way that E.T. would understand". Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B grade; he remarked, "Mr. T-Rex was cool in the first Spielberg flick, sure, but it wasn't until [it was in] San Diego that things got crazy-cool. It's the old 'tree falling in the woods' conundrum: Unless your giant monster is causing massive property damage, can you really call it a giant monster?" Spielberg said that during production he became increasingly disenchanted with the film: I beat myself up... growing more and more impatient with myself... It made me wistful about doing a talking picture, because sometimes I got the feeling I was just making this big silent-roar movie... I found myself saying, 'Is that all there is? It's not enough for me'. Spielberg regretted that the film characters are aware they are going to an island of dinosaurs, unlike the previous film. He later said that he knows a major reason why his sequels tend to not live up to the quality of his original films: My sequels aren't as good as my originals because I go onto every sequel I've made and I'm too confident. This movie made a ka-zillion dollars, which justifies the sequel, so I come in like it's going to be a slam dunk and I wind up making an inferior movie to the one before. I'm talking about The Lost World and Jurassic Park. Later reviews have also been mixed. Critic Tim Brayton described it as "readily the worst thing Steven Spielberg has ever made." In 2015, Matt Goldberg of Collider wrote that the film feels "like the work of a Spielberg protégé. All the beats are in place, but it's an imitation". He considered the film inferior to its predecessor. In 2018, Brian Silliman of Syfy Wire cited the film as a rare example of a film adaptation that is better than its novel counterpart. In particular, he praised the addition of Postlethwaite and his character. However, Syfy Wire's Stephanie Williams considered the novel superior, finding it more action-packed and thrilling while also taking its time "to breathe with these majestic creatures", whereas the film has "way more running and screaming". Bilge Ebiri of Vulture reviewed the film in 2020, praising the horror elements and writing that it "might be Spielberg's nastiest film – a truly demented series of mostly wordless action and horror set pieces whose technical proficiency is matched only by their cruelty". In contrast, Jacob Hall of /Film negatively compared it to Spielberg's 1984 film Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom, writing that The Lost World transforms "intelligent characters into bumbling idiots", increases "the volume and the chaos while dialing back the mystery and the awe", and replaces "excitement with violence and cruelty". List of films featuring dinosaurs As depicted in Jurassic Park (1993). "The Lost World: Jurassic Park". AFI Catalog of Feature Films. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved July 9, 2017. "The Lost World – Jurassic Park". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2013. "The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 9, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2021. "The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997) - Steven Spielberg". AllMovie. Archived from the original on April 10, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2021. Garner, Chris (March 24, 1998). "A 'Titanic' winner". Gannett News Service. Iowa City Press-Citizen. p. 17. Archived from the original on May 6, 2023. Retrieved May 6, 2023 – via Newspapers.com. "The Lost World". MichaelCrichton.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved July 7, 2007. Steven Spielberg (director) (October 25, 2011). "Return to Jurassic Park: Finding The Lost World". The Lost World: Jurassic Park (Blu-ray). Universal. "Encore section". www.Lost-World.com. Archived from the original on July 12, 2018. Retrieved November 10, 2014. Spillman, Susan (March 11, 1994). "Crichton is plotting 'Jurassic 2'". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved May 30, 2017. Spillman, Susan (March 22, 1995). "'Jurassic' sequel in sight: Crichton says book will be out this year". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved May 30, 2017. "Pre-Production section". www.Lost-World.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2019. Retrieved November 10, 2014. Dutka, Elaine (November 10, 1995). "Spielberg Signs On to Direct Sequel to 'Jurassic Park'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. Retrieved June 9, 2017. Busch, Anita M. (November 6, 1995). "Spielberg, U get 'Lost'". Variety. p. 8. Archived from the original on January 30, 2022. Retrieved January 30, 2022. "Jumanji's Joe Johnston Joins Jurassic". www.About.com. Archived from the original on March 5, 2006. "Chase, Crush and Devour". American Society of Cinematographers. June 1997. pp. 1–4. Archived from the original on March 6, 2020. Retrieved March 6, 2020. Lamble, Ryan (June 16, 2015). "Examining the Jurassic Park 4 script that was never filmed". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on October 15, 2018. Retrieved May 2, 2017. Warren, Bill; Shapiro, Marc (September 1997). "Writer of Rampages". Starlog. pp. 70–73. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Stein, Ruthe (May 18, 1997). "Summer Movie Guide". SFGate. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Notbohm, Brent; Friedman, Lester D. (2019). Steven Spielberg: Interviews, Revised and Updated. Univ. Press of Mississippi. pp. 131, 136–138, 140. ISBN 978-1-4968-2404-2. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Anderson, Dennis (May 24, 1997). "'Lost World' is latest special-effects bonanza". Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 19, 2020. Retrieved March 19, 2020. Ressner, Jeffrey (May 19, 1997). "Cinema: I Wanted to See a T. rex Stomping Down a Street". Time. Archived from the original on October 3, 2018. Retrieved November 12, 2015.(subscription required) Duncan, Jody (1997). The Making of The Lost World: Jurassic Park. Ballantine Books. ISBN 9780345407344. Archived from the original on May 8, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Brode, Douglas (2000). The Films of Steven Spielberg. Citadel Press. p. 244. ISBN 0806519517. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2017. Smith, Steven (May 29, 1997). "In 'The Lost World', Bits of Old Movies". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016. Wilmington, Michael (June 8, 1997). "The First 'Lost World' (Page 2 of 2)". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on April 17, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016. Plumb, Ali (October 12, 2014). "Steven Spielberg's The Lost World: Jurassic Park Viewer's Guide". Empire. Archived from the original on June 22, 2017. Retrieved November 12, 2015. Grubbs, Jefferson (June 11, 2015). "12 Un-Adapted Scenes From Michael Crichton's Novels That Should Totally Be In 'Jurassic World'". Bustle. Archived from the original on June 16, 2015. Retrieved July 26, 2017. de Semlyen, Nick (September 2013). "Jurassic Park 20th Anniversary: When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth" (PDF). Empire. p. 3. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 21, 2014. Retrieved July 26, 2017. Silliman, Brian (May 29, 2018). "The Lost World: Jurassic Park is a rare instance of the movie being far better than the book". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Ebert, Roger (December 27, 1998). "Movie Answer Man". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved August 31, 2015. "Spielberg speaks at USC! Updates on Indy 4, Jurassic Park 4 and a remake of one of his own films". AintItCool.com. November 10, 2005. Archived from the original on April 23, 2008. Retrieved July 26, 2017. Sciretta, Peter (June 19, 2015). "Interview: Producer Frank Marshall Talks 'Jurassic World' 'Indiana Jones 5', and 'Back to the Future'". /Film. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2017. Vlastelica, Ryan (June 4, 2015). "In Jurassic Park, Spielberg made a family favorite from an adult book". A.V. Club. Archived from the original on February 4, 2017. Retrieved July 26, 2017. Berry, Mark F. (2015). "The Lost World: Jurassic Park". The Dinosaur Filmography. McFarland. pp. 265–274. ISBN 978-1-4766-0674-3. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved March 6, 2020. "Return to Jurassic Park: Something Survived", The Lost World: Jurassic Park Blu-Ray Wilmington, Michael (June 8, 1997). "The First 'Lost World'". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved June 9, 2017. Archerd, Army (November 14, 1994). "South African welcomes Attenborough – this time". Variety. Archived from the original on January 30, 2017. Retrieved June 9, 2017. Grant, Stacey (May 24, 2017). "The Lost World: Jurassic Park's Kelly Explains How She Landed The Role 20 Years Ago". MTV. Archived from the original on August 30, 2017. Retrieved August 8, 2017. Salisbury, Mark (July 1997). "Pete Postlethwaite: Dinosaur Hunter". Fangoria. pp. 26–30. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Rampton, James (January 24, 1998). "The Artful dodger Interview: Art Malik". The Independent. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "Entertainment News". St. Petersburg Times. April 20, 1996. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved June 9, 2017 – via NewsBank. "Stormare May Speak Up". Rocky Mountain News. June 28, 1996. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved June 9, 2017 – via NewsBank. Woodson, Michelle (August 16, 1996). "Vince Vaughn is starring in "Lost World"". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2017. "Out of Nowhere: Vince Vaughn in Swingers". Movieline. March 1, 1997. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2017. "The Total Film Interview – Vince Vaughn". GamesRadar. July 15, 2005. Archived from the original on October 26, 2016. Retrieved June 9, 2017. Schruers, Fred (June 12, 1997). "Vince Vaughn: He takes on Dinosaurs in the sequel to 'Jurassic Park', but in the bruising world of Hollywood, the new star gives as good as he gets". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 26, 2016. Retrieved June 9, 2017. Vetticad, Anna M. M. (September 15, 1996). "Spielberg's choice: M.R. Gopakumar, first Indian to star in Steven Spielberg's film, A Lost World". India Today. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "The Lost World: A regional actor misses the chance to feature in a Spielberg film". Outlook. September 18, 1996. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "Sound Effects Recording". Mix. April 1997. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Harada, Wayne (February 8, 1996). "'Jurassic' sequel to pass up Kauai". Honolulu Star-Advertiser. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2017. TenBruggencate, Jan (March 11, 1996). "'World' may have been lost, but films still come to Kauai". Honolulu Star-Advertiser. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2017. "Hawaii won't get a part in 'Jurassic' follow-up". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. August 8, 1996. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2017. Wartzman, Rick (October 6, 1996). "Multimedia spins out". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2017. "Return to Jurassic Park: Finding The Lost World", The Lost World: Jurassic Park Blu-Ray "Production section". www.Lost-World.com. Archived from the original on July 12, 2018. Retrieved November 10, 2014. "Filmmakers Wrap It Up". North Coast Journal. October 1996. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Miller, Aaron (February 3, 2014). "The RV From Jurassic Park Is For Sale". Thrillist. Archived from the original on March 19, 2020. Retrieved March 19, 2020. Barsanti, Sam (September 22, 2014). "Jurassic Park fans are restoring the RV from The Lost World". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on March 19, 2020. Retrieved March 19, 2020. Bruce, Chris (September 25, 2014). "Jurassic Park II RV found rotting, being restored for residence". Autoblog. Archived from the original on March 19, 2020. Retrieved March 19, 2020. "The Lost World Jurassic Park 2's T-Rexes". Stan Winston School of Character Arts. May 29, 2012. Archived from the original on March 19, 2020. Retrieved March 19, 2020. "The Lizard King". Entertainment Weekly. May 17, 1997. Archived from the original on October 19, 2016. "The Lost World: Jurassic Park". Visual Effects Headquarters. Archived from the original on April 14, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2021. "A 'World' Apart". Premiere. May 1997. Archived from the original on February 9, 1999. Chapman, Francesca (October 18, 1996). "Fergie Casting About for a Midwest Pad?". Philly.com. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved November 10, 2014. "Scene Is Set For 'Jurassic Park' Sequel". Sun-Sentinel. October 25, 1996. Archived from the original on November 11, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. TenBruggencate, Jan (December 20, 1996). "'Jurassic' sequel films on Kauai". Honolulu Star-Advertiser. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2017. "Kauai is last-minute location for 'Lost World' picnic scene". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. December 20, 1996. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2017. Crisafulli, Chuck (May 11, 1997). "How to Build a Better Dino". Los Angeles Times. pp. 1–3. Archived from the original on December 3, 2015. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Jurassic Party - JP 1-3 & Jurassic World Practical Dinosaur Crew Reunion". Stan Winston School. June 26, 2015. 3:02:30. Archived from the original on August 10, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Audissino, Emilio (2014). John Williams's film music: Jaws, Star Wars, Raiders of the Lost Ark, and the return of the classical Hollywood music style. University of Wisconsin Press. p. 215. ISBN 978-0299297336. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved April 22, 2015. ""Unreleased Music Set to be Released in New John Williams 4 CD Set"". Archived from the original on December 3, 2016. Retrieved December 8, 2016. Jensen, Jeff (February 10, 1997). "The Lost World: Jurassic Park". 'Jurassic' Sequel Set to be Promo Monster: 'Lost World' Gains $250 Mil in Support, Including BK, JVC" Archived January 7, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Advertising Age. Retrieved May 30, 2017 Strauss, Robert (February 11, 1997). "Universal Plans a Mammoth 'Lost World' Marketing Blitz". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 18, 2017. Retrieved May 30, 2017. Jensen, Jeff (May 12, 1997). "Promo Partners of 'Lost World' Stress Own Brands: Multiple Efforts Seek to Marry New Movie to Marketing Base". Advertising Age. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 30, 2017. Arnold, Thomas K. (October 9, 1997). "The Art of the Tie-In". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 19, 2015. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Adelson, Andrea (June 9, 1997). "The battle of summer blockbusters extends from theaters to fast-food chains to grocery aisles". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2017. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Creature Features". Supermarket News. July 7, 1997. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Galindo, Brian (May 3, 2013). "26 Cereals From The '90s You'll Never Be Able To Eat Again". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on April 23, 2017. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Universal Pictures and Sega bring The Lost World: Jurassic Park to Sega Saturn, Sega Genesis, Game Gear and the arcade". Sega of America (press release). June 19, 1997. Archived from the original on February 23, 1998. "The Lost World: Jurassic Park comics". Jurassic Park Legacy. Archived from the original on March 11, 2016. Retrieved January 27, 2015. "The Lost World: Jurassic Park". Comic Vine. Archived from the original on November 23, 2014. Retrieved January 27, 2015. "Merchandise". Dan's Lost World Page. pp. 1–2. Archived from the original on December 12, 2000. Retrieved May 30, 2017. "The Lost World". JPToys.com. Archived from the original on May 6, 2017. Retrieved May 30, 2017. "The Lost World Jurassic Park Game". BoardGameGeek. Archived from the original on May 19, 2018. Retrieved May 30, 2017. "Hershey's dinosaur holograms roam the market". Packaging World. April 30, 1997. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved May 30, 2017. Gleason, Mark (June 17, 1996). "Mercedes is going 'Jurassic'". Advertising Age. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Hindes, Andrew (December 18, 1996). "DTS F/X Out of This 'World'". Variety. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Hunting 'Super' Buzz, Studios to Kick Off Ad Campaigns for Films During Sunday's Game". Los Angeles Daily News. January 25, 1997. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved February 20, 2020 – via NewsLibrary. "Proof That Marketing is Everything". Press-Telegram. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved February 20, 2020 – via NewsLibrary. "Cleveland to Get 'Jurassic' Exhibit". The Plain Dealer. May 14, 1997. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved February 20, 2020 – via NewsLibrary. "Monster Show The Museum of Natural History Opens a New Dinosaur Exhibit". The Record. May 24, 1997. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved February 20, 2020 – via NewsLibrary. "Paleontologists May Roar Over Dinosaur Exhibit". Times Union. May 24, 1997. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved February 20, 2020 – via NewsLibrary. Mirapaul, Matthew (September 4, 1997). "Click, Click, Bang, Bang: The Summer Movie Wrap-Up". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Weiner Campbell, Caren (June 20, 1997). "The Lost World (www.lost-world.com)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. Van Luling, Todd (June 11, 2015). "The 'Jurassic Park II' Website From The '90s Still Exists". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on July 18, 2017. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Hackers fowl up 'Lost World' site". CNN. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on January 20, 2000. Bullock, Paul (November 13, 2017). "When Hackers Infiltrated Jurassic Park: The Lost World's Website". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Kaplan, Karen (June 9, 1997). "Hunting the Hypeosaurus: Some Say Defacing of 'Lost World' Web Site Looks Like a PR Stunt". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Atwood, Brett (June 14, 1997). "Enter-Active". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Los Angeles Premiere of 'The Lost World: Jurassic Park'". Getty Images. May 19, 1997. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "'The Lost World' Premiere". Jet. Johnson Publishing Company. June 16, 1997. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Puig, Claudia (August 26, 1997). "You and a Guest Are Not Invited". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2017. In May, the premiere for "The Lost World: Jurassic Park" was held in similar low-key style at Universal City's Cineplex Odeon theaters. Lots of stars turned out anyway, and the film made a record-breaking $90.2 million on its opening four-day weekend and went on to become one of the year's biggest hits to date. "EDI Box Office News". Variety. January 26, 1998. p. 21. Hindes, Andrew (May 28, 1997). "Wow bow of $93 mil for 'World'". Daily Variety. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved September 24, 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "The Lost World takes $500m worldwide". Screen International. September 12, 1997. p. 31. Sandler, Adam (August 12, 1997). "'Lost' will roar into vid world". Variety. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2021. Sauter, Michael (October 31, 1997). "Making Sure the 'Lost World' Dinos Stay Huge". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 14, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. "'Lost World' finds home on video". The Washington Times. November 13, 1997. Archived from the original on January 30, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2021. Carter, Bill (1998-11-04). "TV Notes; Jurassic Banquet Or Just a Snack?" Archived March 7, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved 2017-05-30. Gross, Darren. "Lost World: Found Footage!" Video Watchdog #49, January/February 1999 IGN staff (June 16, 2000). "Jurassic Park". IGN. Archived from the original on March 9, 2007. Retrieved March 6, 2007. Amazon.com (November 17, 2005). "Jurassic Park/The Lost World limited boxset – Amazon.com". Archived from the original on March 16, 2007. Retrieved March 6, 2007. "Jurassic Park: Ultimate Trilogy". IGN. Archived from the original on February 14, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. IGN DVD (November 17, 2005). "Jurassic Park Adventure Pack". IGN. Archived from the original on February 5, 2008. Retrieved March 6, 2007. Chitwood, Adam (June 27, 2011). "JURASSIC PARK Trilogy Hits Blu-ray October 25th, Trailer Released". Collider. Archived from the original on July 31, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011. Jurassic Park Collection 4K Blu-ray, archived from the original on March 19, 2018, retrieved May 4, 2018 Archerd, Army (May 28, 1997). "Spielberg adds joke to Japanese 'World'". Variety. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. "The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997) – Weekend Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. October 12, 1997. Archived from the original on June 10, 2007. Retrieved June 26, 2007. Brennan, Judy (May 26, 1997). "'Lost World: Jurassic Park' Stomps Record for Openings". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "Biggest Opening Weekends at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. June 26, 2007. Archived from the original on March 9, 2007. Retrieved June 26, 2007. Lyman, Rick (November 19, 2001). "Harry Potter and the Box Office of Gold; Film Based on Popular Book Sets Record With $93.5 Million Opening Weekend". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 26, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Karger, Dave (May 6, 2002). "Spider-Man earns a record $114 million". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 20, 2022. Retrieved February 17, 2022. ""Shrek 2', "Day After Tomorrow' make for record holiday weekend". Archived from the original on March 15, 2022. Retrieved March 15, 2022. "'X-Men: The Last Stand' scores Memorial Day weekend record". Chicago Tribune. May 29, 2006. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved April 17, 2022. Rich, Joshua (May 28, 2008). "'Indiana Jones 4' digs up big box office". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Rich, Joshua (April 5, 2009). "Fast & Furious shatters box office records". Entertainment Weekly. Time Inc. Retrieved April 5, 2009. Weinraub, Bernard (May 27, 1997). "'Lost World' Sets Record, Taking In $92 Million". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 19, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2021. Hayes, Dade (November 29, 1999). "The 'Toy' that ate history". Variety. Archived from the original on May 8, 2022. Retrieved May 8, 2022. Susman, Gary (May 9, 2001). "Mummy Returns rakes in $70.1 million". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 28, 2020. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "Top Grossing Movies in a Single Day at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. June 26, 2007. Archived from the original on July 21, 2013. Retrieved June 26, 2007. Josh Wolk (May 24, 1999). "Flip the Record : 'The Phantom Menace' topples two of three box office records". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 19, 2015. Retrieved March 12, 2009. "Jurassic Profits". Los Angeles Times. May 30, 1997. p. 135. Archived from the original on September 17, 2023. Retrieved September 17, 2023 – via Newspapers.com. "Fastest Movies to $100m". The Numbers. June 26, 2007. Archived from the original on May 13, 2007. Retrieved June 26, 2007. "THE SPOILS OF 'WAR': STUDIO FIREWORKS". Los Angeles Times. July 5, 2005. "'Lost World' Still Rules Box Office / But is it headed for extinction?". Sfgate. June 2, 1997. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved March 26, 2022. "Jurassic Park". boxofficemojo.com. Archived from the original on June 18, 2015. Retrieved June 20, 2012. "Dinosaurs take a big dip". USA Today. June 3, 1997. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2021 – via NewsLibrary. "'Lost World' stays on top of film list". The Olathe Daily News. June 3, 1997. p. 2. Archived from the original on September 18, 2022. Retrieved September 18, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. "Men in Black' wins box office". United Press International. July 7, 1997. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Chaiworaporn, Anchalee (August 15, 1997). "Hollywood Holds Sway". The Nation Weekend. Jana Panviroj. p. 8. Retrieved July 6, 2023. "The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. Retrieved July 13, 2016. "The Lost World: Jurassic Park". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on June 12, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2023. "The Lost World: Jurassic Park: Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on July 30, 2007. Retrieved July 7, 2007. "Find CinemaScore" (Type "Jurassic Park" in the search box). CinemaScore. Archived from the original on January 2, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2020. Ebert, Roger (June 6, 1997). "The Lost World: Jurassic Park review". Chicago Sun-Times. Chicago, Illinois: Sun-Times Media Group. Archived from the original on December 30, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2018 – via rogerebert.com. Siskel, Gene (May 30, 1997). "Characters Extinct In 'Lost World'". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Retrieved November 2, 2014. Thomas, Kevin (May 23, 1997). "The Lost World: Jurassic Park". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved July 7, 2007. Holden, Stephen (May 23, 1997). "The Lost World: Jurassic Park". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Retrieved July 7, 2007. Bernadin, Marc (January 17, 2008). "Attack of the Giant Movie Monsters!". Entertainment Weekly. New York City: Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on January 20, 2008. Retrieved January 21, 2008. McBride, Joseph (2011). Steven Spielberg: A Biography (Second ed.). Jackson, Mississippi: University Press of Mississippi. p. 455. ISBN 978-1-60473-837-7. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved October 15, 2020. "Back to Jurassic Park with Joe Johnston". IGN. July 17, 2001. Archived from the original on February 22, 2020. Retrieved February 24, 2020. Dargis, Manohla (May 15, 2016). "A Word With: Steven Spielberg". The New York Times. New York City. Archived from the original on August 22, 2020. Retrieved October 26, 2019. "The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997) - Movie Review". April 16, 2013. Goldberg, Matt (June 9, 2015). "The Lost World: Jurassic Park Revisited: "Hang on, This Is Going to Be Bad"". Collider. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved June 25, 2021. Williams, Stephanie (May 22, 2019). "Book vs. Flick: The Lost World". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on October 31, 2020. Ebiri, Bilge (August 7, 2020). "The Lost World Is Steven Spielberg's Nastiest Film, and I Love It". Vulture. Archived from the original on March 5, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. Hall, Jacob (September 6, 2020). "The Quarantine Stream: 'The Lost World: Jurassic Park' is a Reminder That Everyone, Even Steven Spielberg, Makes Mistakes". /Film. Archived from the original on March 6, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. "THE 70TH ACADEMY AWARDS 1998". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on May 10, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2018. "Blockbuster Entertainment Awards Nominees Announced". PR Newswire. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved August 13, 2018. "1997 Archive". Golden Raspberry Awards. Archived from the original on April 19, 2001. Retrieved August 13, 2018. "John Williams". Recording Academy. Archived from the original on February 23, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2018. Frankel, Daniel (December 12, 1997). ""Bayou", Badu, Babyface Top Image Noms". E! Online. Archived from the original on August 13, 2018. Retrieved August 12, 2018. Katz, Richard (April 14, 1998). "MTV-watchers pick their pix". Variety. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved August 8, 2017. "Winners by Category". MTV. Archived from the original on November 23, 2010. Retrieved August 8, 2017. Emery, Robert J. (2003). The Directors: Take Three. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-62153-115-9. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "1998 nominees". International Press Academy. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved August 8, 2017. "Past Award Winners". Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Films. Archived from the original on September 8, 2006. Retrieved May 12, 2021. "1997 20th Hastings Bad Cinema Society Stinkers Awards". Stinkers Bad Movie Awards. Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 3, 2007. Retrieved March 30, 2013. Wikiquote has quotations related to The Lost World: Jurassic Park. Official website Jurassic Park & The Lost World official website The Lost World: Jurassic Park at IMDb The Lost World: Jurassic Park at AllMovie The Lost World: Jurassic Park at Box Office Mojo The Lost World: Jurassic Park at Rotten Tomatoes Portals:  Dinosaurs  Film  United States  Science fiction  1990s  Speculative fiction