PAOK FC (Greek: ΠΑΕ ΠΑΟΚ, Πανθεσσαλονίκειος Αθλητικός Όμιλος Κωνσταντινουπολιτών, Panthessaloníkios Athlitikós Ómilos Konstadinoupolitón, "Pan-Thessalonian Athletic Club of Constantinopolitans"), commonly known as PAOK Thessaloniki or simply PAOK, is a Greek professional football club based in Thessaloniki, Macedonia. PAOK are one of the top domestic clubs, the most widely supported in Northern Greece and with the third largest fanbase in the country, according to the latest polls and researches. A research by Marca in August 2018, reported that PAOK are the most popular Greek football team on social media. Established on 20 April 1926 by Greek refugees who fled to Thessaloniki from Constantinople in the wake of the Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922), they play their home games at Toumba Stadium, a 29,000 seating capacity football ground. Their name, along with the club's emblem, the Byzantine-style double-headed eagle with retracted wings, honours the memory of the people and places (mostly from the city of Constantinople) that once belonged to the Eastern Roman Empire. PAOK currently plays in the top-flight Super League, which they have won three times (in 1976, 1985 and 2019). They are eight-time winners of the Greek Cup (in 1972, 1974, 2001, 2003, 2017, 2018, 2019 and 2021). The club is one of the three which have never been relegated from the top national division and the only team in Greece that have won the Double (in 2019) going unbeaten (26–4–0 record) in a national round-robin league tournament (league format since 1959). The team has appeared several times in the UEFA Europa League, but has yet to reach the group stage of the UEFA Champions League. PAOK have reached the quarter-finals of a European competition thrice; once in the 1973–74 European Cup Winners' Cup and twice in the UEFA Europa Conference League, in the 2021–22 and 2023-24 seasons. PAOK is the only Greek team that has more wins than losses in their European record (90 wins, 65 draws and 77 defeats, as of 14 December 2023) and the 0–7 away UEFA Cup win over Locomotive Tbilisi on 16 September 1999 is the largest ever achieved by a Greek football club in all European competitions. PAOK FC is the oldest department of the major multi-sport club AC P.A.O.K., which is closely linked with Hermes Sports Club, that was formed in 1875 by the Greek community of Pera, a district of Istanbul (Constantinople). The football club was founded in April 1926 by Constantinopolitan who fled to Thessaloniki after the Greek defeat in the Greco-Turkish War. PAOK's policy was to be open to every citizen of Thessaloniki, leading to a minor rivalry with Enosis Konstantinoupoliton Thessalonikis (A.E.K.), the other Constantinopolitan club of the city, in which only refugees were allowed to play. Both clubs were founded by Enosis Konstantinoupoliton Thessalonikis (A.E.K.), a social and political organisation. The original logo of PAOK was a horseshoe and a four-leaf clover. PAOK played their primary friendly match on 4 May 1926 at the stadium of Thermaikos, defeating Megas Alexandros Thessaloniki 2–1. The first coach of the club was Kostas Andreadis who spent five years on the team's bench without demanding payment. Their first captain was Michalis Ventourelis. In 1926–1927 season, PAOK participated in the 2nd tier of Macedonia Football Clubs Association (Greek: Ένωση Ποδοσφαιρικών Σωματείων Μακεδονίας or Ε.Π.Σ.Μ.) local Macedonia championship. PAOK FC historic inaugural official match was a 3–1 win against Nea Genea Kalamaria on 12 December 1926. Despite finishing at the top of the 2nd division, PAOK were forced by the organizing committee to play against the 1st division teams and defeat all of them in order to get promoted. Eventually, they defeated all four teams: Thermaikos 4–1, Aris 2–1, Atlas 2–0 (w/o) and Iraklis 1–0. In 1927–1928, PAOK participated for the first time in the 1st tier of Ε.Π.Σ.Μ. The first professional contract was signed by the club on 5 September 1928. The contract stipulated that the French footballer Raymond Etienne (of Jewish descent from Pera Club) would be paid 4,000 drachmas per month. The contract was signed by Dr. Meletiou, the PAOK chairman, and Mr. Sakellaropoulos, the Hon. Secretary. In March 1929, Enosis Konstantinoupoliton Thessalonikis (A.E.K.) was disbanded as a sports club and their members joined PAOK. PAOK thereupon changed their emblem, adopting the Double-headed eagle, as a symbol of the club's Byzantine/Constantinopolitan heritage, which was also the emblem of the maternal organisation Enosis Konstantinoupoliton Thessalonikis (A.E.K.). PAOK also got possession of A.E.K.'s facilities located around Syntrivani (i.e. Fountain Square), next to the Children's Heritage Foundation, where today stands the Faculty of Theology of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. The same year PAOK and Enosis Konstantinoupoliton Thessalonikis (A.E.K.) wanted to expand the football ground, but they faced problems with the underground flow of the river. Finally, after technical works the keystone was put on 12 December 1930. In 1930–1931, PAOK made their debut in the Panhellenic Championship, playing their first match on 1 February 1931 against Olympiacos at Piraeus, where they were defeated by 3–1, and ended the season in 5th place. The first foreign coach in team's history was Austrian Rudolf Gasner, who served at PAOK in 1931–1932. On 5 June 1932 the Syntrivani Stadium was inaugurated with PAOK's 3–2 victory over Iraklis. Syntrivani meant to be their home ground for 27 years. In 1937, PAOK won their first regional title, the Macedonia championship (Greek: Ε.Π.Σ.Μ.) and participated in the Panhellenic Championship, finishing 2nd. The 1937 team included: Sotiriadis, Vatikis, Goulios, Kontopoulos, Bostantzoglou, Panidis, Glaros, Kritas, Ioannidis, Kalogiannis, Koukoulas, Kosmidis, Apostolou, Vafiadis, Vasiliadis, Anastasiadis, Moschidis, Tzakatzoglou, Zakapidas. On 28 May 1939, PAOK competed for first time in a Greek Cup final against AEK Athens and were defeated 2–1 at Leoforos Alexandras Stadium. The following season, PAOK won the Northern Greece Championship and reached the two-legged final of the Panhellenic Championship, but they lost 5–3 on aggregate to AEK. The declaration of the Greco-Italian War caused mobilization in Greece and ended every sport activity. PAOK football players recruited to Hellenic Army and two of them died on duty: left defender Georgios Vatikis and goalkeeper Nikolaos Sotiriadis. They were among four Greek footballers who died in the war (the others were Spyridon Kontoulis of AEK and Mimis Pierrakos of Panathinaikos). Georgios Vatikis, the first Greek athlete to fall on the Greek-Italian front, served as a warrant officer. He was 22 years old when he died in Battle of Morava–Ivan. After his death, Vatikis was honorarily promoted to lieutenant and awarded the Silver Cross of Valour and the Homeland of Gratitude. Nikolaos Sotiriadis, who played from 1932 until 1940 for PAOK, died on 28 January 1941 in Kleisura, fighting with the rank of Sergeant for the 5th Infantry Regiment. He was 33 years old. After World War II, in the early 1950s, PAOK Academy was created by the Austrian coach, Wilhelm (Willi) Sefzik, and was known as the "chicos of Willi". From the newly founded academy sprang some great football players of the period, such as Leandros Symeonidis, Giannelos Margaritis and Giorgos Havanidis. In 1948, PAOK won their second Macedonia Championship, and then participated in the final phase of the Panhellenic Championship where they were ranked third. PAOK footballers dedicated the title to the memory of team captain, Thrasyvoulos Panidis, who had lost his life (18 February 1948) in the civil war few days before. Panidis played for PAOK since 1930 and had 122 appearances. In 1950, they became champions of Macedonia for a third time, and the following year (1950–51), the team reached their second Greek Cup final, but lost 4–0 to Olympiacos at Leoforos Alexandras Stadium. During the summer transfer period of 1953 Kouiroukidis, Petridis, Progios, Geroudis, Kemanidis, Chassiotis and Angelidis joined the team. The arrival of Lampis Kouiroukidis from Doxa Drama was vital and alongside Lefteris Papadakis and Christophoros Yientzis, they formed a famous attacking trio. For four consecutive seasons (1954, 1955, 1956, 1957), PAOK won the Macedonia championship and participated in the Panhellenic Championship, finishing fourth each year. Yientzis was the top scorer in 1953–54 season and Kouiroukidis in 1955–56 season. Coached by Nikos Pangalos, PAOK won the 1954 and 1955 local Macedonia championship unbeaten. In 1955, PAOK participated in a third Greek Cup final and were defeated 2–0 by Panathinaikos at Leoforos Alexandras Stadium (home ground of Panathinaikos). Ιn 1956, under Hungarian coach Erman Hoffman they won their third consecutive unbeaten local championship. The successful 4-year period ended with 1957 championship, coached by the Austrian Walter Pfeiffer. The Aristotle University of Thessaloniki purchased a two-acre piece of land in the area of Syntrivani Stadium in order to construct new schools. PAOK had to relocate and a 7.5 acres area, owned by the Ministry of National Defence at Toumba district was chosen as the adequate location. The purchase cost was set at 1.5 million drachmas and was paid by PAOK administration in 20 six-month instalments of 75,000 drachmas each. On 7 February 1958, a committee of III Army Corps officers delivered the land to PAOK representatives. There were still barracks on the premises, housing victims of the Greek Civil War and the 1953 Ionian earthquake. Relocating all these people cost the club 70,000 drachmas. The total cost of the stadium's construction amounted to 6 million drachmas, with just 1.1 million coming from the General Secretariat of Sports as subvention. In spring of 1958 construction work started, based on the plans of architect Minas Trempelas and civil engineer Antonis Triglianos. In an attempt to collect the necessary funds, the club issued the "Lottery for the construction of PAOK New Stadium" in April 1958 at a cost of 20 drachmas each. Since 1956, the administration was withholding 15% of the gate income in order to fund the construction of the new stadium. Many PAOK fans, apart from money, also contributed to construction by volunteering to work as builders. The construction of the stadium was completed at a record time of one year. The inauguration event was scheduled for Sunday 6 September 1959 with a friendly encounter against AEK (PAOK prevailed 1–0 with a goal by Kostas Kiourtzis). Prime minister Konstantinos Karamanlis's attendance was cancelled at the last minute. However, several ministers of his government were there for the occasion. As for the ball for the first kick-off, it fell at 17:30 off an airplane of Sedes Military Air Base. On inauguration day, 15,000 PAOK supporters packed Toumba Stadium, as that was the stadium's capacity back then. It would increase to 20,000 seats in the following months until it reached a 45,000-seat capacity in the mid-'70s through extensive expansion work. The attendance record remains at 45,252 tickets and was registered on 19 December 1976 in the goalless draw against AEK. In European football, the highest attendance was a 45,200 crowd in the 1–0 win against Barcelona (UEFA Cup, 16 September 1975). In 1959-60 Alpha Ethniki – the precursor of the current Super League – was set up as a national round-robin tournament and the 1959–60 championship was the first nationwide league competition. In the first decade of Greek Alpha Ethniki (1959–1969), PAOK had a top-half finish in every season except from the 10th-place finish in 1961. The best outcome came out in 1963 and 1967 with a 4th-place finish. Notable players of this period were Leandros Symeonidis, Ioannis Giakoumis, Ignatios Mouratidis, Pavlos Papadopoulos, Anestis Afentoulidis and Giorgos Makris. Giorgos Koudas was born on 23 November 1946 in Thessaloniki. Aged 12, he signed his first contract with PAOK and made his first team debut on 21 December 1963 in a 1–0 loss to Ethnikos at Leoforos Alexandras Stadium. Koudas' talent immediately started to excel and in 1965–66 season he made 29 appearancess and scored 13 goals. On 14 July 1966, PAOK fans were shocked by the news of Koudas' descent to Piraeus, accompanied by his father (who was enraged with PAOK administration for financial reasons) and determined to sign for Olympiacos, who tempted him by offering a much higher annual salary without going into a negotiation with his club. PAOK president Giorgos Pantelakis never gave his consent for the transfer to be completed and for the next two seasons, Koudas participated only in Olympiacos friendly games. Military junta's Minister of Sports Kostas Aslanidis suggested in 1968 that Koudas should return to PAOK for two years and then move to Olympiacos, but Pantelakis refused saying "I may go to Gyaros island (place of exile for leftist political dissidents), but Koudas would never go to Olympiacos". Eventually, Koudas returned to PAOK in the summer of 1968 and led the great team of the 1970s to glorious days. Fueled by this incident, Olympiacos–PAOK rivalry is considered nowadays the fiercest intercity football rivalry in Greece. The 1970s decade was one of the best periods in the history of the football club. Scouting some of the best youth players in Northern Greece at the time and signing many of them to PAOK, president Giorgos Pantelakis built a strong team (including Stavros Sarafis, Christos Terzanidis, Kostas Iosifidis, Giannis Gounaris, Dimitris Paridis, Achilleas Aslanidis, Koulis Apostolidis, Filotas Pellios, Aristarchos Fountoukidis, Panagiotis Kermanidis, Angelos Anastasiadis, Neto Guerino and captained by Giorgos Koudas). The team won their first Championship (1976), two Cups (1972, 1974), a Greater Greece Cup (1973) and distinguished themselves in European competitions. PAOK participated in seven Greek Cup finals from 1970 to 1978. In the 1969–70 Greek Cup PAOK lost 1–0 to local rivals Aris in the final held at Kaftanzoglio Stadium and in the 1970–71 Greek Cup final they were defeated 3–1 by Olympiacos at Karaiskakis Stadium (home ground of Olympiacos). The first domestic title PAOK won, was the Cup of 1971–72 season. PAOK reached the final for the third straight year, sixth in total and it would be the fifth time traveling to Athens for the trophy match. This time PAOK faced league champions Panathinaikos (runners-up in 1971 European Cup). The final was held at Karaiskakis Stadium on 5 July 1972. PAOK players had 10,000 fans on their side and they vowed that it was about time to return with the trophy to Thessaloniki. PAOK won the game 2–1 with Koudas scoring both goals. In the second half, a magnificent bicycle kick of Matzourakis found the net, but the goal was surprisingly disallowed by referee Michas. PAOK triumphed and their first Greek Cup title was widely celebrated by fans in Thessaloniki. In 1972–73 season, PAOK came close to winning their first championship title playing exceptional football under the guidance of Les Shannon. On 25 February 1973 (matchday 20), PAOK, who were leading the league table by three points (point system 3–2–1) from rivals Olympiacos, suffered their first loss with 1–0 in a much disputed derby against Olympiacos at Karaiskakis Stadium. PAOK complained that referee Fakis was not taking the proper disciplinary action against Olympiacos players who committed violent fouls. Two players (Iosifidis and Aslanidis) were substituted in the first half after sustaining injuries. One week later, PAOK lost 1–0 to Fostiras in Athens and Olympiacos drew 0–0 away to Egaleo, results that left the two teams level on points. On 22 April 1973 (matchday 28), PAOK suffered a 3–5 shock defeat against Panachaiki at Toumba Stadium and Olympiacos who drew 1–1 away to Kavala, took the lead in the standings and with six wins in their remaining matches won the championship. At the end of the season, PAOK participated for fourth consecutive year in the Greek Cup final and lost 1–0 to Olympiacos at Karaiskakis Stadium (home ground of Olympiacos). In 1973–74 season, PAOK reached the quarter-finals of 1973–74 UEFA Cup Winners' Cup where they were knocked out by Milan 5–2 on aggregate. PAOK had defeated Legia Warsaw 2–1 on aggregate and Lyon 7–3 on aggregate in the previous rounds. That season, PAOK reached the Greek Cup final for a fifth consecutive year. The final was held at Nikos Goumas Stadium, once again in Athens, on 16 June, and was the first to be decided by a penalty shoot-out. The game ended 2–2 and PAOK won 4–3 on penalties over Olympiacos with Koulis Apostolidis converting the last of the procedure. Furtula Fountoukidis Pellios Gounaris Iosifidis Terzanidis Anastasiadis Sarafis Koudas Apostolidis Guerino PAOK lineup in 1975–76 season (Kermanidis was also a first-team regular) In the 1975–76 PAOK FC season, with Gyula Lóránt at the helm, the team had two daily practices instead of one and physical condition of the players improved significantly. On 4 January 1976, PAOK won 4–0 away at Olympiacos (their biggest home defeat in their history). On 11 April, PAOK defeated Panionios 4–0 and topped the table for first time that season, level on points with AEK who lost 0–1 to Panathinaikos. On matchday 25, AEK were defeated 1–0 by Aris in Thessaloniki and PAOK, with a 3–0 away win over Panachaiki, were alone at the top of the league table. The league title would be decided in two consecutive high-profile encounters at Toumba Stadium. PAOK prevailed 3–1 over Olympiacos and 1–0 over AEK with Neto Guerino scoring the winner in the 89th minute, giving the Double-Headed Eagle of the North a four-point lead (point system 2–1–0). The league title was clinched on the following matchday, when AEK were held to a goalless draw at Panserraikos and PAOK defeated 3–1 Iraklis at Kaftanzoglio Stadium. In the 1976–77 season, the team tried to defend the title and reached the last 16 of 1976–77 European Cup where they were knocked out by a far superior Dynamo Kyiv side. On 1 May 1977 (matchday 28), PAOK were leading the league table and lost 1–0 to AEK at Nikos Goumas Stadium with a controversial first-half goal that was scored from a direct free kick while goalkeeper Milinis was still setting up the wall. Referee Tsoukaladelis credited the goal to AEK despite the heavy protests from PAOK players and also sent off PAOK midfielder Damanakis in the first half for dangerous play. In the second half, a headed goal scored by Sarafis was wrongly ruled out for offside. PAOK fell from the top of the table. On 12 June (matchday 32), the team had a great chance against Panathinaikos at a packed Toumba Stadium to regain the lead (Panathinaikos were a point ahead). The game ended in a 0–0 stalemate, disappointing fans eager to win a back-to-back championship, while the team performance in the championship decider also did not meet expectations. On 22 June, PAOK lost 2–1 to Panathinaikos in the Greek Cup final held at Karaiskakis Stadium. President Pantelakis was furious with referee Platopoulos who sent off Gounaris in the 64th minute and ordered PAOK players to leave the awarding ceremony without receiving their medals. In the 1977–78 season, PAOK finished runners-up in the league, with Kostas Orfanos finishing top scorer of the club in the league with 15 goals. The team's loss to AEK at the Nea Filadelfeia Stadium at the end of the season sealed the title to the latter. The team also mounted a strong Cup run, beating Aris in the semi–finals on extra time, but lost 2–0 to AEK in the Cup final held at Karaiskakis Stadium. Compared to the previous three seasons, the 1978–79 season was lackluster, with a 4th place and early eliminations in the domestic Cup and the Cup Winners' Cup to Olympiacos and Servette, respectively, under Polish manager Egon Piechaczek. However, the team mounted a near perfect home run in all competitions, having only wins, save for a draw against Iraklis in October. The team was also affected by the deadly June earthquake that plagued the city of Thessaloniki, with Toumba Stadium being unusable for a period of time. Prior to the 1979–80 season, football in Greece became fully professional and PAOK would become entangled in ownership controversies involving the club's ultras Gate 4 that would go on via various means for over two decades. By March 1980, five teams were battling for the championship title. On 9 March 1980 (matchday 24), PAOK were leading the table and lost 0–2 to rivals Panathinaikos at Toumba Stadium. This was the first home defeat after a 62-game unbeaten run (52 wins/10 draws). Kostikos scored two goals in the first half, but both of them were disallowed by referee Litsas. In the second half, Kostikos was brought down in the area by Kovis, but Litsas denied the penalty and sent off PAOK defender Pellios who was protesting. In the final minutes of the game, PAOK had a chance to score from the penalty spot, but the fans shouted to Orfanos to send the ball wide. Orfanos made a really weak side foot-kick which was easily saved by goalkeeper Konstantinou. After the final whistle, all hell broke loose in and around the stadium with 23 police officers and 20 fans sustaining injuries. In April, Piecharczek was sacked after a series of poor results and was replaced by Gyula Lóránt, who returned after his successful title charge four years earlier, but couldn't pull the team above an ultimately disappointing 5th place in the league table. Adding to the club's short term troubles, Toumba's Gate 8 collapsed in February due to the 1978 earthquake, which rendered the stadium unusable until early into the following season, with the team playing at Iraklis' Kaftanzoglio Stadium for that time period. On 31 May 1981, PAOK manager Gyula Lóránt had a heart attack in the 16th minute of the match against Olympiacos at Toumba Stadium when Koudas headed the ball wide from close range. Doctors attempted to resuscitate him, but he died before the ambulance arrived. At half-time PAOK players were told that he had been taken to hospital and were only told about his death after the game. PAOK eventually won the derby 1–0 with the goal by substitute Vassilis Vasilakos (who had been sitting next to Lóránt when he collapsed). PAOK players wanted to dedicate a Greek Cup title to his memory, but the team lost 3–1 to Olympiacos in the Greek Cup final held at Nikos Goumas Stadium on 21 June. In the 1981–82 season PAOK contested a domestic double, but ultimately fell short of both trophies, owing to a mediocre form in the last fixtures of the league, which condemned the team to a 3rd-place position, and a tense semi–final at Leoforos Alexandras against Panathinaikos, where the team conceded a late goal from Grigoris Charalampidis, resulting in elimination. Moreover, the team engaged in a memorable tie against West German powerhouse Eintracht Frankfurt in that year's Cup Winners' Cup. After a 2–0 loss at the Waldstadion, anticipation for the return tie was massive. In front of a crowd of 35,000 (unofficial estimates range much higher), the team had a dominant display and managed to equal the 2–0 deficit, but failed to score the third goal prior to the penalty shootout. After up-and-coming Christos Dimopoulos's penalty was saved, Bruno Pezzey netted the winning penalty kick. On 29 June 1983, PAOK participated once again in the Greek Cup final which was held for first time at the newly built Olympic Stadium of Athens. Captained for last time in a Greek Cup final by Koudas, the team lost 2–0 to AEK despite their superiority over the opponents that day. A first-half goal by Giorgos Kostikos was ruled out for offside. PAOK also made a memorable appearance against German giants Bayern Munich in the second round of the 1983–84 UEFA Cup, where they were knocked out on penalties (9–8) after two goalless draws. Bayern's first penalty kick, taken by Klaus Augenthaler, was saved twice by PAOK goalkeeper Mladen Furtula, but the English referee Arthur Robinson ordered the penalty to be retaken both times. Augenthaler admitted in a 2018 interview that the referee favored Bayern and that he felt uncomfortable when he was asked to take the penalty for a third time. At the end of the season, Koudas and Furtula retired from professional football. Pantelis Baniotis Jurišić Tsourelas Alavantas Siggas Skartados Vasilakos Paprica Dimopoulos Kostikos Players with most apps in 1984–85 season (Kostikos had 23 apps / 10 goals, Damanakis and Alexandridis had 24 apps each) PAOK's second championship came in 1984–85 season, under Austrian manager Walter Skocik. Notable team figures included Giorgos Skartados, Nikos Alavantas, Thomas Siggas, Rade Paprica and the attacking duo of Giorgos Kostikos and Christos Dimopoulos. It was the last season at the club for Ioannis Damanakis and captain Kostas Iosifidis, who ended his football career. On 20 January 1985 (matchday 15), PAOK gained a five-point lead (point system 2–1–0) with a 1–0 away win over Panathinaikos at the Olympic Stadium of Athens. The crucial goal was scored by Paprica in the 80th minute with a diving header. On 9 June, PAOK clinched the league title with a goalless draw at Nea Smyrni Stadium against Panionios, as Panathinaikos were held to a 2–2 draw by bottom of the table Pierikos. On 22 June, 10-man (Vasilakos was sent-off early in the first half) PAOK lost 4–1 to Larissa in the Greek Cup final held at the Olympic Stadium of Athens and wasted the opportunity to win a first domestic Double. PAOK's top goalscorer that season, Christos Dimopoulos, did not participate as he left the team at Athens airport when they arrived from Thessaloniki for the game. He went to the headquarters of Motor Oil (company of Panathinaikos president Vardinogiannis) in order to seal his transfer to Panathinaikos as his five-year contract with PAOK was expiring. In the 1987–88 season, PAOK were fighting for the title (along with AEL and AEK) up to matchday 23, when they suffered a surprising 0–2 home defeat to Iraklis. Earlier that season, on 6 December 1987, PAOK made a record 6–1 win over rivals Olympiacos at Serres Municipal Stadium (biggest defeat of Olympiacos in Greek Alpha Ethniki/Superleague history). PAOK finished third in the league and qualified for 1988–89 UEFA Cup where they faced Napoli of Maradona, Careca and Alemão. The team fought vigorously, but lost 2–1 on aggregate. Maradona, when asked on RAI TV, moments after the final whistle of the second leg at Toumba Stadium, if he had ever played in such an atmosphere, said "I have played a lot of games, but I have never seen anything like this. We couldn't find any rhythm and I believe that it was difficult for the opponents too. It was a weird encounter". In the 1989–90 season, with Magdy Tolba shining and youngster Giorgos Toursounidis rising, the team managed to reach the half-way stage of the competition topping the table (winter champions), but good form deteriorated and PAOK finished third. The 1990–91 season started with PAOK facing Sevilla in the first round of the UEFA Cup and they were knocked out on penalties after two goalless draws. On 23 September 1990 (matchday 2), president Thomas Voulinos stormed the field in the 77th minute of the derby against Panathinaikos at the Olympic Stadium of Athens. Voulinos was furious with referee Karamanis and despite the fact that the scoreline was 3–0 and the winner was already determined, he ordered PAOK players to leave the pitch. After the game which was eventually abandoned, he said "We felt like sheep that were heading to be butchered and that was unacceptable". PAOK were later penalised with a three-point deduction and had to play five home games behind closed doors. The two teams met again in the Greek Cup semi-finals and in the 57th minute of the second leg at Toumba Stadium, Voulinos once again entered the pitch angry at decisions by referee Vasilakis. Panathinaikos won 2–1 on aggregate. In 1991–92 season, under Croatian manager Miroslav Blažević, PAOK qualified against the then strong KV Mechelen (winners in 1988, semi-finalists in 1989 Cup Winners' Cup / quarter-finalists in 1990 European Cup) in the first round of 1991–92 UEFA Cup, 2–1 on aggregate. Stefanos Borbokis scored the winner in the 85th minute of the second leg at Achter de Kazerne Stadium. Blazevic was replaced by Gounaris later and the team lost in the two-legged Greek Cup final to Olympiacos, 3–1 on aggregate. On 24 May 1992 (matchday 32), PAOK lost 1–2 to Olympiacos at Toumba Stadium and suffered their first home defeat against rivals Olympiacos after a 24-game unbeaten run (21 wins/3 draws – 21 league matches/3 cup matches – goals 52/12) which lasted for 23 years. It is rumoured that after this shock defeat, the renowned PAOK ultras leader Thomas Mavromichalis (nicknamed Makis Manavis, i.e., greengrocer due to his profession – PAOK ultras refer to him as «The General») decided to never set foot again at Toumba Stadium. On 1 October 1992, the PAOK v. Paris Saint–Germain UEFA Cup match was abandoned due to crowd violence. PAOK were punished with a two-year ban from all European competitions by UEFA's disciplinary committee. The sentence was later reduced to one year. In the 1994–95 season, under Dutch manager Arie Haan, PAOK finished third in the league and Apollon Athens took their place in the next season's UEFA Cup. The 1995–96 season was the worst in the club's history. PAOK were seriously threatened with a possible relegation for first time in their history. The team managed to avoid relegation a few weeks before the end of the season, finishing in a record low 14th place, with various demonstrations and riots against Voulinos throughout the season, including an arson attack on his house after a 1–3 loss to AEK in November 1995. However, the team mounted a consistent Cup run, being eliminated in the semi–finals by Apollon Athens. In 1996, Thomas Voulinos handed over a debt-free PAOK to Giorgos Batatoudis. Numerous transfers of quality players such as Zisis Vryzas, Spyros Marangos, free kick specialist Kostas Frantzeskos, Percy Olivares and Joe Nagbe took place under the new administration. In May 1997, after a five-year absence from European competitions, PAOK qualified for the UEFA Cup under coach Angelos Anastasiadis. The club's reappearance at European level was marked by a victory and qualification over Arsenal, 2–1 on aggregate. Arsenal went on to win a domestic Double that season. Remembering the first leg encounter, captain Tony Adams and goalkeeper David Seaman spoke very highly of the atmosphere created by PAOK fans at Toumba Stadium. On 9 February 1998, PAOK player Panagiotis Katsouris, aged 21, was returning from an amateur 5x5 match, when his car skidded off the road due to excessive speed, hitting the barriers at the Thermi interchange outside Thessaloniki. His death was verified in AHEPA Hospital shortly afterwards. He was buried on 12 February in the Anastaseos Cemetery in Thessaloniki. A bust was erected in his memory at Toumba Stadium and memorial services are held each year near the accident scene. In February 2009, PAOK announced that a football tournament, bearing his name, would be held annually. Katsouris' No 17 jersey was permanently retired by the club in his memory. Early on 4 October 1999, in a bus accident in the Vale of Tempe, Thessaly, six PAOK fans were killed (Kyriakos Lazaridis, Christina Tziova, Anastasios Themelis, Charalampos Zapounidis, Georgios Ganatsios, Dimitris Andreadakis). The bus was heading back to Thessaloniki after a 1–1 draw against Panathinaikos at the Olympic Stadium of Athens. A ceremony in commemoration of the incident has taken place every year since. In January 2000, PAOK appointed Dušan Bajević as their new manager. PAOK won the 2001 Greek Cup beating Olympiacos 4–2 in the final held at Nikos Goumas Stadium on 12 May 2001. On 17 May 2003, PAOK defeated local rivals Aris 1–0 in the final held at Toumba Stadium with an excellent goal scored by Georgiadis and earned their fourth Greek Cup title. PAOK manager Angelos Anastasiadis became the first in the club's history to win the Cup both as a player (in 1974) and manager. During the seven-year period of Batatoudis' ownership, PAOK's debts rose to about €10 million. The 2003–04 season was an unexpected success. Batatoudis was no longer the major shareholder and under coach Anastasiadis, PAOK managed to finish third in the league and reached the third qualifying round of 2004–05 UEFA Champions League, where they faced Maccabi Tel Aviv. The first leg at Toumba Stadium ended 1–2, but it was later awarded 0–3 against PAOK for fielding a suspended player - Liasos Louka, a Cypriot player still serving a two-match ban in UEFA competitions (for his sending-off in a UEFA Intertoto Cup tie while playing for Nea Salamis on 8 July 2000) had played. Eventually, the team failed to qualify for the group stage. Rolf Fringer succeeded Angelos Anastasiadis in September 2004, but after a few games, he was replaced by Nikos Karageorgiou, who led the club to a fifth-place finish in May 2005 and a subsequent 2005–06 UEFA Cup qualification. In late May 2006, the club's poor financial position started to emerge; players declared they had been unpaid for months. A shocking decision by UEFA to ban the club from the upcoming UEFA Cup brought the club close to dissolution. The organized supporters' groups launched an all-out war against president Giannis Goumenos during the summer of 2006, even occupying the club's offices in Toumba stadium for a handful of days. The situation was worsening for Goumenos after various negotiations with possible investors failed, constant allegations of embezzlement emerged, and especially after his decision to sell star player Dimitris Salpingidis to Panathinaikos. On 13 November 2006, Goumenos resigned from PAOK presidency leaving huge debts behind (during the three-year period of Goumenos' ownership, the club's debts rose from about €10 million to around €30 million → €10 million were the primary debt obligations plus €20 million from additional taxes, fines and surcharges) and few weeks later, Nikos Vezyrtzis–Apostolos Oikonomidis duo (former PAOK BC presidents) assumed temporary management of the club. In June 2007, former player and captain Theodoros Zagorakis assumed the presidency of the club, replacing the Nikos Vezyrtzis and Apostolos Oikonomidis administration and thus ushered a new era, in an effort to bring the club back to successes. In 2007–08 PAOK FC season, the early replacement of Georgios Paraschos by the well-known established manager Fernando Santos did little to prevent a ninth-place finish in the league. On 6 January 2008, Zisis Vryzas ended his football career coming on as a substitute in the game against AEL and immediately started his tenure as PAOK sports director. The club's finances gradually improved thanks to new sponsorship deals and the continuing support from fans (the number of season tickets was vastly increased). In June 2008, Theodoros Zagorakis announced the club's intention of building a new PAOK FC Sport Center in the Nea Mesimvria urban area of Thessaloniki, owned by the club. The administration had already acquired land from the municipality of Agios Athanasios and the project would be executed by former president Vasilis Sergiannidis' construction company. In the summer of 2008, the club brought in promising winger Vieirinha and widely known internationals Pablo Contreras, Zlatan Muslimović and Pablo García. In the winter transfer window that followed, Olivier Sorlin and Lino joined the team. The end of the 2008–09 PAOK FC found PAOK in second place, eight points behind champions Olympiacos. However, the team lost in the Super League playoffs (pos. 2–5) to Panathinaikos and finished in fourth place. In the 2009–10 PAOK FC season, PAOK fought for the title up to matchday 26 (Panathinaikos were two points ahead), when they lost 2–0 against local rivals Aris at Kleanthis Vikelidis Stadium. The club complained about referee Spathas; after the final whistle, Zagorakis went to the dressing room and apologized to PAOK players for not being able to protect them against poor refereeing. PAOK went on to win the league playoffs (pos. 2–5) and qualified for 2010–11 UEFA Champions League third qualifying round, but the success was swiftly followed by Fernando Santos' announcement of his decision to depart, having concluded his three-year contract as head coach. It was eventually decided in mid-June that Mario Beretta would be his successor. Beretta was quickly replaced by Pavlos Dermitzakis and became the shortest-serving PAOK coach ever, sitting on the bench for just 38 days. With Dermitzakis at the helm, PAOK faced Ajax and was ultimately eliminated on the away goals rule, managing a 1–1 draw in Amsterdam and a thrilling 3–3 draw in Thessaloniki. Entering the UEFA Europa League playoff round, PAOK were drawn against Fenerbahçe, also eliminated from the Champions League third qualifying round. PAOK won the home game 1–0 in Thessaloniki, then secured a 1–1 draw after extra time in Constantinople. Dermitzakis was removed after a 1–0 loss to Panathinaikos FC on 17 October. His assistant, Makis Chavos, replaced him as caretaker manager and PAOK reached the knockout phase of the Europa League, losing 2–1 on aggregate to CSKA Moscow. In the league, PAOK finished third and qualified for the 2011–12 UEFA Europa League. PAOK board appointed Romanian László Bölöni as the club's new head coach for the following season. The team qualified from the UEFA Europa League playoff round and entered the group stage. On 30 November 2011, PAOK achieved a historic 2–1 victory over Tottenham Hotspur at White Hart Lane. With this victory, the club qualified for the knockout phase for a second consecutive year. On 26 January 2012, Theodoros Zagorakis resigned from the club's presidency and was replaced by Zisis Vryzas. On 10 August 2012, Ivan Savvidis acquired PAOK ownership by depositing a fee of €9,951,000 and thus becoming the major shareholder of the club. In 2012–13 PAOK FC season, under manager Giorgos Donis, PAOK finished 2nd during the regular period, qualifying for the Super League Greece playoffs (pos. 2–5). After a Greek Cup semi-final loss to Asteras Tripoli, Donis was replaced by technical director and former player Georgios Georgiadis, who was appointed as caretaker manager. PAOK managed to win qualification for the third qualifying round of the 2013–14 UEFA Champions League through the playoffs after a last game win against PAS Giannina. In June 2013, PAOK appointed Huub Stevens as their new coach, but he was dismissed in March 2014 after achieving poor results. Once again, Georgiadis was appointed as caretaker manager and the team managed to reach the 2013–14 Greek Cup final, but lost 4–1 to Panathinaikos at the Olympic Stadium of Athens. In March 2015, Law N° 4321/2015 on regulations for kickstarting the economy was adopted by the Greek government and stated that a total repayment of a company's primary debt obligations would lead to the deletion of all additional taxes, fines and surcharges. On 12 May 2015, PAOK owner Ivan Savvidis paid the total amount of the club's debts towards Greek public authorities, a fee of €10,886,811. On 27 May, PAOK hired Frank Arnesen as their new sports director. On 18 June, Igor Tudor was hired as the new manager of the club, signing a three-year contract. On 2 September, PAOK announced the signing of Dimitar Berbatov on a one-year deal. Playing a 3–5–2 formation, the team progressed through three qualifying rounds to reach the UEFA Europa League group stage and on 10 December, PAOK made a surprising 1–0 away win over Borussia Dortmund at Signal Iduna Park. Tudor was replaced in March 2016 by youth-team coach Vladimir Ivić and the team won the Super League playoffs (pos. 2–5) and qualified for the 2016–17 UEFA Champions League third qualifying round. PAOK won the 2016–17 Greek Cup beating AEK 2–1 in the final held at Panthessaliko Stadium with a controversial goal scored by Pedro Henrique in the 81st minute. Linesman Kalfoglou failed to indicate that the scorer was in an offside position. In the same phase of play, moments before Leovac made the cross to Henrique, Crespo was brought down in the area by Simoes, but PAOK were denied a penalty by referee Kominis. The final was marred by crowd violence before the kick-off. In the Super League playoffs (pos. 2–5) that followed, a game against Panathinaikos at Leoforos Alexandras Stadium was abandoned (scoreline 1–0 at the time) when Ivić was struck on his head by a beer can that was thrown from the crowd. The Serbian coach was taken to a public hospital and the match was interrupted by referee Kominis in the 54th minute. Panathinaikos representatives claimed that Ivić exaggerated the impact of the injury and could continue. The game was awarded 0–3 to PAOK by court decision. AEK went on to win the playoffs and PAOK finished 4th. After the end of the season, Ivić did not renew his contract and the club appointed Aleksandar Stanojević whose tenure as PAOK manager did not last long. On 11 August 2017, he was replaced by Răzvan Lucescu. On 25 February 2018 (and while PAOK were leading the league table being 2pts ahead of AEK), PAOK–Olympiacos derby was suspended before kick-off when Olympiacos manager Óscar García Junyent was hit by an object thrown from the crowd (reportedly by an unfolding cash register paper roll). Óscar García received medical attention before being taken to a private general hospital (Interbalkan Medical Center). The private clinic where García was taken issued a statement about five hours after the coach was admitted, saying that due to his medical condition (sensitivity in the jaw, neck pain, dizziness and nausea) García had to stay at the hospital overnight and PAOK vs Olympiacos game never started. Olympiacos communications chief Karapapas stated that he expected a huge apology from PAOK for the incident and that their rivals should become more civilized if they want to develop into a big club. He also claimed that the object that fell onto García was a sealed cash register paper roll, which can be as heavy as a stone and when thrown from a certain height and distance with a certain force can be a very powerful blow. PAOK representatives claimed that the whole incident was a certain tactic from Olympiacos, which eventually did not work out because there was no injury sustained. Medical report of the official doctor of the match, approved by the Greek Football Federation (EPO), stated that García was not seriously injured and could return on the bench, but Olympiacos questioned doctor's credibility because he was a PAOK employee, working in PAOK youth academy. Referee Aretopoulos (who had many controversial moments in his career) submitted two match reports to describe why the game was abandoned (an initial report at Toumba Stadium and a supplementary report few days later that was demanded by first-instance court judge). Olympiacos were later awarded a 0–3 win by court decision. On 11 March 2018, during a championship decider derby against AEK (timeline of events before the game: 24 Feb: PAOK 52pts/AEK 50pts, 25 Feb: PAOK–Olympiacos suspended before kick-off, 26 Feb: Atromitos–AEK 1–1 and PAOK 52pts/AEK 51pts, 4 Mar: Asteras Tripoli–PAOK 3–2, AEK–Panionios 1–0 and AEK 54pts/PAOK 52pts, 5 Mar: first-instance court sentence: PAOK deducted 3pts, game awarded 0–3 to Olympiacos, 2 home games behind closed doors and AEK 54pts/PAOK 49pts, 10 Mar: court of appeal sentence: 3pts returned to PAOK, game awarded 0–3 to Olympiacos, closed doors penalty suspended and AEK 54pts/PAOK 52pts), the president of the team, Ivan Savvidis, stormed onto the pitch when referee Georgios Kominis disallowed a 90th-minute goal scored by Fernando Varela with a header. The goal was initially credited to PAOK by both the referee who pointed the center spot and the linesman who never raised his flag and ran towards the center. About 10–15 seconds later and while PAOK players were celebrating, linesman Pontikis was approached by AEK players who were protesting and approximately 3 minutes after the goal was scored, they altered their decision. The goal was ruled out for offside (according to referee Kominis, Maurício influenced play). Savvidis entered the pitch with few members of his personal guard and Ľuboš Micheľ (former UEFA Elite referee). At first, he ordered his team to leave the pitch, but his request was denied by PAOK captain Vieirinha. Afterwards they went close to the referee, where Micheľ expressed his complaints about the decision. Leaving the pitch 1 minute after his entry, a tension was built between Savvidis and members of AEK bench and moments later Savvidis took off his jacket and a gun appeared attached to his belt. The referee suspended the game and sent the two teams to the dressing rooms. Savvidis tried to enter into the referees' dressing room, but he was denied entrance by security and few minutes later he left the stadium. Kominis' intention was the game to be continued after 1 hour (and blew his whistle outside the dressing rooms calling the two teams), but AEK general manager Vasilis Dimitriadis approached him and claimed (as can be heard in audio) that the players of AEK were terrified from the incident and could not continue as he felt that their safety was at risk. PAOK vice-president Chrisostomos Gagatsis is heard trying to persuade Dimitriadis to order AEK players to return on the pitch. Soon after, the game was abandoned. The incident caused the league to be suspended by the Greek government. AEK manager Manolo Jiménez giving his side of the story, confirmed that Kominis wanted the game to be concluded, but AEK president told them not to play. He also said about a year later, that AEK players and himself realized that Savvidis was actually carrying a gun on his belt when they received photos on their cellphones and not while they were on the pitch. AEK midfielder Panagiotis Kone in an interview after the game also confirmed that Kominis told them to go out and play for the remaining 5 minutes, but he did not inform AEK players as to whether he would award or overturn PAOK goal when asked in the dressing rooms. He replied that they would be informed outside on the pitch. Of course, both Jiménez and Kone condemned Savvidis' actions and held him responsible for the interruption. PAOK goalkeeper Alexandros Paschalakis stated that it was clearly a legitimate goal scored by Varela, because Maurício was behind the goalkeeper and did not influence play. He also said that Savvidis' invasion of the pitch wasn't proper. On his official match report, referee Kominis wrote down that when the match was interrupted the scoreline was 1–0 and that he decided to award the goal. Kominis received a summons to appear at the court hearing, but he sent a letter instead, explaining that he could not show up due to personal reasons. He also received a legal document with 3 questions from first-instance court judge and gave a definite answer in one of them and a vague response in the other two. Ivan Savvidis apologised for his behaviour two days after the game and he was later banned from all football stadiums for three years. PAOK were sentenced with a 3pt deduction (and 2pts from next season's championship) and AEK were awarded a 0–3 win by court decision. The 6-point swing was a major blow to PAOK's title hopes and the club was unable to secure the title as AEK were crowned champions with three match-days to go. The club still managed to end their season on a high note by winning their second consecutive Greek Cup beating AEK 2–0 in the final held at the Olympic Stadium of Athens (AEK home ground at the time), with the match refereed after many years in Greece by a foreign referee (David Fernández Borbalán). During the post-game press conference, manager Lucescu and captain Vieirinha (final MVP) both stated that 2018 championship title was stolen from PAOK. Paschalakis Varela Crespo Matos Vieirinha Maurício Shakhov Jabá Biseswar Pelkas Prijović PAOK 2018–19 unbeaten Champions (Akpom was the striker for the 2nd half of the season) 2018–19 season was the best in club's history. During the 2018–19 Super League Greece, the major derbies, after decades in Greek football history, were refereed by foreign referees. On 21 April, PAOK beat Levadiakos 5–0 and clinched the league title, hosting a memorable celebration. On 5 May, PAOK earned their 26th win in 30 games to complete an undefeated season (26–4–0 record). This is arguably the best performance in Greek football history, the previous held by Panathinaikos, who won the 1963–64 Alpha Ethniki title undefeated, but with a 24–6–0 record. PAOK were also the only unbeaten European football club in the national championships held across Europe during the 2018–2019 season. On 11 May, PAOK won the Greek Cup for third consecutive year, defeating AEK 1–0. This was the third consecutive Greek Cup final against the same opponent and it was held for second consecutive year at the Olympic Stadium of Athens (AEK home ground at the time). The Video assistant referee (VAR) was used for the first time in Greek football and in a Greek Cup final. The winning goal came in the 45th minute with an overhead kick of Chuba Akpom. Dimitris Pelkas provided the assist. With this Greek Cup victory, PAOK FC achieved a domestic Double for first time in their history. Vieirinha was named MVP of the Season. On 22 May 2021, under Uruguayan manager and fan favorite Pablo García, PAOK won their eighth Greek Cup title, beating Olympiacos 2–1 in the final held at the Athens Olympic Stadium with Michael Krmenčík scoring the winner in the 90th minute.And PAOK conquered the Greek Cup for 8th time in the history of the club. In the 2021–22 season, PAOK reached the quarter-finals of the inaugural UEFA Europa Conference League, losing 1–3 on aggregate to Marseille. On 21 May 2022, PAOK lost 1–0 to Panathinaikos in the Greek Cup final which was held at the Olympic Stadium of Athens. The 2022–23 season started with an early elimination in the UECL 2nd Qualifying Round to Levski Sofia and a slow start in the league, being 5th at the end of October. However, the team resurged and entered the play–offs as title contenders, but, in a repeat of the previous season, failed to live up to expectations and finished 4th, 16 points below the top. The team's cup run was stopped at the final against AEK Athens, behind closed doors at the Panthessaliko Stadium, losing 2–0. Being trophyless for the previous two seasons, the 2023–24 season started with new signings in the summer window, such as Kiril Despodov. The team managed to suffice in the qualifying rounds of the Europa Conference League, tightly beating Beitar Jerusalem and topping HNK Hajduk Split and Hearts in the 2nd, 3rd and play–off qualifying rounds respectively. In the group stage, the team defeated HJK before scoring a memorable home victory at an atmospheric Toumba Stadium against 2022 Europa League winners Eintracht Frankfurt 2–1 on injury time, a feat which the club would repeat against Aberdeen in Pittodrie, followed by a draw against Aberdeen at home. On 7/3/2024, PAOK FC played Dinamo Zagreb at Maksimir Stadium in the UEFA Conference League, Round of 16. They suffered a heavy 2–0 defeat. However, in the second match against Dinamo Zagreb, PAOK scored a whopping 5 goals, hence qualifying to the round of 8 with a score of 5–3 on aggregate. The first emblem of PAOK depicted a four-leaf clover and a horseshoe. The leaves were green and above them were the initials of the word "PAOK". Kostas Koemtzopoulos, one of PAOK's founding members, came up with this idea, inspired by his favourite brand of cigarettes. On 20 March 1929, Enosis Konstantinoupoliton Thessalonikis (A.E.K.) was dissolved and absorbed by PAOK and a mournful version of the double-headed eagle with the wings closed instead of stretched, indicating the grief for the lost homelands, was adopted as the club's new emblem. On 11 June 2013, under the presidency of Ivan Savvidis, a golden outline was added to the crest, as a symbol of the club's Byzantine heritage. During the 2018–19 season, the first emblem was used on the third kit. The club's colours have always been black and white, black for the sorrow related to countless thousands of Greek refugees who were forced to leave the land their ancestors had been living in for centuries (Asia Minor, Eastern Thrace, Pontus, Caucasus) and white for the hope of a new beginning that came with settling in a new home. PAOK's traditional kit features a black and white vertical striped shirt, combined with black or white shorts and socks. Various types of shirts were used throughout the club's history and the most common alternatives were those with thinner or wider stripes, the all-black one and the all-white one. Over the years, several other colours were used on the 3rd kit, such as grey, silver, blue, purple, orange and red. The current kit manufacturer is Macron, a collaboration that started in July 2015 and was renewed twice until 2027. Stoiximan, a Greek online gambling company, is the shirt sponsor since June 2017, with the sponsorship deal extended twice and set to last until 2025. PAOK's current home ground is Toumba Stadium, which was built in 1959. The stadium has been renovated many times since and its seating capacity is 29,000. PAOK administration have already presented to the Greek public authorities an architecture study of a new at Toumba Stadium. The Greek Council of State (CoS), the country's supreme court, in April 2022 approved a proposal to set up the complete redevelopment of Toumba Stadium, with the CoS deeming legal a draft Presidential Decree concerning the approval of a Special Urban Plan for the district of Toumba, where the venue is located. On 21 June 2022, PAOK has formalized the beginning of a collaboration with a team consisting of domestic engineering and consulting firm SALFO and global architectural design company Populous to deliver the project. It is estimated that PAOK will be granted a building permit in 2023 and the new stadium will be completed by 2026 and will have a capacity of 41,900 spectators. PAOK would probably move to Kaftanzoglio Stadium until the new Stadium is built. The New Stadium plans present some significant changes to the original stadium, notably a giant roof covering the entire stadium which counters a common criticism of the current ground regarding exposure to weather and elements outside of Gates 1 and 2. The existing stands would be demolished and reconstructed, moving closer to the pitch and eliminating the distance from the former running track. However, as of early 2024, the project has been in a continuous stalemate. Toumba Stadium External view Inside view Inside view PAOK FC bus PAOK FC Sport Center is the training ground of the first team and Academy, located in Nea Mesimvria area of Thessaloniki. The construction started under the presidency of Theodoros Zagorakis. On 19 January 2024, a blessing of the land where the club's new training center will be built took place. The newly acquired plot of land is located on the 8th road of the Tagarades farmland in the community of the Thermi municipality. PAOK FC is the most widely supported football club in Northern Greece and with the 3rd largest fanbase in the country, according to the latest polls and researches. PAOK's traditional fanbase comes from the city of Thessaloniki, where the club is based, as well as from the rest of Macedonia region and Northern Greece. They also have fans all over the country and in the Greek Diaspora (Germany, Australia, USA, etc.). Research by Marca in August 2018 reported that PAOK are the most popular Greek football team on social media. Toumba Stadium is infamous for its hostile atmosphere, a factor that led to the attribution of the Stadium as "The Black Hell". On high-profile encounters, when the players walk out of the tunnel, the song Hells Bells by AC/DC is heard from the stadium's speakers. The notorious Gate 4 is home to many PAOK organized supporters' groups from around the globe, with the homonymous Gate 4 fan club which was founded in April 1976, being the most familiar everywhere. The supporters' group from Neapoli district of Thessaloniki that was founded in 1963 is the oldest one. One of the biggest banners in the world was created by Michaniona fan club. No 12 jersey is dedicated to the fans, the symbolic 12th man on the pitch. It was permanently retired by the club on 16 August 2000. 3,000 PAOK fans descended to the Olympic Stadium of Athens for the game against Panathinaikos on 3 October 1999. A few hours later, time stopped. On its way back to Thessaloniki, the double-decker bus of the Kordelio fan club collided with a truck and fell into a ditch in the Vale of Tempe, Thessaly. The aftermath of the bus crash was devastating. Six PAOK fans lost their lives (Kyriakos Lazaridis, Christina Tziova, Anastasios Themelis, Charalampos Zapounidis, Georgios Ganatsios, Dimitris Andreadakis) and many others were injured. A roadside memorial was erected at the site of the crash bearing the following inscription: "Their love for PAOK brought them here, left them here and went beyond". Partizan CSKA Moscow OFI PAOK fans maintain a strong friendship with the supporters of Serbian club Partizan, the Grobari. On many occasions, fans from both clubs traveled to watch each other's games. Lately, some PAOK supporters' groups have developed a friendship with fans of CSKA Moscow (common Orthodox faith). PAOK fans have good relations with the fans of OFI Crete, a friendship that started in October 1987 when OFI faced Atalanta for 1987–88 Cup Winners' Cup at Toumba Stadium and numerous PAOK fans supported the Cretans. The rivalry between Olympiacos and PAOK is the fiercest intercity football rivalry in Greece and is long-standing, emerging in the 1960s, when Olympiacos unsuccessfully tried to acquire Giorgos Koudas from PAOK, approaching him directly without going into a negotiation with his club. A longtime heated rivalry exists between PAOK and local rivals Aris. Panathinaikos and AEK, Athens' two big clubs, are also considered major rivals. There are also some less intense rivalries, like those with Iraklis (local conflict) and AEL. Super League Winners (3): 1975–76, 1984–85, 2018–19 Greek Cup Winners (8): 1971–72, 1973–74, 2000–01, 2002–03, 2016–17, 2017–18, 2018–19, 2020–21 Greater Greece Cup (defunct) Winners (1): 1973 Double Winners (1): 2018–19 UEFA Cup Winners' Cup: Quarter-finalists (1): 1973–74 UEFA Europa Conference League Quarter-finalists (1): 2021–22 Macedonia FCA Championship: Winners (7): 1936–37, 1947–48, 1949–50, 1953–54, 1954–55, 1955–56, 1956–57 Macedonia–Thrace FCA Championship: Winners (1): 1939–40 Last updated: 14 March 2024 UEFA 5-year Club Ranking 2024–25 Current ranking As of 1 September 2023 Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality. Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality. As of 1 September 2023 Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality. Source: PAOK F.C. The following managers won at least one trophy when in charge of PAOK: Source: PAOK F.C. Giorgos Koudas holds the record for most PAOK league appearances, having played 504 matches (607 overall) from 1963 to 1984. Stavros Sarafis is the club's top goalscorer with 170 goals overall (136 in league matches), from 1967 to 1981. Furtula Fountoukidis Varela Vieirinha Iosifidis Zagorakis Skartados Koudas Paridis Kostikos Sarafis The "Greatest Ever" squad chosen by dugoutworldwide.com Effie Achtsioglou, politician Anastasis Daskalakis, footballer Stefanos Athanasiadis, footballer, former PAOK captain Angelos Anastasiadis, former football player and coach Giorgos Aftias, journalist Giannis Aggelakas, musician Anna Korakaki, shooter Elena Asimakopoulou, actor Iordanis Chasapopoulos, journalist Vicky Chatzivasileiou, journalist, TV presenter Sissy Christidou, TV presenter Rallia Christidou, singer, politician Makis Christodoulopoulos, singer Olympia Chopsonidou, model Demy, singer Georgios Donis, football player and coach Pyrros Dimas, Olympic champion, politician Stratos Dionysiou, singer Konstadinos Gatsioudis, Greek javelin thrower Periklis Iakovakis, athlete, European champion Michalis Iatropoulos, actor Antonis Kanakis, journalist Vasilis Karras, singer Stavros Kalafatis, former MP Charis Kastanidis, former MP with PASOK Nikos Kourkoulis, singer Eva Kaili, journalist, politician Georgios Koudas, footballer, former PAOK captain Razvan Lucescu, Romanian former football player and coach Manos Loizos, composer Kostas Makedonas, singer Sokratis Malamas, singer Manolis Mitsias, singer Giorgos Minos, sports journalist Alkinoos Ioannidis, singer Ioanna Lilly, former model Nikos Oikonomou, basketball player Kyriakos Papadopoulos, footballer Nikos Papazoglou, singer Paola, singer Elena Rapti, politician Branislav Prelevic, Serbian basketball player and coach, former PAOK president and Greek champion Dimitris Salpingidis, football player and coach, former PAOK captain Dionysis Savvopoulos, musician Euclid Tsakalotos, former Minister of Economy Akis Tsochatzopoulos, Former Minister of National Defence of Greece Popi Tsapanidou, journalist Giorgos Toursounidis, football player and coach, former PAOK captain Natassa Theodoridou, singer Rania Thraskia, journalist, politician Tasos Telloglou, journalist Fay Skorda, TV presenter Gerasimos Skiadaresis, actor Vasso Laskaraki, actress Katerina Stikoudi, actress, model, singer Sofoklis Schortsanitis, basketball player, 2006 FIBA Silver Medalist, former PAOK player Stavros Sarafis, footballer, former PAOK player Kyriakos Velopoulos, politician Nikos Vertis, singer Evangelos Venizelos, politician Zisis Vryzas, footballer, Euro 2004 champion, former PAOK player and president Kostas Vasileiadis, basketball player Theodoros Zagorakis, footballer, Euro 2004 champion, politician, former PAOK president Christos Zabounis, journalist Kostas Zouraris, author, former MP Association football portal P.A.O.K. List of PAOK FC players List of PAOK FC managers PAOK B Greek refugees PAOK F.C. in European football List of PAOK FC records and statistics List of PAOK FC seasons PAOK FC (women) Thessaloniki Toumba (Thessaloniki) Toumba Stadium PAOK FC Sport Center PAOK Academy P.A.O.K. H.C. P.A.O.K H.C Women's Handball Kanotas, Miltiadis (2005). 80 χρόνια, αυτός είναι ο ΠΑΟΚ (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις Εκδοτική Θεσσαλονίκης. Κυρίτσης, Δημήτρης ; Στεφανίδης, Ανέστης ; Τσιομπανούδη, Ελένη (2005). ΠΑΟΚ, Πανθεσσαλονίκειος Αθλητικός Όμιλος Κωνσταντινοπουλιτών 1926–2005 (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις Κέντρο Ιστορίας Θεσσαλονίκης. ISBN 978-960-88595-2-4. Μπλιάτκας, Κώστας (2005). Γιώργος Κούδας, της ζωής μου το παιχνίδι (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις Ιανός. ISBN 978-960-7827-35-7. Συλλογικό έργο (2009). Για πάντα πρωταθλητές, Π.Α.Ο.Κ. Ποδόσφαιρο-Μπάσκετ (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις Σκάι. ISBN 978-960-482-020-7. Τσάλλος, Αλέξιος (2010). Το αλφαβητάρι του ΠΑΟΚ (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις Δίαυλος. ISBN 978-960-531-259-6. Τσιώλης, Σταύρος (2011). Ταξιδεύοντας με τον ΠΑΟΚ (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις Αιγόκερως. ISBN 978-960-322-419-8. Πετρακόπουλος, Σταύρος (2016). Τα «μυθικά» του ΠΑΟΚ (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις Friends Press. ISBN 978-618-82397-0-8. Ζαμπούνης, Χρήστος (2016). ΠΑΟΚ αφού (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις Φερενίκη. ISBN 978-960-9513-58-6. Ιωαννίδης, Νίκος (2017). Μια εποχή στο τσιμέντο (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις Τόπος. ISBN 978-960-499-192-1. Εδίρνελης, Σωκράτης (2018). Το κλεμμένο πρωτάθλημα (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις ΑΛΔΕ. ISBN 978-960-9451-89-5. Παππούς, Μιχάλης (2019). Ο ΠΑΟΚ του 70 (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις University Studio Press. ISBN 978-960-12-2421-3. Βασιλόπουλος, Κώστας (2023). Ραζβάν Λουτσέσκου, Double PAOK (in Greek). Ελλάδα: Εκδόσεις Φερενίκη. ISBN 978-960-9513-89-0. Νίκος Τριανταφυλλίδης. 90 χρόνια ΠΑΟΚ – Νοσταλγώντας το μέλλον, 2016. "Home Ground". paokfc.gr. "The President". paokfc.gr. Vassiliki Papantonopoulou (31 October 2014). "Myths, heroes and legends: PAOK in focus". uefa.com. Retrieved 15 July 2019. "OPEN έρευνα για το ελληνικό ποδόσφαιρο: Ποια ομάδα υποστηρίζουν οι Ελληνες φίλαθλοι - Πανελλαδική δημοσκόπηση της ALCO για το (Δείγμα: 2,000)" [ALCO nationwide poll conducted for OPEN TV channel]. ethnos.gr (in Greek). 5 April 2021. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Sotiris Milios (17 March 2015). "Ο οπαδικός χάρτης της Ελλάδας - Πανελλαδική δημοσκόπηση της Metron Analysis για το SDNA (Δείγμα: 1,402)" [Metron Analysis nationwide poll conducted for SDNA sports website]. sdna.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 5 July 2017. "Δημοσκόπηση της Palmos Analysis για το Tvxs (Δείγμα: 1,010)" [Palmos Analysis poll conducted for Tvxs news website]. tvxs.gr (in Greek). 30 November 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2019. Thanos Mplounas (11 November 2014). "Ερευνα για το ελληνικό επαγγελματικό ποδόσφαιρο από το Πανεπιστήμιο Μακεδονίας για λογαριασμό του ΣΚΑΪ (Δείγμα: 1,006)" [University of Macedonia research on greek professional football conducted for SKAI TV channel]. kathimerini.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 11 October 2019. "Τι έλαβαν όλες οι ομάδες στη μεγαλύτερη απογραφή που έγινε ποτέ από ένα αθλητικό website (Δείγμα: 65,857)" [Results of the biggest poll ever conducted by a sports website]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). 4 July 2013. Retrieved 11 October 2019. "The most popular teams on social media in Europe". marca.com. 23 August 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2019. "PAOK are the most popular team in Greece". paokfc.gr. 23 August 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (13 October 2018). "Η ΠΑΟΚ-mania στα social media!". gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 10 October 2019. "History". paokfc.gr. Retrieved 26 June 2015. Georgios Moralis. "PAOK FC". footballhistory.org. Retrieved 5 November 2019. Athan Stylos (30 May 2019). "A look at PAOK's 2018/19 squad". agonasport.com. Archived from the original on 22 October 2019. Retrieved 22 October 2019. Ιστορία acpaok.gr "Αφιέρωμα ιστορίας ΠΑΟΚ". paokfc.gr (in Greek). Labros Arnaoutoglou (11 March 2016). "90 χρόνια ΠΑΟΚ! 90 χρόνια προπονητές!" [90 years of PAOK, all PAOK FC managers]. paokvoice.com (in Greek). Retrieved 14 July 2017. "PAOK–Nea Genea Kalamarias 3–1". Μακεδονια (in Greek). 13 December 1926. p. 3. Retrieved 10 January 2021. "PAOK–Thermaikos 4–1 (5/6/1927), ΜΑΚΕΔΟΝΙΑ newspaper (page 3)". efimeris.nlg.gr (in Greek). 6 June 1927. Retrieved 10 January 2021. "PAOK–Aris 2–1 (12/6/1927), ΜΑΚΕΔΟΝΙΑ newspaper (page 3)". efimeris.nlg.gr (in Greek). 13 June 1927. Retrieved 10 January 2021. "Η πρώτη νίκη επί του Άρη" [The first win against Aris]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 12 June 2020. Retrieved 12 June 2020. "PAOK–Atlas Ippodromiou". Μακεδονια (in Greek). 18 July 1927. p. 3. Retrieved 10 January 2021. "PAOK–Iraklis 1–0". Μακεδονια (in Greek). 8 August 1927. p. 3. Retrieved 10 January 2021. Kostas Petrotos (12 April 2017). "Ο ΠΑΟΚ γιορτάζει 91 χρόνια ζωής" [PAOK celebrates 91-year anniversary]. sport24.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 14 July 2017. "Ο άγνωστος Ραϊμόν Ετιέν..." [The unknown first foreign player of PAOK Raymond Ettienne]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 7 December 2015. Retrieved 24 July 2019. "Ο πρώτος ξένος τεχνικός του ΠΑΟΚ!" [PAOK's first foreign manager]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 2 September 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2020. "PAOK–Iraklis 3–2 (5/6/1932), ΜΑΚΕΔΟΝΙΑ newspaper (page 1)". efimeris.nlg.gr (in Greek). 6 June 1932. Retrieved 10 January 2021. "The first PAOK's home". paokfc.gr. Retrieved 22 June 2017. "Σταθμοί στην ιστορία" [Stations of History]. paokfc.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 14 July 2017. Manos Androulakis (5 November 2017). "1939 Greek Cup final AEK–PAOK 2–1 (28/5/1939)". sport-retro.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 15 July 2019. "1940 Panhellenic Championship two-legged final AEK–PAOK (5–3 agg.)". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 16 June 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2019. "Από το γήπεδο στο μέτωπο" [From the football field to the front]. paokfc.gr (in Greek). 28 October 2016. Retrieved 29 March 2020. "Τα πρώτα βήματα του ΠΑΟΚ" [PAOK's first steps]. netbet.gr (in Greek). 23 March 2017. Retrieved 24 July 2017. Michalis Konstantis (28 October 2017). "Αγνωστοι Ηρωες" [Unknown Heroes]. ionikienotita.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 20 September 2019. Giannis Sotiriou (26 April 2018). "1951 Greek Cup final Olympiacos–PAOK 4–0 (11/3/1951)". inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 15 July 2019. "Αφιέρωμα στην τριπλέτα Γιεντζή-Κουϊρουκίδη-Παπαδάκη" [A feature article on Yientzis-Kouiroukidis-Papadakis attacking trio]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 15 April 2012. Retrieved 20 March 2020. Alexander Mastrogiannopoulos (11 June 2010). "Greece – Final Tables 1906–1959". RSSSF. Retrieved 22 July 2017. Evanthis Gogoulis (12 June 2016). "1955 Greek Cup final Panathinaikos–PAOK 2–0 (12/6/1955)". oldfootball.gr (in Greek). Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2019. "Stations of History". paokfc.gr. Retrieved 22 July 2017. Stavros Sountoulidis (16 September 2018). "16/9/1975: ΠΑΟΚ–Μπαρτσελόνα 1–0". gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 31 October 2019. Andreas Katsikaris (16 September 2017). "Όταν η Μπαρτσελόνα υποκλίθηκε στον Κούδα και τον ΠΑΟΚ" [When Barcelona bowed down to Koudas and PAOK]. sport-retro.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 31 October 2019. "Toumba Stadium". stadia.gr. Retrieved 31 October 2019. Giannis Malamas (6 September 2019). "Τούμπα 60 ετών" [60 years of Toumba Stadium]. inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 29 March 2020. "Λέανδρος Συμεωνίδης". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 5 October 2013. Retrieved 25 September 2019. "Παύλος Παπαδόπουλος". paokfc.gr (in Greek). 5 January 2015. Retrieved 1 November 2019. "Ανέστης Αφεντουλίδης". paokfc.gr. 1 December 2014. Retrieved 1 November 2019. "Γιώργος Μακρής". paokfc.gr. 18 October 2016. Retrieved 1 November 2019. Blair Newman (16 February 2015). "The incredible life and times of Greek hero Giorgos Koudas". thesefootballtimes.co. Retrieved 14 October 2019. Manos Androulakis (23 November 2017). "Η ζωή και η καριέρα του θρυλικού Γιώργου Κούδα" [Life and career of legendary Giorgos Koudas]. sport-retro.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 25 September 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (23 November 2015). "H ζωή του Γιώργου Κούδα" [The life of Giorgos Koudas]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 3 July 2017. "Aφιέρωμα στo Γιώργο Παντελάκη" [A feature article on Giorgos Pantelakis]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 2 February 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2019. "Η ιστορική απάντηση του Παντελάκη" [Pantelakis' historic response]. mixanitouxronou.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 13 July 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (3 April 2019). "Σταύρος Σαράφης". forzaonline.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Χρήστος Τερζανίδης". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 25 September 2013. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Κώστας Ιωσηφίδης". paokfc.gr. 20 April 2016. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Δημήτρης Παρίδης". sport24.gr (in Greek). 22 August 2015. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Αχιλλέας Ασλανίδης". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 7 April 2018. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Κούλης Αποστολίδης". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 23 July 2017. Retrieved 20 March 2020. "Αρίστος Φουντουκίδης". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 7 July 2019. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Παναγιώτης Κερμανίδης". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 23 November 2017. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Αγγελος Αναστασιάδης". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 17 May 2013. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Νέτο Γκουερίνο". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 6 April 2018. Retrieved 26 September 2019. Giannis Sotiriou (28 April 2018). "1970 Greek Cup final Aris–PAOK 1–0 (28/6/1970)". inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. Manos Tsalgatidis (1 May 2018). "1971 Greek Cup final Olympiacos–PAOK 3–1 (9/6/1971)". inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. "1972 Greek Cup final Panathinaikos–PAOK 1–2 (5/7/1972)". ert.gr (in Greek). 5 July 2017. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "The first title". paokfc.gr. Ivan Ponting (13 December 2007). "Les Shannon: Feisty footballer and coach". independent.co.uk. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2019. Sotiris Milios (1 April 2019). "Λες Σάννον – Ο προπονητής που άλλαξε την ιστορία του ΠΑΟΚ" [Les Shannon, the coach that changed the course of PAOK's history]. forzaonline.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 4 October 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (25 February 2017). "Ολυμπιακός–ΠΑΟΚ 1–0 (25/2/1973) - Eνα ντέρμπι που έμοιαζε με γουέστερν!" [A derby like a Western]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 12 July 2019. "ΠΑΟΚ–Παναχαϊκή 3–5 (22/4/1973)". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 22 April 2017. Retrieved 13 July 2019. Zastro (18 April 2019). "Η δωροδοκία (Το πριμ του Ολυμπιακού στους παίκτες της Παναχαϊκής)" [The bribery (Olympiacos' bonus to Panachaiki players)]. sdna.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 7 November 2019. "Μαρτυρία - αποκάλυψη για το ΠΑΟΚ–Παναχαϊκή 3–5: "Ο Γουλανδρής πλήρωνε κρυφά επί ένα χρόνο"" [Wife of former Panachaiki player reveals in an interview that Olympiacos president Goulandris paid them in secret for one year]. sdna.gr (in Greek). 2 July 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2021. Manos Tsalgatidis (30 April 2018). "1973 Greek Cup final Olympiacos–PAOK 1–0 (17/6/1973)". inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. "PAOK vs AC Milan (March 1974)". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 20 March 2017. Retrieved 16 July 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (19 September 2016). "Legia Warsaw–PAOK 1–1 (19/9/1973)". gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. "PAOK–Legia Warsaw 1–0 (3/10/1973)". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 5 October 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2019. Manos Androulakis (24 October 2018). "Lyon–PAOK 3–3 (24/10/1973)". sport-retro.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (7 November 2016). "PAOK–Lyon 4–0 (7/11/1973)". gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. Manos Androulakis (16 June 2017). "1974 Greek Cup final Olympiacos–PAOK 2–2 (3–4 pen.) (16/6/1974)". sport-retro.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Cup Winner 1974". paokfc.gr. "Γκιούλα Λόραντ: "Αθάνατος"..." paokmania.gr (in Greek). 31 May 2019. Retrieved 3 October 2019. "Ολυμπιακός–ΠΑΟΚ 0–4 (4/1/1976)". sport24.gr (in Greek). 4 January 2018. Retrieved 13 July 2019. Maria Kaltsidi (2 May 2018). "ΠΑΟΚ–ΑΕΚ 1–0 (2/5/1976) - Ένα γκολ που… άκουσε όλη η Θεσσαλονίκη" [A goal cheer heard across Salonica]. sportime.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 19 January 2021. "At the top of the Greek Championship". paokfc.gr. "Τα ματς με τη Δυναμό Κιέβου..." [The matches against Dynamo Kyiv]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 20 October 2017. Retrieved 4 November 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (1 May 2020). "ΑΕΚ–ΠΑΟΚ 1–0 (1/5/1977) - Μια επεισοδιακή Πρωτομαγιά στη Φιλαδέλφεια" [An eventful May Day at Nikos Goumas Stadium]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 7 May 2020. Giannis Sotiriou (12 June 2019). "ΠΑΟΚ–Παναθηναϊκός 0–0 (12/6/1977) - Μια ισοπαλία...ένα χαμένο πρωτάθλημα!" [A draw that cost the league title]. inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 29 March 2020. "Προπόνηση με πολλές αποδοκιμασίες (1977)" [Training with a lot of booeing]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 14 June 2020. Retrieved 15 June 2020. "Η ένταση έφερε αποχή των Σαράφη-Κούδα! (1977)" [Tension brought the abstention of Koudas and Sarafis]. aspromavresistories.blogspot.com (in Greek). 15 June 2019. Retrieved 24 September 2019. Panagiotis Kiriklidis (3 May 2018). "1977 Greek Cup final Panathinaikos–PAOK 2–1 (22/6/1977)". inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 15 July 2019. Panagiotis Kiriklidis (4 May 2018). "1978 Greek Cup final AEK–PAOK 2–0 (4/6/1978)". inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. Maria Kaltsidi (9 March 2019). "ΠΑΟΚ–Παναθηναϊκός 0–2 (9/3/1980) - Η πρώτη φορά που έπεσαν δακρυγόνα σε γήπεδο!" [The first time tear gas were used on a greek football field]. sportime.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 12 July 2019. Giannis Sotiriou (28 November 2016). "Το απίστευτο εντός έδρας σερί του ΠΑΟΚ (1976–1980)!" [An incredible home winning streak]. inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 25 September 2019. "The day Lóránt was lost". paokfc.gr. 31 May 2020. Giannis Paraskevaidis (31 May 2019). "ΠΑΟΚ–Ολυμπιακός 1–0 (31/5/1981) - Η ημέρα που «έφυγε» ο Λόραντ" [The day Lóránt passed away]. sdna.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 12 July 2019. "1981 Greek Cup final Olympiacos–PAOK 3–1 (21/6/1981)". sdna.gr (in Greek). 11 May 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2019. Manos Navrozidis (11 May 2019). "1983 Greek Cup final AEK–PAOK 2–0 (29/6/1983)". sport24.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 15 July 2019. "PAOK–Bayern Munich 0–0 (19/10/1983)". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 19 October 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2019. Vaso Prevezianou (2 November 2015). "Bayern Munich–PAOK 0–0 (9–8 pen.) (2/11/1983)". sdna.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. Elmar Bergonzini (12 November 2017). "La prima volta del Bayern Monaco ai rigori" [Bayern's first penalty shoot-out]. foxsports.it (in Italian). Retrieved 4 November 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (2 November 2018). "Το "Έπος του Μονάχου" που έμεινε στη μέση…" [The 'Munich's epic' that was not fulfilled]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 4 November 2019. "From controversy to coronation". paokfc.gr. "Γιώργος Σκαρτάδος". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 16 May 2016. Retrieved 25 September 2019. "Νίκος Αλαβάντας". paokfc.gr (in Greek). 25 September 2015. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Θωμάς Σίγγας". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 29 November 2016. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Ράντε Πάπριτσα". paokfc.gr. 28 April 2019. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Γιώργος Κωστίκος". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 25 December 2017. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Γιάννης Δαμανάκης". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 22 July 2017. Retrieved 26 September 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (20 January 2017). "Παναθηναϊκός–ΠΑΟΚ 0–1 (20/1/1985) - Τη μέρα που ο ΠΑΟΚ «είδε» τον τίτλο" [The day PAOK 'eyed' the title]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 13 July 2019. "Ο ΠΑΟΚ κλειδώνει τον τίτλο (9/6/1985)!" [PAOK clinches the league title]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 9 June 2016. Retrieved 7 October 2019. Thodoris Kounadis (22 June 2015). "1985 Greek Cup final AEL–PAOK 4–1 (22/6/1985)". sport24.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (14 December 2016). "Χρήστος Δημόπουλος". gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (6 December 2018). "ΠΑΟΚ–Ολυμπιακός 6–1 (6/12/1987) - Βαρύ κι ασήκωτο μέχρι και σήμερα" [Heavy and unbearable to this day]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 12 July 2019. Manos Tsalgatidis (9 October 2019). "Ο 'Αποδυτηριάκιας' (Κώστας Καίσαρης) γράφει στην εφημερίδα Φίλαθλος για τον κόσμο του ΠΑΟΚ πριν και μετά το 6–1 στις Σέρρες" [Journalist reports on PAOK fans before and after the game]. inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 12 October 2019. Marios Stampoulis (7 September 2018). "Napoli–PAOK 1–0 (7/9/1988)". sdna.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. "PAOK–Napoli 1–1 (6/10/1988) / Maradona statement". sport24.gr (in Greek). 6 October 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2019. Fabrizio d'Esposito (25 August 2017). "PAOK Salonicco–Napoli, 1988: venti feriti, uno ero io" [PAOK–Napoli, 1988: twenty injured, one of them was me]. ilnapolista.it (in Italian). Retrieved 26 April 2020. "Μαγκντί: Ο πρώτος Αφρικανός του ΠΑΟΚ!" [Magdy: PAOK's first African player]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 11 June 2016. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Γιώργος Τουρσουνίδης". paokfc.gr (in Greek). 6 October 2015. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Πρωταθλητής χειμώνα, με γεμάτη Τούμπα!" [Winter champions at a packed Toumba Stadium]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 21 January 2020. Retrieved 20 March 2020. "Sevilla–PAOK 0–0 (19/9/1990) - Με ήρωα τον Γκιτσιούδη στο "Σάντσεθ Πιθχουάν"". paokfc.gr (in Greek). 19 September 2015. Retrieved 13 July 2021. "PAOK vs Sevilla (1990)". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 3 October 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2019. Giannis Paraskevaidis (23 September 2017). "Παναθηναϊκός–ΠΑΟΚ 3–0 (διεκόπη, 23/9/1990) - Όταν ο Βουλινός πήρε τον ΠΑΟΚ και έφυγε από το ΟΑΚΑ" [When Voulinos took his team and left from the pitch of Athens Olympic Stadium]. sdna.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 12 July 2019. "Αποκλεισμός από τη σφυρίχτρα του Βασιλάκη!" [Disqualified due to Vasilakis' poor refereeing]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 24 April 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2020. "PAOK vs KV Mechelen (1991)". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 18 September 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2019. "Στέφανος Μπορμπόκης". paokfc.gr (in Greek). 24 October 2015. Retrieved 7 October 2019. Panos Georgogiannis (8 May 2018). "1992 Greek Cup two-legged final Olympiacos–PAOK (3–1 agg.)". inpaok.com (in Greek). Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2019. Giannis Santolis (24 May 2016). "ΠΑΟΚ–Ολυμπιακός 1–2 (24/5/1992) - Ένα σερί που κράτησε 23 χρόνια" [A winning streak that lasted for 23 years]. oldfootball.gr (in Greek). Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2019. "Οταν ο Ολυμπιακός έχανε από τα...Τέμπη (21 ματς πρωταθλήματος, 19–2–0, γκολ 47–11)" [Olympiacos' losing streak at Toumba (21 league matches, 19–2–0, goals 47–11)]. thessports.gr (in Greek). 9 March 2014. Retrieved 12 July 2019. "The "General" returns home". paokfc.gr. 24 February 2020. Retrieved 23 March 2020. Stavros Sountoulidis (23 February 2020). "ΠΑΟΚ Vs Ολυμπιακός: Ο Μάκης έλειπε όταν έσπασε η παράδοση..." [Makis was absent from Toumba when PAOK lost to Olympiacos after 23 years...]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 18 May 2020. Stavros Sountoulidis (1 October 2016). "PAOK vs PSG (abandoned, 1992)". gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 12 July 2019. Rémi Gyuru (1 October 2016). "Le match du jour, 1er octobre 1992: PAOK–PSG, Paris dans l'enfer de Salonique" [The match of the day, 1 October 1992: PAOK-PSG, Paris at the hell of Salonica]. paris-canalhistorique.com (in French). Retrieved 26 April 2020. Stavros Sountoulidis (28 April 2016). "Αρι Χάαν: Μπαλαδόρος, καπνιστής και… ΠΑΟΚτσής" [Arie Haan: Great player, smoker and...PAOK fan]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 7 October 2019. "Ζήσης Βρύζας". sport24.gr (in Greek). 23 November 2012. Retrieved 8 November 2019. Nikos Dragolias (11 February 2012). "Οταν ο ΠΑΟΚ πήρε από τον ΟΦΗ τον Φραντζέσκο" [When PAOK acquired Frantzeskos from OFI]. sport24.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 3 October 2019. Giannis Bairaktaris (8 March 2017). "Percy Olivares interview". contra.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 8 November 2019. Nikos Ioannidis (28 May 2016). "Δώδεκα" [Twelve]. isovitis.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 26 September 2019. Giorgos Minos (26 May 1997). "Μεθυσμένη πολιτεία..." [A drunken state...]. tanea.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 26 April 2020. Manos Androulakis (30 September 2017). "PAOK vs Arsenal (September 1997)". sport-retro.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 17 July 2019. Mike Rowbottom (1 October 1997). "Greeks' late goal sends Arsenal tumbling out". independent.co.uk. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 15 July 2019. Giannis Georgopoulos, Thanos Sarris (28 August 2015). "Άνταμς: "Δεν ξεχνώ την Τούμπα"" [Adams: "I can't forget Toumba Stadium"]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 24 July 2019. Eleni Mpountou (29 May 2019). "Η υπόκλιση Σίμαν στη Τούμπα" [Seaman praised Toumba atmosphere]. sdna.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 20 March 2020. "Panagiotis' memory is still alive..." paokfc.gr. Kostas Petrotos (9 February 2017). "9/2/1998: Η μέρα που έφυγε το γελαστό παιδί" [The day the smiling kid passed away]. sport24.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. Manos Androulakis (9 February 2017). ""Κατσούρη ζεις…" Η ζωή που έζησε και δεν έζησε" [The life of Panagiotis Katsouris]. sport-retro.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 8 November 2019. "1–1 στο ΟΑΚΑ, λίγο πριν το δράμα των Τεμπών!" [1–1 at Athens Olympic Stadium, shortly before Tempe's drama]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 3 October 2019. Retrieved 4 October 2019. "Time doesn't go by, it stops..." paokfc.gr. Retrieved 16 July 2019. Vagelis Chatzigeorgoudis (4 October 2013). "Τέμπη 4/10/1999: Η "μαύρη" μέρα του ΠΑΟΚ" [The black day of PAOK]. sport24.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 July 2019. "Seven Killed in Greece Bus Wreck". apnews.com. 4 October 1999. Retrieved 16 July 2019. "Κυρίαρχος ο ΠΑΟΚ νίκησε με 4–2 τον Ολυμπιακό και κατέκτησε το Κύπελλο Ελλάδας" [A dominant PAOK beat Olympiacos 4–2 and won the Greek Cup]. in.gr (in Greek). 12 May 2001. Retrieved 8 October 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (12 May 2016). "2001 Greek Cup final Olympiacos–PAOK 2–4 (12/5/2001)". gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 15 July 2019. "Title again...with a triumph against Olympiacos". paokfc.gr. "Georgiadis goal enough for PAOK". uefa.com. 17 May 2003. Retrieved 15 July 2019. Antonis Repanas (19 May 2003). "Πήρε το Κύπελλο στο σπίτι του..." [They won the Cup on their home ground]. tanea.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 8 October 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (17 May 2017). "2003 Greek Cup final PAOK–Aris 1–0 (17/5/2003)". gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 15 July 2019. "A Cup triumph in Toumba". paokfc.gr. Dimos Mpouloukos (16 April 2012). "Παιχνίδια στην πλάτη του ΠΑΟΚ..." [Transfers of shares against PAOK interest]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 26 September 2019. "PAOK–Maccabi Tel Aviv 1–2 (10/8/2004)". ant1news.gr (in Greek). 10 August 2004. Retrieved 26 April 2020. "PAOK punished with 3–0 loss". uefa.com. 13 August 2004. Retrieved 17 July 2019. Alexis Tsatsoulis (12 August 2004). "Ιστορικό λάθος" [Historical mistake]. tanea.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Anastasiadis given push at PAOK". uefa.com. 27 September 2004. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Εκτός Κυπέλλου UEFA ο ΠΑΟΚ, στη θέση του ο Ατρόμητος" [PAOK banned from UEFA Cup and replaced by Atromitos]. in.gr (in Greek). 2 June 2006. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Ο αποδιοπομπαίος (η)Γούμενος του ΠΑΟΚ" [PAOK's scapegoat]. tovima.gr (in Greek). 27 August 2006. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Κατάληψη στην Τούμπα" [PAOK's headquarters at Toumba occupied]. sport-fm.gr (in Greek). 5 May 2006. Retrieved 4 October 2019. "Ο κύκλος των χαμένων επενδυτών" [The unsuccessful negotiations with potential new investors]. tovima.gr (in Greek). 19 November 2006. Retrieved 17 July 2019. V. Papanastasoulis (4 August 2009). "Στο σκαμνί για υπεξαίρεση ο Γούμενος" [Goumenos on trial for embezzlement]. enet.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 26 June 2015. Dimitris Kritis (17 August 2006). "Στα πράσινα ο Σαλπιγγίδης" [Salpingidis in the green jersey]. contra.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Παραιτήθηκε από την προεδρία της ΠΑΕ ΠΑΟΚ ο Γ. Γούμενος" [Goumenos resigned from PAOK's presidency]. in.gr (in Greek). 14 November 2006. Retrieved 17 July 2019. Giorgos Zachariadis (14 November 2006). "Γιατί μπλέχτηκε τελικά με τον ΠΑΟΚ ο Γούμενος;" [Why Goumenos got involved in PAOK?]. sport-fm.gr. (in Greek). Retrieved 7 April 2020. Dimitris Dragogias (25 November 2008). "Το "τσακάλι του Χρηματιστηρίου" που έγινε το "μαύρο πρόβατο" του ΠΑΟΚ" [How an intelligent stockbroker became PAOK's scapegoat]. tovima.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 7 April 2020. Kostas Petrotos (25 March 2015). "Φάκελος: Χρέη του ΠΑΟΚ" [Case file: PAOK's debts]. sport24.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 7 April 2020. Paris Tselepidis (30 November 2006). "Προσωρινή διοίκηση πρωτοδικείου στην ΠΑΕ ΠΑΟΚ" [New temporary PAOK administration ordered by first instance court]. sport24.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 17 July 2019. Kishen Patel (4 June 2012). "Euro 2004 Legends: Theodoros Zagorakis". goal.com. Retrieved 4 October 2019. "Ο Ζαγοράκης κρεμάει τα παπούτσια του για να αναλάβει πρόεδρος στον ΠΑΟΚ" [Zagorakis ends football career to assume PAOK presidency]. in.gr (in Greek). 14 June 2007. Retrieved 9 October 2019. "Zagorakis announces retirement, set to take over at PAOK". uk.reuters.com. 15 June 2007. Retrieved 31 October 2019. "PAOK plump for Santos experience". uefa.com. 5 September 2007. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Nikos Dragolias (10 July 2016). "Όταν ο Σάντος αμφισβητήθηκε έντονα στον ΠΑΟΚ" [When Santos' work was questioned]. sport24.gr (in Greek). "Long-serving striker ends career". ekathimerini.com. 3 January 2008. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (6 January 2018). "Το... αυθεντικό "Zisis the end"". gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 23 July 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (19 September 2017). "Ασπρόμαυρα ρεκόρ και ιστορίες… διαρκείας!" [Records and stories about season tickets]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 23 July 2019. "Αθλητικο Κεντρο Π.Α.Ο.Κ." Archived from the original on 12 February 2010. Retrieved 23 February 2010. "Απέκτησε αθλητικό κέντρο στη Νέα Μεσήμβρια" [PAOK acquired land in Nea Mesimvria to build a sports center]. sport24.gr (in Greek). 27 June 2008. Retrieved 10 October 2019. "Aφιέρωμα στoν Βασίλη Σεργιαννίδη". paokmania.gr (in Greek). 4 July 2019. Retrieved 12 September 2019. "Training Center". paokfc.gr. Stavros Sountoulidis (26 February 2016). "Αθλητικό Κέντρο ΠΑΟΚ: μια βόλτα στο χρόνο" [The PAOK FC Sport Center through time]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 23 July 2019. Antonis Repanas (26 July 2008). "Με λύσεις σε όλες τις γραμμές, τρίβει τα χέρια του ο Φερνάντο Σάντος" [Fernando Santos satisfied with roster]. tanea.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 18 July 2019. Chris Paraskevas (31 July 2008). "PAOK sign Pablo García". goal.com. Retrieved 31 October 2019. Chris Paraskevas (3 January 2009). "PAOK agree Sorlin loan from Rennes". goal.com. Retrieved 31 October 2019. Chris Paraskevas (10 January 2009). "PAOK sign Lino from Porto". goal.com. Retrieved 31 October 2019. Antonis Tsakaleas (11 May 2016). "Αδερφέ, εσύ ήσουν ΠΑΟΚ και απλά δεν το ήξερες..." [García, you were already a PAOK fan, you simply didn't know that...]. contra.gr (in Greek). "Αρης–ΠΑΟΚ 2–0 (14/3/2010) - Όταν ο Σπάθας «έσφαξε» τον ΠΑΟΚ στο... γόνατο" [When PAOK was victimized by referee Spathas]. sdna.gr (in Greek). 14 March 2016. Retrieved 12 July 2019. "Ζαγοράκης: Συγγνώμη που δεν μπορώ να σας προστατεύσω" [Zagorakis: I am sorry for not being able to protect you]. newsit.gr (in Greek). 14 March 2010. Retrieved 24 July 2019. "Santos to quit coaching PAOK". soccernews.com. 18 May 2010. Retrieved 31 October 2019. Sakis Ginas (18 May 2010). "Το αντίο του Φερνάντο Σάντος" [Fernando Santos' farewell]. contra.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 23 July 2019. "PAOK hire Italian coach Beretta". soccernews.com. 14 June 2010. Retrieved 25 December 2020. "PAOK swap Beretta for Dermitzakis". Union of European Football Associations. 24 July 2010. Retrieved 26 June 2015. Dimitris Spiridakos (14 August 2017). "The quickest coaching changes in the Superleague". agonasport.com. Retrieved 25 December 2020. Chris Driessen (28 July 2010). "Ajax–PAOK 1–1 (28/7/2010)". uefa.com. Retrieved 31 October 2019. Stergios Anastasiadis (28 July 2015). "Η τελευταία ανάσα του Βλάνταν" [Vladan's last breath before being substituted]. paok24.com (in Greek). Retrieved 24 July 2019. Vassiliki Papantonopoulou (4 August 2010). "Ajax hold off determined PAOK comeback". uefa.com. Retrieved 31 October 2019. "Αγγιξε τα… αστέρια ο ΠΑΟΚ αλλά τα έχασε από τον Αγιαξ". in.gr (in Greek). 4 August 2010. Retrieved 24 July 2019. "Στόχος επετεύχθη για τον ΠΑΟΚ, 1–0 τη Φενέρμπαχτσε" [Target accomplished, 1–0 win over Fenerbahçe]. in.gr (in Greek). 19 August 2010. Retrieved 24 July 2019. Giannis Sotiriou (26 August 2014). "Το "έπος της Πόλης"" [The 'Constantinople's epic']. inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 24 July 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (26 August 2016). "Η "άλωση" της Πόλης από μέσα…". gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 24 July 2019. "Dermitzakis vacates PAOK post". uefa.com. 17 October 2010. Retrieved 31 October 2019. Chrisanthos Dovletoglou (11 January 2014). "ΠΑΟΚ, Ευρώπη, Χάβος" [PAOK, Europe, Chavos]. contra.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 10 May 2020. Richard van Poortvliet (22 February 2011). "Ignashevich on the spot to send CSKA through". uefa.com. Retrieved 31 October 2019. "Όσκαρ ατυχίας και αποκλεισμός του ΠΑΟΚ από την ΤΣΣΚΑ Μόσχας" [Unlucky PAOK eliminated by CSKA Moscow]. in.gr (in Greek). 22 February 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2019. "PAOK hire experienced Bölöni". uefa.com. 9 June 2011. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Josh Hershman (30 November 2011). "Ten-man PAOK advance thanks to Tottenham win". uefa.com. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Michael Da Silva (30 November 2011). "Tottenham 1–2 PAOK Salonika (30/11/2011)". bbc.com. Retrieved 15 July 2019. "Παραιτήθηκε ο Ζαγοράκης, τον διαδέχτηκε ο Βρύζας" [Zagorakis resigned, succeeded by Vryzas]. tovima.gr (in Greek). 26 January 2012. Retrieved 16 July 2019. Harry Papachristou (26 January 2012). "PAOK president Zagorakis resigns to appease angry fans". uk.reuters.com. Retrieved 23 July 2019. "Ivan Savvidis". forbes.com. "Ivan Savvidis personal website". savvidi.ru. "Επιβεβαίωση εισροής κεφαλαίων από τον Ιβάν Σαββίδη" [Savvidis' income funds confirmed]. sportdog.gr (in Greek). 10 August 2012. Retrieved 16 July 2019. Areti Kotseli (11 August 2012). "Savvidis takes big stake in PAOK Football Club". greekreporter.com. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Georgiadis stands in for Donis at PAOK helm". uefa.com. 29 April 2013. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Η ζωή στον ΠΑΟΚ μετά τον Σάντος" [PAOK's journey after Santos]. onsports.gr (in Greek). 5 May 2015. Retrieved 29 June 2017. "Stevens accepts PAOK post". uefa.com. 14 June 2013. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Huub Stevens dismissed by PAOK Salonika after Greek Super League disappointment". skysports.com. 3 March 2014. Retrieved 5 September 2015. Giannis Malamas (11 May 2018). "2014 Greek Cup final Panathinaikos–PAOK 4–1 (26/4/2014)". inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 18 July 2019. "Nόμος υπ' αριθ. 4321 Ρυθμίσεις για την επανεκκίνηση της οικονομίας" [Law N° 4321/2015 on regulations for kickstarting the economy]. taxheaven.gr (in Greek). 21 March 2015. Retrieved 8 April 2020. "PAOK FC present full payment invoices of their depts". paokfc.gr. 12 May 2015. Retrieved 18 July 2019. "Ελεύθερος ο ΠΑΟΚ! Παρελθόν ο βραχνάς των χρεών" [PAOK are free from debt burden!]. in.gr (in Greek). 12 May 2015. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Ξεπέρασε κάθε προσδοκία η 'ρύθμιση Βαλαβάνη'. Ξεχρέωσε και ο ΠΑΟΚ" [Regulatory reform for kickstarting the economy exceeded all expectations. PAOK paid off their debts too]. news247.gr (in Greek). 14 May 2015. Retrieved 7 April 2020. "Frank Arnesen takes over as PAOK FC Sports Director". paokfc.gr. 27 May 2015. Retrieved 31 October 2019. "Igor Tudor takes PAOK reins for three seasons". paokfc.gr. 18 June 2015. Retrieved 31 October 2019. "Dimitar Berbatov joins PAOK". paokfc.gr. 2 September 2015. Retrieved 26 April 2020. "Presentation of Dimitar Berbatov: backstage camera". paokfc.gr. 4 September 2015. Retrieved 26 April 2020. Daniel Thacker (10 December 2015). "Mak show means PAOK outflank Dortmund". uefa.com. Retrieved 26 April 2020. Graham Wood (9 March 2016). "PAOK replaces manager Tudor with Vladan Ivic". ekathimerini.com. Retrieved 23 July 2019. "The first trophy of the Savvidis era". paokfc.gr. Themis Kaisaris (6 May 2017). "2017 Greek Cup final PAOK–AEK 2–1 (6/5/2017)". sport24.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 15 July 2018. "Πριν το γκολ - οφσάιντ προηγήθηκε πέναλτι στον Κρέσπο" [A penalty on Crespo preceded the offside goal]. metrosport.gr (in Greek). 7 May 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2018. "PAOK Salonica beat AEK Athens to win Greek Cup final marred by crowd violence". eurosport.com. 7 May 2017. Retrieved 7 May 2020. "Panathinaikos–PAOK interrupted after manager Ivic's head injury". sdna.gr. 17 May 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2019. George Georgakopoulos (18 May 2017). "Game abandoned as Panathinaikos fan hits PAOK coach with beer can". ekathimerini.com. Retrieved 22 July 2019. "Κωνσταντίνου: "Έκανε θέατρο ο Ίβιτς για να το πάρει στα χαρτιά"" [Konstantinou: "Ivic acted a theatrical play in order to win the game by court decision"]. sdna.gr (in Greek). 18 May 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2019. "Αλαφούζος: Διεφθαρμένος ο Σαββίδης, θεατρίνος ο Ίβιτς" [Alafouzos: Savvidis is a corrupt person, Ivic is an actor]. protothema.gr (in Greek). 1 June 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2019. Sarantos Kaperonis (10 June 2017). "Ivic and PAOK officially part ways". agonasport.com. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Sarantos Kaperonis (11 August 2017). "Stanojevic sacked after 56 days, Lucescu takes over PAOK". agonasport.com. Retrieved 23 July 2019. "To ντέρμπι ΠΑΟΚ–Ολυμπιακός δεν άρχισε ποτέ - Ρολό ταμειακής τραυμάτισε τον Γκαρθία" [PAOK–Olympiacos derby never started - Cash register paper roll injured Garcia]. enikos.gr (in Greek). 25 February 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2019. "PAOK v Olympiakos abandoned after manager is hospitalised by toilet roll thrown by fans". foxsports.com. 26 February 2018. Retrieved 19 July 2019. "Καραπαπάς: "Να συναντήσει ο ΠΑΟΚ τον πολιτισμό για να γίνει μεγάλη ομάδα"" [Karapapas: "PAOK should become more civilized if they want to develop into a big club"]. sport24.gr (in Greek). 25 February 2018. Retrieved 29 July 2019. "Σχόλιο Ραζβάν Λουτσέσκου" [One-word comment of PAOK manager Razvan Lucescu]. sport24.gr (in Greek). 25 February 2018. Retrieved 19 July 2019. "Δηλώσεις υπεύθυνου επικοινωνίας ΠΑΕ ΠΑΟΚ Κυριάκου Κυριάκου" [PAOK communications chief Kyriakos' remarks on the matter]. sport24.gr (in Greek). 25 February 2018. Retrieved 19 July 2019. Shaun Nicolaides (25 February 2018). "PAOK point finger at Olympiacos in Toumba scandal". agonasport.com. Retrieved 27 July 2019. "The story of Oscar Garcia's "injury" and Olympiacos departure from Toumba Stadium". sdna.gr. 1 March 2018. Retrieved 19 July 2019. Alberto Bravo (6 November 2019). "La noche más aciaga de Óscar García" [Óscar García's darkest night]. eldesmarque.com (in Spanish). Retrieved 3 November 2020. "Εφετείο για Οσκαρ Γκαρθία στην Τούμπα: "Δεν υπήρξε σωματική βλάβη"" [Court of Appeal verdict (PAOK fan case) on Óscar García at Toumba: ″There was no physical injury″]. ethnos.gr (in Greek). 21 November 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2020. Éric Maggiori et Mathieu Rollinger (18 March 2020). "Top 10: Foot et PQ / 4. Et l'Oscar revient à... Oscar". sofoot.com (in French). Retrieved 23 March 2020. Greg Gavalas (3 March 2018). "The Soap Opera". agonasport.com. Retrieved 22 July 2019. "Ο Αρετόπουλος στα... "ερυθρόλευκα"" [Aretopoulos in... "red and white"]. metrosport.gr (in Greek). 1 December 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2019. "Αρετόπουλος, ένα γνήσιο παιδί του συστήματος!" [Aretopoulos, a genuine child of all the establishment's desires]. sdna.gr (in Greek). 23 October 2016. Retrieved 29 July 2019. Giorgos Fradelakis (26 February 2018). "Το φύλλο αγώνα της Τούμπας δείχνει... δικαστικό θρίλερ!" [Official match report preludes a thriller court case]. sdna.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 22 July 2019. "Συμπληρωματική έκθεση Αρετόπουλου που "καίει" τον ΠΑΟΚ - Ζητήθηκε αναβολή, αλλά δεν έγινε δεκτή" [Supplementary report foredooms PAOK]. sport-fm.gr (in Greek). 2 March 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2019. Nikos Tzavaras (23 September 2018). "Πόσο καλά θυμάσαι το γκολ του Βαρέλα; (quiz, poll)" [How well do you remember the goal of Varela?]. sport24.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 18 July 2019. "Εισβολή Σαββίδη στο γήπεδο, ζητούσε από τους παίκτες του ΠΑΟΚ να φύγουν" [Savvidis invaded the pitch, urging PAOK players to leave]. sport24.gr (in Greek). 11 March 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2019. "PAOK president Ivan Savvidis enters pitch with hand gun on his belt". en.protothema.gr. 11 March 2018. Retrieved 19 July 2019. Vasilis Papatheodorou (13 March 2018). "Ivan Savvidis mistake and the hypocrisy of football Mafia". sdna.gr. Retrieved 24 July 2019. "Το επίμαχο βίντεο με τον Κομίνη στα αποδυτήρια της Τούμπας" [The controversial video of Kominis from Toumba Stadium's dressing rooms]. onsports.gr (in Greek). 11 April 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2019. "Ηχητικό ντοκουμέντο από Τούμπα, Γκαγκάτσης: "Ελάτε έξω να παίξουμε" – Δημητριάδης: "Με όπλο; Θα μας σκοτώσουν!"" [Audio recording from Toumba Stadium, Gagatsis: "Come out to play" – Dimitriadis: "With a gun? They 're gonna kill us!"]. sportdog.gr (in Greek). 12 March 2018. Retrieved 24 July 2019. "Greek football league suspended, government decides". en.protothema.gr. 12 March 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2019. Shaun Nicolaides (11 March 2018). "Jimenez shocked by the Toumba chaos". agonasport.com. Retrieved 24 July 2019. "Χιμένεθ: "Δεν είδαμε τον Σαββίδη να κουβαλάει όπλο"" [Jiménez: "We didn't see Savvidis carrying a gun"]. sport24.gr (in Greek). 16 March 2019. Retrieved 29 July 2019. "Κονέ: "Αθλιότητες όσα έκανε ο Σαββίδης"" [Kone: "What Savvidis did was awful"]. sport24.gr (in Greek). 11 March 2018. Retrieved 24 July 2019. "Πασχαλάκης: "Ήταν καθαρό το γκολ του Βαρέλα"" [Paschalakis: "Varela's goal was legitimate"]. sport24.gr (in Greek). 12 March 2018. Retrieved 29 July 2019. Graham Wood (12 March 2018). "Giorgos Kominis' controversial referee report". agonasport.com. Retrieved 19 July 2019. ""Άκυρο" από Κομίνη! Δεν πάει στην εκδίκαση του ΠΑΟΚ – ΑΕΚ" [Kominis does not appear in court hearing]. newsit.gr (in Greek). 15 March 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2019. "Αποκάλυψη στη "Δίκη": Ο Κομίνης απάντησε στο ένα από τα τρία ερωτήματα του δικαστή" [Kominis answered to one out of three questions from the judge]. skai.gr (in Greek). 19 March 2018. Retrieved 24 July 2019. "Statement by Ivan Savvidis". paokfc.gr. 13 March 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2019. "PAOK punished with 3-point deduction, 2 from next season, 3-year ban for Savvidis". sdna.gr. 29 March 2018. Retrieved 24 July 2019. "2018 Greek Cup final AEK–PAOK 0–2 (12/5/2018)". onsports.gr (in Greek). 12 May 2018. Retrieved 15 July 2019. George Georgakopoulos (12 May 2018). "PAOK outplays AEK to lift the Greek Cup in Athens". ekathimerini.com. Retrieved 15 July 2019. "Champions on the pitch, Greek Cup winners on their pitch". paokfc.gr. 12 May 2018. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Shaun Nicolaides (12 May 2018). "Vieirinha named Greek Cup final MVP". agonasport.com. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Graham Wood (12 May 2018). "'They stole the double from us', says Luscescu". agonasport.com. Retrieved 23 July 2019. "Βιεϊρίνια: Έχω κουραστεί να λέω ότι μας έκλεψαν το πρωτάθλημα" [Vieirinha: I am tired of saying that they stole from us the championship]. sport24.gr (in Greek). 12 May 2018. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Shaun Nicolaides (21 April 2019). "Jubilant PAOK celebrate in style". agonasport.com. Retrieved 22 October 2019. "PAOK's Title Celebrations - The View From Above". dugout.com. 23 April 2019. Retrieved 22 October 2019. "Champions PAOK and their global effect". paokfc.gr. 30 April 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "PAOK 1st undefeated team in Greek league season for 55 years". espn.com. 5 May 2019. Retrieved 22 October 2019. Shaun Nicolaides (4 June 2019). "The Invincibles, Greek Style". agonasport.com. Retrieved 30 October 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (6 May 2019). "ΠΑΟΚ: Αήττητος και καλύτερος απ' όλους!" [Unbeaten and better than anyone else!]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 23 July 2019. Shaun Nicolaides (8 May 2019). "PAOK the only unbeaten European league champions". agonasport.com. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Eleni Mpountou (11 May 2019). "2019 Greek Cup final AEK–PAOK 0–1 (11/5/2019)". sdna.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 15 July 2019. George Georgakopoulos (11 May 2019). "Akpom seals PAOK's first ever double". ekathimerini.com. Retrieved 15 July 2019. Graham Wood (11 May 2019). "Three-peat PAOK". agonasport.com. Retrieved 23 July 2019. "André Vieirinha voted 11888 MVP of 2018-19 season". paokfc.gr. 12 June 2019. George Georgakopoulos (23 May 2021). "Krmencik's late strike gives PAOK its eighth Greek Cup". ekathimerini.com. Retrieved 24 May 2021. "The habit that became an addiction!". paokfc.gr. 23 May 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2021. George Georgakopoulos (22 May 2022). "Panathinaikos ends eight-year trophy drought lifting the Greek Cup". ekathimerini.com. Retrieved 29 June 2022. "Inglorious finale to an incredible season". paokfc.gr. 21 May 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2022. "Milestones". paokfc.gr. "Ιστορία". acpaok.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 24 July 2019. Chrisanthos Dovletoglou (11 June 2013). "Το νέο λογότυπο του ΠΑΟΚ" [PAOK's new logo]. contra.gr (in Greek). Kostas Pallis (6 February 2016). "Η ιστορία του σήματος του ΠΑΟΚ" [PAOK logo history]. oldfootball.gr (in Greek). Archived from the original on 14 October 2019. Retrieved 14 October 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (16 August 2019). "Κάθε φανέλα, μια ιστορία, σε άσπρο και μαύρο φόντο" [Each shirt comes with a story in black and white background]. forzaonline.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 14 October 2019. Thodoros Chastas (8 March 2016). "Όλες οι 117 φανέλες ΠΑΟΚ!" [All 117 PAOK shirts]. inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 24 July 2019. Manos Androulakis (23 September 2014). "PHOTOSTORY: Οι εμφανίσεις του ΠΑΟΚ στην Α' Εθνική" [PAOK kits in National League]. contra.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 14 October 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (20 December 2015). "Retro stories: Οι φανέλες του ΠΑΟΚ!" [PAOK shirts]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 14 October 2019. "Ένας ΠΑΟΚ με άλλα χρώματα…" [PAOK alternative kits]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). 7 February 2013. Retrieved 14 October 2019. "PAOK initiate collaboration with Macron". paokfc.gr. 11 July 2015. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "PAOK and Macron extend their partnership". paokfc.gr. 21 December 2018. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "PAOK and Macron renew partnership until 2027". paokfc.gr. 22 March 2023. Retrieved 23 March 2023. "PAOK and Stoiximan together until 2025". paokfc.gr. 4 November 2022. Retrieved 4 November 2022. "PAOK Salonicco photogallery". abmdiffusion.it (in Italian). Retrieved 24 July 2019. Sakis Ginas (3 January 2008). "Χορηγός στη φανέλα η ΔΕΠΑ" [DEPA is the new shirt sponsor]. contra.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Ο ΟΠΑΠ και επίσημα χορηγός του ΠΑΟΚ" [OPAP officially introduced as PAOK sponsor]. newsbomb.gr (in Greek). 4 January 2011. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "ΠΑΟΚ: Με τον ΟΠΑΠ στην φανέλα και φέτος" [OPAP shirt sponsorship extended for another year]. sportandbusiness.gr (in Greek). 19 August 2013. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Πώς μοιράζεται στις ΠΑΕ της Super League η χορηγία του ΟΠΑΠ" [How the OPAP sponsorship is split between the Superleague teams]. skai.gr (in Greek). 24 June 2015. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Sportingbet become PAOK FC Golden Partner". paokfc.gr. 22 September 2015. Retrieved 16 October 2019. Stavros Kolkas (10 September 2015). "Γιατί ο ΠΑΟΚ επέλεξε Sportingbet". sdna.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Η Stoiximan Μεγάλος Χορηγός της ΠΑΕ ΠΑΟΚ". paokfc.gr (in Greek). 30 June 2017. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Αυτό είναι το deal του ΠΑΟΚ με τη Stoiximan.gr". sdna.gr (in Greek). 30 June 2017. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "A historic day". paokfc.gr. 21 June 2022. Retrieved 5 July 2022. "Populous Appointed as Lead Architect for New PAOK FC Stadium". populous.com. 22 June 2022. Retrieved 5 July 2022. "Θεσσαλονίκη: "Νέα Τούμπα" με υπόγεια Κλεάνθους και πάρκινγκ". Typosthes.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 21 February 2023. "PAOK Academy". paokfc.gr. "The blessing of PAOK's new training center [video]". paokfc.gr. 19 January 2024. Allan Jiang (15 February 2012). "10 Most Hostile World Football Stadiums". bleacherreport.com. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Mark Doyle, Richard Martin (16 May 2023). "San Siro, Anfield and European football's best atmospheres - ranked". goal.com. Retrieved 17 May 2023. Manos Tsalgatidis (5 October 2013). ""Welcome to the hell"". inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 13 October 2019. Aegletes Coelispex (7 October 2018). "PAOK: an endless black and white devotion". coelispex.eu. Retrieved 13 October 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (20 April 2016). ""Μαγκιά μου που είμαι ΠΑΟΚτσής..."!" [Proud to be a PAOK fan]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 12 October 2019. "Αφιέρωμα στον Σύνδεσμο Φίλων ΠΑΟΚ Νεάπολης "Μπέλλος"" [Neapoli fan club 'Mpellos']. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 21 June 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2019. "Το μεγαλύτερο πανό της Ευρώπης ανήκει στον ΠΑΟΚ!" [Europe's biggest banner belongs to PAOK!]. protothema.gr (in Greek). 21 February 2014. Retrieved 5 July 2017. "Ο 12ος… παίκτης του ΠΑΟΚ απέκτησε και φανέλα" [PAOK's 12th player got a jersey]. in.gr (in Greek). 16 August 2000. Retrieved 13 October 2019. Michalis Koutsogiannis (16 August 2019). "Όταν αποσύρθηκε η φανέλα "12"" [When No 12 jersey was retired]. inpaok.com (in Greek). Retrieved 13 October 2019. "ΠΑΟΚ – Παρτιζάν: Έτσι ξεκίνησαν όλα" [How it all started]. thessnews.gr (in Greek). 20 February 2017. Archived from the original on 30 June 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2019. Stavros Sountoulidis (8 October 2016). "Ίδιο χρώμα, ίδια θρησκεία, ίδιο αίμα!" [Same colour, same religion, same blood!]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 24 April 2020. Vasilis Sambrakos (14 May 2014). "Μία Πολίτικη ιστορία" [A Besiktas fan article on Constantinople's football history]. gazzetta.gr (in Greek). Manolis Sarris (10 October 2011). "Κάπως έτσι ξεκίνησε η φιλία ΟΦΗ–ΠΑΟΚ" [How OFI–PAOK friendship started]. gentikoule.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 11 October 2019. Chrisanthos Dovletoglou (28 September 2013). "ΠΑΟΚ–ΟΦΗ, μία αληθινή φιλία" [A true friendship]. contra.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 11 October 2019. Vasilis Nikolopoulos (22 October 2017). "Ολυμπιακός – ΠΑΟΚ: Ξετυλίγοντας το κουβάρι της κόντρας που κρατά πάνω από μισό αιώνα" [A rivalry enduring for over half a century]. eleftherostypos.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 10 October 2019. Dimitris Moros (8 November 2013). "Αυτή η βεντέτα δε θα σβήσει ποτέ" [This vendetta would never fade away]. tanea.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 4 January 2021. "ΠΑΟΚ–Αρης. Μία διαμάχη χρόνων" [A longstanding conflict]. thesstoday.gr (in Greek). 8 May 2018. Retrieved 17 September 2019. Manuel Veth (28 August 2018). "Thessaloniki – Aris and PAOK and the tale of football artwork". futbolgrad.com. Retrieved 6 May 2020. Zastro (20 February 2016). "Τελικά τι είναι το Παναθηναϊκός–ΠΑΟΚ;" [In the end, what is Panathinaikos vs PAOK?]. contra.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 18 May 2020. "Όπου τολμούν οι Αετοί: Ίδιο έμβλημα, κοινή καταγωγή, διαφορετικοί κόσμοι" [Where Eagles dare: Same emblem, common origin, different worlds]. sdna.gr (in Greek). 6 May 2017. Retrieved 18 May 2020. "First Team". paokfc.gr. "On loan". paokfc.gr. "Τα 133 γκολ του Γιώργου Κούδα στο πρωτάθλημα" [Koudas' 133 league goals]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 18 November 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2019. "Τα 136 γκολ του Σταύρου Σαράφη στο πρωτάθλημα" [Sarafis' 136 league goals]. paokmania.gr (in Greek). 16 November 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2019. "Η Hall of Fame ενδεκάδα του ΠΑΟΚ μέσα από το Dugout (Pic)". 6 February 2019. "Αυτιάς: "Είμαι ΠΑΟΚάρα, αλλά μακάρι να πάρει το πρωτάθλημα ο Παναθηναϊκός" (vid) | SDNA". Archived from the original on 18 August 2023. Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Γιάννης Αγγελάκας: ΠΑΟΚ είμαι, τί άλλο;". thestival.gr. Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2023. "Άννα Κορακάκη: "Θέλω να πάρει το πρωτάθλημα ο ΠΑΟΚ"". in.gr. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2023. "Ο Βασίλης Καρράς ψηφίζει... ΠΑΟΚ!" (in Greek). Archived from the original on 18 August 2023. Retrieved 18 August 2023. "Lucescu: PAOK is the club of my heart". metrosport.gr (in Greek). 19 September 2023. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 27 October 2023. "Ο Γιάννης Πάριος θυμάται". tovima.gr. Λένα Παπαδημητρίου. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2023. "Ναι ρε Πάολα! Η εκρηκτική λαϊκή diva είναι ΠΑΟΚ και ακούει Metallica! Τελικά... ήρθε η συντέλεια" (in Greek). Archived from the original on 18 August 2023. Retrieved 18 August 2023. "Σαββόπουλος: "Ο Τσίπρας είναι long play αυταπατώμενος"". tovima.gr. Δημήτρης Θεοδωρόπουλος. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2023. "Τσακαλώτος: Τραγoυδάει το σύνθημα του ΠΑΟΚ για τον… Μάικλ Τζάκσον (βίντεο)". Archived from the original on 18 August 2023. Retrieved 18 August 2023. "Διάσημοι Έλληνες στις κερκίδες για τις ομάδες τους - In2life". Archived from the original on 26 October 2023. Retrieved 26 October 2023. "90 χρόνια ΠΑΟΚ – Νοσταλγώντας το μέλλον" [90 years of PAOK – Nostalgia for the future]. paokfc.gr (in Greek). 1 November 2016. Retrieved 15 November 2019. "90 years of PAOK - Nostalgia for the future". laikaproductions.gr. Retrieved 15 November 2019.[permanent dead link] Wikimedia Commons has media related to PAOK FC. Official websites Official website (in English, Greek, and Russian) PAOK at Super League (in English and Greek) PAOK at UEFA News sites PAOK on paok24.com (in Greek) PAOK news Archived 26 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine from Nova Sports Current results of PAOK matches Media Official YouTube channel