Sleeping Beauty is a 1959 American animated musical fantasy film produced by Walt Disney Productions and released by Buena Vista Distribution. Based on Charles Perrault's 1697 fairy tale, the production was supervised by Clyde Geronimi, and was directed by Wolfgang Reitherman, Eric Larson, and Les Clark. Featuring the voices of Mary Costa, Bill Shirley, Eleanor Audley, Verna Felton, Barbara Luddy, Barbara Jo Allen, Taylor Holmes, and Bill Thompson, the film follows Princess Aurora, who was cursed by the evil fairy Maleficent to die from a prick from the spindle of a spinning wheel. She is saved by three good fairies, who alter the curse so that the princess falls into a deep sleep and is awakened by true love's kiss. Sleeping Beauty began development in 1950. The film took nearly a decade and $6 million to produce, and was Disney's most expensive animated feature at the time. Its tapestry-like art style was devised by Eyvind Earle, who was inspired by pre-Renaissance European art; its score and songs, composed by George Bruns, was based on Pyotr Tchaikovsky's 1889 ballet. Sleeping Beauty was the first animated film to use the Super Technirama 70 widescreen process and was the second full-length animated feature filmed in anamorphic widescreen, following Lady and the Tramp (1955). It was released in theaters on January 29, 1959, to mixed reviews from critics who praised its art direction and musical score and criticized its plot and characters. The film was a box-office bomb in its initial release, grossing $5.3 million, and losing $900,000 for the distributor and many employees from the animation studio became layoffs. Sleeping Beauty's re-releases have been successful, and it has become one of Disney's most artistically acclaimed features. The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Scoring of a Musical Picture at the 32nd Academy Awards. Maleficent, a live-action reimagining of the film from Maleficent's perspective, was released in 2014, followed by a sequel, Maleficent: Mistress of Evil, in 2019. The latter year, Sleeping Beauty was selected for preservation in the United States Library of Congress' National Film Registry as "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". King Stefan and Queen Leah, rulers of a European kingdom, welcome their newborn daughter Aurora after many years of childlessness. They proclaim a holiday for their subjects to pay homage to the princess, and she is betrothed to Prince Phillip, the son of Stefan's friend King Hubert, at her christening to unite their kingdoms. Among the guests are three good fairies, Flora, Fauna and Merryweather. Flora and Fauna bless Aurora with beauty and song, but Merryweather's gift is interrupted by the arrival of the evil fairy Maleficent. As revenge for not being invited, she places a curse on Aurora: before the sun sets on her sixteenth birthday, she will prick her finger on the spindle of a spinning wheel and die. Although her magic is not as powerful as Maleficent's, Merryweather uses her blessing to weaken the curse; Aurora will fall into a deep sleep instead of dying, and will only awaken with true love's kiss. Stefan orders all the kingdom's spinning wheels burned as a precaution. The fairies come up with the idea of raising Aurora in a secluded location, so she lives in safety until her sixteenth birthday. At their urging, Stefan and Leah reluctantly agree to the fairies' plan. The fairies move into a forest cottage, decide to stop using magic for the next sixteen years, and rename Aurora "Briar Rose". On Aurora's sixteenth birthday, the fairies send her to gather berries so they can prepare a surprise party. In the forest, Aurora begins to sing to the forest animals; this attracts the attention of Phillip, now a handsome young man. They meet, and immediately fall in love; Aurora invites Phillip to the cottage that evening, but they depart without revealing who they are. Flora and Merryweather argue about the color of Aurora's birthday gown. They begin using magic, which attracts the attention of Maleficent's pet raven, Diablo, who learns the princess's whereabouts. Back at home, Aurora tells her guardians that she has fallen in love; they tell her that she is a princess, already betrothed to a prince, and must never see the man she met again. Meanwhile, Phillip tells his father about the peasant girl he met and wants to marry, despite his prearranged marriage. King Hubert unsuccessfully tries to dissuade him. Shortly before sunset, the fairies bring Aurora to the castle for her birthday celebration. Maleficent appears and lures her away from them to a tower room, where Aurora pricks her finger on the spindle of a spinning wheel Maleficent has conjured. The fairies place the sleeping Aurora in the highest tower and cast a spell on the people in the castle, causing them to sleep until their princess awakens. Flora overhears a conversation between the kings and realizes that Phillip is the man with whom Aurora has fallen in love. The fairies rush to the cottage, only to learn that Phillip has been abducted by Maleficent and her goons. At her domain, the Forbidden Mountain, Maleficent reveals Aurora's identity to Phillip. She plans to lock him away until he is an old man on the verge of death before releasing him to meet Aurora, who will not have aged a single day. The fairies rescue Phillip and arm him with the magical Sword of Truth and the Shield of Virtue. Maleficent surrounds Stefan's castle with a forest of thorns to stop Phillip, but he breaks through it. She then appears in front of him and transforms into a giant, fire-breathing dragon. They fight, and Phillip kills Maleficent by thrusting his sword into her heart. Phillip awakens Aurora with a kiss, breaking the spell and awakening the kingdom. They descend to the ballroom, where Aurora reunites with her parents and happily waltzes with Phillip while Flora and Merryweather continue arguing about the color of her dress. Mary Costa as Princess Aurora, also known as Briar Rose and Sleeping Beauty, an innocent and romantic daughter of King Stefan and Queen Leah who is cursed by Maleficent. Bill Shirley as Prince Phillip, Aurora's bold and spirited "true love" to whom she was betrothed and King Hubert's son. He is occasionally accompanied by his horse, Samson. Eleanor Audley as Maleficent, a powerful evil fairy and self-proclaimed "Mistress of All Evil" who casts a curse on Aurora and is responsible for all misfortune in King Stefan's kingdom. Verna Felton as Flora, the domineering and responsible self-appointed leader of the Three Good Fairies. Her signature color is red. Barbara Luddy as Merryweather, a feisty and impulsive good fairy who challenges Flora's leadership. Her signature color is blue. Barbara Jo Allen as Fauna, a sweet and affectionate good fairy who is a peacemaker between Flora and Merryweather. Her signature color is green. Taylor Holmes as King Stefan, Aurora's placid and dignified father. Bill Thompson as King Hubert, Phillip's jovial and bombastic father. Candy Candido, Pinto Colvig, and Bob Amsberry voiced the Goons, Maleficent's bumbling but loyal henchmen. Candido also voiced Diablo, Maleficent's pet raven. Dallas McKennon voiced the Owl, one of Aurora's animal friends, with Purv Pullen providing the sounds of other forest animals. Marvin Miller was the film's narrator. Walt Disney first considered making an animated version of Charles Perrault's 1697 fairy tale "Sleeping Beauty" in 1938. Preliminary artwork was submitted by Joe Grant, but the project did not move forward. Disney registered Sleeping Beauty as a planned production title with the Motion Picture Association of America on January 19, 1950, after a preview audience's positive response to Cinderella. By November of that year, the Los Angeles Times officially confirmed the film's development. Disney envisioned Sleeping Beauty as the pinnacle of his studio's achievements in animation and was willing to pool all resources needed to achieve that. Recognizing the difficulty of producing another fairy-tale feature which would not be too reminiscent of his previous films, notably Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937) and Cinderella (1950), he repeatedly told his staff during production that it had to be different. Key story work was done by Ted Sears, Winston Hibler, Bill Peet, and Ralph Wright, who were joined by other story artists as production continued. They decided to discard the second half of the original Perrault story (which describes a sleeping beauty married to a strange prince) and focus on its first half to develop a more convincing relationship between the characters. The earliest known story outline was written by April 1951, featuring a climactic wake-up kiss and the encounter between prince and princess before she succumbs to the curse. It also included the names of the fairies, who had been reduced from eight to four, and their corresponding magical abilities: Tranquility, the Fairy of Dreams; Fernadell, the Fairy of the Forest; Merryweather, the Fairy of the Elements; and Maleficent, the Fairy of Darkness. The story artists expanded the fairies' roles, turning the good fairies into comical guardians of the princess and the evil fairy into a more powerful villain. In this version of the story, Maleficent would conjure an indestructible spinning wheel which the king and queen would unsuccessfully try to get rid of; they would be forced to hide their daughter in the castle walls and never let her out. The princess was envisioned as a "poor little rich girl", burdened with her royal lineage and dreaming of exploring the world outside the castle. Shortly before her sixteenth birthday, the princess was to switch clothes with her maidservant and secretly escape to a nearby forest (or country fair) where she would meet and fall in love with the prince. He would travel to a faraway land and return a few years later to fight Maleficent with the help of the good fairies, find the sleeping princess and wake her up with the kiss. Story ideas of that period also included the good fairies attempting to surround the castle with a protective circle and Maleficent having a comically-incompetent vulture sidekick, although the earlier outline depicted him as a sinister falcon. We had a lot of problems. We were fighting to break away from what we had done in the past. Sleeping Beauty was tough, because it had many of the elements we had already used in Snow White and Cinderella. You've got to give the creators new things to work with so they'll be able to keep their enthusiasm up. You're in trouble if they start saying, "Haven't we done this before?" We had to find out what we had and whether it would please the public. I'm never sure myself what they're going to buy. —Walt Disney, on the difficulties of adapting Sleeping Beauty as an animated feature By June 1952, the full storyboard of Sleeping Beauty was completed, but Disney rejected it, saying that its approach was too similar to his studio's earlier films. The story artists discarded the original version and started from scratch, deciding to retain several ideas from earlier suggestions such as the prince's acquaintance with the princess before the curse is fulfilled and a shorter sleep. The story team initially developed a sequence in which the characters meet during a treasure hunt, but abandoned it, feeling that it became too drifted from the central storyline. It was written instead that the prince and princess would meet in the forest by chance, which had been introduced in the 1951 outline. Striving for more serious storytelling, Disney decided to cut several gags involving the Three Good Fairies which he felt were more appropriate for Donald Duck shorts. In one, the fairies (who had been renamed Flora, Fauna, and Merryweather) try to bake a birthday cake for the princess and accidentally blow up the oven. The good fairies were originally intended to rule the domains indicated by their names: Flora would be in charge of flowers and plants, Fauna would oversee the animals and birds, and Merryweather would control the climate. Disney discarded this idea as well, feeling that it did not advance the central storyline. Part of the difficulty was in differentiating Disney's third princess, who had been named Aurora, from Snow White and Cinderella. The story artists came up with an idea of the fairies raising her in a forest cottage, with Aurora unaware of her background or the danger she faced. She was also given a different personality – "a freshness and a modern sensibility" – to make her more appealing to audiences. In earlier versions of the story, Aurora would encounter Maleficent, who would trick her into pricking the finger on the spindle, but Disney felt that the "eerie, haunting presentation of a victim powerless in the hands of evil" would be a stronger choice, so the scene was rewritten to have Maleficent lure Aurora with hypnosis. The improvement of his animators' skill in drafting a realistic male figure prompted Disney to expand the role of the prince, who had been named Phillip. To establish him as Aurora's "true love", the story artists developed a plot in which Maleficent kidnaps Phillip and plans to keep him prisoner in her castle for a century (which was also a reference to the 100-year slumber in Perrault's story). Several story elements originated from discarded ideas for Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937) and Cinderella (1950), including the prince and princess dancing on a cloud (Disney's favorite concept) and Phillip's escape from Maleficent's domain. Disney spent three years searching for a voice for Princess Aurora and considered shelving the project before Mary Costa was cast by June 1952. She was invited to audition by Walter Schumann (the film's composer at the time), who heard her singing at a dinner party for the entertainment industry. Born in Knoxville, Tennessee, Costa had a strong Southern accent which nearly prevented her from being cast until she proved that she could sustain a British accent. Disney contacted Costa within hours of her audition to confirm that she had the role and communicated with her at least twice a week for nine months with advice or guidance by telephone, since he did not want her personality or appearance to influence his vision of the character. Before Costa was cast, LP records by forty female singers were heard by the story artists, and fifteen of them auditioned. Costa recorded her lines for three years, from 1952 to 1955. Twenty singers auditioned for the role of Prince Phillip and Bill Shirley, who had a high baritone voice and experience in light opera, was the final choice. Before he and Costa were selected, they made audition records together to determine if their voices complemented each other. Disney was convinced that they did, and approved the casting. Disney personally suggested Eleanor Audley for the role of Maleficent. Audley initially refused, since she had tuberculosis and was unsure if she was strong enough for recording sessions, but reconsidered when she began feeling better. About her voice work for the character, Audley later said that she "tried to do a lot of contrasting to be both sweet and nasty at the same time." Disney chose Barbara Jo Allen for Fauna, who had been frequently compared by the story artists to Vera Vague (Jo Allen's character in The Bob Hope Show), and Barbara Luddy for Merryweather. Many actors auditioned for the role of King Stefan, including Hans Conried, before Taylor Holmes was cast because of his "bemused, but dignified" voice. This was Holmes' final film role before his death in September 1959, eight months after the film's release. Several veteran voice actors of the studio were cast in the film, including Verna Felton as Flora and Bill Thompson as King Hubert. Felton is also believed to have been the voice of Queen Leah, but the studio has no saved records of who voiced the character. It was very difficult for him to put his mind on this picture. I think mainly because Walt was working on Disneyland, he was occupied with that ... He just didn't have time or energy to come in as often as we'd like him to. He come in if we pressed him, but otherwise he'd just say "Well, I think you're doing okay. Why don't you go ahead, and I'll come in later" ... He just didn't have the creative juices going on this picture than he did on most of them. —Ollie Johnston, on Walt Disney's involvement in the film's production By mid-1952, Disney had planned to release Sleeping Beauty in 1955. Production began in July 1953, when supervising director Wilfred Jackson recorded the dialogue, assembled a story reel, and was to begin preliminary animation for a pilot scene in which Aurora and Phillip meet in the forest. Disney was dissatisfied with the original version of the scene, and Jackson, along with Ted Sears and two other story artists, had to extensively rewrite it over the next few months before Disney approved the revised version. In December 1953, Jackson had a heart attack and was replaced by Eric Larson, whose unit would animate the forest scene. The film was scheduled for a February 1957 release by April 1954, and was later postponed to Christmas 1957. By July 1954, Disney began building the Disneyland theme park and developing a number of television series (such as Disneyland and The Mickey Mouse Club), and most of the studio personnel working on Sleeping Beauty at the time were assigned to develop those projects. Production of Sleeping Beauty was suspended, although the castle at Disneyland was named Sleeping Beauty Castle to promote the film. During its dormancy, the project was given to Erdman Penner and Joe Rinaldi for further development, and the full storyboard was completed to be discussed with Disney by early 1955. Production of Sleeping Beauty resumed in December 1956, with its release rescheduled for Christmas 1958. Although Disney insisted on overseeing every aspect of the film, he remained focused on Disneyland, and animators (such as Milt Kahl) blamed him for the delays. 2,500 feet of animation had been completed by January 1957, with 3,775 feet to be done. According to studio executive Harry Tytle, after the screening of finished footage on August 22 of that year, Disney expressed disinterest in Sleeping Beauty and "didn't give this the treatment he would have in years past, where he'd go in for a couple of days and fine-tooth comb the whole picture." Production delays led to an increase in the film's budget: the $10,000 forest scene, which took several years to complete, exceeded its budget and displeased Disney. Relatively late in production, he replaced supervising director Larson with Clyde Geronimi. A quota system was introduced to keep costs down, requiring animators to create a specified number of drawings per day. To distinguish Sleeping Beauty from his previous features, Disney decided to take a different approach to the film's visual design. After one of the story meetings, he told Larson that he needed a "moving illustration" and did not care how long it would take. By December 1952, Kay Nielsen was the first to create styling sketches for the film, suggesting an "ethereal depiction of the Middle Ages". Although he was impressed with his artwork, Ken Anderson (the film's production designer) felt that Nielsen's pastel paintings would be difficult to translate into animation. Disney tasked John Hench to help interpret Nielsen's artwork with opaque cel paint, but Nielsen left the studio by April 1953. The film's tapestry-like style developed after Hench's visit to the Cloisters, where he saw the Unicorn Tapestries series. Hench brought reproductions of the tapestries back to the studio, suggesting them as a visual template for Sleeping Beauty which Disney approved. Hench made sketches inspired by the museum visit, and background artist Eyvind Earle made trial paintings based on those sketches. I wanted stylized, simplified Gothic. Straight, tall, perpendicular lines like Gothic cathedrals ... I used one-point perspective. I rearranged the bushes and trees in geometrical patterns. I made a medieval tapestry out of the surface wherever possible. All my foregrounds were tapestry designs of decorative weeds and flowers and grasses. And since it is obvious that the Gothic style and detail evolved from the Arabic influence acquired during the Crusades, I found it perfectly permissible to use all the wonderful patterns and details found in Persian miniatures. And since Persian miniatures had a lot in common with Chinese and Japanese art, I felt it was OK for me to inject quite a bit of Japanese art, especially in the close-up of leaves and overhanging branches. —Eyvind Earle, on devising the film's background styling Wanting Sleeping Beauty to have a unified look from beginning to end, Disney made Earle both the film's color stylist and artistic director, giving him unprecedented control of the film's visual appearance. Sleeping Beauty was the first film of the studio in which background paintings defined its art direction. Earle's main inspiration was the illuminated book of hours by Herman and Jean Limbourg, Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry, from which he took key colors such as the yellow-green for Maleficent's flames and pink and blue for Aurora's royal dress. He was also influenced by the pre-Renaissance Northern European art (including the works of Pieter Bruegel, Albrecht Dürer, Huybrecht van Eyck, Giotto di Bondone, and Sandro Botticelli), as well as by Gothic and Persian art, medieval tapestries, and Japanese prints. In five years of working on the film, Earle created about three hundred visual-development paintings, hundreds of thumbnail scene sketches, and dozens of key background paintings, some fifteen feet long. Over eight hundred other backgrounds in the film were created by Frank Armitage, Thelma Witmer, Al Dempster, Walt Peregoy, Bill Layne, Ralph Hulett, Dick Anthony, Fil Mottola, Richard H. Thomas, and Anthony Rizzo, who worked under Earle's supervision and followed his style to maintain consistency in the film's design. Although the layout artists and animators were impressed with Earle's paintings, they became discouraged by working in a style which many considered "too cold, flat, and modernist" for a fairy-tale feature. Animators struggled to make the characters (which had to be stylized to match Earle's design) stand out against his detailed background paintings, with their design and color styling hindering character animation. At one point, Frank Thomas and Milt Kahl rebelled and went to Disney's office to complain, but Disney insisted on the visual design, saying that the past inspirational artwork he had commissioned (such as Mary Blair's) had always been homogenized by the animators. Earle's design prompted Disney to film Sleeping Beauty in Super Technirama 70 as the first animated film in this format. This decision presented additional difficulties for animators and layout artists, who had to work with very large sheets of paper and create twice as much art to fill the frame. Sleeping Beauty was the last hand-inked Disney animated feature film before the studio switched to the Xerox process with One Hundred and One Dalmatians (1961). Xerox was partially used in Sleeping Beauty to animate the forest of thorns in the final battle scene. When Clyde Geronimi became the supervising director, he had creative differences with Earle, feeling that Earle's paintings "didn't have the mood ... All that beautiful detail in the trees, the bark, and all that, that's all well and good, but who the hell's going to look at that? The backgrounds became more important than the animation. He'd made them more like Christmas cards". By that time, Disney felt that too much focus was on the film's design at the expense of its story. In March 1958, before Sleeping Beauty was completed, Earle left the Disney studio for John Sutherland Productions. Geronimi then had the background paintings softened with an airbrush so they did not compete with the animation. Before animation began, a live-action reference version with actors in costumes as models was filmed for the animators to study. Disney insisted on this because he wanted the characters to be "as real as possible, near flesh-and-blood", although several animators (such as Milt Kahl) objected to this method, saying that "anyone worth his salt in this business ought to know how people move." By March 1954, Helene Stanley was hired to provide a live-action reference for Princess Aurora and several scenes of the Three Good Fairies. Stanley was chosen from over three hundred candidates interviewed for the role. Her costume for Aurora's woodland disguise, Briar Rose, was created by Alice Estes at the behest of Marc Davis (her future husband) as her first job assignment for the Disney studio. Prince Phillip was modeled by Ed Kemmer. For a few scenes in the final battle scene, Kemmer had to ride a wooden wagon imitating a horse which was controlled by the animators. Cubby O'Brien was a model for young Phillip. The live-action reference for Maleficent was provided by her voice actress Eleanor Audley and dancer Jane Fowler. Among the actresses who appeared in reference footage for the Three Good Fairies were Spring Byington, Madge Blake, and Frances Bavier. Hans Conried and Don Barclay were live-action references for King Stefan and King Hubert. The lackey who serves wine to the kings in the "Skumps" scene was modeled by Franklin Pangborn. Tom Oreb, whose designs employed a "straight-against-curve" motif similar to Earle's backgrounds, was the film's character stylist. Oreb was the first Disney artist to receive a credit in that capacity. He worked closely with Earle (who also had decision-making capability in character designs and color schemes) and created preliminary sketches for most of the characters, incorporating strong horizontal and vertical planes of the background paintings into the designs. The studio's ink and paint department made finished cels of Oreb's sketches, which were placed over Earle's backgrounds to ensure that they would match the film's style. The animators complained that Oreb's designs, like Earle's styling, were too rigid to animate; according to Ken Anderson, the characters became "really, unfortunately, quite stiff. In order to fit this mannered background, they, too, took on a sort of cylindrical, geometrical shape that didn't lend itself as well to the ... Well, you might say, the Bambi type of animation. It wasn't really possible just to make the characters fit the style and still be quite as attractive." Marc Davis, who (unlike most of the animators) embraced Earle's style, was the supervising animator of Princess Aurora. Collaborating with Oreb, he created a "leading lady of elegance" whose earlier designs were influenced by Audrey Hepburn. Stylizing the character to match the backgrounds, Oreb incorporated vertical lines into the folds of her costume and two-dimensional swirls into her hair; Davis slightly sharpened her features and clothes, adding Art Nouveau and Art Deco style to her curls. Aurora's final design was more refined than those of preceding Disney heroines, and therefore required much more attention to detail than any animated character before. Iwao Takamoto, who handled the quality control of Aurora's animation, called working with her animation drawings a "laborious job" which limited in-betweeners (such as himself) to completing only six or seven drawings per day; twenty-four were required for each second of film. Davis was also tasked with supervising Maleficent's animation and design, which was influenced by a painting in a Czechoslovakian art book that Davis found in his home library. Although his original designs had red trim on Maleficent's costume to highlight its flame-like shape, Earle asked to change it to lavender because red would appear too strong. Davis also added horns and a collar resembling bat wings to give the character a diabolic look, and endowed her costume with a reptilian quality to foreshadow her dragon form. Animating Maleficent was challenging for Davis because of the character's tendency to soliloquize and her lack of physical contact with other characters. This was resolved with the introduction of Diablo, Maleficent's raven, whom Davis also designed and animated. Maleficent's dragon form was animated by Eric Cleworth, who based its head movements on those of a rattlesnake. Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston, who struggled the most to adapt to Earle's style, were the supervising animators of Flora, Fauna, and Merryweather. Disney initially urged that the characters be homogeneous, but Thomas and Johnston objected, feeling that it would be more interesting for each fairy to have a distinct personality. Oreb's earlier designs portrayed the characters in a stricter geometrical style, reflecting the three primary shapes (square, triangle, and circle), but this was too difficult to animate, and was discarded. The final design was set after Don DaGradi created preliminary drawings suggesting a "lighter and more delicate" look for the fairies, although they retained angularity in their capes and headdresses to match the background styling. Thomas and Johnston studied the movements of old women they saw at wedding receptions and grocery stores for help in animation, and the fairies' costume design was influenced by wardrobe books for medieval Scandinavian and German-style attire. Milt Kahl, who had animated similar characters in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937) and Cinderella (1950), animated Prince Phillip but was displeased with the character's limited emotional range. He also animated Phillip's horse, Samson (whose design was influenced by the works of Ronald Searle), King Stefan, and King Hubert. Kahl's characters were co-animated by John Lounsbery, who also worked on Aurora's forest-animal friends and the pig-like leader of Maleficent's goons. Among other animators working on the film were Wolfgang Reitherman, who directed the climactic dragon battle sequence; Les Clark, who directed the opening scene in which the townspeople march to the castle for Aurora's christening; and John Sibley, who animated the lackey. The use of music from Pyotr Tchaikovsky's 1889 ballet The Sleeping Beauty was discussed early in the film's development, but the idea was initially discarded due to the potential difficulty of adapting Tchaikovsky's ballet as a film score. Jack Lawrence and Sammy Fain were signed to write the film's original songs in April 1952, and Walter Schumann was the composer. A song score was produced by late summer of that year, which included the main title song and its reprise by Fain and Victor Young; the opening number "Holiday", sung by the royal subjects celebrating Princess Aurora's birth, followed by "It Happens I Have a Picture", in which King Stefan and King Hubert discuss the virtues of their respective children; "Sunbeams (Bestowal of Gifts)", sung by the Three Good Fairies and Maleficent as they bestow gifts on Aurora; "Where in the World", Aurora's solo, followed by the love song "Once Upon a Dream", in which she meets Prince Phillip; and "Mirage (Follow Your Heart)", in which Aurora is lured to the spinning wheel. After Eyvind Earle became the film's artistic director the following year, Disney returned to the idea of using Tchaikovsky's ballet score; he felt that Lawrence and Fain's Broadway-type songs of would clash with Earle's stylized design. Schumann unsuccessfully tried to create new arrangements for the songs which would give them a "Tchaikovsky sound", but the original song score was unusable except for "Once Upon a Dream" (which was based on the ballet's "Garland Waltz" theme). Schumann later left the project due to creative differences with Disney, and Ward Kimball recommended that George Bruns replace him. Sleeping Beauty was Bruns' first collaboration with the Disney studio and his first experience as a film composer. Working closely with animators, directors, and story artists, Bruns studied and experimented with Tchaikovsky's music for three years to make it work as a film score. The opening number, "Hail to the Princess Aurora" (sung by the royal subjects going to the castle for Aurora's christening) was based on a march in the ballet's prologue; the third strain of the "Garland Waltz" became "I Wonder", sung by Aurora as she walks through the forest with her animal friends. For the scene in which Maleficent lures Aurora to the spinning wheel, Bruns used the "Puss in Boots" theme from the ballet's third act due to its "ominous quality that fitted perfectly into the needs of the suspense sequence". He made several attempts to create a song from the "Silver Fairy" theme, resulting in "Riddle, Diddle, One, Two, Three" (sung by Flora, Fauna, and Merryweather as they prepare birthday presents for Aurora). The song was eventually cut, but its melody remained in the scene. Among other deleted songs were "Evil—Evil", which would have been sung by Maleficent and her goons, and "Go to Sleep", in which the Three Good Fairies put a sleeping spell on the castle. Four of Bruns' songs based on the ballet score were used in the film: "Hail to the Princess Aurora", "The Gifts of Beauty and Song", "I Wonder", and "Sleeping Beauty". For "Skumps", sung by King Stefan and King Hubert as they toast their children's upcoming wedding, Bruns composed his own tune in Tchaikovsky's style because he could not find anything suitable in the ballet. The song lyrics were written by Tom Adair, Erdman Penner, Winston Hibler, and Ted Sears; most have the same placement and purpose in the plot as Fain and Lawrence's original songs. Recording of the music began in the United States but, due to a musicians' strike, Disney sent Bruns to a state-of-the-art studio in Berlin which permitted a new stereo sound system for the film. Sleeping Beauty's score was the first true-stereo soundtrack. It was recorded with the Graunke Symphony Orchestra from September 8 to November 25, 1958. Sleeping Beauty premiered at the Fox Wilshire Theater in Los Angeles on January 29, 1959, and was released in theaters with the Academy Award-winning short documentary film Grand Canyon (1958). It was shown in selected theaters which were specially equipped to project the film in large-format Super Technirama 70 with six-track stereophonic sound. To promote the film, a Disneyland episode entitled "The Peter Tchaikovsky Story" was aired on ABC on January 30, 1959. The episode, which included a loose version of Tchaikovsky's life, Disney's explanation of the Super Technirama 70 process, and clips from Sleeping Beauty, was the first television show simulcast in stereo. With a production budget of $6 million, Sleeping Beauty was the most expensive Disney film at the time; it was over twice as expensive as each of the preceding three Disney animated features: Alice in Wonderland (1951), Peter Pan (1953), and Lady and the Tramp (1955). During its original release, the film grossed approximately $5.3 million (the distributor's share of the box office gross) in the United States and Canada. It was considered a box-office bomb, and Buena Vista Distribution (Disney's distribution division) lost $900,000. Eric Larson blamed the studio's publicity department for the film's underperformance, feeling that The Shaggy Dog (released later that year) had a far more extensive and successful advertising campaign. The production costs and box-office failure of Sleeping Beauty, coupled with the underperformance of much of Disney's 1959–1960 release slate, caused him to lose interest in animation; his company posted an annual loss of $1,300,000 for fiscal year 1960 (its first in a decade), and there were massive layoffs throughout the animation department. Sleeping Beauty was re-released theatrically in 1970 on standard 35 mm film, earning $3.8 million. It was re-released in May 1979 in the original 70 mm format for a ten-week test engagement at Seattle's Crest Theatre before a wider release later that year in 70 and 35 mm, with stereo and mono sound. The film was re-released in 1986 (grossing $40 million in the United States and Canada) and in 1995. With a lifetime gross in the United States and Canada of $51.6 million from all releases, Sleeping Beauty is the second-most-successful film released in 1959 behind Ben-Hur. Adjusted for ticket-price inflation, the domestic total gross is nearly $681 million; this makes it one of the top 40 highest-grossing films. On October 14, 1986, Sleeping Beauty was released on VHS, Betamax, and LaserDisc as part of the Walt Disney Classics collection; over one million videocassettes were sold. The film began a moratorium on March 31, 1988. Digitally restored in 1997, it was released on VHS and LaserDisc in fullscreen and widescreen as part of the Walt Disney Masterpiece Collection on September 16 of that year. To commemorate the release, Mary Costa (the voice of Princess Aurora) hosted a special theatrical screening of the film in her hometown of Knoxville, Tennessee. Sleeping Beauty was released on VHS and in a two-disc Special Edition DVD on September 9, 2003; the DVD edition included widescreen (formatted at 2.35:1) and fullscreen versions of the film. The DVD also included a making-of featurette from the 1997 VHS, the Grand Canyon short documentary film, the life-of-Tchaikovsky segment of the Disneyland episode "The Peter Tchaikovsky Story", a 1951 story outline of the film, live-action reference clips, a virtual gallery of concept art, layout and background designs, three trailers, and audio commentary by Mary Costa, Eyvind Earle, Ollie Johnston, and others. The release ended on January 31, 2004. On October 7, 2008, a Platinum Edition of Sleeping Beauty was released as a two-disc DVD and on Blu-ray; it was the first installment in the Platinum line released in high-definition video. This release was based on the 2007 restoration of the film from its original Technicolor negatives (interpositives, several generations removed from the original negative, were used for other home-video releases) in its full-negative aspect ratio of 2.55:1, which is wider than both prints shown at the film's original Technirama engagements (2.20:1) and the CinemaScope-compatible reduction prints for general release at 2.35:1. It included an online feature BD-Live, a new behind-the-scenes documentary Picture Perfect: The Making of Sleeping Beauty, a virtual recreation of Sleeping Beauty Castle Walkthrough at Disneyland, an alternate opening of the film, four deleted songs, and bonus features from the previous DVD release. The set returned to the Disney Vault on January 30, 2010. Sleeping Beauty was re-released on Diamond Edition Blu-ray and DVD and on Digital HD on October 7, 2014, including the documentary short Art of Evil: Generations Of Disney Villains (dedicated to animators and the legacy of villains in Disney features), three deleted scenes from the film, karaoke, and extras from the Platinum Blu-ray release. For its 60th anniversary on September 24, 2019, Sleeping Beauty was re-released for HD digital download and on Blu-ray as part of the Walt Disney Signature Collection. In May 1989, Mary Costa sued the Walt Disney Company for royalties of $2 million owed to her since the 1986 home-video release of Sleeping Beauty; Costa said that her contract with the studio prevented it from producing "phonograph recordings or transcriptions for sale to the public" without her permission. The case had been settled out of court by June 1991, with Costa receiving an undisclosed sum. Sleeping Beauty received mixed reviews from critics, with many praising its art direction, voice acting, and musical score but criticizing its plot and characters. Ren Grevatt of Billboard called the film a "Disney best" and complimented its score, colors, and the final battle scene, which he described as a "hair-raiser for the youngsters and grown-up alike." Variety praised the vocal work of Mary Costa and Bill Shirley, and called the scenes involving the Three Good Fairies "some of the best parts of the picture." For The New York Daily News, Kate Cameron wrote that the film "will charm the young and tickle adults" and praised its story, voice acting, and character animation. George Bourke of the Miami Herald described the film as a "magnificent achievement, offering suspense, action and happy humor, in a truly giant-size package." Lorna Carroll, writing for the St. Petersburg Times, called the film a "masterpiece and the last word in the art of animation"; however, although Sleeping Beauty is "far more magnificent, far more advanced, it does not touch the heart as did Snow White." Henry Ward of The Pittsburgh Press praised the film's art direction and said that children "undoubtedly will find the film completely enchanting", adding that a more-mature audience "may find this new effort somewhat of a carbon copy" of previous Disney animated features. Bosley Crowther wrote for The New York Times that "the colors are rich, the sounds are luscious and magic sparkles spurt charmingly from wands", but felt that the film's plot and characters were too similar to Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937). Philip K. Scheuer of Los Angeles Times praised the film's visual design, animation quality, and the Three Good Fairies and Maleficent, but criticized its "stereotyped" human characters and found himself more impressed by the accompanying short film Grand Canyon (1958). In the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Harold V. Cohen praised the film's "sharp and unmistakable" art style and animation but found the characters underdeveloped and "not exactly memorable". Harrison's Reports also noted the film's similarity to Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937), saying that although Sleeping Beauty is "unquestionably superior from the viewpoint of the art of animation", it lacked the "unforgettable" characters, songs, and the overall entertainment appeal of Snow White. Time harshly criticized the film, particularly its design: "Even the drawing in Sleeping Beauty is crude: a compromise between sentimental, crayon-book childishness and the sort of cute, commercial cubism that tries to seem daring but is really just square." Among contemporary reviews, Dave Kehr of the Chicago Reader described Sleeping Beauty as "the masterpiece of the Disney Studios' postwar style". Kehr praised its use of the Super Technirama 70 process, particularly in the final battle scene. Charles Solomon wrote for the Los Angeles Times that the film "represents the culmination of Walt Disney's effort to elevate animation to an art form". Solomon praised its visual design, the character of Maleficent, and the finale battle scene, but felt that it lacks "the strong story line of the other Disney features" (particularly the "not very interesting" romance between Aurora and Phillip). Ed Gonzalez of Slant Magazine praised the film's "limber, giddy" art style, calling it "one of [Disney's] studio’s most under-cherished works." A Time Out reviewer wrote that although Sleeping Beauty "rarely achieves the heights of classics like Snow White and Dumbo, it still has its moments", highlighting its "polished if sometimes stodgy" animation, soundtrack, and the final confrontation between Maleficent and Phillip. In his book, The Disney Films, Leonard Maltin praised the film's design: "The fantastic effort and phenomenal expense do show up on the screen; it is unquestionably Disney’s most elaborate cartoon film." Its animators, Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston, said on their website that Sleeping Beauty was "dazzling in color and design but lacked warmth." The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that the film had an 89% approval rating based on 46 reviews, with an average rating of 8.2/10. According to its consensus, "This Disney dreamscape contains moments of grandeur, with its lush colors, magical air, [and] one of the most menacing villains in the Disney canon." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 85 out of 100 from 12 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". It has been recognized by the American Film Institute: 2003: AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes & Villains: Maleficent – Nominated Villain 2006: AFI's Greatest Movie Musicals – Nominated 2008: AFI's 10 Top 10: Nominated Animation Film Since its original release in 1959, Sleeping Beauty has become one of the most artistically-acclaimed animated films ever produced; its artistic direction, background and color styling, and character animation have been praised. It is considered one of the most influential Disney features by the animation industry, with animators such as Mike Gabriel and Michael Giaimo citing the film as inspiring them to enter the business. Sleeping Beauty's background and color styling heavily influenced the design of the animated films such as Pocahontas (1995), Frozen (2013), Frozen II (2019), and Wish (2023). Andreas Deja, Glen Keane, and Russ Edmonds were inspired by the film's design and animation for their characters in Aladdin (1992), Pocahontas (1995), and The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996). In 2019, Sleeping Beauty was selected for preservation in the United States' National Film Registry as "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 1955, while the film was still in production, Sleeping Beauty Castle opened at Disneyland as a symbol of the park and a promotional tool for the film. Walt Disney and Shirley Temple opened an indoor walk-through exhibit with a series of dioramas depicting the story of Sleeping Beauty, designed by Eyvind Earle and Ken Anderson, in 1957. The walk-through was redesigned in 1977, replacing the original hand-painted displays with three-dimensional sets and doll-like figurines. It was closed in 2001 due to declining attendance, although the September 11th attacks are also believed to be a factor. The exhibit, refurbished to recreate the original 1957 dioramas, reopened in 2008. The film's characters (particularly Princess Aurora and Maleficent) make regular appearances in the parks and parades, with Maleficent a villain in the nighttime show Fantasmic! at Disneyland and Disney's Hollywood Studios. Opened in 1992, Le Château de la Belle au Bois Dormant at Disneyland Paris is a variant of Sleeping Beauty Castle with a gallery of displays illustrating the story of Sleeping Beauty in tapestries, stained-glass windows and figures. The building also contains an animatronic version of Maleficent's dragon form, La Tanière du Dragon, in the lower-level dungeon. Hong Kong Disneyland opened in 2005 with a Sleeping Beauty Castle nearly replicating Disneyland's design; it was closed in 2018, redesigned as the Castle of Magical Dreams, and reopened in 2020. DisneyToon Studios released a 2007 direct-to-video animated film, Disney Princess Enchanted Tales: Follow Your Dreams, featuring two new stories about Aurora and Jasmine from Aladdin (1992). Many of Sleeping Beauty's characters make cameo appearances in the 2001–03 television series House of Mouse, as well as in the films Who Framed Roger Rabbit (1988) and The Lion King 1½ (2004). Flora, Fauna, and Merryweather are recurring characters in the 2013–18 Disney Junior series Sofia the First, and Aurora makes a guest appearance in the "Holiday in Enchancia" episode. With other Disney Princesses, Aurora appears in the 2018 film Ralph Breaks the Internet. Like other Walt Disney Animation Studios characters, Sleeping Beauty characters have cameo appearances in the short film Once Upon a Studio (2023). A 2014 live-action adaptation of the film, Maleficent, tells the story from the perspective of the antagonist (played by Angelina Jolie). It was followed by a sequel, Maleficent: Mistress of Evil, in 2019. Live-action versions of Sleeping Beauty characters are featured in the 2011–18 fantasy television series Once Upon a Time (produced by Disney-owned ABC Studios), including Maleficent, Aurora, Prince Phillip, and King Stefan. Maleficent is a main villain in the 2015 television film Descendants, which follows the teenage children of Disney's iconic heroes and villains (including Maleficent's daughter Mal and Audrey, the daughter of Aurora and Phillip). Maleficent is a recurring villain in the Square Enix/Disney Kingdom Hearts video-game series, and Aurora is one of the Princesses of Heart. The Enchanted Dominion, a world based on the film, appears in Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep. Aurora, Phillip, and the Three Good Fairies are playable characters in the world-builder video game Disney Magic Kingdoms, with Maleficent its main antagonist. An alternate version of Maleficent appears as a playable character in the video game Disney Mirrorverse (2022). A retrospective exhibition, Awaking Beauty: The Art of Eyvind Earle, was presented at the Walt Disney Family Museum from May 18, 2017 to January 8, 2018. With over 250 works such as thumbnail paintings, concept artworks, and commercial illustrations, the exhibit reflected Eyvind Earle's biography and his work at the Walt Disney Studios (including his contribution to Sleeping Beauty). An exhibition catalog was published by Weldon Owen on August 8, 2017. Disney portal Film portal United States portal 1950s portal Cartoon portal 1959 in film List of American films of 1959 List of animated feature films of the 1950s List of Walt Disney Pictures films List of Disney theatrical animated feature films List of Disney animated films based on fairy tales Medieval fantasy The Queen's name is not mentioned in the film. She is referred to as Leah in the film's 1993 book adaptation by A. L. Singer. The raven's name is not mentioned in the film. He was referred to as Diablo by the animators during the film's production. Michael Barrier, on the other hand, indicates that the film did not reach theaters until April 1959. Thomas 1994, p. 295. "Sleeping Beauty". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved January 5, 2012. Maltin 1987, p. 74. Smith, Dave. ""Sleeping Beauty" Movie History". Disney Archives. Archived from the original on March 31, 2010. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Smith 2012, p. 35. Singer 1993, p. 5. Radish, Christina (October 18, 2014). "12 Things to Know about 'Sleeping Beauty' and the Art of Disney Animation". Collider. Archived from the original on January 20, 2023. Retrieved January 20, 2023. "Sleeping Beauty is as Beautiful as Ever at 55". D23. January 29, 2014. Archived from the original on November 27, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Biedenharn, Isabella (April 24, 2023). "Disney heroines through the years". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 22, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023. Smith, Dave. "Sleeping Beauty Character History". Disney Archives. Archived from the original on March 31, 2010. Retrieved January 18, 2023. Adams, Michael Anthony (May 29, 2014). "Hoosier was prince before Angelina Jolie's "Maleficent"". The Indianapolis Star. Archived from the original on May 30, 2023. Retrieved August 5, 2023. "Walt Disney's Sleeping Beauty". Walt Disney Productions (Press release). Buena Vista Distribution. 1959. p. 6. Barrier 2007, p. 271. Thomas 1958, p. 56. Zuckerman, Esther (May 30, 2014). "Meet Eleanor Audley, the Original 'Maleficent'". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on August 28, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023. Dakin & Saxon 2020, p. 20. Smith, Dave. "Maleficent Villains History". Disney Archives. Archived from the original on April 1, 2010. Retrieved January 12, 2023. Thomas & Johnston 1981, p. 400. Korkis, Jim (June 20, 2015). "In His Own Words: Frank Thomas on the "Sleeping Beauty" Fairies". Cartoon Research. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. Retrieved October 27, 2015. "Flora". D23. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2023. "Merryweather". D23. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2023. Canemaker 2001, p. 196. Thomas & Johnston 1981, p. 401. "Fauna". D23. Archived from the original on April 2, 2023. Retrieved August 5, 2023. "Famous Voices Bring Life to 'Sleeping Beauty'". The Pittsburgh Press. March 1, 1959. p. 7. Retrieved August 5, 2023 – via Google News Archive. "King Stefan". D23. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2023. Thomas 1958, p. 98. "King Hubert". D23. Archived from the original on August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2023. Thomas 1958, p. 73. Beck 2005, p. 252. Dakin & Saxon 2020, p. 21. Webb 2011, p. 324. Benda, Jessica. "It's Almost Superb Owl Sunday! Here Are Seven of Disney's Most Memorable". D23. Archived from the original on March 20, 2023. Retrieved December 15, 2023. John Lasseter; Andreas Deja; Leonard Maltin (2008). Audio commentary (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. "The Story of "Sleeping Beauty"". Walt Disney Family Museum. Archived from the original on June 21, 2009. Retrieved September 20, 2022. Jeff Kurtti (2003). Audio commentary (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Special DVD ed.). Walt Disney Home Entertainment. Fanning, Jim (January 24, 2019). "11 Royal Facts You Might Not Know About Sleeping Beauty". D23. Archived from the original on February 8, 2023. Retrieved September 18, 2019. Hopper, Hedda (November 25, 1950). "Walt Disney Plans 'Sleeping Beauty' Film". Los Angeles Times. Part II, p. 6 – via Newspapers.com. Once Upon a Dream: The Making of Sleeping Beauty (Documentary film) (Sleeping Beauty Fully Restored Limited VHS ed.). Walt Disney Home Video. 1997. King, Susan (July 17, 2008). "Waking up to Disney's 'Beauty'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Solomon 2014, p. 27. Koenig 1997, p. 104. The 1951 Outline (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Special DVD ed.). Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2003. Solomon 2020, p. 65. Solomon 2014, p. 28. Deleted Scene: The Fair (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Diamond Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2014. Mclean, Craig (May 30, 2014). "Maleficent: Sleeping Beauty's villain gets her revenge". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved September 20, 2022. Thomas 1958, pp. 30–31. Thomas 1958, p. 31. Thomas 1958, p. 15. Solomon 2020, p. 69. Deleted Scene: The Curse is Fulfilled (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Diamond Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2014. Thomas & Johnston 1993, p. 125. Sleeping Beauty Virtual Galleries (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Special DVD ed.). Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2003. Princess Fun Facts (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2008. Allan 1999, p. 39. Clark, John (September 28, 2003). "Giving a voice to 'Beauty' / Mary Costa remembers working with Walt Disney". SFGATE. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 12, 2023. "Disney Holding Gal in Reserve". The Spokesman-Review. June 9, 1952. Retrieved August 4, 2023 – via Google News Archive. Noyer, Jérémie (October 7, 2008). "Once Upon A Dream: Mary Costa as Sleeping Beauty's Princess Aurora". Animated Views. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved January 12, 2023. Minow, Nell. "Interview: Mary Costa of Disney's 'Sleeping Beauty'". Beliefnet. Archived from the original on September 27, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2023. "Mary Costa". D23. Walt Disney Archives. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved January 12, 2023. "The Music of "Sleeping Beauty"". Walt Disney Family Museum. Archived from the original on October 23, 2008. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Williams & Denney 2004, p. 171. Thomas 1958, p. 72. Thomas 1958, pp. 72–73. Solomon 2014, p. 47. Korkis, Jim (September 2, 2022). "The Animated Hans Conried". Cartoon Research. Archived from the original on October 31, 2023. Retrieved October 31, 2023. "Sleeping Beauty (1959)". AFI Catalog of Feature Films. American Film Institute. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved November 7, 2023. Picture Perfect: The Making of Sleeping Beauty (Documentary film) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2008. Smith 2012, p. 11. Barrier 1999, p. 554. Koenig 1997, p. 106. Barrier, Michael; Gray, Milton (March 16, 2015). "Gerry Geronimi". MichaelBarrier.com (Interview). Archived from the original on July 18, 2018. Retrieved October 27, 2015. Gabler 2006, p. 559. Jo, Sophie (December 19, 2018). "Once Upon a Dream: The History of Sleeping Beauty Castle". Walt Disney Family Museum. Archived from the original on January 24, 2023. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Barrier 2007, p. 273. Solomon 1995, p. 24. Sequence 8 (Documentary film) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2008. Barrier 1999, p. 558. Canemaker 2001, p. 75. "The Artwork of "Sleeping Beauty"". Walt Disney Family Museum. Archived from the original on October 23, 2008. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Solomon 2014, p. 25. Ghez 2016, p. 51. Barrier 1999, p. 555. Burchard 2021, p. 92. Canemaker 1996, p. 81. Thomas 1997, p. 104. Burchard 2021, p. 88. Szasz 2017, p. 56. Seastrom, Lucas O. (May 16, 2014). "Eyvind Earle: Artistic Devotion & Distinction in Sleeping Beauty". Walt Disney Family Museum. Archived from the original on January 28, 2023. Retrieved January 21, 2023. Burchard 2021, pp. 90–91. Cain, Abigail (May 13, 2017). "Artist Eyvind Earle Made Disney's "Sleeping Beauty" Enchanting—and Nearly Impossible to Animate". Artsy. Archived from the original on May 31, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2022. Solomon, Charles (January 24, 2019). "How Eyvind Earle's Stunning Art Made Sleeping Beauty a "Moving Illustration"". D23. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved December 27, 2022. Thomas 1958, p. 165. Thomas 1958, p. 177. Thomas 1958, p. 169. Gabler 2006, p. 558. Finch, Christopher. ""Sleeping Beauty" and "101 Dalmatians"". Walt Disney Family Museum. Archived from the original on October 28, 2008. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Barrier, Michael (November 2, 2014). "Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston (1987)". MichaelBarrier.com (Interview). Archived from the original on August 28, 2018. Retrieved January 21, 2014. Holt 2019, p. 210. Barrier 2007, pp. 274–275. Maltin 1995, p. 156. Carroll, Harrison (March 18, 1954). "Tras De Los Sets En Hollywood". La Opinión (in Spanish). p. 4. Retrieved August 4, 2023 – via Google News Archive. Solomon 2014, p. 49. "Seven years to make a 'Beauty'". The Bulletin. February 16, 1959. p. 4. Retrieved August 4, 2023 – via Google News Archive. Seastrom, Lucas O. (August 4, 2014). "Marc Davis: Style & Compromise on Sleeping Beauty". Walt Disney Family Museum. Archived from the original on May 18, 2023. Retrieved October 27, 2015. Solomon 2014, p. 50. Cosgrove, Ben (May 25, 2014). "Maleficent Comes Alive! 1958 Edition". Time. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023. Smith, Dave. "Captain Hook Villains History". Disney Archives. Archived from the original on April 1, 2010. Retrieved January 22, 2023. Ghez 2012, p. 553. Sigman Lowery, Paula (January 31, 2013). "Unusual Suspects: The Lackey". Walt Disney Family Museum. Archived from the original on January 20, 2023. Retrieved January 20, 2023. Takamoto & Mallory 2009, p. 83. Ghez 2018, p. 109. Deja 2015, p. 358. The Art of Evil: Generations of Disney Villains (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Diamond Blu-ray ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2014. Canemaker 2001, p. 284. Deja 2015, p. 362. Solomon 2014, p. 79. Deja 2015, p. 222. Canemaker 2001, p. 194. Thomas 1958, p. 37. Solomon 2014, p. 60. Canemaker 2001, p. 137. Canemaker 2001, p. 126. Deja 2015, p. 166. Solomon 2014, p. 58. Deja 2015, p. 167. Canemaker 2001, p. 257. Canemaker 2001, p. 74. Deja 2015, p. 314. Canemaker 2001, p. 48. Deja 2015, p. 15. Thomas 1958, p. 91. "Lawrence, Fain to Score "Beauty"". Billboard. April 19, 1952. p. 17. Archived from the original on April 23, 2023. Retrieved October 27, 2015 – via Google Books. Sigman-Lowery, Paula; Schroeder, Russell (2014). The Legacy Collection: Sleeping Beauty (booklet). Walt Disney Records. Archived from the original on January 26, 2023 – via YouTube. Bohn 2017, p. 169. Alternate Opening (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2008. Deleted Songs: It Happens I Have a Picture (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2008. Sampson, Wade (August 19, 2009). "Frank and the Fairies". MousePlanet. Retrieved January 25, 2023. Bohn 2017, p. 162. Bohn 2017, p. 164. Thomas 1958, pp. 91–92. Thomas 1958, p. 93. Bohn 2017, p. 170. Deleted Songs: Riddle, Diddle (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2008. Deleted Songs: Go to Sleep (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2008. Thomas 1958, p. 92. The Sound of Beauty: Restoring a Classic (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2008. Solomon 2014, p. 97. "Sleeping Beauty Premieres". D23. Walt Disney Archives. January 29, 1959. Archived from the original on January 26, 2023. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Barrier 1999, p. 559. "Disney Readies Film About Grand Canyon". Deseret News. January 6, 1959. p. 8A. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved May 9, 2016 – via Google News Archive. "The Peter Tchaikovsky Story Airs on Walt Disney Presents". D23. Walt Disney Archives. January 30, 1959. Archived from the original on January 27, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Tibbetts 2008, p. 69. The Peter Tchaikovsky Story (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2008. "All-Time Top Grossers". Variety. January 4, 1961. p. 49. Retrieved October 3, 2019 – via Internet Archive. Gabler 2006, p. 560. "Cinema Scene". Ludington Daily News. July 10, 1979. p. 9. Retrieved April 21, 2016 – via Google News Archive. Thomas, Bob (September 16, 1979). "'Beauty' napped at the box office". St. Petersburg Times. Associated Press. p. 11B. Retrieved May 9, 2016 – via Google News Archive. "'Sleeping Beauty' B.O. Strong In First Seattle Weekend". Daily Variety. May 9, 1979. p. 4. Harmetz, Aljean (September 17, 1979). "Disney's 'Sleeping Beauty' Is Awakening Again". The New York Times. p. C13. Archived from the original on June 2, 2023. Retrieved June 27, 2022. Gaul, Lou (November 20, 1979). "Unappetizing Thanksgiving movie menu". Beaver County Times. p. B5. Retrieved April 21, 2016 – via Google News Archive. Thomas, Bob (April 11, 1986). "A Renaissance: Animated films are enjoying a surprise". Evening Independent. p. 13-D. Retrieved May 9, 2016 – via Google News Archive. Horn, John (June 1, 1997). "Can Anyone Dethrone Disney?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023. Publicity (Bonus feature) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2008. "Top Lifetime Adjusted Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 26, 2023. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Hunt, Dennis (August 4, 1986). "Disney 'Sleeping Beauty' To Go Out With $29.95 Tag". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2018. Yarrow, Andrew (February 22, 1988). "Video Cassettes Pushing Books Off Shelves". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved May 9, 2016. Stevens, Mary (March 18, 1988). "'Lady And The Tramp' Going Back To Vault". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved May 14, 2018. Hettrick, Scott (December 19, 1997). "'Sleeping Beauty' Dream to Behold". Sun-Sentinel. Archived from the original on January 30, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023. Traiman, Steve (August 23, 1997). "Video Watch: It's All Too Much!". Billboard. p. 81. Retrieved January 30, 2023 – via Google Books. Paige, Earl (October 4, 1997). "Vids Bring Harmony To Music Retail". Billboard. Retrieved January 30, 2023 – via Google Books. ""Sleeping Beauty Special Edition" On Disney DVD For The First Time Ever!". Disney.com. Disney DVD And Video Newsletter. August 2003. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. King, Susan (September 13, 2003). "Disney dusts off 'Sleeping Beauty'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved May 9, 2016. Germain, David (September 13, 2003). "Disney's grand 1959 animated 'Sleeping Beauty' released on DVD". Eugene Register-Guard. Associated Press. Retrieved May 9, 2016 – via Google News Archive. Wagner, Holly J. (January 15, 2004). "Time Is Running Out for Half-a-Dozen Animated Disney Classics". Home Media Magazine. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved January 29, 2023. Chang, Justin (October 10, 2008). "Sleeping Beauty: 50th Anniversary Platinum Edition". Variety. Archived from the original on April 11, 2021. Retrieved March 20, 2024. Kehr, Dave (October 13, 2008). "O, Prince! How Clear You Are on Blu-ray". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 17, 2024. Retrieved March 20, 2024. Noyer, Jérémie (October 10, 2008). "Once Upon A Dream: Sara Duran-Singer on Sleeping Beauty 's Restoration". Animated Views. Archived from the original on December 9, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Mayer, Lindsay (October 11, 2008). "Sleeping Beauty Restoration Web Conference". Blu-ray.com. Archived from the original on October 30, 2008. Retrieved January 30, 2023. "Sleeping Beauty: The 50th Anniversary Platinum Edition". People. October 6, 2008. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. Leamons, Travis (December 12, 2009). "Back into the Disney Vault". Inside Pulse. Archived from the original on January 5, 2024. Retrieved March 21, 2024. "'Sleeping Beauty' Released from the Disney Vault". The Walt Disney Company. October 7, 2014. Archived from the original on March 25, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023. "Sleeping Beauty Diamond Edition Now Available on Blu-ray, Digital HD and Disney Movies Anywhere". D23. October 7, 2014. Archived from the original on June 7, 2023. Retrieved March 20, 2024. Tuttle, Brittani (August 22, 2019). "'Sleeping Beauty: Anniversary Edition' joining Walt Disney Signature Collection". Attractions Magazine. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Beck, Lia (September 17, 2022). "Why the Voice of Sleeping Beauty Sued Disney". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on January 30, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023. Greenbaum, Kurt (May 12, 1989). "Awakened Beauty Sues Disney Co". Sun-Sentinel. Archived from the original on January 30, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023. Di Paola, Jim (June 1, 1991). "'Beauty' Suit Put to Bed Disney, Singer Settle Videocassette Fight". Sun-Sentinel. Archived from the original on January 30, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023. Grevatt, Ren (February 9, 1959). "'Sleeping Beauty' a Disney Best". Billboard. p. 10. Retrieved August 1, 2023 – via Google Books. "Film Reviews: Sleeping Beauty". Variety. January 21, 1959. p. 6. Retrieved July 12, 2018 – via Internet Archive. Cameron, Kate (February 18, 1959). "Walt Disney's Latest A Four Star 'Beauty'". The New York Daily News. p. C15. Retrieved February 22, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. Bourke, George (February 12, 1959). "Sleeping Beauty's Full of Magic". Miami Herald. Retrieved August 4, 2023 – via NewspaperArchive. Carroll, Lorna (April 17, 1959). "'Sleeping Beauty' Awakens Eyes and Ears, Leaves Heart Slumbering". St. Petersburg Times. p. 9. Retrieved August 1, 2023 – via Google News Archive. Ward, Henry (March 9, 1959). "Disney Unfolds More Magic with 'Sleeping Beauty'". The Pittsburgh Press. p. 8. Retrieved August 4, 2023 – via Google News Archive. Crowther, Bosley (February 18, 1959). "Screen: 'Sleeping Beauty'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2016. Scheuer, Philip K. (January 30, 1959). "'Sleeping Beauty' Is Typical Disney". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 4, 2023 – via Internet Archive. Cohen, Harold V. (March 9, 1959). "Walt Disney's 'Sleeping Beauty' Comes to Nixon". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. p. 10. Retrieved August 1, 2023 – via Google News Archive. "Sleeping Beauty". Harrison's Reports. January 31, 1959. p. 18. Retrieved February 22, 2020 – via Internet Archive. "Cinema: The New Pictures". Time. March 2, 1959. p. 68. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved October 3, 2019. Kehr, Dave (October 26, 1985). "Sleeping Beauty". Chicago Reader. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved September 4, 2022. Solomon, Charles (March 31, 1986). "3 Animated Films: Good, Bad, and Ugly". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 10, 2022. Retrieved October 8, 2022. Gonzalez, Ed (September 3, 2003). "Review: Sleeping Beauty". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on November 29, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2023. "Sleeping Beauty". Time Out. May 26, 2014. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved August 2, 2023. Maltin 1995, p. 154. "Feature Films". Frank and Ollie. Archived from the original on November 21, 2005. Retrieved August 2, 2013. "Sleeping Beauty (1959)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Retrieved October 5, 2021. "Sleeping Beauty (1959) Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved November 29, 2022. "The 32nd Academy Awards". The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on March 30, 2023. Retrieved September 9, 2016. "1959 Grammy Awards". Grammy Awards. Retrieved December 18, 2021. "Complete National Film Registry Listing". Library of Congress. Retrieved December 16, 2015. "Film Hall of Fame Productions". Online Film & Television Association. Retrieved May 15, 2021. "Film Hall of Fame Inductees: Songs". Online Film & Television Association. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. Retrieved August 15, 2021. "2008 Satellite Awards". Satellite Awards. International Press Academy. Archived from the original on November 17, 2011. Retrieved June 3, 2023. "Past Saturn Awards". Saturn Awards.org. Archived from the original on September 14, 2008. Retrieved May 7, 2008. "First Annual Youth in Film Awards 1978-1979". Young Artist Awards. Archived from the original on February 5, 2005. Retrieved June 3, 2023. "AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes & Villains Nominees" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. "AFI's Greatest Movie Musicals Official Ballot" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved June 3, 2023. "AFI's 10 Top 10 Nominees" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 16, 2011. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Solomon 2014, p. 104. "Mike Gabriel Biography". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved January 29, 2023. Flores, Terry (December 11, 2013). "Disney Celebrates 90 Years of Animation". Variety. Archived from the original on June 27, 2022. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Desowitz, Bill (May 1, 2016). "Mike Giaimo Talks the Art of Eyvind Earle: Sleeping Beauty and Beyond". Creative Talent Network. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. Knox, Kelly (November 18, 2019). "How Sleeping Beauty inspired Frozen II". Nerdist. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. Idelson, Karen (October 26, 2023). "Disney's 'Wish' Creative Team Discusses the Movie's Throwback Look and Powerful Message". Animation Magazine. Archived from the original on November 20, 2023. Retrieved November 7, 2023. Solomon 2014, p. 102. Barnes, Mike (December 11, 2019). "'Purple Rain,' 'Amadeus,' 'Boys Don't Cry,' 'Clerks' Enter National Film Registry". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 27, 2022. Retrieved December 15, 2020. Solomon 2014, p. 106. "Flashback to 1957: Sleeping Beauty Castle Walkthrough and Shirley Temple Black". Disney Parks Blog. April 9, 2010. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. History of the Sleeping Beauty Castle Walkthrough Attraction (Documentary film) (Sleeping Beauty Platinum Blu-ray and DVD ed.). Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment. 2008. French, Sally (July 17, 2008). "Disney announces Sleeping Beauty Castle Walkthrough". The Orange County Register. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Townsend, Adam (November 26, 2008). "Sleeping Beauty Castle opens its doors again". The Orange County Register. Archived from the original on January 28, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. "Disney Parks Guests See Maleficent at Disney Parks Around the World". The Walt Disney Company. June 11, 2014. Archived from the original on June 18, 2023. Retrieved November 7, 2023. "Château de la Belle au Bois Dormant, Le". D23. Archived from the original on March 20, 2023. Retrieved March 21, 2024. "La Galerie de la Belle au Bois Dormant". Disneyland Paris. Retrieved March 21, 2024. "La Tanière du Dragon". Disneyland Paris (in French). Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Miller, Daniel (November 22, 2016). "Hong Kong Disneyland in line for a $1.4-billion expansion, adding a 'Frozen' themed land in a bid to boost growth". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Tsui, Tracy (August 26, 2019). "Hong Kong Disneyland Names its Transformed Castle the Castle of Magical Dreams" (PDF). Hong Kong Disneyland. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 28, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Zemler 2022, p. 179. Lyttelton, Oliver (March 14, 2013). "5 Things You Might Not Know About 'Who Framed Roger Rabbit'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on February 2, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. "Disney Unveils New Princess With 'Sofia The First' TV Movie, Series". Deadline Hollywood. December 12, 2011. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. Wolfe, Jennifer (November 13, 2013). "Disney Junior Ushers in Holiday Season with Themed Episodes". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved March 20, 2024. Breznican, Anthony (July 14, 2017). "Wreck-It Ralph sequel will unite the Disney princesses, Star Wars — and Taraji P. Henson!". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 16, 2023. Retrieved November 4, 2018. Johnson, Zach (October 16, 2023). "How Once Upon a Studio Reacquaints Fans with Beloved but Rarely Seen Characters". D23. Archived from the original on October 18, 2023. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Patten, Dominic (September 18, 2013). "Disney Shifts 'Maleficent', 'Good Dinosaur' & 'Finding Dory' Release Dates". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 30, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 6, 2019). "Angelina Jolie Sequel 'Maleficent 2' Moves Up To Fall 2019". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved January 2, 2020. Masters, Megan (October 28, 2011). "Once Upon a Time Visitor Kristin Bauer: 'Evil-Bitch Typecasting Is an Awesome Thing!'". TVLine. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Mitovich, Matt Webb (July 5, 2012). "Exclusive: Wake Up! Once Upon a Time Has Cast Sarah Bolger as Sleeping Beauty". TVLine. Archived from the original on March 20, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Ng, Philiana (July 26, 2012). "'Once Upon a Time' Books 'Pretty Little Liars' Actor in Princely Role". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 28, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Finbow, Katy (December 23, 2014). "Sebastian Roché joins Once Upon a Time as Aurora's father". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on January 28, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Snetiker, Marc (June 19, 2014). "See Kristin Chenoweth as Maleficent in Disney's 'Descendants' -- PHOTO". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 28, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Li, Shirley (July 31, 2015). "Descendants recap: The Disney Channel tale about junior villains". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved January 31, 2023. Olah, Lucas (April 12, 2022). "Kingdom Hearts: The Best Adapted Disney Characters". TheGamer. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. Birlew, Dan (2003). Kingdom Hearts Official Strategy Guide. BradyGames Publishing. p. 171. ISBN 0-7440-0198-6. "KINGDOM HEARTS Birth by Sleep Unveils the Saga's Untold Origins Today". SYS-CON Media. September 7, 2010. Archived from the original on November 19, 2018. Retrieved January 29, 2023. "Update 1: Sleeping Beauty | Trailer". Disney Magic Kingdoms. May 6, 2016 – via YouTube. "Disney Magic Kingdoms Minisite". Gameloft. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. "Maleficent - Disney Mirrorverse". Kabam. Retrieved March 24, 2024. "Awaking Beauty: The Art of Eyvind Earle". Walt Disney Family Museum. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. Flores, Terry (April 26, 2017). "Walt Disney Family Museum to Exhibit Work by 'Sleeping Beauty' Artist Eyvind Earle". Variety. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. Szasz 2017, p. 176. Allan, Robin (1999). Walt Disney and Europe: European Influence on the Animated Feature Films of Walt Disney. John Libbey & Co. ISBN 978-1-8646-2041-2. Barrier, Michael (1999). Hollywood Cartoons: American Animation in Its Golden Age. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-1980-2079-0. Barrier, Michael (2007). The Animated Man: A Life of Walt Disney. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-5202-5619-4. Beck, Jerry (2005). The Animated Movie Guide. Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-5565-2591-9. Bohn, James (2017). Music in Disney's Animated Features: Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs to The Jungle Book. University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-4968-1215-5. Burchard, Wolf (2021). Inspiring Walt Disney: The Animation of French Decorative Arts. Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 978-1-5883-9741-6. Canemaker, John (1996). Before the Animation Begins: The Art and Lives of Disney Inspirational Sketch Artists. Hyperion Books. ISBN 978-0-7868-6152-1. Canemaker, John (2001). Walt Disney's Nine Old Men and the Art of Animation. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-0-7868-6496-6. Dakin, Glenn; Saxon, Victoria (2020). Disney Villains The Essential Guide New Edition. DK Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7440-3483-7. Deja, Andreas (2015). The Nine Old Men: Lessons, Techniques, and Inspiration from Disney's Great Animators. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-1350-1586-2. Gabler, Neal (2006). Walt Disney: The Triumph of the American Imagination. Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-6797-5747-4. Ghez, Didier (2012). Walt's People: Talking Disney with the Artists who Knew Him – Volume 12. Xlibris US. ISBN 978-1-4771-4790-0. Ghez, Didier (2016). They Drew As they Pleased: The Hidden Art of Disney's Musical Years (The 1940s - Part One). Chronicle Books LLC. ISBN 978-1-4521-3744-5. Ghez, Didier (2018). They Drew As They Pleased Vol 4: The Hidden Art of Disney's Mid-Century Era (The 1950s and 1960s). Chronicle Books LLC. ISBN 978-1-4521-6413-7. Holt, Nathalia (2019). The Queens of Animation: The Untold Story of the Women Who Transformed the World of Disney and Made Cinematic History. Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-3164-3916-9. Koenig, David (1997). Mouse Under Glass: Secrets of Disney Animation & Theme Parks. Bonaventure Press. ISBN 978-0-9640-6051-7. Maltin, Leonard (1987). Of Mice and Magic: A History of American Animated Cartoons. Plume. ISBN 978-0-4522-5993-5. Maltin, Leonard (1995). The Disney Films. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-0-7868-8527-5. Singer, A.L. (1993). Walt Disney's Sleeping Beauty. Disney Press. ISBN 978-1-5628-2366-5. Smith, Dave (2012). Disney Trivia from the Vault: Secrets Revealed and Questions Answered. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-1-4231-7857-6. Solomon, Charles (1995). The Disney That Never Was: The Stories and Art from Five Decades of Unproduced Animation. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-0-7868-6037-1. Solomon, Charles (2014). Once Upon a Dream: From Perrault's Sleeping Beauty to Disney's Maleficent. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-1-4231-9902-1. Solomon, Charles (2020). The Disney Princess: A Celebration of Art and Creativity. Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-1-4521-5911-9. Szasz, Ioan (2017). Awaking Beauty: The Art of Eyvind Earle. Weldon Owen. ISBN 978-1-6818-8271-0. Takamoto, Iwao; Mallory, Michael (2009). Iwao Takamoto: My Life with a Thousand Characters. University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-6047-3193-4. Thomas, Bob (1958). Walt Disney, the Art of Animation. Simon & Schuster. Thomas, Bob (1994). Walt Disney: An American Original. Hyperion Press. ISBN 0-7868-6027-8. Thomas, Bob (1997). Disney's Art of Animation: From Mickey Mouse To Hercules. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-0-7868-6241-2. Thomas, Frank; Johnston, Ollie (1981). Disney Animation: The Illusion of Life. Abbeville Press. ISBN 978-0-7868-6070-8. Thomas, Frank; Johnston, Ollie (1993). The Disney Villain. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-1-5628-2792-2. Tibbetts, John C. (2008). Composers in the Movies: Studies in Musical Biography. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-3001-2803-1. Webb, Graham (2011). The Animated Film Encyclopedia: A Complete Guide to American Shorts, Features and Sequences, 1900-1999. McFarland & Company. ISBN 978-0-7864-4985-9. Williams, Pat; Denney, James (2004). How to Be Like Walt: Capturing the Disney Magic Every Day of Your Life. Health Communications Inc. ISBN 978-0-7573-0231-2. Zemler, Emily (2022). Disney Princess: Beyond the Tiara. Epic Ink. ISBN 978-0-7603-7363-7. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sleeping Beauty (1959 film). Wikiquote has quotations related to Sleeping Beauty (1959 film). Official website Sleeping Beauty at the American Film Institute Catalog Sleeping Beauty at AllMovie Sleeping Beauty at Box Office Mojo Sleeping Beauty at IMDb Sleeping Beauty at Rotten Tomatoes Sleeping Beauty at the TCM Movie Database