A thesis statement usually appears in the introductory paragraph of a paper. It offers a concise summary of the main point or claim of the essay, research paper, etc. It is usually expressed in one sentence, and the statement may be reiterated elsewhere. It contains the topic and the controlling idea. There are two types of thesis statements: direct and indirect. The indirect thesis statement does not state the explicit reasons, while the direct thesis statement does. "I love New York for three reasons" is an indirect thesis statement because it promises three rationales to support the claim but does not include the reasons in the thesis statement itself. On the other hand, "I love New York because of the food, jazz clubs, and Broadway Shows," is a direct thesis statement because it specifies three reasons. The thesis statement is developed, supported, and explained in the course of the paper using examples and evidence. Thesis statements help organize and develop the body of the writing piece. They let readers know what the writer's statement is and what it is aiming to prove. A thesis statement does not necessarily forecast the organization of an essay, which can be more complex than its purpose. The thesis statement reflects the kind of paper being written. There are three kinds of papers: analytical, expository, and argumentative.[citation needed] The structure of a thesis statement depends upon the nature of determining essay type. In simple terms, first, a thesis statement has a main topic sentence formed from questioning it, then the writer's statement regarding the topic sentence, and finally ends with the specific supporting points detailing the writer's statement for justifying its relation with the topic sentence. It generally has a supportable opinion (specific/focused) and clear intent for the essay. Topic sentence Conclusion (writing) "Tips and Examples for Writing Thesis Statements". Purdue Online Writing Lab. Retrieved 25 September 2019. "How to Write a Thesis Statement". Writing Tutorial Services, Indiana University Bloomington. Retrieved 2023-03-24. Jonathan Culler and Kevin Lamb. Just being difficult?: academic writing in the public arena Stanford, Calif. : Stanford University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-8047-4709-1 William Germano. Getting It Published, 2nd Edition: A Guide for Scholars and Anyone Else Serious About Serious Books. ISBN 978-0-226-28853-6. Read a chapter. Wellington, J. J. Getting published a guide for lecturers and researcher London; New York Routledge Falmer, 2003. ISBN 0-415-29847-4 John A. Goldsmith et al. "Teaching and Research" imic Keywords: A Devil's Dictionary for Higher Education. ISBN 0-415-92203-8. Martin Horton-Eddison. "First Class Essays" Hull, United Kingdom: Purple Peacock Press, 2012 Carol Tenopir and Donald King. "Towards Electronic Journals: Realities for Librarians and Publishers. SLA, 2000. ISBN 0-87111-507-7. Björk, B-C. (2007) "A model of scientific communication as a globally distributed information system" Information Research, 12(2) paper 307. Furman, R. (2007). Practical tips for publishing scholarly articles: Writing and publishing in the helping professions. Chicago: Lyceum Books. Cargill, M. and O'Connor, P. (2013) Writing Research Articles. West Sussex, UK. John Wiley & Sons Inc. 2nd Ed. ISBN 978-1-4443-5621-2 Lisa A. Kirby, Writing Effective Thesis Statements, North Carolina Wesleyan College Guide to Writing Master Thesis in English, Tomas Bata University in Zlín, Pg. 48