A gate or gateway is a point of entry to or from a space enclosed by walls. The word derived from old Norse "gat" meaning road or path; But other terms include yett and port. The concept originally referred to the gap or hole in the wall or fence, rather than a barrier which closed it. Gates may prevent or control the entry or exit of individuals, or they may be merely decorative. The moving part or parts of a gateway may be considered "doors", as they are fixed at one side whilst opening and closing like one. A gate may have a latch that can be raised and lowered to both open a gate or prevent it from swinging. Gate operation can be either automated gate operator or manual. Locks are also used on gates to increase security. Larger gates can be used for a whole building, such as a castle or fortified town. Actual doors can also be considered gates when they are used to block entry as prevalent within a gatehouse. Today, many gate doors are equipped with self-closing devices that can improve safety, security, and convenience. It is important to choose a controlled gate closer to ensure a consistent closing speed, as well as safety and security. A self-closing gate can help prevent accidents by children or pets, particularly around swimming pools, spas, beaches and hot tubs. A self-closing gate can also improve the security of the property by ensuring that the gate is closed and latched properly. There are various types of gate closers available, including exposed spring devices, gate closers, spring hinges, and self-closing hinges. The appropriate type of closer will depend on the weight and size of the gate, as well as other factors like speed control, weather resistance, and ADA compliance. Baby gate: a safety gate to protect babies and toddlers City gate of a walled city Hampshire gate (a.k.a. New Zealand gate, wire gate, etc.) Kissing gate on a footpath Lychgate with a roof Mon Japanese: gate. The religious torii compares to the Chinese pailou (paifang), Indian torana, Indonesian Paduraksa and Korean hongsalmun. Mon are widespread, in Japanese gardens. Portcullis of a castle Race gate used for checkpoints on race tracks. Slip gate on footpaths Turnstile Watergate of a castle by navigable water Slalom skiing gates Wicket gate This gate and massive gateposts has no locks—a gate marks a borderline in ownership/use and can allow passage. A small, elegant gate to a meadow path Ishtar Gate is the oldest city gate in existence Wringin Lawang, a 14th-century Majapahit split gate, called "Candi bentar", in Trowulan, Java, Indonesia Richly decorated Indonesian Balinese temple gate called Paduraksa This gate at Columbia University was closed to prevent entry of protesters The gate of Finlayson factory in Tampere, Finland A gate at Kansai University, built in 1923 Malaysian King's Palace Gate, Kuala Lampur Medieval ironclad city gate, from the Upper Gate in the old town of Ohrid Chinese traditional type gate (iron gate in front of house) in Kerala, India Gates decorate routes in the entrance of Muscat, Oman Kuwait Gate, historically surrounded Kuwait City, built in 1929 Royal Military College of Canada front gates and gatehouse Ernst Rudolph, By the Entrance A wooden gate pictured in the coat of arms of Nivala Decorative emblems of state are also fixed on gates to public buildings, old Royal Melbourne Mint Gate of Shri Swaminarayan Mandir, Bhavnagar, India Dr.Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University gate on the eve of Namvistar Din celebrations reflects Ajanata art Michael's Gate in Bratislava, Slovakia St. Louis Gateway Arch A Chinese Paifang at Foshan, China Warsaw University main gate, Poland Gate of Farm Gunsteling in Namibia (2017) Thai Temple (wat) gate at Wat Suan Dok, Chiang Mai A gopuram, Hindu temple gate tower, in Sri Lanka A Japanese temple gate (mon) at Eiheiji A Moorish architecture gate in Alhambra, Granada, Spain A French-manner gate of the embassy of Thailand in Paris Adapted-Korean-manner gate of the embassy of South Korea in Moscow The Iron Gates of Osgoode Hall, Toronto Beachside gate with a self-latching device and a higher than 54” release mechanism. City Gate Barricade Boom barrier (a.k.a. boom gate) Border Gate tower Gopuram Leave the gate as you found it Portal (architecture) Portcullis Threshold (disambiguation) Triumphal arch List of scandals with "-gate" suffix Watergate, as used in politics "gate | Origin and meaning of gate by Online Etymology Dictionary". www.etymonline.com. Retrieved 2019-04-20. "GATE | meaning in the Cambridge English Dictionary". dictionary.cambridge.org. Retrieved 2019-04-20. "Hardware 101: Gate Latches". Gardenista. 2016-11-17. Retrieved 2019-04-20. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gates and Portals. Look up gate in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.