Marcus Rashford MBE (born 31 October 1997) is an English professional footballer who plays as a forward for Premier League club Manchester United and the England national team. A product of the Manchester United youth system, Rashford joined the club at the age of seven. Rashford scored two goals on both his first-team and European debut against Midtjylland in the UEFA Europa League in February 2016 and his Premier League debut against Arsenal three days later. He also scored in his first Manchester derby, as well as on his EFL Cup and UEFA Champions League debuts. With United, Rashford has won the FA Cup, two EFL Cups, the FA Community Shield and the UEFA Europa League. Rashford scored on his England debut in May 2016, becoming the youngest English player to score in his first senior international match. He has since appeared at two UEFA European Championship; 2016, where he was the tournament's youngest player, and 2020, where he appeared in the final as England finished runners-up to Italy. He has also represented England at the 2018 and 2022 FIFA World Cup. Rashford has been praised for using his platform to be a political activist and philanthropist to drive societal change. He is a campaigner against racism, homelessness and child hunger in the United Kingdom. He has been recognised for his efforts by organisations both within and outside of sport, and was subject of a mural painted by street artist Akse in Withington. Marcus Rashford was born on 31 October 1997 in Manchester, and raised in the Fallowfield, Withington, and Wythenshawe areas of the city. He is of paternal Jamaican descent, and maternal Kittitian descent, with his grandmother born on the West Indies island of Saint Kitts. Rashford comes from a working class family; his mother is Melanie Maynard, a single parent who worked multiple jobs, sometimes skipping meals to ensure her children had enough to eat. Rashford has four older siblings: two brothers, Dwaine Maynard and Dane Rashford, both of whom went on to represent him professionally, and two sisters, Chantelle and Claire. He is a cousin of footballer Lois Maynard, who plays as a midfielder for Radcliffe. A lifelong supporter of his local football club Manchester United, Rashford grew up in a family divided in their support of United and local rivals Manchester City. Rashford attended Ashton-on-Mersey School, where United have sent their academy players since 1998, close to their Carrington training ground; he studied for a Business and Technology Education Council (BTEC) National Diploma in Sport. Rashford began playing football for Fletcher Moss Rangers at the age of five, starting out as a goalkeeper, and cited former United goalkeeper Tim Howard as his goalkeeping idol. Fletcher Moss Rangers academy development officer Dave Horrocks recalls that Rashford was on a "different level" to other boys, playing a major role as the team won a tournament with 15 scouts from various clubs watching. He spent a week training with Manchester City before he joined the academy system at Manchester United at the age of seven, amid interest from Everton and Liverpool. He credited his brothers with helping him decide to join United. Former United youth coach Paul McGuinness quickly saw Rashford's potential due to his athleticism both on and off the ball, but during his early years at the club he often had to miss training as a result of difficulty getting there while his mother and brothers were at work. He eventually received assistance from youth coaches Dave Bushell, Eamon Mulvey, and Tony Whelan, who helped find drivers for Rashford to get to the training ground. When he was 11, he became the youngest ever player to be selected for the Manchester United Schoolboy Scholars scheme, usually reserved for players 12 and above. He was fastracked and began playing cage football with Paul Pogba, Jesse Lingard and Ravel Morrison, helping to increase his skill level playing with players four years his senior. In 2012, he was part of the Manchester United under-15 squad which finished second in the 23rd annual Marveld tournament. In 2014, The Guardian named him as Manchester United's best prospect in the 2014 Next Generation, saying that his "total-football style gives him a fair chance of going all the way". Rashford trained with United's first team for the first time aged 16 under the management of David Moyes during the 2013–14 season, and described the training session as "priceless" to himself and other United academy players; he began training with the first team more regularly, and was deemed a "high flier" by coaches. In 2015, United Under-19s manager Nicky Butt praised Rashford's performances for the team in a group stage match of the UEFA Youth League. His inclusion in the team began following an injury to Demetri Mitchell, and he capitalised on his chance by scoring six goals in 11 games in the Under-18's Premier League, as well as three goals in the Youth League. He was awarded the captaincy of the team by Butt, who hailed him as a leader. Rashford was named on the first-team bench for the first time on 21 November by Louis van Gaal for a Premier League match against Watford, which Manchester United won 2–1. He received the number 39 squad number, due to Van Gaal's insistence that strikers wear a squad number containing a nine. The following week against Leicester City, he was again named on the bench, but was again unused in a 1–1 draw. In February 2016, Rashford was subject to a loan bid from League One club Crewe Alexandra, but the temporary transfer was rejected by Reserves manager Warren Joyce. Former teammate Sean Goss described how Rashford impressed in first-team training sessions while the club was suffering an injury crisis, despite being one of the younger players called up to train. On 25 February 2016, Rashford was included in the 18-man squad for United's UEFA Europa League round of 32, second leg tie against Danish club Midtjylland, owing to an injury crisis which saw 13 players injured. After Anthony Martial was injured in the warm-up, Rashford was chosen to start the game, and marked his first-team debut with two goals in the second half of a 5–1 win. Rashford's goals made him United's youngest ever scorer in European competition, beating a record previously held by George Best, and which was later broken by Mason Greenwood in the 2019–20 season. Rashford made his Premier League debut against Arsenal three days later; he again scored twice and provided the assist for the other goal in a 3–2 home victory against their rivals, making him the third youngest scorer for United in the Premier League after Federico Macheda and Danny Welbeck. Van Gaal hailed his performance as "fantastic" and better than his first match, but urged caution from the press not to harass and hype him, feeling he had the character to cope. On 20 March, Rashford made history when he scored the only goal in the Manchester derby, his team's first away league win over Manchester City since 2012; aged just 18 years and 141 days, he became the youngest scorer in the fixture in the Premier League era, overtaking Wayne Rooney's record by almost one year. During the FA Cup sixth-round replay against West Ham United on 13 April, Rashford scored a fantastic curled goal in a 2–1 win to help United advance to the semi-final. Three days later, he scored the only goal of the game against Aston Villa, who were subsequently relegated for the first time since 1987. He later led the line in the FA Cup final against Crystal Palace on 21 May, which ended in a 2–1 victory marking United's 12th FA Cup win and Rashford's first piece of silverware. He wrapped up the season with 8 goals in 18 appearances, despite only debuting in February, as well as winning the Jimmy Murphy Young Player of the Year. On 30 May, Rashford signed a new contract with United worth £20,000 a week, which would keep him at the club until 2020, with an option to extend for a further year. For the 2016–17 season, marking his place as part of the senior squad, Rashford was given the number 19 by new manager José Mourinho. The signing of veteran striker Zlatan Ibrahimović meant he often had to settle for a place on the substitutes bench, though upon his signing, Ibrahimović praised Rashford as a "huge talent" and "the future of England". Rashford scored his first goal of the season on 27 August 2016 against Hull City, scoring in the second minute of injury time after coming on for Juan Mata in the 71st minute. He scored thrice more the next month, on 18 September in a 3–1 league defeat to Watford; on 21 September in a 3–1 victory against Northampton Town in the EFL Cup third round; and in a 4–1 league win over Leicester City on 24 September. The following month, he was named as runner-up to Portugal's Renato Sanches in the Golden Boy award for best European player under the age of 21. On the pitch, however, he failed to score until 7 January 2017, when he scored a four-minute brace in the FA Cup against Jaap Stam's Reading, which ended 4–0. Rashford won his third trophy on 26 February in the EFL Cup final, coming on as a 77th-minute substitute in the 3–2 victory over Southampton. He was an instrumental part of United's 2–0 win over league leaders' Chelsea on 16 April, scoring the first goal after seven minutes from Ander Herrera's through ball. Rashford scored another key goal four days later against Anderlecht in the 107th minute of the Europa League quarter-final second leg in a 2–1 win (3–2 on aggregate), sending United into the next round. He started in the Europa League final on 24 May against Dutch team Ajax, which Manchester United won 2–0 thus earning his fourth, and first European, trophy. Due to the signing of Ibrahimović, Rashford spent the majority of the season on the wing. He made the most appearances of any United player during the season, playing 53 times. Rashford made his first appearance of his second full senior season on 8 August 2017 against Real Madrid in the UEFA Super Cup as a 46th-minute substitute in a 2–1 defeat. He started in a 4–0 home win against West Ham United five days later on 13 August, providing the assist for Romelu Lukaku's opening goal. Rashford scored his first goal of the season on 26 August, the opener in a 2–0 victory over Leicester, three minutes after coming on as a substitute. On 12 September, Rashford scored against Basel on his UEFA Champions League debut, the third in a 3–0 win, marking the sixth competition that he had scored on his debut. He scored a brace against Burton Albion on 20 September in the EFL Cup third round, as well as assisting the fourth goal in a 4–1 victory. On 23 October, Rashford came third in the 2017 Golden Boy award behind winner Kylian Mbappé and Ousmane Dembélé. By 28 October, Rashford had contributed to 12 goals in 16 games, with seven goals and five assists, with his most recent goal being against Huddersfield Town on 21 October and his most recent assist coming against Swansea City on 24 October. On 6 December, he put in a man of the match performance in a 2–1 victory against CSKA Moscow, scoring the winning goal to help United qualify for the knockout phase of the Champions League. In the January transfer window, the club signed Alexis Sánchez, threatening Rashford's future in the team. On 10 March 2018, Rashford scored both goals in a 2–1 win over rivals Liverpool on his first Premier League start of the year. Three days later, United were eliminated from the Champions League after a 2–1 defeat to Spanish side Sevilla, with Rashford producing the assist for United's goal. Mourinho was criticised for playing Rashford out of position on the right wing, where he was unable to play with any "spontaneity and freedom". Rashford scored in United's last game of the season on 13 May, a 1–0 victory over Watford at Old Trafford. At the conclusion of the season, Mourinho rejected the possibility of Rashford leaving on loan, pointing out Rashford had been selected for almost every match of the season. Prior to the 2018–19 season, Rashford was given the squad number 10 following the release of Ibrahimović, the club's previous number 10. The shirt had also previously been worn in the Premier League by Teddy Sheringham, Ruud van Nistelrooy, and Wayne Rooney, and he was the third academy graduate to wear it after Mark Hughes and David Beckham. On 2 September, Rashford was sent off in a 2–0 win over Burnley at Turf Moor after clashing heads with Phil Bardsley, having only been on the pitch for 10 minutes; Mourinho labelled him "naïve", and put it down to inexperience. On 11 September, Sky Sports pundit Jamie Carragher opined that Rashford would have to leave United to reach his potential, having not started a game in the season at that point. Mourinho defended his use of Rashford in the team, suggesting that other clubs did not give youth players the same game time Rashford had recorded in the prior two seasons; he started his first game and subsequently scored his first goal of the season on 29 September in a 3–1 loss to West Ham United. On 3 November, he scored again, providing a winning goal in the second minute of stoppage time in a 2–1 win over AFC Bournemouth. On 1 December, Rashford provided both assists in United's 2–2 draw with Southampton, with the goals coming from Lukaku and Herrera. The following Saturday against Fulham, he provided two assists for Ashley Young and Juan Mata before scoring the final goal in a 4–1 victory. On 22 December, Rashford scored in the third minute of Manchester United's first match under new interim manager Ole Gunnar Solskjær, in which United beat Cardiff City 5–1. On 30 December, Rashford again scored against Bournemouth in his final game of 2018, also assisting Paul Pogba's first goal in United's 4–1 victory. Solskjær praised Rashford's performances during the beginning of his reign, describing him as "different class", and said he thought Rashford had the chance to become one of the best strikers in the world. During United's first match of 2019 on 2 January, Rashford assisted their first goal from a free kick and scored the second in a 2–0 win over Newcastle United at St James' Park. Following this series of performances, pundit Gary Neville praised Rashford for beginning to play beyond just his potential, establishing himself as a "devastating" forward player. On 13 January, Rashford scored the only goal in a 1–0 victory over Tottenham Hotspur at Wembley Stadium; this marked the first time he had scored in three successive league games in his career, the third youngest to achieve this for United behind only Rooney and Ronaldo. The following week, he made his 150th appearance for the club in a 2–1 win against Brighton & Hove Albion, scoring a solo goal to become the youngest player in United's history to score in four successive league games, and the fourth youngest to reach 150 games, behind Norman Whiteside, George Best, and Ryan Giggs. On 2 February, Rashford was announced as Manchester United's Player of the Month for January 2019, as well as winning United's goal of the month for his strike against Tottenham. A day later, he made his 100th league appearance for the club and scored the only goal in a 1–0 away victory over Leicester City. In doing so, he became the second-youngest player after Giggs to reach the milestone for the club. His impressive performances in January earned him his first Premier League Player of the Month title, becoming the first United player since Ibrahimović in December 2016 to win the award. On 6 March, Rashford scored from his first competitive penalty for the club, sealing a 3–1 win in the second leg of their Champions League round of 16 tie against Paris Saint-Germain to send the club through to the quarter-final on the away goals rule; he also contributed to Lukaku's equaliser, who scored off the rebound from Rashford's initial shot. Solskjær described him as "fearless" for taking the penalty. On 30 March, Rashford scored the opening goal in United's first victory with Solskjær as permanent manager, beating Watford 2–1. On 1 July 2019, Rashford signed a new four-year contract with Manchester United, keeping him at the club until June 2023, with the option to extend by a further year. On the opening week of the season, Rashford scored a brace in a 4–0 win over Chelsea. In September, following a spell of poor form, Solskjær said he was not concerned about Rashford's dip in form and lack of goals. Towards the end of October, a return to form saw Rashford score in a 1–1 draw with rivals Liverpool, ending their 17 match winning streak. The following week, Rashford scored and assisted against Norwich City, and scored a second brace against Chelsea in the EFL Cup. The return to form saw Rashford go on the best goalscoring run of his career to date, with 16 club goals in 20 matches, ending the run with a brace in a 4–0 victory over Norwich. Rashford suffered a double stress fracture to the back in the following game, an FA Cup tie a\on 19 January 2020 gainst Wolverhampton Wanderers, which put him out of action for several months. By playing in the game, he became the fourth youngest United player to have played 200 games for the club. The season was halted for over three months, following a decision on 13 March by the Premier League to suspend the league after a number of players and other club staff became ill due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In May, Solskjær announced that Rashford would be fit to play following the return to football during project restart, which saw the season resume behind closed doors for the remainder of the season. On 4 July, he scored his first goal since the restart as United beat Bournemouth 5–2. On 16 July, he scored his 17th league goal of the season in a 2–0 victory against Crystal Palace, equalling his tally in the two previous seasons combined. At the end of season, Rashford was voted third for the English FWA Footballer of the Year award, and he also received the PFA Merit Award. On 26 September 2020, Rashford scored his first goal of the season in a 3–2 win against Brighton & Hove Albion. On 20 October, he scored the winning goal in a 2–1 away win against PSG in the first match of the 2020–21 Champions League. In the next Champions League match, Rashford scored his first United hat-trick in a 5–0 win over RB Leipzig; it was the second hat-trick ever scored by a United substitute, following manager Solskjær in the Premier League in 1999. He became the sixth United player to score a Champions League hat-trick, and the first since Robin van Persie in 2014. Rashford suffered a shoulder injury during a 3–1 victory against Everton; he continued to play despite the injury, but completed only one full game over the following month. On 26 December, Rashford became the third youngest United player to score 50 Premier League goals, when he scored the opening goal in the away fixture against Leicester City that ended in a 2–2 draw. On 12 January 2021, Rashford assisted a goal for Paul Pogba to score the only goal of the game against Burnley, which resulted in United being top of the table for the first time since the 2012–13 season. On 2 February, he scored the second goal in United's Premier League record-equalling 9–0 win against Southampton. During a 1–0 win against West Ham in the FA Cup on 9 February, Rashford made his 250th appearance for the club, becoming the fourth youngest to reach the milestone. In April it was reported by ESPN that he had "not played a game completely pain-free in two years" due to shoulder, back, and foot injuries. Following the conclusion of the UEFA Euro 2020 tournament in which he represented England, it was agreed upon by club doctors and specialists that Rashford would be operated on; the surgery "went well" and ruled him out until October of the 2021–22 season. Rashford returned to training on 11 October 2021, and made a goalscoring return in a 4–2 away loss to Leicester, coming off the bench and making the score 2–2. On 22 January 2022, in a 1–0 win against West Ham United, Rashford came on in the 63rd minute for Anthony Elanga, going on to score a 93rd-minute winner; the goal meant he had scored more last-minute winners in Premier League history (four) than any other player, and new manager Ralf Rangnick responded by saying Rashford was "one of the top strikers in England" amid a bad run of form. After enjoying a successful pre-season under new manager Erik ten Hag, who began the season by deploying Rashford both as a centre-forward and a left-winger, he opened his account for the season by scoring in a 2–1 win against Liverpool, and then twice in a 3–1 win against Arsenal; with an additional two assists, Rashford matched his contributions from the previous season. On 30 October, Rashford scored his 100th United goal in a 1–0 win against West Ham. He became the 22nd player to reach the figure for United, and the first in 13 years since Wayne Rooney. On 20 December, Rashford extended his contract by a year, but was dropped for a game against Wolverhampton Wanderers on 31 December as punishment for oversleeping and being late for a team meeting; he came on during the match and scored the only goal in a 1–0 win. On 14 January 2023, he was instrumental in United's 2–1 comeback win in the Manchester derby, first being part of the build-up play for United's controversial equaliser despite being in an offside position, and then scoring the winning goal four minutes later. Rashford's performances during the season were recognised as some of the most impactful and consistent of his career. On 16 February, Rashford became the third United player – after Andy Cole and Dwight Yorke in 1998 – to score against Barcelona at the Camp Nou during a 2–2 draw in a knockout round play-off in the Europa League. On 26 February, Rashford scored his team's second goal in the 2023 EFL Cup final against Newcastle United, helping his team win the trophy; the goal was initially given as an own goal by Newcastle defender Sven Botman before Rashford was credited with the goal. He scored his 30th goal of the season during a 4–1 win against Chelsea in May, with manager ten Hag saying he was capable of scoring 40 in a season; Rashford was the first United player to reach the milestone since Robin van Persie in the 2012–13 season. At the end of the season, he was voted by the clubs supporters and playing squad as the Sir Matt Busby Player of the Year and the Players' Player of the Year. On 18 July 2023, Rashford signed a new contract with Manchester United until 2028, for which he is paid £325,000 per week (£16.9m per year). He received his second career red card in a 4–3 UEFA Champions League group stage loss to FC Copenhagen on 8 November that year. In January 2024, he missed an FA Cup game against Newport County after calling in sick; Manchester United said "Marcus has taken responsibility for his actions. This has been dealt with as an internal disciplinary matter, which is now closed". Rashford, who had scored four goals in the first half of the season, had also been dropped by Ten Hag in November for hosting a birthday party after losing to Manchester City. Former Manchester United player Gary Neville said "I know he's going through a dip in form at this moment in time but it's happened twice and it can sometimes become your personality if you're not careful". In 2012, Rashford was invited to an England under-16 training camp, and was later selected to play in the Victory Shield against Northern Ireland under-16s in September, and Wales under-16s in October. Under-16's manager Kenny Swain later revealed that Rashford only played two appearances for the side due to an understanding with coaches at Manchester United regarding him being underdeveloped physically, and also thought the exposure would have been "too much" for him. Three weeks after making his senior début for United in early 2016, Rashford made his first appearance for the England under-20 team, providing an assist for Kasey Palmer in a 2–1 defeat to Canada under-20s. Despite already making his senior début earlier in the year, Rashford was called up to the England under-21 team for the first time in August 2016 for a fixture in September against Norway under-21s. He scored a hat-trick in the 6–1 home victory over Norway in his only appearance for the team, scoring the third with a penalty, his first since turning professional. Under-21 manager Gareth Southgate praised Rashford for his humility in dropping down to under-21 level. Despite having already made his senior tournament début, it was expected Rashford would be available for selection for the 2017 UEFA European Under-21 Championship, with the hopes of gaining more tournament experience. United manager José Mourinho responded to these reports by stating it would make no sense for his development as he was already playing senior football. In April 2017, Mourinho appeared to concede Rashford would attend the tournament, saying he had no right to stop him from participating, but later in the month reiterated his opinion that dropping down wouldn't make sense, with Rashford having gained so much senior experience throughout the season. In May, Rashford made the decision not to go to the tournament, and was instead selected for the senior squad by Southgate, the new manager. Southgate praised the decisions taken by United coaching staff in helping maximise the potential of Rashford by not allowing him exposure at youth level for England, saying his development had been handled well by all parties. Rashford's performances in his first senior season led to calls for him to represent England at UEFA Euro 2016. Manchester United academy coach Nicky Butt dismissed these calls, calling them premature and possibly harmful for the player's development, as did England manager Roy Hodgson, who said Rashford should be allowed to "develop in peace". In April, Hodgson admitted it was "unlikely" Rashford would be included in his tournament squad, but on 16 May, Hodgson named him in his preliminary 26-man squad for the tournament. He became part of England's Euro 2016 squad less than four months after making his United debut. On 27 May, he made his début for England wearing the number nine shirt, starting a warm-up match against Australia at the Stadium of Light and scoring the opening goal of a 2–1 win after three minutes, becoming the youngest Englishman to score on his international début, and the third youngest overall. The previous youngest scoring debutant was Tommy Lawton in 1938. On 16 June, he replaced Adam Lallana in the 73rd minute of England's 2–1 win over Wales at Euro 2016, making his tournament début at the age of 18 years and 229 days, becoming England's youngest ever player at a European Championships and breaking Wayne Rooney's Euro 2004 record by four days. He played just one more game in the tournament, coming on as a late substitute in England's shock 2–1 loss to Iceland in which he was praised for his impact, but described it as a valuable experience. New England manager Sam Allardyce told Rashford he would not be called up to his first squad for a 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification match against Slovakia in September, citing his lack of playing time in the early stages of the season. Allardyce was quickly replaced by Southgate, and Rashford was recalled to the senior team for games against Malta and Slovenia in October. Rashford scored his first competitive goal for the senior team on 4 September 2017, with the winning goal in England's 2–1 win over Slovakia in 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification. He was named in the 23-man England squad for the World Cup. Rashford scored the opening goal of England's final warm-up match against Costa Rica on 7 June 2018, and was tipped by former England stars Chris Waddle and Glenn Hoddle to start England's opening match against Tunisia. He started the game on the bench, but came on and performed well after replacing Raheem Sterling, deemed to be his direct competition for the starting role. He was reportedly set to start the second game against Panama due to the potential physically posed by their opposition, but Southgate ultimately changed his mind, Having already qualified for the knockout stage, he started England's final group game against Belgium alongside Jamie Vardy, but failed to impress. Rashford came on as a substitute and scored in the round of 16 penalty shoot-out against Colombia which saw England progress to the quarter-final. England ultimately finished fourth overall – their best performance since 1990. On 8 September 2018, Rashford scored at Wembley in England's UEFA Nations League opener against Spain, losing 2–1. Three days later, Rashford also scored in a 1–0 friendly win over Switzerland at the King Power Stadium. The following month, he scored a goal and provided an assist in a 3–2 away win against Spain. England's final Nations League game on 18 November saw Rashford play in a 2–1 win over Croatia that saw England top their group and qualify for the Nations League finals in June 2019. His appearance in this game saw Rashford equal a national record set by Jack Charlton in 1966 by playing a total of 16 games for England throughout the year. In the semi-final, Rashford scored the opening goal of the game against the Netherlands, however England lost 3–1 in extra time. During the October 2019 internationals, Rashford scored his first goal in England's qualification campaign for Euro 2020 in a 6–0 away victory over Bulgaria on 14 October. Rashford also scored in both of England's November internationals, a 7–0 win over Montenegro and a 4–0 win over Kosovo. These wins saw England become the ninth team to qualify for Euro 2020. On 6 June 2021, Rashford captained England for the first time, converting a penalty in a 1–0 win against Romania; he became the youngest England captain since Michael Owen in 2003, and was the seventh Manchester United player to captain England score in the same game. Rashford was named in the 26-man squad for Euro 2020, and was given the number 11 shirt, but going into the tournament, Rashford's role as a starter appeared in doubt. In the final against Italy on 11 July, Rashford was brought on as a substitute in the final minutes of extra time. He was chosen to take the team's third penalty during the subsequent shoot-out but his effort hit the post and went wide, and Italy went on to win the tournament after saving two more penalties. After the loss, Rashford was subjected to racially abusive messages on social media, and a street mural honouring him in Withington was vandalised. Residents quickly filled the wall with hearts and messages of support for Rashford, and street artist Akse returned to restore the mural to its original form. After undergoing surgery on his shoulder, Rashford missed England's next squad for World Cup qualification games against Group I opponents Hungary, Andorra, and Poland, but returned to the squad for November's qualification games against Albania and San Marino, before being forced to withdraw due to illness. Due to a drop in form for United during the 2021–22 season, he was not called up to the England for March 2022 friendlies against Switzerland and Ivory Coast, and again in June for four Nations League matches against Hungary, Germany, and Italy, with Southgate saying Rashford and club teammate Jadon Sancho had a lot to do to get back in the squad for the World Cup. Rashford subsequently failed to receive a call-up for England's next squad in September for the final two Nations League matches against Italy and Germany. Despite not appearing for England since the final of the European Championships, Rashford was named in Southgate's 26-man squad for the 2022 FIFA World Cup in Qatar, and was again assigned the number 11 shirt. In England's opening game of the group stage, a 6–2 win over Iran, Rashford came on as a second-half substitute and scored within a minute of coming on, making the score 5–1. At 49 seconds, the goal was the third quickest by a substitute in World Cup history. In England's final group game, Rashford scored two goals in a 3–0 win against Wales to qualify for the knockout stage. His second was England's 100th goal in all World Cups, and meant he became only the second United player after Bobby Charlton to score three or more at a major tournament. Southgate and former England defender Gary Neville both praised him for making progress after a tough 18 months for both club and country. Rashford can play as either a centre forward or a winger, primarily on the left-wing. Rashford himself prefers playing on the left, a position which allows him to cut inside and strike on goal with his stronger right foot, and likes to drop deep to collect the ball and build an attack, something he learned as a youngster when playing as a central midfielder following a battle with Osgood–Schlatter disease. In his formative years, Rashford's former youth coach Paul McGuinness noted how he was attempting to play similarly to Italian midfielder Andrea Pirlo, but he and fellow coaches Warren Joyce and Colin Little saw Rashford's potential as a striker and helped him work on his body shape and various attacking runs. They advised him to focus on being a goalscorer rather than a creative player, and to use his pace to make runs behind the defence. His coaches were reminded of Danny Welbeck due to his versatility, but it was decided to instead teach him the "art" of goalscoring, instructing him how to make runs at the right time, and was held back from playing reserve team football to give him confidence in his goalscoring abilities by pitting him against lesser defences. Rashford says his versatility can enable him to become the "ultimate centre forward". Rashford is a pacey and direct player, and often moves to central positions to create chances and get into goalscoring positions. He constantly tests defenders both with his movement and positioning off the ball, meaning opponents often double up on him. Rashford's former United manager José Mourinho has said he is "not a target man, he is a man of movement. I do not think he is a pure nine", comments echoed by his manager with England, Gareth Southgate, who has said his ability to play with his back to goal and his hold-up play weren't his major strengths, and is better suited as a "wide raider" coming in off the wing. United captain and England compatriot Harry Maguire attributes Rashford's reputation for being a goal threat to his movement and "clever play". Another former manager at United, Ole Gunnar Solskjær, has been credited with improving him as a player and helping him mature by giving him freedom as a winger he hadn't previously experienced. Rashford's main attributes also include his dribbling ability, and his "ruthless" finishing ability, which has been compared to that of former United striker Ruud van Nistelrooy, a player McGuinness advised him to study while they worked together in the club's academy. Rashford understands the need for a striker to be able to score different kinds of goals to be a player who can score 20 to 25 per season, and is said to be a player with composure and awareness. Rashford often takes penalties and free kicks for United, and has been known to use the knuckleball technique on set pieces, which was popularised by Cristiano Ronaldo during his first spell at the club. England teammate Phil Foden has described his striking technique as being among the "top three in the world". His success has been credited to his drive and personal ambition both on and off the pitch, and is viewed as a role model for younger players like Mason Greenwood due to his success at a young age. He attributes his "focus and dedication" to watching and listening to former United striker Robin van Persie, and recalls seeing pictures of former academy players such as David Beckham and Paul Scholes on the walls of Carrington, United's training centre, and being determined to reach the same level they had. According to McGuinness he was always professional and mature, and even at a young age, has been described as a leader, with former United and England midfielder Owen Hargreaves saying he has the characteristics to be a captain. Rashford has praised former teammate Zlatan Ibrahimović and Mourinho with helping improve his mentality, describing their combined influence as key to his development. He has been described as a "big game player" due to his performances and contributions in important matches, including on several débuts for club and country. Rashford has also received praise for his willingness to play on despite major injuries, with manager Solskjær saying he would "run through a brick wall for you", while his captain Harry Maguire describes him as a battler. Louis van Gaal, Rashford's first senior manager, and Fletcher Moss coach Dave Horrocks have both praised his ability to handle criticism, with van Gaal saying it was amongst his best assets. He is seen as a similar type of player to Thierry Henry in terms of style of play, physical attributes and end product. Van Gaal said his performances at a young age were similar to those of Patrick Kluivert, who he had managed at Ajax in the 1990s. Erik ten Hag, the United manager from the 2022–23 season, compared him to favourably to Kylian Mbappe due to the similar nature of their roles. Growing up, the player he most tried to emulate was Brazilian striker Ronaldo, having watched him score a hat-trick for Real Madrid in a Champions League quarter-final in the first match he attended live at Old Trafford. Speaking about Ronaldo, Rashford said: "I've grown up watching so much of him and his games. He always played free, and went out there and expressed himself. When you do that, that's when you play your best football." Rashford said that Cristiano Ronaldo and Wayne Rooney were United players he idolised in his youth, having seen them join the team at an early age and watched many of their games live, and said of Ronaldo that "there is no bigger inspiration in football" after Rashford had begun his own professional career; comparisons have been made between the development of the two by Southgate, Solskjær, and McGuinness. He credits Rooney's professionalism with helping him mature in the early stages of his career, describing how he was "always ready to play and give his best", and has been tipped by Little to break Rooney's goalscoring record of 253 goals for the club. He has been described as a "student of the game", continuing to watch matches of players such as Lionel Messi and Sergio Agüero with the idea of studying and learning to improve his own game. In October 2019, Rashford set up the In the Box campaign with Selfridges to give homeless people essential items over the Christmas period, something he had wanted to do when first training with United as a youth. He and his mother visited homeless shelters to personally hand the boxes out, while also sending some to a children's home in his grandmother's home country of Saint Kitts and Nevis. He was reportedly frustrated by the limited outreach the campaign resulted in. In March 2020, during the UK lockdown imposed by Boris Johnson's government in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Rashford teamed up with the poverty and food waste charity FareShare to deliver meals to those in the Greater Manchester area who were no longer receiving their free school meals, as well as to children who attended community centres and school breakfast clubs. Rashford initially contacted FareShare to make a "substantial" donation, but after discussion with CEO Lindsay Boswell, he decided to provide his full support. With an initial target of supporting 400,000 children in the region, the initiative quickly raised over £20 million to provide food for children nationwide who, if still at school, would be receiving free school meals. On 11 June, Rashford revealed that the charity had been able to provide 3 million meals across the country, a figure that rose to 4 million the following month. On 15 June, Rashford wrote an open letter to the UK government calling on them to end UK child poverty. A day later, the government announced a change in policy regarding the extension of free school meals for children during the summer holidays, with Rashford's campaign credited as a major turning point in governmental talks; Rashford described himself as "proud" of what he had helped accomplish on behalf of 1.3 million children. His actions were described as a "political masterclass" by The Guardian, and he was praised for countering comments made by Secretary of State for Health and Social Care Matt Hancock regarding the contributions of footballers. On 1 September, in an attempt to tackle child food poverty, Rashford announced that he had set up the Child Food Poverty Task Force in collaboration with several UK food shops, manufacturers, charities and delivery companies. Later that month, he said he was "disappointed by the lack of empathy" being shown by Conservative members of parliament. After he was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in October, Rashford vowed to continue his campaign, and a week later he began a petition on the UK Parliament petitions website to end child food poverty, with demands made for expansion of the free school meals programme, provision of meals and activities during school holidays, and an increase in the value of Healthy Start vouchers. The petition received over 100,000 signatures in 10 hours, meaning it had passed the threshold to be considered for parliamentary debate, and received over 200,000 signatures in the first day. With the petition close to 300,000 signatures after less than a week, Labour proposed an opposition day debate on the matter of extending free school meals, which was rejected by a majority of 61. Rashford criticised those who voted against it as lacking humanity. Later that week, Rashford began using his Twitter account to promote cafés, individual people, charities and local businesses offering assistance to FareShare to help the impoverished around the country. He received the local backing of the Mayor of Greater Manchester Andy Burnham, and The Co-operative Group, to provide 1,000 food vouchers over half-term, which was quickly followed by councils and businesses across the North-West backing the efforts. He described himself as "blown away" by the nationwide support which followed, with over 100 businesses, charities, and local councils quickly pledging to the campaign. The same day, FareShare announced their new warehouse would be named Melanie Maynard House in honour of Rashford's mother, and it was revealed they had received donations in record numbers in the day following the Parliamentary debate. In the following days, over 1,200 had signed up to provide free meals over the half-term, and Rashford's petition became only the sixth to reach over 1 million signatures. On 8 November, it was announced that, because of Rashford's campaign, the government would be providing funding of almost £400m over the next 12 months to support the cost of food and household bills to poor families. At the end of the month, former Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson and venture capitalist Michael Moritz pledged to double any donations through a Christmas fundraising appeal set up by Rashford in conjunction with The Times newspaper, with Ferguson declaring himself "proud" of Rashford. The campaign had raised over £2.7 million by the beginning of January. In January 2021, Rashford again used his Twitter account to begin highlighting the "unacceptable" food packages parents had received through supplier Chartwells, an offspring of Compass Group, with Johnson again pressured into conducting a review into the situation after the pair had a conversation regarding the matter. During Prime Minister's Questions on 13 January, Johnson credited Rashford as being more effective opposition than the actual Leader of the Opposition Keir Starmer, the current Leader of the Labour Party. In April 2021, Rashford with chef Tom Kerridge, announced the launch of a series of recipes and online video lessons which will be available each week on Instagram and on recipe cards in supermarkets, schools and food banks to provide cheap and simple recipe ideas such as spaghetti bolognese and fish finger sandwich so that people could cook simple menus at home with the ideal that no one would go to bed feeling hungry. In October 2020, Rashford publicly questioned Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak regarding a permanent £20 increase in Universal Credit, stressing his concern that many families would be "counting down the days" until the scheduled reversal the following April. A member of Rashford's team told The Times the permanent annual increase of £1,040 was the "missing piece" in their campaign strategy. At the end of December, it was reported by The Guardian that Rashford would have discussions with Thérèse Coffey, the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, regarding the permanent increase in Universal Credit; Rashford had previously been critical of Coffey during the initial stages of his campaign. In the wake of the popularity generated by his charity work, Rashford signed with American rapper Jay-Z's entertainment agency Roc Nation in April 2020, with president Michael Yormark saying he was a "shining example" of somebody who was "passionate about community". In July 2020, he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Manchester in recognition of his work to end child poverty in the UK, becoming the youngest person to receive an honorary doctorate from the university. In October 2021, in the ceremony at which the degree was conferred (delayed because of the COVID-19 pandemic), Dame Nancy Rothwell, the Vice-Chancellor, called him "an exceptional young man who continues to demonstrate a sense of community and generosity that goes well beyond his years." In a speech in reply, he remarked that the occasion was bittersweet, because it was the day after the £20/week increase in Universal Credit made by the government in April 2020 as a temporary response to the pandemic had been withdrawn. His efforts also led to him being featured on the September cover of British Vogue's "Activism Now" edition alongside Adwoa Aboah, which he downplayed, saying that he "had a voice and a platform that could be used to at least ask the questions". In October, Rashford was appointed MBE in the 2020 Birthday Honours, and was also a recipient of the City of Manchester Award for his "outstanding and exceptional contribution to the city". At the 2020 Pride of Britain Awards, he won the award for Special Recognition for his campaign against child food poverty. Local street artist Akse honoured Rashford with a mural of him in Withington, a suburb of Manchester where Rashford lived at the time he signed for Fletcher Moss Rangers. The Voice, the only British African-Caribbean newspaper in the United Kingdom, named Rashford on the Football Black List, an initiative designed to celebrate influential black people in football. Rashford was named as Campaigner Of The Year in the 2020 GQ Men Of The Year awards. Although not on the main category shortlist, he was the recipient of a special award at the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award's, with a documentary airing the following night. At the annual The Best FIFA Football Awards 2020 held in December, Rashford was the inaugural winner of the FIFA Foundation Award, with the FIFA Foundation CEO Youri Djorkaeff also donating £75,000 to the charities. In November 2020, Rashford was recognised for his sporting achievements and his activism, by being included in the 2020 edition of the annual Powerlist of the 100 most influential Black Britons. In January 2021, Rashford was awarded The Guardian Footballer of the Year, an award given to "a player who has done something remarkable, whether by overcoming adversity, helping others or setting a sporting example by acting with exceptional honesty", and was the recipient of the Football Writers' Association's (FWA) Tribute Award. In February, he was listed on Time magazine's 100 Next list, selected as an "advocate", and in April was named as part of Forbes magazine's 30 Under 30, Europe Sports & Games for showcasing "impactful leadership". The following month, Rashford became the youngest person to be ranked number one in the Sunday Times Giving List, the newspaper's annual measure of "the generosity of those financially best equipped to make a difference". In April 2021, Rashford received an award from the National Education Union for his work in campaigning for free school meals. In 2023, Rashford’s continued political influence led him to be ranked 42nd on the New Statesman’s Left Power List 2023, described by the paper as a “one-man opposition party” that reimagined the role of the celebrity activist. For the 2020 World Book Day, Rashford supported a campaign to help share a million stories. He also agreed to judge a poetry competition for children with hearing impairments, and began learning sign language in preparation. In November, he teamed with Macmillan Publishers to launch a book club to help vulnerable and underprivileged children experience the "escapism of reading", with Rashford saying that reading shouldn't be something a family should have to budget for. Under the partnership, Rashford released a non-fiction motivational children's book called You Are A Champion, which won Book of the Year at the British Book Awards in 2022. The book club was formally launched in April 2021, with the intention of freely distributing 50,000 books, while the club will release two new books a year. In May 2022, Rashford announced his engagement to girlfriend Lucia Loi. They had been dating since meeting in school, and briefly split in 2021 before reconciling. However, they announced their split in June 2023. Rashford is Christian, and has said, "The faith we have in God is shown by the people that we are." He has also talked about his values and how his mother impacted him: "The rules and the respect we had for each other. For my whole upbringing, she was the leader in that". He enjoys playing on PlayStation games consoles, and listens to rap and grime music, naming Dave as among his favourites. The pair linked for the 2022 advertisement Never Beaten for Beats. Rashford also owns a Cane Corso, purchased in 2018, who is his guard dog. As of match played 30 March 2024 Appearances in UEFA Europa League Appearance in FA Community Shield Appearances in UEFA Champions League Appearance in UEFA Super Cup Six appearances and six goals in UEFA Champions League, seven appearances and two goals in UEFA Europa League As of match played 23 March 2024 As of match played 23 March 2024 England score listed first, score column indicates score after each Rashford goal Manchester United FA Cup: 2015–16; runner-up: 2017–18, 2022–23 EFL Cup: 2016–17, 2022–23 FA Community Shield: 2016 UEFA Europa League: 2016–17; runner-up: 2020–21 England UEFA European Championship runner-up: 2020 UEFA Nations League third place: 2018–19 Individual Jimmy Murphy Young Player of the Year: 2015–16 Premier League Player of the Month: January 2019, September 2022, January 2023, February 2023 PFA Premier League Fans' Player of the Year: 2022–23 PFA Premier League Fans' Player of the Month: December 2019, February 2023 PFA Community Champion Award: 2019–20 Premier League Academy Graduate of the Year Award: 2019–20 UEFA Europa League Team of the Season: 2019–20, 2022–23 UEFA Europa League top scorer: 2022–23 Manchester United Goal of the Season: 2019–20 (vs. Chelsea, 30 October 2019) Manchester United Players' Player of the Year: 2022–23 Sir Matt Busby Player of the Year: 2022–23 PFA Merit Award: 2020 FIFA Foundation Award: 2020 The Guardian Footballer of the Year: 2020 FWA Tribute Award: 2020 FIFPro Merit Award: 2020 Time 100 Next: 2021 Pat Tillman Award for Service: 2021 Orders and special awards Member of the Order of the British Empire: 2020 Campaigner Of The Year in the 2020 GQ Men Of The Year Expert Panel Special Award in the 2020 BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lockdown Heroes (Special Recognition) in the 2020 FSA Awards Honorary Doctorate Degree from the University of Manchester, October 2021 "Marcus Rashford: Overview". Premier League. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 26 February 2023. "Squads for 2017/18 Premier League confirmed". Premier League. 1 September 2017. Archived from the original on 19 May 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2017. "Marcus Rashford: Overview". ESPN. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "Marcus Rashford". 11v11.com. AFS Enterprises. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "A powerful mural honouring Marcus Rashford MBE has appeared in a Manchester suburb where he lived as a boy". Manchester Evening News. 6 November 2020. Retrieved 9 September 2021. Wilkinson, Damon (1 September 2020). "Manchester United star Marcus Rashford leads huge new campaign to end child poverty". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "Ghana: A former Football player claims to be the father of Marcus Rashford". 10 June 2020. Mason, Jonathan (5 September 2018). "Soccer Star Marcus Rashford Puts Smile On Faces Of Hungry Children". The St. Kitts-Nevis Observer. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2020. Blakey, Ashlie; Glaze, Ben (17 December 2020). "Marcus Rashford praises his mum's sacrifices to put food on the table when he was growing up". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 16 January 2021. "Marcus Rashford's mother 'missed meals so her children could eat'". BT Sport. 16 December 2020. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Adams, Tim (17 January 2021). "Marcus Rashford: the making of a food superhero". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 January 2021. "Man Utd 'sick to the core' of Raiola after Rashford 'talks'". Football365. Planet Sport. 14 January 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2020. Northcroft, Jonathan (20 December 2020). "Marcus Rashford has become a national treasure". The Times. London. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Rashford, Marcus (19 March 2017). "The Number 9". The Players' Tribune. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Whalley, Mike (4 March 2016). "Marcus Rashford helped Manchester United slay Arsenal but was back at school the next day". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Stone, Simon (19 May 2016). "Marcus Rashford: The making of teenage Manchester United striker". BBC Sport. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Mitten, Andy (19 June 2016). "Marcus Rashford the latest to benefit from Man United's education setup". ESPN. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Fordyce, Tom (2 March 2017). "Manchester's cold war". BBC News. Archived from the original on 6 April 2019. Retrieved 2 March 2017. Shread, Joe (19 November 2017). "Marcus Rashford reveals surprise Manchester United idol". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Dawson, Rob (17 December 2019). "Man United star Rashford maps out journey from academy standout to world-class talent". ESPN. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Fenn, Alec (6 April 2018). "Marcus Rashford – by the men who made him". FourFourTwo. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Luckhurst, Samuel (26 February 2016). "Marcus Rashford rejected Liverpool to join Manchester United". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 11 April 2017. Flanagan, Chris (15 June 2020). "Marcus Rashford interview: Why the 2020s are going to belong to the Manchester United forward". FourFourTwo. Future. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Stone, Simon (13 December 2019). "Marcus Rashford on helping Man Utd academy reach landmark". BBC Sport. Retrieved 23 October 2020. "Marcus Rashford grateful to Man Utd's academy coaches for their early support". BT Sport. 19 December 2020. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Robson, James (2 May 2017). "Manchester United used Paul Pogba to school Marcus Rashford aged just 12". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 17 January 2021. "Manchester United 2012". Marveld Tournament. 1 June 2012. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 28 October 2020. Jackson, Jamie (13 October 2014). "Next Generation 2014: 20 of the best talents at Premier League clubs". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2020. Dawson, Rob (18 September 2015). "Manchester United: Nicky Butt identifies two future Reds stars". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Luckhurst, Samuel (20 November 2015). "Marcus Rashford is Manchester United's latest academy star". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 16 January 2021. De Menezes, Jack (21 November 2015). "Who is Marcus Rashford? Manchester United include 18-year-old on substitutes' bench for Watford match". The Independent. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Hafez, Shamoon (21 November 2015). "Watford 1–2 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 17 March 2017. Retrieved 26 February 2016. Dawson, Rob (21 November 2015). "Marcus Rashford: The story behind Manchester United youngster's new squad number". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 15 January 2021. McNulty, Phil (28 November 2015). "Leicester City 1–1 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 19 February 2021. "Marcus Rashford: Manchester United turned down Crewe Alexandra loan bid for striker". BBC Sport. 8 June 2016. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Lustig, Nick (9 June 2016). "Man Utd forward Marcus Rashford subject of Crewe loan bid". Sky Sports. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Jackson, Jamie (31 October 2017). "Marcus Rashford turns 20: how 'late developer' grew into a superstar". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Luckhurst, Samuel (25 February 2016). "Manchester United include Marcus Rashford in Midtjylland squad". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Johnston, Neil (25 February 2016). "Manchester United 5–1 FC Midtjylland: Teenager Marcus Rashford scores twice on his debut as Manchester United thrash FC Midtjylland in the Europa League". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 25 February 2016. Rej, Arindam (26 February 2016). "Rashford joins Rooney and Martial as the latest teen United wonder". ESPN. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Wilson, Paul (19 September 2019). "Mason Greenwood's first Manchester United goal earns win over Astana". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Jurejko, Jonathan (28 February 2016). "Manchester United 3–2 Arsenal". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 26 June 2018. Retrieved 11 April 2017. Jackson, Jamie (28 February 2016). "Louis van Gaal: Marcus Rashford's second match even better than his first". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Jackson, Jamie (1 March 2016). "Don't harass Marcus Rashford, urges Manchester United's Louis van Gaal". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Masefield, Fraser (20 March 2016). "Marcus Rashford hits winner as Manchester United turn up heat on City in Champions League race". Eurosport. Retrieved 18 January 2021. McNulty, Phil (13 April 2016). "West Ham 1–2 Man Utd". BBC Sport. Retrieved 14 August 2017. Jennings, Patrick (16 April 2016). "Manchester United 1–0 Aston Villa: Aston Villa are relegated to English football's second tier for the first time since 1987 after defeat by Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 18 January 2021. McNulty, Phil (21 May 2016). "Crystal Palace 1–2 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2017. Tuck, James (2 May 2016). "Marcus Rashford scoops Under-18s Award". Manchester United F.C. Archived from the original on 4 September 2017. Retrieved 15 December 2017. "Marcus Rashford: Man Utd striker signs new deal until 2020". BBC Sport. 30 May 2016. Retrieved 30 May 2016. Robson, James (20 July 2017). "Manchester United manager Jose Mourinho told Marcus Rashford to change shirt number". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 18 September 2022. "Ibrahimovic: Give Rashford time and he'll take over everything". FourFourTwo. 11 September 2016. Retrieved 7 March 2021. Shreeves, Geoff (14 August 2016). "Zlatan Ibrahimovic on Manchester United, Wayne Rooney and Marcus Rashford". Sky Sports. Retrieved 6 March 2021. Henson, Mike (27 August 2016). "Hull City 0–1 Man Utd". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 25 June 2018. Retrieved 14 August 2017. Osborne, Chris (18 September 2016). "Watford 3–1 Man Utd". BBC Sport. Retrieved 14 August 2017. McNulty, Phil (21 September 2016). "Northampton Town 1–3 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 14 August 2017. Rostance, Tom (24 September 2016). "Manchester United 4–1 Leicester City". BBC Sport. Retrieved 14 August 2017. Aarons, Ed (24 October 2016). "Renato Sanches beats Marcus Rashford to 2016 Golden Boy award". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 13 April 2019. Retrieved 31 October 2016. Strickland, Jamie (7 January 2017). "Manchester United 4–0 Reading". BBC Sport. Retrieved 14 August 2017. McNulty, Phil (26 February 2017). "Manchester United 3–2 Southampton". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2017. McNulty, Phil (16 April 2017). "Manchester United 2–0 Chelsea". BBC Sport. Retrieved 14 August 2017. McNulty, Phil (20 April 2017). "Manchester United 2–1 RSC Anderlecht aet (3–2)". BBC Sport. Retrieved 14 August 2017. McNulty, Phil (24 May 2017). "Ajax 0–2 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2017. "Marcus Rashford explains his best position at Manchester United". The Peoples Person. 26 March 2017. Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 14 August 2017. Tuck, James (16 May 2017). "Mourinho's Trust Is "Massive" For Rashford". Manchester United F.C. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2017. Jurejko, Jonathan (8 August 2017). "Real Beat Man Utd in Super Cup". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 28 June 2018. Retrieved 14 August 2017. Jurejko, Jonathan (13 August 2017). "Man Utd 4–0 West Ham". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 18 June 2018. Retrieved 14 August 2017. Chowdhury, Saj (26 August 2017). "Manchester United 2–0 Leicester City". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 26 November 2017. Retrieved 29 August 2017. Grant, Ryan (12 September 2017). "Manchester United 3 FC Basel 0". Manchester United F.C. Archived from the original on 13 September 2017. Retrieved 12 September 2017. Johnston, Neil (20 September 2017). "Manchester United 4–1 Burton Albion". BBC Sport. Retrieved 30 October 2017. "Golden Boy 2017: Kylian Mbappé beats Dembélé and Rashford to award". The Guardian. London. 23 October 2017. Archived from the original on 3 October 2018. Retrieved 31 October 2017. Davis, Matt (21 October 2017). "Huddersfield Town 2–1 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 31 October 2017. Pritchard, Dafydd (24 October 2017). "Swansea 0–2 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 31 October 2017. "Manchester United 2–1 CSKA Moscow: Marcus Rashford stars as United secure top spot". Sky Sports. 6 December 2017. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Boswell, Zinny (31 January 2018). "Marcus Rashford to thrive with Alexis Sanchez at Man Utd, says Jose Mourinho". Sky Sports. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Taylor, Daniel (10 March 2018). "Marcus Rashford's double gives Manchester United victory over Liverpool". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 25 February 2019. Retrieved 11 March 2018. Hafez, Shamoon (13 March 2018). "Manchester United 1–2 Sevilla (agg: 1–2): Manchester United are knocked out of the Champions League after an awful performance ends in a 2–1 home defeat by Sevilla". BBC Sport. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Kay, Oliver (14 March 2018). "Manchester United v Seville: Marcus Rashford shackled again by his manager's rigid approach". The Times. London. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Davis, Matt (13 May 2018). "Manchester United 1–0 Watford". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 21 September 2019. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Mourinho explains why he won't consider Rashford loan". Football365. 10 May 2018. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "Marcus Rashford given Manchester United's No 10 shirt". Sky Sports. 6 August 2018. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2018. "Manchester United give Marcus Rashford famous No. 10 shirt". ESPN. 5 August 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2021. Luckhurst, Samuel (5 August 2018). "Manchester United reveal new number 10". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 15 January 2021. Lovett, Samuel (3 September 2018). "Marcus Rashford apologises for red card in Manchester United win: 'Emotions got the better of me'". The Independent. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "Mourinho brands Rashford 'naive' for Burnley red card". FourFourTwo. 2 September 2018. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Carrgher, Jamie (12 September 2018). "Jamie Carragher: Marcus Rashford may need to leave Manchester United to reach potential". Sky Sports. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Jackson, Jamie (14 September 2018). "José Mourinho pulls out stats sheet to defend use of Marcus Rashford". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Poole, Harry (29 September 2018). "West Ham United 3–1 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 22 November 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Mitchener, Mark (3 November 2018). "Bournemouth 1–2 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Rostance, Tom (1 December 2018). "Southampton 2–2 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Emons, Michael (8 December 2018). "Manchester United 4–1 Fulham". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Pearlman, Michael (22 December 2018). "Cardiff City 1–5 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Chowdhury, Saj (30 December 2018). "Manchester United 4–1 Bournemouth". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 4 January 2019. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Manchester United's Marcus Rashford 'different class', says Ole Gunnar Solskjaer". Sky Sports. 30 December 2018. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Johnston, Neil (2 January 2019). "Newcastle United 0–2 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 5 January 2019. Retrieved 6 January 2019. O'Toole, Dan (2 January 2019). "Gary Neville praises Marcus Rashford after brilliant Newcastle performance". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 8 March 2021. McNulty, Phil (13 January 2019). "Tottenham Hotspur 0–1 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 4 February 2019. Wilkinson, Jack (14 January 2019). "Tottenham 0–1 Manchester United: Marcus Rashford and David de Gea masterclass see off Spurs". Sky Sports. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Rickson, Will (17 January 2019). "Marcus Rashford in form of his career ahead of 150th Manchester United game". Sky Sports. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Critchley, Mark (19 January 2019). "Manchester United vs Brighton: Marcus Rashford's solo goal sees Ole Gunnar Solskjaer equal league win record". The Independent. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Brand, Gerard (20 January 2019). "Manchester United 2–1 Brighton: Ole Gunnar Solskjaer secures seventh consecutive win". Sky Sports. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Lincoln, Chris (19 January 2019). "Man United 2–1 Brighton: United continue pursuit of top four with another three points". Vavel. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Higgins, Adam (2 February 2019). "Rashford Crowned Our January Star". Manchester United F.C. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 4 February 2019. "Your January Goal of the Month". Manchester United F.C. 3 February 2019. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 4 February 2019. Davis, Matt (3 February 2019). "Leicester City 0–1 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 3 February 2019. Retrieved 4 February 2019. Jones, Michael (4 February 2019). "Marcus Rashford marks 100th Manchester United appearance with goal in Leicester win". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019. "Rashford named EA Sports Player of the Month". Premier League. 8 February 2019. Archived from the original on 9 February 2019. Retrieved 8 February 2019. Higgins, Adam (8 February 2019). "In-form Rashford Wins Premier League Award". Manchester United F.C. Archived from the original on 15 February 2019. Retrieved 15 February 2019. Hafez, Shamoon (6 March 2019). "Champions League: PSG 1–3 Man Utd (agg: 3–3)". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 March 2019. Jackson, Jamie (7 March 2019). "Ole Gunnar Solskjær salutes 'fearless' Rashford on United's glory night". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Walker-Roberts, James (30 March 2019). "United sneak past Watford". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2019. "Marcus Rashford: Man Utd striker signs new contract to 2023". BBC Sport. 1 July 2019. Retrieved 11 August 2019. Stone, Simon (11 August 2019). "Manchester United 4–0 Chelsea: Marcus Rashford stars in fine win". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 11 August 2019. Retrieved 11 August 2019. "Marcus Rashford: Man Utd boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has 'no worries' over form". BBC Sport. 20 September 2019. Retrieved 20 September 2019. Carney, Sam (20 October 2019). "Manchester United v Liverpool 20 October Premier League match report". Manchester United F.C. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2020. Plant, Michael (27 October 2019). "Norwich 1 Man Utd 3, match report 27 October 2019". Manchester United F.C. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2020. "Chelsea v Manchester United match report 30 October 2019". Archived from the original on 30 October 2019. "Games played by Marcus Rashford in 2019/2020". Soccerbase. Centurycomm. Retrieved 16 August 2020. Reddy, Luke (26 April 2014). "Manchester United 4–0 Norwich City". BBC Sport. Retrieved 19 June 2020. Hytner, David (19 January 2020). "Marcus Rashford out for at least two months with double back stress fracture". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2020. "200 and counting: What the stats say about Marcus Rashford's development as he reaches Manchester United milestone". BT Sport. 14 January 2020. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Jackson, Jamie (26 May 2020). "Pogba and Rashford ready to return for Manchester United, says Solskjær". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 16 October 2020. Retrieved 19 June 2020. Stone, Simon (4 July 2020). "Manchester United 5–2 Bournemouth: Mason Greenwood scores twice in crushing win". BBC Sport. Retrieved 4 July 2020. McNulty, Phil (16 July 2020). "Crystal Palace 0–2 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 17 July 2020. de Menezes, Jack (24 July 2020). "Jordan Henderson named as FWA Footballer of the Year". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 24 July 2020. "Rashford receives PFA Merit award". Sky Sports. 8 September 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 8 September 2020. "Brighton 2–3 Manchester United". Manchester United F.C. 26 September 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 26 September 2020. "Paris Saint Germain 1–2 Manchester United". BBC Sport. 20 October 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020. Critchley, Mark (28 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford grabs hat-trick as Manchester United's new shape rips through RB Leipzig". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2020. Hafez, Shamoon (28 October 2020). "Man Utd 5–0 RB Leipzig: Mason Greenwood, Marcus Rashford hat-trick, Anthony Martial score". BBC Sport. Retrieved 28 October 2020. Menon, Anirudh (29 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford gets United's first hat trick since RVP". ESPN. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Booth, Dominic (10 November 2020). "Manchester United handed Marcus Rashford injury update". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 5 March 2021. Jackson, Jamie (4 December 2020). "Solskjær has fingers crossed for Marcus Rashford's lingering shoulder injury". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "Marcus Rashford Third-Youngest For Manchester United To Hit 50 Premier League Goals". Outlook India. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 26 December 2020. Jackson, Jamie (12 January 2021). "Manchester United go clear at top after Paul Pogba volley sees off Burnley". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Stone, Simon (2 February 2021). "Manchester United 9–0 Southampton: Man Utd thrash nine-man Saints". BBC Sport. Retrieved 3 February 2021. Fullerton, Gareth (9 February 2021). "Marcus Rashford joins Northern Ireland heroes on Manchester United appearance list". Belfast Live. Retrieved 10 February 2021. "Rashford's two-year battle through pain at Man United". ESPN. 30 April 2021. Retrieved 26 August 2021. Dawson, Rob (30 July 2021). "Manchester United confirm Marcus Rashford to undergo shoulder surgery, could miss 12 weeks". ESPN. Retrieved 26 August 2021. "Marcus Rashford: Manchester United forward says shoulder surgery 'went well'". Sky Sports. 10 August 2021. Retrieved 26 August 2021. Murphy, Daniel (11 October 2021). "Marcus Rashford takes step closer to Manchester United return ahead of Leicester City fixture". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 18 October 2021. Bate, Adam (16 October 2021). "Leicester 4–2 Man Utd: Thrilling come-from-behind win ends 29-game unbeaten away run for Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's side". Sky Sports. Retrieved 18 October 2021. Smith, George (23 January 2022). "Marcus Rashford sets Premier League record with late Manchester United winner vs West Ham". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 30 January 2022. "Manchester United boss Ralf Rangnick hails Marcus Rashford impact and Old Trafford atmosphere". Sky Sports. 23 January 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2022. "Marcus Rashford: Manchester United forward says he is enjoying a 'priceless' full pre-season under Erik ten Hag". Sky Sports. 24 July 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Anka, Carl (1 September 2022). "Marcus Rashford, his best position and why he must now kick on". The Athletic. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Hobkinson, Matthew (13 September 2022). "Marcus Rashford form at Manchester United shows Erik ten Hag succeeded where Ralf Rangnick failed". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Wilkinson, Jack (8 September 2022). "Marcus Rashford: Happiness key to Man Utd striker's renaissance, says Erik ten Hag". Sky Sports. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Critchley, Mark (30 October 2022). "Marcus Rashford's 100th Manchester United goal just enough to beat West Ham". The Independent. Retrieved 30 October 2022. White, Tom (31 October 2022). "Marcus Rashford: The numbers behind his 100 Man Utd goals". The Independent. Retrieved 29 November 2022. Jackson, Jamie (20 December 2022). "Manchester United extend contracts of Rashford, Shaw, Dalot and Fred". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 December 2022. Fisher, Ben (31 December 2022). "'I overslept': Rashford scores for United after being dropped by Ten Hag". The Guardian. Retrieved 31 December 2022. McNulty, Phil (14 January 2023). "Man Utd 2–1 Man City: Marcus Rashford scores winner in Manchester derby". BBC Sport. Retrieved 14 January 2023. Jackson, Jamie (14 January 2023). "Rashford stuns Manchester City as United comeback seals derby honours". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2023. Anka, Carl (7 January 2023). "Marcus Rashford's resurgence continues – both goals and now assists are flowing". The Athletic. Retrieved 14 January 2023. Wallace, Alex (8 January 2023). "Marcus Rashford Is In The Best Form Of His Manchester United Career So Far". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 14 January 2023. Albaharna, Maram (13 January 2023). "The New Version of Marcus Rashford is the Best One Yet". The Analyst. Retrieved 14 January 2023. Boswell, Zinny (14 January 2023). "Marcus Rashford: How Man Utd forward got his Old Trafford career back on track". Sky Sports. Retrieved 14 January 2023. Whitwell, Laurie (7 January 2023). "Manchester United and Barcelona are on upward arcs — this was a worthy chapter in their rivalry". The Athletic. Retrieved 14 January 2023. McNulty, Phil (26 February 2023). "Manchester United 2–0 Newcastle United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 26 February 2023. "Man United's Marcus Rashford credited with League Cup final goal against Newcastle". ESPN. Reuters. 27 February 2023. Retrieved 5 March 2023. Peach, Simon (27 May 2023). "Erik ten Hag confident Marcus Rashford can score 40 goals in a season". The Independent. Retrieved 29 May 2023. Smith, George (25 May 2023). "Marcus Rashford equals Robin van Persie record in Manchester United victory vs Chelsea". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 29 May 2023. Flintham, Jack (29 May 2023). "Marcus Rashford scoops two prizes at Manchester United's end of season awards". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 10 June 2023. "Marcus Rashford: Manchester United forward signs new contract until 2028". BBC Sport. 18 July 2023. "'VAR has got out of control' - Man Utd lose again on chaotic night in Copenhagen". BBC Sport. 9 November 2023. "Man Utd: Marcus Rashford 'takes responsibility for his actions' after missing FA Cup clash with Newport". Sky Sports. 30 January 2024. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Manchester United say Marcus Rashford 'disciplinary matter closed'". BBC Sport. 30 January 2024. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Initial England U16 Summer Training Camp Callups". England Football Blog. 8 June 2012. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2020. "England U16s Squad for N. Ireland (Victory Shield)". England Football Blog. 12 September 2012. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 28 October 2020. "England U16s 2012 Victory Shield Squad vs Wales". England Football Blog. 11 October 2012. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2020. "England U20s 1–2 Canada U20s: Marcus Rashford draws blank on debut". Sky Sports. 27 March 2016. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2020. "Marcus Rashford: Man Utd striker named in England Under-21 squad". BBC Sport. 25 August 2016. Retrieved 28 October 2020. Mackay, Hamish (6 September 2020). "England U21 6–1 Norway U21: Marcus Rashford scores a hat-trick on his debut". Daily Mirror. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2020. "Marcus Rashford's debut hat-trick for England Under-21s helps thrash Norway". The Guardian. 6 September 2016. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Rej, Arindam (6 September 2016). "Marcus Rashford's 'great humility' led to England U21 success – Southgate". ESPN. Retrieved 18 January 2021. De Menezes, Jack (19 October 2016). "Manchester United news: Marcus Rashford to play for England Under-21s next summer despite senior call-up". The Independent. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Topliss, Ben (19 October 2016). "Mourinho locks horns with FA over Rashford". The Times. London. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Ogden, Mark (7 April 2017). "Jose Mourinho: I have no right to keep Marcus Rashford England Under-21s". ESPN. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Jose Mourinho says no sense in Marcus Rashford playing for England Under-21s". Eurosport. 21 April 2017. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Hughes, Matt (6 May 2017). "Rashford expected to skip U21s". The Times. London. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Wallace, Sam (25 May 2017). "Gareth Southgate defends decision not to make Marcus Rashford available for England U21s". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Fifield, Dominic (5 September 2017). "Gareth Southgate praises Marcus Rashford and Manchester United". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Ornstein, David (14 March 2016). "Euro 2016 too early for Man Utd's Marcus Rashford – Nicky Butt". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 6 April 2019. Retrieved 14 March 2016. Fifield, Dominic (3 March 2016). "Marcus Rashford on Roy Hodgson's radar amid Manchester United heroics". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 January 2021. "Marcus Rashford Euro 2016 inclusion unlikely – Roy Hodgson". BBC Sport. 21 April 2016. Retrieved 16 January 2021. "Euro 2016: Marcus Rashford makes England provisional squad". BBC Sport. 16 May 2016. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016. Retrieved 16 May 2016. "Euro 2016: Marcus Rashford's England rise 'doesn't seem real'". BBC Sport. 9 June 2016. Retrieved 11 April 2017. Taylor, Louise (27 May 2016). "Marcus Rashford hits the mark in England debut to remember". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2021. McNulty, Phil (27 May 2016). "England 2–1 Australia". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 29 May 2016. "Marcus Rashford becomes England's youngest ever player at Euros". ESPN. 16 June 2016. Archived from the original on 12 July 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2022. Taylor, Daniel (27 June 2016). "England humiliated as Iceland knock them out of Euro 2016". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 March 2021. Cottingham, Robert (8 November 2016). "Manchester United striker Rashford opens up about learning experience". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 8 March 2021. Dawson, Rob (23 August 2016). "England manager Allardyce sends warning to Manchester United striker Rashford". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 8 March 2021. Taylor, Daniel (25 August 2016). "Marcus Rashford loses England place after being ousted at Manchester United". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 March 2021. Taylor, Daniel (2 October 2016). "Gareth Southgate recalls Glen Johnson for England and picks Marcus Rashford". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 March 2021. McNulty, Phil (4 September 2017). "England 2–1 Slovakia". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2017. "England World Cup squad: Trent Alexander-Arnold in 23-man squad". BBC Sport. 16 May 2018. Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 17 May 2018. McNulty, Phil (7 June 2018). "England 2–0 Costa Rica: Marcus Rashford and Danny Welbeck score as England beat Costa Rica 2–0 in their final World Cup warm-up match". BBC Sport. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "England v Costa Rica: Marcus Rashford played with swagger – Gareth Southgate". BBC Sport. 7 June 2018. Retrieved 5 March 2021. Taylor, Daniel (19 June 2018). "Raheem Sterling and supporting cast must find shooting boots". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 March 2021. Joyce, Paul (22 June 2018). "World Cup: Raheem Sterling could miss England's physical Panama test". The Times. London. Retrieved 2 March 2021. Pitt-Brooke, Jack (24 June 2018). "England vs Panama team news: Raheem Sterling retains place as Gareth Southgate springs selection shock". The Independent. Retrieved 5 March 2021. Lovett, Samuel (28 June 2018). "World Cup 2018: Marcus Rashford struggles to make his point for England on the main stage – scouting report". The Independent. Retrieved 5 March 2021. McNulty, Phil (3 July 2018). "World Cup 2018: England beat Colombia 4–3 on penalties". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 3 July 2018. Retrieved 5 May 2019. McNulty, Phil (14 July 2018). "World Cup 2018: England finish fourth after Belgium defeat". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 19 May 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2018. Jones, Lewis (8 September 2018). "England 1–2 Spain: Gareth Southgate's men suffer Wembley defeat". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 28 March 2019. Retrieved 6 December 2018. Jones, Lewis (11 September 2018). "England 1–0 Switzerland: Marcus Rashford strikes again as England break losing run". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 28 March 2019. Retrieved 6 December 2018. Villamarín, Daniel Taylor at the Estadio Benito (15 October 2018). "Raheem Sterling's double inspires England to stunning victory in Spain". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 18 April 2019. Retrieved 6 December 2018. McNulty, Phil (18 November 2018). "England 2–1 Croatia: Harry Kane seals Nations League finals spot". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Bristow, Thomas (19 November 2018). "Marcus Rashford equals 52-year-old England record following Croatia victory". Daily Mirror. Retrieved 5 March 2021. Olley, James (7 June 2019). "Netherlands 3 England 1: Defensive errors see England beaten in Nations League semi-finals". Evening Standard. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 7 June 2019. Hytner, David (15 October 2019). "England crush Bulgaria 6–0 but racist chants force stoppages in qualifier". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 14 October 2019. McNulty, Phil (14 November 2019). "England 7–0 Montenegro". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 19 November 2019. Retrieved 17 November 2019. McNulty, Phil (17 November 2019). "Kosovo 0–4 England". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 December 2019. Retrieved 17 November 2019. Smith, Peter (6 June 2021). "England 1–0 Romania: Marcus Rashford's penalty gives Gareth Southgate's much-changed side a second win at the Riverside". Sky Sports. Retrieved 7 June 2021. Gillespie, Tom (4 June 2021). "Euro 2020: Gareth Southgate announces final England squad for delayed tournament". Sky News. Retrieved 13 June 2021. "England squad numbers: Jack Grealish handed No 7 for Euro 2020". The Independent. 2 June 2021. Retrieved 13 June 2021. Whittell, Ian (7 June 2021). "Marcus Rashford's first-choice status with England under threat – but Man Utd forward is happy with that". i. Retrieved 13 June 2021. McNulty, Phil (11 July 2021). "Euro 2020 final: England beaten by Italy on penalties". BBC Sport. Retrieved 13 July 2021. Jamieson, Alastair (12 July 2021). "Bukayo Saka, Jadon Sancho and Marcus Rashford racially abused online after England Euro 2020 final defeat". The Independent. Retrieved 13 July 2021. "Marcus Rashford mural defaced after England Euro 2020 defeat". BBC News. 12 July 2021. Retrieved 13 July 2021. Ng, Kate (12 July 2021). "Mancunians leave hearts and messages on defaced Marcus Rashford mural". The Independent. Retrieved 13 July 2021. Halle-Richards, Sophie (13 July 2021). ""Not in our city": Emotional restoration of Marcus Rashford's mural begins with player on 'verge of tears' following outpouring of love and support". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 13 July 2021. Cole, Jackson (27 September 2021). "Marcus Rashford reveals hopes to return to contact training as Manchester United and England star continues recovery from shoulder injury". Talksport. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Whitwell, Laurie (8 November 2021). "Marcus Rashford pulls out of England squad for upcoming World Cup qualifiers". The Athletic. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Critchley, Mark (17 March 2022). "Marcus Rashford dropped from England squad for March friendlies". The Independent. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Grounds, Ben (10 June 2022). "Marcus Rashford: England's forgotten man conspicuous by his absence ahead of Italy reunion in Nations League". Sky Sports. Retrieved 18 September 2022. "Gareth Southgate in World Cup warning for Marcus Rashford & Jadon Sancho". BBC Sport. 12 June 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Olley, James (15 September 2022). "England omit Marcus Rashford, Jadon Sancho from Nations League squad". ESPN. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Hytner, David (10 November 2022). "England World Cup squad: Maddison makes cut with Wilson and Rashford". The Guardian. Retrieved 29 November 2022. White, Mark; Pope, Conor; McCambridge, Ed (21 November 2022). "England World Cup 2022 squad: Gareth Southgate names his final 26-man squad for Qatar". ESPN. Retrieved 29 November 2022. Yew, Oliver (22 November 2022). "England 6–2 Iran: Gareth Southgate's side make flying start in Qatar World Cup". Sky Sports. Retrieved 23 November 2022. "World Cup data dive: England hammer Iran as records tumble for Southgate and Three Lions". Yahoo Life UK. 21 November 2022. Retrieved 29 November 2022. Delaney, Miguel (29 November 2022). "Rejuvenated Marcus Rashford haunts Wales to lead England into World Cup last-16". Sky Sports. Retrieved 29 November 2022. Hayward, Ben (29 November 2022). "Marcus Rashford scores England's 100th World Cup goal with second vs Wales". FourFourTwo. Retrieved 29 November 2022. McNulty, Phil (29 November 2022). "England: Marcus Rashford's World Cup 2022 display against Wales a poignant moment for a true talent". BBC Sport. Retrieved 30 November 2022. Smith, Peter (29 November 2022). "Marcus Rashford a 'completely different version' to how he was at Euros, says England boss Gareth Southgate". Sky Sports. Retrieved 30 November 2022. Neville, Gary; Reddy, Melissa (30 November 2022). "Gary Neville: Marcus Rashford 'back on it' and should start for England against Senegal in World Cup". Sky Sports. Retrieved 30 November 2022. Warrington, Declan (17 September 2020). "Premier League Player Watch: Manchester United's Marcus Rashford is contributing to an attack that potentially rivals all". The Coaches' Voice. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 25 February 2021. Dowdeswell, Andrew (24 April 2020). "Marcus Rashford's style highlights the type of centre forward Manchester United need". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Baldi, Ryan (10 August 2020). "Why scoring less goals might actually make Marcus Rashford even better". Optus Sport. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Taylor, Daniel (18 December 2019). "Marcus Rashford: Man United footballer, people's champion". The Athletic. Retrieved 16 January 2021. "Ex-Man United coach: 'Rashford wanted to play like Pirlo'". Football365. Planet Sport. 22 June 2017. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Wilkinson, Jack (24 September 2016). "Exclusive: Marcus Rashford seeks 'ultimate striker' status at Manchester United". Sky Sports. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Nicholson, John (6 December 2019). "Marcus Rashford is football at its most basic and glorious". Football365. Planet Sport. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Canning, Liam (30 October 2019). "Manchester United's Marcus Rashford Is Turning Into A Big-Game Player". Forbes. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2020. Hughes, David Alexander (2 May 2020). "How Marcus Rashford has become a playmaker for Manchester United from the wing". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Bray, Joe (21 October 2019). "Jose Mourinho tells Solskjaer where Marcus Rashford's best position is at Manchester United". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Delaney, Miguel (8 September 2019). "Manchester United news: Marcus Rashford is best as a 'wide raider' rather than a No 9, says Gareth Southgate". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Peach, Simon (3 December 2022). "Marcus Rashford can be 'one of the best in the world', Harry Maguire claims". The Independent. Retrieved 12 January 2023. Wright, Nick (15 December 2019). "Marcus Rashford's potential unlocked for Manchester United under Ole Gunnar Solskjaer". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Dowdeswell, Andrew (24 March 2020). "How Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's U-turn on Marcus Rashford is benefitting Manchester United". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Syed, Matthew (9 December 2019). "Dashing and daring Marcus Rashford shows that the art of dribbling is still alive". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Kershaw, Tom (29 October 2020). "Paul Scholes compares Marcus Rashford's finishing to Manchester United legend Ruud van Nistelrooy". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Luckhurst, Samuel (15 December 2015). "Manchester United striker Marcus Rashford 'must be more like Van Nistelrooy'". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Smith, Peter (8 December 2016). "Marcus Rashford interview: Man Utd forward studying for success on the training ground". Sky Sports. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Stafford-Bloor, Seb (16 July 2020). "Rashford is now Manchester United's sharpest edge". Football365. Planet Sport. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Marshall, Adam (8 July 2020). "Who is Manchester United's penalty-taker?". Manchester United F.C. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2020. "Set-piece analysis: Rashford profiting from dead-ball duties". Premier League. 13 November 2019. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2020. Booth, Dominic (31 October 2019). "Rashford vs Ronaldo Man Utd free-kick comparison". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2020. Bray, Joe (30 November 2022). "Phil Foden says Manchester United's Marcus Rashford is 'top three in the world' after England heroics". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 12 January 2023. Cooper, James (17 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford the perfect example for Man Utd's young players, says head of academy Nick Cox". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 4 November 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020. White, Jim (29 October 2020). "The evolution of Marcus Rashford: From raw teenager to incisive finisher and feeder of the nation". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 30 October 2020. "When Marcus Rashford met Robin van Persie: Manchester United marksmen past and present share fascinating sit-down chat". BT Sport. 10 January 2020. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Baldi, Ryan (26 June 2020). "The making of Marcus Rashford: the Man Utd and England star who never forgot his roots". i. London. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Marshall, Tyrone (2 March 2020). "Manchester United have a new leader". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Challies, Josh (29 October 2020). "Owen Hargreaves pinpoints moment Marcus Rashford showed he should be Manchester United captain". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Jackson, Jamie (21 April 2020). "'Beyond anything I'd played with': Rashford says Ibrahimovic key to his rise". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 11 December 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Sansom, Dan (21 April 2020). "Marcus Rashford: Man Utd forward says 'tough period' under Jose Mourinho made him stronger". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Pitt-Brooke, Jack (4 September 2017). "Marcus Rashford shows big-game character to atone for early error and vindicate Gareth Southgate's faith". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Fay, Richard (5 December 2019). "Manchester United have found their ultimate big game player". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2020. "Marcus Rashford is Manchester United's man for the big occasions". Sky Sports. 30 October 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Edwards, Harry (7 December 2019). "Marcus Rashford: Man Utd's big-game specialist has never been deadlier in the Premier League". Squawka. Retrieved 16 January 2021. "Marcus Rashford continues impressive run of debut goals for Manchester United and England with Basel strike". The Independent. London. 12 September 2019. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Sharp, Will (9 March 2018). "Marcus Rashford: a master in the art of first impressions". These Football Times. Archived from the original on 24 September 2020. Retrieved 30 October 2020. "Ole Gunnar Solskjaer hoping for Marcus Rashford fitness boost ahead of big week". BT Sport. 4 December 2020. Retrieved 5 March 2021. Turk, Alex (11 May 2020). "Maguire: Rashford most talented I've played with". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 5 March 2021. Bate, Adam (22 February 2019). "The rise of Rashford". Sky Sports. Retrieved 6 March 2021. Samson, Dan (5 December 2020). "Marcus Rashford: How 'humble' Manchester United star was nurtured on and off the pitch". Sky Sports. Retrieved 6 March 2021. Merson, Paul (24 April 2017). "Manchester United's Marcus Rashford uses his pace like Thierry Henry, says Paul Merson". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Victor, Tom (26 April 2020). "Where Manchester United player Marcus Rashford ranks among great goalscorers now". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Wilson, Paul (21 April 2016). "Louis van Gaal: Marcus Rashford rivals the best I have brought through". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Duncker, Charlotte (12 December 2022). "Marcus Rashford is one of best forwards in the world, says boss Erik ten Hag". The Times. London. Retrieved 12 January 2023. "Man United's Erik ten Hag: Only Kylian Mbappe is better than Marcus Rashford". ESPN. 12 December 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2023. Law, Matt (12 November 2017). "Marcus Rashford: Ronaldo is my hero, as a kid I saw him destroy Manchester United". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 10 September 2018. Pitt-Brooke, Jack (12 November 2017). "How Manchester United vs Real Madrid and Ronaldo YouTube clips inspired Marcus Rashford's career". The Independent. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Marshall, Tyrone (7 November 2017). "Manchester United's Marcus Rashford says he has 'no bigger inspiration in football' than Cristiano Ronaldo". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Watson, Ian (13 September 2018). "'Rashford record on par with Kane and Ronaldo' – Southgate". Football365. Planet Sport. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Aarons, Ed (9 December 2019). "Marcus Rashford can be as good as Cristiano Ronaldo, says Solskjær". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 12 December 2020. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Ducker, James (14 January 2021). "Marcus Rashford regrets never playing under Alex Ferguson". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved 15 January 2021. Ford, Will (11 December 2020). "Former youth coach backs Rashford to break Man Utd record". Football365. Planet Sport. Retrieved 15 January 2021. Ducker, James (17 January 2020). "The evolution of Marcus Rashford: How studious striker turned himself into Manchester United's goal-obsessed talisman". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Halle-Richards, Sophie (17 October 2019). "Manchester United star Marcus Rashford pledges support for city's homeless – and he wants donations". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 September 2020. "Six times Marcus Rashford was a better person than all of us put together". PlanetFootball. 16 June 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2020. Dawson, Rob (26 November 2019). "Marcus Rashford embraces Man United leadership role and giving back to the city he loves". ESPN. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 29 September 2020. Marshall, Tyrone (16 June 2020). "Second chance helped Manchester United striker Marcus Rashford become the pride of his city". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2020. "Marcus Rashford puts Manchester children first in coronavirus crisis". The Guardian. London. 30 March 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Murphy, Daniel (20 March 2020). "Manchester United star Marcus Rashford partners with charity to get meals to vulnerable children". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 21 March 2020. Retrieved 28 September 2020. de Menezes, Jack (21 April 2020). "Manchester United striker Marcus Rashford helps raise more than £20m for charity donating food to vulnerable children". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2020. "'I'll keep fighting' – Marcus Rashford on meals campaign". BBC Sport. 11 June 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Rathborn, Jack (14 July 2020). "Marcus Rashford thrilled after helping raise four million meals for most vulnerable in UK". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Rashford, Marcus (15 June 2020). "'Protect the vulnerable': Marcus Rashford's emotional letter to MPs". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2020. Pidd, Helen; Stewart, Heather; Syal, Rajeev (16 June 2020). "Johnson makes U-turn on free school meals after Rashford campaign". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2020. "Marcus Rashford: Food voucher U-turn after footballer's campaign". BBC News. 16 June 2020. Archived from the original on 29 September 2020. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Dale, James (16 June 2020). "Marcus Rashford 'proud' after forcing government U-turn on free school meals". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Simmonds, Kadeem (16 June 2020). "Marcus Rashford 1–0 Boris Johnson". Morning Star. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2020. "The Guardian view on Marcus Rashford's triumph: a political masterclass". The Guardian. 16 June 2020. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Lewis, Aimee (18 June 2020). "Marcus Rashford, the gifted Manchester United star who became a remarkable activist". CNN. Retrieved 16 January 2021. "Rashford unites food giants to fight child poverty". BBC News. 1 September 2020. Retrieved 1 September 2020. Geraghty, Liam (1 September 2020). "Marcus Rashford says 'time is now' to end child food poverty". The Big Issue. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2020. "Marcus Rashford 'disappointed' by government response on food poverty". BBC News. 26 September 2020. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Kershaw, Tom (10 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford awarded MBE in Queen's Birthday Honours list for efforts to eradicate child food poverty". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 16 October 2020. Simmonds, Kadeem (15 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford starts parliamentary petition to #endchildfoodpoverty". Morning Star. London. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 16 October 2020. "Marcus Rashford 'won't accept any less' as school meals petition races past 200,000 names". Sky News. 16 October 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 16 October 2020. Stewart, Heather (20 October 2020). "Pressure mounts on No 10 to extend free school meals holiday scheme". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. McGuinness, Alan (22 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford speaks out after Tory MPs reject call to extend free school meals over the holidays". Sky News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Adams, Richard; Weale, Sally (21 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford in 'despair' as MPs reject free school meal plan". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Tickner, Dave (23 October 2020). "They will come for heroic Rashford... we must stand with him". Football365. Planet Sport. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Butler, Patrick; Taylor, Diane; Topping, Alexandra (23 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford: public rallies behind campaign to end child food poverty". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Blakey, Ashley (23 October 2020). "Andy Burnham teams up with Marcus Rashford and Co-op to provide 1,000 food vouchers to kids over half term". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Bardsley, Andrew (23 October 2020). "'We stand with Marcus Rashford... not the 322': The Greater Manchester cafés, restaurants and shops offering free meals to children over half term following United star's incredible campaign". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Forrest, Adam; Tidman, Zoe (23 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford 'blown away' as cafés and restaurants offer free meals for children in support of campaign". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Hope, Russell; Robertson, Chris (23 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford: At least 100 organisations join Premier League star's free school meals push". Sky News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. "Marcus Rashford and his mum help out at food charity after free school meals vote". ITV News. 23 October 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Delahunty, Stephen (23 October 2020). "FareShare receives record number of donations in response to Marcus Rashford's campaign". Third Sector. Haymarket Media Group. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Reid, Alastair (26 October 2020). "Free school meals map shows over 1,000 businesses support kids over half term". The Big Issue. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2020. "Marcus Rashford school meals petition passes 1 m signatures". BBC News. 28 October 2020. Retrieved 28 October 2020. Butler, Patrick; Weale, Sally (28 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford petition to end child food poverty signed by over 1 m people". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 28 October 2020. Retrieved 28 October 2020. Hancock, Sam (28 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford's free school meals petition reaches 1 m signatures". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2020. Richardson, Hannah (8 November 2020). "Marcus Rashford: PM climbdown over free meals in school holidays". BBC News. Retrieved 8 November 2020. Sylvester, Rachel; Thompon, Alice (27 November 2020). "Marcus Rashford and Alex Ferguson team up to stop the poor going hungry". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 27 November 2020. Burgess, Kaya (6 January 2021). "Times Christmas appeal: Marcus Rashford praises readers for generous donations". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Campbell, Lucy; Weale, Sally (12 January 2021). "Rashford: something 'going wrong' with free school meal deliveries". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Honeycombe-Foster, Matt (13 January 2021). "Marcus Rashford scores again as UK to 'name and shame' food parcel contractors". Politico Europe. Axel Springer SE. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Woodcock, Andrew (13 January 2021). "Boris Johnson 'commits to review' of free school meal parcels in Marcus Rashford phone call". The Independent. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Zorzut, Adrian (13 January 2021). "PMQs: Boris Johnson claims Marcus Rashford is 'more effective' leader than Keir Starmer". The New European. ISSN 2398-8762. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. "Marcus Rashford's budget cookery serves up fish finger sandwich". BBC News. 22 April 2021. Retrieved 22 April 2021. Sandhu, Serina (25 November 2020). "Universal Credit: Marcus Rashford 'concerned families counting down days' until £20-a-week uplift removed". i. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Strauss, Delphine (26 November 2020). "Sunak urged to extend boost to welfare benefit: Campaigner Marcus Rashford warns families 'counting down days until help is taken away'". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Sylvester, Rachel (21 December 2020). "Ministers fear £6bn cost of Rashford hat-trick". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Butler, Patrick (24 December 2020). "Marcus Rashford to fight for permanent rise in universal credit". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Forrest, Adam (24 December 2020). "Marcus Rashford set to push for permanent rise in universal credit". The Independent. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Merrick, Rob (16 June 2020). "Cabinet minister clashes with Marcus Rashford after she criticises his poverty claim on Twitter". The Independent. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Wells, Darren (22 June 2020). "Marcus Rashford's link with rapper Jay-Z helped his free school meals fight". Daily Mirror. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2020. Reilly, Nick (23 June 2020). "Marcus Rashford helped by Jay-Z's Roc Nation in successful school meals fight". NME. Bandlab Technologies. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2020. "Marcus Rashford: Man Utd star to get honorary doctorate from University of Manchester". BBC Sport. 15 July 2020. Retrieved 15 July 2020. "Marcus Rashford attacks universal credit cut at degree ceremony". The Guardian. PA Media. 8 October 2021. Petter, Olivia (7 August 2020). "British Vogue: Marcus Rashford fronts magazine in first cover by black male photographer out today". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Davies, Caroline (9 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford given MBE in birthday honours for school meals campaign". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 16 October 2020. Halle-Richards, Sophie (28 October 2020). "Marcus Rashford to receive City of Manchester award for 'outstanding' contribution to ending child food poverty". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2020. "Marcus Rashford gets 'special recognition' at Pride of Britain Awards". ITV News. 26 October 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Halle-Richards, Sophie (6 November 2020). "A powerful mural honouring Marcus Rashford MBE has appeared in a Manchester suburb where he lived as a boy". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 6 November 2020. "Marcus Rashford features on the Football Black List". The Voice. 26 November 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2020. Burrows, Ben (26 November 2020). "Marcus Rashford named on Football Black List after child food poverty campaign". The Independent. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2020. Monroe, Jack (26 November 2020). "Marcus Rashford: 'I immediately started thinking about what happens next'". GQ. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 26 November 2020. Jackson, Jamie (25 November 2020). "Marcus Rashford will receive special award at BBC's Spoty". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 10 December 2020. "Marcus Rashford: Special BBC award at Sports Personality show for Man Utd forward". BBC Sport. 26 November 2020. Archived from the original on 10 December 2020. Retrieved 10 December 2020. "Rashford named first FIFA Foundation Award recipient". FIFA. 18 December 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. "Lewis Hamilton named most influential black person in UK". BBC News. 17 November 2020. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Lavender, Jane (17 November 2020). "Lewis Hamilton ends incredible year top of influential Black Powerlist 2021". Daily Mirror. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Hytner, David (4 January 2021). "The Guardian Footballer of the Year Marcus Rashford: 'My mum is everything'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2021. Fay, Richard (14 January 2021). "'I've known him since he was 7... he's developed into a truly wonderful person': Sir Alex Ferguson pays emotional tribute to Marcus Rashford". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 14 January 2021. Hamilton, Lewis (17 February 2021). "Marcus Rashford Is on the TIME100 Next 2021 List". Time. Retrieved 17 February 2021. "Marcus Rashford: Man Utd and England forward named in Time magazine's Next 100 list". BBC Sport. 17 February 2021. Retrieved 17 February 2021. Birnbaum, Justin; Dawkins, David (7 April 2021). "Marcus Rashford Fights Child Hunger, Others Lead In A World Under Lockdown". Forbes. Retrieved 9 April 2021. "Marcus Rashford: Man Utd forward becomes youngest person to top Sunday Times Giving List". Sky Sports. 21 May 2021. Retrieved 25 May 2021. McCall, Alastair; Rodrigues, Nick (21 May 2021). "Marcus Rashford tops The Sunday Times Giving List 2021". The Times. Retrieved 25 May 2021. "Marcus Rashford MBE receives 2021 Fred and Anne Jarvis Award". NEU. 7 April 2021. Retrieved 2 August 2021. Statesman, New (17 May 2023). "The New Statesman's left power list". New Statesman. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "World Book Day smashes Share a Million Stories target". The Bookseller. 11 March 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2020. "Marcus Rashford: Man Utd striker says 'helping children is important' during coronavirus pandemic". BBC Sport. 30 March 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2020. Young, Sarah (17 November 2020). "Marcus Rashford launches book club so children from all backgrounds can experience 'escapism' of reading". The Independent. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2020. "Marcus Rashford launches children's book club to spread joy of reading". BBC News. 17 November 2020. Retrieved 17 November 2020. Bakare, Lanre (17 November 2020). "Marcus Rashford launches book club so every child can experience 'escapism'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2020. "Marcus Rashford launches book club so children can experience 'escapism' of reading". Sky News. 17 November 2020. Archived from the original on 17 November 2020. Retrieved 17 November 2020. "Marcus Rashford's children's book wins the top prize at the British Book Awards". The Independent. 24 May 2022. Retrieved 26 May 2022. "Marcus Rashford launches book club for disadvantaged children". BBC News. 19 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. Chandler, Mark (19 April 2021). "Marcus Rashford Book Club kicks off with Puri and 50,000 free books". The Bookseller. Retrieved 19 April 2021. Ng, Kate (26 May 2022). "Marcus Rashford announces engagement to long-time girlfriend Lucia Loi". The Independent. Retrieved 26 May 2022. Davies, Ethan (25 May 2022). "Childhood sweethearts Marcus Rashford and Lucia Loi announce engagement". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 25 May 2022. Banerjee, Rotabarta (11 June 2023). "Man Utd star Marcus Rashford splits from chilhood sweetheart & fiancée Lucia Loi just two months after paying £240k to rent a plane for New York trip". Goal. Retrieved 26 February 2024. "God-given talent: Saka, Rashford and Sterling blaze a trail for black British Christians". The Guardian. 17 July 2021. Retrieved 3 December 2022. "Marcus Rashford: 'Whenever I hear "no", I ask myself: why not?'". The Guardian. 22 May 2021. Retrieved 3 December 2022. Taylor, Daniel (2 October 2017). "Marcus Rashford stays grounded but is hoping to propel England to Russia". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 January 2023. Jenas, Jermaine (18 March 2019). "Meet the real Marcus Rashford: exclusive interview with Manchester United's talented star". GQ. Retrieved 11 January 2023. Sawyer, Miranda (21 December 2019). "Dave meets Marcus Rashford: 'I rate you so highly, because you take football seriously'". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 January 2023. "Marcus Rashford talks about his favourite Dave track on new Beats spot". The Line of Best Fit. 7 July 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2023. Patel, Sanj (3 August 2022). "Marcus Rashford & Dave Unite For Beats By Dre's New Illustrative Short Film 'Never Beaten'". Complex. Retrieved 11 January 2023. Gamble, Andrew (8 June 2022). "Athletes and their favourite pets from Messi's beloved Hulk to Fury's guard dog". Daily Mirror. Retrieved 3 December 2022. "Games played by Marcus Rashford in 2015/2016". Soccerbase. Centurycomm. Retrieved 13 January 2019. "Games played by Marcus Rashford in 2016/2017". Soccerbase. Centurycomm. Retrieved 13 January 2019. "Games played by Marcus Rashford in 2017/2018". Soccerbase. Centurycomm. Retrieved 13 January 2019. "Games played by Marcus Rashford in 2018/2019". Soccerbase. Centurycomm. Retrieved 6 June 2019. "Games played by Marcus Rashford in 2020/2021". Soccerbase. Centurycomm. Retrieved 3 July 2021. "Games played by Marcus Rashford in 2021/2022". Soccerbase. Centurycomm. Retrieved 3 September 2023. "Games played by Marcus Rashford in 2022/2023". Soccerbase. Centurycomm. Retrieved 3 June 2023. "Games played by Marcus Rashford in 2023/2024". Soccerbase. Centurycomm. Retrieved 31 March 2024. "Marcus Rashford: Internationals". worldfootball.net. HEIM:SPIEL. Retrieved 23 March 2024. "England vs. Australia 2–1: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "England vs. Slovakia 2–1: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "England vs. Costa Rica 2–0: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "England vs. Spain 1–2: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "England vs. Switzerland 1–0: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Spain vs. England 2–3: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Netherlands vs. England 3–1: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Bulgaria vs. England 0–6: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "England vs. Montenegro 7–0: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Kosovo vs. England 0–4: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "England vs. Belgium 2–1: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "England vs. Romania 1–0: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "England vs. Iran 6–2: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Wales vs. England 0–3: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 19 June 2023. "England vs. North Macedonia 7–0: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 19 June 2023. "England vs. Italy 3–1: Summary". Soccerway. Perform Group. Retrieved 29 October 2023. Murray, Scott (19 May 2018). "Chelsea 1–0 Manchester United: 2018 FA Cup final – as it happened". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 December 2023. McNulty, Phil (3 June 2023). "Manchester City 2–1 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 27 December 2023. Bevan, Chris (7 August 2016). "Community Shield: Leicester City 1–2 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 18 September 2016. Stone, Simon (26 May 2021). "Villarreal 1–1 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Retrieved 27 December 2023. McNulty, Phil (9 June 2019). "Switzerland 0–0 England". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 October 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2019. "The winner of the PFA Vertu Motors Premier League Fans' Player of the Year – 2022/23". 90min.com. 29 August 2023. Retrieved 30 August 2023. "PFA Bristol Street Motors Fans' Player of the Month – Marcus Rashford wins Premier League award for December". FootballFanCast.com. 6 January 2020. "The winner of the PFA Vertu Motors Premier League Fans' Player of the Month – February". 90min.com. 16 March 2023. Retrieved 24 March 2023. "Rashford and Groenen receive PFA Community Champions award". Manchester United F.C. 6 August 2020. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. Marshall, Adam (30 July 2020). "United trio win Premier League academy awards". Manchester United F.C. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "UEFA Europa League Squad of the Season". UEFA. 26 August 2020. Archived from the original on 27 September 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. "2022/23 UEFA Europa League Team of the Season". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 4 June 2023. Retrieved 4 June 2023. "2022/23 Europa League top scorers: Boniface, Rashford at the summit". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations (UEFA). 31 May 2023. Retrieved 31 May 2023. "Rashford Wins 2019/20 Goal of the Season". Manchester United F.C. 17 September 2020. Archived from the original on 19 September 2020. Retrieved 17 September 2020. Holt, Matthew (29 May 2023). "Rashford wins Players' Player of the Year". Manchester United F.C. Retrieved 29 May 2023. Ganley, Joe (29 May 2023). "Rashford voted United's Player of the Year". Manchester United. Retrieved 29 May 2023. "The 2020 FIFPRO Merit Awards: Three Winners and One Hero". FIFPro. 18 February 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2021. "Manchester United star Marcus Rashford wins Pat Tillman Award for Service after raising millions to feed children". ESPN. 21 June 2021. Retrieved 22 June 2021. "No. 63142". The London Gazette (Supplement). 10 October 2020. p. B70. "FSA Awards in association with BeGambleAware". thefsa.org.uk. 12 March 2021. Retrieved 13 March 2021. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Marcus Rashford. Wikiquote has quotations related to Marcus Rashford. Profile at the Manchester United F.C. website Profile at the Football Association website Marcus Rashford – UEFA competition record (archive) 