Konstantin Yuryevich Bogomolov (Russian: Константи́н Ю́рьевич Богомо́лов; born July 23, 1975) is a Russian theater director, poet, and actor. He has served as the art director of the Theater on Malaya Bronnaya [ru]. He is the son of the film critic Yuri Bogomolov [ru]. He has been honoured with a Golden Mask Award. In 1990, Bogomolov's poems were published in the literary magazine We and the poetry collection Seventeenth Echo, in 1995 in the almanac Babylon. In 2019, with the book Thus Spoke Bogomolov (AST), the author was included in the short-list of the Andrei Bely Prize in the category poetry. Bogomolov was Andrey Goncharov's student at the Russian Institute of Theatre Arts. Until November 2013, he served as Assistant Artistic Director of the Chekhov Moscow Art Theater. In 2014 he became a staff director of the Lenkom. Since 2012 he has been a teacher at the Moscow School of New Cinema. At the end of May 2019, it was announced that Konstantin Bogomolov would be appointed artistic director of the Moscow Drama Theater on Malaya Bronnaya. On June 25, 2019, he took up this position. In 2019 he directed the TV series Gold Diggers, starring his ex-wife Darya Moroz. In 2018, he was the confidant of the candidate for mayor of Moscow Sergey Sobyanin. In February 2021, he published the Rape of Europe 2.0 manifesto in Novaya Gazeta, in which he criticized the New Ethics, and stated that Europe was in a deep ethical crisis, urging Russia to stop focusing on European values. The author's text says that Europe is turning into a new ethical Reich, the standards of which are developed under the influence of queer activists, fem-fanatics and ecopsychopaths. Bogomolov urged to build a new right-wing ideology outside of radical orthodoxy, but strictly and irreconcilably defending the values of a complex world based on a complex person. The manifesto sparked polar reactions among the Russian public. Bogomolov's first wife was the actress Darya Moroz. The couple divorced in 2018. They have a daughter named Anna. His second wife is the journalist Ksenia Sobchak. Bogomolov is the stepfather of Sobchak's only child, Platon, (born 2016). The Helena Modrzejewska National Stary Theatre (2015-12-19). "Anton Czechow Dir. Konstantin Bogomołow". The Helena Modrzejewska National Stary Theatre. "Юрий Богомолов". РИА Новости. Объявлены победители «Золотой маски» Опубликован шорт-лист премии Андрея Белого 2019 года Константин Богомолов // Great Russian Encyclopedia Художественным руководителем Театра на Малой Бронной назначен Константин Богомолов Константин Богомолов вступает в должность худрука Театра на Малой Бронной Vladimir Varfolomeyev (2018-08-26). "Но есть и новички". Эхо Москвы. Богомолов. Похищение Европы 2.0 "В хвосте безумного поезда, несущегося в босховский ад: манифест Богомолова и реакция на него". BBC News Russian (in Russian). 2021-02-10. Ivan Vyrypaev. Возвращение «похищенного» Запада «Превратился в охранителя»: как соцсети встретили колонку Богомолова о новой этике // Afisha Анастасия Козлова. Дарья Мороз стала мамой. — Актриса родила дочку. Дарья Мороз: «Дочь мудрее меня — я была эгоисткой». — Актриса рассказала «ТН» о родителях, непростом характере, гармонии в семейных отношениях, воспитании дочери и грядущих премьерах. Спектакль окончен: Ксения Собчак и Константин Богомолов перестали скрываться // 7days.ru Собчак объяснила нарушение во время поездки на свадебном катафалке // Известия Wikimedia Commons has media related to Konstantin Bogomolov. «Временно доступен», ТВЦ, гость — Константин Богомолов. Блог Константина Богомолова на сайте «Эха Москвы»