An oblast (/ˈɒblæst/, UK also /ˈɒblɑːst/; plural oblasts, oblasti, or rarely oblasty; Russian and Ukrainian: область, romanized: oblast'; Belarusian: вобласць, romanized: voblasc'; Bulgarian: област, romanized: oblast; Kazakh: облыс, romanized: oblys; Kyrgyz: облус, romanized: oblus) is a type of administrative division in Bulgaria and several post-Soviet states, including Belarus, Russia and Ukraine. Historically, it was used in the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union. The term oblast is often translated into English as region or province. In some countries, oblasts are also known by cognates of the Russian term. The English term oblast is borrowed from Russian: область, romanized: oblast', where it is inherited from Old East Slavic, in turn borrowed from Church Slavonic: область, romanized: oblastĭ, lit. 'power, empire', formed from the prefix oб-, оb- (cognate with Classical Latin: ob and Ancient Greek: ἐπί, ἔπι, romanized: epi) and Church Slavonic: власть, romanized: vlastĭ, lit. 'power, rule'. In Old East Slavic it was used alongside оболость, obolost', equivalent of об-, ob-, 'against' and волость, volost', 'territory, state, power', cognate with English wield; see volost. In the Russian Empire, oblasts were considered to be administrative units and were included as parts of Governorates General or krais. The majority of then-existing oblasts were on the periphery of the country (e.g. Kars Oblast or Transcaspian Oblast) or covered the areas where Cossacks lived. In the Soviet Union, oblasts were one of the types of administrative divisions of the union republics. As any administrative units of this level, oblasts were composed of districts (raions) and cities/towns directly under oblasts' jurisdiction. Some oblasts also included autonomous entities called autonomous okrugs. Because of the Soviet Union electrification program under the GOELRO plan, Ivan Alexandrov, as director of the Regionalisation Committee of Gosplan, divided the Soviet Union into thirteen European and eight Asiatic oblasts, using rational economic planning rather than "the vestiges of lost sovereign rights". The names of oblasts did not usually correspond to the names of the respective historical regions, as they were created as purely administrative units. With a few exceptions, Soviet oblasts were named after their administrative centers. In 1922, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes was divided into 33 administrative divisions also called oblasts. In 1929, oblasts were replaced with larger administrative units known as banovinas. During the Yugoslav Wars, several Serb Autonomous Oblasts were formed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia. These oblasts were later merged into the Republic of Serbian Krajina and the Republika Srpska. Since 1999, Bulgaria has been divided into 28 oblasts, usually translated as "provinces". Before, the country was divided into just nine units, also called oblasts. Viloyat and welaýat are derived from the Turkish language term vilayet, itself derived from the Arabic language term wilāya (ولاية). Look up Oblast in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Autonomous oblast Guberniya, an administrative unit, comparable to an oblast, of the Russian Empire, early Russian SFSR, and the Soviet Union Raion, district or sub-division of an oblast Krai Okrug Political divisions of Russia Chránená krajinná oblasť Horná Orava (the Horná Orava Protected Landscape Area) in Slovakia "oblast, n.", Oxford English Dictionary, July 2023, doi:10.1093/OED/6423855087, retrieved 2023-12-01 "Oblast definition and meaning", Collins English Dictionary, retrieved 25 December 2022 "What Is An Oblast?", World Atlas, 2017, retrieved 25 December 2022 Фасмера, Макса (2006). "область". Этимологический онлайн-словарь русского (in Russian) (4th ed.). Retrieved May 1, 2023. Ekonomicheskoe raionirovanie Rossii, Gosplan, Moscow 1921 "Government - Regions - The Government of Armenia". gov.am. "Legislation: National Assembly of RA". parliament.am. "Geography, Belarus - Belarus.by". belarus.by. "Chapter 3. The Federal Structure - The Constitution of the Russian Federation". constitution.ru. Archived from the original on 2018-12-25. Retrieved 2014-10-16. "Microsoft Word - Newsletter II-2 2010-06-30.doc" (PDF). Retrieved 2019-03-07. "Regions of Ukraine - MFA of Ukraine". mfa.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 2014-10-08. Retrieved 2014-10-16. "Ukraine's Snap Parliamentary Elections". Ria Novosti. Archived from the original on 2014-10-31. Retrieved 2014-10-31. "The Governmental portal of the Republic of Uzbekistan - Local authority". Archived from the original on 2014-10-19. Retrieved 2014-10-16. Media related to Oblasts at Wikimedia Commons