James Hadley Snyder, known professionally as Dan Green, (born 1970) is an American voice actor, voice director and screenwriter. He is best known for being the voice of Yugi Muto/Yami Yugi for Yu-Gi-Oh! Duel Monsters, the anime series version of Yu-Gi-Oh!, as well as all of the character's U.S. series appearances. Green attended Rutgers University in New Brunswick, New Jersey. Green is best known as the voice of Yugi Muto/Yami Yugi in Yu-Gi-Oh! Duel Monsters, Trudge in Yu-Gi-Oh! 5D's, and Knuckles the Echidna in Sonic X and the Sonic the Hedgehog video games (2005–2010). He has worked for 4Kids Entertainment, DuArt Film and Video, NYAV Post, TAJ Productions and Central Park Media. He has also worked on script adaptations of Kurokami: The Animation and Mobile Suit Gundam Unicorn, and teaches voice acting at Edge Studio in New York City. Green married singer and voice actress Michal Lura Friedman, better known as Michal the Girl, in 2008. While giving birth to twins (a son named Jackson and a daughter named Reverie) on November 25, 2011, Friedman died from complications following a C-section. Fans began charity efforts to provide financial support for the twins. Akudama Drive - Headmaster (ep. 7) Descendants of Darkness - Asato Tsuzuki Dinosaur King - Jonathan G.I. Joe Sigma 6 - Lt. Stone Patlabor: The TV Series - Fujioka, Asuma Shinohara The King of Braves GaoGaiGar - Koutaro Taiga Kirby: Right Back at Ya! - N.M.E. Sales Guy, Whispy Woods The Legend of Snow White - Prince Richard (episodes 17-52) One Piece - Johnny, Mr. 4, Nezumi, Narrator (4Kids) Pokémon - Professor Birch, Treecko, Lombre, Spiritomb Pokémon: Mewtwo Returns - Mewtwo Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time & Darkness - Grovyle Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Sky - Beyond Time & Darkness - Grovyle Revolutionary Girl Utena - Soji Mikage Shaman King (2001) - Silva, Lee Pai-Long, Zen, Ramiro, Savage Dan Shaman King (2021) - Lee Pyron, Silva, Patch Hao Sonic X - Knuckles the Echidna Yu-Gi-Oh! Duel Monsters - Yugi Muto/Yami Yugi Yu-Gi-Oh! Capsule Monsters - Yugi Muto/Yami Yugi Yu-Gi-Oh! GX - Yugi Muto/Yami Yugi Yu-Gi-Oh! 5Ds - Tetsu Trudge, Guard Robot Yu-Gi-Oh! ZEXAL - Tombo Tillbitty Angel's Friends - Gas Astonishing X-Men: Gifted - Colossus The Boy Who Wanted To Be A Bear - Father Bear Chaotic - Mezzmarr, Tangath Toborn, Codemaster Imthor and Tartarek Huntik: Secrets & Seekers - Montehue, Clease, Zan-Tanos, Lord Casterwill, The Oracle GoGoRiki - Pogoriki (4Kids dub) Hammerboy - Moonk The Incredible Crash Dummies - Crash (4Kids dub) Kappa Mikey - Additional Voices Pat & Stan - Pat Polar Krush - PK The Polar Bear, Gordon the Gorilla, Maurice the Mammoth Robotomy - Additional Voices Stickin' Around - Additional Voices Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2003) - Mortu, Commander Mozar, Mephos, The Professor Thumb Wrestling Federation - Ring Announcer, Corbata, Tom Cat, Snagglefangs, Sick Vick Viva Piñata - Hudson Horstachio, King Roario Vampirina - Boris Winx Club - Sky, Pegataur elder (4Kids dub), Ice Guardian/Spirit Gladiformers - Patrion Tokal The Little Panda Fighter - Pancada Ratatoing - Carlos Turtles Forever - Leonardo (1987) Doraemon: The Record of Nobita's Spaceblazer - Uno (2009) Beautiful Hunter - Man 7 The Bondage Master - Shiro Cutie Honey - Black Claw Close Your Eyes and Hold Me - Amane Exte: Hair Extensions - Kiyomi's Boyfriend The Machine Girl - Yusuke Magic in the Water - Radar Naughty Guide to Tokyo Nightlife - Tsuruta Scorpion's Revenge - Jimmy Yoshioka Zero Woman: The Accused - Detective PlayStation All-Stars Battle Royale - Professor Shaman King video games - Silva, Lee Pai-Long Shaman King: Power of Spirit - Ashcroft, Homunculus, Mysterious Mask Shaman King: Master of Spirits - Store Clerk Shaman King: Master of Spirits 2 - Store Clerk Sonic the Hedgehog series – Knuckles the Echidna (2005–10) Shadow the Hedgehog Sonic Riders Sonic '06 - also played Mephiles the Dark Sonic Rivals Sonic and the Secret Rings - Sinbad the Sailor Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games Sonic Rivals 2 Sonic Riders: Zero Gravity Sonic and the Black Knight - Sir Gawain Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Winter Games Sonic & Sega All-Stars Racing Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles video games - Mortu, Commander Mozar (uncredited) Battle Nexus Mutant Nightmare The Bureau: XCOM Declassified - Dr. Scott, Major Nigrosh Ultimate Muscle: Legends vs. New Generation - Robin Mask, Buffaloman, Warsman Yu-Gi-Oh! video games - Yugi Muto/Yami Yugi Yu-Gi-Oh! Destiny Board Traveler - Yugi Muto/Yami Yugi Yu-Gi-Oh! Capsule Monsters Coliseum - Yugi Muto/Yami Yugi Duel Terminals - Trudge Yu-Gi-Oh! Duel Links - Yugi Muto/Yami Yugi, Officer Tetsu Trudge Power of Chaos: Yugi the Destiny Yu-Gi-Oh! Reshef of Destruction - Yugi Muto/Yami Yugi Astonishing X-Men: Gifted Iron Man: Extremis Jungle Emperor Leo (co-directed with Michael Sinterniklaas) Knight Hunters Eternity Mobile Suit Gundam Unicorn (co-directed with Michael Sinterniklaas and Marc Diraison) Phoenix Samurai Deeper Kyo Shura no Toki: Age of Chaos The Gokusen Domain of Murder Knight Hunters Eternity Kurokami: The Animation (co-written with Marc Diraison) Mobile Suit Gundam Unicorn (co-written with Michael Sinterniklaas and Stephanie Sheh) Phoenix Queen's Blade Revolutionary Girl Utena Seven of Seven Shura no Toki: Age of Chaos G.I. Joe: Sigma 6 (co-executive producer) Iron Man: Extremis (casting director, audio producer) "Manhattan dad's heartbreak after wife dies giving birth to twins". New York Daily News. Zanoni, Carla (December 3, 2011). "Singer Michal the Girl Dies After Giving Birth to Twins". DNAinfo. Archived from the original on April 12, 2012. "Dan Green, Eric Stuart Return for Yu-Gi-Oh!: The Dark Side of Dimensions Film's English Dub (Updated With Trailer)". Anime News Network. Retrieved December 29, 2016. "Yu-Gi-Oh!: The Dark Side of Dimensions Film Surpasses 1 Billion Yen at Box Office". Anime News Network. Retrieved December 29, 2016. "The 2016 Yu-Gi-Oh! Trading Card Game World Championship Will Be Settled In Orlando, Florida August 20-21". Anime News Network. Retrieved December 29, 2016. "Yu-Gi-Oh!: The Dark Side of Dimensions Film Opens on January 20 in US, Canada". Anime News Network. Retrieved December 29, 2016. "Yu-Gi-Oh! The Dark Side Of Dimensions Movie Voice Actors Announced". Anime News Network. Retrieved December 29, 2016. "The Snyder Twins - Jay". thetigersnest.com. Archived from the original on August 21, 2012. Retrieved March 29, 2016. "Obituary: Michal Lura Friedman". The State. Legacy.com. December 1, 2011. "Index of /". thesnydertwins.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2016. "Voice Actress, Singer Michal Friedman Passes Away". Anime News Network. November 30, 2011. Evans, Heidi (December 8, 2011). "Readers open hearts to widowed dad of twins". New York Daily News. Jay Snyder ... a 41-year-old actor and freelance voiceover artist Crunchyroll (January 26, 2017). Official Yu-Gi-Oh! The Dark Side of Dimensions Exclusive Producer Interview. Event occurs at 1:06. Retrieved January 31, 2017 – via YouTube.[dead YouTube link] "Patlbor: The TV Series". IMDB. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Dan Green initially read the opening narration before he was replaced with Eric Stuart. Sims, Chris (August 9, 2010). "Astonishing X-Men: Motion Comics, Why Bother? [Review]". ComicsAlliance. I was especially impressed with Mike Pollock's voice for Beast, as he gives him the cadence of a nerdy scientist with the underlying animalistic growl of…well, of a beast. Same goes for Dan Green's Colossus, who isn't nearly as overblown as I was expecting him to go with the Russian accent. "Dan Green (visual voices guide)". Behind The Voice Actors. A green check mark indicates that a role has been confirmed using a screenshot (or collage of screenshots) of a title's list of voice actors and their respective characters found in its opening and/or closing credits and/or other reliable sources of information.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: postscript (link) Dan Green at IMDb  Dan Green at Anime News Network's encyclopedia Dan Green at Behind The Voice Actors Dan Green convention appearances on AnimeCons.com