Susanne Blakeslee is an American actress. Her notable roles include the voices of Wanda, Anti-Wanda, and Mrs. Turner on The Fairly OddParents; and as the voices of Cruella de Vil, Evil Queen, Lady Tremaine and Maleficent for various Disney media. In 2012, Blakeslee won an Ovation Award for Lead Actress in a Musical for Forbidden Broadway Greatest Hits, Volume 2. Blakeslee performed on the stage set of Forbidden Broadway from 1990 to 1994 and worked as the show's choreographer in 1994. Blakeslee won the Lead Actress in a Musical Ovation Award in 2012 for her performance in Forbidden Broadway Greatest Hits, Volume 2. Blakeslee is noted for voicing Wanda, Anti-Wanda, and Mrs. Turner, for The Fairly OddParents franchise from 2001 to 2017, including 127 episodes of the television series, six specials and seven TV movies, as well as voicing these characters in the related Jimmy Timmy Power Hour trilogy. Blakeslee reprised the role of Wanda in the 2022 live-action/animated series, The Fairly OddParents: Fairly Odder. Blakeslee has done extensive voice work for Disney, including animated features and theme park attractions at the Disneyland Resort, Walt Disney World and Tokyo Disney Resort since 2001. Blakeslee has voiced-sound-alikes and original characters in Disney media. Her roles include: Cruella de Vil in 102 Dalmatians: Puppies to the Rescue and 101 Dalmatians II: Patch's London Adventure. The Evil Queen in House of Mouse and Once Upon a Halloween. Kala in The Legend of Tarzan (replacing Glenn Close). Madame Leota in the Haunted Mansion Holiday attraction in Disneyland. Lady Tremaine in Cinderella II: Dreams Come True and Cinderella III: A Twist in Time. Maleficent in Kingdom Hearts. Delores Derceto and Ms. Birch in American Dragon: Jake Long. Flora in the Nightfall Glow attraction in Tokyo Disneyland. The Witch in the video game Brave. Old Lady Crowley in Rapunzel's Tangled Adventure (replacing Pat Carroll). Mrs. Quackfaster in the 2017 reboot series DuckTales. Saved by the Bell: The New Class - Woman ("No Smoking", 1995) The Home Court - Tricia ("Touched by an Anger", 1996) Caroline in the City - Singing Woman ("Caroline and the Long Shot", 1997) Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide - Wanda (voice; "Daydreaming", 2005) The Fairly OddParents: Fairly Odder - Wanda (voice; 2022) Vampire Princess Miyu - Machiko (ep. 8), Ja-Ka (ep. 10) All Dogs Go to Heaven: The Series - Additional Voices All Hail King Julien - Butterfly Queen (episode "The Butterfly War") American Dragon: Jake Long - Principal Dercerto Amphibia - Valeriana Be Cool, Scooby-Doo! - Charlene (episode "Poodle Justice") Billy Dilley's Super-Duper Subterranean Summer - Hag Witch Brandy & Mr. Whiskers - Rodent in Stands (episode "Go! Fight! Win!") Bunsen Is a Beast - Wanda, Mrs. Turner (episode "Beast of Friends") Channel Umptee-3 - Additional voices Chowder - Witch, Abigail and Turtle Lady (episode "The Big Hat Biddies") Cow and Chicken - Additional Voices Crash Nebula - Princess Galaxandra Danny Phantom - Dora Mattingly (Dorathea the Dragon Ghost) DuckTales - Mrs. Quackfaster Elena of Avalor - Ship Chandler The Fairly OddParents - Wanda, Mrs. Turner, Anti-Wanda, additional voices Fifi and the Flowertots - Webby (US Version) Grandma for President - Grandma Green Lantern: The Animated Series - Sayd The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy - Crabina (episode "My Fair Mandy") Hey Duggee - Additional Voices House of Mouse - Cruella de Vil, Evil Queen I Am Weasel - Loulabelle It's Pony - Nana B Kick Buttowski: Suburban Daredevil - Librarian Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness - Mei Ling (season 3) The Legend of Tarzan - Kala The Legend of Korra - Additional voice (episode: "Night of a Thousand Stars") The Loud House - Mrs. Agnes Johnson, Mrs. Jelinsky The New Woody Woodpecker Show - Mother Nature (1999–2001) Oh Yeah! Cartoons - Wanda, Mrs. Turner The Penguins of Madagascar - Ms. Trevor (Teacher) (episode "Field Tripped") Phineas and Ferb - Additional Voices The Powerpuff Girls - Sandra Practice (episode: "Girls Gone Mild") The Powerpuff Girls (2016) - Miss Moss, Additional voices (episode: "Staged Bombed", You're a Good Man, Mojo Jojo, Worship) Rapunzel's Tangled Adventure - Lady Crowley (replaced Pat Carroll in season 3) Roary the Racing Car - Big Christine The Replacements - Mistress Serena (episode "Fiddlin' Around") Twirlywoos - The Very Important Lady The Secret Saturdays - Rani Nagi, Dr. Miranda Gray What's New, Scooby-Doo? - Penelope Bailey (episode "Recipe for Disaster") Winx Club - Griselda, Bloom's Guardian of Sirenix The Zula Patrol - Black Zulean Chess Queen 101 Dalmatians II: Patch's London Adventure - Cruella de Vil A Fairly Odd Movie: Grow Up, Timmy Turner! - Wanda A Fairly Odd Christmas - Wanda A Fairly Odd Summer - Wanda Aladdin and the Adventure of All Time Cinderella II: Dreams Come True - Lady Tremaine Cinderella III: A Twist in Time - Lady Tremaine Disney Princess Enchanted Tales: Follow Your Dreams - Narrator Ernest & Celestine - Additional Voices Howl's Moving Castle - Additional Voices Mickey's House of Villains - Cruella de Vil My Life as a Courgette - Ms. Paterson, Zucchini's mother Once Upon a Halloween - Evil Queen Planet 51 - Additional Voices Shrek the Third - Evil Queen Star Tours - Kaink (from Star Wars: Ewoks) The Jimmy Timmy Power Hour series - Wanda, Mrs. Turner, Anti-Wanda, additional voices Tales from Earthsea - The Queen Tangled - Additional Voices Winx Club: The Secret of the Lost Kingdom - Griselda 102 Dalmatians: Puppies to the Rescue - Cruella de Vil Arc the Lad: Twilight of the Spirits - Selkis BioShock - Julie Langford, various Splicers BioShock 2 - Lady Smith Splicers Coraline - Miss Forcible, Other Forcible Destroy All Humans! - Rural Crazy Destroy All Humans! 2: Make War Not Love - Additional voices Diablo 3 - Maghda Disney Infinity 3.0 - Maleficent Disney Villains Challenge - Maleficent, Lady Tremaine, Cruella de Vil Disneyland Adventures - Madame Leota Epic Mickey - Madame Leota EverQuest II - Generic Bixie Enemy, Generic Centaur Enemy, Generic Dark Elf Enemy, Generic Barbarian Guard Evil Dead: Regeneration (2005) - Female Deadite #2, Female Deadite #3 Final Fantasy XIV - Various Freelancer - Additional voices God of War - Village Oracle, Oracle of Athens God of War III - Gaia God of War: Ascension - Village Oracle (cameo) Kingdom Hearts - Maleficent Kingdom Hearts II - Maleficent, Twilight Town Computer Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep - Maleficent, Lady Tremaine, Evil Queen Kingdom Hearts Re:coded - Maleficent Kingdom Hearts 3D: Dream Drop Distance - Maleficent Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5 ReMIX - Maleficent Kingdom Hearts HD 2.5 ReMIX - Maleficent, Lady Tremaine, Evil Queen, Twilight Town Computer Kingdom Hearts HD 2.8 Final Chapter Prologue - Maleficent Kingdom Hearts III - Maleficent Kingdom Hearts: Melody of Memory - Maleficent Lands of Lore III - Jaden, Rosalinda Like a Dragon: Infinite Wealth - Additional voices Nicktoons: Movin' - Wanda Nicktoons Unite! - Wanda Nicktoons: Battle for Volcano Island - Wanda Nicktoons: Attack of the Toybots - Wanda Nox - Woman 1-3 Scooby-Doo! Unmasked - Dame Nella Vivante Scooby-Doo! Who's Watching Who?- Henrietta Bascombe and the Scare Pair Shadows of the Damned - Sister Grim Shisatsu Spider-Man: Shattered Dimensions - Madame Web Spyro: A Hero's Tail - Ineptune Summoner 2 - Bashra, Perduellion, Nepanthies Sword of the Berserk - Dunteth's Wife Tarzan - Kala Tarzan: Untamed - Kala The Fairly OddParents: Breakin' Da Rules - Wanda, Mrs. Turner The Fairly OddParents: Shadow Showdown - Wanda The Nightmare Before Christmas: Oogie's Revenge - Helgamine the Big Witch Treasure Planet: Battle at Procyon - Admiral Amelia Wishes - Evil Queen (voice) Fantasmic! - Cruella de Vil (voice) Halloween Screams - Maleficent (voice) HalloWishes - Maleficent (voice) Magic, Music and Mayhem - Flora (voice) Haunted Mansion Holiday - Madame Leota (voice) Jimmy Neutron's Nicktoon Blast - Wanda (voice) Nightfall Glow - Flora (voice, uncredited) Disney's Fantillusion! - Flora (voice, uncredited) Sorcerers of the Magic Kingdom - Cruella de Vil (voice), Flora (voice, uncredited), Maleficent (voice) Disney Live! Mickey's Magic Show - Evil Queen (voice) Disney on Ice: Disneyland Adventure - Maleficent (voice) Disney on Ice: Let's Celebrate - Cruella de Vil (voice), Evil Queen (voice), Maleficent (voice) Disney on Ice: Princess Classics - Lady Tremaine (voice) Dream Along With Mickey - Maleficent (voice) Hocus Pocus Villain Spelltacular - Maleficent (voice) The Disney Villains Mix and Mingle - Maleficent (voice) Three Classic Fairy Tales - Evil Queen (voice), Lady Tremaine (voice) Forbidden Broadway 1990, Theatre East, New York City, 1990 Forbidden Broadway 1991 ½, Theatre East, 1991–92 Forbidden Christmas, Theatre East, 1991–92 Forbidden Broadway featuring Forbidden Christmas, Theatre East, 1992 Forbidden Broadway 1993, Theatre East, 1993 Forbidden Broadway 1994, Theatre East, 1994 On the Twentieth Century as Dr. Johnson, UCLA Freud Playhouse, Los Angeles, 2003 What If?, Hudson Main Stage, Los Angeles, 2004 Choreographer, Forbidden Broadway 1994, Theatre East, New York City, 1994 Disney Princess Cinderella Read-Along Storybook and CD (2009/Disney Book Group) - Lady Tremaine Disney Songs and Story: Cinderella (2009/Walt Disney Records) - Lady Tremaine Ovation Awards 2012: Won the award for Lead Actress in a Musical for her role as Woman 1 in the Musical Theatre West production of "Forbidden Broadway Greatest Hits, Volume 2" "Disney Princess Enchanted Tales (with Bonus Disc)". Animated Views. January 23, 2020. "Disney Princess Enchanted Tales: Follow Your Dreams". Animated Views. January 25, 2020. "Disney Princess Enchanted Tales (with Bonus Disc)". Animated Views. February 1, 2020. "DISNEY SEQUELS: NOT JUST ONE MORE SILK IN DADDY'S CARAVAN". February 3, 2020. Archived from the original on 2014-02-12. Ernest & Celestine (film). 2013. "Destroy All Humans! 2: Make War Not Love (2006 Video Game)". Behind The Voice Actors. Retrieved 25 September 2021. A green check mark indicates that a role has been confirmed using a screenshot (or collage of screenshots) of a title's list of voice actors and their respective characters found in its opening and/or closing credits and/or other reliable sources of information.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: postscript (link) "Like a Dragon: Infinite Wealth (2024 Video Game)". Behind The Voice Actors. Retrieved 24 March 2024. "Susanne Blakeslee (visual voices guide)". Behind The Voice Actors. Retrieved 26 August 2021. A green check mark indicates that a role has been confirmed using a screenshot (or collage of screenshots) of a title's list of voice actors and their respective characters found in its opening and/or closing credits and/or other reliable sources of information.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: postscript (link) "Center Theatre Group Tops 2012 Ovation Awards". 13 November 2012. Archived from the original on 1 December 2014. Retrieved 27 January 2013. Susanne Blakeslee at IMDb