Yuzuru Hanyu (羽生 結弦, Hanyū Yuzuru, Hiragana: はにゅう ゆづる; born December 7, 1994) is a Japanese figure skater, ice show producer and director, author, and philanthropist. Regarded as one of the greatest figure skaters in history for his well-rounded skills, achievements, innovations, longevity, popularity, and impact on the sport, he started skating at four years old and competed in the men's singles discipline from 2004 to 2022. Hanyu is the first male single skater in 66 years since Dick Button to win back-to-back Olympic titles (2014, 2018), and also the youngest and first Olympic champion from Asia in that discipline. He is a two-time World champion (2014, 2017), a six-time Japanese national champion (2012–2015, 2020–2021), and the first single skater to win four consecutive Grand Prix Finals (2014–2017). With his win at the 2020 Four Continents Championships, he became the first male single skater to complete the Super Slam, having won all major international junior and senior titles in the course of his career. He is also the only male single skater besides Jan Hoffmann to medal at seven World Championships in the post-war era since 1946. Hanyu broke world records 19 times, the most in singles since the introduction of the ISU Judging System in 2003, and was the first skater to land a quadruple loop jump in international competition among other achievements. According to Nikkei Asia, Hanyu's move to professional level in 2022 marked the "end of an era" in competitive figure skating. His first major work as a professional is the ongoing Yuzuru Hanyu Ice Story series, with its prelude event Prologue (2022) being the first solo ice show and the Repray Tour (2023–24) the first solo tour production in figure skating. His second solo show Gift (2023) was the first ice skating event to be held at Tokyo Dome, breaking the record for the largest ice show audience with 35,000 spectators. Hanyu's Ice Story series, which attracted more than 100,000 spectators in total, has opened a new genre of performing art and entertainment, weaving figure skating programs into comprehensive, philosophical stories with on-screen narration. At 16 years old, Hanyu experienced the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami in his hometown of Sendai, which fundamentally shaped his life and career, having participated in different charity events and dedicated various performances to the victims of the disaster. He is also the chairperson of Nippon TV's annual commemoration ice show Yuzuru Hanyu Notte Stellata. By the end of 2023, he has donated a cumulative total of ¥365 million (US$3.12 million) for reconstruction, disaster prevention, and other humanitarian efforts. The donations include the full prize money of his Olympic wins and all royalties from his best-selling autobiography series Blue Flames I–IV. In recognition of his achievements, Hanyu became the youngest recipient of the People's Honor Award (2018), bestowed by the Prime Minister of Japan, received Japan's Medal of Honor with purple ribbon twice (2014, 2018) and was awarded the Kikuchi Kan Prize (2022). He is the first figure skater to be nominated for the Laureus World Sports Award (2019) and was named the Most Valuable Skater at the inaugural ISU Skating Awards (2020). He was also featured in prestigious lists, such as Forbes' 30 Under 30 Asia (2018) as well as ESPN's World Fame 100 (2018, 2019) and The Dominant 20 (2018). In 2022, he was ranked sixth in the list of most-searched athletes on Google Search worldwide. Yuzuru Hanyu was born on December 7, 1994, in Izumi ward, Sendai, Japan, as the second child to father Hidetoshi Hanyu, a junior high school teacher, and mother Yumi Hanyu, a former clerk at a department store. Hanyu's given name 結弦 (Yuzuru, lit. 'tie the bowstring') was chosen by his father, wishing that his son may "live a dignified life like a tightly drawn bowstring",: 1  symbolizing confidence, strength, and straightness. Hanyu's father was an advisor to the baseball school club and recommended the sport to his son, but Hanyu eventually decided to pursue a career in figure skating. His mother used to make the costumes in his early career, including the free skate costume for the 2010–11 season, which was designed by American figure skater Johnny Weir. In 2012, she moved with Hanyu to Toronto, Canada, and accompanied him during training, while his father and older sister, Saya, stayed in Japan. At the age of two, Hanyu was diagnosed with asthma, a condition that gradually improved with time yet negatively affected his stamina, especially during his junior career. He began skating at the age of four at Ice Rink Sendai [ja] (formerly Konami Sports Club) in Izumi,: 2  after coach Mami Yamada had suggested he try the sport instead of being a nuisance during his sister's training. Yamada noted Hanyu's impatience when he first got onto the ice, but also praised him for his sincerity. Coaching him until the end of his second grade in elementary school, Yamada had to move to another prefecture and asked Shōichirō Tsuzuki [ja], former coach of Japan's first World medalist, Minoru Sano, to train Hanyu and "not put his talent to waste". Hanyu described Tsuzuki's practice sessions as particularly strict and exhausting, tempting him to skip lessons at times, but he appreciated Tsuzuki's approach to build a solid foundation of skills and focus on basic training, noting: "He placed so much emphasis on skating and the Axel jump. Perhaps that made me confident to this day that the Axel is my forte." Hanyu competed for the first time in the 2004–05 season, winning gold at the Japan Championships in the Novice B category, the lower of the two novice level categories.: 2  His home rink then closed due to financial issues, forcing him to switch to the Katsuyama Skating Club [ja] in Aoba ward, Sendai. The same year, Shōichirō Tsuzuki moved to Yokohama, and Nanami Abe became Hanyu's main coach and choreographer, guiding him until 2012.: 2  On weekends, Hanyu travelled three hours from Sendai to Yokohama for additional lessons at Tsuzuki's new skating club. In summer 2006, at 11 years old, Hanyu's confidence showed up when initiating a spin battle against that year's Olympic silver medalist, Stéphane Lambiel,: 3  who was known for his world-class spins. Hanyu suffered a disarming defeat, which he remembered as an important career lesson: "After competing against him, I decided to improve my spins as well. You will definitely improve, learning from [the best]." In the 2006–07 season, Hanyu won the bronze medal at the Japan Championships in the Novice A category, which earned him an invitation to the Japan Junior Championships, where he placed seventh. His home rink in Izumi ward eventually reopened in 2007 after being closed for two years. The next season, he placed first at the Japan Championships in the Novice A category and won the bronze medal at the Japan Junior Championships. In 2008–09, Hanyu moved up to junior level and made his international debut in the ISU Junior Grand Prix at the Merano Cup in Italy, where he placed fifth. The same season, he won gold at the Japan Junior Championships, becoming the youngest male skater with 13 years to win the event. This result earned him an invitation to the Japan Senior Championships for the first time, where he placed eighth. His national junior title also qualified him for the 2009 World Junior Championships in February, where he finished 12th with an ISU personal best score of 161.77 points in the combined total. In that season, Hanyu had included the triple Axel, a jump with three and a half revolutions, in his programs for the first time, though receiving negative grades of execution (GOE) for all three attempts. The following 2009–10 season marked the beginning of an 11-year-long quest for the first Super Slam in the men's singles discipline, with wins at the ISU Junior Grand Prix Final and World Junior Championships. Hanyu placed first at both of his Grand Prix assignments, in Poland and Croatia, and entered the Final as the top qualifier, which he won with a new personal best score of 206.77 points. At Junior Nationals, he successfully defended his title from the previous season, qualifying him for the Senior Nationals, where he finished sixth. Based on his results, Hanyu was selected to compete at the 2010 World Junior Championships, winning gold after placing third in the short program and first in the free skate with a new personal best score of 216.10 points. Hanyu became the fourth and youngest Japanese man to win the junior world title. In that season, he had significantly improved the quality of the triple Axel, his most difficult technical element at that time, having landed nine jumps with positive GOE in ten attempts. In the 2010–11 season, Hanyu moved up to senior level at 15 years old, facing significant competition in the Japanese men's field, including Daisuke Takahashi, Nobunari Oda, Takahiko Kozuka, and Tatsuki Machida, who all had finished ahead of him at the previous Japan Championships. Hanyu skated his short program to "White Legend" from Pyotr Tchaikovsky's ballet Swan Lake, performed by Japanese violinist Ikuko Kawai, and used Zigeunerweisen by Pablo de Sarasate for the free skate. He gave his international senior debut at the 2010 NHK Trophy, where he landed his first successful quadruple jump at an ISU-sanctioned event; a quad toe loop. He placed fourth overall at the competition and seventh at the subsequent Rostelecom Cup, missing out on a medal at his first two senior Grand Prix events. At the 2010–11 Japan Championships, Hanyu was in second place after the short program, but faltered in the free skate and finished fourth overall. The next year, at the 2011 Four Continents Championships, he won his first medal at a main international senior competition, placing second behind Daisuke Takahashi with a new personal best score of 228.01 points. At 16 years old, Hanyu became the youngest medalist at the Four Continents Championships. On March 11, 2011, he was skating at his home rink in Sendai when the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami struck his hometown and the Tōhoku region. With his house being damaged, he had to spend the following three days with his family at an evacuation center. A month later, on April 7, the water pipes at his rink burst as a result of an aftershock, known as the April 2011 Miyagi earthquake, and Hanyu was forced to move his training base to Yokohama and Hachinohe until his home rink reopened on July 24, 2011. In the meantime, he had participated in 60 ice shows across Japan, using them as an opportunity to get additional practice time and raise money for the areas affected by the disaster. In the 2011–12 season, Hanyu skated his short program to Alexander Scriabin's Étude in D-sharp minor and the free skate to a medley of Romeo + Juliet by Craig Armstrong. The choreographies were created by Nanami Abe in collaboration with Natalia Bestemianova and Igor Bobrin from Russia. Hanyu opened the season at the Nebelhorn Trophy, where he won his first gold medal at an international senior competition. During the event, he shared his career goals with the media: "My goals for the future are to land all quad jumps in competition. I would also like to learn the quad Axel. Another goal is to win the next two Olympics, or at least win medals." For the 2011–12 Grand Prix series, he was assigned to the Cup of China, where he placed fourth, and the Rostelecom Cup, which he won with one of the closest margins of 0.03 points ahead of Javier Fernández from Spain. The results qualified him for his first senior Grand Prix Final, where he finished fourth. Hanyu then won the bronze medal at the Japan Championships, earning a spot on the Japanese team for the 2012 World Championships. At his senior Worlds debut, he competed on a sprained ankle, placing seventh in the short program, but with a strong free skate he moved up to third place overall, winning the bronze medal with a new personal best score of 251.06 points. He became the youngest Japanese world medalist, finishing behind then two-time world champion Patrick Chan (gold) and Daisuke Takahashi (silver). After the competition, both skaters acknowledged Hanyu as a potential strong rival in the future. Upon the conclusion of the 2011–12 season, Hanyu changed coaches, training with Brian Orser and Tracy Wilson at the Toronto Cricket, Skating and Curling Club (Toronto CSCC) in Canada, who had coached Korean single skater Yuna Kim to Olympic gold in 2010 among others. Hanyu's main motivation for the change were the consistent quadruple jumps performed by Orser's student Javier Fernández. According to Hidehito Ito, figure skating director of the Japan Skating Federation, the change was also necessary to "challenge" Hanyu and "raise the level [of his skating] more". The first months, Hanyu was making frequent trips to Toronto, but continued to attend high school in Sendai. After moving to Canada, he increased his on-ice training to 3–4 hours a day, up from 1–2 hours, which had been due to limited ice time in Sendai, schooling, and asthma. In the first season at his new skating club, Hanyu teamed up with two new choreographers. His short program was created by the 2008 World champion, Jeffrey Buttle, to "Parisienne Walkways" by Gary Moore, and the free skate was choreographed by Canadian David Wilson to a medley of Riccardo Cocciante's musical Notre-Dame de Paris. The coaching change resulted in immediate success; At the 2012 Finlandia Trophy, Hanyu landed his first quadruple Salchow in international competition and won the event. In the Grand Prix series, he scored his first two world records in the short program with 95.07 points at the 2012 Skate America, where he finished second behind Takahiko Kozuka, and 95.32 points at the NHK Trophy, which he won ahead of Daisuke Takahashi. The placements qualified him for the Grand Prix Final, where he finished second behind Takahashi and beat Patrick Chan for the first time in competition. At the Japan Championships, Hanyu won his first national senior title, defeating the reigning and five-time national champion, Daisuke Takahashi, scoring an unofficial record of 285.23 points in the combined total. However, his win was not well received among spectators and officials, being booed on the podium, but Orser encouraged his student, saying: "They will come around. Just give it some time and they will come your way." After the 2013 Four Continents Championships, where he had finished second behind Canadian Kevin Reynolds, Hanyu suffered a knee injury and resumed training two weeks prior to the World Championships. An additional ankle sprain in practice forced him to compete on painkillers.: 3  Placing ninth after the short program, he fought back with a strong free skate, finishing fourth overall behind Patrick Chan (gold), Denis Ten (silver), and Javier Fernández (bronze), and earning a third spot for Japanese men at the 2014 Winter Olympics. For his first Olympic season, Hanyu returned to his short program "Parisienne Walkways" and selected Nino Rota's music from Romeo and Juliet for the free skate, choreographed by David Wilson. He launched the season with a win at the 2013 Finlandia Trophy and won silver in both of his Grand Prix events, the 2013 Skate Canada and Trophée Éric Bompard, qualifying him for the 2013–14 Grand Prix Final. At the Final, he set a new world record in the short program with 99.84 points and placed first overall ahead of Patrick Chan (silver) and Nobunari Oda (bronze), winning his first major international senior title. At the Japan Championships, Hanyu went on to win a second national title and was selected to represent the Japanese team at the 2014 Winter Olympics and World Championships. At the Winter Olympics in Sochi, he participated in the men's short program of the figure skating team event, earning ten points for Team Japan. In the individual event, he broke his world record, becoming the first skater to score above 100 points in the short program with a score of 101.45. Despite two falls in the free skate, he managed to win the event with a new Olympic record of 280.09 points in the combined total, finishing ahead of Patrick Chan (silver) and Denis Ten (bronze). With his win, Hanyu became the youngest gold medalist since American Dick Button in 1948. It was the first Olympic title for an Asian skater in the men's singles event and the second for Japan in figure skating, following Shizuka Arakawa's win in the women's event in 2006 in Turin. Hanyu concluded the season with a victory at the World Championships in Saitama, Japan, defeating compatriot Tatsuki Machida with 0.33 points and becoming the first skater to win the Olympics, Worlds, and the Grand Prix Final in the same season after Russian Alexei Yagudin in 2002–01. After the Sochi Olympics, Hanyu's coaching team was joined by jump expert Ghislain Briand who had coached Canadian skater Elvis Stojko to Olympic silver and two world titles in the 1990s. After Stojko's retirement, Briand was convinced that he would "never have the opportunity to work with another athlete with that much talent, dedication, and passion." However, with Hanyu, Briand had eventually found a student who was open towards his unconventional training methods and analysis of figure skating jumps, stating: "Yuzu is probably the first athlete who really recognizes what I do with him. He is the perfect model and he masters his art like no one else. It sometimes makes the job easier, but his higher level also comes with many challenges.": 1  In the 2014–15 season, Hanyu skated his short program to Frédéric Chopin's Ballade No. 1 in G minor and selected a medley from Andrew Lloyd Webber's musical The Phantom of the Opera for the free skate. The programs were choreographed by Jeffrey Buttle and Shae-Lynn Bourne, respectively, who created all short and free skate programs for Hanyu from 2014 onward. For Hanyu, the 2014–15 season was shaped by a series of injuries, starting with an accident in practice, where he hurt his back and was forced to withdraw from the 2014 Finlandia Trophy. In his first Grand Prix event at the Cup of China, he collided with Chinese skater Yan Han during the free skate warm-up, suffering bruises on his head and chin along with injuring his midriff, left thigh, and right leg. Despite his severe condition, he decided to compete in the free skate and managed to finish second overall behind Maxim Kovtun from Russia. At the NHK Trophy, he came in fourth, securing his place at the Grand Prix Final by one of the slimmest margins of 0.15 points. At the Final, he successfully defended his title with 34.26 points ahead of silver medalist Javier Fernández. In December, Hanyu competed at the 2014–15 Japan Championships, placing first in both segments and winning his third consecutive national title. However, he was forced to withdraw from the exhibition gala due to abdominal pain. He was diagnosed with a tubal residual disease and had to undergo surgery on his bladder, being hospitalized for two weeks and resting for another month. His series of injuries continued with a sprain of his right ankle that forced him to stay in Japan until the 2015 World Championships, where he finished second behind Fernández by less than three points. In April, Hanyu competed for the first time at the ISU World Team Trophy, placing first in both competition segments and earning 24 points to help Team Japan win the bronze medal behind Team USA (gold) and Team Russia (silver). For the 2015–16 season, Hanyu returned to his short program Ballade No. 1 and selected the soundtrack of the films Onmyōji and Onmyōji II by Shigeru Umebayashi for the free skate, portraying the Japanese philosopher and astronomer Abe no Seimei. He started the season by winning gold at the 2015 Autumn Classic, finishing 36 points ahead of silver medalist Nam Nguyen. However, in his first Grand Prix event at Skate Canada, he placed sixth in the short program after invalidating two jumping passes, finishing second overall behind Patrick Chan. Hanyu had been struggling with his short program layout throughout the previous season that included a quad toe loop and a triple Lutz-triple toe loop combination in the second half. While his coach Brian Orser suggested a more "conservative" change, Hanyu decided to add another quad, stating: "I thought by the time of the Pyeongchang Olympics, you cannot win without a short program that includes two quads with difficult entries and exits—plus excellent footwork, spins, and presentation. As the reigning Olympic champion, I want to be absolutely dominant." The offensive strategy earned him a series of back-to-back world records within two weeks: At the 2015 NHK Trophy, he set new highest scores of 106.33 in the short program, 216.07 in the free skate, and 322.40 in the combined total, becoming the first skater to score above 200 and 300 points in the two segments, respectively. It was the first free skate performance of Hanyu's competitive career with all-positive grades of execution, featuring three quadruple jumps and two triple Axels. At the 2015–16 Grand Prix Final in Barcelona, he broke his own records in all three segments with 110.95 points in the short program, 219.48 in the free skate, and 330.43 overall, becoming the first man to win the Grand Prix Final for three consecutive seasons. He finished 37.48 points ahead of Javier Fernández, breaking the record of the largest victory margin at the Grand Prix Final, which was held by Evgeni Plushenko with 35.10 points in 2004. At the Japan Championships, Hanyu won his fourth consecutive national title after placing first in both segments. However, a lingering pain in his left foot worsened throughout the season, threatening his participation at the 2016 World Championships in Boston. At the event, he managed to skate another clean short program of 110.56 points, but faltered in the free skate, placing second overall behind Fernández. It was subsequently announced that Hanyu had been diagnosed with a Lisfranc injury in his left foot, forcing him off ice for two months. In the 2016–17 season, Hanyu skated to the song "Let's Go Crazy" by Prince in the short program and a medley of "Asian Dream Song" and "View of Silence" by Joe Hisaishi, titled Hope and Legacy, in the free skate. He opened the season with a win at the 2016 Autumn Classic, becoming the first skater to successfully land a quadruple loop jump in competition. After a rough performance at Skate Canada with a second-place finish behind Patrick Chan, Hanyu and Orser had a debate on the approach for the next competitions. While Orser described the performances as a "skeleton of the [planned] choreography" and pleaded to work on the "total package", Hanyu was convinced that landing his jumps was the key to a well-rounded program. The strategy paid off with a win at the NHK Trophy, surpassing the 300 mark with a total score of 301.47. At the 2016–17 Grand Prix Final in Marseille, Hanyu placed first the short program with a season's best score of 106.53. In the free skate, he made mistakes on three jumping passes, placing third in the segment, but his advantage from the short program was enough to stay in first overall, becoming the first male single skater to win four consecutive Grand Prix Finals. After contracting the flu, Hanyu was forced to withdraw from the Japan Championships, missing the event for the first time. At the 2017 Four Continents Championships, he placed third in the short program after turning his quad Salchow into a double, a jump that had caused him issues throughout the season. He fought back with a strong free skate, placing first in the segment and scoring a new season's best of 303.71 points in the combined total. However, he finished second behind American Nathan Chen by about four points, taking the silver medal for a third time. At the World Championships, Hanyu moved up from fifth place after the short program to first with a clean free skate performance that featured four quadruple jumps and two triple Axels. He scored a new world record of 223.20 points in the segment and won his second world title, finishing ahead of his compatriot Shoma Uno (silver) and Jin Boyang from China (bronze). The event marked the first time that all three medalists scored above 300 points. In July 2022, Hanyu named the free skate performance of Hope and Legacy as the one that he thought would represent him best and was the most perfectly executed of his competitive career.: 1  At the 2017 World Team Trophy, the final competition of the season, he came in seventh place after an error-filled short program, but placed first in the free skating, becoming the first skater to complete three quadruple jumps in the second half of a skating program. He contributed 18 points to the team score and won gold with Team Japan. For the Olympic season, Hanyu returned to his short program Ballade No. 1 and free skate Seimei from the 2015–16 season. At the 2017 CS Autumn Classic, he scored a new world record of 112.72 points in the short program; at the Rostelecom Cup, he landed his first successful quadruple Lutz jump in international competition. However, due to mistakes, he finished second at both events behind Javier Fernández and Nathan Chen, respectively. In November, Hanyu was scheduled to compete at the NHK Trophy, but injured a lateral ligament in his right ankle after a fall on a quad Lutz in practice and was forced to withdraw from all remaining competitions of the year. At the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, he placed first in the short program with a new Olympic record of 111.68 points. In the free skating, he missed a jump combination and stumbled on his final triple Lutz, placing second in the segment, but it was enough to stay in first overall ahead of Shoma Uno (silver) and Javier Fernández (bronze), scoring another Olympic record of 317.85 points in the combined total. With his win, Hanyu became the first male single skater in 66 years to successfully defend his Olympic title since Dick Button in 1952. Upon the conclusion of the Olympics, Hanyu announced the quadruple Axel as his next career goal, a jump that hadn't been landed in competition until then. In order to allow his injured ankle to recover, he decided to withdraw from the World Championships, but remained first in the world standings for a fifth consecutive time at the end of the 2017–18 season. For the 2018–19 season, Hanyu selected his programs with the thought to pay tribute to the skating idols of his childhood. His short program to "Otoñal" by Raúl Di Blasio was dedicated to American skater Johnny Weir who had used the piece for his free skate in the 2004–05 season. Hanyu's new free skate program Origin, a medley of the pieces "Art on Ice" and "Magic Stradivarius" by Edvin Marton, was a homage to Russian Evgeni Plushenko who had skated to the music in his free skate Tribute to Nijinsky in 2003–04. Regarding his program choices, Hanyu remarked: "I am satisfied that as a result [of my Olympic success] I have been released from the pressure that I have to produce results. I think and feel that I can skate for myself from now on. I want to go back to my skating origins." Hanyu opened the season with a win at the 2018 Autumn Classic, but expressed dissatisfaction with his performances, pledging to improve in the next competitions. At the Grand Prix of Helsinki, he set highest scores in all segments under the new +5/-5 GOE judging system, earning 106.69 points in the short program, 190.43 in the free skate, and 297.12 points in the combined total. He also became the first skater to land a quad toe loop-triple Axel jump sequence in competition, winning the event by about 40 points over Michal Březina. At the Rostelecom Cup in Moscow, Hanyu upped the short program record to 110.53 points, but on the following day, he re-injured his right ankle in practice after falling on a quad loop. Yet he opted to compete, aided by painkillers, and managed to place first in all segments, winning gold at both of his Grand Prix assignments for the first time. After the competition, Hanyu admitted: "I thought about withdrawing because of the injury, but it is my choice. I really wanted to skate this program in Russia." Due to the injured ligaments and tendons in his right foot, he was forced to withdraw from the Grand Prix Final and Japan Championships, taking about three weeks of rest and another month of rehabilitation. At the 2019 World Championships in Saitama, Hanyu placed third in the short program after turning his opening quad Salchow into a double, but came back with a strong free skate, becoming the first skater to surpass the 200 and 300 marks in the new judging system with 206.10 points in the free skate and 300.97 in total. However, he finished second behind Nathan Chen who bested both scores later in the event. Similar to his preparations for the Olympics, Hanyu had relied on painkillers before and during the competition to make jumping possible. Due to the injury, he was forced to withdraw from the season's final event, the World Team Trophy. In 2019–20, Hanyu returned to the short program "Otoñal" and free skate Origin, and launched the new season with a solid win at the 2019 Autumn Classic. Brian Orser praised his student, noting that he has "never seen him at this time of the year to be so focused." In the Grand Prix series, Hanyu won his first gold medal at Skate Canada, scoring new personal bests of 212.99 in the free skate and 322.59 in the combined total. He placed first with a new largest victory margin of 59.82 points ahead of Nam Nguyen, improving his own record of 55.97 points from 2015. Hanyu expressed his satisfaction with the performance, feeling reaffirmed about the image of skating he was aiming for, and added: "For the first in a long time, I genuinely felt being able to win against myself." At the NHK Trophy, he captured another gold with a total score above 300 and more than 55 points ahead of silver medalist Kevin Aymoz. At the Grand Prix Final, Hanyu went into the short program without company due to a delayed arrival of his coach Ghislain Briand. In his performance, he missed a mandatory jump combination, placing second in the segment and trailing Nathan Chen by about 13 points. In the free skate, Hanyu landed five quadruple jumps in one program for the first time in his career, including his first attempt on a quad Lutz since 2017, but missed a planned triple Axel-triple Axel sequence, finishing second overall behind Chen by more than 43 points. Competing at his first Japanese championships since the 2016–17 season, Hanyu placed first in the short program, 5.01 points ahead of Shoma Uno. Several jump errors in the free skate saw him place third in that segment, behind Uno and Yuma Kagiyama, and win the silver medal overall. It was Hanyu's first loss to Uno. Heading into the Four Continents Championships in Seoul, Hanyu opted to return to his Ballade No. 1 (Chopin) program and his "Seimei" program from prior seasons. Referencing the 2018 Winter Olympics which were held in Pyeongchang, Hanyu noted that while he wanted to win a gold medal once again in South Korea, he wanted to showcase and focus on his own style of figure skating even more. In the short program, Hanyu broke his previous world record with 111.82 points. Hanyu called it "the most perfect performance I've ever done." Despite errors on two of his quad attempts in the free skate, he won that segment as well, taking the gold medal overall with 299.42 points. Hanyu's victory on February 9, made him the first and only male singles skater to win all of the major ISU championship events at the junior and senior levels, a feat known as the Super Slam, previously only achieved by five other competitors in the other three skating disciplines. He was assigned to compete at the World Championships in Montreal, but these were canceled as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. At the ISU Skating Awards in 2020, Hanyu was nominated for Best Costume and Most Valuable Skater for the 2019–2020 season, and proceeded to win the latter. In 2021, due to travel restrictions related to the coronavirus pandemic, Hanyu started to train alone in Sendai with some remote consultation from his coaches. Despite the difficulties of training alone, Hanyu found that it had been a good opportunity to learn how to control and analyze himself, which led him not return to Canada until he turned professional and made Ice Rink Sendai his training base again. Hanyu also opted to receive remote choreography for his programs ever since and has contributed significantly to the choreography of his programs in the 2020–21 season. On August 28, he announced that he would skip the Grand Prix series, citing the risk of COVID-19 for himself, the competition staff, and for his fans who would gather to support him. Despite feeling "conflicted" over whether he should have competed or not as COVID-19 continued and practicing without his coaching team, Hanyu decided to compete in Japanese championships, which doubled as the final qualifier for the upcoming World Championships in Stockholm. He placed first in the short program (103.53 points) and the free skate (215.83 points) with all positive grades of execution on jumping passes and won his fifth national figure skating title with a total score of 319.36 points. The 2021 World Championships were to be the first direct competition between Hanyu and Nathan Chen since the 2019–20 Grand Prix Final. Hanyu placed first in the short program with a solid performance, 6.02 points ahead of compatriot Yuma Kagiyama. In the free skate, Hanyu opened his program with two quadruple jumps and a triple Axel but received negative grades of execution for all three of them. Scoring 182.20 points, he placed fourth in the free skate and third overall, behind Chen and Kagiyama. It was the first competition Hanyu had placed below second since 2014, however, he became the first male single skater besides German Jan Hoffmann to win seven World medals in the post-war era since 1946. On the following day, Hanyu confirmed the report of his asthma attack by overseas media. He stated that he felt a little painful after finishing the free skate, and explained: "There were few small troubles that kept stacking up ... However, if asked whether that was what led to the huge mistake (in the free skate), I don't think it was as big of a miss as it was in terms of the miss in the score." Hanyu's placement combined with Kagiyama's qualified three berths for Japanese men at the 2022 Winter Olympics. Hanyu competed as part of Team Japan for the 2021 World Team Trophy. He placed second in both the short program and the free skate, only behind Nathan Chen. He achieved a personal season's best score in both the short program and the free skate with 107.12 and 193.76 points respectively and earned a total of 22 points to help his team take home the bronze medal. Hanyu confirmed his plans to compete in the 2021–22 Olympic season, and was scheduled to compete at the 2021 NHK Trophy and 2021 Rostelecom Cup in November for the 2021–22 Grand Prix series. On November 4, 2021, the Japan Skating Federation announced Hanyu's withdrawal from the NHK Trophy due to an injury in his right ankle ligament during a fall in practice. The JSF subsequently announced his withdrawal from the Rostelecom Cup prior to the event, but said that he would remain in consideration for the Olympic team. Hanyu made his season debut at the 2021–22 Japan Figure Skating Championships, placing first in both the short program and free skate, winning his sixth Japanese National title, tying Takeshi Honda's record of most national titles in the last 50 years. He also attempted a quadruple Axel for the first time during the free skate, although it was downgraded to a triple Axel with a two-footed landing. Hanyu was assigned to represent Japan at the 2022 Winter Olympics and the 2022 World Championships. At the 2022 Winter Olympics, Hanyu missed his opening quadruple Salchow jump in the short program due to a hole in the ice and placed eighth with 95.15 points, qualifying him for the free skate. The score was his lowest in the segment since the 2019 World Championships. In the free skate, he fell twice in his first two opening jumps, a quadruple Axel and a quad Salchow. His quad Axel attempt is the first that was not downgraded to triple Axel. Other than these two mistakes, he delivered a clean skate, placing third in the free skate and fourth place overall with a total score of 283.21 points, behind fellow Japanese compatriot and bronze medalist Shoma Uno. Following his free skate, Hanyu confirmed in a press conference that he had re-injured his right ankle in practice the day before the free skate, but since it was the Olympics and not a normal competition, he chose to compete on painkillers instead of withdrawing. On March 1, 2022, the Japan Skating Federation announced Hanyu's withdrawal from the 2022 World Championships due to the unhealed injury. At a press conference on July 19, 2022, Hanyu announced his decision to "step away" from competitive figure skating at amateur level and turn professional, stating that "he had achieved everything he could achieve" and would no longer "seek those kinds of evaluations." He also stated his intention to continue pursuing his "ideal skating" and dream of completing the quadruple Axel as a professional athlete. Nikkei Asia and International Figure Skating noted that Hanyu's exit from the competitive circuit "marks the end of an era". Juliet Macur of The New York Times remarked that "we may never see another skater like Yuzuru Hanyu". Numerous sports figures from and outside figure skating reacted to Hanyu's announcement with gratitude and praise, including Japanese gymnast Kōhei Uchimura, baseballer Shohei Ohtani, and tennis player Naomi Osaka. In August and September 2022, Hanyu opened accounts on social media, having long eschewed it for years, that are mainly managed by staff. He stated his intention to show his skating through his YouTube channel and increase opportunities for everyone to watch it, including those who are unable to attend ice shows. On August 10, he live-streamed an open practice session on his channel titled Share Practice where he presented some of his past programs, including three run-throughs and a clean performance of his free skate Seimei with the same elements as used in his layout at the 2018 Winter Olympics. The session was open to the press, followed from the rinkside by numerous journalists and photographers, and was watched live on YouTube by more than 100,000 people, having exceeded a total of 3 million views in less than a month. In 2022, Hanyu presented his first ice show as a professional figure skater, titled Prologue, in Yokohama and Hachinohe. It was the first solo ice show production in figure skating, with each show having a duration of 90 minutes and featuring a selection of eight different programs from Hanyu, performed at the athletic level of skating competitions, including multiple quadruple jumps and triple Axels. Prologue was a prelude event to Hanyu's Ice Story solo show series, produced and directed by himself in collaboration with choreographer Mikiko. The first main chapter of the series was the solo ice show Gift, the first ice skating event to be held at Tokyo Dome, one of Japan's largest and most prestigious entertainment venues, with a record ice show audience of 35,000 spectators. It was presented on February 26, 2023, and featured 12 programs that were weaved into a comprehensive, philosophical story of 120 minutes about Hanyu's life and future on ice. In his performances, he was accompanied by the dance group Elevenplay, the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra, and a special band led by Satoshi Takebe. The Olympics' official news site called Hanyu's programs "performances for the ages", noting that it was "more a concert for a blockbuster artist than an ice show." On July 14, Gift became the first ice show to be distributed on the streaming platform Disney+ worldwide. The Repray Tour, a sequel to Gift and the second main chapter of Hanyu's Ice Story series, is the first solo ice show tour to be produced in figure skating, scheduled with four stops across Japan in Saitama, Saga, Yokohama, and Rifu from November 2023 to April 2024. Similar to Gift, each show has a duration of 120 minutes with 12 programs being merged into a gaming-themed story that picks up the contrasts between the virtual and real world and gives "food for thought about life and the series of choices we make." Hanyu's performances to soundtracks from popular video games like Final Fantasy or Undertale have attracted many fans not only from figure skating but also the gaming scene. Due to high ticket demand, an additional performance in Rifu has been added to the three initial tour stops. With Hanyu's solo shows, a new genre of performing art and entertainment has been created, combining his skating performances with on-screen narration to deep stories. As of February 2024, the Ice Story series has attracted a cumulative total of 112,800 spectators, with all 12 solo performances being sold out by lottery. The shows received universal acclaim in Japan and overseas, including figure skating world champions Patrick Chan and Elizaveta Tuktamysheva who praised Hanyu's remarkable athleticism and stamina to skate 8 to 12 programs in one show. Japanese sportswriter Takaomi Matsubara named Hanyu's solo shows a new milestone in professional skating and, according to USC Annenberg columnist Valerie Fang, "we are witnessing the rise of a figure skating franchise." In March 2023, the annual ice show Yuzuru Hanyu Notte Stellata, a commemoration event of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami, was inaugurated at Sekisui Heim Super Arena in Rifu, which had served as a morgue at the time of the disaster. The show is produced by Nippon TV with Hanyu as the chairperson, featuring a cast of international professional skaters as well as a guest artist from a different sport or performing art field. The special guests of the first two editions were three-time Olympic gymnastics champion Kohei Uchimura and renowned stage actor Mao Daichi. Hanyu's signature moves Layback Biellmann spin Doughnut camel spin One-handed hydroblading Layback Ina Bauer Side lunge (pistol pose) Hanyu is regarded by analysts as an accomplished skater known for his high-level technical elements as well as mature and versatile artistry. His performance is often characterized as "the perfect combination of skills, strength and elegance", tending to "[blur] rigid gender lines". According to four-time Olympic medalist Evgeni Plushenko, Hanyu had a "decided edge over other skaters in the completeness of his performance—spins, skating skills, transitions between jumps and musical interpretation". Two-time world champion Stephane Lambiel described him as "the most complete athlete in figure skating, probably ever." Hanyu is known for his ability to generate skating speed "out of nowhere" and cover long distances with only a few strokes. At the 2021–22 Japan Championships, he managed to perform a clean short program without using consecutive crossovers and reduce the number of basic skating movements to a minimum. This is a feat that has long been considered near impossible, as stated by former competitive skater John Misha Petkevich in his book Figure Skating: Championship Techniques from 1989: "Without a doubt, crossovers are the staple of every skater. Not only are they used to negotiate corners, but they are also used to pick up speed. Skating without crossovers would be virtually unthinkable." The ability to accelerate with a few strokes allows Hanyu to execute his jumps from a variety of difficult entries. Notable are the backward counter turn, twizzle, and spread eagle into his signature triple Axel jump. Hanyu is also known for his strong vaulting technique with minimal pre-rotation on the ice at the take-off, achieving trajectories of impressive size. With a height of 70 centimeters and covering a distance of 3.62 meters, his triple Axel was the largest measured jump in the men's short program at the 2019 World Championships.: 1  In 2018, Hanyu's triple Axel from the 2018 Winter Olympics was used as a demonstration example by the ISU for the GOE judging criteria "very good height and very good length" as well as "steps before the jump, unexpected or creative entry". Despite the complex preceding steps and big trajectory, he manages to land his jumps smoothly and increase his skating speed from take-off to landing.: 1  With the toe loop, Salchow, loop, and Lutz, Hanyu has successfully executed four different types of quadruple jumps in the course of his competitive career. He stated his preference for edge jumps, and notably featured all three types in his short program of the 2016–17 season. Hanyu is able to execute the layback Biellmann and doughnut camel spin, which are more commonly seen in women's singles and known for their difficulty among male skaters due to the high flexibility required in spine, hips, and shoulders. Other signature moves include the layback Ina Bauer, hydroblading, and the side lunge.: 2  Overall, Hanyu's technical elements stand out for their high quality of execution, having received a total of 29 maximum scores in international competition, covering all four types of required elements in the men's singles discipline: jumps, spins, steps, and choreographic sequences. Beyond that, his elements are noted for their seamless embedding into the choreography and his movements for their precise timing with the music, the latter being awarded a perfect 10.00 in the interpretation component at the 2021–22 Japan Championships. Hanyu's programs cover a variety of different music genres, including classical pieces, modern pop rock, musicals, and traditional Japanese music. He notably portrayed the historical Japanese figures Abe no Seimei and Uesugi Kenshin in his free skate programs at the 2018 and 2022 Winter Olympics. He also dedicated various exhibition programs to the victims of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami and performed them as live music collaborations at shows like Fantasy on Ice among others. Hanyu is known to be involved in all aspects of his programs, from the music selection and editing process to the costume design and choreography. As his choreographer Shae-Lynn Bourne stated, "He knows what costume he wants. He knows what jump order he wants. He makes a lot of the decisions on his own. You can't say 'no' to that ever. You know, with music especially, because he is going to skate with conviction." Figure skaters Hanyu looked up to while growing up are Evgeni Plushenko and Johnny Weir. With his competitive programs for the 2018–19 season, he paid homage to the two skaters by skating to "Otoñal" by Raúl Di Blasio as well as "Art on Ice" and "Magic Stradivarius" by Edvin Marton, which had been used by Weir and Plushenko, respectively, in their programs. At the press conference of the 2018 Winter Olympics, Hanyu also mentioned Stephane Lambiel, Javier Fernández, and Dick Button as the skaters who had influenced him as a skater. Hanyu has appeared in many commercials and advertising campaigns over the years. In 2013, Hanyu, alongside fellow Japanese figure skater Daisuke Takahashi, became the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics campaign ambassador for P&G's global "Proud Sponsor of Moms" campaign. He also signed an affiliation contract with All Nippon Airways which ended when he turned professional in 2022 but he remained sponsored by the company till September 2023. From February 8 to 23, 2014, Hanyu endorsed ANA's new line of flight attendant outfits, which were designed by Prabal Gurung and appeared in a TV commercial for their 2018 Pyeongchang Winter Olympics "Hello Blue Hello Future" campaign. In September 2014, Hanyu starred in a TV commercial for Capcom's new video game Monster Hunter 4G and endorsed Lotte's Ghana milk chocolate with Mao Asada, singer Airi Matsui, and actresses Suzu Hirose and Tao Tsuchiya, in following years he also endorsed Lotte's Xylitol Whites and GUM FOR THE GAME. Hanyu has also worked with other brands such as Ajinomoto endorsing their sport nutritional products Amino Vital and nutritional meals along with other athletes like Uta Abe, bath salts Bathclin Kikiyu, bedding products Nishikawa Sangyo co., and Phiten for their Aqua-Titanium sports socks and line of Rakuwa nylon-coated necklaces and bracelets including Hanyu's inspired 'Wings Gold' models. In 2019, Hanyu became the ambassador for Citizen in China, Hong Kong, and Macau, as well as the global ambassador of the Sekkisei series by Kosé. He was later appointed as the global "muse" of the Sekkisei Miyabi brand in 2020. In October 2021, Hanyu was chosen as a face of Towa Pharmaceutical co. appearing in a TV commercial with veteran actress Tetsuko Kuroyanagi and endorsed ANA's new teleportation services "avatarin". In 2013 and 2021, Hanyu was appointed as the model for Miyagi Prefecture Police's traffic safety poster aiming to encourage compliance with traffic rules and spread awareness of safe driving. According to an official in March 2021, Hanyu was chosen because "he embodies sportsmanship". In June 2021, Hanyu was appointed as the ambassador of the world's first official Paralympics game The Pegasus Dream Tour, making his video game debut with his avatar appearing in the game. According to the representative of the game's developer company, Hanyu was chosen because "he is an athlete as well as a person who has artistry in his way of life". Since April 2014, Hanyu has been acting as the tourism ambassador of Sendai and featured in the city's tourism posters as well as tourist guidebooks. On March 14, 2024, he was announced as a new brand ambassador for the Italian luxury fashion house Gucci, joining Italian tennis player Jannik Sinner, Chinese actor and singer Xiao Zhan, British soccer player Jack Grealish, and American rapper and hip-hop dancer Jay Park among others. Since the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami, Hanyu has been an advocate for and supporter of various campaigns to help earthquake victims, as he was also directly affected by the disaster, stating: "When the earthquake hit, I was on the ice at my home rink in Sendai". Shortly after the disaster, he and other skaters skated in ice shows to raise money for the victims, raising a total of more than $150,000. He also sold his personal belongings at the show, fundraising an additional ¥2,954,323 ($35,387). And since the disaster, Hanyu has been lending his image to the Great East Japan Earthquake Employment, Education and Health Support Organization to use for posters encouraging donations for the disaster area. Hanyu donated his 2014 Olympic gold medal 6 million yen ($55,000) prize money as well as his 2018 Olympic gold medal 10 million yen ($92,000) prize money received from the Japan Skating Federation and Japanese Olympic Committee to Sendai and Miyagi Prefecture to help with the reconstruction of the disaster areas. He also has been helping his home rink Ice Rink Sendai, rendered unusable after the disaster, by donating all the royalties and part of the proceeds of his autobiography series. It was revealed, in 2023, that a total of ¥87,330,406 ($617,000) had been donated to the rink. In September 2014, Hanyu was appointed as the Tsunami Disaster Prevention Ambassador for one year participating in activities to spread tsunami disaster prevention public awareness. In February 2015, Hanyu became the spokesman for reconstruction efforts led by the Japanese Red Cross Society. He also lent his image as the spokesman for the Red Cross' "Hatachi no Kenketsu" donation campaign where he starred in the promotional video with patients. In April 2016, upon his request to his sponsor Phiten, drinking water was donated to the areas affected by the 2016 Kumamoto earthquakes. In March 2019, he donated a pair of figure skates to an online charity auction which raised 7.12 million yen ($64,000) for the disaster area reconstruction. He also collaborated with Line Corporation supervising the creation of "Yuzuru Hanyu 3.11 Smile Stamp" which went on sale with all revenues donated to the Nippon Foundation's "Special Fund for Disaster Reconstruction" to support acts for reconstruction and future disaster preparation. On August 21, 2019, a poster of Hanyu with the protagonist of the anime Yowamushi Pedal was released to promote Tour de Tohoku, an annual charity cycling event held to support the cause. He appeared in five of the nine posters being released. In 2021, marking the 10th anniversary of Tohoku earthquake and tsunami, Hanyu organized the "Together, Forward" exhibition that traces his footsteps during that difficult period, revisiting the affected people and places. The exhibition was held in multiple Japanese cities in an effort to remind everyone of the importance of disaster prevention and preparation. In cooperation with Yomiuri Shimbun, a free entry exhibition of Hanyu's photos, costumes, and medals was held offline in multiple locations in Japan in 2018 and 2022 and online in 2020. A total sum of more than 150 million yen was donated from the sales of the exhibition's official goods. Around 42 million yen was donated in 2018 to support victims of the Great East Japan Earthquake and other disasters and around 27 million yen was donated in 2020 to the National Corona Medical Welfare Support Fund. The donation from the 2022 exhibition that exceeded 85 million yen was donated to the Yomiuri Light and Love Foundation which was used to create a disaster relief fund in case of any large-scale disaster that occurs in Japan in the future. In February 2023, it was announced that 10 million yen from the fund would be donated for relief and reconstruction efforts in areas affected by the 2023 Turkey–Syria earthquake in Turkey. In January 2024, it was announced that 10 million yen from the fund would be donated to the Ishikawa Prefecture which was badly affected by the 2024 Noto Peninsula earthquake to help support the disaster victims and reconstruction efforts. From 2014 to 2022, Hanyu also regularly participated in Nippon TV's annual charity program 24-Hour Television, holding special ice shows and visiting victims in disaster areas. In 2014, he held a one-night ice show to bring in donations. In 2015, he and Hey! Say! JUMP member Yuri Chinen designed "Chari-T-shirts" for the program under the slogan "To connect: a smile beyond time". The shirts were to be sold with the profits given to charity. He also visited earthquake-affected areas in Fukushima and Ishinomaki, interviewing the victims as part of the program segment. In December 2022, it was announced that Hanyu was appointed as a special messenger for NTV's program news every. [ja] presenting a new segment called "Yuzuru Hanyu, Thoughts I want to convey" every few months promoting awareness about natural disaster areas and disaster prevention. Hanyu served as a judge on Japan's popular New Year's Eve music show Kōhaku Uta Gassen twice, in 2015 and 2022. He made his on-screen debut as Date Shigemura, a samurai lord, in the 2016 movie, The Magnificent Nine. In May 2023, Hanyu guested on a special episode celebrating the 48th-anniversary of the world's longest-running single-host talk show, Tetsuko's Room [ja]. Hanyu was one of the athletes featured in the 2022 Winter Olympics official documentary film Beijing 2022 released in May 2023. Hanyu released two video albums compiling some of his competitive career performances, the first titled Time of Awakening was released on May 21, 2014, including performances till the 2014 Winter Olympics. The album became the first from an athlete to top Oricon's DVD weekly chart since its establishment in 1999 and peaked at number 3 on the Blu-ray weekly chart after selling 44,000 copies in its first week. The second album titled Time of Evolution was released on September 15, 2019, including performances from the 2015–16 season to the 2018 winter Olympics. The album became the first sports-related work to top Oricon's Blu-ray weekly chart and peaked at number 2 on the DVD weekly chart after selling over 38,000 copies in its first week. On December 18, 2015, NHK Enterprises released the DVD of The Flowers Bloom on Ice, featuring behind-the-scenes and interviews with Shizuka Arakawa and Yuzuru Hanyu as they skate at the ice show together to support reconstruction after the 2011 Japan earthquake. In 2018, Hanyu's first self-produced show Continues with Wings was live broadcast on CS TV Asahi and live-streamed at 66 movie theaters throughout Japan. He is also one of the lead cast members besides Stéphane Lambiel and Johnny Weir at the annual touring ice show Fantasy on Ice, having participated in all editions of the tour since its revival in 2010 with one exception, having missed the shows in 2016 due to rehabilitation from a ligament injury. Hanyu released the first two parts of his autobiography series Blue Flames and Blue Flames II in 2012 and 2016 respectively. In 2023, the third part Blue Flames III and the fourth and final part of the series Blue Flames IV were released. As of 2023, the series has sold over 400,000 copies. Hanyu released various photobooks cooperating with multiple publishers and photographers. His first photo book, Yuzuru, was released on October 4, 2014, selling over 23,000 copies in the first week. It ranked first in Oricon's weekly charts for photos and sport-related categories, as well as second in the chart's general books category. On September 25, 2015, Yuzuru Hanyu Sayings was released containing pictures and quotes by the skater. The book topped Amazon's reservation sales rankings. On October 2, 2022, a second part of the book was released. On March 1, 2018, the book Live Your Dream including a collection of interviews with Hanyu from 2015 to 2018 was released. The book sold 28,000 copies ranking third in Oricon's weekly general books chart. On October 11, 2018, Yuzuru Hanyu Soul Program was released. The book includes photos and descriptions of programs performed by Hanyu. In November, 2022, Yuzuru Hanyu Amateur Era Complete Record was released. The book looks back on Hanyu's competitive skating life including press photos and competition results. Hanyu has graced the cover of numerous Japanese sports magazines as well as famous fashion and lifestyle magazines, including An An, Aera, and Elle Japan. Hanyu's special edition of the Aera magazine The Driving Force of the Leap released in October, 2022 sold over 29,000 copies in the first week topping the Oricon's weekly general books chart. Since Hanyu began carrying a Winnie-the-Pooh tissue box to competitions in 2010, his supporters and fans eventually made it a custom to acknowledge the end of his performances by throwing Pooh bears onto the ice instead of other kinds of stuffed toys or gifts, which has been a tradition in figure skating. Hanyu donates the bears to disadvantaged children at local hospitals and charities surrounding the arena that hosted the event. Hanyu studied at Nanakita Elementary and Junior High School. In 2013, Hanyu graduated from Tohoku High School [ja] then entered an e-school program on Human Information Science at Waseda University. He attended the school from his training base in Canada. In August 2020, it was revealed that his graduation thesis summarizes how 3D motion capture technology could be used in figure skating, and in particular its potential for use in figure skating judging. One area of research he did is recording and analyzing his movement while doing the triple Axel jump off-ice which he hopes can be used to improve the skills of athletes and AI judging. He officially graduated from the university in September 2020, but was unable to attend the ceremony due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Japan. In March 2021, a bulletin paper summarizing his graduation thesis was published in the Waseda Journal of Human Sciences. On August 4, 2023, Hanyu announced his marriage to an unnamed spouse through his official social media account. Hanyu announced on November 17, 2023 that he and his spouse had divorced, citing harassment by the media as cause for the separation. Many sport writers, commentators, and skaters have made the case for Hanyu as the greatest skater in history, particularly after his second Olympic victory, for his well-rounded skills, longevity at the top in a highly competitive field, and ability to deliver under pressure. His decision to attempt the quadruple Axel at the 2022 Winter Olympics instead of taking a conservative option was seen to have strengthened his status. Hanyu is regarded as part of the vanguard of the quad revolution in men's figure skating. He was one of the few skaters who challenged quadruple Salchow at the 2014 Olympics. He is credited as the first figure skater to successfully land a quadruple loop in competition after performing it in the short program at the Autumn Classic International in Montreal, Canada on September 30, 2016. He is also the only skater who has landed a quadruple toe loop-triple Axel sequence in competition, doing so for the first time at Grand Prix Helsinki 2018. Hanyu is also the first skater to land a quadruple toe loop-Euler-triple flip combination at Skate Canada 2019. At the 2022 Winter Olympics, Hanyu made his first attempt on the quadruple Axel in an international competition. Despite falling on the jump, he received the base value of quad Axel before being reduced for under-rotation. It was the closest quad Axel attempt in a competition until American Ilia Malinin successfully landed one at the 2022 CS U.S. Classic, who cited Hanyu as his inspiration to attempt the jump. However, in regards to the ongoing debate on jumps versus artistry in the sport, Hanyu spoke through an interpreter after his second Olympic win in 2018: "I believe [...] that this artistry is very much based on having the correct technique and a strong foundation at the core of everything. It is upon these that the artistry is built, and without that strong foundation and that basis in technique, it is not possible to have that full artistry required as well. [...] Of course there are some other figure skaters who perhaps place a much higher priority on the jumps themselves and they are also successful in winning in competitions through this as well. However, [sic] personally I believe that within these different difficult jumps these are used as the basis for the artistry, and this relationship is balanced, which comes together to form what is most important." In recognition of his achievements, Hanyu has been awarded numerous accolades, including the People's Honor Award in 2018 becoming the first figure skater and the youngest recipient of the award. He was also awarded the Medal of Honour with Purple Ribbon in 2014 and 2018, and received two monuments depicting his trademark poses performed at the 2014 and 2018 Olympics in his hometown of Sendai. He was also nominated for the Laureus World Sports Award for Comeback of the Year in 2019 becoming the first figure skater to be nominated for the award, and was awarded the Most Valuable Skater of the 2019–20 season at the inaugural ISU Skating Awards in 2020. In 2021, he was awarded the Azusa Ono Memorial Award, the most prestigious award that can be conferred to students and given to those recognized as a model, from Waseda University. On October 11, 2022, he was announced as a recipient of the Kikuchi Kan Prize for his accomplishments as a competitive figure skater as well as his attitude of "continuing to take on challenges". Hanyu was featured in prestigious lists, such as Forbes' 30 Under 30 Asia 2018 as well as ESPN's World Fame 100 and The Dominant 20, and has received multiple awards and ranked high in multiple lists and popularity polls from various media outlets. In 2022, he placed sixth in the list of most-searched athletes on Google Search worldwide, behind Novak Djokovic, Rafael Nadal, Serena Williams (all tennis), Manti Te'o (American football), and Shaun White (snowboard). Throughout his career, Hanyu has broken world records nineteen times – seven times under the current +5/-5 GOE system and twelve times in the old +3/-3 GOE system. He holds the historical world record in all three competition segments: the short program, free skating, and combined total score. SP – Short program FS – Free skating The table only lists Hanyu's world records under the current +5/-5 GOE system. Programs performed at the Winter Olympics highlighted in bold and blue Solo ice shows Prologue (2022) Gift (2023) Repray Tour (2023–24) Ensemble ice shows Fantasy on Ice (2010–present, lead cast member) Continues with Wings (2018, chairperson) Yuzuru Hanyu Notte Stellata (2023–present, chairperson) ^team – Team event GP – Event of the ISU Grand Prix Series CS – Event of the ISU Challenger Series C – Cancelled event WD – Withdrew from event Medals at team events are awarded for the team result only. The individual placement at the ISU World Team Trophy is listed in brackets. JGP – Event of the ISU Junior Grand Prix Series A – novice level A, B – novice level B List of Olympic medalists in figure skating List of highest historical scores in figure skating Grand Slam (figure skating) Various figure skating experts and news outlets have called Hanyu one of the greatest, or made the case for him as the greatest skater in history, including Olympic champion Nathan Chen, world champions Kurt Browning and Brian Orser, and figure skating analyst Jackie Wong. The International Skating Union (ISU) only records results that were scored at international competitions; scores achieved at national championships are not officially recognized as new highest scores. With the change of the judging system, the ISU decided to start the recording of highest score statistics from zero and declared all records historical that were achieved before the 2018–19 season. A show or concert tour usually consists of a minimum of three stops in three different cities or prefectures. For that reason, Hanyu's first solo show Prologue may not qualify as a "tour". As of February 2024, Hanyu's Ice Story series was sold out with 12 shows and attracted a total of 112,800 spectators: Prologue (2022): 7,900 spectators per day in Yokohama (2 days), and 3,000 per day in Hachinohe (3 days) Gift (2023): single-day event with 35,000 spectators Repray Tour (2023–24): 14,000 spectators per day in Saitama (2 days), 5,500 per day in Saga (2 days), and 7,000 per day in Yokohama (2 days). Since the 2022–23 season, jumps with "excessive rotation on the ice at the take-off" are listed under "poor take-off" and result in a deduction of -1 to -3 in the raw GOE mark. In the ISU Judging System, a technical element is awarded a perfect score if it is credited with the full base value by the technical panel and the maximum grade of execution (GOE) after dropping the highest and lowest mark across the judging panel (+3 GOE before and +5 GOE since the 2018–19 season). The 2015 Autumn Classic International was not part of the Challenger Series that season. 羽生結弦 [Hanyu Yuzuru]. Japan Skating Federation (in Japanese). Shinjuku, Tokyo. Archived from the original on March 29, 2022. Bonds, Faith (October 30, 2019). "The Inside Edge: Yuzuru Hanyu is the greatest figure skater of all time". USC Annenberg Press. Los Angeles. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. "About HANYU YUZURU". YouTube. Samuels, Robert (February 17, 2018). "Is two-time Olympic gold medalist Yuzuru Hanyu the greatest figure skater of all time?". The Washington Post. Washington, D.C. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on February 18, 2018. Gallagher, Jack (February 26, 2022). "Yuzuru Hanyu's Performance in Beijing Increased His Legend". Japan Forward. Chiyoda, Tokyo: Sankei Shimbun. Archived from the original on April 10, 2022. Hersh, Philip (January 31, 2022). "In pushing each other, Hanyu and Chen have redefined the meaning of figure skating greatness". NBC Sports. Stamford, Connecticut. Archived from the original on February 1, 2022. Longman, Jeré (January 4, 2018). "The Greatest Figure Skater Ever Is Michael Jackson on Ice, Surrounded by Winnie the Poohs". The New York Times. New York City. ISSN 1553-8095. Archived from the original on May 10, 2022. Barron, Laignee (February 16, 2018). "5 Things to Know About Figure Skating Champion Yuzuru Hanyu". Time. New York City. ISSN 0040-781X. Archived from the original on May 12, 2018. Mezydlo, Jeff (February 5, 2022). "The 25 greatest figure skaters of all time". Yardbarker. Burlingame, California. Archived from the original on April 20, 2022. Toney, James (February 10, 2022). "Nathan Chen beats Yuzuru Hanyu to figure skating gold, exorcising PyeongChang demons". iNews. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. "Yuzuru Hanyu's second Olympic title reaffirms greatness". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. February 18, 2018. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on November 9, 2023. Gallagher, Jack (April 17, 2018). "Orser says Hanyu is greatest ever". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on March 12, 2022. 'I have to say, he is the greatest of all time. That's for sure.' The words of Brian Orser resonate more than ever after Yuzuru Hanyu became the first man in 66 years to win the Olympic gold medal twice in a row. Wong, Jackie (February 17, 2018). "Opining on Olympic men (part 2): Yuzuru Hanyu, no doubt, the greatest". Rocker Skating. New York City. Archived from the original on October 10, 2023. 「羽生結弦」と「大谷翔平」父親はいずれも野球好き ["Yuzuru Hanyu" and "Shohei Otani": Both fathers love baseball]. Weekly Flash (in Japanese). Bunkyo, Tokyo: Kobunsha. April 12, 2018. Archived from the original on December 3, 2022. 羽生結弦が大賞張本智和は特別賞 ... 東北運動記者会スポーツ大賞 [Yuzuru Hanyu wins the grand prize and Tomokazu Harimoto the special prize ... Tōhoku Sports Press Association Sports Awards]. Sports Hochi (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. May 24, 2018. Archived from the original on December 30, 2021. 第81回 ピシッと結びたい [No. 81: I want to tie it tightly]. Mainichi Shimbun (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. December 17, 2019. Archived from the original on July 19, 2022. なぜソチ五輪代表選手にはキラキラネームが続出しているのか [Why are the Sochi Olympic athletes getting so many sparkly names?]. News Post Seven (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo: Shogakukan. February 24, 2014. Archived from the original on July 19, 2022. Flade, Tatjana (April 21, 2011). "Shooting for the top". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on August 23, 2011. 羽生结弦—始于颜值，陷于才华，忠于人品 [Yuzuru Hanyu – Starts with appearance, falls for talent, stays for the character]. Tencent (in Chinese). Shenzhen, Guangdong. Vogue China. April 27, 2018. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Jojima, Mitsuru (July 22, 2022). 《羽生結弦8歳、天才スケーターの原点》「宝石のような少年」「ユヅルと過ごした時間は私の肥やし」名伯楽が感謝した理由 [8-year-old Yuzuru Hanyu, the origin of a genius skater: "A boy like a jewel" "The time spent with Yuzuru is my fertilizer" Why a famous artist was grateful]. Number (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo: Bungeishunjū. Archived from the original on July 22, 2022. Russell 2022, p. 26. Iwasa, Tomo (July 19, 2022). 羽生結弦、9歳で「負けず嫌いの心に火」 原点作った恩師たちの記憶 [Yuzuru Hanyu, at the age of 9: "Ignited the fire of my competitive spirit" Memories of his teachers who laid his foundations]. Asahi Shimbun (in Japanese). Kita-ku, Osaka. Archived from the original on November 10, 2022. Jojima 2015, p. 34: "まだ8歳ですが、すごい選手になるかもしれません。厳しく、でも、絶対に潰さないようによろしくお願いします。 [He is only 8 years old, but he has the potential to become a great skater. Please, be strict, but don't put his talent to waste.]". Iwasa, Yu (September 1, 2022). "'9-year-old self' tilled the soil that allowed Hanyu's career to bloom". Asahi Shimbun. Kita-ku, Osaka. Archived from the original on September 1, 2022. Hanyu 2018a, p. 208: "彼と勝負して、僕は「スピンもうまくなってやる」って決意したんです。彼らに習えば絶対にうまくなる｡". Fukushima, Mikako; Hara, Yuki; Ota, Hideyuki (July 19, 2022). "Yuzuru Hanyu: Spin The Dream (career summary)". Asahi Shimbun (in Japanese). Kita-ku, Osaka. Archived from the original on January 16, 2023. Zeitlin, Anna; Ichikawa, Yuka (December 7, 2012). "Yuzuru Hanyu – past, present and future". Absolute Skating. United States. Archived from the original on May 26, 2013. "Competition Results – Yuzuru Hanyu (JPN)". International Skating Union. Lausanne. May 12, 2022. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. "Triple Axel element query – Yuzuru Hanyu junior level choronological list". Skating Scores. United States. Archived from the original on January 28, 2023. Stevenson, Alexandra (December 4, 2009). "Hanyu edges Song for junior title". Ice Network. Colorado Springs, Colorado: U.S. Figure Skating. Archived from the original on March 9, 2012. "Japan Figure Skating Championships 2009 – Men result". Japan Skating Federation. Shinjuku, Tokyo. December 25, 2009. Archived from the original on January 29, 2010. "Hanyu nabs Junior World title". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. March 11, 2010. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Kany, Klaus-Reinhold (November 8, 2011). "Yuzuru Hanyu Rises From the Ashes". International Figure Skating. Denville Township, New Jersey. Archived from the original on January 21, 2012. Todoroki 2021, ch. 2010–11. Hanyu 2022, p. 317. "ISU Four Continents Figure Skating Championships 2011 – Men result". International Skating Union. Lausanne. February 19, 2011. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. 被災地の「明かり」羽生選手の勇姿に感慨 ["Lights" of the disaster-stricken area: Impressed by Hanyu's brave appearance]. Jiji Press (in Japanese). Chūō, Tokyo. February 14, 2014. Archived from the original on February 14, 2014. "Hanyū Yuzuru: Career Highlights and Photos of Memorable Moments". Nippon Communications Foundation. Minato, Tokyo. July 22, 2022. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Todoroki 2021, ch. 2011–12. Rutherford, Lynn (November 26, 2011). "Hanyu sneaks past Fernandez by a whisker". Ice Network. Colorado Springs, Colorado: U.S. Figure Skating. Archived from the original on March 12, 2012. Sarkar, Pritha (March 31, 2012). "Boos greet Chan as he wins men's title". Reuters. Canary Wharf, London. Archived from the original on April 20, 2022. "Rising star Hanyu inspires Takahashi to silver". Bangkok Post. Bangkok. AFP. April 1, 2012. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. "World bronze medalist Hanyu switches to Orser". Ice Network. Colorado Springs, Colorado: U.S. Figure Skating. April 25, 2012. Archived from the original on February 13, 2014. "Tracy Wilson Brings Elite Skaters Back to the Basics". Skate Canada. Ottawa. April 27, 2015. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Hanyu, Yuzuru (March 29, 2018b). What Makes Yuzuru Hanyu Great? Coach Brian Orser's Exclusive Insights. International Olympic Committee (Motion picture). Lausanne. Event occurs at 58s. Archived from the original on July 2, 2021. The main reason I chose Canada was because I wanted to train with coach Brian Orser. The reason for that is I saw how Javier Fernández was able to consistently deliver the quadruple jump after he started training with Brian Orser, and I went to learn the secret of doing that. Russell 2022, p. 27. Rutherford, Lynn (October 19, 2012). "Orser amazed by pupil Hanyu's skill, politeness – World bronze medalist makes early impression on new coach, shows great promise". Ice Network. Colorado Springs, Colorado: U.S. Figure Skating. Archived from the original on February 13, 2014. Todoroki 2021, ch. 2012–13. Flade, Tatjana (November 23, 2012). "Hanyu sets new record at 2012 NHK Trophy". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. ISU progression of men's highest scores. International Skating Union. Lausanne (March 24, 2018). Statistics by competition segment: Total. Archived August 15, 2018. Short program. Archived August 15, 2018. Free skating. Archived August 15, 2018. Gallagher, Jack (November 25, 2012). "Hanyu, Mao victorious in NHK Trophy". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Kondakova, Anna (December 9, 2012). "Takahashi scores a victory on his seventh try at Grand Prix Final". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on October 6, 2022. "Hanyu captures first national title; Suzuki leads after women's short program". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. December 23, 2012. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Oriyama, Toshimi (June 28, 2021). "羽生結弦の2013年世界選手権。なぜ満身創痍でも攻めることができたのか" [Yuzuru Hanyu's 2013 World Championships: How was it possible to attack even with full-blown wounds?]. Sportiva (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo: Shueisha. Archived from the original on July 7, 2021. Todoroki 2021, ch. 2013–14. "Versluis rikkoi Suomen ennätyksen Finlandia Trophyssa" [Versluis broke the Finnish record at the Finlandia Trophy]. Etelä-Suomen Sanomat (in Finnish). Lahti. October 6, 2013. ISSN 0359-5056. Archived from the original on June 26, 2021. McCarvel, Nick (December 6, 2013). "Hanyu cruises over Chan, claims Grand Prix Final gold". NBC Sports. Stanford, Connecticut. Archived from the original on January 19, 2022. Wilner, Barry (February 6, 2014). "Figure Skating Team Event Debuts in Sochi". NBC New York. New York City. Archived from the original on July 23, 2018. Longman, Jeré (February 14, 2014). "Yuzuru Hanyu of Japan Wins Men's Figure Skating Gold". The New York Times. New York City. ISSN 1553-8095. Archived from the original on May 13, 2019. "Men's Historical Absolute Best Scores". International Skating Union. Lausanne. March 24, 2018. Archived from the original on May 29, 2018. Sarkar, Pritha (February 14, 2014). "Hanyu survives blunders to win gold". Reuters. Canary Wharf, London. Archived from the original on May 15, 2021. "Winter Olympics: Emotional Hanyu gives Japan first men's gold". The Straits Times. Singapore. AFP. February 15, 2014. OCLC 8572659. Archived from the original on August 19, 2022. "The day Yuzuru Hanyu announced himself to the world". International Olympic Committee. Lausanne. February 14, 2020. Archived from the original on May 15, 2021. Bergeron, Alain (December 7, 2019). "Patinage artistique: un Québécois derrière les succès d'un champion japonais" [Figure skating: a Quebecer behind the success of a Japanese champion]. Le Journal de Québec (in French). Quebec City. ISSN 0839-1106. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Russell 2022, p. 33. Wei, Xiong (June 20, 2015). "Hanyu: 'Failure is the stepping stone for success'". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Zaccardi, Nick (September 23, 2014). "Yuzuru Hanyu (back) pulls out of first event this season". NBC Sports. Stanford, Connecticut. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. "Hanyu may need three weeks to fully recover from injuries". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Kyodo News. November 10, 2014. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on November 11, 2014. "Yuzuru Hanyu suffers nasty collision, still wins silver at Cup of China". CBC Sports. Toronto, Ontario. Associated Press. November 8, 2014. Archived from the original on October 5, 2022. Gallagher, Jack (November 29, 2014). "Determined Hanyu books spot in Grand Prix Final by razor-thin margin". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on December 3, 2014. "Hanyu claims second Grand Prix Final victory". Eurosport. Issy-les-Moulineaux. December 13, 2014. Archived from the original on June 28, 2015. Gallagher, Jack (December 28, 2014). "Hanyu claims third national title by impressive margin". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on February 24, 2019. Todoroki 2021, ch. 2014–15. Bergman, Justin (March 24, 2015). "Hanyu returns from surgery to defend title at worlds". The San Diego Union-Tribune. San Diego, California. Archived from the original on April 21, 2018. "ISU World Figure Skating Championships 2015 – Men Free Skating". International Skating Union. Lausanne. March 28, 2015. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. "Hanyu helps Japan close gap on U.S. at World Team Trophy". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. AP. April 17, 2015. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Wei, Xiong (June 12, 2015). "Japanese stars debut programs at 'Dreams on Ice' – Hanyu goes in surprising new direction; Miyahara shows exhibition number". Ice Network. Colorado Springs, Colorado: U.S. Figure Skating. Archived from the original on September 17, 2017. "Hanyu takes lead in season debut". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Kyodo News. October 15, 2015. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on October 25, 2018. "Chan beats Hanyu at Skate Canada; Murakami third". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. AFP, Jiji, Kyodo News. November 1, 2015. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Flade, Tatjana (November 18, 2015). "No rest for Japan's Yuzuru Hanyu". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on July 22, 2022. Xiong, Wei (December 23, 2015). "Hanyu wants performances that stay in hearts". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on November 27, 2022. Russell 2022, p. 28. "Perfect Hanyu scores record 322.40 points to win NHK Trophy". Japan Today. Chiyoda, Tokyo. AFP. November 28, 2015. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Todoroki 2021, ch. 2015–16. Zaccardi, Nick (December 12, 2015). "Yuzuru Hanyu breaks world records, three-peats at Grand Prix Final". NBC Sports. Stanford, Connecticut. Archived from the original on December 22, 2022. "Hanyu nabs fourth straight national title; Miyahara leads women's field". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Kyodo News. December 26, 2015. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on January 7, 2019. "Hanyu sidelined with foot injury". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Kyodo News. April 26, 2016. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on January 7, 2019. Utsunomiya 2016, ch. 4. Graham, Bryan Armen (April 2, 2016). "Fernandez defends figure skating world title with stunning comeback". The Guardian. Kings Place, London. ISSN 1756-3224. Archived from the original on October 22, 2022. Hanyu 2022, p. 318. Todoroki 2021, ch. 2016–17. Russell 2022, p. 29. Gallagher, Jack (November 26, 2016). "Hanyu claims victory with spectacular showing at NHK Trophy; Pogorilaya wins women's title". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on April 21, 2017. Kondakov, Anna (December 11, 2016). "Hanyu wins fourth consecutive Grand Prix Final". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on July 23, 2022. Flade, Tatjana (May 5, 2017). "Hanyu heads optimistically into Olympic season". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. "Hanyu's rally falls short as Chen wins Four Continents". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Kyodo News. February 19, 2017. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. "Hanyu claims second career gold at worlds with spectacular comeback; Uno grabs silver". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. AFP, Jiji, Kyodo News. April 1, 2017. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017. Yurika, Mita (July 20, 2022). "決意会見"羽生が生出演 ["Determination press conference" Hanyu live on TV]. FNN Live News α (Television production) (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo: Fuji TV. 8-91636-1579520 (Kakaku.com). Archived from the original on September 12, 2022. Flade, Tatjana; Ritoss, Robin (April 21, 2017). "Hanyu, Uno keep Japan in the lead at World Team Trophy". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. "Hanyu 2nd after short program". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Kyodo News. October 21, 2017. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Gallagher, Jack (November 10, 2017). "Star Yuzuru Hanyu pulls out of NHK Trophy with injury". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Gallagher, Jack (February 16, 2018). "Yuzuru Hanyu takes lead after short program at Pyeongchang Games". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on October 17, 2018. Longman, Jeré; Mather, Victor (February 16, 2018). "Yuzuru Hanyu Writes Another Chapter in Figure Skating Legend". The New York Times. New York City. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 17, 2018. Lies, Elaine (February 18, 2018). "Hanyu eyes landmark new jump to cement golden legacy". Reuters. Canary Wharf, London. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. "Figure skating: Olympic Champion Yuzuru Hanyu pulls out of Worlds: Japan federation". The Straits Times. Singapore. AFP. March 7, 2018. OCLC 8572659. Archived from the original on March 7, 2018. "Hanyu skating for himself this season". International Figure Skating. Denville Township, New Jersey. August 31, 2018. Archived from the original on January 16, 2022. "Olympic champ Hanyu wins Autumn Classic". Mainichi Shimbun. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Kyodo News. September 23, 2018. Archived from the original on September 23, 2018. "The new range of Grade of Execution" (PDF). International Skating Union. Lausanne. September 26, 2018. Archived from the original on December 1, 2021. "More records for Yuzuru Hanyu in Helsinki". International Olympic Committee. Lausanne. November 5, 2018. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Todoroki 2021, ch. 2018–19. Yoshinaga, Takeo (November 18, 2018). "Gutsy Hanyu battles injury to capture 10th Grand Prix title". The Asahi Shimbun. Kita-ku, Osaka. Archived from the original on January 25, 2020. Slater, Paula (November 17, 2018). "Yuzuru wins Rostelcom Cup gold in Moscow". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on April 14, 2022. 羽生結弦がGPファイナル欠場 ロシア杯で右足首負傷 3週間安静とリハビリ加療1カ月 [Yuzuru Hanyu misses GP Final, right ankle injury at Cup of Russia requiring 3 weeks of bed rest and 1 month of rehabilitation]. Sports Nippon (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. November 29, 2018. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. ISU progression of men's highest scores. International Skating Union. Lausanne (April 16, 2022). Statistics by competition segment: Total. Archived from the original on April 22, 2022. Short program. Archived from the original on April 20, 2022. Free skating. Archived from the original on April 20, 2022. Shimizu, Ayano (March 24, 2019). "Yuzuru Hanyu takes 2nd at worlds as Nathan Chen repeats". Kyodo News. Minato, Tokyo. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. "Yuzuru Hanyu to miss World Team Trophy due to ankle injury". Kyodo News. Minato, Tokyo. March 25, 2019. Archived from the original on March 5, 2021. "Yuzuru Hanyu opens season with win; Nathan Chen challenge coming". NBC Sports. Stanford, Connecticut. September 14, 2019. Archived from the original on August 9, 2022. Slater, Paula (October 27, 2019). "Hanyu takes first Skate Canada gold in Kelowna". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on November 29, 2022. "Yuzuru Hanyu wins Skate Canada by largest margin in Grand Prix history". NBC Sports. Stanford, Connecticut. October 27, 2019. Archived from the original on December 4, 2022. Todoroki 2021, ch. 2019–20: "演技後は、「久しぶりに心の中から自分に勝てたなと思える演技でした」と満足そうに語り。". Slater, Paula (November 23, 2019). "Hanyu wins fourth NHK Trophy title with 55 points to spare". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Todoroki 2021, ch. 2019–20. Slater, Paula (December 7, 2019). "USA's Chen wins third consecutive Grand Prix Final title". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on October 3, 2022. Slater, Paula (December 20, 2019). "Hanyu takes lead; Uno impresses at Japanese Nationals". Golden Skate. Slater, Paula (December 22, 2019). "Uno edges out Hanyu for fourth consecutive national title". Golden Skate. Griffiths, Rachel (February 1, 2020). "Hanyu Using Olympic Winning Routines in Bid for Career 'Super Slam' at Four Continents". Olympic Channel. Goh, ZK (February 7, 2020). "Hanyu Yuzuru sets new men's short program World Record score at Four Continents". Olympic Channel. Slater, Paula (February 7, 2020). "Hanyu lands new record score at Four Continents". Golden Skate. Slater, Paula (February 9, 2020). "Hanyu bags first Four Continents gold". Golden Skate. Palar, Sanjeev (February 9, 2020). "Hanyu Yuzuru Wins Four Continents to Complete Career 'Super Slam'". Olympic Channel. Ewing, Lori (March 11, 2020). "World figure skating championships cancelled in Montreal". CBC Sports. "Hanyu named Most Valuable Skater at ISU Skating Awards". Olympic Channel. July 12, 2020. McCarvel, Nick (December 24, 2020). "Hanyu Yuzuru has been training solo at home, eyes spot at world championships". olympics.com. Lausanne: Olympics. Archived from the original on May 1, 2021. Kurasawa, Hitoshi (July 10, 2021). "Skating star Hanyu: Athletes should do their best at Olympics even without spectators". Mainichi Shimbun. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Archived from the original on July 14, 2021. "ISU Bios 2020/2021 – Men, Yuzuru Hanyu JPN". International Skating Union. Lausanne. Archived from the original on March 27, 2021. "羽生結弦選手 ISUグランプリシリーズの欠場について" [Yuzuru Hanyu Missing ISU Grand Prix Series] (in Japanese). August 28, 2020. "Hanyu 'conflicted' about return to ice as virus surges in Japan". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. AFP-Jiji. December 24, 2020. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on December 24, 2020. "Yuzuru Hanyu leads Japanese figure skating nationals, ends longest break of career". NBC Sports. December 25, 2020. Retrieved December 27, 2020. "Yuzuru Hanyu goes from feeling 'like I could have quit' to fifth Japan figure skating title". NBC Sports. December 26, 2020. Retrieved December 27, 2020. "Figure skating: Yuzuru Hanyu thrills with new routine at nationals". Mainichi Japan. December 25, 2020. Archived from the original on December 25, 2020. Retrieved December 27, 2020. Flade, Tatjana (March 18, 2021). "Hanyu, Chen face off again in Stockholm". Golden Skate. McCarvel, Nick (March 27, 2021). "Preview: Leading after the short program, Hanyu Yuzuru is a skate away from third world title". Olympic Channels (in Japanese). Retrieved March 28, 2021. "Figure skating: Kagiyama 2nd, Hanyu 3rd as Chen wins worlds". Kyodo News. March 27, 2021. Retrieved March 28, 2021. 羽生結弦、語る 一夜明け編(1):「自分の中ではやりきれたなという感触」 [Yuzuru Hanyu talks about one night dawn edition (1): "I feel like I've accomplished everything"]. Sports Nippon (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. March 28, 2021. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. "Communication No. 2388". International Skating Union. April 1, 2021. "Figure skating: Yuzuru Hanyu 2nd best, Japan 3rd on Team Trophy 1st day". Kyodo News. April 15, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "Figure skating: Chen again upstages Hanyu in World Team Trophy". Kyodo News (in Japanese). April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "Russia scores first World Team Trophy victory with U.S. in second". NBC Sports. April 17, 2021. Retrieved April 17, 2021. "2021 Grand Prix Series". ifsmagazine.com. Toronto, Ontario: International Figure Skating. June 29, 2021. 羽生結弦がNHK杯欠場、右足関節靱帯損傷「たった一度の転倒で」 [Yuzuru Hanyu withdraws from NHK Trophy due to right ankle ligament injury 'just one fall']. Sports Nippon (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. November 4, 2021. Archived from the original on November 4, 2021. 羽生結弦がロシア杯欠場「着実に前に進んでいきます」 [Yuzuru Hanyu to miss Russian Cup "We will move forward steadily"]. Sports Nippon (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. November 17, 2021. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. "Figure skating: Hanyu still in Olympic hunt despite missing 2nd meet". Mainichi Shimbun. Chiyoda, Tokyo. November 17, 2021. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. "Yuzuru Hanyu attempts quadruple Axel, wins Japan figure skating nationals". NBC Sports. December 26, 2021. Retrieved December 27, 2021. 羽生結弦ら来年3月の世界選手権代表に [Yuzuru Hanyu and others to represent in World Championships next March]. Sponichi (in Japanese). December 26, 2021. Archived from the original on December 26, 2021. Retrieved December 28, 2021. Maine, D'Arcy (February 8, 2022). "Nathan Chen scores world-record 113.97 points in men's short program at Beijing Olympics". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on February 8, 2022. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Chen wins Olympic figure skating gold as Hanyu falls, ends fourth". France 24. February 10, 2022. Retrieved February 10, 2022. "羽生の挑戦 ４回転半としてＩＳＵ公認大会で初認定 回転不足、転倒で大幅減点も". Daily (in Japanese). February 10, 2022. Retrieved February 10, 2022. Teh, Cheryl. "Japanese figure skater Yuzuru Hanyu quashes retirement rumors but reveals he suffered a serious ankle injury and has been told to stay off the ice for now". Insider. Retrieved February 27, 2022. "Injured Yuzuru Hanyu to miss world championships". The Japan Times. March 1, 2022. Archived from the original on March 22, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Japanese icon Yuzuru Hanyu retires from competition". Kyodo News. Minato, Tokyo. July 19, 2022. Archived from the original on July 22, 2022. Macur, Juliet (July 20, 2022). "Oh, Pooh. We May Never See Another Skater Like This One". The New York Times. New York City. ISSN 1553-8095. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Kimura, Satoshi (July 20, 2022). "Yuzuru Hanyu's retirement marks end of an era for figure skating". Nikkei Asia. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Russell 2022, p. 22. 内村航平さん、プロ転向の羽生結弦さんにエール「互いに刺激し合う関係であれたら」 [Kohei Uchimura encourages Yuzuru Hanyu, who is turning pro: "I hope we can inspire each other"]. Sankei Sports (in Japanese). Sankei Shimbun. July 21, 2022. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Sakaguchi, Mikaho (July 22, 2022). "Hanyu Yuzuru to retire from competitive skating". NHK World-Japan. Shibuya, Tokyo. Archived from the original on July 22, 2022. Jain, Parag (July 23, 2022). "Naomi Osaka pays tribute to retired Japanese skating legend Yuzuru Hanyu". Sportskeeda. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. "Yuzuru Hanyu opens Twitter, Instagram accounts; announces ice show". GMA Network. Quezon City. October 1, 2022. Archived from the original on October 2, 2022. "Figure skating legend Yuzuru Hanyu launches YouTube channel". GMA Network. Quezon City. August 7, 2022. Archived from the original on August 24, 2022. Kurasawa, Hitoshi (September 11, 2022). 分かち合うモノ [Things to share]. Mainichi Shimbun (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. Archived from the original on September 11, 2022. Kano, Shintaro (September 30, 2022). "Hanyu Yuzuru announces 1st professional ice show - makes debut on Instagram and Twitter". International Olympic Committee. Lausanne. Archived from the original on September 30, 2022. "Figure skating hero Hanyu Yuzuru to start gaming-inspired 'RE_PRAY' solo ice tour in Saitama". International Olympic Committee. Lausanne. September 4, 2023. Archived from the original on September 4, 2023. Matsubara, Takaomi (January 12, 2023). "Going Pro: Hanyū Yuzuru Reinvents What It Means to Be a Figure Skater". Nippon Communications Foundation. Minato, Tokyo. Archived from the original on January 12, 2023. Matsubara, Takaomi (December 6, 2022). 羽生結弦は涙を浮かべていた...アイスショー八戸公演で見せた"魂とクオリティの90分間"に、記者は再び驚いた「28歳はプロだけの自分になる」 [Yuzuru Hanyu had tears in his eyes ... The reporter was once again surprised by the "90 minutes of soul and quality" shown at the ice show performance in Hachinohe, "At 28-year-old, I will have become a pure professional"]. Number (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo: Bungeishunjū. pp. 1–3. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022. Kano, Shintaro (February 26, 2023). "Hanyu Yuzuru "Gift"-wraps sold-out Tokyo Dome with performances for the ages". International Olympic Committee. Lausanne. Archived from the original on February 26, 2023. Palmera, Amanda (March 24, 2023). "Rant and Rave: Yuzuru Hanyu embraces vulnerability in historic ice show 'GIFT'". The LaSallian. Manila. Archived from the original on March 24, 2023. Grover, Ashima (July 17, 2023). "Who is Yuzuru Hanyu? How Has His Art Changed the World's Perception of Figure Skating?". Leisurebyte. India. Archived from the original on September 5, 2023. Mitsuoka, Maria-Laura (February 28, 2023). "Yuzuru Hanyu: 'Gift' to the figure skating world". Golden Skate. Cary, North Carolina. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Kano, Shintaro (November 4, 2023). "In his latest solo show 'RE_PRAY', Hanyu Yuzuru goes deep". International Olympic Committee. Lausanne. Archived from the original on November 4, 2023. 羽生結弦「RE_PRAY」ツアー、地元宮城での追加公演決定! [Yuzuru Hanyu's "RE_PRAY" tour will have an additional performance in Miyagi!]. World Figure Skating (in Japanese). Bunkyo, Tokyo: Shinshokan. March 6, 2024. Archived from the original on March 6, 2024. Fang, Valerie (November 11, 2023). "In the Loop: Hanyu Yuzuru's RE_PRAY ice show is a poem on the will to be". USC Annenberg Press. Los Angeles. Archived from the original on November 11, 2023. Goto, Taisuke; Yamashita, Hironobu (December 28, 2022). 「羽生結弦っていうジャンルの...」GIFTで示す「僕の使命」 [It's a genre called 'Yuzuru Hanyu' ... 'My mission' as shown by GIFT]. The Asahi Shimbun (in Japanese). Kita-ku, Osaka. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. JAC AWARD 2023 グランプリ受賞者のインタビュー プロデューサー部門大野瑞樹氏 [JAC Award 2023 Grand Prize Winner Interview – Producer Division: Mizuki Ohno]. CM Index (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo: Tokyo Kikaku Co., Ltd. March 14, 2024. Archived from the original on March 14, 2024. "2-time Olympic champ Yuzuru Hanyu premieres own new ice show". Kyodo News. Minato, Tokyo. November 4, 2022. Archived from the original on January 16, 2023. "Figure skating: Yuzuru Hanyu to perform at Tokyo Dome next Feb". Kyodo News. Minato, Tokyo. December 5, 2022. Archived from the original on March 28, 2023. Ito, Serika (January 13, 2024). 羽生結弦さんが九州で初の単独公演 SAGAアリーナにファン5500人 [Yuzuru Hanyu performs solo for the first time in Kyushu in front of 5,500 fans at Saga Arena]. Nishi Nippon Shimbun (in Japanese). Chuo-ku, Fukuoka. Archived from the original on January 12, 2024. 羽生結弦さん「やっと『破滅』ノーミスできたぁ!」4回転3本、3回転半2本の高難度構成、満員7000人が歓喜の喝采 [Yuzuru Hanyu: 'I finally skated a no-mistake performance to 'Darkness of Eternity'!' The difficult layout with three quadruple jumps and two triple Axels made a sellout crowd of 7,000 people cheer with joy]. Sports Hochi (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. February 19, 2024. Archived from the original on February 19, 2024. 羽生結弦の"ライバル"たちの今 パトリック・チャンは不動産エージェントに [Yuzuru Hanyu's rivals today: Patrick Chan becomes a real estate agent]. AERA (in Japanese). Kita-ku, Osaka: Asahi Shimbun. March 7, 2023. pp. 1–3. Archived from the original on March 7, 2023. トゥクタミシェワが羽生結弦の３時間連続ショーに驚嘆「どうやり遂げたのか想像もつかない」 [Tuktamysheva marvels at Yuzuru Hanyu's three-hour show: "I can't imagine how he did it"]. Tokyo Sports (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. March 14, 2023. Archived from the original on March 14, 2023. 「3.11」から12年...羽生結弦さん、地元・宮城で「notte stellata」公演 [12 years have passed since "3.11" ... Yuzuru Hanyu performs "Notte Stellata" in his hometown in Miyagi]. Sports Nippon (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. March 11, 2023. Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. McCarvel, Nick (March 10, 2023). "Hanyu Yuzuru's 'notte stellata' show debuts in Japan featuring Uchimura Kohei, Jason Brown and more". International Olympic Committee. Lausanne. Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. Kano, Shintaro (March 8, 2024). "Thirteen years on from devastation, Hanyu Yuzuru tries to turn a page with 'notte stellata 2024'". International Olympic Committee. Lausanne. Archived from the original on March 9, 2024. Gallagher, Jack (April 11, 2017). "Hanyu's legend continues to grow with latest masterpiece". The Japan Times. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on April 11, 2017. Qi Qi; Yi Ling; Zhang Han (February 10, 2022). "Profile: From "Ice Prince" to "Ice Warrior," Hanyu determined to rise after fall". Xinhua News Agency. Beijing. Archived from the original on June 22, 2022. Gallagher, Jack (November 29, 2016). "Hanyu's strength, style a sight to behold". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on May 2, 2017. Ryan, Maggie (February 8, 2022). "Yuzuru Hanyu Fought to the Finish in His First Short Program in Beijing". Yahoo!Life. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Archived from the original on February 9, 2022. "Yuzuru Hanyu". Edea Skates. Crocetta del Montello, Veneto. Archived from the original on December 5, 2015. 羽生結弦、語る SP編（1）「全部、見ていただけるようなプログラムにしていきたい」 [Yuzuru Hanyu talks about his SP (1) "I want to make it a program, where everything can be seen"]. Sports Nippon (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. December 24, 2021. Archived from the original on December 24, 2021. Petkevich 1989, p. 56. Scibilia, Angele (November 23, 2012). "Yuzuru Hanyu short program analysis". The Wrong edge, figure skating blog. Italy. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Gallagher, Jack (September 19, 2019). "Christina Valdez ecstatic after fulfilling dream of seeing Yuzuru Hanyu skate in person". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on April 4, 2022. Gallagher, Jack (March 31, 2021). "No Reason to Worry About Yuzuru Hanyu's Result at World Championships". Japan Forward. Chiyoda, Tokyo: Sankei Shimbun. Archived from the original on April 30, 2021. Nakai, Masahiro (May 7, 2018). 中居正広のスポーツ！『平成のスポーツ名場面ベスト50大発表』 [Masahiro Nakai's Sports "The 50 best sports moments of the Heisei Era"] (Television production) (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo: TV Asahi. 10-53433-1160981 (Kakaku.com). Archived from the original on September 16, 2022. 羽生結弦氏が言う「下で回る」とはどういうことかをしばし考えた結果、そこで言葉を区切ったら不十分かもしれないと思い至った件 [After some thorough thought about Yuzuru Hanyu's wording "go underneath", I came to the conclusion that it might not be enough to separate the words there]. news.livedoor.com (in Japanese). Shinjuku, Tokyo: Line Corporation. November 1, 2019. Archived from the original on January 24, 2021. "Single & Pair Skating – Levels of Difficulty and Guidelines for marking Grade of Execution and Program Components, season 2022/23". International Skating Union. Lausanne. June 2022. p. 13. Archived from the original on May 4, 2022. フィギュア、ジャンプ測定に新技術採点で導入は可能か？ [Figure skating: Can new technology for jump measurement be implemented for scoring?]. News Post 7 (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo: Shogakukan. June 5, 2019. Archived from the original on May 16, 2022. Grades of Execution +5 to -5 Single Skating. International Skating Union. Lausanne. July 7, 2018. Event occurs at 6:08 and 7:18. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022 – via YouTube. Ice Jewels 2017, ch. 1. "Yuzuru Hanyu Biography". International Olympic Committee. Lausanne. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Yanai, Yumiko (February 19, 2014). "A Post-Plushenko Champion: Hanyū Yuzuru Wins Figure Skating Gold". Nippon Communications Foundation. Minato, Tokyo. Archived from the original on August 19, 2022. Zaichik, Paul. "Biellmann Spin in Figure Skating: Strength & Flexibility – Training at Home". easyflex.com. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022. Noguchi, Yoshie (June 12, 2022). 羽生結弦の情熱のアイスショー 北京冬季五輪以来96日ぶりの演技に歓喜 [Yuzuru Hanyu's Passionate Ice Show – Delighted with his first performance in 96 days since the Beijing Winter Olympics]. Aera (in Japanese). Kita-ku, Osaka: Asahi Shimbun. pp. 1–3. Archived from the original on June 15, 2022. "Skating Scores – Yuzuru Hanyu (JPN)". Skating Scores. United States. Archived from the original on June 21, 2022. "ISU GP NHK Trophy 2015 – Men free skating, judges details per skater" (PDF). International Skating Union. Lausanne. November 28, 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 28, 2020. "2016 Autumn Classic International – Senior men short program, judges details per skater" (PDF). skatecanada.ca. Lausanne: International Skating Union. September 30, 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 1, 2016. "2017 Autumn Classic International – Senior men short program, judges details per skater" (PDF). skatecanada.ca. Lausanne: International Skating Union. September 22, 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 17, 2019. Ganguly, Sudarshana (March 6, 2022). "Yuzuru Hanyu creates fire on ice". The Telegraph. Kolkata, West Bengal. OCLC 271717941. Archived from the original on March 6, 2022. Gallagher, Jack (May 9, 2019). "Salute to Hanyu: U.S. ballet troupe paying tribute to legend". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on May 9, 2019. "Japan Figure Skating Championships 2021 – Men short program, judges details per skater" (PDF). Japan Skating Federation. Shinjuku, Tokyo. December 26, 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 26, 2021. Gallagher, Jack (August 7, 2018). "Shae-Lynn Bourne noted Yuzuru Hanyu's genius making 'Seimei'". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Noguchi, Yoshie (January 22, 2021). 伊藤みどり、荒川静香…歴戦のプログラム編曲者が語る羽生結弦「なぜ羽生君の『SEIMEI』は音にピタリとハマるのか」 [The veteran program music editor who worked with Midori Ito and Shizuka Arakawa explains "why Hanyu-kun's SEIMEI looks perfectly in one with the music"]. number.bunshun.jp (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo: Bungeishunjū. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Matsubara, Takaomi (May 30, 2022). 羽生結弦の登場に思わず歓声が…3年ぶりのファンタジー・オン・アイスで魅せた「『羽生結弦のスケート好きだな』って思ってもらえる演技を」 [Yuzuru Hanyu's appearance drawing cheers from the audience "I want to give a performance that makes people think, 'I like Yuzuru Hanyu's skating'" at Fantasy on Ice after 3 years]. Number (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo: Bungeishunjū. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. "ISU Bios 2016/2017 – Men, Yuzuru Hanyu JPN". International Skating Union. Lausanne. Archived from the original on August 5, 2017. 羽生結弦「嫌われたくないってすごい思う」金メダル獲得後の記者会見で漏らした本心 [Yuzuru Hanyu "I really don't want to be hated" at the press conference after winning the gold medal]. Logmi Inc. (in Japanese). Shibuya, Tokyo. February 18, 2018. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Manjur, Rezwana (October 31, 2013). "P&G launches massive Olympics campaign". Marketing-interactive.com. Retrieved September 7, 2015. "羽生ＡＮＡと所属契約「羽」つながり" [Hanyu Affiliation contract with ANA "feather" connection]. nikkansports.com (in Japanese). Nikkan Sports. July 2, 2013. Archived from the original on September 14, 2014. Retrieved October 9, 2021. 競技・選手協賛紹介 [Introduction of competitions and athlete sponsorships]. www.anahd.co.jp (in Japanese). Archived from the original on December 5, 2022. Retrieved February 17, 2023. "Sports Sponsorship". www.anahd.co.jp (in Japanese). Archived from the original on October 17, 2023. Retrieved October 17, 2023. "ANA Presents Prabal Gurung Designed Uniforms with Yuzuru Hanyu". Fashion Headline Japan. April 29, 2014. Retrieved September 7, 2015. 平昌2018オリンピック冬季競技大会　羽生選手編（30秒） [Pyeongchang 2018 Olympic Winter Games Hanyu (30 seconds)] (in Japanese). ANA. December 28, 2017. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2021. "Capcom | Shipments of "Monster Hunter 4G" Quickly Surpass 2 Million Units". www.capcom.co.jp. October 15, 2014. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. "羽生結弦が、土屋太鳳と松井愛莉にはさまれて照れまくり！". Walkerplus. Kadokawa Corporation. August 28, 2014. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved September 7, 2015. "羽生結弦選手出演。「2人の羽生結弦」篇 CMギャラリー｜ガーナ｜お口の恋人 ロッテ". Lotte. Archived from the original on September 13, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2015. "Xylitol White | メタリン酸ナトリウム配合ガム | お口の恋人 ロッテ". Lotte. Archived from the original on February 27, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2015. 羽生 眼光鋭く勝利を狙う 6日からロッテ新CM出演 [Hanyu Eyes Sharply aiming for victory Lotte new CM appearance from 6th]. Sports Nippon (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. December 6, 2019. Archived from the original on December 23, 2019. "「勝ち飯®」スタジアム この冬がんばるあなたへ". park.ajinomoto.co.jp. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Corporation, Mynavi (February 20, 2015). "羽生結弦、愛用するバスクリンで広告出演契約 – ひたむきさ・誠実さが理由". マイナビニュース. Retrieved September 7, 2015. "ご利用者の声｜＆ Free｜東京西川公式サイト". andfree.jp. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2015. ファイテン×羽生結弦選手 アドバイザリー契約締結 [Phiten x Yuzuru Hanyu Advisory Contract Concluded]. www.phiten.com (in Japanese). Archived from the original on February 17, 2023. Retrieved February 17, 2023. "フィギュアスケーター羽生結弦選手 シチズン中国のアンバサダーに就任 ［Citizen-シチズン腕時計］". citizen.jp. Archived from the original on August 22, 2019. Retrieved August 22, 2019. "羽生結弦がコーセーの「雪肌精」新アンバサダーに 演技の映像も使用した新CMを公開". WWD Japan (in Japanese). March 12, 2019. Retrieved April 7, 2021. "コーセー「雪肌精」の最高峰シリーズをリニューアル グローバルミューズに羽生結弦". WWD Japan (in Japanese). January 6, 2020. Retrieved April 7, 2021. 羽生結弦 黒柳徹子と共演 心の笑顔とは [Yuzuru Hanyu Co-starring with Tetsuko Kuroyanagi What is the smile of your heart?]. Sports Nippon (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. October 4, 2021. Archived from the original on October 3, 2021. "こころの笑顔、あしたの健康". www.towayakuhin.co.jp. Archived from the original on October 3, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2021. "羽生結弦氏（ANA）が推すANAの未来サービス「avatarin」に、ふたりの明るい将来が見えたので世界アバター化不可避ですの巻。" [ANA's future service "avatarin" recommended by Yuzuru Hanyu (ANA) shows a bright future for the two, so it is inevitable to make it a world avatar.]. Livedoor News (in Japanese). October 22, 2021. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2021. "「ゆずる思いやり」持って 宮城県警、交通ポスターに羽生選手" [Miyagi Prefectural Police with "Yuzuru Compassion", Hanyu on the traffic poster]. sankei.com (in Japanese). Sankei Shimbun. March 23, 2021. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021. "The Pegasus Dream Tour". June 24, 2021. Archived from the original on July 1, 2021. Sakakibara, Issei; Makusu, Hiro (July 10, 2021). "The world's first official parasports game developer's desire: I want to make society better through games". The Asahi Shimbun. Kita-ku, Osaka. Archived from the original on July 10, 2021. "―今年4月仙台観光アンバサダー就任― 羽生結弦選手の仙台観光PRポスターを作成しました（質疑応答）" [-April this year, Sendai Tourism Ambassador appointed- Yuzuru Hanyu's Sendai Tourism PR poster was created (question and answer)] (in Japanese). Sendai City. September 2, 2014. Archived from the original on June 30, 2021. "観光ガイドブック「仙台巡り」について" [About the tourist guidebook "Sendai Tour"] (in Japanese). Sendai City. July 3, 2020. Archived from the original on June 28, 2021. "羽生結弦選手へ第4期仙台観光アンバサダーを委嘱しております" [We have commissioned the 4th Sendai Tourism Ambassador to Yuzuru Hanyu.] (in Japanese). Sendai City. March 19, 2021. Archived from the original on June 21, 2021. Onate, Andrea (March 14, 2024). "EXCLUSIVE: Gucci Taps Japanese Figure Skater Yuzuru Hanyu as Brand Ambassador". Women's Wear Daily. New York City: Fairchild Fashion Media. ISSN 0043-7581. Archived from the original on March 14, 2024. 「東日本大震災復興啓発ポスター展」7月23日まで、三重県・津松菱で ["Great East Japan Earthquake Reconstruction Awareness Poster Exhibition" until July 23rd at Tsumatsubishi, Mie Prefecture]. artexhibition.jp (in Japanese). Yomiuri Shimbun. July 9, 2023. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. 「ゆづの恩返し」報奨金600万円は被災地へ寄付 ["Yuzu's gratitude" reward of ¥6 million is donated to the disaster-stricken area.]. Sports Nippon (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. February 26, 2014. Archived from the original on January 13, 2021. "Huge hometown crowd celebrates Olympic figure skating champ Yuzuru Hanyu in Sendai". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Kyodo News. April 22, 2018. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. 羽生結弦、7年ぶり自叙伝『蒼い炎III-究竟編-』発売に直筆メッセージ「私の夢が1つ、皆さんの応援の力でかないました」 [Yuzuru Hanyu's handwritten message for the release of his first autobiography in 7 years "Blue Flame III -Kyukyuhen-" "My one dream came true with the power of everyone's support"]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. January 30, 2023. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. 羽生結弦様からのご寄付について [About the donation from Yuzuru Hanyu]. Ice Rink Sendai (in Japanese). Sendai. July 25, 2023. Archived from the original on July 29, 2023. "Yuzuru Hanyu lends 31 mil. yen helping hand to rink in quake-hit Sendai". english.kyodonews.net. Minato, Tokyo: Kyodo News. March 11, 2021. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2021. Sakakibara, Issei; Makusu, Hiro (September 2, 2014). "フィギュアの羽生選手、津波防災大使に任命 内閣府" [Figure Hanyu appointed as tsunami disaster prevention ambassador Cabinet Office]. asahi.com. Asahi. Archived from the original on September 2, 2014. "復興支援をはじめとした、日本赤十字社の活動に力を 東日本大震災復興支援事業のご案内 メッセンジャーに羽生結弦選手を起用". February 27, 2015. Retrieved September 8, 2015. "【日本赤十字社】平成27年はたちの献血". ken-love.jp. Archived from the original on September 18, 2015. Retrieved September 8, 2015.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) 熊本地震 被災地支援 [Kumamoto earthquake disaster relief]. www.phiten.com (in Japanese). April 28, 2016. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. "Hanyu's figure skates raise $64,000 for 2011 quake charity auction". Minato, Tokyo: Kyodo News. March 12, 2019. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved July 17, 2021. "震災から8年。災害に備える大切さを考えるLINEの取り組み" [It has been eight years since the earthquake. LINE's efforts to consider the importance of preparing for disasters] (in Japanese). Line Corporation. March 1, 2019. "丸森町に「日本財団災害復旧サポートセンター」設置" ["Nippon Foundation Disaster Recovery Support Center" established in Marumori Town] (in Japanese). The Nippon Foundation. December 24, 2019. Archived from the original on August 27, 2020. "「弱虫ペダル」×羽生結弦選手！ 「ツール・ド・東北 2019」コラボイラストで次元を超えた共演". ねとらぼ (in Japanese). Retrieved August 22, 2019. "羽生結弦展 共に、前へ". Yuzuru Hanyu Exhibition "Together, Forward" (in Japanese). Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2021. 【羽生結弦展2022情報】グッズ売上から8593万5835円を被災地支援に寄付 [[Hanyu Yuzuru Exhibition 2022 Information] Donate 85,935,835 yen from goods sales to support disaster areas]. artexhibition.jp (in Japanese). Yomiuri Shimbun. December 27, 2022. Archived from the original on December 27, 2022. 【羽生結弦展2022情報】トルコ地震被災地の救援・復興に基金から1000万円を寄付 [[Yuzuru Hanyu Exhibition 2022 Information] Donation of 10 million yen from the fund for relief and reconstruction of earthquake-stricken areas in Turkey]. artexhibition.jp (in Japanese). Yomiuri Shimbun. February 17, 2023. Archived from the original on February 17, 2023. 【羽生結弦展2022情報】能登半島地震の被災地に基金から1,000万円を寄付 [[Yuzuru Hanyu Exhibition 2022 Information] Donation of 10 million yen from the fund to areas affected by the Noto Peninsula Earthquake]. artexhibition.jp (in Japanese). Yomiuri Shimbun. January 5, 2024. Archived from the original on January 4, 2024. モデルプレス (August 26, 2014). "「24時間テレビ」が開幕 嵐vs関ジャニ∞、羽生結弦選手のショー...今年の見どころ – モデルプレス". Retrieved September 8, 2015. "羽生結弦、『24時間テレビ』"チャリＴシャツ"とコラボ「気に入っています」". Retrieved September 8, 2015. yusu01207 (August 30, 2014). "140830 yuzuru hanyu 羽生結弦 – Dailymotion動画". Dailymotion. Retrieved September 12, 2015.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "『Yuzuru Hanyu visited Fukushima』". Retrieved September 12, 2015. 羽生結弦さん、「news every.」で被災地の思いを伝えるメッセンジャーに就任…来年から数か月に一度出演 [Yuzuru Hanyu will become a messenger to convey the feelings of the disaster-affected areas on "news every."...Starting next year, he will appear once every few months.]. Sports Hochi (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. December 28, 2022. Archived from the original on December 28, 2022. Yoshida, Hiro (December 28, 2015). "Yuzuru Hanyu Focused on Worlds; Mao Asada Heads to Taipei". International Figure Skating. Denville Township, New Jersey. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. 羽生結弦が紅白歌合戦のゲスト審査員 ... 黒柳徹子、坂東彌十郎、ヤクルト・村上宗隆らも [Yuzuru Hanyu is a guest judge for the Kohaku Uta Gassen ... Tetsuko Kuroyanagi, Yajuro Bando, Munetaka Murakami of Yakult, and others]. Sports Hochi (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. December 21, 2022. Archived from the original on December 21, 2022. "Champion figure skater Yuzuru Hanyu to make on-screen acting debut as samurai lord ‹ Japan Today: Japan News and Discussion". www.japantoday.com. February 7, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2016. "Olympic Figure Skater Yuzuru Hanyu Plays Feudal Lord in Big Screen Debut". Wall Street Journal. February 4, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2016. 羽生結弦『徹子の部屋』で母撮影の“幼少期秘蔵映像”公開 4歳のスケートデビュー時も振り返る [Yuzuru Hanyu's "Tetsuko's Room" Released "Treasured Childhood Video" Taken by Mother]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. May 2, 2023. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. 北京冬奥会官方电影《北京2022》定档5月19日 [Beijing Winter Olympics official film "Beijing 2022" scheduled for May 19]. chinadaily.com.cn (in Chinese). April 23, 2023. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Xu Fan (May 22, 2023). "Documentary highlights true Olympic ideal". China Daily. Beijing. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. "Yuzuru Hanyu's "Time of Awakening" CDJapan Articles Archive". www.cdjapan.co.jp. February 27, 2014. Archived from the original on December 15, 2022. 【オリコン】羽生結弦、スポーツ選手初のDVD首位 初週売上枚数も歴代最高 [[Oricon] Yuzuru Hanyu becomes the first sports player to rank first on DVD, and has the highest number of sales in the first week]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. July 23, 2014. Archived from the original on July 23, 2022. 羽生結弦、スポーツ関連作品史上初のBD1位獲得【オリコンランキング】 [Yuzuru Hanyu becomes the first sports-related work to win BD 1st place [Oricon Ranking]]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. October 3, 2019. Archived from the original on December 8, 2019. 週間 DVDランキング 2019年10月07日付 [Weekly DVD ranking October 07, 2019]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. October 7, 2019. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. "花は咲く on ICE ～荒川静香 羽生結弦～｜ドキュメンタリー｜DVD". www.nhk-ep.com. Retrieved February 13, 2016. "羽生結弦"凱旋公演"のテレビ生中継が決定！ 感謝の気持ち伝える". The Television (in Japanese). April 1, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2021. "羽生結弦の凱旋公演が全国66映画館でライブビューイングに！". Livedoor News (in Japanese). April 8, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Makabe 2021, p. 61. 羽生結弦の自叙伝『蒼い炎』愛蔵版BOXセット発売決定 限定特典には「羽生結弦年表」も [Hanyu Yuzuru's autobiography "Aoi Enou" box set will be released. Limited benefits include "Hanyu Yuzuru Chronology"]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. May 26, 2023. Archived from the original on May 26, 2023. Narinari 編, 集部 (October 30, 2014). "羽生結弦が初写真集も"金"、2014年発売の男性写真集で最高週間売上。". narinari.com. Retrieved September 12, 2015. "予約開始とともに、Amazon総合ランキング1位！『羽生結弦語録』発売！". prtimes.jp. September 11, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2015. "羽生結弦の生きざま…「羽生結弦語録」で名言と写真が一冊に！". www.cinematoday.jp. September 5, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2015. 羽生結弦、フォト&メッセージ集第2弾発売決定 人々を魅了する「言葉」に迫る [Yuzuru Hanyu, photo & message collection 2nd release decision Approaching the "words" that attract people]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. September 15, 2022. Archived from the original on September 24, 2022. 3/12付週間本ランキング BOOK総合3位に羽生結弦『夢を生きる』がランクイン [Yuzuru Hanyu's "Living Your Dreams" ranked 3rd overall in the Weekly Book Ranking on 3/12]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. March 9, 2018. Archived from the original on June 23, 2018. 羽生結弦選手、写真集2作が同時TOP10入り AKB48以来7年6ヶ月ぶりに樹立 [Yuzuru Hanyu's two photo collections simultaneously enter TOP 10, first time in 7 years and 6 months since AKB48]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. October 19, 2018. Archived from the original on November 3, 2018. ご注文多数につき緊急重版！『羽生結弦 アマチュア時代 全記録』いよいよ本日発売！ [Urgent reprint of the book due to many orders! Yuzuru Hanyu: The Complete Record of His Amateur Years" is finally on sale today!]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. November 2, 2022. Archived from the original on February 18, 2023. "羽生結弦が「anan」の表紙に登場 フィギュアスケート選手では初". Fashionsnap (in Japanese). December 4, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2021. "羽生結弦の表紙に反響殺到！「AERA」異例の大増刷を決定！！". PR Times (in Japanese). February 21, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2021. 羽生結弦、グッチ着こなす"美麗ショット"に反響「今まで見たことない羽生くん!」「カッコ良すぎ」「美しい!」 [Yuzuru Hanyu's "Beautiful Shoot" wearing Gucci receives reactions of "I've Never seen Yuzuru Hanyu like this before!" "He's too cool" "He's beautiful!"]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. June 19, 2023. Archived from the original on June 19, 2023. 週間 BOOKランキング 2022年10月24日付 [Weekly BOOK Ranking October 24, 2022]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. October 24, 2022. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Edmonds, Charlotte (February 10, 2022). "Ever Wonder Why Fans Throw Stuffed Animals Onto the Ice After a Figure Skating Routine?". NBC Bay Area. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved September 13, 2022. Bieler, Des (February 16, 2018). "So what's the deal with Japan's Yuzuru Hanyu and all those Winnie-the-Pooh dolls?". Washington Pos. Archived from the original on February 17, 2018. Retrieved September 13, 2022. "平昌五輪 仙台のＰＶ会場に母校の短冊２３００枚". Sankei (in Japanese). February 18, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2021. "Disaster survivors rejoice in Hanyu's gold". Bangkok Post. February 15, 2014. Retrieved November 8, 2020. "Waseda Student Yuzuru Hanyu wins Gold Medal in Men's Figure Skating at Sochi Winter Olympics". Waseda University. February 15, 2014. Retrieved August 23, 2020. "羽生結弦が９月に早大卒業 スケートと学問両立 在学中に五輪連覇と国民栄誉賞". Sports Hochi (in Japanese). November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. "羽生結弦"動いたこと"は卒論完成 24時間テレビにリモート出演". Sponichi (in Japanese). August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. "羽生結弦が卒業論文を公開 24時間テレビに出演". Nikkan Sports (in Japanese). August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. "羽生結弦９月に早大卒業していた 卒業式は欠席". Nikkan Sports (in Japanese). November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. "A Feasibility Study on Utilization in Figure Skating by A Wireless Inertia Sensor Motion Capture System". 人間科学研究 = Waseda Journal of Human Sciences (in Japanese). 2021: 1–7. March 18, 2020. hdl:2065/00080605. Retrieved May 27, 2021. "Olympic figure skating legend Hanyu Yuzuru announces his marriage". International Olympic Committee. Lausanne. August 4, 2023. Archived from the original on August 5, 2023. 羽生結弦さんが結婚「私、羽生結弦は入籍する運びとなりました」…自身の公式ＳＮＳで発表 [Yuzuru Hanyu gets married "I, Yuzuru Hanyu, have decided to register"...announced on his official SNS]. Sports Hochi (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. August 4, 2023. Archived from the original on August 5, 2023. "Two-time Olympic figure skating champion Hanyu Yuzuru announces divorce: 'I will continue to move forward'". International Olympic Committee. Lausanne. November 17, 2023. Archived from the original on November 18, 2023. "Skating icon Yuzuru Hanyu announces divorce after 3 months". The Asahi Shimbun. Kita-ku, Osaka. November 18, 2023. Archived from the original on November 20, 2023. "Hanyu first to nail quadruple loop". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. Kyodo News. October 1, 2016. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Gallagher, Jack (October 4, 2016). "Hanyu's quad loop adds to Japan's skating legacy". the japan times. Retrieved December 1, 2017. "Yuzuru Hanyu (JPN) hits quad toe-triple Axel en route to gold in Helsinki". International Skating Union. Retrieved November 5, 2018. 羽生、独壇場V 新境地で自己新322・59点「自分に勝てたな」 [Hanyu single-handedly scoring a new personal best of 322.59 points in a new system "I think I beat myself"]. Sports Nippon (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo. October 28, 2019. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Galocha, Arthur; Samuels, Robert; Berkowitz, Bonnie (February 10, 2022). "How Yuzuru Hanyu nearly landed a quadruple axel". Washington Post. Retrieved February 11, 2022. Bender, Maddie (February 16, 2022). "Are Quintuple Jumps in Figure Skating Even Possible?". Slate Magazine. Archived from the original on February 19, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2022. "U.S. figure skater Ilia Malinin lands first quad axel in competition". The Washington Post. September 14, 2022. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022. Retrieved September 15, 2022. Aoshima, Hirono (January 29, 2018). "Athleticism Over Artistry? The Jump Obsession in Men's Figure Skating". Nippon.com. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Abad-Santos, Alex (February 3, 2022). "How figure skating became all about the jumps". Vox. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. VanOpdorp, David (February 9, 2022). "Beijing 2022: Yuzuru Hanyu, the quad axel and the future of figure skating". Deutsche Welle. Bonn. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. Hanyu, Yuzuru (subject) (February 28, 2019). Yuzuru Hanyu, PyeongChang Olympic Figure Skating Gold Medalist (Press conference). Tokyo, Japan: The Foreign Correspondent's Club of Japan. 39:49 minutes in. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "Olympic figure skating champ Yuzuru Hanyu to receive People's Honor Award". Kyodo News. Minato, Tokyo. June 1, 2018. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. "Figure skating star Hanyu awarded second Japan gov't decoration – The Mainichi". The Mainichi. April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 30, 2018. Gallagher, Jack (April 28, 2014). "Figure skater Hanyu among 684 spring decoration recipients". The Japan Times. Chiyoda, Tokyo. ISSN 0447-5763. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. "つながる金メダリストの系譜。荒川静香と羽生結弦が語る「五輪の記憶」｜フィギュア｜集英社 スポルティーバ 公式サイト web Sportiva". 集英社のスポーツ総合雑誌 スポルティーバ 公式サイト web Sportiva (in Japanese). Retrieved August 15, 2017. "'Yuzu-mania' hits Sendai as design for new Hanyu monument unveiled". The Japan Times. April 20, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2019. "Laureus World Sports Awards Monaco 2019". Retrieved January 18, 2019. "Olympic, Paralympic champions on list of Laureus nominees". OlympicTalk. January 17, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Waseda University (March 22, 2021). "羽生結弦さんも受賞 早稲田大学小野梓記念賞発表". kyodonewsprwire.jp (in Japanese). Kyodo News. Archived from the original on March 22, 2021. Retrieved March 22, 2021. "羽生結弦、決戦の地・ストックホルムに到着 練習には姿見せず／フィギュア". Sanspo (in Japanese). March 23, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2021. 羽生結弦『第70回菊池寛賞』受賞 「挑戦を続ける」姿勢に評価 [Yuzuru Hanyu awarded with the 70th Kikuchi Kan Prize for his attitude of "continuing to take on challenges"]. Oricon (in Japanese). Minato, Tokyo. October 11, 2022. Archived from the original on October 11, 2022. Thomas, Carla; Wehbe, Rana. "30 Under 30 Asia 2018". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 31, 2018. Retrieved March 27, 2018. "ESPN World Fame 100 2019". espn.com. ESPN. Archived from the original on January 4, 2021. Retrieved March 12, 2019. Keating, Peter; Teng, Elaine. "The Dominant 20: We rank the best athletes of 2018". espn.com. ESPN. Archived from the original on November 13, 2019. Retrieved December 12, 2018. "『第13回 好きなスポーツ選手ランキング』男女別TOP10を発表". oricon.co.jp (in Japanese). Oricon. October 16, 2020. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved April 6, 2021. Lamelas, Pedro. "The Best 100 Sportsmen of the 21st Century". especiales.marca.com (in Spanish). Marca. Archived from the original on June 6, 2020. Retrieved June 6, 2020. "Year in Search 2022: See what's trending in 2022 – Global". Google Search. Mountain View, California. Archived from the original on December 7, 2022. Hanyu, Yuzuru (March 1, 2018a). 夢を生きる [Live Your Dream] (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo: Chuokoron-Shinsha. ch. 10: Special Interview Pyeongchang Olympics. ISBN 978-4120050497. Hanyu, Yuzuru (November 1, 2022). 羽生結弦 アマチュア時代 全記録 [Yuzuru Hanyu amateur career complete record] (in Japanese). Shinagawa, Tokyo: CCC Media House. ISBN 978-4484222233. Ice Jewels (February 9, 2017). 羽生結弦インタビュー「進化の方程式」 [Special Interview with Yuzuru Hanyu: "The Formula of Evolution"]. Ice Jewels (mook) (in Japanese). Vol. 5. Minato, Tokyo: Kazi Co., Ltd. ISBN 978-4807295746. Jojima, Mitsuru (April 2, 2015). ユヅルが初めてリンクに立った日 [The day Yuzuru stood on the ice for the first time]. Sports Graphic Number (in Japanese). Vol. 785. Chiyoda, Tokyo: Bungeishunjū. ch. 4. JAN 4910268530453. Makabe, Kikuo (February 1, 2021). 志～アイスショーに賭ける夢～ [Aspiration: Dream to bet on an ice show] (in Japanese). Bunkyo, Tokyo: Shinshokan. ISBN 978-4403231278. Petkevich, John Misha (March 1, 1989). "Figure Skating: Championship Techniques". Sports Illustrated. New York City: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0452262096. Russell, Susan D. (September 6, 2022). "Yuzuru Hanyu – An icon leaves the competitive stage". International Figure Skating. Denville Township, New Jersey. pp. 22–33. IFSISS22-05. Todoroki, Aimi (October 7, 2021). 羽生結弦 – フィギュアスケート史に燦然と輝く栄光の軌跡 [Yuzuru Hanyu – The track of glory shining brightly in the history of figure skating]. Non-no (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo: Shueisha. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Utsunomiya, Naoko (June 22, 2016). 羽生結弦の扉 [Yuzuru Hanyu's Door]. オール讀物 (All Read) (in Japanese). Chiyoda, Tokyo: Bungeishunjū. ch. 4. JAN 4910021030763. Hanyu, Yuzuru; Russell, Scott (March 16, 2020). Figure skating star Yuzuru Hanyu shares his emotional journey to becoming world's best. CBC Sports (Motion picture). Toronto, Ontario. Archived from the original on July 19, 2022. NHK (2022). "Yuzuru Hanyu Story". NHK (in Japanese). Shibuya, Tokyo. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Yuzuru Hanyu at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Yuzuru Hanyu at the International Skating Union Yuzuru Hanyu at SkatingScores.com Yuzuru Hanyu at the Japan Skating Federation at the Wayback Machine (archived March 29, 2022) (in Japanese) Yuzuru Hanyu (athlete profile) at All Nippon Airways at the Wayback Machine (archived June 7, 2021) Yuzuru Hanyu at Olympedia Yuzuru Hanyu at Olympics.com Yuzuru Hanyu at IMDb 