The Estonian Declaration of Independence, also known as the Manifesto to the Peoples of Estonia (Estonian: Manifest Eestimaa rahvastele), is the founding act which established the independent democratic Republic of Estonia on 24 February 1918. Since then the 24 February has been celebrated as the Estonian Independence Day, the national day of Estonia. The declaration was drafted by the Salvation Committee elected by the elders of the Estonian Provincial Assembly and consisting of Konstantin Päts, Jüri Vilms and Konstantin Konik. Originally intended to be proclaimed on 21 February 1918, the proclamation was delayed until the evening of 23 February, when the manifesto was printed and read out aloud publicly in Pärnu. On the next day, 24 February 1918, the manifesto was printed and distributed in the capital, Tallinn (Reval). During World War I, on 24 February 1918, in the capital city Tallinn, between the retreating Russian bolshevik troops and the advancing German army (and the nearing occupation by the German Empire), the Estonian Salvation Committee — the executive body of the democratically elected Provincial Assembly (Maapäev) — declared the independence of Estonia. The declaration was made in the main hall of the local branch of the former imperial Russian state bank. The German Empire did not recognise the newly declared "democratic republic of Estonia". However, after the defeat of the Central Powers in World War I in November 1918, Germany withdrew its troops from Estonia, and formally handed power in Estonia over to the Estonian Provisional Government on 19 November 1918. The Russian Bolshevik invasion and the Estonian War of Independence followed. On 2 February 1920, the Tartu Peace Treaty was signed by the Republic of Estonia and Bolshevik Russia. The Republic of Estonia obtained international recognition and became a member of the League of Nations in 1921. Manifesto to the peoples of Estonia Never in the course of centuries have the Estonian people lost their ardent desire for independence. From generation to generation the secret hope has endured in Estonians that despite the dark night of servitude and violent rule by foreign peoples the time will come in Estonia "when all splinters, at both end, will burst forth into flames" and when "Kalev will reach home to bring his children happiness." Now is the time. An unheard-of struggle of nations has destroyed the rotten foundations of the Russian tsarist state. All over the Sarmatian plains ruinous anarchy is spreading, threatening to overwhelm in its wake all peoples living within the borders of the former Russian state. From the West the victorious armies of Germany are approaching in order to claim their share of Russia's inheritance and, first of all, to take possession of the coastal lands by the Baltic Sea. In this fateful hour the Estonian Provincial Assembly, as the legal representative of our land and people, has, in unanimous agreement with Estonian democratic political parties and organizations, and by virtue of the right of self-determination of peoples, found it necessary to take the following decisive steps to shape the destiny of Estonian land and people. ESTONIA, within her historical and ethnic boundaries, is declared as of today an INDEPENDENT DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. The independent Republic of Estonia shall include Harjumaa, Läänemaa, Järvamaa, Virumaa, with the city of Narva and its surroundings, Tartumaa, Võrumaa, Viljandimaa, and Pärnumaa with the Baltic islands of Saaremaa, Hiiumaa, Muhumaa, and others where the Estonians have settled for ages in large majorities. Final determination of the boundaries of the Republic in the areas bordering on Latvia and Russia will be carried out by plebiscite after the conclusion of the present World War. In the aforementioned areas the only supreme and organizing authority is the democratically supported Estonian Salvation Committee created by the Estonian Provincial Assembly. The Republic of Estonia wishes to maintain absolute political neutrality towards all neighbouring states and peoples and expects that they will equally respond with complete neutrality. Estonian military forces shall be reduced to the extent necessary to maintain internal order. Estonian soldiers serving in the Russian military forces will be called home and demobilized. Until the Estonian Constituent Assembly, elected by general, direct, secret, and proportional elections, will convene and determine the constitutional structure of the country, all executive and legislative authority will remain vested in the Estonian Provincial Assembly and in the Estonian Provisional Government created by it, whose activities must be guided by the following principles: 1. All citizens of the Republic of Estonia, irrespective of their religion, ethnic origin, and political views, shall enjoy equal protection under the law and courts of justice of the Republic. 2. Ethnic minorities residing within the borders of the Republic – Russians, Germans, Swedes, Jews, and others – shall be guaranteed their rights to cultural autonomy. 3. All civic freedoms, such at the freedom of expression, of the press, of religion, of assembly, of association, and the freedom to strike as well as the inviolability of the individual and the home, shall be irrefutably effective within the territory of the Republic of Estonia and based on laws which the Government shall immediately work out. 4. The Provisional Government will be charged with the immediate organization of the courts of justice to protect the security of the citizens. All political prisoners shall be released immediately. 5. The city, county, and township local governments will be called upon to continue their work which has been violently interrupted. 6. For maintenance of public order, people's militia, subordinated to local governments, shall be immediately organized and citizens' self-defence organizations established in the cities and rural areas. 7. The Provisional Government in instructed to work out without delay, on a broad democratic basis, bills for the solution of the agrarian problem, and the problems of labor, of food supply, and of finances. Estonia! You stand on the threshold of a hopeful future in which you shall be free and independent in determining and directing your destiny. Begin building a home of your own, ruled by law and order in order to be a worthy member within the family of civilized nations. Sons and daughters of our homeland, let us unite as one man in the sacred task of building our homeland. The sweat and blood shed by our ancestors for this country oblige us to do it, and we must do it for the sake of our future generations. May God watch over Thee And amply bless Whatever thou undertake My dear homeland! Long live the independent democratic Republic of Estonia! Long live peace among nations! The Council of Elders of the Estonian Provincial Assembly February 24, 1918 Estonia portal Independence Day (Estonia) Estonian War of Independence Estonian Sovereignty Declaration Arjakas, Küllo (23 February 2008). "23. ja 24. veebruar 1918: kuidas iseseisvust kuulutati" (in Estonian). Postimees. Archived from the original on 26 February 2008. Retrieved 24 February 2008. Vahtre, Lauri (23 February 2007). "89 aastapäeva – sinimustvalgega ja ilma" (in Estonian). Postimees. Archived from the original on 2 March 2007. Retrieved 24 February 2008. "The buildings of Eesti Pank". Eesti Pank. 28 September 2012. Valdur Ohmann (2017). "The Artist Nikolai Kalmakov and the Twists and Turns of his Creative Legacy". Tuna. Rosenthal, Reigo (3 October 2012). "World War I". Estonica. Archived from the original on 27 June 2017. Retrieved 24 February 2017. Rosenthal, Reigo (3 October 2012). "Estonian War of Independence". Estonica. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 24 February 2017. Pajur, Ago (3 October 2012). "Years of parliamentarian democracy". Estonica. Archived from the original on 31 May 2017. Retrieved 24 February 2017. "Declaration of Independence". Office of the President of Estonia. Retrieved 18 February 2020. Estonian Declaration of Independence, 24 February 1918 at www.president.ee February 24 – Estonia's Independence Day! at Visit Estonia