Belgium has competed at most editions of the Olympic Games after making its first appearance at the 1900 Games. The nation was host to the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp. The National Olympic Committee for Belgium was created and recognized in 1906. Belgium has hosted the Games on one occasion. a Russian team's gold medals were stripped due to anti-doping rules violation by Yulia Chermoshanskaya. Belgium's Olympic debut included one swimmer, who entered the men's 4000 metre freestyle and did not finish the first round (semifinals). Archery was one of the sports in which Belgium competed in the nation's first appearance in 1900. The Belgian archers took the gold medal in 3 of the 7 events in Paris, finishing with 7 medals total. Belgium's debut in 1900 included one cyclist. Belgium competed at the first equestrian events in 1900, winning gold medals in three of the five events. Belgium's Olympic debut in 1900 included five fencers, one of whom reached the final pool but who won no medals. Belgium's Olympic debut was in 1920 as the host nation. They won the bronze medal. Their best result was the gold medal in 2020. Belgium's Olympic debut in 1900 included a men's football team, which is currently recognized as bronze medalists. The team's next appearance was as the host of the 1920 Games, at which the Belgian men won gold. Belgium competed again at the next two Games (1924 and 1928), but then did not appear again until 2008. That year, Belgium reached the semifinals but then lost twice to finish fourth. Belgium has not appeared at the Olympics in women's soccer. Belgium's Olympic debut in 1900 included two gymnasts who competed in the men's individual all-around. Belgium competed at the first Olympic rowing regatta in 1900; the Royal Club Nautique de Gand men's eight took silver. Belgium debuted in shooting in 1900. List of flag bearers for Belgium at the Olympics Category:Olympic competitors for Belgium Belgium at the Paralympics The IOC medal database showns two more team members van Schauwbroeck (perhaps van Schauwenbroeck) and van Cauwenberg (perhaps Albert van Cauwenberg), however all other serious databases show only three medalists. "Belgium". International Olympic Committee. "Belgium". Olympedia.com. "Olympic Analytics/BEL". olympanalyt.com. BOIC – Belgian Olympic and Interfederal Committee official website