Dzinara Smolskaya (née Dzinara Talhatauna Alimbekava, Kazakh: Динара Талғатқызы Әлімбекова, romanized: Dinara Talğatkyzy Älimbekova, born 5 January 1996) is a Kazakhstan-born Belarusian biathlete. She won a gold medal in the 4×6 km relay at the 2018 Olympics. Alimbekava won her first IBU World Cup competition (a sprint) in Hochfilzen, Austria, in December 2020, and finished as the Under-25 Cup leader for the 2020-21 World Cup season. Alimbekava was born in Kazakhstan to a Kazakh father and a Belarusian mother. When she was three years old, her family moved to Belarus, where her younger brother Zhenya was born. Dzinara is professionally trained in piano and skates and practices snowboarding in her free time. In October 2022, Alimbekava revealed via her Instagram account that she had married fellow biathlete Anton Smolski on January 10 of that same year. She now competes under the name Dzinara Smolskaya. All results are sourced from the International Biathlon Union. 1 medal (1 gold) 0 medals *During Olympic seasons competitions are only held for those events not included in the Olympic program. **The single mixed relay was added as an event in 2019. 1 victories (1 Sp) 6 podiums (1 Sp, 3 Pu, 2 Ms) Dzinara Alimbekava. biathlonresults.com "5 things we learned in the 2020/21 season". International Biathlon Union - IBU. Retrieved 24 March 2021. "(interview with mother in Russian)". kp.by. "От пианистки до биатлонистки. История Динары Алимбековой (interview in Russian)". krayavidy.by. "«Начинается новая глава моей жизни». Знаменитая биатлонная пара наконец-то сыграла свадьбу" [“A new chapter of my life begins.” The famous biathlon couple finally got married]. championat.com (in Russian). Retrieved 3 October 2022. "Belarusian biathlete Dzinara Alimbekava is now Dzinara Smolskaya". belta.by. Retrieved 26 June 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dzinara Alimbekava. Dzinara Smolskaya at IBU BiathlonWorld.com Dzinara Smolskaya at IBU BiathlonResults.com Dzinara Alimbekava at the National Olympic Committee of the Republic of Belarus Dzinara Alimbekava at Olympedia Alimbekava at Olympics.com v t e