Ukraine first participated at the Olympic Games as an independent nation in 1994, and has sent athletes to compete in every Summer Olympic Games and Winter Olympic Games since then. The first athlete who won the gold medal for the yellow-blues was Oksana Baiul. However for the first time the Ukrainian national flag and the Ukrainian state anthem sounded in 1992 when Oleg Kutscherenko from Luhansk Oblast won his gold medal in Barcelona as part of the so called "Unified Team". Previously, athletes of modern Ukraine mostly competed as part of the Russian Empire (1900–1912) and the Soviet Union from 1952 to 1988, and after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ukrainian athletes were part of the Unified Team in 1992. Tatiana Gutsu became the best athlete of the Unified Team in 1992 from independent Ukraine. Independently, Ukraine has won a total of 120 medals at the Summer Games and 8 at the Winter Games, with gymnastics at summer and biathlon at winter as the nation's top medal-producing sports. The National Olympic Committee of Ukraine was created in 1990 and recognized by the International Olympic Committee in 1993. Ukraine has won a total of 148 medals since it regained independence, with 38 of them gold, the second most amongst all post-Soviet states behind Russia. 1994 Lillehammer – Viktor Petrenko 1996 Atlanta – Sergey Bubka 1998 Nagano – Andriy Deryzemlya 2000 Sydney – Yevhen Braslavets 2002 Salt Lake City – Olena Petrova 2004 Athens – Denys Sylantyev 2006 Turin – Natalia Yakushenko 2008 Beijing – Yana Klochkova 2010 Vancouver – Liliya Ludan 2012 London – Roman Hontyuk 2014 Sochi – Valentina Shevchenko 2016 Rio de Janeiro – Mykola Milchev 2018 Pyeongchang – Olena Bilosiuk 2020 Tokyo – Olena Kostevych, Bohdan Nikishyn 2022 Beijing – Oleksandr Abramenko, Oleksandra Nazarova List of Soviet medalists who represented Soviet clubs out of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and recognized by the Ukrainian NOC. Category:Olympic competitors for Ukraine List of Olympic champions of Ukraine Ukraine at the Paralympics Ukraine at the Youth Olympics Ukraine at the European Games including Polina Astakhova including Ivan Deriuhin including Leonid Bartenev including Polina Astakhova including Heorhiy Zhylin and Ihor Yemchuk including Yevhen Cherepovsky including Leonid Bartenev including Albert Valtin including Leonid Kolumbet including Yury Vengerovsky, Eduard Sibiryakov, and Yuriy Poyarkov including Andrei Khimich including Nikolai Chuzhikov including Lyudmila Gureyeva and Valentina Mishak including Mykola Bahley including Tatyana Devyatova including Yuri Poyarkov, Volodymyr Byelyayev, Yevgeni Lapinsky, Vladimir Ivanov, Boris Tereshchuk, Viktor Mikhalchuk, and Vasilius Matushevas including Viktor Sidyak including Grigory Kriss and Iosif Vitebsky including Vasili Stankovich and Viktor Putyatin including Pavel Lednev and Boris Onishchenko including Aleksei Barkalov including Anatoli Polivoda including Yuriy Hromak and Vladimir Nemshilov including Valentyn Kravchuk and Volodymyr Sterlik including Yuri Filatov, Yuri Stetsenko, and Volodymyr Morozov including Aleksei Barkalov including Sergei Kovalenko and Anatoli Polivoda including Yekaterina Kuryshko including Pavel Lednev and Boris Onischenko including Valeriy Borzov including Vasyl Stankovych and Victor Putyatin including Oleh Blokhin, Yuri Eliseev, Viktor Kolotov, Vladimir Onishchenko, Yevhen Rudakov, Vyacheslav Semyonov, and Anatoli Kuksov including Grigori Kriss and Sergei Paramonov including Yuriy Poyarkov and Yevhen Lapinsky «Незалежний» український спорт: від першого гімну на Олімпіаді до наймолодшого чемпіона Європи. www.radiosvoboda.org. 24 August 2019 Olympic champions (Олімпійські чемпіони). Ukraine NOC. "Ukraine". International Olympic Committee. "Ukraine". Olympedia.com. "Olympic Analytics/UKR". olympanalyt.com.