Belcalis Marlenis Cephus (née Almánzar; born October 11, 1992), known professionally as Cardi B, is an American rapper. She is one of the most commercially successful female rappers of her generation. Born and raised in New York City, she first gained popularity through videos shared on Vine and Instagram. From 2015 to early 2017, she appeared as a regular cast member on the VH1 reality television series Love & Hip Hop: New York, which depicted her pursuit of her music aspirations, and earned further recognition with the release of her two mixtapes: Gangsta Bitch Music, Vol. 1 (2016) and Vol. 2 (2017). Her first studio album, Invasion of Privacy (2018), debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and was ranked the top female rap album of the 2010s by Billboard. Critically acclaimed, it made Cardi B the first female artist to win the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album as a solo artist, and marked the first female rap album in 15 years nominated for Album of the Year. It spawned two number-one singles on the Billboard Hot 100; with "Bodak Yellow", its lead single, Cardi B became the first female rapper to top the Hot 100 with a solo song in the 21st century and the first to achieve a diamond-certified song by the RIAA, while "I Like It" marked the first time a female rapper attained multiple number-one songs on the Hot 100. Her third Hot 100 number-one, the collaboration "Girls Like You" with band Maroon 5, made her the only female rapper to achieve multiple diamond-certified songs by the RIAA. She has since released two singles: "WAP" (featuring Megan Thee Stallion) in 2020 and "Up" in 2021, both of which topped the Hot 100 and other charts worldwide. Outside of music, Cardi B served as a judge on the music competition series Rhythm + Flow (2019), appeared in the films Hustlers (2019) and F9 (2021), and had a voice role in Baby Shark's Big Movie! (2023). In 2022, she became the creative director of entertainment magazine Playboy. Recognized by Forbes as one of the most influential female rappers of all time, Cardi B holds various records among women in hip hop; she is the female rapper with the most number-one singles (five) on the Billboard Hot 100g the only to achieve multiple solo number-ones and the only to earn number-ones in two decades (2010s and 2020s) on the chart. She is also the female rapper with the most diamond-certified songs (three) by the RIAA, the highest-certified female rapper of all time on their Top Artists (Digital Singles) ranking, and has 100 million certified units (album and songs) sold in the US alone. Additionally, she is the female rapper with the most songs with a billion streams on Spotify—where she also has the most-streamed female rap album. She was the first lead artist to top the Billboard Global 200. Her accolades include a Grammy Award, eight Billboard Music Awards, six Guinness World Records, six American Music Awards, 14 BET Hip Hop Awards, and two ASCAP Songwriter of the Year awards. In 2018, Time magazine included her on its annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world, and in 2020, Billboard honored her as Woman of the Year. Belcalis Marlenis Almánzar was born on October 11, 1992, in the Washington Heights neighborhood of Manhattan, New York City. Her father Carlos is Dominican and her mother Clara is a Trinidadian of African and Spanish descent; Almánzar identifies as an Afro-Latina. Almánzar was raised in the Highbridge neighborhood of the South Bronx, and spent much time at her paternal grandmother's home in Washington Heights, which she credits with giving her "such a thick accent." Almánzar developed the stage name "Cardi B" as a derivation of Bacardi, a rum brand that was formerly her nickname. She has a younger sister, Hennessy Carolina, who was born in 1995. She has said she was a gang member with the Bloods in her youth, since age 16, but stated she would not encourage joining a gang. She attended Renaissance High School for Musical Theater & Technology, a vocational high school on the Herbert H. Lehman High School campus. During her teens, Cardi B was employed at a grocery store in Tribeca. She was fired and became a dancer at a strip club across the street. Cardi B has said that becoming a stripper was positive for her life in many ways: "It really saved me from a lot of things. When I started stripping I went back to school." She stated that she became a stripper to escape poverty and domestic violence, having been in an abusive relationship at the time after being kicked out of her mother's house, and that stripping was her only way to earn enough money to escape the situation and get an education. She attended Borough of Manhattan Community College before eventually dropping out. While stripping, Cardi B lied to her mother by telling her she was making money by babysitting. In 2013, she began to gain publicity due to several of her videos spreading on social media, on Vine and her Instagram page. In 2015, Cardi B joined the cast of the VH1 reality television series Love & Hip Hop: New York, debuting in season six. Jezebel considered her the breakout star of the show's sixth season. The New York Times wrote that she garnered popularity with "her ability to rattle off one-liners". The sixth and seventh seasons chronicle her rise to stardom and her turbulent relationship with her incarcerated fiancé. On December 30, 2016, after two seasons, she announced that she would be leaving the show to further pursue a career in music. In November 2015, Cardi B made her musical debut on Jamaican reggae fusion singer Shaggy's remix to his single "Boom Boom", alongside fellow Jamaican dancehall singer Popcaan. She made her music video debut on December 15, 2015, with the song "Cheap Ass Weave", her rendition of British rapper Lady Leshurr's "Queen's Speech 4". On March 7, 2016, Cardi B released her first full-length project, a mixtape titled Gangsta Bitch Music, Vol. 1. In November 2016, she was featured on the digital cover of Vibe magazine's "Viva" issue. On September 12, 2016, KSR Group released the compilation Underestimated: The Album, which is a collaboration between KSR Group artists Cardi B, HoodCelebrityy, SwiftOnDemand, Cashflow Harlem, and Josh X. It was previously released only to attendees of their U.S. tour. the label's flagship artist, Cardi B, said: "I wanted to make a song that would make girls dance, twerk and at the same time encourage them to go get that Shmoney," in regard to the compilation's single "What a Girl Likes". She appeared on the December 9, 2015, episode of Uncommon Sense with Charlamagne. On April 6, 2016, she was on the twelfth episode of Khloé Kardashian's Kocktails with Khloé: in this episode, she revealed how she told her mother that she was a stripper. In November 2016, it was announced that she would be joining the cast of the BET series Being Mary Jane. TVLine describes her character, Mercedes, as a "round-the-way beauty with a big weave, big boobs and a big booty to match her oversize, ratchet personality." In 2016, Cardi B was featured in her first endorsement deal with Romantic Depot, a large New York chain of lingerie stores that sell sexual health and wellness products. The ad campaign was featured on radio and cable TV. On January 20, 2017, Cardi B released her second mixtape, Gangsta Bitch Music, Vol. 2. In February 2017, Cardi B partnered with MAC Cosmetics and Rio Uribe's Gypsy Sport for an event for New York Fashion Week. In late February, Cardi B signed her first major record label recording contract with Atlantic Records. On February 25, 2017, Cardi B was the opening act for East Coast hip hop group The Lox's Filthy America... It's Beautiful Tour, alongside fellow New York City-based rappers Lil' Kim and Remy Ma. In April 2017, she was featured in i-D's "A-Z of Music" video sponsored by Marc Jacobs. Cardi guest-starred on the celebrity panel show Hip Hop Squares, appearing on the March 13 and April 3, 2017, episodes. She also released the freestyle "Red Barz". In May 2017, the nominees for the 2017 BET Awards were announced, revealing that Cardi B had been nominated for Best New Artist and Best Female Hip-Hop Artist. Although Chance the Rapper and Remy Ma won those categories, respectively, Cardi B performed at the BET Awards Afterparty show. On June 11, 2017, during Hot 97's annual Summer Jam music festival, Remy Ma brought out Cardi B, along with The Lady of Rage, MC Lyte, Young M.A, Monie Love, Lil' Kim, and Queen Latifah, to celebrate female rappers and perform Latifah's 1993 hit single "U.N.I.T.Y." about female empowerment. In June 2017, it was revealed that Cardi B would be on the cover of The Fader's Summer Music issue for July/August 2017. She performed at MoMA PS1 on August 19 to a crowd of 4,000. On June 16, 2017, Atlantic Records released Cardi B's commercial debut single, "Bodak Yellow", via digital distribution. She performed the single on The Wendy Williams Show and Jimmy Kimmel Live! The song climbed the charts for several months, and, on the Billboard Hot 100 chart dated September 25, 2017, "Bodak Yellow" reached the number one spot, making Cardi B the first female rapper to do so with a solo single since Lauryn Hill's "Doo Wop (That Thing)" debuted atop the chart in 1998. The song stayed atop the charts for three consecutive weeks, tying with American pop singer Taylor Swift's "Look What You Made Me Do" as the longest running female at the number one spot in 2017. Cardi B became the first person of Dominican descent to reach number one in the history of the Hot 100 since it was launched in 1958. An editor of The New York Times called it "the rap anthem of the summer". Selected by The Washington Post and Pitchfork music critics as the best song of 2017, "Bodak Yellow" was eventually certified Diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The song received nominations for Best Rap Performance and Best Rap Song at the 60th Grammy Awards. It won Single of the Year at the 2017 BET Hip Hop Awards. With her collaborations "No Limit" and "MotorSport", she became the first female rapper to land her first three entries in the top 10 of the Hot 100, and the first female artist to achieve the same on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. In October 2017, Cardi B headlined Power 105.1's annual Powerhouse music celebration, alongside the Weeknd, Migos, and Lil Uzi Vert, at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn, New York. In December, she released two songs: a collaboration with Puerto Rican singer Ozuna titled "La Modelo", and "Bartier Cardi", the second single from her debut album. On January 3, 2018, Cardi B was featured on the remix of Bruno Mars' single "Finesse", and appeared in the 90s inspired video. It reached the top three on the Hot 100, Canada and New Zealand. On January 18, 2018, Cardi B became the first female rapper to have five top 10 singles simultaneously on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. She released another single, "Be Careful", on March 30, 2018, a week before her album's release. Her debut studio album, Invasion of Privacy, was released on April 6, 2018, to universal acclaim from music critics. Editors from Variety and The New York Times called it "one of the most powerful debuts of this millennium" and "a hip-hop album that doesn't sound like any of its temporal peers," respectively. The album entered at number one in the United States, while she became the first female artist to chart 13 entries simultaneously on the Billboard Hot 100, on the chart issue dated April 21. It became the most streamed album by a female artist in a single week in Apple Music, and the largest on-demand audio streaming week ever for an album by a woman. Cardi held the latter record until 2019. The album's title reflects Cardi B's feeling that as she gained popularity her privacy was being invaded in a variety of ways. Following the album's release, during a performance on Saturday Night Live, Cardi B officially announced her pregnancy, after much media speculation. She also co-hosted an episode of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon. Several months later, in July 2018, the album's fourth single, "I Like It", which features vocals from Bad Bunny and J Balvin, reached number one on the Hot 100; this marked her second number one on the chart and made her the first female rapper to achieve multiple chart-toppers. It received critical acclaim, with Rolling Stone naming it "the best summer song of all time" in 2020. Her collaboration with Maroon 5, "Girls Like You", also reached number one on the Hot 100 chart, extending her record among female rappers and also making her the sixth female artist to achieve three number-one singles on the chart during the 2010s. The song's music video has received more than 3 billion views on YouTube and was the fifth-best selling song of the year globally. With "Girls Like You" following "I Like It" at the top of the Billboard Radio Songs chart, Cardi B became the first female rapper to replace herself at number one on the chart. The single spent seven weeks atop the Hot 100, making Cardi the female rapper with the most cumulative weeks atop the chart, with eleven weeks. It spent 33 weeks in the top 10, tying both Ed Sheeran's "Shape of You" and Post Malone and Swae Lee's "Sunflower" for the longest top 10 run in the chart's archives at the time. In October 2018, Invasion of Privacy was certified double platinum by the RIAA, and the following year it was updated to triple platinum. With the thirteen tracks, she became the first female artist to have all songs from an album certified gold or higher in the US. Cardi B received the most nominations for the 2018 MTV Video Music Awards with 12 mentions—including for Video of the Year, winning three awards. She tied with Drake for the most nominations at the 2018 American Music Awards. She won three AMAs and performed at the ceremony. Her single "Money" earned her a fourth Video Music Award, with visuals that feature Cardi playing characters in different locations, including in an art museum, a bank and a strip club. Her collaboration with DJ Snake "Taki Taki" topped the charts in a number of Hispanic countries, made Cardi B the first female rapper to top the Spotify Global 50 chart, and has garnered more than 2 billion views. Both singles were certified multiple-platinum by the RIAA. People en Español named her Star of the Year, and Entertainment Weekly deemed her "a pop culture phenomenon", as she was named one of "2018 Entertainers of the Year". On November 30, 2018, Cardi B was honored at Ebony's annual Power 100 Gala. Cardi ranked fifth on the 2018 Billboard Year-End Top Artists chart, while Invasion of Privacy ranked sixth. She achieved the most-streamed album of the year by a female artist globally in Apple Music, and ranked as the most streamed female artist of the year in the United States in Spotify. Editorial staff from Apple Music and Billboard named "I Like It" the best song of 2018, while Time magazine and Rolling Stone named Invasion of Privacy the best album of the year. Also in 2018, Time included her on their annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world. In its decade-end review article, NME stated that the era secured "her crown as the new Queen of Rap." Cardi B received five nominations at the 61st Grammy Awards, including for Album of the Year, Best Rap Album and Record of the Year ("I Like It"). She became the third female rapper to be nominated for Album of the Year, following Lauryn Hill (1999) and Missy Elliott (2004). On February 10, 2019, she then performed at the award ceremony, where she wore three vintage Thierry Mugler couture looks during the telecast and became the first female rapper to win Best Rap Album as a solo artist. Cardi B led the 2019 Billboard Music Awards nominations, with 21, earning the most nominations in a single year by a female artist and the third most nominations in a year (behind Drake and The Chainsmokers, who both had 22 in a year). She ended up winning six awards, including for Top Hot 100 Song, bringing her career total wins to seven—the most of any female rapper in history. An article by Omaha World-Herald called her "the biggest rapper in the world." On February 15, 2019, Cardi B released "Please Me", a collaboration with Bruno Mars, which became her seventh top-ten song on the Hot 100, reaching number three. The song marked Cardi and Bruno's second collaboration, following "Finesse" in 2018. The official music video was released two weeks later. On March 1, Cardi set a new attendance record at the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, with 75,580 fans in the audience. With "Backin' It Up", "Twerk" and "Money", Cardi became the first female artist to occupy the top three on the Billboard Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop airplay chart. Her following single titled "Press" was released on May 31, 2019. The parental-advisory labeled music video marked her directorial debut—being credited as co-director, and was released on June 26, 2019. It had its debut performance at the 2019 BET Awards, where she received the most nominations with seven, and won Album of the Year. During the summer of 2019, she embarked on an arena tour. In September, she led the BET Hip Hop Awards nominations with ten. Cardi B made her film debut in Hustlers directed by Lorene Scafaria, opposite Jennifer Lopez, Constance Wu, and Lili Reinhart. The film was released on September 13, 2019. Cardi B, along with Chance the Rapper and T.I., were confirmed as judges for the Netflix series Rhythm + Flow, a ten-part hip-hop talent search that premiered on October 9, 2019, which she also executive produced. In December 2019, Cardi B embarked on her first tour of Africa, performing in Nigeria and Ghana. Her collaboration "Clout" was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance. She was the most streamed female rapper of 2019 in the US, according to Spotify. Consequence of Sound deemed her "one of the most formidable hip-hop artists of the decade." In March 2020, Cardi B created a reaction video about the coronavirus pandemic. DJ iMarkkeyz, a Brooklyn DJ known for turning memes and online moments into full-length songs, created a track, based on her reaction titled "Coronavirus", which became an internet meme and was released to music platforms. Netflix announced the return of Rhythm + Flow for 2021. Cardi B released the single "WAP" featuring American rapper Megan Thee Stallion on August 7, 2020, as the lead single off her forthcoming second studio album. The song received critical acclaim and was praised for its sex positive messages. The Colin Tilley-directed music video accompanied the song itself, and broke the record for the biggest 24-hour debut for an all-female collaboration on YouTube. She became the only female rap artist to top the Global Spotify chart multiple times. "WAP" debuted at number-one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, garnering Cardi B her fourth chart-topper in the US, extending her record as the female rapper with the most number-one singles, and also making her the first female rapper to achieve Hot 100 number one singles in two different decades (2010s and 2020s). With 93 million streaming units, it became the largest first-week streams for a song, breaking the all-time record held by Ariana Grande's "7 Rings". It has spent four weeks atop the Hot 100. The single has also spent multiple weeks at number one in seven other countries, including Australia and the United Kingdom. Neil Shah of The Wall Street Journal deemed it "a big moment for female rappers" and "a historic sign that women artists are making their mark on hip-hop like never before". "WAP" became the first number one single on the inaugural Billboard Global 200 chart. It became critics' best song of the year according to a compilation of rankings made by the BBC, with publications such as Pitchfork and Rolling Stone placing it at number one. Cardi B won the Billboard Music Award for Top Rap Female Artist for the third time at the 2020 ceremony. In December 2020, Cardi B became the first female rapper to be named Woman of the Year at the Billboard Women in Music Awards. With her win for "WAP" at the American Music Awards, she became the first artist to win the American Music Award for Favorite Rap/Hip-Hop Song multiple times, following her win for "Bodak Yellow" in 2018. On February 5, 2021, Cardi B released "Up", the second single from her upcoming studio album. A music video for the single was released alongside it. The song was praised by NME magazine for its lyricism and fresh approach as a successor to "WAP". "Up" debuted at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart, marking the highest debut for a solo female rap song since Lauryn Hill's "Doo Wop (That Thing)" in 1998. The song debuted at number one on the Rolling Stone Top 100, becoming both Cardi B's second number-one single and second number-one debut, as well as the first time a female rapper debuts atop the chart with a solo song. Cardi B became the first female artist and first lead artist with consecutive number-one debuts on the US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, and second overall performer following Drake in 2016. "Up" reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 after her Grammy Awards performance, making her the only female rapper to reach number one multiple times with solo songs, following "Bodak Yellow", and extended her record as the female rapper with the most number-one songs on the Hot 100 as her fifth chart-topper. Cardi B received a second nomination for the Brit Award for International Female Solo Artist. Cardi B made a last-minute appearance in "Big Paper", from DJ Khaled's album Khaled Khaled released on April 30, 2021. Cardi received two nominations for the BET Award for Video of the Year, for the videos "Up" and "WAP", winning for the latter and becoming the first female rapper to win Video of the Year as a lead artist. This became the 10th time that an artist has had two nominated videos in this category as a lead artist, and the second time for her, following her nominations for "Money" and "Please Me" in 2019. She announced her second pregnancy during the performance of her Migos collaboration "Type Shit" at the 2021 ceremony. She also appeared in F9, which was released on June 25, 2021, by Universal Pictures. On July 16, 2021, Cardi B was featured on the Normani single "Wild Side". Cardi collaborated with Lizzo on "Rumors", which debuted at number four on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Cardi B's tenth top 10 single on the chart, and her seventh number-one on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. Cardi B received six nominations at the 2021 MTV Video Music Awards, including her second nomination for Video of the Year. She also led the nominations for the 2021 BET Hip Hop Awards along with Megan Thee Stallion, with nine each; both rappers won the most awards during the ceremony with three for "WAP", with Cardi becoming the first female artist to win Best Hip Hop Video twice (2019 and 2021). On October 28, 2021, Cardi B previewed her second album to Atlantic Records via her Instagram Story. She captioned "The money people liking the album sounds". On November 2, Cardi B was announced as the host of the 2021 American Music Awards (AMAs). The award show was held at the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles on November 21, and marked the most social telecast of the year per interactions across social media. During the ceremony, "Up" won the award for Favorite Hip Hop Song, making Cardi B the first artist to win the category three times. Cardi B featured on Summer Walker's 2021 album Still Over It on the opening track "Bitter". Warner Records released the soundtrack for Halle Berry's directorial debut film Bruised on November 19. Selected by executive producers Berry and Cardi B, the Netflix film's soundtrack features six original songs by female artists, including Cardi, H.E.R., City Girls, Flo Milli, Saweetie, and Latto, and seven additional female rap songs inspired by the film. In March 2022, Cardi B appeared on the extended version of Summer Walker and SZA's collaboration, "No Love". The following month, she featured on rapper Kay Flock's song, "Shake It"; it samples Akon's 2005 song "Belly Dancer (Bananza)". Also in April, Cardi guest-voiced as Sharki B, her "aquatic alter ego", on "The Seaweed Sway" episode of the Nickelodeon animated series Baby Shark's Big Show!—and performed a song of the same name. She appeared alongside Offset and her daughter. On July 1, 2022, Cardi B released "Hot Shit", featuring rappers Kanye West and Lil Durk, as the third single from her upcoming second studio album. The song was first announced during a BET Awards 2022 commercial break. On July 8 and 9, she headlined the 2022 Wireless Festival in London and Birmingham. Cardi B worked with cousin and fellow rapper GloRilla on the remix to her song "Tomorrow" titled "Tomorrow 2", which was released in September 2022. The remix peaked at number 9 on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Cardi's eleventh top-ten single on the chart. HipHopDX listed it as the "Best Hip-Hop Collaboration" of 2022 while it was also the highest-listed song by a female rapper on Billboard's 100 Best Songs of 2022 list. On October 1, Cardi B made a surprise appearance at the Inglewood show of Puerto Rican rapper Bad Bunny's concert tour, the World's Hottest Tour. In November, she signed with entertainment executive Irving Azoff's Full Stop Management. In December 2022, she gave a 35-minute private performance at the Miami Art Basel for which she was paid $1 million. Later that month, a remix of Spanish artist Rosalía's song, "Despechá", featuring Cardi, was released. Cardi B appeared as a surprise performer at the New York City shows of SZA and GloRilla's tours: the SOS Tour and Anyways, Life's Great Tour, in early 2023. In April, she served as one of three headliners of the inaugural Rolling Loud Thailand festival in Pattaya, along with Travis Scott and Chris Brown. In June, she featured on "Put It on da Floor Again", the remix to rapper Latto's "Put It on da Floor". It peaked at number 13 on the Hot 100, becoming Cardi's 20th top-twenty single on the chart. On June 4, Cardi B headlined the 2023 Summer Jam festival in Elmont, New York. ln July, she featured on "Point Me 2", the remix to drill rapper FendiDa Rappa's single "Point Me to the Slut's". Later that month, she collaborated with Offset on two tracks of his second solo album, Set It Off (2023): "Freaky" and "Jealousy". The latter was released as the lead single of the record; it samples Three 6 Mafia's "Jealous Ass Bitches". Cardi released "Bongos" featuring Megan Thee Stallion on September 8, 2023, as the fourth single of her upcoming second studio album. The song marks the pair's second collaboration after "WAP" (2020). The music video, directed by Tanu Muino, cost over $2 million. "Bongos" reached number 14 in the US. Also in September, the rapper confirmed that her second studio album would be released in 2024, after being previously iterated for a 2023 release. She revealed that she was "just holding it" because she felt "[like she is] missing a couple of things" and "gotta make sure that everything is just planned out". Cardi B reprised her voice role as Sharki B for the children's animated film, Baby Shark's Big Movie!, in which she appeared alongside Offset and their two children. It premiered in December on Paramount+ and Nickelodeon. She co-headlined TikTok's inaugural In the Mix festival on December 10 in Mesa, Arizona which was released as a concert special on Disney+ and Hulu on December 15. Cardi performed at the Fontainebleau Miami Beach, accompanied by DJ Gryffin, on December 31, 2023, which aired live for the 2024 edition of Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve. She released the promotional single "Like What (Freestyle)" on March 1, 2024, with an accompanying music video directed by Offset. Her first solo song since "Up" (2021), it is a freestyle of rapper Missy Elliot's "She's a Bitch" (1999). The track reached the top 40 in the US and became Cardi's 19th top-ten and 11th chart-topper on Hot Rap Songs and Hot Rap Digital Songs. It was followed by "Enough (Miami)" on March 15, which marked her 12th top-ten on the Hot 100 and seventh number-one on the Digital Songs chart. A remix of Flo Milli's "Never Lose Me" was released on the same day, featuring SZA and Cardi B. On March 11, Cardi joined Madonna onstage for a guest appearance at the Inglewood show of her Celebration Tour. She appeared on "Puntería" with Shakira, the opening track and eighth single of the latter's twelfth album Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran, released on March 22, 2024. In Billboard's "You Should Know" series, Cardi B said the first albums she ever purchased were by American entertainers Missy Elliott and Tweet, respectively. She has credited Puerto Rican rapper Ivy Queen and Jamaican dancehall artist Spice as influences, as well as Beyoncé, Lady Gaga, Lil' Kim, Madonna, and Selena. She has mentioned Chicago drill music as an important influence. When asked about the initial direction for her music, Cardi B said in an interview, "When I first started rapping [...] I liked certain songs from Khia and Trina, and they [were] fighting songs. I haven't heard fighting songs for a very long time," crediting the two female rappers for her aggressive rap style. She continued, saying "a lot of girls they cannot afford red bottoms, a lot of girls they cannot afford foreign cars [...] but I know that every girl has beef with a girl [...] I know that every bitch don't like some bitch, and it's like 'that's what I wanna rap about.'" She also credits growing up in the South Bronx and real life experiences as influences for her songwriting; "I wouldn't be able to rap about the things that I rap about now [if I hadn't grown up there]." Her first studio album, Invasion of Privacy, is primarily a hip hop record, which comprises elements of trap, Latin music, and R&B. Consequence of Sound described her flow as "acrobatic and nimble." AllMusic editor David Jeffries called Cardi B "a raw and aggressive rapper". Stereogum called her voice "a full-bodied New Yawk nasal bleat, the sort of thing that you've heard if someone has ever told you that you stupid for taking too long at swiping your MetroCard." They continued to call her voice "an unabashedly loud and sexual fuck-you New York honk—that translates perfectly to rap." In a 2017 Complex article about her, the editor wrote "unapologetic does not begin to describe the totally unfiltered and sheer Cardi B-ness of Cardi B's personality. She's a hood chick who's not afraid to be hood no matter the setting. Cardi B is Cardi B 24/7, 365, this is why she resonates with people, and that same energy comes out in her music." Her flow has been described as aggressive In 2019, NME described her lyrics as "sexually free" performed with "rapid" flow, and other publications have further described her lyrics as outspoken, while her punchlines have been praised, by such publications as Pitchfork and The Source, as clever and quotable. She possesses a New York-Dominican accent. Cardi B has defended her musical content featuring sexually-charged lyrics—like most contemporary female rappers; she stated that the content "seems like that's what people want to hear", since she faced negative reactions after releasing her more emotional song, "Be Careful". She has declared, "[Drill music] is the type of artist I always wanted to be: I like to rap about the streets, and I like to rap about my pussy. I don't give a fuck about it." She has stated that writing and performing songs about her personal life and relationships initially caused her a "weird and uncomfortable" feeling and shyness. Cardi B employs different vocal styles in her music; in "WAP" her vocal performance has been described as "throaty" and "staccato", while in "Up" she raps with alliteration, a tongue twister-run, and "some classically comedic Cardi" punch lines. In February 2017, she partnered with M.A.C and Rio Uribe's Gypsy Sport for a New York Fashion Week event. Her April appearance in i-D's "A-Z of Music" video was sponsored by designer Marc Jacobs, and she made the cover of The Fader's July/August 2017 Summer Music issue. Tom Ford's Cardi B-inspired lipstick, named after her, was released in September 2018. It sold out within 24 hours. In November, she released a clothing line collection with Fashion Nova. The same month she partnered with Reebok, promoting the brand's Aztrek sneaker. In partnership with Reebok, she released a footwear and apparel collection in 2020, inspired by her personal style and paying homage to "classic 80s styling" and motifs. She released her second collection with Reebok in 2021, titled "Let Me Be...In My World", comprising sneakers, tracksuits, and corsets, inspired by everyday life in New York City. The third collection with the brand, "Mommy & Me", was released in May 2021 in recognition of Mother's Day, which includes Cardi's iteration of Club C shoes for adults, children, and infants. The next, titled "Let Me Be...Enchanted" was released in two parts in June and July 2022; it was revealed to be inspired by "a state of enchantment and euphoria" and included crop tops, faux fur jackets, and leotards along with footwear. The fifth and final collection, "Let Me Be...Next Level Energy", was also released in two parts in September and December 2022, concluding her four-year partnership with Reebok. Inspired by Cardi B's "unmatched energy", the collection consisted of bodysuits, crop tops, footwear, leggings, and woven jackets—of a color palette based on crystals. Cardi B teamed up with Pepsi for three television commercials, which aired during the Super Bowl LIII, the 61st Annual Grammy Awards, and Christmas. In early 2019, Cardi also joined other hip hop artists (including her husband Offset, as part of Migos) in releasing her flavors of snack food Rap Snacks: two flavors of chips, and two of popcorn. The bags' artwork was designed by Jai Manselle and inspired by the cover of Invasion of Privacy. In December 2021, Cardi B partnered with PLBY Group Inc. as creative director in residence for Playboy and founding member of Centerfold, a creator-driven website in the works. The partnership also includes fashion and sexual wellness products. In February 2023, Cardi B and Offset partnered with McDonald's to create the Cardi B and Offset meal, which was launched on Valentine's Day. The meal was first announced in the 2023 McDonald's Super Bowl commercial which the couple appeared in. In October, she fronted the campaign for Skims' Cotton Collection. The campaign generated over $4 million in media impact value (MIV). In December 2023, she made her runway debut at the Balenciaga fall 2024 show in Los Angeles. In February 2024, Cardi B starred in NYX Cosmetics' inaugural Super Bowl commercial for Super Bowl LVIII, titled "Lips Only". An edited version of the advert—centered around the company's Duck Plump lip gloss—was broadcast during the commercial break, due to ribald themes of humor. In collaboration with Starco Brands, Cardi B launched a vodka-infused, vegan whipped cream, called Whipshots, in the US in December 2021. It has sold over five million cans as of March 2024. She premiered the series Cardi Tries via Facebook Messenger in December 2020, with herself as one of the executive producers. The web series ran for three seasons until April 2023. In 2022, Cardi B donated $100,000 to the elementary school she attended, I.S. 232 in The Bronx. Cardi B identifies as a feminist. The rapper has been called "unabashedly, directly political" and often uses social media to advocate for causes she believes in, such as gun control. During the 2016 presidential primaries, she warned her fans of President Trump's immigration policies and encouraged them to vote for Senator Bernie Sanders. At the Grammy Awards in 2018, she appeared in a video along with Hillary Clinton to narrate a portion of Fire and Fury, Michael Wolff's insider's account of Trump's administration, and stated "Why am I even reading this shit? I can't believe this. I can't believe—this is how he really lives his life?" Early in 2018 she used her social media to demand transparency on tax policy, asking for detailed information on how her taxpayer dollars are being spent in New York state and criticizing the maintenance of its streets, prisons, and public transportation. Cardi B endorsed Sanders once again in his second bid for the presidency in the 2020 United States presidential election, while praising U.S. Representative Tim Ryan. She stated that one of the reasons for her endorsement is Sanders' long-time involvement in supporting underprivileged minorities and "people getting Medicare because he knows they can't afford it," while Politico argued that she "might be one of Bernie's most powerful 2020 allies." She has used her social pages to raise awareness for victims of police brutality, and has encouraged people to vote for mayors, judges and district attorneys in local elections. In a conversation with Democratic candidate Joe Biden for Elle, they discussed Medicare, free college tuition, and racial equality. According to a study published by The Hollywood Reporter, Cardi B ranked as the fifth most influential celebrity, and fourth among Generation Z, for the 2020 presidential election. In November 2023, Cardi B stated that she no longer supports Joe Biden for president, saying that she would "not [be] endorsing no fucking president's no more" as a result of Biden's "spending on wars". She has praised President Franklin D. Roosevelt for advocating for the Social Security program and the New Deal project. She said of President Roosevelt, "he helped us get over the Depression, all while he was in a wheelchair. Like, this man was suffering from polio at the time of his presidency, and yet all he was worried about was trying to make America great—make America great again for real. He's the real 'Make America Great Again,' because if it wasn't for him, old people wouldn't even get Social Security." Sanders has praised her for her "leading role" in calling attention to Social Security. Cardi has a noted affinity for Christian Louboutin heels, a running theme in her song "Bodak Yellow". She has also mentioned her affinity for cheap, fast fashion brands stating "I don't care if it cost $20 or $15. If it looks good on me, it looks good on me". During an interview in early 2017, Cardi B spoke on being rejected by some fashion designers. Cardi wore vintage Thierry Mugler to the 2019 Grammy Awards, with an i-D article stating that the fashion house's "resurgence onto the fashion scene can almost single-handedly be attributed" to the Swarovski crystal-embroidered crinoline sheath gown she wore at the ceremony. Mugler's collaboration with Cardi B marked the second time in 25 years that the Paris house opened its archives to dress a celebrity, the first being Beyoncé for her 2009 concert tour. W magazine credited the "WAP" music video for popularizing the Mugler bodysuit in the mainstream. Cardi has acknowledged Mugler as one of the first designers to "take a major chance on [her]" for their fashion collaborations. Vogue, The Telegraph, Time, and Vibe have referred to her as a fashion icon. An article from Vogue noted she "is famous for her statement getups—whether she's rocking archival Mugler on the red carpet, or dripping in Chanel while sitting courtside at a basketball game." Her over-the-top manicures, designed by nail artist Jenny Bui and studded with Swarovski crystals, has become a part of her signature look. Editor Christian Allaire from the magazine in 2021 commented that her signature "bold" ensembles "create a spectacle" during fashion weeks. In 2018, she became the first female rapper in the US to appear on the cover of Vogue magazine. Photographed by Annie Leibovitz, the cover, one of four for the January 2019 issue that included Stella McCartney, features her in a red and white Michael Kors dress and matching red Jimmy Choo shoes, while holding her daughter, Kulture. In 2019, the Council of Fashion Designers of America included her on their list of "28 Black Fashion Forces". Vogue editor-in-chief Anna Wintour commended her fashion sense, declaring that she "completely rethought [her] opinion of Cardi B's style" after the 2019 Met Gala, where the rapper wore a Thom Browne-designed burgundy gown that extends outward in concentric circles for about ten feet and was inspired by the female form. Cardi B became the face of Balenciaga's ad campaign for the winter 2020 season. The campaign includes billboards in several international locations, such as the Louvre museum. Vogue's Brooke Bobb commented, "This is Cardi's first campaign for a luxury fashion house, though she's definitely no stranger to the Parisian style scene", citing her floral printed Richard Quinn ensemble "that literally covered her from head to toe" and her being "a front row fixture" at high fashion shows, adding, "She and her stylist Kollin Carter have been wildly successful in carving out a much-needed space for Cardi within the fashion industry, and they've cultivated a personal style that is all her own while being inspiring to all". In 2020, Cardi B became the first female rapper to be awarded by the FN Achievement Awards when she won the Style Influencer of the Year award, which was presented to her by Christian Louboutin. In a press release for the awards show, she was called an "influence just about everything in pop culture—from music, fashion and style to social media, politics and even public service". In 2022, Rolling Stone ranked her as the second most-stylish woman in music, behind Lady Gaga, and GQ considered her "one of fashion's preeminent risk-takers." Cardi B has been referred to as the "Reigning Queen of Hip Hop" by multiple publications, including Billboard, The Hollywood Reporter, Entertainment Weekly, Omaha World-Herald, Black Enterprise, Newsweek, and The A.V. Club, and as the "Queen of Rap" by NME, Essence, Harper's Bazaar Malaysia, The Jakarta Post, Uproxx, iHeartRadio, Geo TV, Vanity Fair, Joe, Boston Herald, Refinery 29, France 24, and Nigerian media The Guardian, BBC News, and Daily Trust. Spin staff credited her for opening "the table to a new generation of pop artists remaking American music in their own image and accents," as Cardi B "recognized that POC artists no longer need to pander or soften themselves in order to become household names." Billboard editors stated that with "Bodak Yellow"'s commercial success, "she left an indelible mark on the summer of 2017, not only because she rewrote history, but she gave hope to the have nots...". Several publications have credited "I Like It", the first Latin trap song to reach number one on the Hot 100, for introducing the "musical movement" to a mainstream, massive audience. Billboard's Carl Lamarre considered "WAP"'s achievements "a clever Trojan horse for the myriad ways Cardi influences the culture with every move she makes." The Wall Street Journal's Neil Shah stated in 2020 that her breakthrough and success influenced "today's female-rap renaissance," while Genius staff credited her for "helping jumpstart a new wave of female hip-hop signings and promotion at labels," and NPR Music commented that the "renaissance" of the dynamism of women in rap grew "in enthusiasm and breadth" since Cardi's "first historic run" in 2017. Similarly, Clover Hope's book The Motherlode (2021) stated that Invasion of Privacy "jump-started a new era for women rappers in which success felt much more tangible" as Cardi B "multiplied the wealth of talent and resurrected the idea that numerous women who controlled their own stories could dominate rap at once." The New Yorker has credited her for "changing a genre that has rarely allowed for more than one female superstar at a time." Uproxx noted Cardi B for promoting up-and-coming female rappers; "[she is] choosing to use her position at the height of stardom to open doors for other women to flourish in hip-hop at a greater level than any since the Golden Era and 'Ladies First'," considering it "something of a departure from tradition; for the decade previous to Cardi's precipitous come-up, it seemed hip-hop had an unspoken, Highlander-esque rule in place regarding women." Variety deemed her a "hip-hop icon", and The Independent called her "the people's pop culture icon", writing that she "has become one of the most recognisable cultural figures of the past 10 years". NPR defined "Cardi B effect" as "a branding power rooted in specific authenticity, created and permeated by rapper Cardi B" and noticed that with her breakthrough, "brands finally started to become hip to [her] effect, noticing the cultural markers outside of the rap world that were proving it wasn't limited to clubs, concerts and radio." Business magazine Inc. stated that her success "shows how social media changed everything we knew about traditional marketing and media", which no longer relies on a "well-thought marketing scheme or millions of dollars in advertising." In 2019, a life-sized sculpture of her was on display at the Brooklyn Museum, as part of Spotify's RapCaviar "Pantheon". Bloomberg reported that her data bill helped to boost Ghana's GDP growth in 2019, after it was part of a concert tour. She inspired the creation of the sitcom Partners in Rhyme, executively produced by MC Lyte about a young woman in high school who "aspires to be the next Cardi B." P-Valley creator and executive producer Katori Hall cited her an inspiration for the TV series, and credited her for "helping prepare the public" for its storyline. Several artists have cited Cardi B's work as an inspiration, including Rosalía, Olivia Rodrigo, Jazmine Sullivan, Selena Gomez, Blackpink, Spice, Greta Gerwig, Nathy Peluso, Rubi Rose, María Becerra, and Abigail Asante. Cardi B has been credited for supporting and uniting female rappers in the industry, with a writer from Uproxx considering her co-sign "the new Drake effect" for women in hip hop. Cardi B is the recipient of numerous accolades, including a Grammy Award, eight Billboard Music Awards (including three consecutive Top Rap Female Artist wins), six Guinness World Records, six American Music Awards, four MTV Video Music Awards, six BET Awards (including Album of the Year), and fourteen BET Hip Hop Awards. Invasion of Privacy—which made her the first female rapper to win the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album as a solo artist—became the first female rap album in fifteen years to be nominated for a Grammy Award for Album of the Year. Time included her on their annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2018. She received the ASCAP award for Songwriter of the Year in 2019, becoming the first female rapper to win the award. She received the honor for the second time in 2020, making her the first female songwriter to win the award twice. In 2020, Cardi B became the first female rapper to be named Woman of the Year at the Billboard Women in Music Awards. Cardi B is the female rapper with the most Billboard Hot 100 number one singles (5) and the one with the most total weeks on the top position (16). "I Like It" became the first song led by a female rapper to surpass a billion streams on Spotify, making her the first woman in hip hop with multiple billion-streamers on the service, with a total of three so far. With the singles "Taki Taki" and "WAP" she became the only female rapper to top the global Spotify chart multiple times. Since August 2020, "WAP" holds the record of the biggest first-week streams for a song in the United States. Invasion of Privacy was the top female rap album of the 2010s, according to the Billboard 200 decade-end chart. It became the longest-charting album by a female rapper on the Billboard 200, and the most-streamed female rap album on Spotify. Cardi is the female rapper with the most Diamond-certified songs by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) (3): "Bodak Yellow", which made her the first female rapper to have a song certified Diamond; "Girls Like You", which made her the only female rapper to achieve multiple Diamond-certified songs; and "I Like It", a tie for the most among women artists. Cardi B has topped twice Pitchfork's annual list of best songs of the year (2017 and 2020). Billboard staff and Rolling Stone ranked her debut album number 13 and 34 on their critics' lists of the best albums of the 2010s respectively, both the highest rank for a female rapper for the decade. Cardi B has become the highest-certified female rapper of all time on the RIAA's Top Artists (Digital Singles) ranking, with 54 million certified units, also being among the highest-certified female artists overall. In October, 2022, five years after her major-label debut, she reached 100 million units sold in RIAA certifications, across her album, singles and guest appearances. In the US, Cardi has achieved three times the best-performing song of the year by a female artist—the first act to do so this century—in 2017, 2018, and 2020. As of 2021, "I Like It" is the most-streamed song by a female rapper in the United Kingdom. In August 2021, "Bodak Yellow" made Cardi B the only female rapper to have two videos on her YouTube channel with more than 1 billion views, joining "I Like It", and became the fastest solo female rap song to reach that mark on the platform. Cardi is the only female rapper ranked on Billboard's Greatest Hot 100 Hits of All Time, with "Girls Like You" at number 30. Cardi B defined herself as a practicing Catholic. In 2016, Cardi B said that, while working as a stripper during her younger years, she used to drug and rob men to get money. Following controversies on the matter, sparked in 2019, she defended herself by saying that she took money from them because they "wasted her time by falling asleep", and then "kept coming back." She identifies as bisexual. In connection with the Me Too movement, she has discussed being sexually assaulted in the past while working as a stripper. In a 2018 interview, Cardi B talked about being Afro-Latina and Afro-Caribbean: We are Caribbean people. [...] Some people want to decide if you're black or not, depending on your skin complexion, because they don't understand Caribbean people or our culture. [...] I don't got to tell you that I'm black. I expect you to know about it. When my father taught me about Caribbean countries, he told me that Europeans took over our lands. That's why we all speak different languages. [...] Just like everybody else, we came over here the same way. I hate when people try to take my roots from me. Because we know that there's African roots inside of us. As of early 2017, Cardi B began dating fellow rapper Offset. They became engaged on October 27, 2017. On April 7, 2018, during her second performance on Saturday Night Live, Cardi B revealed her pregnancy; she was about six months (24 weeks) pregnant at the time. On June 25, 2018, TMZ found a marriage license revealing Cardi B and Offset had actually secretly married in September 2017, one month before the public proposal. She later confirmed this in a social media post. Cardi B gave birth to her daughter on July 10, 2018. In December 2018, she announced on Instagram that she and Offset had separated, though the pair later reunited. In February 2019, the couple made a public appearance for the Grammys. He accompanied her onstage during her acceptance speech for Best Rap Album. In September 2020, it was reported that Cardi B had filed for divorce from Offset, but the following month it was revealed they were back together. In June 2021, Cardi B revealed she was pregnant with her second child, a boy. She gave birth to her son on September 4, 2021. On the fifth anniversary of her marriage, Cardi B announced she was planning her official wedding. In December 2023, Cardi B shared via Instagram that she had been "single for a minute," confirming that she and Offset were no longer together. On October 1, 2018, Cardi B was accused of an alleged assault of two female bartenders. The victims claimed that Cardi B and her entourage "threw bottles and alcohol at them." She denied involvement. She was charged with two misdemeanors: assault and reckless endangerment. Cardi B appeared in court for her arraignment on December 7, 2018, after she did not show up for the originally scheduled date due to a scheduling conflict, according to her attorney. On June 21, 2019, a jury indicted Cardi B on 14 charges, including two counts of felony assault with intent to cause serious physical injury, stemming from the incident. She was arraigned on June 25, 2019, and pleaded not guilty on all charges. On September 15, 2022, she pleaded guilty to third-degree assault and second-degree reckless endangerment, resulting in a sentence of 15 days of community service. On January 24, 2022, Cardi won a million-dollar defamation verdict against YouTuber Latasha Kebe (Tasha K) for waging a "malicious campaign" to hurt her reputation by posting false rumors. She stated that the lies had led her to contemplate suicide in 2019. The jury issued a verdict that Cardi B had been defamed and awarded $1.25 million in damages. Further proceedings brought the total fine against Kebe to $3.82 million. On March 25, 2022, Cardi, her sister Hennessy, and Hennessy's girlfriend won a defamation lawsuit filed against them by three men over an incident at a Suffolk County beach. In July 2023, Cardi B threw her microphone into the crowd at a Las Vegas concert of her's after a fan threw a liquid at her. Subsequently, one fan attempted to press charges but the Clark County Police Department following an investigation decided not to move forward with a case. Cardi B sparked controversy after throwing one of her high heel shoes at and attempting to physically attack fellow rapper Nicki Minaj at a New York Fashion Week after-party in September 2018; bodyguards intervened before she could reach Minaj, leaving her a large bump on her forehead. Following the altercation, she alleged on Instagram that Minaj had previously "liked" social media comments that spoke negatively of Cardi B's ability to take care of her newborn daughter. Minaj denied the allegations on her Queen Radio show and expressed embarrassment at the fight. She accused Cardi B of building "her career off of sympathy and payola" and of bribing DJs and radio outlets with sex to play her records. Minaj also criticized Cardi B's rapping ability, saying, "Do you know what it’s like to sit in your room for hours writing raps? You came into my fucking culture. I never had to fuck a DJ to play my songs." Minaj also called Cardi B a "disgusting pig" for allegedly cyberbullying a guest caller on Minaj's show and unearthed posts calling dark-skinned black women “cockroaches", which she had defended earlier by saying that it is a derogatory term in the Bronx used for anyone being disrespectful. Cardi B was on the cover of the 2019 spring fashion issue of Harper's Bazaar, which featured her in a Cinderella-themed photo shoot wearing a red gown and leaving a shoe behind. Some interpreted this as a reference to the incident. After the release of "Girls" in May 2018, a collaboration where she had a featured verse, Cardi B responded to accusations of the song trivializing LGBT relationships; she tweeted, "We never try to cause harm or had bad intentions with the song." She went on to add, "I personally myself had experiences with other women." Invasion of Privacy (2018) United States portal Dominican Republic portal Caribbean portal Music portal Biography portal New York City portal Afro-Caribbean music Black Hispanic and Latino Americans LGBT culture in New York City List of self-identifying LGBTQ New Yorkers List of highest-certified music artists in the United States List of artists who reached number one in the United States Dominican Americans Hispanics and Latinos in New York List of most-followed Instagram accounts English pronunciation: /ˈbɛlkəliːz ɑːlˈmænzɑːr/ BEL-kə-leez ahl-MAN-zar, Spanish pronunciation: [alˈmansaɾ]. "CARDI B | KSR Group". "iamcardib on Twitter: "A lot of people calling me a immigrant lol my mum is Trini &spaniard my pop Dominican i was born in wash heights raised in The Bronx"". Twitter. April 21, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2019. "Cardi B: Unfiltered, Unapologetic, Unbowed". Vogue. December 9, 2019. "Cardi B talks of her 'Afro-Latina' roots to educate people on race and nationality". April 2, 2021. Yeung, Neil Z. "Cardi B Biography". AllMusic.com. Retrieved April 8, 2018. "Cardi B's So-Called Life". Retrieved April 22, 2018. "The One Thing Cardi B Is 'Fed Up' About Regarding Her Race". Atlanta Black Star. February 6, 2018. "Cardi B talks sexuality, society and being straight-up | Dazed". Dazeddigital.com. September 16, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "iamcardib on Twitter: "I'm from HIGHBRIDGE"". Twitter. November 16, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B on Twitter: "Just a bum bitch from Highbridge"". Twitter. August 30, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Salud, April (April 25, 2017). "Cardi B Shares 5 Things You Should Know About Her". Billboard. Retrieved July 25, 2017. Overdeep, Meghan (November 7, 2017). "Cardi B Reveals How She Got Her Unique Name". InStyle. Archived from the original on April 9, 2018. Retrieved October 29, 2018. "iamcardib on Twitter: "Bitch I been a big time Blood since I was 16 sooo fuck is you talking bout ..ya just never peep it "". Twitter. May 6, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B. Blood Anthem Music Video 'Red Bars'". Bossip.com. April 6, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Weber, Caity Weaver, Christian (April 9, 2018). "Cardi B on Her Unstoppable Rise, Repping Gang Life, and the Peril of Butt Injections". GQ. Retrieved April 9, 2018.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Cardi B Gets Emotional Talking to Students at Her High School". Ebony. November 30, 2018. Decker, Megan (May 14, 2018). "You Definitely Didn't Know These Fun Facts About Cardi B". Harper's BAZAAR. Retrieved May 7, 2019. "Here Are 14 Things You Never Knew About Cardi B". Retrieved March 20, 2018. "Cardi B's So-Called Life". The FADER. Archived from the original on March 2, 2016. "'Love & Hip-Hop' Star Cardi B Says Stripping Changed Her Life". Centrictv.com. January 13, 2016. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "#OneCrazyAssStory – Cardi B's Basement Butt Job". YouTube. March 1, 2016. "Flashback: Cardi B on How Stripping Influenced Her Cosmetic Surgery". YouTube. September 26, 2017. Retrieved October 4, 2017. Estevez, Marjua (November 15, 2016). "Cardi B Doesn't Give A F**k, And Neither Should You (Digital Cover)". Vibe.com. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "How Cardi B Told Her Mom She Was a Stripper Kocktails with Khloe FYI". YouTube. "#LHHNY Cardi B. Says She Started Stripping To Escape Domestic Violence". Bossip.com. January 18, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Carter, Terry (August 2, 2018). "7 Fun Facts About Cardi B, the Feminist Rapper Taking Over the Music Industry". Popsugar.com. Retrieved October 27, 2018. Mantini, Natalia. "Cardi B on 'Love & Hip Hop,' Haters and Hoeism". Complex.com. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "30 Eccentric Facts About Cardi B". The Fact Site. July 2, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Kameir, Rawiwa (June 22, 2017). "Cardi B Did It Her Way". The Fader. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Kameir, Rawiya (February 29, 2016). "Cardi B's So-Called Life". The Fader. Retrieved July 2, 2017. Hope, Clover (June 1, 2016). "America Loves Cardi B, Love & Hip-Hop's Best New Cast Member". Jezebel. Nikas, Joanna (August 17, 2017). "An Afternoon With Cardi B as She Makes Money Moves". The New York Times. Retrieved October 4, 2017. "Cardi B Announces Decision To Leave Cast Of Love & Hip Hop: New York". Hip-Hop Wired. December 30, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Hate It Or Love It?!?! Shaggy Feat. Popcaan & Cardi B – "Boom Boom" [Listen]". Bossip. November 26, 1997. "Cardi B Drops Music Video "Cheap Ass Weave"". VH1. December 15, 2015. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B – "Cheap Ass Weave" [Music Video]". MaseTV.com. December 18, 2015. Archived from the original on December 17, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B – Gangsta Bitch Music Vol 1 Mixtape – Stream & Download". Datpiff.com. Archived from the original on July 17, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B's 'Gangsta Bitch Music Vol. 1' Is the First Good Record to Come Out of 'Love and Hip-Hop'". Noisey.vice.com. November 15, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B Is Everybody's Homegirl In 'VIBE Viva' Cover Shoot". Hypehair.com. November 16, 2016. Archived from the original on August 8, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B & The KSR Group Drop 'The Underestimated' Mixtape [AUDIO] – HOT 97 – #1 For Hip Hop". "Bonus – Behind the Sense: Women's Intuition & Cardi B Joins the Holiday Fun – Uncommon Sense Live". MTV. December 9, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Watch How Cardi B Told Her Mom She Was a Stripper Video – Kocktails With Khloe | FYI". Fyi.tv. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Tisha Campbell & Cardi B On Kocktails With Khloe". Bossip.com. April 7, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B Joins the Cast of BET's Being Mary Jane". VH1. November 2, 2016. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B Joins Being Mary Jane Cast". Latina.com. January 5, 2017. Archived from the original on March 2, 2018. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Saunders, Cherie (January 31, 2017). "Mary Jane Goes Viral After Reading Cardi B. on Tonight's 'Being Mary Jane' (Watch Clip)". EURweb.com. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B Once Played With a Massive Dildo in Local Sex Toy Store Ad". Billboard. Retrieved March 29, 2019. Miller, Gregory E. (April 5, 2018). "Cardi B's meteoric rise from stripper to superstar". New York Post. Retrieved March 29, 2019. Ivey, Justin (January 20, 2017). "Stream Cardi B's 'Gangsta Bitch Music Vol. 2' Mixtape – XXL". XXL. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Espinoza, Joshua (January 20, 2017). "Cardi B 'Gangsta Bitch Music Vol. 2" Mixtape". Complex.com. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B For MAC Cosmetics x Gypsy Sport Event!1966 Magazine". 1966mag.com. February 8, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B Reportedly Signs Deal With Atlantic Records". Hotnewhiphop.com. February 28, 2017. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B Reportedly Signs Mega Deal With Atlantic Records". Vibe.com. March 1, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "The LOX Announce 'Filthy America...It's Beautiful Tour' With Lil Kim & Remy Ma". Billboard. January 25, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Burgess, Omar. "Remy Ma Is Already Performing "ShETHER" on Tour With Lil Kim". Complex.com. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "i-D's 'A-Z of Music' Video & Composition Featuring Kodie Shane, Cardi B & More: Exclusive". Billboard. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Ice Cube, T.I. and More Help Kick Off 'VH1 Hip Hop Squares' – XXL". Xxlmag.com. March 13, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Adrienne Bailon Has An Unhealthy Obsession With Cardi B – Hip Hop Squares". VH1. April 3, 2013. Archived from the original on August 15, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Michel, Sarah (April 4, 2017). "Cardi B Isn't the Same Girl She Was on Love & Hip Hop And Reminds People Who She Is in "Red Barz" Freestyle". VH1. Archived from the original on May 29, 2022. "Cardi B's Reaction to Being Nominated for a BET Award Is Too Cute | Music | News". BET.com. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Norwin, Alyssa (June 23, 2017). "Cardi B Fears Winning BET Award Over 'Idol' Remy Ma: It Would Be 'Awkward' – Hollywood Life". Hollywoodlife.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B Runs Through A Medley Of Songs At BET Awards After-Party (VIDEO)". Allhiphop.com. June 26, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Williams, Aaron (June 26, 2017). "Cardi B's BET Afterparty Performance Proves She Was Robbed At The Show". Uproxx.com. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Did Cardi B Betray Nicki Minaj?". Allhiphop.com. June 13, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Remy Ma Disses Nicki Minaj at 2017 Summer Jam, Brings Cardi B, Lil Kim on Stage – XXL". Xxlmag.com. June 12, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Williams, Aaron (June 22, 2017). "Cardi B's Atlantic Records Deal Is Confirmed In Her 'Fader' Cover". Uproxx.com. Retrieved July 17, 2017. Nikas, Joanna (August 17, 2017). "An Afternoon With Cardi B as She Makes Money Moves". The New York Times. Retrieved April 8, 2018. "Cardi B Is All About the Cash on New Song 'Bodak Yellow (Money Moves)' – XXL". Xxlmag.com. June 16, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "New Music: Cardi B – 'Bodak Yellow (Money Moves)'". Rap-Up. June 16, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Wendy Williams – Cardi B Performs "Bodak Yellow"". Wendyshow.com. Archived from the original on September 23, 2017. Retrieved October 4, 2017. "Cardi B Performs 'Bodak Yellow' On 'Jimmy Kimmel Live': Watch". Billboard. Retrieved April 28, 2018. "Cardi B is now the first female solo rapper to top the Billboard 100 chart since 1998". Vox.com. September 25, 2017. Retrieved October 4, 2017. "Cardi B's "Bodak Yellow" Breaks Another Billboard Hot 100 Record". HNHH. October 9, 2017. Trust, Gary. "J Balvin, Willy William & Beyoncé Blast to No. 3 on Billboard Hot 100 With 'Mi Gente', Cardi B No. 1 for Third Week". Billboard. Retrieved October 9, 2017. "Cardi B Becomes First Person of Dominican Descent to Reach No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100". Remezcla.com. September 25, 2017. Retrieved October 4, 2017. Richards, Chris (December 6, 2017). "Best music of 2017: Cardi B paints the world 'Bodak Yellow'". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 6, 2017. "The 100 Best Songs of 2017". Pitchfork. December 10, 2017. Retrieved December 19, 2017. Grammy Nominations 2018, November 28, 2017 Cline, Georgette (October 10, 2017). "Cardi B Performs "Bodak Yellow" at 2017 BET Hip Hop Awards - XXL". XXL. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Zellner, Xander (December 19, 2017). "Cardi B Makes History on Hot 100 With Third Career-Opening Top 10". Billboard. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Anderson, Trevor (November 10, 2017). "Cardi B Makes History With First Three Top 10s on Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs Chart". Billboard. Retrieved November 12, 2017. "The Weeknd, Migos, Lil Uzi Vert & Cardi B to Perform at Power 105.1's Powerhouse 2017". Billboard.com. August 28, 2017. Retrieved December 22, 2017. Estevez, Marjua (December 19, 2017). "Ozuna & Cardi B Head to Jamaica to Trade Bilingual Rhymes in 'La Modelo' Video Debut: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved December 19, 2017. "New Music: Cardi B feat. 21 Savage – 'Bartier Cardi'". Rap-Up. December 21, 2017. Retrieved December 22, 2017. "Cardi B and Bruno Mars drop 'Finesse' — listen now!". EW.com. Retrieved January 8, 2018. France, Lisa Respers. "Cardi B surpasses Beyoncé on the charts". CNN. Retrieved January 19, 2018. Clark, Anne Victoria. "Cardi B Drops New Single 'Be Careful'". Vulture. Retrieved March 30, 2018. Aniftos, Rania (March 26, 2018). "Cardi B Reveals 'Invasion of Privacy' Album Release Date & Cover Art". Billboard. Retrieved March 27, 2018. Kaplan, Ilana (April 13, 2018). "Cardi B breaks Taylor Swift record on Apple Music with her debut album Invasion of Privacy". The Independent. Retrieved July 27, 2018. Asward, Jem (April 6, 2018). "Album Review: Cardi B's 'Invasion of Privacy'". Variety. Retrieved April 9, 2018. Caraminaca, Jon (April 10, 2018). "Cardi B Is a New Rap Celebrity Loyal to Rap's Old Rules on 'Invasion of Privacy'". The New York Times. Retrieved April 15, 2018. Trust, Gary (March 16, 2018). "Cardi B Bests Beyonce for the Most Simultaneous Hot 100 Hits Among Women". Billboard. Retrieved March 16, 2018. Kaufman, Gil (April 13, 2018). "Cardi B Sets Apple Music Record For Most Streamed Album by Female Artist in One Week". Billboard. Retrieved April 13, 2018. Caulfield, Keith (March 15, 2018). "Cardi B's 'Invasion of Privacy' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Retrieved March 15, 2018. McIntyre, Hugh (February 19, 2019). "Ariana Grande's New No. 1 Album Has The Biggest Streaming Week Ever For A Woman". Forbes. Retrieved June 18, 2019. "Cardi B is Pregnant, Confirms Pregnancy on 'SNL'". Billboard. April 8, 2018. "Cardi B's Tonight Show Co-Hosting Gig Was a Stroke of Brilliance". Vanity Fair. Retrieved April 28, 2018. Trust, Gary (July 2, 2018). "Cardi B Becomes First Female Rapper With Two Billboard Hot 100 No. 1s, as 'I Like It', With Bad Bunny & J Balvin, Follows 'Bodak Yellow' to the Top". Billboard. Retrieved July 2, 2018. "What J-Lo and Shakira missed in their Super Bowl halftime show". The Washington Post. "Best Summer Songs of All Time". Rolling Stone. May 24, 2020. Trust, Gary (September 24, 2018). "Maroon 5 & Cardi B's 'Girls Like You' Hits No. 1 on Hot 100, Eminem & 5 Seconds of Summer New to Top 10". Billboard. Retrieved September 24, 2018. "Halsey's 'Without Me' Tops Billboard Hot 100, Becoming Her First No. 1 as a Lead Artist". Billboard. Retrieved April 18, 2019. "IFPI Best Selling Singles 2018". Billboard. March 6, 2019. Retrieved March 6, 2019. Trust, Gary (July 30, 2018). "Drake Tops Hot 100 For Third Week With 'In My Feelings,' Passes Rihanna For Most Weeks at No. 1 This Decade". Billboard. Retrieved July 30, 2018. Trust, Gary (October 15, 2018). "Maroon 5 & Cardi B's 'Girls Like You' Tops Hot 100 For Fourth Week, Lady Gaga & Bradley Cooper Hit Top 10". Billboard. Retrieved October 16, 2018. Trust, Gary (October 29, 2018). "Maroon 5 and Cardi B Rule Billboard Hot 100 For Sixth Week, Post Malone and Swae Lee Debut in Top 10". Billboard. Retrieved October 30, 2018. Trust, Gary (February 11, 2019). "Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved February 11, 2019. Trust, Gary (September 20, 2019). "Stuck By Ya: Post Malone & Swae Lee's 'Sunflower' Ties Record For Most Weeks Spent in Hot 100's Top 10". Billboard. Retrieved September 20, 2019. Holmes, Charles (December 21, 2018). "Cardi B Raps, Twerks, Breastfeeds In Extravagantly NSFW 'Money' Video". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 21, 2018. Nordyke, Kimberly (August 20, 2018). "VMAs: Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Lewis, Hilary (September 12, 2018). "American Music Awards: Drake, Cardi B Lead 2018 Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Nordyke, Kimberly (October 9, 2018). "American Music Awards: Taylor Swift Wins Artist of the Year, Sets New Record". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 9, 2018. "Instagram Flexin: Cardi B Becomes 1st Female Rapper To Top Spotify's Global Chart". Hip Hop DX. October 7, 2018. Retrieved October 9, 2018. "RIAA – Gold & Platinum: Top Artists (Digital Singles)". Recording Industry Association of America. Fernandez, Suzette (October 30, 2018). "Cardi B Says She Won't Allow Her Baby to Forget Her in 'People en Espanol' Cover Story". Billboard. Retrieved October 31, 2018. "How Cardi B became a pop culture phenomenon". Entertainment Weekly. November 29, 2018. Retrieved November 29, 2018. Lyle, Ashley (December 3, 2018). "Cardi B, Drake, Travis Scott & More Honored at Ebony Power 100 Gala". Billboard. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Aswad, Jem (December 3, 2018). "Apple Music Unveils Its Top 100 Songs and Albums for 2018". Variety. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Apple Music's Top 100 Global Albums Aniftos, Rania (December 4, 2018). "Spotify Announces 2018 'Wrapped' Most Streamed Stats: Drake & Ariana Grande Top the List". Billboard. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Aswad, Jem (December 3, 2018). "Apple Music Unveils Its Top 100 Songs and Albums for 2018". Variety. Retrieved December 4, 2018. "Billboard's 100 Best Songs of 2018: Critics' Picks". Billboard. December 11, 2018. Retrieved December 11, 2018. "The 10 Best Albums of 2018". Time. November 16, 2018. Retrieved November 16, 2018. "50 Best Albums of 2018". Rolling Stone. December 13, 2018. Retrieved December 13, 2018. "Cardi B by Taraji P. Henson". Time. April 19, 2018. Retrieved April 19, 2018. "Best Albums of The Decade: The 2010s". NME. November 29, 2019. "2019 GRAMMY Awards: Complete Nominations List". The Recording Academy. December 7, 2018. Retrieved December 7, 2018. Powell, Emma (December 7, 2018). "Grammy nominations 2019 LIVE: Full list of nominees from Lady Gaga to Taylor Swift and Cardi B". Evening Standard. Retrieved December 7, 2018. "Cardi B becomes first solo female artist to win Best Rap Album at Grammys". Entertainment Weekly. February 10, 2019. Retrieved February 10, 2019. Warner, Denise (April 4, 2019). "Cardi B Leads 2019 Billboard Music Awards Nominations With 21". billboard. Retrieved April 4, 2019. Lynch, Joe (May 1, 2019). "2019 Billboard Music Awards Winners: The Complete List". Billboard. "The biggest rapper in the world was in Nebraska, okurrr?". Omaha World-Herald. July 27, 2019. "Hear Cardi B, Bruno Mars' Flirtatious New Song 'Please Me'". Rolling Stone. February 15, 2019. "Cardi B & Bruno Mars Take Over an After-Hours Taco Joint in 'Please Me' Video: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved March 2, 2019. Peters, Mitchell (March 2, 2019). "Cardi B Breaks Houston Rodeo Attendance Record, Cites Selena Quintanilla as Inspiration". Billboard. Retrieved March 2, 2019. Anderson, Trevor (March 8, 2019). "Cardi B Replaces Herself Atop Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop Chart as Pardison Fontaine's 'Backin It Up' Hits No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved March 8, 2019. "Press Single and Official Artwork This Week !!!". May 27, 2019. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2019 – via Instagram. "Cardi B – Press [Official Music Video]". Linkfire/YouTube. June 26, 2019. Bloom, Madison (June 24, 2019). "BET Awards 2019: Watch Cardi B Open the Show With "Press"". Pitchfork. Retrieved July 13, 2019. "The Source |Cardi B Announces First Dates of Debut Arena Tour". February 26, 2019. "Cardi B Leads 2019 BET Hip Hop Awards With 10 Nominations". Billboard. Retrieved September 12, 2019. Wiseman, Andreas (March 19, 2019). "Hustlers': Cardi B, Lili Reinhart, Keke Palmer & Julia Stiles Join Constance Wu & Jennifer Lopez In Avenging Strippers Pic". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 19, 2019. N'Duka, Amanda (April 15, 2019). "Jennifer Lopez-Starring 'Hustlers' Film Gets September Release Date From STX". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 15, 2019. O'Connell, Michael (November 13, 2018). "Cardi B and Chance the Rapper Will Judge Hip-Hop Competition 'Rhythm + Flow' for Netflix". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 13, 2018. Cardi B, hip-hop's current reigning queen "Rhythm + Flow". Netflix. Salaudeen, Aisha (December 5, 2019). "Cardi B is set to perform for the first time in Nigeria and Ghana". CNN. Retrieved December 9, 2019. "2020 GRAMMY Awards: Complete Nominees List". Grammy.com. November 20, 2019. Retrieved November 20, 2019. "Cardi B tops Spotify's most-streamed female rapper list". Hola. December 3, 2019. "Top 100 Albums of the 2010s". Consequence of Sound. December 30, 2019. Rowley, Glenn (March 17, 2020). "Cardi B 'Coronavirus Remix' Continues to Explode, Gets a Nod From Miley Cyrus & Cody Simpson". Billboard. Retrieved March 18, 2020. "Netflix's 'Rhythm + Flow' to Return for Season 2 in 2021". Complex. "Hot Girls Rejoice". Vulture. August 3, 2020. Damshenas, Sam (August 20, 2020). "Leslie Jordan's reaction to Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion's WAP is pure art". Gay Times. Cardi B's critically-acclaimed collaboration with Megan Thee Stallion, WAP... due to its sex positive message and now-iconic video Holt, Brianna (August 9, 2020). "Why Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion's Empowering Anthem 'WAP' Is So Important". Complex. Retrieved August 9, 2020. BW Staff (August 18, 2020). "Cardi B Makes History with New Single, "WAP"". BroadwayWorld. Retrieved August 18, 2020. "Cardi B's 'Bodak Yellow' becomes first song by a female rapper to go Diamond". Entertainment Weekly. ...the first female rapper to have a No. 1 hit in two different decades Trust, Gary (August 17, 2020). "Cardi B & Megan Thee Stallion's 'WAP' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100 With Record First-Week Streams". Billboard. Retrieved August 17, 2020. Shah, Neil (August 17, 2020). "Cardi B, Megan Thee Stallion Top the Charts in Big Moment for Female Rappers". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 17, 2020. Trust, Gary (September 14, 2020). "Cardi B's 'WAP' & Maluma's 'Hawai' Rule Inaugural Billboard Global 200 & Global Excl. U.S. Charts". Billboard. Retrieved September 14, 2020. "The best albums and songs of 2020". BBC. December 22, 2020. "The 100 Best Songs of 2020". Pitchfork. December 7, 2020. "The 50 Best Songs of 2020". Rolling Stone. December 7, 2020. Atkinson, Katie. "2020 Billboard Music Awards Winners: Complete List". Billboard. "Cardi B, Jennifer Lopez, Dolly Parton, Dua Lipa & More to Be Honored at Billboard's 2020 Women in Music Event". Billboard. 2020. Retrieved November 18, 2020. "Cardi B Just Made History at the 2020 American Music Awards". E!. November 23, 2020. "Cardi B UP review". NME. February 5, 2021. "Cardi B's "Up" Becomes Hot 100 Chart's Highest-Debuting Solo Female Rap Song Since 1998". AllHipHop. February 17, 2021. "RS Charts: Cardi B's 'Up' Launches at Number One". Rolling Stone. February 16, 2021. "Cardi B Is First Woman With Consecutive No. 1 Debuts on Hot R&B/ Hip-Hop Songs Chart". Billboard. February 17, 2021. Trust, Gary (March 22, 2021). "Cardi B's 'Up' Soars to No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100 After Grammy Awards Performance". Billboard. Retrieved March 22, 2021. v"BRIT Awards 2021 nominations". Official Charts. Crawford, Lauren (April 30, 2021). "DJ Khaled Drops New Album 'Khaled Khaled' With Last-Minute Cardi-B Collab". iHeartRadio. Retrieved May 8, 2021. "Cardi B, Beyonce & More Artists Who Have Competed Against Themselves For Video of the Year at BET Awards". Billboard. June 21, 2021. "Cardi B Reveals She's Pregnant With Baby No. 2 at BET Awards". Billboard. June 28, 2021. Saponara, Michael (October 22, 2019). "Cardi B Joins the 'Fast & Furious' Family: See Her Video With Vin Diesel". Billboard. Retrieved October 22, 2019. July 16, Christi CarrasStaff Writer; Pt, 2021 9:13 Am (July 16, 2021). "When it comes to dancing, no one is doing it like Normani in 'Wild Side' video". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 22, 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Trust, Gary (August 23, 2021). "The Kid LAROI & Justin Bieber's 'Stay' Leads Hot 100 for Third Week, Lizzo & Cardi B's 'Rumors' Bows in Top Five". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Martoccio, Angie (August 11, 2021). "2021 MTV VMAs: Justin Bieber, Megan Thee Stallion, Olivia Rodrigo Lead Nominations". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 11, 2021. "2021 BET Hip Hop Awards Nominees Announced: Cardi B, Megan Thee Stallion, Drake". Complex. Grein, Paul (October 6, 2021). "2021 BET Hip Hop Awards Facts & Feats: Cardi B Makes History With 'WAP' Wins". Billboard. "Cardi B Previews Sophomore Album To Atlantic Records, Says They're "Liking The Sounds"". HipHopMill. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2021. "Cardi B to Host 2021 American Music Awards". Billboard. November 2, 2021. Del Rosario, Alexandra (November 22, 2021). "American Music Awards Slightly Up From 2020 Ceremony, Marks 2021's Most Social Telecast Per ABC – Update". Deadline. "BTS, Taylor Swift & More Record-Setters at the 2021 AMAs". Billboard. November 22, 2021. "Summer Walker's 'Still Over It' Album Breaks Multiple Apple Music Records". AllMusic. November 10, 2021. "Halle Berry's 'Bruised' Soundtrack Includes H.E.R., Cardi B and Saweetie From Warner Records (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. November 2, 2021. Curto, Justin (March 25, 2022). "Hear the Dulcet Tones of Cardi B's Voice on Summer Walker's Extended 'No Love'". Vulture. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Strauss, Matthew (April 15, 2022). "Cardi B Joins Kay Flock on New Song "Shake It"". Pitchfork. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Jones, Abby (March 25, 2022). "Cardi B Appears as "Sharki B" in Upcoming Episode of Baby Shark's Big Show!: Watch". Consequence. Retrieved December 25, 2023. Aniftos, Rania (April 13, 2022). "Watch Cardi B Perform the Catchy 'Seaweed Sway' on 'Baby Shark's Big Show!': Exclusive Video". Billboard. Retrieved December 25, 2023. Corcoran, Nina (June 27, 2022). "Cardi B Releasing New Song "Hot Shit" With Kanye West and Lil Durk This Friday". Pitchfork. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Gularte, Alejandra (July 12, 2022). "Cardi B Defies Gravity in Her 'Hot Shit' Music Video". Vulture. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Kaufman, Gil (February 28, 2022). "Megan Thee Stallion, Doja Cat, Burna Boy Join 2022 Wireless Festival Lineup". Billboard. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Hussey, Allison (September 23, 2022). "Cardi B Joins Glorilla on New Song "Tomorrow 2"". Pitchfork. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Rowley, Glenn (September 21, 2022). "Here's When Cardi B's 'Tomorrow 2' Collab With GloRilla Arrives". Billboard. Retrieved September 21, 2022. Trust, Gary (October 3, 2022). "Steve Lacy's 'Bad Habit' Hits No. 1 on Hot 100, Sam Smith & Kim Petras, GloRilla & Cardi B Debut in Top 10". Billboard. Retrieved June 17, 2023. DX Staff (December 9, 2022). "Best Hip Hop Collaborations of 2022". HipHopDX. Retrieved January 8, 2023. Billboard Staff (December 7, 2022). "The 100 Best Songs of 2022: Staff List". Billboard. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Peters, Mitchell (October 2, 2022). "Cardi B Compares Bad Bunny's L.A. Stadium Concert to 2022 Super Bowl: 'There's More People Here'". Billboard. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Aswad, Jem (November 18, 2022). "Cardi B Joins Irving and Jeffrey Azoff's Full Stop Management". Variety. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Rowley, Glenn (December 5, 2022). "Cardi B Claps Back With Her Million-Dollar Paycheck for Half-Hour Art Basel Concert". Billboard. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Devin (December 4, 2022). "Cardi B Reveals She Was Paid $1 Million for a 35-Minute Performance". Rap-Up. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Mier, Tomás (December 16, 2022). "Rosalía Clears the Floor for Cardi B on New Version of 'Despechá'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Dailey, Hannah (March 6, 2023). "SZA Surprises Madison Square Garden Crowd With Cardi B & Phoebe Bridgers: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Kreps, Daniel (February 23, 2023). "See GloRilla Bring Out Surprise Guest Cardi B at New York Concert". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Singh, Surej (January 28, 2023). "Cardi B, Travis Scott, Offset and more announced for Rolling Loud Thailand line-up". NME. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Strauss, Matthew (June 2, 2023). "Latto and Cardi B Share Video for New Song "Put It on da Floor Again"". Pitchfork. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Anderson, Trevor (June 15, 2023). "Latto & Cardi B's 'Put It On Da Floor Again' Hits Top 10 on Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs Chart". Billboard. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Corcoran, Nina (April 3, 2023). "Cardi B, Glorilla, Ice Spice, and More to Perform at Hot 97 Summer Jam 2023". Pitchfork. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Rizzo, Carita (July 7, 2023). "Cardi B Twerks With FendiDa Rappa in Chicago on 'Point Me 2'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 10, 2023. Strauss, Matthew (October 13, 2023). "Offset and Cardi B Share New Song "Freaky": Listen". Pitchfork. Retrieved March 14, 2024. Minsker, Evan (July 28, 2023). "Offset and Cardi B Share Video for New Song "Jealousy"". Pitchfork. Retrieved July 31, 2023. Paul, Larisha (September 8, 2023). "Rap's Resident Work Wives Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion Reunite With 'Bongos'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Corcoran, Nina (September 8, 2023). "Watch Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion's Video for New Song "Bongos"". Pitchfork. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Williams, Aaron (September 11, 2023). "Cardi B Explained Why The 'Bongos' Video Cost A Whopping $2 Million". Uproxx. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Anderson, Trevor (September 21, 2023). "Cardi B & Megan Thee Stallion's 'Bongos' Drums Up Top 5 Debut on Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs Chart". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Mamo, Heran (December 1, 2022). "Cardi B Says New Album Is Coming 'Next Year' But It's Still 'Missing Something'". Billboard. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Blake, Cole (September 9, 2023). "Cardi B Says Her Sophomore Album Will Drop In 2024". HotNewHipHop. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Armstrong, Megan (September 7, 2023). "Cardi B Has A Release Date 'In Mind' For Her New Album. But A Title Is Still In The Works". Uproxx. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Caraan, Sophie (September 11, 2023). "Cardi B Confirms 2024 Release for New Album". Hypebeast. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Nickelodeon, Paramount+ and Pinkfong Reveal Official Trailer for Original Animated Musical Adventure "Baby Shark's Big Movie," Premiering Friday, Dec. 8, on Nickelodeon and Paramount+" (Press release). CBS. November 14, 2023. Retrieved December 25, 2023 – via The Futon Critic. Aniftos, Rania (December 11, 2023). "Cardi B Is 'Drippin' in Jewels' During Hit-Filled TikTok In the Mix Performance". Billboard. Retrieved December 16, 2023. "In the Mix with TikTok: Update". Hits. December 12, 2023. Retrieved December 17, 2023. Andreeva, Nellie (December 27, 2023). "'New Year's Rockin' Eve With Ryan Seacrest' Adds L.L. Cool J & Cardi B To Lineup — Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 28, 2023. Bartholomew, Dinniah (December 26, 2023). "5 Tracks That Show Why Cardi B Is Still on Top". Miami New Times. Retrieved December 28, 2023. Strauss, Matthew (March 1, 2024). "Cardi B Shares Offset-Directed Video for New Song "Like What (Freestyle)": Watch". Pitchfork. Retrieved March 14, 2024. Conteh, Mankaprr (March 1, 2024). "Cardi B Unleashes 'Like What (Freestyle)'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 1, 2024. Anderson, Trevor (March 13, 2024). "Cardi B's 'Like What (Freestyle)' Launches in Top 10 on Hot Rap Songs Chart". Billboard. Retrieved March 14, 2024. Zemler, Emily (March 15, 2024). "Cardi B Is Unapologetic on Confident Single 'Enough (Miami)'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 15, 2024. Trust, Gary (March 25, 2024). "Teddy Swims' 'Lose Control' Hits No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved March 26, 2024. Cho, Regina (March 14, 2024). "Flo Milli Surprises Fans With Cardi B, SZA Remix Of "Never Lose Me"". Vibe. Retrieved March 15, 2024. Blistein, Jon (March 12, 2024). "Cardi B Doles Out Chops and 10s as Madonna's Guest Judge on Celebration Tour Ballroom Show". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 14, 2024. Trapp, Malcolm (March 22, 2024). "Cardi B Gets In Her Pop Bag For Shakira's "Puntería" Single And Video". Rap-Up. Retrieved March 23, 2024. Herrera, Isabela (July 11, 2017). "Ivy Queen Jams to Cardi B on Instagram and the Internet Trembles With Caribeña Glory". Remezcla. Remezcla, LLC. Retrieved August 1, 2017. "Instagram post by Grace Hamilton • Oct 7, 2017 at 8:31pm UTC". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2017. Moore, Sam (August 13, 2020). "Cardi B says her new album will "have my 'Lemonade' moments"". NME. Archived from the original on September 19, 2020. Retrieved November 16, 2021. "Cardi B said Lady Gaga inspired her 3 years ago and freaked out after finally meeting her at the 2019 Grammys". Insider.com. Retrieved July 9, 2019. "Cardi B Returns To Her Stripper Roots And Reminds Us Why She Was Born To Flex In 'Money' Video". Blavity. December 21, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018. "Cardi B rinde tributo a Selena Quintanilla y revela que la 'Reina del Tex-Mex' fue la inspiración para 'Please Me'". Univision (in Spanish). Retrieved December 9, 2019. "Billboard Woman of the Year Cardi B: 'I Like Justice. But I Also Like Popping My P*ssy'". Billboard. December 2, 2020. "Hollywood Unlocked Uncensored: Cardi B. Unlocks The One Thing She's Most "Cocky" About • The Hollywood Unlocked". thehollywoodunlocked.com. Archived from the original on March 22, 2019. Retrieved July 28, 2017. "Cardi B Reveals What She's Most Cocky About on Hollywood Unlocked [UNCENSORED]". Hollywood Unlocked. June 30, 2017 – via YouTube. Hurst, Josh (April 10, 2018). "Cardi B Invasion of Privacy". Slant. Retrieved October 14, 2018. "Top 50 Albums of 2018". Consequence of Sound. December 3, 2018. Retrieved December 4, 2018. "Cardi B Is A Great Rapper, And You Need To Start Taking Her Seriously". July 19, 2017. "Don't Sleep on Cardi B's "Bodak Yellow"". Complex. "WHAT DOES 'BODAK YELLOW' MEAN? CARDI B'S NEW BILLBOARD NO. 1 SINGLE, EXPLAINED". Newsweek. September 25, 2017. "American rapper CARDI B reveals her BTS bias name and it's not Jungkook or Taehyung". July 4, 2022. "Cardi B: Invasion of Privacy Album Review". Pitchfork. April 10, 2018. "THE BEST INSTAGRAM CAPTIONS AND PUNCHLINES ON CARDI B'S 'INVASION OF PRIVACY'". The Source. April 6, 2018. "Cardi B gives new voice to Hispanics and women with No. 1 hit". El Paso Times. Ramli, Sofiana (July 12, 2019). "Cardi B hits out at Jermaine Dupri: "I rap about my pussy because she's my best friend"". NME. Chan, Anna (July 12, 2019). "Cardi B Defends Female Rappers After Jermaine Dupri Compares Them to Strippers". Spin. Starling, Lakin (August 7, 2020). "Cardi B 'WAP' [ft. Megan Thee Stallion]". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Wood, Mikael (August 8, 2020). "Review: Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion's 'WAP' is a savage, nasty, sex-positive triumph". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Pareles, Jon; Russonello, Giovanni; Zoladz, Lindsay (February 5, 2021). "Cardi B's 'Up,' and 12 More New Songs". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Aniftos, Rania (September 10, 2018). "Tom Ford's Cardi B Inspired Lipstick Sold Out in 24 Hours". Billboard. Retrieved September 10, 2018. Hall, Chloe (November 14, 2018). "Cardi B on Fashion Nova Fits, Financial Security, and the State of Democracy". Elle. Retrieved November 15, 2018. Hughes, Aria (November 5, 2018). "Cardi B Signs Reebok Deal". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved November 5, 2018. "People Offended by Cardi B's Shoe Collection Promo Probably Bought the Shoes Anyway". Rolling Stone. November 13, 2020. "Cardi B Unveils Latest Clothing and Sneaker Collection With Reebok, Inspired by NYC". Rolling Stone. August 20, 2021. Aniftos, Rania (May 10, 2021). "Cardi B Shares Motherhood Advice Ahead of 'Mommy & Me' Reebok Collection". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Widjojo, Conchita (June 7, 2022). "Cardi B and Reebok Team for Another Collection, Inspired by 'Enchantment'". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Aniftos, Rania (July 8, 2022). "Here's Cardi B x Reebok's 'Let Me Be…Enchanted' Full Collection, Part 2". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Ishmael, Aiyana (September 29, 2022). "Cardi B's New Reebok Collection Is Inspired by Crystals and Hustling". Teen Vogue. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Jr., Anthony Palliparambil (December 2, 2022). "Reebok and Cardi B have dropped the final part of their next level collaboration". USA Today. Retrieved June 17, 2023. "Cardi B and Monet X Change Star in New Pepsi Commercial: Watch". Billboard. February 7, 2019. Retrieved February 13, 2019. Hsu, Tiffany (November 24, 2019). "For Holiday Ads, Nothing Says Tradition Like Cardi B's Twerk Shop". The New York Times. "Rap Snacks Unveils New Flavors for Cardi B and Migos". Complex. February 11, 2019. Retrieved April 23, 2019. Rashad, Ayana. "Cardi B, Walmart, Reebok, Showtime, Allen Iverson and more Included in MANSELLE's 2020". Respect Magazine. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved December 3, 2020. "Playboy Taps Cardi B for Creative Post in Brand Comeback Bid". Bloomberg. December 2, 2021. "Roses are Red, Violets are Blue, the Cardi B & Offset Meal is Coming to a McDonald's Near You". McDonald's. February 13, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2023. Aizin, Rebecca (February 12, 2023). "Cardi B and Offset Share Their Love in McDonald's Super Bowl Ad — and Announce Their New Meal". People. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Richards, Bailey (October 16, 2023). "Cardi B Brings Her Signature Curves and Sharp Sense of Humor to 'Sexy' New SKIMS Campaign". People. Retrieved December 17, 2023. Herndon, Ayana (October 24, 2023). "Cardi B's Skims Campaign Generates More Than $4 Million in Media Impact Value". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved December 17, 2023. Herndon, Ayana (December 4, 2023). "Cardi B Walks the Runway in Dramatic Blue Faux Fur Coat at the Balenciaga Los Angeles Fashion Show". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved December 17, 2023. Lee, Michelle (February 2, 2024). "Cardi B Recreates Her Viral 'That's Suspicious' TikTok in NYX Super Bowl Ad Teaser: Watch!". People. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Russell, Shania (February 11, 2024). "Watch Cardi B's full uncensored Super Bowl ad that NFL reps deemed NSFW". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Iasimone, Ashley (February 11, 2024). "NYX Professional Makeup Commercial Starring Cardi B Shortened for 2024 Super Bowl Broadcast". Billboard. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Martin, Brittany (December 3, 2021). "Cardi B Invites You to a 'Party in a Can' with Her New Line of Vodka-Infused, Whipped Cream (and It's Reportedly Vegan!)". Vegetarian Times. "Whipshots Tops the Charts with 5 Million Cans Sold". Business Wire. March 12, 2024. Retrieved March 14, 2024. "Cardi B Launches a New Series 'Cardi Tries' on Facebook Messenger". Rolling Stone. December 17, 2020. Ahlgrim, Callie (May 20, 2022). "Cardi B says her show 'Cardi Tries' made her appreciate how 'stressful' it is to work in a restaurant". Insider. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Nellie, Andreeva; White, Peter (April 26, 2023). "Meta Content Exec Mina Lefevre Leaves As Facebook Watch Ends Originals; 'Red Table Talk' Being Shopped". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Rowley, Glenn (September 13, 2022). "Cardi B Makes $100K Donation to Bronx School She Attended as a Child". Billboard. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Wells, Veronica (November 18, 2016). "Cardi B. Is A Feminist And Y'all Can Stay Mad". Madamenoire.com. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "Cardi B Official IG on Instagram: "Imagine a old ass female teacher bussing a burner 🙄This man really out his mind .America must be entertainment to other countries ."". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved April 9, 2018.[permanent dead link] Cardi B (March 4, 2016). "Like it's not funny nomore". Twitter. ""Vote for Daddy Bernie Bitch!" – The Political History of Cardi B". The Guardian. Retrieved January 22, 2019. Bruner, Raisa (January 28, 2018). "Hillary Clinton and Cardi B Are the Perfect Narrators of President Trump's Life Story". Time. "Cardi B Is Demanding More Transparency When It Comes to Tax Policy". Time. @Variety (April 13, 2019). "Cardi B says she's rooting for Bernie Sanders in the 2020 election (Watch)" (Tweet). Retrieved April 13, 2019 – via Twitter. "Cardi B might be one of Bernie's most powerful 2020 allies. Seriously". Politico. August 26, 2019. "Cardi B encourages followers to vote in local elections following George Floyd's death". Revolt. May 29, 2020. "Cardi B In Conversation With Joe Biden". Elle. August 17, 2020. "Study: LeBron James Cited as Most Influential Celebrity in 2020 Election". The Hollywood Reporter. October 28, 2020. Musumeci, Natalie. "Cardi B slams Biden's war funding and says she will never endorse another president again". Business Insider. Retrieved March 25, 2024. Oshin, Olafimihan (November 20, 2023). "Cardi B declines to endorse Biden, pointing to spending on wars". The Hill. Retrieved March 25, 2024. Vara, Kelby (November 20, 2023). "Cardi B Turns Her Back On Biden Over Aid To Ukraine, Israel". HuffPost. Retrieved March 25, 2024. "15 Things We Learned From Cardi B's 'Invasion of Privacy' Press Run", XXL site, April 12, 2018. Caity Weaver, "Cardi B's Money Moves", GQ, April 9, 2018. Amatulli, Jenna (April 18, 2018). "Bernie Sanders Says 'Cardi B Is Right' About Who Really Made America Great Again". Huffington Post. "How Cardi B Makes Fashion Moves". The Business of Fashion. October 29, 2018. Retrieved January 3, 2019. "Cardi B Opens Up About Fashion Designers Rejecting Her". Billboard. April 22, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2017. "here's why everyone who's anyone is wearing vintage thierry mugler". i-D. July 18, 2019. "How the Mugler Bodysuit Became the New Pop Star Uniform". W. March 26, 2021. Wenger, Stephanie (January 25, 2022). "Cardi B Says Thierry Mugler Was One of the First Designers to 'Take a Chance' on Her in Moving Tribute". People. Hahn, Rachel (October 10, 2019). "Cardi B on Feeling Like Lizzie McGuire, Taking Risks in Fashion, and What She and Bernie Sanders Have in Common". Vogue. Turner, Krissy (April 18, 2018). "Why Cardi B is a fashion icon for our times". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Lang, Cady (February 10, 2019). "From Balenciaga to Bloody Shoes: All the Times Cardi B's Style Stole the Show". Time. Pickens, Ashley (April 24, 2017). "15 Times Cardi B Proved She's Worthy Of The "Fashion Icon" Moniker". Vibe. "Cardi B Takes At-Home Loungewear to the Extreme". Vogue. April 27, 2020. Branch, Kate (May 7, 2018). "Cardi B's Nail Artist Did My Manicure for the Met Gala—And It Totally Upstaged My Dress". Vogue. Retrieved August 30, 2020. Allaire, Christian (October 4, 2021). "Cardi B's Best Paris Fashion Week Looks". Vogue. Vogue, January 2020 "Cardi B becomes first female rapper to cover 'Vogue'". Revolt. Retrieved January 8, 2020. "28 Black Fashion Forces". Council of Fashion Designers of America. February 5, 2019. Retrieved February 13, 2019. "How Cardi B's style won over Vogue editor-in-chief Anna Wintour". CNN. July 3, 2019. Hahn, Rachel (May 7, 2019). "Cardi B Brought the Red Carpet to the Met Gala". Vogue. Bobb, Brooke (September 1, 2020). "Cardi B's Impressive Balenciaga Billboard Graces the Louvre in Paris". Vogue. Retrieved September 1, 2020. "FN to Honor Cardi B, Fenty, Amina Muaddi, Aurora James and More at the First Virtual FNAAs". Footwear News. "The 25 Most Stylish Musicians Now". Rolling Stone. January 21, 2022. "The GQ team's best-dressed women of 2021". GQ. January 2, 2022. Sources for "Reigning Queen of Hip Hop": Rowley, Glenn (February 5, 2019). "Chrissy Teigen Talks Kanye & John Legend Drama in New #BehindTheTweets Video". Billboard. Retrieved February 5, 2019. the reigning queen of hip-hop may rap about her but... "All the best performances from the 2019 Grammy Awards". Entertainment Weekly. Coffey, Kevin. "Cardi B topped Taylor Swift: How the rapper dethroned the reigning queen of pop". Omaha World-Herald. And that's when the reigning queen of hip-hop... Hill, Selena. "Cardi B Performs At HOT 97'S SOLD-OUT Summer Jam". Black Enterprise. Hip hop, including the genre's reigning queen, Cardi B "The 5 Best New Music Artists of 2018, from Cardi B to Greta Van Fleet". Newsweek. Retrieved February 3, 2022. "Cardi B goes both soft and hard in her new single, "Be Careful"". The A.V. Club. Retrieved February 11, 2019. Sources for "Queen of Rap": Danielle, Britni (October 24, 2020). "From Presidential History To Her Love Of Zora Neale Hurston: 3 Things We Learned From Cardi B's Revealing GQ Interview". Essence. burgeoning queen of rap released the hottest album in the country... "Cardi B's Most Memorable Fashion Moments". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved February 11, 2019. Donaldson, Maggy (February 13, 2019). "Cardi B, sassy queen of American hip-hop". The Jakarta Post. Indonesia. the larger-than-life image of the reigning queen of rap... Rodgers, Katherine (March 23, 2021). "From Reality TV To The Queen Of Rap, Cardi B Is The Blueprint For The Modern Pop Star". Uproxx. to her status today as the reigning Queen of Rap "Artist of the Week: Cardi B". iHeartRadio. May 5, 2018. The reigning queen of rap's new record includes... "Cardi B defends $150,000 purchase for 3-year-old daughter". Geo TV. Pakistan. July 13, 2021. Queen of rap, Cardi B recently... "¿Quién es Cardi B, la reina del rap que ha destronado a Taylor Swift?". Vanity Fair (in Spanish). Spain. September 26, 2017. Lavin, Will. "Bruno Mars recruits Cardi B for "Finesse" remix, video pays homage to In Living Color". Joe. current reigning queen of rap Vanni, Olivia (July 19, 2018). "Cardi B's coming for Forbes fest". Boston Herald. Cardi B, music's new reigning queen of rap... Diaz, Thatiana (July 9, 2018). "Why Cardi B's Makeup Always Looks So Good — Even In The Summer Heat". Refinery 29. The reigning queen of rap soared to the top with her track "I Like It,"... "Cardi B & American hip-hop". France 24. France. November 2, 2019. the reigning queen of rap, who had earlier gyrated through... "Cardi B debutta al cinema con "Hustlers" come spogliarellista". GQ (in Italian). Italy. March 25, 2019. La nuova regina del rap Cardi B... Nwanne, Chuks (November 9, 2019). "Cardi B... Queen Of Rap Comes To Motherland". The Guardian. Nigeria. "Cardi B go perform for Ghana dis December, Ghanaians say she for tear collabo plus Sarkodie". BBC News (in Nigerian Pidgin). Nigeria. November 5, 2019. American queen of rap dey come visit Nigeria... Kehinde, Opeyemi (November 5, 2019). "Livespot X Festival: American Rapper, Cardi B To Perform In Lagos, Accra This December". Daily Trust. Nigeria. the queen of rap will also thrill the festival's audience... "The 101 Best Albums of the 2010s". Spin. Archived from the original on July 6, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2020. "Cardi B's 'Bodak Yellow': Songs That Define the Decade". Billboard. November 21, 2019. "Cardi B's 'I Like It' Joins YouTube's Billion Views Club". Forbes. ...essentially introducing Latin trap to the masses. "How Bad Bunny Brought Latin Trap to the American Mainstream". Vulture. January 8, 2019. "Cardi B Recalls Not Feeling Welcome In The Music Industry At First". Genius. August 9, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. "2020 Was The Year Female Rappers Dominated". NPR Music. Hope, Clover (February 2, 2021). "Book Excerpt: The Unstoppable Rise of Cardi B". Jezebel. "Is Rap Finally Ready To Embrace Its Women". The New Yorker. December 7, 2018. Williams, Aaron (February 19, 2020). "For Women In Hip-Hop, Cardi B's Co-Sign Is The New Drake Effect". "Cardi B Lands First Starring Movie Role in Paramount Comedy 'Assisted Living'". Variety. January 14, 2021. "Queen Cardi B: The people's pop culture icon". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Madden, Sidney (April 5, 2018). "The Business Of Being Cardi B". NPR. "Cardi B's Personal Brand Took the Media by Storm. Here's What You Can Learn From It". Inc. April 11, 2018. "Cardi B, Juice WRLD, More Inducted Into Spotify's RapCaviar 'Pantheon'". Variety. April 3, 2019. "How Cardi B's Data Bill Helped to Boost Ghana's GDP Growth". Bloomberg.com. April 22, 2020. "MC Lyte & 'Martin' EP Bentley Kyle Evans Link For Sitcom About Teen With Cardi B Aspirations". Hip Hop DX. May 20, 2020. "'P-Valley' Creator on Cardi B, Female Gaze and Black Girl Magic on TV (Exclusive)". ET. August 28, 2020. "P-Valley creator Katori Hall talks explosive finale, what to expect from season 2". Entertainment Weekly. "Rosalía elige a las 28 mujeres que le inspiran: de Aretha Franklin a Azúcar Moreno". El Confidencial. March 12, 2019. "Olivia Rodrigo Says Cardi B Inspires Her 'Honest' Songwriting: 'I'm So In Love With Her'". Billboard. April 20, 2021. Breakfast Club Power 105.1 FM. "Jazmine Sullivan Speaks On Worthiness, Relationships + New Project 'Heaux Tales'". YouTube.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Selena Gomez tells Billboard Cardi B is her inspiration". Yahoo. UK. On Demand Entertainment. "BLACKPINK On Working with Lady Gaga, Selena Gomez and Cardi B". YouTube. The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon. "Cardi B Inspired Greta Gerwig's Vogue Cover and Directing Little Women Pregnant". YouTube. "Nathy Peluso Reacts to Cardi B Listening to 'Delito': 'Music Has No Borders'". Billboard. February 19, 2021. "Rubi Rose Is The Cardi B-Cosigned Rapper Who's Unapologetically Herself". nylon. "Te presentamos a María Becerra, la youtuber que se ha ganado un hueco en la industria urban". Los 40 (in Spanish). September 1, 2020. "The BBC Radio 1 & 1Xtra Playlists: 5th June". BBC Radio 1. June 3, 2020. Danielle Ransom. "Cardi B Wants To See More Support For Diverse Female Artists In The Music Industry". BET. Michael Saponara (July 11, 2019). "Cardi B Urges Fans to Support Female MCs Who Don't Rap About Sex". Billboard. Eli Countryman (August 7, 2020). "Cardi B Is Over Being Pitted Against Other Female Artists: 'Why Does It Even Have to Be Like That?'". Variety. "10 record-breaking celebrity achievements from 2018". Guinness World Records. December 21, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Most RIAA Diamond singles for a female artist". Guinness World Records. February 6, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Most US No.1 singles by a female rapper". Guinness World Records. September 29, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "First solo female artist to win Best Rap Album at the Grammy Awards". Guinness World Records. February 10, 2019. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Most streamed album on Apple Music in one week by a female artist". Guinness World Records. April 13, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Diversity wins as female artists and hip-hop triumph at Grammys". The Guardian. February 11, 2019. Payne, Ogden. "Cardi B Takes Home ASCAP Songwriter Of The Year Award". Forbes. "Cardi B Is First Woman to Repeat as Songwriter of the Year at ASCAP's Rhythm & Soul Awards". Billboard. July 15, 2020. McIntyre, Hugh. "Cardi B Has Made History On Spotify". Forbes. Agence France-Presse (June 9, 2020). "Number of the day: DJ Snake's 'Taki Taki' amasses a billion plays on Spotify". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on June 14, 2020. Retrieved June 14, 2020. "Billboard 200 – Decade-End". Billboard. "Cardi B's 'Invasion Of Privacy' Becomes Longest-Charting Album By A Female Rapper". All Hip Hop. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved August 24, 2020. "Cardi B's 'Invasion Of Privacy' Is The Most-Streamed Album By A Female Rapper Ever On Spotify". BET.com. "Cardi B's 'Bodak Yellow' becomes first song by a female rapper to go Diamond". EW.com. Retrieved March 9, 2021. "Cardi B Snags Another Diamond-Certified Single With 'I Like It'". Billboard. December 13, 2021. "Cardi B Reacts to Earning 3 Diamond Singles, Tied for Most Diamond Songs Ever by a Woman Artist". Complex. "The 100 Best Songs of 2020". Pitchfork. December 7, 2020. Retrieved January 30, 2021. Rolling Stone staff (December 3, 2019). "The 100 Best Albums of the 2010s". Rolling Stone. "100 Best Albums of the 2010s: Staff Picks". Billboard. November 19, 2019. "Cardi B breaks new ground, earns 100 million RIAA-certified units". HipHopDX. October 22, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022. "Cardi B Becomes Only Female Artist To Have Three Top-Selling Songs Of The Year In Total Units In The US This Century". Vibe Hip Hop. January 9, 2021. ..."Bodak Yellow" in 2017, "I Like It" feat. J Balvin and Bad Bunny in 2018, and "WAP" in 2020 "The UK's Official Top 40 most-streamed songs by female artists". Official Charts. "Cardi B's "Bodak Yellow" Music Video Passes 1 Billion Views On YouTube". AllHipHop. "Cardi B's 2017 Breakout Hit Single, "Bodak Yellow," Hits 1 Billion YouTube Views For Its Music Video, Becomes Fastest Solo Female Rap Song in History To Do This". Vibe Hip Hop. "Greatest of All Time Hot 100 Songs". Billboard. November 23, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2021. "Cardi B on Her Kicking Baby and Pearl-Covered Dress". Vogue. Condé Nast. Retrieved May 29, 2018. "Cardi B says she used to drug and rob men when she worked as a stripper". The Independent. March 27, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2019. "Cardi B explains why she 'drugged and robbed' men". BBC News. March 27, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2019. "Cardi B defends herself after saying she used to drug and rob men when she worked as stripper". The Independent. March 27, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2019. "Why Cardi B Cancelled Her Book Deal". T.I. Rude, Mey (July 26, 2021). "Cardi B Says 'Wild Side' Queerbaiting Claims Ignore Her Bisexuality". Out.com. Archived from the original on July 26, 2021. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Adejobi, Alicia (June 30, 2020). "Cardi B hits back at homophobic accusations after revealing she's a 'whole bisexual'". Metro. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Gonzales, Erica (March 20, 2018). "Cardi B Shares Her Own #MeToo Story and Stands Up for Women in Hip-Hop". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved January 1, 2021. Hughes, Jazmine (March 19, 2018). "Cardi B Gives Her Most Explicit Interview Yet". Cosmopolitan. Connick, Tom (March 19, 2018). "Cardi B wants the #MeToo movement to be more inclusive – NME". NME. "How Did Cardi B Handle Her #Metoo Incident?". YouTube. September 25, 2019. Retrieved January 1, 2021. "Cardi B Says #MeToo Movement Has Ignored Video Vixens: 'Nobody Gives a F---'". Billboard. March 19, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2018. "Cardi B Opens up to Zendaya in the New Issue of CR Fashion Book". CR Fashion Book. December 21, 2018. Archived from the original on January 20, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2019. Ballin, Sofiya (October 28, 2017). "Cardi B gets engaged at Power 99's Powerhouse Concert in Philly". philly.com. Retrieved October 28, 2017. DiMeglio, Mary J. (April 8, 2018). "Cardi B Reveals Pregnancy in 'SNL' Performance". Billboard. Retrieved April 8, 2018. Whittum, Connor (June 25, 2018). "Cardi B Confirms Secret Marriage to Offset: 'There Are Some Moments I Want to Keep for Myself'". Billboard. Retrieved June 25, 2018. "Cardi B announces birth of daughter on Instagram". ABC News. Archived from the original on July 13, 2018. Retrieved July 11, 2018. Sager, Jessica (February 28, 2019). "Offset reveals how he and Cardi B got back together". Fox News. Retrieved May 10, 2020. Merrett, Robyn; Sands, Nicole. "Cardi B Says She and Husband Offset Are Not Together Anymore: 'I Guess We Fell Out of Love'". People. Retrieved December 5, 2018. "Cardi B and Offset Share Major PDA Moment on the 2019 Grammys Red Carpet/". E! Online. February 11, 2019. "Grammys 2019: Cardi B Wins Best Rap Album". Pitchfork. February 11, 2019. Retrieved February 17, 2019. "Cardi B files for divorce from Offset after 3 years of marriage". eonline.com. September 15, 2020. "Cardi B files for divorce from Offset". BBC News. September 16, 2020. Retrieved January 1, 2021. Mier, Tomás (October 15, 2020). "Cardi B Reveals She's Back with Offset Amid Divorce: 'It's Hard Not to Talk to Your Best Friend'". People. Retrieved January 1, 2021. "Cardi B Reveals She's Pregnant With Baby No. 2 at BET Awards". Billboard. June 27, 2021. Bergeson, Samantha (September 6, 2021). "Cardi B Gives Birth, Welcomes Baby No. 2 With Offset". E! Online. NBC Universal. Elitou, Tweety (September 21, 2022). "Cardi B Celebrates Her 5th Wedding Anniversary With Offset, Says She's Ready For A 'Wedding'!". BET. Moore, Julia (December 11, 2023). "Cardi B Confirms Split from Offset: 'I've Been Single for a Minute Now'". People. Retrieved December 11, 2023. "Cardi B charged with strip club assault". BBC News. June 21, 2019. Retrieved April 13, 2021. Evans, Mel (December 5, 2018). "Cardi B returns shots in reignited Nicki Minaj feud with rhinestone bikini". Metro. Retrieved April 13, 2021. "Cardi B pleads not guilty to strip club assault". the Guardian. June 26, 2019. Retrieved April 13, 2021. "Cardi B gets assault summons but lawyer say she did no harm". AP. October 1, 2018. Pasquini, Maria; Michaud, Sarah; Rubenstein, Janine (October 1, 2018). "Cardi B Turns Herself in to Police, Arrested and Charged for Alleged Attack on Bartenders". People. Melas, Chloe (December 7, 2018). "Cardi B shows up to court and avoids potential arrest". CNN. Kreps, Daniel (December 7, 2018). "Cardi B Appears in Court for Hearing Over Strip Club Assault Charges". Rolling Stone. Fieldstadt, Elisha (June 21, 2019). "Cardi B indicted on felony charges in alleged strip-club brawl". NBC. "Cardi B charged with strip club assault". BBC. June 21, 2019. Griffith, Janelle (June 25, 2019). "Cardi B pleads not guilty to strip club fight charges". NBC News. Retrieved January 1, 2021. "Cardi B pleads guilty to assault charges: 'I've made some bad decisions'". The Guardian. September 15, 2022. Retrieved September 15, 2022. "Cardi B: Rapper pleads guilty to strip club assault charges". BBC News. September 16, 2022. Retrieved September 16, 2022. "Cardi B Talks Marriage To Offset, Cosmetic Surgery, Takeoff's Death & More The Jason Lee Show". Youtube. Retrieved August 11, 2023. "S1 E1 Cardi B". Revolt. Retrieved August 11, 2023. Donahue, Bill (January 24, 2022). "Cardi B Wins Million-Dollar Defamation Verdict Against 'Malicious' YouTuber". Billboard. Retrieved January 24, 2022. Donahue, Bill (January 25, 2022). "Cardi B Wins Another $3M in Defamation Case Against 'Malicious' YouTuber YouTuber". Billboard. Retrieved January 25, 2022. Dillon, Nancy (March 26, 2022). "Cardi B Beats Libel Claim From NY Beachgoers Sporting MAGA Hat, Trump Flag". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 9, 2022. "Cardi B will not be charged related to microphone-throwing incident, police say". CNN. August 3, 2023. "Cardi B Won't Face Charges After Throwing Mic at Fan in Las Vegas". July 30, 2023. "Cardi B Jokes About Nicki Minaj Fight — and That Knot on Her Forehead — One Week Later". people.com. Retrieved September 18, 2018. Ngwadla, Nkosazana. "Cardi B opens up about why she attacked Nicki Minaj". Drum. Retrieved April 13, 2021. "Cardi B Reveals Why She Attacked Nicki Minaj With Shoe At New York Fashion Week". Capital XTRA. September 8, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2021. "Everything We Know About Cardi B and Nicki Minaj's Fight at Harper's Bazaar's ICONS Party". Elle. September 8, 2018. Retrieved September 18, 2018. "Nicki Minaj denies insulting Cardi B's parenting skills – Independent.ie". Independent.ie. Retrieved November 10, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Opens Up About Cardi B Altercation, Plus More Revelations From Queen Radio Episode 8". Billboard. Retrieved April 23, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Denies Mocking Cardi B's Daughter On 'Queen Radio'". UPROXX. September 10, 2018. Retrieved November 10, 2018. "Cardi B's Harper's Bazaar Photo Shoot Winks At Shoe-Throwing Fight With Nicki Minaj". HuffPost. February 7, 2019. Bollinger, Alex (May 16, 2018). "Rapper Cardi B comes out as bisexual". LGBTQ Nation. Retrieved January 15, 2020. "Cardi B Announces New Reebok "Let Me Be...Next Level Energy" Collection Inspired by Crystals and Hustling". teenvogue. September 29, 2022. "The Cardi B & Offset Meal". www.youtube.com. Retrieved March 22, 2023. Hope, Clover (2021). The Motherlode: 100+ Women Who Made Hip-Hop. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-1-4197-4296-5. Cardi B at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Official website Cardi B at AllMusic Cardi B discography at Discogs Cardi B at IMDb Cardi B discography at MusicBrainz