The 2018 Tour of California was a road cycling stage race that took place between May 13 and 19, 2018 in California, United States. It was the thirteenth edition of the Tour of California and the twenty-second event of the 2018 UCI World Tour. As a newer event to the UCI World Tour, all UCI WorldTeams were invited to the race, but not obligated to compete in the race. As such, thirteen of the eighteen WorldTeams competed in the race. Four UCI Professional Continental teams also competed making a 17-team peloton. Each team had a maximum of seven riders: UCI WorldTeams AG2R La Mondiale Team Dimension Data LottoNL–Jumbo Team Sky UAE Team Emirates BMC Racing Team EF Education First–Drapac p/b Cannondale Mitchelton–Scott Team Sunweb Bora–Hansgrohe Team Katusha–Alpecin Quick-Step Floors Trek–Segafredo UCI Professional Continental teams Hagens Berman Axeon UnitedHealthcare Holowesko Citadel p/b Arapahoe Resources Rally Cycling In the Tour of California, five different jerseys were awarded. For the general classification, calculated by adding each cyclist's finishing times on each stage, and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers at intermediate sprints and at the finish of mass-start stages, the leader received a yellow jersey.[citation needed] This classification was considered the most important of the 2017 Tour of California, and the winner of the classification was considered the winner of the race. Additionally, there was a sprints classification, which awarded a green jersey.[citation needed] In the sprints classification, cyclists received points for finishing in the top 10 in a stage. For winning a stage, a rider earned 15 points, with 12 for second, 9 for third, 7 for fourth with a point fewer per place down to a single point for 10th place. Points towards the classification could also be accrued – awarded on a 3–2–1 scale – at intermediate sprint points during each stage; these intermediate sprints also offered bonus seconds towards the general classification. There was also a mountains classification, the leadership of which was marked by a white jersey with red polka dots.[citation needed] In the mountains classification, points were won by reaching the top of a climb before other cyclists, with more points available for the higher-categorised climbs. The fourth jersey represented the young rider classification, marked by a predominantly "white design" jersey.[citation needed] This was decided in the same way as the general classification, but only riders born after January 1, 1992, were eligible to be ranked in the classification. There was also a classification for teams, in which the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added together; the leading team at the end of the race was the team with the lowest total time. In addition, there was a combativity award given after each stage to the rider considered, by a jury, to have "who best exemplifies the character of those engaged in the fight against cancer / heart disease", in line with the jersey's sponsors. This award was marked by a blue jersey.[citation needed] "UCI announces 2018 road calendar". Cycling News. Retrieved October 20, 2017. "2018 UCI WorldTour calendar unveiled". Velon. Archived from the original on September 25, 2017. Retrieved October 20, 2016. "2018 Amgen Tour of California - Startlist". FirstCycling. Retrieved March 8, 2019. "2018 Amgen Tour of California (WorldTour)". BikeRaceInfo. Retrieved March 8, 2019. "Tour of California 2018". Cycling News. Retrieved March 10, 2019. "Tour of California: Gaviria wins stage 1 in Long Beach". Cycling News. Retrieved March 18, 2019. "Tour of California: Bernal wins on steep slopes of Gibraltar Road". Cycling News. Retrieved March 18, 2019. "Tour of California: Skujins takes his third ToCA stage win". Cycling News. Retrieved March 18, 2019. "Tour of California: Van Garderen takes time trial win". Cycling News. Retrieved March 18, 2019. "Tour of California: Gaviria makes it two in Elk Grove". Cycling News. Retrieved March 18, 2019. "Tour of California: Bernal wins mountainous stage 6". Cycling News. Retrieved March 18, 2019. "Bernal seals Tour of California victory". Cycling News. Retrieved March 18, 2019. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tour of California 2018. Official website