The Championships, commonly known simply as Wimbledon, is the oldest tennis tournament in the world and is regarded by many as the most prestigious. It has been held at the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club in Wimbledon, London, since 1877 and is played on outdoor grass courts, with retractable roofs over the two main courts since 2019. Wimbledon is one of the four Grand Slam tournaments, the others being the Australian Open, the French Open, and the US Open. Wimbledon is the only major still played on grass, the traditional tennis playing surface. Also, it is the only Grand Slam that retains a night-time curfew, though matches can now continue until 11.00 pm under the lights. The tournament traditionally takes place over two weeks in late June and early July, starting on the last Monday in June and culminating with the Ladies' and Gentlemen's Singles Finals, scheduled for the Saturday and Sunday at the end of the second week. Five major events are held each year, with additional junior and invitational competitions also taking place. In 2009, Wimbledon's Centre Court was fitted with a retractable roof to lessen the loss of playing time due to rain. A roof was operational over No. 1 Court from 2019, when a number of other improvements were made, including adding cushioned seating, a table and 10 independently operable cameras per court to capture the games. Wimbledon traditions include a strict all-white dress code for competitors, and royal patronage. Strawberries and cream are traditionally consumed at the tournament. Unlike other tournaments, advertising is minimal and low key from official suppliers such as Slazenger and Rolex. The relationship with Slazenger is the world's longest-running sporting sponsorship, providing balls for the tournament since 1902. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Wimbledon 2020 was cancelled, the first cancellation of the tournament since World War II. The rescheduled 134th edition was staged from 28 June 2021 to 11 July 2021. The 135th edition was played between 27 June 2022 and 10 July 2022, and regularly scheduled play occurred on the middle Sunday for the first time. It marked the centenary of the inaugural championships staged at the Centre Court. The ATP, ITF, and WTA did not award ranking points for the 2022 tournament, due to controversy over the tournament excluding players representing Russia and Belarus. The 2023 Wimbledon Championships was the 136th staging and ran from 3 July 2023 to 16 July 2023. The All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club is a private club founded on 23 July 1868, originally as "The All England Croquet Club". Its first ground was at Nursery Road off Worple Road, Wimbledon. In 1876, lawn tennis, a game devised by Major Walter Clopton Wingfield a year or so earlier as an outdoor version of real tennis and originally given the name Sphairistikè, was added to the activities of the club. In spring 1877, the club was renamed "The All England Croquet and Lawn Tennis Club" and signalled its change of name by instituting the first Lawn Tennis Championship. A new code of laws, replacing the code administered by the Marylebone Cricket Club, was drawn up for the event. Today's rules are similar except for details such as the height of the net and posts and the distance of the service line from the net. The inaugural 1877 Wimbledon Championship started on 9 July 1877 and the Gentlemen's Singles was the only event held. 22 men paid a guinea to enter the tournament, which was to be held over five days. The rain delayed it four more days and thus, on 19 July 1877, the final was played. Spencer Gore, an Old Harrovian rackets player, defeated William Marshall 6–1, 6–2 and 6–4 in 48 minutes. Gore was presented with the silver challenge cup, valued at 25 guineas and donated by the sports magazine The Field, as well as a prize money of 12 guineas. About 200 spectators paid one shilling each to watch the final. The lawns at the ground were arranged so that the principal court was in the middle with the others arranged around it, hence the title "Centre Court". The name was retained when the Club moved in 1922 to the present site in Church Road, although no longer a true description of its location. However, in 1980 four new courts were brought into commission on the north side of the ground, which meant the Centre Court was once more correctly described. The opening of the new No. 1 Court in 1997 emphasised the description. By 1882, activity at the club was almost exclusively confined to lawn tennis and that year the word "croquet" was dropped from the title. However, for sentimental reasons it was restored in 1899. In 1884, the club added the Ladies' Singles competition and the Gentlemen's Doubles was transferred from the Oxford University Lawn Tennis Club. Ladies' doubles and mixed doubles events were added in 1913. The first black player to compete at Wimbledon was Bertrand Milbourne Clark, an amateur from Jamaica, in 1924. Until 1922, the reigning champion had to play only in the final, against whoever had won through to challenge them. As with the other three Major or Grand Slam events, Wimbledon was contested by top-ranked amateur players; professional players were prohibited from participating. This changed with the advent of the open era in 1968. No British man won the singles event at Wimbledon between Fred Perry in 1936 and Andy Murray in 2013, while no British woman has won since Virginia Wade in 1977, although Annabel Croft and Laura Robson won the Girls' Championship in 1984 and 2008 respectively. The Championship was first televised in 1937. Though formally called "The Championships, Wimbledon", depending on sources the event is also known as "The All England Lawn Tennis Championships", the "Wimbledon Championships" or simply "Wimbledon". From 1912 to 1924, the tournament was recognized by the International Lawn Tennis Federation as the "World Grass Court Championships". In the period of 1915–1918, no tournament was organized due to World War I. During World War II, the tournament was not held in the period 1940–1945. On 11 October 1940 one bomb hit a corner of the competitors’ stand of the Centre Court. The championships did go ahead in 1946 even though the damage meant that 1,200 seats were lost. The organisers were unable to repair the damaged section until 1947 and the Centre Court was fully restored and renovated for the 1949 edition. In 1946 and 1947 Wimbledon was held before the French Championships and was thus the second Grand Slam tennis event of the year. Wimbledon is widely considered the world's premier tennis tournament and the priority of the club is to maintain its leadership. To that end a long-term plan was unveiled in 1993, intended to improve the quality of the event for spectators, players, officials and neighbours. Stage one (1994–1997) of the plan was completed for the 1997 championships and involved building the new No. 1 Court in Aorangi Park, a broadcast centre, two extra grass courts and a tunnel under the hill linking Church Road and Somerset Road. Stage two (1997–2009) involved the removal of the old No. 1 Court complex to make way for the new Millennium Building, providing extensive facilities for players, press, officials and members, and the extension of the West Stand of the Centre Court with 728 extra seats. Stage three (2000–2011) was completed with the construction of an entrance building, club staff housing, museum, bank and ticket office. A new retractable roof was built in time for the 2009 championships, marking the first time that rain did not stop play for a lengthy time on Centre Court. The Club tested the new roof at an event called A Centre Court Celebration on Sunday, 17 May 2009, which featured exhibition matches involving Andre Agassi, Steffi Graf, Kim Clijsters, and Tim Henman. The first Championship match to take place under the roof was the completion of the fourth round women's singles match between Dinara Safina and Amélie Mauresmo. The first match to be played in its entirety under the new roof took place between Andy Murray and Stanislas Wawrinka on 29 June 2009. Murray was also involved in the match completed latest in the day at Wimbledon, which ended at 11:02 pm in a victory over Marcos Baghdatis at Centre Court in the third round of the 2012 Championships. The 2012 Gentlemen's Singles Final on 8 July 2012, between Roger Federer and Murray, was the first singles final to be partially played under the roof, which was activated during the third set. A new 4,000-seat No. 2 Court was built on the site of the old No. 13 Court in time for the 2009 Championships. A new 2,000-seat No. 3 Court was built on the site of the old No. 2 and No. 3 Courts. On 1 August 2011, the All England Club transferred all of its assets relating to The Championships to a separate though wholly owned subsidiary, The All England Lawn Tennis Club (Championships) Limited, also known as AELTC. Since that time, the club's activities have been formally conducted separately from those of The Championships. In 2012, the All England Club hosted the Summer Olympic Games and became the first Olympic grass court tournament since tennis was reintroduced as an Olympic sport and the first to be held at a Grand Slam venue in the Open era. In April 2013, Wimbledon unveiled its 'Master Plan' a vision in which to improve the championships over the next 10–15 years. This was in large part due to other Grand Slam tournaments such as the French Open and Australian Open also announcing expansion and re-development plans. Aspects of the master plan included new player and media facilities, expansion of the No.1 court including a new retractable roof, new catering and hospitality areas, additional floor to the museum building, construction of an underground car park and new indoor courts and also a total reconfiguration of the site including the relocation of a number of practice, clay and championship courts. Part of the plan also includes acquiring the land of the adjacent Wimbledon Park Golf club for £65 million, so that the tournament qualifying matches can be played on site. On 19 October 2018, it was announced that a tie-break will be played if the score reaches 12–12 in the final set of any match; this will apply to all competitions including in qualifying, singles, and doubles. In a related statement, it was announced that starting at the 2019 Championships, quad wheelchair competitions would become a permanent event. As a result of the COVID-19 global pandemic, the All England Club announced on 1 April 2020 that the entire grass-court season was to be cancelled as a public safety precaution until June 2021, marking the first time a Wimbledon tournament would not be played since World War II. Club officials considered playing the tournament behind closed doors, but this was ruled out in part because at least 5,000 people–including ballboys, officials, coaches, maintenance, and security–would have still needed to be on site to hold a functioning tournament. Former player and current All England Club board member Tim Henman told the Tennis Channel of the US that the board had carefully considered holding a closed-door Wimbledon. However, the sheer number of people who still would have needed to be on site led the board to realise "that wasn't going to be a workable option". Prior to the start of the 2003 tournament, the club began paying an annual insurance premium of £1.61m ($2 million) to cover losses from cancellation of Wimbledon in the event of a worldwide pandemic as a result of the SARS outbreak; it would receive an insurance payment of £114 million ($141 million) for the 2020 cancellation on expected losses of around £250 million ($312 million). In April 2022, due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the All England Club announced that Russian and Belarusian players would be prohibited from competing in the tournament. Unlike the ATP and WTA, participation as neutral athletes is also prohibited. On 20 May 2022, the ATP, ITF, and WTA announced that they will not award ranking points for the tournament, as they considered the prohibition unilateral, and constituted discrimination against players based on nationality. On 31 March 2023, the ban on Russian and Belarusian players was lifted by the All England Club. Wimbledon consists of five main events, four junior events and seven invitation events. The five main events, and the number of players (or teams, in the case of doubles) are: Gentlemen's Singles (128) Ladies' Singles (128) Gentlemen's Doubles (64) Ladies' Doubles (64) Mixed Doubles (48) The four junior events and the number of players or teams are: Boys' Singles (64) Girls' Singles (64) Boys' Doubles (32) Girls' Doubles (32) No mixed doubles event is held at this level The seven invitational events and the number of pairs are: Gentlemen's Invitation Doubles (8 pairs Round Robin) Ladies' Invitation Doubles (8 pairs Round Robin) Senior Gentlemen's Invitation Doubles (8 pairs Round Robin) Gentlemen's Wheelchair Singles Ladies' Wheelchair Singles Gentlemen's Wheelchair Doubles (4 pairs) Ladies' Wheelchair Doubles (4 pairs) Matches in the Gentlemen's Singles are best-of-five sets. In 2023 it was decided that Gentlemen's Doubles match formats will be changed from best-of-five sets to best-of-three sets due to complaints from partaking players; all other events are best-of-three sets. Up to and including the 2018 tournament, a tiebreak game is played if the score reaches 6–all in any set except the fifth (in a five-set match) or the third (in a three-set match), in which case a two-game lead must be reached. Since 2019, a final set tiebreak game is played if the score in the final set reaches 12–all. In 2022 it was decided all matches would have a final set tiebreak once the match reached 6–6, with a champions tiebreak taking place meaning the winner needs to get to 10 points and win by two points. If the score is 9–9 play continues until one player wins by two points. All events are single-elimination tournaments, except for the Gentlemen's, Senior Gentlemen's and the Ladies' Invitation Doubles, which are round-robin tournaments. Up to 1921, the winners of the previous year's competition (except in the Ladies' Doubles and Mixed Doubles) were automatically granted byes into the final round (then known as the challenge round). This led to many winners retaining their titles in successive years, as they were able to rest while their opponent competed from the start of the competition. Since 1922, the prior year's champions were required to play all the rounds, like other tournament competitors. Each year the tournament begins on the last Monday in June or first Monday in July, two weeks after the Queen's Club Championships, which is one of the men's major warm-up tournaments, together with the Gerry Weber Open, which is held in Halle, Germany, during the same week. Other grass-court tournaments before Wimbledon are Eastbourne, Great Britain, and Rosmalen in the Netherlands, both combining mixed events. The other women's warm-up tournament for Wimbledon is Birmingham, also in Great Britain. The men's event which is outside Europe before Wimbledon is the Antalya open in Turkey. The only grass-court tournament scheduled after the Championships is the Hall of Fame Tennis Championships at Newport, Rhode Island, USA, which takes place the week after Wimbledon. Wimbledon is scheduled for 14 days, beginning on a Monday and ending on a Sunday. Before 1982 it ended a day earlier, with the women's singles final on the Friday and the men's singles final on the Saturday. The five main events span both weeks, but the junior and invitational events are held mainly during the second week. Traditionally, unlike the other three tennis Grand Slams, there was no play on the "Middle Sunday", which is considered a rest day. However, rain has forced play on the Middle Sunday four times, in 1991, 1997, 2004 and 2016. On the first of these four occasions, Wimbledon staged a "People's Sunday", with unreserved seating and readily available, inexpensive tickets, allowing those with more limited means to sit on the show courts. Before 2022, the second Monday at Wimbledon was often called "Manic Monday", because it is the busiest day with the last-16 matches for both men's and women's singles, where fans have a pick of watching on a single day, any of the best 32 players left; which is also unique in a Grand Slam singles competition. Since 2015, the championships have begun one week later than in previous years, extending the gap between the tournament and the French Open from two to three weeks. Additionally the Stuttgart Open men's tournament converted to a grass surface and was rescheduled from July to June, extending the grass court season. Since 2009 all matches have to finish before 11:00pm. Wimbledon is the only Grand Slam that retains a night-time curfew. The curfew is in place to protect local residents from late-night disturbances. When the roof was built on Centre Court - something that allowed matches to continue at night under the lights, the local Merton Council put the time limit into place when granting planning permission for the roof. A statement from Wimbledon in 2018 read: “The 11pm curfew is a Planning Condition applied to balance the consideration of the local residents with the scale of an international tennis event that takes place in a residential area. The challenge of transport connectivity and getting visitors home safely is also a key consideration.” Both the men's and ladies' singles consist of 128 players. Players and doubles pairs are admitted to the main events on the basis of their international rankings, with 104 direct entries into the men's and 108 into the ladies' competitions. Both tournaments have 8 wild card entrants, with the remainder in each made up of qualifiers. Since the 2001 tournament, 32 players have been given seedings in the Gentlemen's and Ladies' singles, 16 teams in the doubles events. The system of seeding was introduced during the 1924 Wimbledon Championships. This was a simplified version allowing countries to nominate four players who were placed in different quarters of the draw. This system was replaced for the 1927 Wimbledon Championships and from then on players were seeded on merit. The first players to be seeded as no. 1 were René Lacoste and Helen Wills. The Committee of Management decide which players receive wildcards. Usually, wild cards are players who have performed well during previous tournaments or would stimulate public interest in Wimbledon by participating. The only wild card to win the Gentlemen's Singles Championship was Goran Ivanišević in 2001. Players and pairs who neither have high enough rankings nor receive wild cards may participate in a qualifying tournament held one week before Wimbledon at the Bank of England Sports Ground in Roehampton. The singles qualifying competitions are three-round events. From 2019 singles qualification will increase to 128 players and no doubles qualification will occur. Previously the same-sex doubles competitions lasted for only two rounds. There is no qualifying tournament for Mixed Doubles. The furthest that any qualifier has progressed in a Singles tournament is the semi-final round: John McEnroe in 1977 (Gentlemen's Singles), Vladimir Voltchkov in 2000 (Gentlemen's Singles), and Alexandra Stevenson in 1999 (Ladies' Singles).[citation needed] Players are admitted to the junior tournaments upon the recommendations of their national tennis associations, on their International Tennis Federation world rankings and, in the case of the singles events, on the basis of a qualifying competition. The Committee of Management determines which players may enter the four invitational events. The Committee seeds the top players and pairs on the basis of their rankings, but it could change the seedings based on a player's previous grass court performance. Since 2002 a seeding committee has not been required for the Gentlemen's Singles following an agreement with the ATP, and since the 2021 tournament, the seeding has followed the same process as the ATP rankings. From 2002 to 2019, the top 32 players (according to the ATP rankings) were seeded according to a formula that more heavily weighted previous grass-court tournaments: ATP Entry System Position points + 100% points earned for all grass court tournaments in the past 12 months + 75% points earned for the best grass court tournament in the 12 months before that. A majority of the entrants are unseeded. Only two unseeded players have won the Gentlemen's Singles: Boris Becker in 1985 and Goran Ivanišević in 2001. In 1985 there were only 16 seeds and Becker was ranked 20th; Ivanišević was ranked 125th when he won as a Wild Card entrant, although he had previously been a finalist three times, and been ranked no. 2 in the world; his low ranking was due to having been hampered by a persistent shoulder injury for three years, which had only just cleared up. In 1996, the title was won by Richard Krajicek, who was originally unseeded (ranked 17th, and only 16 players were seeded) but was promoted to a seeded position (still with the number 17) when Thomas Muster withdrew before the tournament. In 2023, the Ladies' Singles title was captured for the first time by an unseeded player, Marketa Vondrousova, who ranked 42 in the world. Previously, the lowest seeded female champion was Venus Williams, who won in 2007 as the 23rd seed; Williams was returning from an injury that had prevented her playing in previous tournaments, giving her a lower ranking than she would normally have had. Unseeded pairs have won the doubles titles on numerous occasions; the 2005 Gentlemen's Doubles champions were not only unseeded, but also (for the first time ever) qualifiers. Since 2001, the courts used for Wimbledon have been sown with 100% perennial ryegrass. Prior to 2001 a combination of 70% ryegrass and 30% Creeping Red Fescue was used. The change was made to improve durability and strengthen the sward to better withstand the increasing wear of the modern game. The main show courts, Centre Court and No. 1 Court, are normally used for only two weeks a year, during the Championships, but play can extend into a third week in exceptional circumstances. The remaining 17 courts are regularly used for other events hosted by the club. The show courts were in action for the second time in three months in 2012 as Wimbledon hosted the tennis events of the 2012 Olympic Games. One of the show courts is also used for home ties for the Great Britain teams in the Davis Cup on occasions. Wimbledon is the only remaining Grand Slam event played on natural grass courts. At one time, all the Majors, except the French Open, were played on grass. The US Open abandoned grass in 1975 for green clay and the Australian Open did so in 1988 for hard courts; the US Open eventually adopted hard courts as well. From 1877 until 1921, the club's grounds were situated on four acres of meadowland in central Wimbledon between Worple Road and the railway line. In 1908, this venue hosted the tennis events for the 1908 Summer Olympic Games. As the attendance at the Championships grew, it became obvious before the First World War that the 8,000 ground capacity at Worple Road was inadequate, and so the Club started looking for a new site. It eventually settled on an area of land off Church Road, to the north of Wimbledon town centre, and moved to its new home in 1922. At the time the relocation was regarded as something of a financial gamble, costing as it did approximately £140,000. After the Club moved to the current site in Church Road, the old Worple Road ground then became the Wimbledon High School playing field, which it remains today. The principal court at Church Road, Centre Court, was inaugurated in 1922. The new venue was substantially larger and was needed to meet the ever-growing public demand. Due to the possibility of rain during Wimbledon, a retractable roof was installed prior to the 2009 Championship. It is designed to close/open fully in 20 minutes and will be closed primarily to protect play from inclement (and, if necessary, extremely hot) weather during The Championships. Whilst the roof is being opened or closed, play is suspended. The first time the roof was closed during a Wimbledon Championship match was on Monday 29 June 2009, involving Amélie Mauresmo and Dinara Safina. The first full match played and completed under the roof featured Andy Murray and Stan Wawrinka, played on the same date. The court has a capacity of 14,979. At its south end is the Royal Box, from which members of the Royal Family and other dignitaries watch matches. Centre Court usually hosts the finals and semifinals of the main events, as well as many matches in the earlier rounds involving top-seeded players or local favourites. The second most important court is No. 1 Court. The court was constructed in 1997 to replace the old No.1 Court, which was adjacent to Centre Court. The old No.1 Court was demolished because its capacity for spectators was too low. The court was said to have had a unique, more intimate atmosphere and was a favourite of many players. Construction of a new retractable roof on the No.1 Court began after the 2017 Championships and was completed in time for the 2019 championships. The capacity of the stadium also rose by 900 to 12,345. Since 2009, a new No. 2 Court has been used at Wimbledon with a capacity for 4,000 people. To obtain planning permission, the playing surface is around 3.5m below ground level, ensuring that the single-storey structure is only about 3.5m above ground level, and thus not affecting local views. Plans to build on the current site of Court 13 were dismissed due to the high capacity of games played at the 2012 Olympic Games. The old No.2 Court has been renamed as No.3 Court. The old No.2 Court was known as the "Graveyard of Champions" because many highly seeded players were eliminated there during early rounds over the years, including Ilie Năstase, John McEnroe, Boris Becker, Andre Agassi, Pete Sampras, Martina Hingis, Venus Williams, Serena Williams and Maria Sharapova. The court has a capacity of 2,192 + 770 standing. In 2011 a new No.3 Court and a new Court 4 were unveiled on the sites of the old No.2 and 3 courts. Because of the summer climate in southern England, Wimbledon employs 'Court Attendants' each year, who work to maintain court conditions. Their principal responsibility is to ensure that the courts are quickly covered when it begins to rain, so that play can resume as quickly as possible once the referees decide to uncover the courts. The outer court attendants are mainly university students working to make summer money. Centre Court is covered by full-time groundstaff, however. At the northern end of the grounds is a giant television screen on which important matches are broadcast to fans inside the grounds without tickets to the relevant court. Fans watch from a gently inclined area of grass officially known as the Aorangi Terrace. When British players do well at Wimbledon, this area attracts fans for them, and is often renamed after them by the press: Greg Rusedski's followers convened at "Rusedski Ridge", and Tim Henman has had the hill nicknamed Henman Hill. As both of them have now retired and Andy Murray is the most successful current British player, the hill is occasionally referred to as "Murray Mound" or "Murrayfield", as a reference to his Scottish heritage and the Scottish rugby ground of the same name, but this has largely failed to catch on – the area is still often referred to as Henman Hill.[citation needed] None of these nicknames are the official name. An attempt was made to destroy the grounds in 1913, during the suffragette bombing and arson campaign. The suffragettes, as part of their campaign for women's votes before the First World War, had begun carrying out politically motivated arson and bombings across the country. On the night of 27 February 1913, a suffragette woman "between the ages of 30–35" was arrested within the grounds, after being spotted by a groundsman climbing over a hedge at around midnight. She was found to have with her some paraffin and wood shavings, for the purpose of setting fires in the grounds. The woman refused to give her name or any information to the police and was later sentenced to two months' imprisonment. The qualifying matches, prior to the main draw, take place at the Bank of England Sports Ground, in Roehampton, 3.6 miles (5.8 km) from the All England Club. Social commentator Ellis Cashmore describes Wimbledon as having "a David Niven-ish propriety", in trying to conform to the standards of behaviour regarded as common in the 1950s. Writer Peter York sees the event as representing a particular white, upper middle class, affluent type of Britishness, describing the area of Wimbledon as "a southern, well off, late-Victorian suburb with a particular social character". Cashmore has criticised the event for being "remote and insulated" from the changing multicultural character of modern Britain, describing it as "nobody's idea of all-things-British".[importance?] In the championship games, ball boys and girls, known as BBGs, have a brief that a good BBG "should not be seen. They should blend into the background and get on with their jobs quietly." From 1947 ball boys were recruited from Goldings, the only Barnardos school to provide them. Prior to this, from the 1920s onwards, the ball boys came from The Shaftesbury Children's Home. Since 1969, BBGs have been drawn from local schools. Traditionally, Wandsworth Boys School in Sutherland Grove, Southfields and Mayfield Girls School on West Hill in Wandsworth (only Southfields remains extant), were the schools of choice for selection of BBGs. This was possibly owing to their proximity to the club. Since 2008 they have been drawn from schools in the London boroughs of Merton, Sutton, Kingston, and Wandsworth, as well as from Surrey. BBGs have an average age of 15, being drawn from the school years nine and ten. They serve for one, or if re-selected, for up to five tournaments, up to year thirteen. Starting in 2005, BBGs work in teams of six, two at the net, four at the corners, and teams rotate one hour on court, one hour off, (two hours depending on the court) for the day's play. Teams are not told which court they will be working on the day, to ensure the same standards across all courts. With the expansion of the number of courts, and lengthening the tennis day, as of 2008, the number of BBGs required is around 250. Starting on the second Wednesday, the number of BBGs is reduced due to the decrease in the number of matches per day, leaving around 80 on the final Sunday. Each BBG receives a certificate, a can of used balls, a group photograph and a programme when leaving. BBG service is paid, with a total of £160-£250 being paid to each ball boy or girl after the 13-day period, depending on the number of days served, around £17 per day. Every BBG keeps their kit. BBG places are split 50:50 between boys and girls, with girls having been included since 1977, appearing on centre court since 1985. Prospective BBGs are first nominated by their school headteacher, to be considered for selection. To be selected, a candidate must pass written tests on the rules of tennis, and pass fitness, mobility and other suitability tests, against initial preliminary instruction material. Successful candidates then commence a training phase, starting in February, in which the final BBGs are chosen through continual assessment. As of 2008, this training intake was 600. The training includes weekly sessions of physical, procedural and theoretical instruction, to ensure that the BBGs are fast, alert, self-confident and adaptable to situations. As of 2011, early training occurs at the Wimbledon All England Lawn Tennis Club Covered Courts, to the side of the Grounds, and then moves to outside courts (8, 9, 10) the week before the Championships to ensure that BBGs gain a feel of the grass court.[citation needed] At The Championships at Wimbledon, forty-two chair umpires are assigned each day and usually work two matches a day. They use tablet computers to score each match and these scores are displayed on the scoreboards and on wimbledon.com. Line umpires work in teams of nine or seven. Teams of nine umpires work the Centre Court and Court numbers 1, 2, 3, 12, and 18 with the remaining teams of seven working the other courts. These teams rotate, working sixty minutes on the court and then sixty minutes off. In 2007 a new technology called Hawk-Eye was introduced. This technology can show whether the ball bounces in bounds or out. Wimbledon has started using this technology but continues to use line umpires as well. However the players are only allowed to ask to see this 3 times during one match. Dark green and purple are the traditional Wimbledon colours. However, all tennis players participating in the tournament are required to wear all-white or at least almost all-white clothing, a long-time tradition at Wimbledon. This rule was put in place in 1963, when the tournament’s first dress code was enforced. Wearing white clothing with some colour accents is also acceptable, provided the colour scheme is not that of an identifiable commercial brand logo (the outfitter's brand logo being the sole exception). Controversy followed Martina Navratilova's wearing branding for "Kim" cigarettes in 1982. Green clothing was worn by the chair umpire, linesmen, ball boys and ball girls until the 2005 Championships; however, beginning with the 2006 Championships, officials, ball boys and ball girls were dressed in new navy blue- and cream-coloured uniforms from American designer Ralph Lauren. By tradition, the "Men's" and "Women's" competitions are referred to as "Gentlemen's" and "Ladies'" competitions at Wimbledon. The junior competitions are referred to as the "Boys'" and "Girls'" competitions. Prior to 2009, female players were referred to by the title "Miss" or "Mrs" on scoreboards. On the Wimbledon's Champions Board, married female players were referred to by their husband's name up until 2019. For the first time during the 2009 tournament, players were referred to on scoreboards by both their first and last names. The title "Mr" is not used for male players who are professionals on scoreboards but is retained for amateurs, although chair umpires refer to players as "Mr" when they use the replay challenge. The chair umpire will say "Mr <surname> is challenging the call..." and "Mr. <surname> has X challenges remaining." Up until 2018, the chair umpire said "Miss"/"Mrs" <surname> when announcing the score of the Ladies' matches. However, the chair umpire no longer calls "Miss"/"Mrs" <surname> when announcing the score, since 2019. As of the 2022 edition of the tournament, the use of Mr, Miss and Mrs was eliminated entirely: players are now referred to by their names, as written on the scoreboard by the umpire at all points in a match. If a match is being played with two competitors of the same surname (e.g. Venus and Serena Williams, Bob and Mike Bryan), the chair umpire will specify to whom they are referring by stating the player's first name and surname during announcements (e.g. "Game, Venus Williams", "Advantage, Mike Bryan"). Previously, players bowed or curtsied to members of the royal family seated in the Royal Box upon entering or leaving Centre Court. However, in 2003, All England Club president Prince Edward, Duke of Kent decided to discontinue the tradition. Now, players are required to bow or curtsy only if the Prince of Wales or the King is present, as was in practice during the 2010 Championships when Elizabeth II was in attendance at Wimbledon on 24 June. On 27 June 2012, Roger Federer said in his post-match interview that he and his opponent had been asked to bow towards the Royal Box as Prince Charles and his wife were present, saying that it was not a problem for him. Prior to the Second World War, members of the Brigade of Guards and retired members of the Royal Artillery performed the role of stewards. In 1946 the AELTC offered employment to wartime servicemen returning to civilian life during their demobilisation leave. Initially, this scheme extended only to the Royal Navy, followed by the British Army in 1947 and the Royal Air Force in 1949. In 1965 London Fire Brigade members joined the ranks of stewards. The service stewards, wearing uniform, are present in Centre Court and No.'s 1, 2, 3, 12 and 18 courts. In 2015, 595 Service and London Fire Brigade stewards attended. Only enlisted members of the Armed Forces may apply for the role, which must be taken as leave, and half of each year's recruits must have stewarded at Wimbledon before. The AELTC pays a subsistence allowance to servicemen and women working as stewards to defray their accommodation costs for the period of the Championships. The Service Stewards are not to be confused with the 185 Honorary Stewards. The majority of centre and show court tickets sold to the general public have since 1924 been made available by a public ballot that the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club holds at the start of the year. The ballot has always been substantially oversubscribed. Successful applicants are selected at random by a computer. The most recent figures from 2011 suggested there were four applicants to every ballot ticket. Applications must be posted to arrive at the AELTC by the last day of December in the year prior to the tournament. Seats and days are allocated randomly and ballot tickets are not transferable. The All England Club, through its subsidiary The All England Lawn Tennis Ground plc, issues debentures to tennis fans every five years to raise funds for capital expenditure. Fans who invest thus in the club receive a pair of tickets for every day of the Wimbledon Championships for the five years the investment lasts. Only debenture holders are permitted to sell on their tickets to third parties and demand for debentures has increased in recent[when?] years, to such an extent that they are even traded on the London Stock Exchange.[citation needed] Wimbledon and the French Open are the only Grand Slam tournaments where fans without tickets for play can queue up and still get seats on the three show courts on the day of the match. Sequentially numbered queue cards were introduced in 2003. From 2008, there is a single queue, allotted about 500 seats for each court. When they join the queue, fans are handed queue cards. Anyone who then wishes to leave the queue temporarily, even if in possession of a queue card, must agree their position with the others nearby in the queue or a steward. To get access to the show courts, fans normally have to queue overnight. This is done by fans from all over the world and, although considered vagrancy, is part of the Wimbledon experience in itself. The All-England Club allows overnight queuing and provides toilet and water facilities for campers. Early in the morning when the line moves towards the Grounds, stewards walk along the line and hand out wristbands that are colour-coded to the specific court. The wrist band (and payment) is exchanged at the ticket office for the ticket when the grounds open. General admission to the grounds gives access to the outer courts and is possible without queuing overnight. Tickets returned by people leaving early go on sale at 2:30 pm and the money goes to charity. Queuing for the show courts ends after the quarter finals have been completed. At 2.40pm on Day Seven (Monday 28 June) of the 2010 Championships, the one-millionth numbered Wimbledon queue card was handed out to Rose Stanley from South Africa. Unlike other tournaments, advertising from major brands is minimal and low key, from suppliers such as IBM, Rolex and Slazenger. Wimbledon is notable for the longest running sponsorship in sports history due to its association with Slazenger who have supplied all tennis balls for the tournament since 1902. Between 1935 and 2021, Wimbledon had a sponsorship deal with Robinsons fruit squash – one of the longest sponsorships in sport. In February 2024, alongside the Australian, French and US Open Tennis Championships, it is announced that Emirates would sponsor Wimbledon for the first time in the tennis tournament's 147-year history. Strawberries and cream are traditionally eaten by spectators at Wimbledon and have become culturally synonymous with the tournament. The story behind this tradition is about when King Henry VIII visited Cardinal Thomas Wolsey. Wolsey’s home was at Hampton Court, about six miles from Wimbledon. The rumor is that the chancellor’s cook served wild strawberries and cream as a dessert while the King was there. Since the King ate it, the dessert gained popularity. In 2017, fans consumed 34,000 kg (33 imperial tons) of British strawberries and 10,000 litres (2,200 imperial gallons) of cream. In 2019, 191,930 portions of strawberries and cream were served at The Championships at Wimbledon. Until 2011 when its contract ended, Radio Wimbledon could be heard within a five-mile radius on 87.7 FM, and also online. It operated under a Restricted Service Licence. Presenters included Sam Lloyd and Ali Barton. Typically they worked alternate four-hour shifts until the end of the last match of the day. Reporters and commentators included Gigi Salmon, Nick Lestor, Rupert Bell, Nigel Bidmead, Guy Swindells, Lucie Ahl, Nadine Towell and Helen Whitaker. Often they reported from the "Crow's Nest", an elevated building housing the Court 3 and 4 scoreboards which affords views of most of the outside courts. Regular guests included Sue Mappin. In later years Radio Wimbledon acquired a second low-power FM frequency (within the grounds only) of 96.3 FM for uninterrupted Centre Court commentary, and, from 2006, a third for coverage from No. 1 Court on 97.8 FM. Hourly news bulletins and travel (using RDS) were also broadcast. Radio Wimbledon's theme tune is called "Purple and Green" and has been used since 1996 when it was composed by a British Composer called Tony Cox. Beginning with the 2018 tournament, an in-house operation known as Wimbledon Broadcasting Services (WBS) has served as the official host broadcaster of the tournament, replacing BBC Sport. Since 1937 the BBC has broadcast the tournament on television in the United Kingdom. Between 1956 and 1968 The Championships were also covered by the ITV Network, but since 1969 the BBC has had a monopoly. The matches covered are primarily split between its two main terrestrial channels, BBC One and BBC Two, and their Red Button service. This can result in live matches being moved across all 3 channels. The BBC holds the broadcast rights for Wimbledon until 2027. During the days of British Satellite Broadcasting, its sports channel carried extra coverage of Wimbledon for subscribers. One of the most notable British commentators was Dan Maskell, who was known as the BBC's "voice of tennis" until his retirement in 1991. John Barrett succeeded him in that role until he retired in 2006. Current commentators working for the BBC at Wimbledon include British ex-players Andrew Castle, John Lloyd, Tim Henman, Greg Rusedski, Samantha Smith and Mark Petchey; tennis legends such as John McEnroe, Tracy Austin, Boris Becker and Lindsay Davenport; and general sports commentators including David Mercer, Barry Davies, Andrew Cotter and Nick Mullins. The coverage is presented by Sue Barker (live) and Claire Balding (highlights). Previous BBC presenters include Des Lynam, David Vine, John Inverdale and Harry Carpenter. The Wimbledon Finals are obliged to be shown live and in full on terrestrial television (BBC Television Service, ITV, Channel 4, or Channel 5) by government mandate. Highlights of the rest of the tournament must be provided by terrestrial stations; live coverage (excepting the finals) may be sought by satellite or cable TV. The BBC was forced to apologise after many viewers complained about "over-talking" by its commentary team during the TV coverage of the event in 2011. It said in a statement that views on commentary were subjective but that they "do appreciate that over-talking can irritate our audience". The BBC added that it hoped it had achieved "the right balance" across its coverage and was "of course sorry if on occasion you have not been satisfied". Tim Henman and John McEnroe were among the ex-players commentating. Wimbledon was also involved in a piece of television history, when on 1 July 1967 the first official colour television broadcast took place in the UK. Four hours live coverage of the 1967 Championships was shown on BBC Two, which was the first television channel in Europe to regularly broadcast in colour. Footage of that historic match no longer survives, however, the Gentlemen's Final of that year is still held in the BBC archives because it was the first Gentlemen's Final transmitted in colour. The tennis balls used were traditionally white, but were switched to yellow in 1986 to make them stand out for colour television. Since 2007, Wimbledon matches have been transmitted in high-definition, originally on the BBC's free-to-air channel BBC HD, with continual live coverage during the tournament of Centre Court and Court No. 1 as well as an evening highlights show Today at Wimbledon. Coverage is now shown on BBC One and Two's HD feeds. Beginning 2018, all centre court matches are televised in 4K ultra-high-definition. The BBC's opening theme music for Wimbledon was composed by Keith Mansfield and is titled "Light and Tuneful". A piece titled "A Sporting Occasion" is the traditional closing theme. The finally notes of this theme are regularly used to end BBC One and BBC Two Wimbledon transmissions. For the end of broadcast at the conclusion of the tournament a montage set to popular music is traditionally used instead. Mansfield also composed the piece "World Champion", used by NBC during intervals (change-overs, set breaks, etc.) and at the close of broadcasts throughout the tournament. In Ireland, RTÉ broadcast the tournament during the 1980s and 1990s on their second channel RTÉ Two, they also provided highlights of the games in the evening. The commentary provided was given by Matt Doyle a former Irish-American professional tennis player and Jim Sherwin a former RTÉ newsreader. Caroline Murphy was the presenter of the programme. RTÉ made the decision in 1998 to discontinue broadcasting the tournament due to falling viewing figures and the large number of viewers watching on the BBC. From 2005 until 2014 TG4 Ireland's Irish-language broadcaster provided coverage of the tournament. Live coverage was provided in the Irish language while they broadcast highlights in English at night. In 2015 Wimbledon moved to pay TV broadcaster Setanta Sports under a 3-year agreement. Its successor, Eir Sport, took over broadcasting rights in Ireland until its demise in 2021. In the United States, ABC began showing taped highlights of the Wimbledon Gentlemen's Singles Final in the 1960s on its Wide World of Sports series. NBC began a 43-year run of covering Wimbledon in 1969, with same-day taped (and often edited) coverage of the Gentlemen's Singles Final. In 1979, the network began carrying the Gentlemen's and Ladies' Singles Finals live. For the next few decades, Americans made a tradition of NBC's "Breakfast at Wimbledon" specials at weekends. Live coverage started early in the morning (the US being a minimum of 5 hours behind the UK) and continued well into the afternoon, interspersed with commentary and interviews from Bud Collins, whose tennis acumen and famous patterned trousers were well known to tennis fans in the US. Collins was sacked by NBC in 2007, but was promptly hired by ESPN, the cable home for The Championships in the States. For many years NBC's primary Wimbledon host was veteran broadcaster Dick Enberg. From 1975 to 1999, premium channel HBO carried weekday coverage of Wimbledon. Hosts included Jim Lampley, Billie Jean King, Martina Navratilova, John Lloyd and Barry MacKay among others. ESPN took over as the cable-television partner in 2003. The AELTC grew frustrated with NBC's policy of waiting to begin its quarterfinal and semifinal coverage until after the conclusion of Today at 10 a.m. local, as well as broadcasting live only to the Eastern Time Zone and using tape-delay in all others. NBC also held over high-profile matches for delayed broadcast in its window, regardless of any ongoing matches. In one notorious incident in 2009, ESPN2's coverage of the Tommy Haas–Novak Djokovic quarterfinal was forced off the air nationwide when it ran past 10 a.m. Eastern, after which NBC showed the conclusion of the match on tape only after presenting the previous Ivo Karlović–Roger Federer quarterfinal in full. Beginning with the 2012 tournament, coverage moved to ESPN and ESPN2, marking the second major tennis championship (after the Australian Open) where live coverage is exclusively on pay television, while ESPN Deportes provide the coverage in Spanish. The finals are also broadcast tape-delayed on ABC. On 9 July 2021, ESPN and AELTC reached an agreement to extend the coverage for 12 years, beginning from 2024 until 2035. This agreement is including live coverage on ABC of play on the middle weekend which begins in 2022, after AELTC announces will no longer schedule a rest day on its middle Sunday. Taped coverage using the world feed is aired in primetime and overnights on Tennis Channel and is branded Wimbledon Primetime. In Canada, coverage of Wimbledon is exclusively carried by TSN and RDS, which are co-owned by Bell Media and ESPN. Prior to 2012, CBC Television and SRC were the primary broadcaster of Wimbledon for Canada, and its live coverage of the tournament predated "Breakfast at Wimbledon" by over a decade, Canada being at least four hours from its fellow Commonwealth realm. In Mexico, the Televisa family of networks has aired Wimbledon since the early 1960s. Presently, most weekend matches are broadcast through Canal 5 with the weekday matches broadcast on the Televisa Deportes Network. As Mexico is six hours behind the U.K., some Canal 5 affiliates air the weekend matches as the first program of the day after sign-on. Although Mexico had begun broadcasting in colour in 1962, Wimbledon continued to air in black and white in Mexico until colour television came to the United Kingdom in 1967. In most of the remainder of Latin America, Wimbledon airs on ESPN, as do the other Grand Slam tournaments. In Brazil, SporTV has exclusive rights to the broadcast. In several European countries, Wimbledon is shown live on Eurosport 1, Eurosport 2 and the Eurosport Player. Although there are some exceptions, as in Denmark, where the Danish TV2 holds the right to show matches until 2022 and in Italy where Sky Sport and SuperTennis holds the rights to show live matches until 2022. In the Netherlands Center Court is shown live on Eurosport 1 and all other courts are shown live on the Eurosport Player. But Court One is covered live on Ziggo Sport/Ziggo Sport Select. Wimbledon has been exclusively broadcast on Sky Sport in Germany since 2007. In December 2018, Sky extended its contract for Austria, Germany and Switzerland until 2022. In Australia, the free-to-air Nine Network covered Wimbledon for almost 40 years but decided to drop their broadcast following the 2010 tournament, citing declining ratings and desire to use money saved to bid on other sports coverage. In April 2011, it was announced that the Seven Network, the then-host broadcaster of the Australian Open, along with its sister channel 7Two would broadcast the event from 2011. Pay television network Fox Sports Australia also covered the event. Free-to-air coverage returned to Nine Network in 2021. In India and its Subcontinental region, it is broadcast on Star Sports. In Pakistan it is broadcast on PTV Sports. Coverage is free-to-air in New Zealand through TVNZ One, beginning each night at 11 pm (midday in London). In 2017 their new channel, TVNZ Duke (also free-to-air), carried an alternative to the main feed, including (for example) matches on outside courts involving New Zealand players. Fox Sports Asia held broadcasting rights across Southeast Asia from 1992 until network's shutdown in 2021. SPOTV currently holds broadcasting rights across Southeast Asia. Most matches are also available for viewing through internet betting websites and other live streaming services, as television cameras are set up to provide continuous coverage on nearly all the courts. The Gentlemen's Singles champion is presented with a silver gilt cup 18.5 inches (about 47 cm) in height and 7.5 inches (about 19 cm) in diameter. The trophy is decorated with a variety of symbols, including a miniature gold pineapple. The trophy has been awarded since 1887 and bears the inscription: "All England Lawn Tennis Club Single Handed Championship of the World". The actual trophy remains the property of the All England Club in their museum, so the champion receives a three-quarter size replica of the Cup bearing the names of all past Champions (height 13.5 inches, 34 cm). The Ladies' Singles champion is presented with a sterling silver salver commonly known as the "Venus Rosewater Dish", or simply the "Rosewater Dish". The salver, which is 18.75 inches (about 48 cm) in diameter, is decorated with figures from mythology. The actual dish remains the property of the All England Club in their museum, so the champion receives a miniature replica bearing the names of all past Champions. From 1949 to 2006 the replica was 8 inches in diameter, and since 2007 it has been a three-quarter size replica with a diameter of 13.5 inches. The winner of the Gentlemen's Doubles, Ladies' Doubles, and Mixed Doubles events receive silver cups. A trophy is awarded to each player in the Doubles pair, unlike the other Grand Slam tournaments where the winning Doubles duo shares a single trophy. The Gentlemen's Doubles silver challenge cup was originally from the Oxford University Lawn Tennis Club and donated to the All England Club in 1884. The Ladies' Doubles Trophy, a silver cup and cover known as The Duchess of Kent Challenge Cup, was presented to the All England Club in 1949 by The Duchess of Kent. The Mixed Doubles Trophy is a silver challenge cup and cover presented to the All England Club by the family of two-time Wimbledon doubles winner Sydney Smith. The runner-up in each event receives an inscribed silver plate. The trophies are usually presented by the Patron of the All England Club, The Princess of Wales. Prize money was first awarded in 1968, the year that professional players were allowed to compete in the Championships for the first time. Total prize money was £26,150; the winner of the men's title earned £2,000 (equivalent to £36,900 in 2021) while the women's singles champion received £750 (equivalent to £13,800 in 2021). In 2007, Wimbledon and the French Open became the last grand slam tournaments to award unequal prize money to women and men. The bulk of the increases in 2012 were given to players losing in earlier rounds. This move was in response to the growing angst among lower-ranked players concerning the inadequacy of their pay. Sergiy Stakhovsky, a member of the ATP Player Council and who was at the time ranked 68th, was among the most vocal in the push for higher pay for players who bow out in the earlier rounds. In an interview Stakhovsky intimated that it is not uncommon for lower-ranked players to be in financial debt after playing certain tour events, if they had a poor result. Doubles prize money is per team. Ranking points for the ATP and WTA have varied at Wimbledon through the years but at present singles players receive the following points: Gentlemen's singles Ladies' singles Gentlemen's doubles Ladies' doubles Mixed doubles All champions Tennis portal London portal 2012 Summer Olympics venues List of British finalists at Grand Slam tennis tournaments Wimbledon (film) Wimbledon Effect Lists of champions List of Wimbledon champions (all events) List of Wimbledon gentlemen's singles champions List of Wimbledon ladies' singles champions List of Wimbledon gentlemen's doubles champions List of Wimbledon ladies' doubles champions List of Wimbledon mixed doubles champions List of Wimbledon singles finalists during the Open Era, records and statistics Other Grand Slam tournaments Australian Open French Open US Open Except Centre Court & No. 1 Court during rain; each having a retractable roof In the main draws, there are 128 singles players (S) and 64 doubles teams (D), and there are 128 and 16 entrants in the respective qualifying (Q) draws. Informally known as The Championships, Wimbledon A Centre Court did not yet exist during the first four years of the championship. To date only four finals were played on a Monday due to rain: 1919, 1922, 1988, and 2001. The men who are eligible for the Gentlemen's Invitation Doubles are 35 years old and older. The men who are eligible for the Senior Gentlemen's Invitation Doubles are 45 years old and older. In a single-elimination tournament, a losing player or team is eliminated from the tournament. Guidelines regarding the prominently-white clothing rule include no solid mass of colouring; coloured trims not to exceed 1 cm; shirt or dress backs to be totally white; all other items of clothing, including shorts, shirts, caps, headbands, socks, and shoe uppers to be predominantly white. During the first year of television coverage in 1937 the BBC used two cameras at the Centre Court to transmit matches for a maximum of half an hour a day. The first match to be broadcast was between Bunny Austin and George Lyttleton-Rogers. In Renshaw's era, the defending champion was exempt from playing in the main draw, playing only in the final. This policy was abolished in 1922. "Prize Money and Finance". All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club. Archived from the original on 23 June 2022. Retrieved 9 June 2022. Clarey, Christopher (7 May 2008). "Traditional Final: It's Nadal and Federer". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009. Retrieved 17 July 2008. Federer said[:] 'I love playing with him, especially here at Wimbledon, the most prestigious tournament we have.' Will Kaufman & Heidi Slettedahl Macpherson, ed. (2005). "Tennis". Britain and the Americas. Vol. 1 : Culture, Politics, and History. ABC-CLIO. p. 958. ISBN 1-85109-431-8. this first tennis championship, which later evolved into the Wimbledon Tournament ... continues as the world's most prestigious event. "Djokovic describes Wimbledon as "the most prestigious event"". BBC News. 26 June 2009. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 14 September 2010. Ryan Rudnansky (24 June 2013). "Wimbledon Tennis 2013: Why Historic Tournament Is Most Prestigious Grand GMR Slam". bleacherreport. Archived from the original on 29 June 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2013. Monte Burke (30 May 2012). "What Is The Most Prestigious Grand Slam Tennis Tournament?". Forbes. Archived from the original on 3 July 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2013. It seems pretty clear that of the four tennis Grand Slam events—Wimbledon and the French, Australian and U.S. Opens—the former is by far the most prestigious one. Varun Khanna (25 June 2019). "All You Need to Know About the Wimbledon Championships Roof". EssentiallySports. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022. Retrieved 13 March 2022. "Wimbledon's strawberries and cream has Tudor roots". BBC. 9 June 2015. Archived from the original on 8 October 2021. Retrieved 2 December 2017. "A 115-year-old tale of sport's surviving sponsorships". Inside Sport. 15 October 2017. Archived from the original on 29 May 2023. Retrieved 31 August 2022. Rossingh, Danielle. "Taking A Look At Every Time Wimbledon Has Been Canceled, Including The 2020 Tournament". Forbes. Archived from the original on 9 June 2020. Retrieved 9 June 2020. "Anyone for a game of sphairistiké?" Archived 5 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine 41, The Northern Echo, 27 June 2009, accessed 8 July 2009 says, Eva Kovacs (16 October 2023). "October 16, 1833: The day the man who invented lawn tennis - Walter Clopton Wingfield - was born". Tennis Majors. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Atkin, Ron. "1877 Wimbledon Championships". Wimbledon.org. Archived from the original on 21 December 2010. Retrieved 5 October 2010. Little, Alan (2011). Wimbledon Compendium 2011 (21st ed.). London: All England Lawn Tennis & Croquet Club. pp. 9, 102. ISBN 978-1-899039-36-4. Malin Lundin (12 March 2015). "Throwback Thursday: The New Wimbledon". AELTC. Archived from the original on 4 January 2017. Retrieved 4 January 2017. Bauckham, Jon (1 July 2020). "I'm related to the first black tennis player to play at Wimbledon". Who Do You Think You Are Magazine. Archived from the original on 2 June 2021. Retrieved 1 June 2021. "History – 1940s". AELTC. Archived from the original on 13 August 2017. Retrieved 3 December 2017. "Long Term Plan". AELTC. Archived from the original on 15 March 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2012. [1] Archived 1 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine New Court No. 2 Archived 20 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine "The New Court 3". Blog.wimbledon.org. Archived from the original on 3 August 2010. Retrieved 14 September 2010. "About the AELTC". The All England Lawn Tennis & Croquet Club. Archived from the original on 14 October 2018. Retrieved 19 October 2018. "Olympic Tennis". UK Media Limited. Archived from the original on 12 June 2013. "First glimpse of future-facing Roland-Garros – Roland-Garros – The 2018 French Open official site". www.rolandgarros.com. Archived from the original on 25 November 2018. Retrieved 5 January 2019. "Melbourne Park Redevelopment". Tennis Australia. Retrieved 5 January 2019. "The Championships, Wimbledon 2018". wimbledon.com. Archived from the original on 6 January 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019. correspondent, Rupert Neate Wealth (13 December 2018). "Wimbledon to expand after golf club members vote to sell for £65m". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 5 January 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019. "Wimbledon: Final set tie-breaks to be introduced in 2019". BBC Sport. 19 October 2018. Archived from the original on 17 May 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2018. "AELTC announces introduction of final set tie-break". Wimbledon. 19 October 2018. Archived from the original on 19 October 2018. Retrieved 19 October 2018. Wimbledon (9 November 2018). "AELTC announces Referee Designate and Championships enhancements AELTC confirms Referee succession and issues Championships updates". Archived from the original on 23 November 2018. Retrieved 23 November 2018. Fuller, Russell. "Wimbledon cancelled due to coronavirus – where does that leave tennis in 2020?". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 23 June 2020. Retrieved 1 April 2020. Cale Hammond (13 April 2020). "Behind the curtain: Henman on AELTC's decision to cancel Wimbledon". Tennis Channel. Archived from the original on 28 April 2020. Retrieved 29 April 2020. "Wimbledon cancelled due to coronavirus – where does that leave tennis in 2020?". Tennis 365. 9 April 2020. Archived from the original on 12 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. "Russian players to be barred from competing at Wimbledon – report". Reuters. 20 April 2022. Archived from the original on 20 April 2022. Retrieved 20 April 2022. "ATP, WTA pull Wimbledon points over Russia ban". ESPN.com. 20 May 2022. Archived from the original on 20 May 2022. Retrieved 21 May 2022. "Wimbledon lifts ban on Russian & Belarusian players". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "Wimbledon Event Guide". wimbledon.org. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 12 November 2010. "Wimbledon announces Wheelchair Tennis Singles events from 2016". www.wimbledon.com. AELTC. 12 July 2015. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 6 June 2016. There are no age limits for the Wheelchair Doubles events. "Wimbledon Cut Men's Doubles Matches To Best-Of-Three Sets From Best-Of-Five Sets Following Nick Kyrgios Criticism". www.eurosport.com. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 3 July 2023. "Grand Slam tournaments jointly announce 10-point final set tie-break at six games all". Wimbledon. AELTC. 16 March 2022. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 5 July 2023. "Ten-point final set tie-breaker to be trialled at all Grand Slams". BBC Sport. 16 March 2022. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 5 July 2023. "Wimbledon Switches To Sunday Men's Final". The New York Times. Associated Press. 17 October 1981. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 2 July 2019. "Wimbledon 2017: What is Manic Monday". The Independent. 12 July 2017. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. Retrieved 15 September 2017. "Wimbledon Championships moved back a week from 2015". BBC. 19 July 2012. Archived from the original on 31 August 2012. Retrieved 1 September 2012. "Wimbledon curfew: Why do players have to leave the court at 11pm?". 6 July 2023. Archived from the original on 7 July 2023. Retrieved 6 July 2023. "Wimbledon crowd boo Stefanos Tsitsipas as Andy Murray match reaches curfew". 6 July 2023. Archived from the original on 7 July 2023. Retrieved 6 July 2023. "FAQ: Facts and Figures". Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 27 May 2015. Little, Alan (2013). 2013 Wimbledon Compendium (23rd ed.). London: The All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club. pp. 163, 164, 200. ISBN 978-1-899039-40-1. Jonathan (10 July 2020). "Wimbledon Drops Grass Court Seeding Formula For 2021 – peRFect Tennis". perfect-tennis.com. Archived from the original on 25 June 2021. Retrieved 25 June 2021. Tebbutt, Tom (16 June 2010). "Explaining Wimbledon's seeding method". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 11 March 2016. Retrieved 17 June 2016. Jayasinghe, Indika (30 June 2019). "All you need to know about the seeding methodology used in Wimbledon 2019 – In depth data driven discussion about the method and its effectiveness". Medium. Archived from the original on 27 June 2021. Retrieved 30 June 2021. Tumaini, Carayol. "Unseeded Marketa Vondrousova stuns Ons Jabeur to win Wimbledon title". The Observer. Archived from the original on 27 August 2023. Retrieved 15 July 2023. "Wimbledon grass". Wimbledon Championship. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013. Retrieved 7 February 2015. "Wimbledon – Centre Court roof". AELTC. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013. Retrieved 1 September 2012. "New No. 1 Court Roof Among Stadium Changes For Wimbledon 2019". Forbes. 11 June 2019. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 16 June 2019. "Tickets – 2013 Wimbledon Championships Website – Official Site by IBM". AELTC.com. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011. Retrieved 6 July 2013. "How the 'Graveyard of champions' got its name". Blog.wimbledon.org. 26 May 2009. Archived from the original on 10 July 2014. Retrieved 11 December 2014. "Wimbledon Debentures – About Debentures – The Long Term Plan". AELTC.com. Archived from the original on 8 June 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2010. "Suffragettes, violence and militancy". British Library. Archived from the original on 10 September 2021. Retrieved 25 September 2021. Kay, Joyce (2008). "It Wasn't Just Emily Davison! Sport, Suffrage and Society in Edwardian Britain". The International Journal of the History of Sport. 25 (10): 1342. doi:10.1080/09523360802212271. S2CID 154063364. Archived from the original on 25 September 2021. Retrieved 25 September 2021. "Qualifying – Information on The Championships Qualifying Competition". Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017. Retrieved 1 July 2017. James Montague (25 June 2012). "Game, set and match: What Wimbledon says about the British". CNN. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2017. Strawberries, cream and BBGs. The Daily Telegraph (London), 29 June 2006. "Goldings Ballboys". Goldonian.org. 26 June 2004. Archived from the original on 11 June 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2010. "Ball Boys and Ball Girls". www.wimbledon.com. AELTC. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 4 January 2017. Official site Archived 5 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine BBGs at The Championships Official site Archived 7 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine About the Ball Boys and Girls "About Wimbledon – Behind the scenes – Ball boys and ball girls". AELTC. Archived from the original on 13 September 2021. Retrieved 1 September 2012. "Umpires". www.wimbledon.com. Archived from the original on 2 March 2023. Retrieved 2 March 2023. "Hawk-Eye to make Wimbledon debut". BBC Sport. 23 May 2007. Archived from the original on 21 July 2023. Retrieved 21 July 2023. Addicott, Adam (9 July 2021). "EXCLUSIVE: Wimbledon Says No To Replacing Line Umpires With Hawk-Eye, But Others Say Yes". UBITENNIS. Archived from the original on 2 March 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2023. "Game and All Set for a Match: Wimbledon and our Inner Tennis Player". The Green Rooms. Archived from the original on 15 January 2014. Retrieved 15 January 2014. "Clothing and equipment". Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 12 July 2016. Retrieved 12 July 2016. "Wimbledon Fashions & Styles: What To Wear". Battery Magazine. Archived from the original on 30 January 2024. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Why has Wimbledon dropped 'Miss'?". BBC. 30 June 2009. Archived from the original on 3 July 2009. Retrieved 28 February 2015. Ben Rothenberg (1 July 2019). "Wimbledon, Wedded to Tradition, Steps into the Present". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 July 2019. Retrieved 1 July 2019. "Wimbledon – The Royal Box". www.wimbledon.com. AELTC. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Eden, Richard (15 May 2010). "Advantage Andy Murray as the Queen visits Wimbledon". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 24 May 2010. Retrieved 26 July 2010. "Roger Federer advances to 3rd round". ESPN. 27 June 2012. Archived from the original on 15 July 2016. Retrieved 20 August 2012. "Follow my blog as a steward at Wimbledon". Army West Midlands. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022. Hamilton, Leigh (2 July 2010). "Wimbledon fans show pride in Armed Forces". Defence News. London. Archived from the original on 19 August 2016. Retrieved 10 July 2016. "Wimbledon – Facts and Figures". www.wimbledon.com. AELTC. Archived from the original on 14 June 2015. Retrieved 10 July 2016. "Ticket Resale Kiosk". www.wimbledon.com. AELTC. Archived from the original on 22 August 2016. Retrieved 21 August 2016. "Ticket Resale – where does it go?". www.wimbledon.com. AELTC. 27 July 2015. Archived from the original on 22 August 2016. Retrieved 21 August 2016. "Ballot". AELTC. Archived from the original on 19 February 2013. Retrieved 25 January 2013. "Tickets". AELTC. Archived from the original on 24 September 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2012. "Wimbledon Debentures – About Debentures – About Wimbledon Debentures". AELTC.com. Archived from the original on 23 July 2010. Retrieved 26 July 2010. "Evening Visitors | Le site officiel de la billetterie Roland-Garros 2013". Rolandgarros.fft-tickets.com. Archived from the original on 21 June 2013. Retrieved 6 July 2013. "Natee's Blog". Blog.nationmultimedia.com. Archived from the original on 14 July 2011. Retrieved 6 July 2013. "The Championships – Day Nine Diary". www.atpworldtour.com. ATP. 29 June 2010. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 28 February 2015. John Martin (3 July 2010). "For Many Wimbledon Fans, the Waiting Is Not the Hardest Part". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 28 February 2015. "Information about Official suppliers to The Championships". Wimbledon.com. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. The Club has always sought to retain the unique image and character of The Championships and has successfully achieved this over many years by developing long-term mutually beneficial Official Supplier agreements with a range of blue-chip brands, as well as specifically not commercialising the Grounds overtly. Rothenberg, Ben (9 July 2017). "Wimbledon in Style for Marketers, Bringing a Reverent Hush to Their Ads". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. "At 113 Years and Counting, Slazenger Maintains the Longest Sponsorship in Sports". S&E Sponsorship Group. 4 November 2015. Archived from the original on 17 June 2016. "Robinsons and Wimbledon end 86-year partnership". the Guardian. 24 June 2022. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. Squash brand's sponsorship deal with tennis championships was one of the longest in sport Miller, Ben (10 July 2022). "Why do fans at Wimbledon eat strawberries and cream and drink Pimm's?". www.sportingnews.com. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. "Facts and Figures". www.wimbledon.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. Atkin, Nicolas (23 September 2011). "Radio Wimbledon lose rights to broadcast Wimbledon tennis Championships". South West Londoner. Archived from the original on 15 June 2017. Retrieved 16 September 2018. "Wimbledon to launch in-house host broadcaster". Archived from the original on 19 July 2018. Retrieved 3 July 2018. Sarah Kirkham (5 February 2015). "Throwback Thursday: The first Wimbledon on television". www.wimbledon.com. AELTC. Archived from the original on 5 February 2015. Little, Alan (2013). Wimbledon Compendium 2013 (23 ed.). London: All England Lawn Tennis & Croquet Club. p. 483. ISBN 978-1-899039-40-1. "BBC extends Wimbledon broadcast deal". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 9 July 2021. "Coverage of Sport on Television" (PDF). DCMS. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 April 2010. Retrieved 26 July 2010. "BBC sorry for 'over-talking' Wimbledon commentators". BBC. 5 July 2011. Archived from the original on 5 July 2011. Retrieved 5 July 2011. "Wimbledon Facts". www.watches2u.com. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2019. "Wimbledon in 4K: the best ways to catch the tennis action in Ultra HD". TechRadar. Archived from the original on 3 July 2018. Retrieved 3 July 2018. "Tennis – set for change?". The Irish Times. 8 July 1998. Archived from the original on 9 February 2012. Retrieved 22 June 2010. "TG4'S SUCCESSFUL TENNIS COVERAGE TO CONTINUE WITH WIMBLEDON 2009". TG4. 20 June 2009. Archived from the original on 18 February 2010. Retrieved 2 June 2010. "Big summer of sport on Setanta". Setanta Sports. Archived from the original on 12 June 2015. "NBC Sports establishes "Breakfast at Wimbledon"". NBC Sports History Page. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 August 2017. HBO Guides, program schedules, 1975 to 1999 "ESPN, Wimbledon come to terms". UPI. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2019. Sandomir, Richard (5 July 2011). "Why Wimbledon Switched to ESPN From NBC". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2019. Sandomir, Richard (3 July 2011). "ESPN Reaches Deal to Carry Wimbledon". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 4 July 2011. "ESPN, AELTC Sign 12-Year Agreement to Extend Exclusive Relationship for The Championships, Wimbledon through 2035". ESPN Press Room U.S. 9 July 2021. Archived from the original on 10 July 2021. Retrieved 10 July 2021. "Weiter nur im Pay-TV: Wimbledon läuft bis 2022 exklusiv bei Sky" [Only on pay TV: Wimbledon runs exclusively on Sky until 2022]. Tennis Magazin (in German). 13 December 2018. Archived from the original on 4 June 2022. Retrieved 4 June 2022. "Sky überträgt Wimbledon bis 2022 live und exklusiv" [Sky will broadcast Wimbledon live and exclusively until 2022] (in German). Sky Sport Austria. 13 December 2018. Archived from the original on 3 December 2020. Retrieved 5 June 2022. "Trophies". www.wimbledon.com. AELTC. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Retrieved 21 August 2016. "Wimbledon – Behind the Scenes – Trophies". AELTC. Archived from the original on 21 July 2018. Retrieved 1 September 2012. UK Retail Price Index inflation figures are based on data from Clark, Gregory (2017). "The Annual RPI and Average Earnings for Britain, 1209 to Present (New Series)". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved 11 June 2022. "Prize Money and Finance". AELTC. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 11 October 2020. John Barrett, ed. (1969). BP Year Book of World Tennis. London, Sydney: Ward Lock & Co. Ltd. p. 52. OCLC 502175694. "The Championships, Wimbledon 2009 – 2009 Prize money". AELTC2009.wimbledon.org. Archived from the original on 12 June 2009. Retrieved 26 July 2010. "Wimbledon pays equal prize money". BBC Sport. 22 February 2007. Archived from the original on 26 May 2016. Retrieved 3 August 2019. "French Open to award equal prize money". Reuters. 16 March 2007. Archived from the original on 8 August 2020. Retrieved 12 July 2020. Herman, Martyn (24 April 2012). "Wimbledon announce increase in prize money for losers". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 10 July 2012. "Wimbledon announces 40 per cent prize money increase for 2013 Championships". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 22 June 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2013. "Wimbledon Prize Money 2022". Perfect Tennis. Archived from the original on 2 November 2019. Retrieved 9 June 2022. "Wimbledon Prize Money 2023". All England Lawn Tennis Club. Archived from the original on 14 June 2023. Retrieved 14 June 2023. Eugene Shvets (4 April 2012). Сергей Стаховский: большие заработки теннисистов – это иллюзия Источник [Sergiy Stakhovsky: big earnings tennis players – it is an illusion]. LB.ua (in Russian). Archived from the original on 8 November 2012. Retrieved 3 November 2012. "The Championships 2022 Prize Money" (PDF). All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 June 2023. Retrieved 14 June 2023. "Hall of Famers – Arthur Gore". www.tennisfame.com. International tennis Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 28 March 2016. Retrieved 2 April 2016. "Wimbledon 2014: Britain's Jamie Delgado smashes record with 23rd consecutive All England Club appearance". Telegraph. 25 June 2014. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Schiavone-Kuznetsova Epic is Second-Longest Ever Women's Match". World Tennis Magazine. 23 January 2011. Archived from the original on 24 March 2012. Retrieved 8 June 2012. Barrett, John (2001). Wimbledon – The Official History of The Championships. CollinsWillow. ISBN 978-0-00-711707-9. OCLC 49691980. Robertson, Max (1977). Wimbledon 1877–1977. Arthur Barker. ISBN 978-0-213-16643-4. OCLC 461807313. Tingay, Lance (1977). 100 years of Wimbledon. Guinness Superlatives. ISBN 978-0-900424-71-7. OCLC 3630554. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wimbledon Championships. Official website