Griffith is a surname of Welsh origin which derives from the given name Gruffudd. The prefix Griff (originally Gruff) may mean "strong grip" and the suffix, udd, means "chief"/"lord". The earliest recorded example of the surname was "Gryffyth" in 1295, but the given name is older. People with the surname or its variants include: Alan Arnold Griffith, British engineer specializing in fracture mechanics and aircraft gas turbine engines Anastasia Griffith, British actress Andrew Griffith, (born 1971) British Conservative politician Andy Griffith (1926–2012), American actor, writer and producer Anthony Griffith, English-born Montserrat international football player Arthur Griffith, Irish Republican leader Bill Griffith, (born 1944), American cartoonist Charles Griffith (disambiguation), various people Clark Griffith, baseball player, manager, executive, and member of the Hall of Fame Claudia Griffith (1950–2018), American politician Corinne Griffith, silent film era actress and author D. W. Griffith, American film director Dan Griffith (born 1987), American DJ known as Gryffin Edward Griffith (zoologist), British naturalist Edward H. Griffith (1894–1975), American film director Elisabeth Griffith, American historian, educator, and activist Emile Griffith (1938–2013), U.S. Virgin Islands boxer Eva Kinney Griffith (1852–1918), American journalist, temperance activist Forrest Griffith (1928–2007), American football player Francis Griffith (disambiguation) Frank Kingsley Griffith, British Liberal politician and judge Frederick Griffith (disambiguation), multiple people George Griffith, writer Grace Griffith, American folk singer Griffith J. Griffith, Welsh-American industrialist known for donating land for Griffith Park in Los Angeles Harold Griffith (1894–1985), Canadian anaesthetist Hugh Griffith, Welsh actor James Bray Griffith (1871–1937), American business theorist Jamie Bamber, born Jamie St. John Bamber Griffith, British actor Jason Griffith, American voice actor who is the former voice of Sonic the Hedgehog John Griffith (disambiguation), multiple people Jonas Griffith (born 1997), American football player Justin Griffith, NFL fullback who currently plays for the Oakland Raiders Kenneth Griffith, Welsh actor and documentary film maker Laetitia Griffith (born 1965), Dutch politician Lillian Griffith (1877–1972) Welsh artist and sculptor Manley Griffith, American actor better known as Griff Barnett Mari Griffith, Welsh radio announcer and writer Melanie Griffith (born 1957), American actress Michael Griffith (disambiguation) Morgan Griffith, American politician from Virginia Nanci Griffith (1953–2021), American singer, guitarist and songwriter Nicola Griffith, British author Nathaniel Griffith Lerotholi, the fifth Paramount Chief of Lesotho Phillip Griffith, mathematician Ralph T. H. Griffith, Indologist Ronald H. Griffith, former Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Army Samuel Griffith, Australian politician and jurist who had a large part in composing the Constitution of Australia Samuel B. Griffith, officer and commander in the United States Marine Corps Thomas B. Griffith, American federal judge Thomas Ian Griffith, American actor Virgil Griffith, American hacker Welborn Griffith, American soldier William Griffith (1810–1845), British doctor, naturalist, and botanist Xiomara Griffith, Venezuelan judoka Reanne Griffith, a.k.a. Hazuki Fujiwara, from the anime series Ojamajo Doremi George Griffith, a.k.a. Akira Fujiwara, her father Griffith (name) Griffiths Griffin (surname) Gruffudd "Surname: Griffith". surnamedb.com. 2007. Retrieved 2008-04-07. This page lists people with the surname Griffith. If an internal link intending to refer to a specific person led you to this page, you may wish to change that link by adding the person's given name(s) to the link.