The use of the country name "Macedonia" was disputed between Greece and the Republic of Macedonia (now North Macedonia) between 1991 and 2019. The dispute was a source of instability in the Western Balkans for 25 years. It was resolved through negotiations between the two countries, mediated by the United Nations, resulting in the Prespa Agreement, which was signed on 17 June 2018. Pertinent to its background is an early 20th-century multifaceted dispute and armed conflict that formed part of the background to the Balkan Wars. The specific naming dispute, although an existing issue in Yugoslav–Greek relations since World War II, was reignited after the breakup of Yugoslavia and the newly-gained independence of the former Socialist Republic of Macedonia in 1991. Since then, it was an ongoing issue in bilateral and international relations until it was settled with the Prespa agreement in June 2018, the subsequent ratification by the Macedonian and Greek parliaments in late 2018 and early 2019 respectively, and the official renaming of Macedonia to North Macedonia in February 2019. The dispute arose from the ambiguity in nomenclature between the Republic of Macedonia, the adjacent Greek region of Macedonia and the ancient Greek kingdom of Macedon. Citing historical and irredentist concerns, Greece opposed the use of the name "Macedonia" without a geographical qualifier such as "Northern Macedonia" for use "by all ... and for all purposes". As a significant contingent of ethnic Greeks identify themselves as Macedonians and view themselves as unrelated to ethnic Macedonians, Greece further objected to the use of the term "Macedonian" for the neighboring country's largest ethnic group and language. North Macedonia was accused by Greece of appropriating symbols and figures that are historically considered part of Greek culture such as the Vergina Sun and Alexander the Great, and of promoting the irredentist concept of a United Macedonia, which involves territorial claims on Greece, Bulgaria, Albania, and Serbia. The dispute escalated to the highest level of international mediation, involving numerous attempts to achieve a resolution. In 1995, the two countries formalised bilateral relations and committed to start negotiations on the naming issue, under the auspices of the United Nations. Until a solution was found, the provisional reference "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" (FYROM) was used by multiple international organisations and states. UN members, and the UN as a whole, agreed to accept any name resulting from successful negotiations between the two countries. The parties were represented by Ambassadors Vasko Naumovski and Adamantios Vassilakis with the mediation of Matthew Nimetz, who had worked on the issue since 1994. On 12 June 2018, an agreement was reached. A referendum was held in Macedonia on 30 September 2018, with voters overwhelmingly affirming support for EU and NATO membership by accepting the Prespa agreement. However, voter turnout was well below the 50 percent threshold needed to validate the result. Therefore, the agreement had to be ratified by the Macedonian Assembly with a two-thirds majority. After the agreement was ratified by both sides, it entered into force on 12 February 2019. On 27 March 2020, North Macedonia became the 30th member of NATO. In antiquity, the territory of the present-day Republic of North Macedonia equated approximately to the kingdom of Paeonia, which lay immediately north of ancient Macedonia. The western and central parts of modern Greek region of Macedonia approximately corresponds to that of ancient Macedonia, while the Bulgarian part and the eastern part of the Greek area, are mostly in Ancient Thrace. After the Romans conquered Greece in 168 BC they established a large administrative district in northern Greece which added Paeonia and eastern parts of Ancient Thrace to other territories outside the original ancient Macedonia. It used the name 'Macedonia' to describe the whole of this new province. This province was divided in the 4th century CE into Macedonia Prima ("first Macedonia") in the south, encompassing most of the ancient Macedonia and southeastern parts of Ancient Thrace, coinciding with the modern Greek region of Macedonia, and Macedonia Salutaris ("wholesome Macedonia", also called Macedonia Secunda – "second Macedonia") in the north, encompassing partially Dardania, the whole of Paeonia and northeastern Thrace. Thus Macedonia Salutaris encompassed most of the present-day North Macedonia and southeastern Bulgaria. In late Roman times, the provincial boundaries were reorganized to form the Diocese of Macedonia, which was much larger. This situation lasted, with some modifications, until the 7th century. From the beginning of the 6th century, the former Roman province, then part of the Byzantine Empire became a subject to frequent raids by Early Slavs which, in the course of next centuries, resulted in drastic demographic and cultural changes. The Slavs continued to assault the Byzantine Empire, either independently, or aided by Bulgars or Avars during the 7th century. The Byzantines organized a massive expedition against the Slavs in the area. They subdued many Slavic tribes and established a new theme of Thrace in the hinterland of Thessaloniki. A new theme called Macedonia was created in the late 8th century from the older theme of Thrace. Most of the modern region of Macedonia became in the 9th century a Bulgarian province known as Kutmichevitsa. Its southern parts corresponded to new Byzantine provinces of Thessalonica and Strymon. The area of North Macedonia was incorporated again into the Byzantine Empire in the early 11th century as a new province called Bulgaria. As result for nearly thousand years the name of Macedonia had different meanings for Western Europeans and for the Balkan people. For the Westerners it denoted the territory of the Ancient Macedonia, but for the Balkan Christians, when rarely used, it covered the territories of the former Byzantine theme of Macedonia, situated between modern Turkish Edirne and the river Nestos, in present-day Thrace. The Ottoman Empire absorbed the area in the 14th century. There was no Ottoman province called Macedonia. The Balkans became part of province called Rumelia. In the early 19th century the name of Macedonia was almost forgotten in the modern-day area, but within the decades after the Greek independence (1830) it was revived by the Greek propaganda. In 1893 a revolutionary movement against Ottoman rule began, resulting in the Ilinden Uprising on 2 August 1903 (St. Elias's Day). The failure of the Ilinden Uprising caused a change in the strategy of the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (then Internal Macedonian-Adrianople Revolutionary Organization) from revolutionary to institutional. It split into two wings: one led by Yane Sandanski and fighting for autonomy for Macedonia and Adrianople regions inside the Ottoman Empire or inside a Balkan Federation, and a second Supremist wing supporting the inclusion of Macedonia and Southern Thrace in Bulgaria. After the Ilinden Uprising, the revolutionary movement ceased and opened a space for the Macedonian Struggle: frequent insurgencies of Bulgarian, Greek and Serbian squads into Ottoman Europe, including the ill-defined territory of the wider Macedonian region. In 1912 rivalries resulted in the First Balkan War of 1912–1913, and the Ottomans lost most of their European lands. In 1913, the Second Balkan War began in the aftermath of the division of the Balkans among five entities to have secured control over these territories: Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, Romania and Montenegro (all hitherto recognized). Albania, in conflict with Serbia, Montenegro and Greece, declared its independence in 1912, striving for recognition. The Treaty of London (1913) assigned the region of the future Republic of North Macedonia to Serbia. The outbreak of the First World War allowed Bulgaria to occupy eastern Macedonia and Vardar Macedonia, helping Austria-Hungary defeat the Serbs by the end of 1915, and leading to the opening of the Macedonian front against the Greek part of Macedonia. Bulgaria would maintain control over the area until their capitulation in September 1918, at which point the borders reverted (with small adjustments) to the situation of 1913, and the present-day Republic of North Macedonia became part of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. This period saw the rise of ideals of a separate Macedonian state in Greece. The Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes changed its name in 1929 to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and the present-day Republic of North Macedonia was included as South Serbia in a province named Vardar Banovina. During World War II, Axis forces occupied much of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia from 1941. Bulgaria as an associate of the Axis powers advanced into the territory of the Republic of North Macedonia and the Greek province of Macedonia in 1941. The territory of the Republic of North Macedonia was divided between Bulgaria and Italian Albania in June 1941. The Yugoslav Communists Resistance began officially in 1941 in what is now North Macedonia. On 2 August 1944 (St. Elias's Day), honoring the fighters of the Ilinden Uprising, the Anti-fascist Assembly for the National Liberation of Macedonia (ASNOM), meeting in the Bulgarian occupation zone, proclaimed clandestinely the Macedonian state (Democratic Federal Macedonia) as a federal state within the framework of the future Yugoslav federation. In 1946 the People's Republic of Macedonia was recognized by the new communist constitution as a federal component of the newly proclaimed Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia under the leadership of Josip Broz Tito. The issue of the republic's name immediately sparked controversy with Greece over Greek concerns that it presaged a territorial claim on the Greek coastal region of Macedonia (see Territorial concerns below). The U.S. Roosevelt administration expressed the same concern through Edward Stettinius in 1944. The Greek press and the Greek government of Andreas Papandreou continued to express the above concerns confronting the views of Yugoslavia during the 1980s and until the Revolutions of 1989. In 1963 the People's Republic of Macedonia was renamed the "Socialist Republic of Macedonia" when the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia was renamed the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It dropped the "Socialist" from its name a few months before declaring independence from Yugoslavia in September 1991. Strong Greek opposition delayed the newly independent republic's accession to the United Nations and its recognition by the European Community (EC). Although the Arbitration Commission of the Peace Conference on the former Yugoslavia declared that the then called Republic of Macedonia met the conditions set by the EC for international recognition, Greece opposed the international community recognizing the Republic due to a number of objections concerning the country's name, flag and constitution. In an effort to block the European Community from recognizing the Republic, the Greek government persuaded the EC to adopt a common declaration establishing conditions for recognition which included a ban on "territorial claims towards a neighboring Community state, hostile propaganda and the use of a denomination that implies territorial claims". In Greece, about one million Greek Macedonians participated in the "Rally for Macedonia" (Greek: Συλλαλητήριο για τη Μακεδονία), a very large demonstration that took place in the streets of Thessaloniki in 1992. The rally aimed to object to "Macedonia" being a part of the name of then newly established Republic of Macedonia. In a following major rally in Australia, held in Melbourne and organised by the Macedonians of the Greek diaspora (which has a strong presence there), about 100,000 people protested. The major slogan of these rallies was "Macedonia is Greek" (Greek: H Μακεδονία είναι ελληνική). Greece's major political parties agreed on 13 April 1992 not to accept the word "Macedonia" in any way in the new republic's name. This became the cornerstone of the Greek position on the issue. The Greek diaspora also mobilized in the naming controversy. A U.S. Greek group, Americans for the Just Resolution of the Macedonian Issue, placed a full-page advertisement in the 26 April and 10 May 1992 editions of the New York Times, urging President George H. W. Bush "not to discount the concerns of the Greek people" by recognizing the "Republic of Skopje" as Macedonia. Greek-Canadians mounted a similar campaign.[citation needed] The EC subsequently issued a declaration expressing a willingness "to recognize that republic within its existing borders ... under a name which does not include the term Macedonia". Greek objections likewise held up the wider international recognition of the then Republic of Macedonia. Although the Republic applied for membership of the United Nations on 30 July 1992, its application languished in diplomatic limbo for nearly a year. A few states—Bulgaria, Turkey, Slovenia, Croatia, Belarus, and Lithuania—recognized the republic under its constitutional name before its admission to the United Nations. Most, however, waited to see what the United Nations would do. The delay had a serious effect on the Republic, as it led to a worsening of its already precarious economic and political conditions. With war raging in nearby Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia, the need to ensure the country's stability became an urgent priority for the international community. The deteriorating security situation led to the UN's first-ever preventative peacekeeping deployment in December 1992, when units of the United Nations Protection Force deployed to monitor possible border violations from Serbia. During 1992, the International Monetary Fund, World Bank and the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia all adopted the appellation "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" to refer to the Republic in their discussions and dealings with it. The same terminology was proposed in January 1993 by France, Spain and the United Kingdom, the three EC members of the United Nations Security Council, to enable the Republic to join the United Nations. The proposal was circulated on 22 January 1993 by the United Nations Secretary General. However, it was initially rejected by both sides in the dispute. It was immediately opposed by the Greek Foreign Minister, Michalis Papakonstantinou. In a letter to the Secretary General dated 25 January 1993, he argued that admitting the republic "prior to meeting the necessary prerequisites, and in particular abandoning the use of the denomination 'Republic of Macedonia', would perpetuate and increase friction and tension and would not be conducive to peace and stability in an already troubled region." The president of the Republic of Macedonia, Kiro Gligorov, also opposed the proposed formula. In a letter of 24 March 1993, he informed the President of the United Nations Security Council that "the Republic of Macedonia will in no circumstances be prepared to accept 'the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia' as the name of the country." He declared that "we refuse to be associated in any way with the present connotation of the term 'Yugoslavia'". The issue of possible Serbian territorial ambitions had been a long-running concern in the Republic of Macedonia, which some Serbian nationalists still called "South Serbia" after its pre-World War II name. The government in the Republic of Macedonia was consequently nervous of any naming formula which might be seen to endorse a possible Serbian territorial claim. Both sides came under intense diplomatic pressure to compromise. The support that Greece had received initially from its allies and partners in NATO and the European Community had begun to wane due to a combination of factors that included irritation in some quarters at Greece's hard line on the issue and a belief that Greece had flouted sanctions against Slobodan Milošević's Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The intra-Community tensions were publicly exposed on 20 January 1993 by the Danish foreign minister, Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, who attracted the ire of Greek members of the European Parliament when he described the Greek position as "ridiculous" and expressed the hope that "the Security Council will very quickly recognise Macedonia and that many of the member states of the Community will support this." The Greek Prime Minister, Konstantinos Mitsotakis, took a much more moderate line on the issue than many of his colleagues in the governing New Democracy party. Despite opposition from hardliners, he endorsed the proposal in March 1993. The acceptance of the formula by Athens also led to the reluctant acquiescence of the government in Skopje, though it too was divided between moderates and hardliners on the issue. On 7 April 1993, the UN Security Council endorsed the admission of the republic in United Nations Security Council Resolution 817. It recommended to the United Nations General Assembly "that the State whose application is contained in document S/25147 be admitted to membership in the United Nations, this State being provisionally referred to for all purposes within the United Nations as 'the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia' pending settlement of the difference that has arisen over the name of the State." The recommendation was agreed by the General Assembly, which passed Resolution 225 on the following day, 8 April, using virtually the same language as the Security Council. The Republic of Macedonia thus became the 181st member of the United Nations. The compromise solution, as set out in the two resolutions, was very carefully worded in an effort to meet the objections and concerns of both sides. The wording of the resolutions rested on four key principles: The appellation "[F]ormer Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" is a provisional term to be used only until the dispute was resolved. The term was a reference, not a name; as a neutral party in the dispute, the United Nations had not sought to determine the name of the state. The President of the Security Council subsequently issued a statement declaring on behalf of the Council that the term "merely reflected the historic fact that it had been in the past a republic of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia". The purpose of the term was also emphasised by the fact that the expression begins with the uncapitalised words "the former Yugoslav", acting as a descriptive term, rather than "the Former Yugoslav", which would act as a proper noun. By also being a reference rather than a name, it met Greek concerns that the term "Macedonia" should not be used in the republic's internationally recognised name. The use of the term was purely "for all purposes within the United Nations"; it was not being mandated for any other party. The term did not imply that the Republic of Macedonia had any connection with the existing Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as opposed to the historical and now-defunct Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. One additional concern that had to be taken care of was the seating of the Republic of Macedonia in the General Assembly. Greece rejected seating the Republic's representative under M [as in "Macedonia (former Yugoslav Republic of)"], and the Republic rejected sitting under F (as in "Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia", which turned the reference into a proper noun rather than a description). Instead, it was seated under T as "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" and placed next to Thailand. In due course, the same convention was adopted by many other international organisations and states but they did so independently, not as the result of being instructed by the UN. For its part, Greece did not adopt the UN terminology at this stage and did not recognise the Republic under any name. The rest of the international community did not immediately recognise the Republic, but this did eventually happen at the end of 1993 and start of 1994. The People's Republic of China was the first major power to act, recognising the Republic under its constitutional name on 13 October 1993. On 16 December 1993, two weeks before Greece was due to take up the European Union presidency, six key EC countries—Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom—recognised the Republic under its UN designation. Other EC countries followed suit in quick succession and by the end of December, all EC member states except Greece had recognised the Republic. Japan, Russia and the United States followed suit on 21 December 1993, 3 February 1994, and 9 February 1994 respectively. Despite the apparent success of the compromise agreement, it led to an upsurge in nationalist agitation in both countries. Anti-Western and anti-American feelings came to the fore in Greece, in response to a perception that Greece's partners in the EC and NATO had betrayed it. The government of Constantine Mitsotakis was highly vulnerable; it had a majority of only a couple of seats and was under considerable pressure from ultra-nationalists. After the country's admission to the UN, the hardline former foreign minister Antonis Samaras broke away from the governing New Democracy (ND) party along with three like-minded deputies who resented what they saw as the prime minister's unacceptable weakness on the Macedonian issue. This defection deprived ND of its slim parliamentary majority and ultimately caused the fall of the government, which suffered a landslide defeat in the general election of October 1993. It was replaced by the PASOK party under Andreas Papandreou, who introduced an even more hardline policy on Macedonia and withdrew from the UN-sponsored negotiations on the naming issue in late October. The government of the Republic of Macedonia also faced domestic opposition for its part in the agreement. Protest rallies against the UN's temporary reference were held in the cities of Skopje, Kočani and Resen. The parliament only accepted the agreement by a narrow margin, with 30 deputies voting in favour, 28 voting against and 13 abstaining. The nationalist VMRO-DPMNE party (then in opposition) called a vote of no confidence over the naming issue, but the government survived with 62 deputies voting in its favour. The naming dispute has not been confined to the Balkans, as immigrant communities from both countries have actively defended the positions of their respective homelands around the world, organising large protest rallies in major European, North American and Australian cities. After Australia recognised the "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" in early 1994, tensions between the two communities reached a climax, with churches and properties hit by a series of tit-for-tat bomb and arson attacks in Melbourne. The relations between the two countries further worsened in February 1994 when Greece imposed a trade embargo on Macedonia which coincided with the UN embargo on Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on its northern border. The combined blockade denied Macedonia access to its closest and most accessible sea port, Thessaloniki, and rendered its main north-south trade route useless. The country was forced to supply itself through the undeveloped east-west route. During the embargo oil was imported to Macedonia via the Bulgarian port of Varna, which is located over 700 km from Skopje, on tank trucks using a mountain road. It has been estimated that Macedonia suffered damages of around US$2 billion due to the trade embargo. Greece received heavy international criticism; the embargo lasted for 18 months, and was lifted after the interim accord between the two countries was signed in October 1995. Greece and the Republic of Macedonia eventually formalised bilateral relations in an interim accord signed in New York on 13 September 1995. Under the agreement, the Republic removed the Vergina Sun from its flag and allegedly irredentist clauses from its constitution, and both countries committed to continuing negotiations on the naming issue under UN auspices. For its part, Greece agreed that it would not object to any application by the Republic so long as it used only the appellation set out in "paragraph 2 of the United Nations Security Council resolution 817" (i.e. "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia").[citation needed] This opened the door for the Republic to join a variety of international organisations and initiatives, including the Council of Europe, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and Partnership for Peace. The accord was not a conventional perpetual treaty, as it can be superseded or revoked, but its provisions are legally binding in terms of international law. Most unusually, it did not use the names of either party. Greece, "the Party of the First Part", recognised the Republic of Macedonia under the term "the Party of the Second Part". The accord did not specifically identify either party by name (thus avoiding the awkwardness of Greece having to use the term "Macedonia" in reference to its northern neighbour). Instead, it identified the two parties elliptically by describing the Party of the First Part as having Athens as its capital and the Party of the Second Part having its capital at Skopje. Subsequent declarations have continued this practice of referring to the parties without naming them. Cyrus Vance was the witness of Interim Accord as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The naming issue was effectively at a stalemate until the 2018 agreement. Various names had been proposed over the years, for instance "New Macedonia", "Upper Macedonia", "Slavo-Macedonia", "Nova Makedonija", "Macedonia (Skopje)" and so on. However, these had invariably fallen foul of the initial Greek position that no permanent formula incorporating the term "Macedonia" was acceptable. Athens had counter-proposed the names "Vardar Republic" or "Republic of Skopje", but the government and opposition parties in Skopje had consistently rejected any solution that eliminated the term "Macedonia" from the country's name. Following these developments, Greece has gradually revised its position and demonstrated its acceptance of a composite appellation, with a geographical qualifier, erga omnes (i.e. the incorporation of the term "Macedonia" in the name, but with the use of a disambiguating name specification, for international and intergovernmental use). The inhabitants of the Republic were overwhelmingly opposed to changing the country's name. A June 2007 opinion poll found that 77% of the population were against a change in the country's constitutional name, and 72% supported the Republic's accession to NATO only if it was admitted under its constitutional name. Only 8% supported accession under the reference "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia". A number of states recognized the Republic of Macedonia by its constitutional name. A few had recognised it by this name from the start, while most others had switched from recognising it under its UN reference. By September 2007, 118 countries (61% of all UN member states) had recognised the Republic of Macedonia under its constitutional name, including the likes of the United States, Russia and China. Some observers had suggested that the gradual revision of the Greek position means that "the question appears destined to die" in due course. On the other hand, attempts by the Republic to persuade international organisations to drop the provisional reference have met with limited success. A recent example was the rejection by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe of a draft proposal to replace the provisional reference with the constitutional name in Council of Europe documents. The compromise reference is always used in relations when states not recognising the constitutional name are present. This is because the UN refers to the country only as "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia". Moscow's ambassador to Athens, Andrei Vdovin, stated that Russia will support whichever solution stems from the UN compromise talks, while hinting that "it is some other countries that seem to have a problem in doing so". Most Greeks reject the use of the word "Macedonia" to describe the Republic of Macedonia, instead calling it "ΠΓΔΜ" (Πρώην Γιουγκοσλαβική Δημοκρατία της Μακεδονίας, the Greek translation of "FYROM"), or Skopje, after the country's capital. The latter metonymic name is not used by non-Greeks, and many inhabitants of the Republic regard it as insulting. Greeks also call the country's inhabitants Skopians (Greek: Σκοπιανοί), a derogatory term. Greek official sources sometimes also use the term "Slavomacedonian"; the U.S. Department of State has used the term side by side with "Macedonian" in context of the ethnic Macedonian minority in Greek Macedonia and their inability to self-determine as Macedonians due to pressure by the Greek government. Both terms were used by the U.S. Department of State in quotation marks to reflect nomenclature being used in Greek Macedonia. The name "Macedonian Slavs" (Македонски Словени) is another term used to refer to the ethnic Macedonians, though this term can be viewed as derogatory by ethnic Macedonians, including those in Greek Macedonia. The name had been occasionally used in early ethnic Macedonian literary sources as in Krste Misirkov's work On Macedonian Matters (Za Makedonckite Raboti) in 1903. Although the two countries continued to argue over the name, in practice they dealt pragmatically with each other. Economic relations and cooperation resumed to such an extent that, as of 2006, Greece was considered one of the Republic's most important foreign economic partners and investors. In 2005, Matthew Nimetz, UN Special Representative, suggested using "Republika Makedonija-Skopje" for official purposes. Greece did not accept the proposal outright, but characterised it as "a basis for constructive negotiations". Prime Minister Vlado Bučkovski rejected the proposal and counterproposed a "double name formula" where the international community uses "Republic of Macedonia" and Greece uses "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia". Nimetz was reported to have made a new proposal in October 2005; that the name "Republika Makedonija" should be used by those countries that have recognised the country under that name and that Greece should use the formula "Republika Makedonija – Skopje", while the international institutions and organisations should use the name "Republika Makedonia" in Latin alphabet transcription. Although the government of the Republic of Macedonia accepted the proposal as a good basis for solving the dispute, Greece rejected the proposal as unacceptable. In December 2006, the newly-elected nationalist VMRO-DPMNE-led government of the Republic announced the intent to rename Skopje Airport "Petrovec" to "Aleksandar Veliki" (Alexander the Great). Matthew Nimetz was invited to Athens in January 2007, where he commented that the efforts to mediate in the issue over the name were "affected and not in a positive way". The Republic of Macedonia's aspirations to join the European Union and NATO under its constitutional name caused controversy in recent years. Under the Interim Accord of September 1995, Greece agreed not to obstruct the Republic's applications for membership in international bodies as long as it did so under its provisional UN appellation. Leading Greek officials had repeatedly stated that Athens would veto the country's accession in the absence of a resolution to the dispute. The Greek foreign minister, Dora Bakoyannis, stated that "the Hellenic Parliament, under any composition, will not ratify the accession of the neighbouring country to the EU and NATO if the name issue is not resolved beforehand." The Greek Prime Minister Kostas Karamanlis had initially denied ever committing himself unequivocally to exercising Greece's right of veto, stating instead that he would only block the neighbouring country's application for EU and NATO membership if it sought to be admitted as the "Republic of Macedonia", but on 19 October 2007, he stated that without a mutually acceptable solution to the name issue, the country could not join either NATO or the EU. Negotiations between Athens and Skopje were resumed on the 1 November 2007, continued on 1 December of the same year, and a bilateral meeting was held in January 2008. On 19 February 2008 in Athens, the delegations of the two countries met under the auspices of the UN mediator, Matthew Nimetz. They were presented with a new framework, which they both accepted as a basis for further negotiations. The new framework was intended to be secret so that negotiations could take place, but was leaked early in the press. The full text in Greek was published initially by To Vima and circulated speedily in all major media. It contained 8 points, and the general idea was a "composite name solution" for all international purposes. It also contained five proposed names: "Constitutional Republic of Macedonia" "Democratic Republic of Macedonia" "Independent Republic of Macedonia" "New Republic of Macedonia" "Republic of Upper Macedonia" On 27 February 2008, a rally was held in Skopje called by several organisations in support of the name "Republic of Macedonia". Greek nationalist party Popular Orthodox Rally also organised a similar rally in Thessaloniki on 5 March, in support of the name "Macedonia" being used only by Greece. The Greek church and both major Greek parties strongly discouraged such protests "during this sensitive time of negotiation". On 2 March 2008, in New York, Matthew Nimetz announced that the talks had failed, that there was a "gap" in the positions of the two countries, and that there would not be any progress, unless there were some sort of compromise, which he characterised as "valuable" for both sides. After Greek PM Karamanlis's warnings that "no solution equals no invitation", the Greek media took it for granted that Greece would veto the coming NATO accession talks for the country, in the Foreign Ministers' summit on 6 March 2008 in Brussels. Meanwhile, in a newer poll in Greece, the "composite name that includes the name Macedonia for the country" seemed, for the first time, to be marginally more popular than the previous more hard-lined stance of "no Macedonia in the title" (43% vs 42%). In the same poll, 84% of the respondents were pro-veto in the country's NATO accession talks, if the issue had not been resolved by then. All Greek political parties except the small nationalist party Popular Orthodox Rally support the "composite name for all uses" solution, and are vehemently opposed to any "double name" formula which is proposed by the republic. This shift in the official and public position was described by the PM of Greece as "the maximum recoil possible". Following his visit to Athens in an attempt to persuade the Greek government not to proceed to a veto, the NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer implied that the onus to compromise rested on the Republic of Macedonia. In the same spirit, the EU's Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, expressed his fear that "it might have negative consequences on FYROM's EU bid, although it is a bilateral question, Greece—as any other EU member—has the right to veto". On 5 March 2008, Nimetz visited Skopje to try to find common ground on his proposal, but announced that "the gap remains". As earlier anticipated, on 6 March 2008, in the NATO Foreign Minister's summit in Brussels, Greek minister Dora Bakoyannis announced that "as regards the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, ... , unfortunately, the policy followed by our neighbouring country in its relations with Greece, on the one side with intransigence and on the other with a logic of nationalist and irredentist actions tightly connected with the naming issue, does not allow us to maintain a positive stance, as we did for Croatia and Albania. ... As long as there is no such solution, Greece will remain an insuperable obstacle to the European and Euro-Atlantic ambition of FYROM". On 7 March 2008, the U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs, Daniel Fried, made an unscheduled visit to Skopje, with the message that the two sides must cooperate with Matthew Nimetz to find a mutually acceptable solution for the naming dispute. Concerns were expressed in Skopje and Athens on the stability of the governing coalition of VMRO-DPMNE and Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) and subsequently the negotiating power of PM Nikola Gruevski with regards to the naming dispute, after the leader of DPA Menduh Thaçi accused the government of not complying with its requests about the rights of Albanians in the Republic of Macedonia. Greek media considered the option that the crisis might be a diplomatic way of increasing the pressure on the Greek side. Following a call for cooperation by the president Branko Crvenkovski, the other four major parties agreed to support Gruevski's government until NATO's convention in Bucharest on 4 April 2008. The possibility of a failure of the ascension talks was met with unease by the ethnic Albanian part of the population that places more importance on EU and NATO membership than on the Macedonia name issue. Following the declaration of Athens for a veto, the press in Skopje reported increased intervention from the United States to solve the dispute, through Victoria Nuland, the U.S. NATO ambassador. Antonio Milošoski announced that "Nimetz's proposal remains unchanged". The daily newspaper Dnevnik reported that diplomatic sources claimed that this would be the last attempt from the American leadership to help in finding a solution, and that the target of this effort would be for the country to retreat from its position in regard to a "double name formula" and for Greece to accept something along these lines. It continued by saying that the U.S. would exercise pressure on both sides to find a solution before NATO's summit, so that the alliance could be expanded. Olli Rehn urged "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to show the correct political will in seizing the opportunity to find an acceptable solution for both parts". A new meeting between Nimetz and the two parties was arranged on 17 March 2008 in Vienna, in the office of the former UN special envoy to Kosovo and ex-president of Finland, Martti Ahtisaari. Nimetz noted that he did not present any new proposals, thanked the United States with whom he said he was in contact, and urged more countries to help in solving the dispute. He also announced that he was more optimistic after this meeting, and that he focused only on the solutions that could be applied by NATO's summit in April. According to the press in the Republic of Macedonia Nimetz now limited his proposal to three names of the five that were proposed in his original framework: "Republic of Upper Macedonia" "New Republic of Macedonia" or "Republic of New Macedonia" "Republic of Macedonia-Skopje" Of the three, Greek media reported that the only serious contender was "New Macedonia", which was the solution favoured at the time throughout the round of negotiations by Washington, which regarded it as the "most neutral" option. According to some reports, all three proposals were swiftly rejected by Skopje on the grounds that "neither would constitute a logical basis for a solution, given that all had been rejected by one or the other side over the last 15 years". Greek diplomatic sources intimated that international pressure had now shifted towards the former Yugoslav republic. A special meeting outside the auspices of the UN was arranged on 21 March 2008, at U.S. ambassador's to NATO Victoria Nuland's house in Brussels, between the two foreign ministers Dora Bakoyannis and Antonio Milošoski and with the presence of the U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs, Daniel Fried. Following the meeting, both ministers stressed for the first time their "commitment" for finding a solution before NATO's summit. In 2011, the first voices seeking compromise started to be heard in Skopje. The president of the republic, Branko Crvenkovski, announced: "If during the ongoing talks we can reach a rational compromise, which from the one side will defend our ethnic identity, and from the other will enable us to receive the NATO invitation, while at the same time canceling our further EU accession obstacles, then I think that this is something that must be supported, and I personally side with the supporters. Some accuse me that with my stance I am undermining the negotiating position of the Republic of Macedonia, yet I do not agree, because we are not in the beginning, but in the final phase of the negotiations. The one who will tell me that the price is high, is obliged to address the public opinion and announce an alternative scenario on how Macedonia will develop in the next ten to fifteen years." In the same spirit, opposing New Social Democratic Party party leader Tito Petkovski (which by now was participating in the governmental coalition until NATO's summit), announced: "I do not hide that we must proceed on an international usage name's change, with some type of addition, which in no way must put our values under question. I do not want to proceed in an auction with the name, because that will be very damaging also for the interests of the neighboring country that disputes it." He added that "the overwhelming majority of the state and the scholars, ask for a solution and for a way out, using something that does not put our identity and our cultural distinction under questioning. I think that such a solution can be found, especially if the greatest lobbyists and supporters of ours, the United States, declare that Macedonia will be safe, with a safe territorial integrity, with financial support and dynamic development. If we declare which name we support, probably there will be more terms". However, governing VMRO-DPMNE party leader and prime minister at the time, Nikola Gruevski, when asked to comment on these statements, said: "We have different views from Mr. Petkovski, however there is still time to overcome these differences and reach a solution which will benefit the country". Centre-left Greek newspaper To Vima reported that the two countries were close to an agreement on the basis of the name "New Macedonia" or the untranslated native form, "Nova Makedonija". Another meeting under the auspices of UN mediator Matthew Nimetz was held in New York on 25 March 2008. Nimetz announced his final proposal, with a name "with a geographic dimension, and for all purposes". He also noted that the proposal was a compromise, and that the ways of implementation were also included in his proposal. The two representatives would urgently return to their countries for consultation on this proposal, given the short timeframe until NATO's summit. According to Greek media reports at the time, Nimetz revived his 2005 proposal, "Republic of Macedonia-Skopje". The news agency for Macedonian private television station A1 reported that the full proposal was: The constitutional name, in Cyrillic ("Република Македонија") could be used for internal purposes. "Republic of Macedonia (Skopje)" would be used for international relations. For bilateral relations, "Republic of Macedonia (Skopje)" is suggested, and any countries using the state's constitutional name would be encouraged to use it, but not forced to change it. The terms "Macedonia" and "Macedonian", on their own, would be able to be used freely by both countries The Macedonian government did not issue a statement on whether the proposal has been accepted or rejected. Greek foreign minister Dora Bakoyannis told journalists that the proposal does not meet Greece's stated objectives. The Macedonian foreign minister, Antonio Milošoski, stated that any reasonable solution that did not impose on the identity of ethnic Macedonians would be explored. However, he also stated that if Greece were to veto the country's entrance into NATO, compromise talks would be stopped. Meanwhile, police in Skopje said they were investigating death threats against academics, journalists and politicians who publicly favoured reaching a compromise in the dispute with Greece. On 3 April 2008, at NATO's summit in Bucharest, Greece presented its case on the non-invitation of the republic. NATO secretary general Jaap de Hoop Scheffer announced the mutually agreed text of the NATO members, which included the following points: Reason for no invitation was the inability to find solution in the name dispute Open invitation to the government of Skopje for new negotiations for the name under the auspices of the United Nations, The wish that those negotiations start as soon as possible, And the further wish that they are concluded as soon as possible, without mentioning a specific time frame. A major concern cited by Greek officials was a number of maps that have circulated by nationalist groups based in Skopje depicting parts of Greece (including Thessaloniki, Greece's second largest city) as being part of a future United Macedonia, and the country's prime minister photographed laying a wreath under such a map just a few weeks before the summit. Also a poster displayed in Skopje just days before the Bucharest summit by an artist replacing the white cross on the Greek flag with the swastika, as a way of comparing modern Greece to Nazi Germany and caricatures of Greek PM Karamanlis depicted wearing a Nazi SS uniform led to vigorous Greek diplomatic protests and international condemnation although the government disassociated itself from the depictions and expressed it has no connection and no authority over artists' works. According to Greek media reports, the Greek position was strongly supported by France and Spain. Italy, Portugal, Luxembourg, Iceland, Belgium, Hungary, Slovakia, and the Netherlands also showed understanding to the Greek concerns. The U.S. proposal for inviting the country under its UN provisional reference (FYROM) was backed by Turkey, Slovenia, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Lithuania, Denmark, Bulgaria, and Norway; Germany, the United Kingdom, and Canada were reported neutral. According to polls, 95% of Greeks believed the veto appropriate, while only 1% opposed it. Then Foreign Affairs Minister Dora Bakoyannis stated that her country would continue to focus on promoting its neighbour's NATO and EU accession as soon as the naming issue is resolved. Since coming to power in 2006, and especially since the Republic of Macedonia's non-invitation to NATO in 2008, the nationalist VMRO-DPMNE government pursued a policy of "Antiquisation" ("Antikvizatzija") as a way of putting pressure on Greece and for domestic identity-building. Antiquisation was also spreading due to intensive lobbying by the Macedonian diaspora from the U.S., Canada, Germany and Australia. As part of this policy, stations and airports were renamed after Ancient Macedonian figures, and statues of Alexander the Great and Philip II of Macedon were built in several cities across the country. In 2011, a massive, 22 m tall statue of Alexander the Great (called "Warrior on a horse" because of the dispute with Greece) was inaugurated in Macedonia Square in Skopje, as part of the Skopje 2014 remodelling of the city. An even larger statue of Philip II was under construction at the other end of the square. Statues of Alexander also adorn the town squares of Prilep and Štip, while a statue to Philip II of Macedon was recently built in Bitola. A triumphal arch named Porta Macedonia, constructed in the same square, features images of historical figures including Alexander the Great, causing the Greek Foreign Ministry to lodge an official complaint to authorities in the Republic of Macedonia. Additionally, many pieces of public infrastructure, such as airports, highways, and stadiums, were named after them. Skopje's airport was renamed "Alexander the Great Airport" and antique objects were moved there from Skopje's archeological museum. One of Skopje's main squares was renamed Pella Square (after Pella, the capital of the ancient kingdom of Macedon, which falls within modern Greece), while the main highway to Greece was renamed to "Alexander of Macedon" and Skopje's largest stadium was renamed "Philip II Arena". These actions were seen as deliberate provocations in neighboring Greece, exacerbating the dispute and further stalling Macedonia's EU and NATO applications. Antiquisation faced criticism by academics as it demonstrated feebleness of archaeology and of other historical disciplines in public discourse, as well as a danger of marginalization. The policy also attracted criticism domestically, by ethnic Macedonians within the country, who saw it as dangerously dividing the country between those who identify with classical antiquity and those who identify with the country's Slavic culture. Ethnic Albanians in the Republic of Macedonia saw it as an attempt to marginalise them and exclude them from the national narrative. Foreign diplomats warned that the policy reduced international sympathy for the Republic of Macedonia in the naming dispute with Greece. The Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia voted on 11 April 2008 to dissolve itself and hold early elections within sixty days. Following a meeting with the four major parties, president Branko Crvenkovski announced the continuation of the negotiations for the name, despite the parliament dissolution. The parties agreed that the dispute should not be a matter of heavy political debate before the elections. Matthew Nimetz visited Skopje on 17 April 2008 and Athens on the following day, initiating a new cycle of negotiations, but without bearing a new proposal yet. Talks continued in New York from 30 April to 2 May 2008, though Nimetz again did not propose a new compromise name. According to media from both sides, the main points of the proposal from 8 October 2008 were the following: the name "Republic of Macedonia" will stay the official name inside the country (in the native language) the name for the country in all official purposes (i.e. United Nations, EU, NATO) will be "Republic of North Macedonia" (Macedonian: Република Северна Македонија) UN Security Council will suggest to third countries to use the name "Republic of North Macedonia" in official bilateral relations the name "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" will no longer be an acceptable name for the country "Macedonia" alone cannot be used by any of the two parties as an official name for the country or the region. Both parties can use "Macedonia" and "Macedonian" in unofficial settings, with the precondition that they will not claim exclusive rights of any kind. the front page of the Macedonian passports will contain the following names for the country: Republic of North Macedonia in English République de Macédoine du Nord in French Република Македонија in Macedonian Greece will support the integration of its neighbouring country into EU and NATO both countries will confirm that they have no territorial claims towards each other The cabinet of the President of the Republic of Macedonia, Branko Crvenkovski, announced that the Republic of Macedonia wanted "serious changes" in the latest proposal and that the presented set of ideas could not be a basis for the resolution of the dispute. Prime minister Nikola Gruevski agreed with Crvenkovski. The English edition of the Greek newspaper Kathimerini reported that Greek diplomats privately welcomed the proposals. Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis, however, did not make a comment on the newest set of proposals. It was also said that Athens would not state its position before Skopje. In the meantime, all major opposition parties expressed serious concerns about the proposal since it crossed the "red line" that Greece had set on a single name to be used erga omnes. Before either Athens or Skopje had officially responded to the proposal, the Athenian daily Ethnos published an alleged secret diplomatic correspondence of the U.S. Department of State. The leaked document, originally tagged as classified until 2018, was said to detail a behind-the-scenes deal between Washington and Skopje on the main provisions of the Nimetz proposal as early as July. According to the newspaper, the latest UN-sponsored set of ideas were secretly sketched to please Skopje by the U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice three months earlier. The report sparked outrage in Greece, with opposition parties accusing the government of tolerating "US interference" in the UN mediation process and calling for Greece's withdrawal from the negotiations. Skopje "strongly and categorically" denied all claims of the existence of a secret deal with Washington. Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov, stated in June 2012 that names like "Northern Macedonia" would be completely unacceptable, since this geographical term would include Bulgarian territories, and more specifically the region of Blagoevgrad, giving rise to irredentist territorial claims by nationalist ethnic Macedonians against Bulgaria. In November 2008, Republic of Macedonia instituted proceedings against the Hellenic Republic in front of the UN's International Court of Justice for what it described as "a flagrant violation of [Greece's] obligations under Article 11 of the Interim Accord signed by the Parties on 13 September 1995". The alleged violation was referring to the blockade by Athens to Macedonia's bid for NATO membership. Following the submissions of memorials and counter-memorials, and the public hearings, the legal positions of the parties were as follows: Republic of Macedonia requested that: Greek objections to the jurisdiction of the Court should be rejected, The Court should adjudge and declare that Greece has violated the obligations under the provisions of the Interim Accord, Article 11, paragraph 1, and The Court to order Greece to immediately take all necessary steps to comply with the obligations under the above provisions, and to refrain from objecting in any way, directly or indirectly, to the membership of the Republic of Macedonia in NATO and/or any other "international, multilateral and regional organizations and institutions" if the Republic of Macedonia applies for such membership under the name "Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia". The Hellenic Republic requested that the Court: Should find that the case does not fall within the jurisdiction of the Court and to reject it as inadmissible; In the event that the Court finds that it has jurisdiction over the case submitted by the Applicant, then to find those claims as unfounded. The Court delivered its judgement on 5 December 2011. In its judgment, which was final, without possibility for appeal, and binding on the parties, the ICJ found that: it had jurisdiction to process this case; the Hellenic Republic, by objecting to the admission of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to NATO, had breached its obligation under Article 11, paragraph 1, of the Interim Accord of 13 September 1995; rejected all other submissions made by the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. The ICJ decision was welcomed by the Macedonian foreign minister Nikola Poposki, who stated that Macedonia remained "strongly committed to finding a lasting, mutually acceptable solution to the difference with Greece over the name". On the other hand, the response of the Ministry for foreign affairs of Greece was that they were reviewing the decision and that "Greece will continue to pursue negotiations in good faith to reach a mutually acceptable solution on the name of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia". The court however did not grant Macedonia's request that it instruct Greece to refrain from similar actions in the future, nor was there a change in the EU's stance that Macedonia's accession negotiations could not begin until the name issue was resolved. Greece issued a statement condemning its northern neighbor for "confirming that it is not interested in a solution", adding that "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has itself flagrantly violated a series of fundamental obligations expressly foreseen by the Accord, including the fundamental principle of good neighbourly relations." The prime minister of the Republic of Macedonia Nikola Gruevski announced on 25 November 2008 that the "name negotiations will resume despite Macedonia's lawsuit against Greece". The EU did not comment on the latest development. Reinforcing the Greek position that in the summit of Bucharest there was no veto, on 21 November in a conference in Skopje, the Czech representative in NATO Štefan Füle reiterated that there had not been a veto from Greece but that there was not a consensus on invitation. The Gruevski government's decision to pursue legal action against Athens was criticised by then-president Branko Crvenkovski, highlighting the internal tensions in Skopje between the government and the presidency. Noting that the process could take years, the president called it a "waste of valuable time", given that there was no way for the International Court to enforce any verdict in Skopje's favour. The first round of name talks in 2009 took place on 11 February. The UN Mediator Nimetz did not propose a new solution for the name row, but it was agreed that talks should continue after elections in Greece and the Republic of Macedonia, probably in July or August. Republic of Macedonia's new name negotiator Zoran Jolevski told the mediator and the Greek negotiator that if the Republic of Macedonia would receive a NATO membership invitation at the Alliance's next summit in April, this would be positive for the name talks. One week before the fresh name talks, Macedonian foreign minister Antonio Milošoski told German newspaper Die Tageszeitung that a solution could be found "only on bilateral basis". The Republic of Macedonia indicated it could be ready to allow Greece to use another name for the country, such as "Republic of Macedonia (Skopje)", however, its citizens would decide on a referendum for that. In addition, foreign minister Antonio Milošoski sent a letter to the Greek foreign ministry with a proposal of forming a joint committee of scholars from both countries who would work on determining the historical facts of the dispute, but this was promptly dismissed by Athens. On 14 April 2009, at the Center for Strategic and International Studies Conference on the topic of Completing America's Mission in the Balkans moderated by Janusz Bugajski, the Ambassador of Macedonia H.E. Zoran Jolevski stated: Greece, in essence, moved the goal posts further away, and our fear is that they will continue to move the goal posts again, and again, and again. The question then becomes, will they stop? Because, dear friends, the dignity and identity of an entire nation is at stake here that cannot be compromised. Later on, they moved into an open discussion where the Greek Ambassador to the U.S. Alexandros Mallias stated that Greece would accept the last proposal by the UN Mediator Matthew Nimetz for the international use of "Republic of Northern Macedonia". On 22 June 2009, the UN Mediator Matthew Nimetz, together with the negotiators from both sides gathered in Geneva to discuss the differences and the problematic points of the dispute. According to Nimetz, the negotiations had made some progress which identified and discussed the issues that had so far stalled the solution process. Both sides were strong on their positions. Mediator Nimetz visited the Republic of Macedonia on July 6 to July 8, then Greece from July 8 to July 10. In August 2009, UN mediator Matthew Nimetz expressed pessimism regarding the Greek response to the names he proposed in his July meetings. Nimetz said "Efforts to solve the name issue continue, even though Greece's answer is not positive". According to the Greek representative, Athens would not accept a proposed formulation that was only intended for use in bilateral relations, and insisted that any name that is decided must be used internationally. In late August, Nimetz met Zoran Jolevski, the ethnic Macedonian negotiator who said that "Macedonia is committed to active participation in the talks over the name and we expect a mutually acceptable solution, which will ensure preserving of the identity, dignity and integrity of the Macedonian citizens on the basis of Euro-Atlantic values and democratic principles." The "name talks" were frozen because of Athens' rejection of essential points in the most recent proposal and the elections in Greece in October. The actual talks may, it was reported, restart in May 2010 when the new Greek prime minister would have more space for negotiations. In early April 2010, it emerged that the Greek government considered "Northern Macedonia" a possible compromise name, indicating it was up to the Republic of Macedonia to decide whether to accept that proposal. The Macedonian Prime minister Nicola Gruevski declared he would reject this proposition and called for a vote on the new name. The June 13th issue of Kathimerini reported that sources claimed that Greece and the Republic of Macedonia appeared to be close to a solution to their name dispute, and were set to agree on using the name of the Vardar river (the longest river in the Republic of Macedonia) to differentiate the Republic of Macedonia from Greek Macedonia. It is not clear at this stage if this would mean Republic of Macedonia would be called "Republic of Macedonia of Vardar", "Republic of Vardar Macedonia", "Vardar Republic of Macedonia" or "Republic of Macedonia (Vardar)". Macedonian diaspora organizations, such as the Macedonian Human Rights Movement International (MHRMI) and the Australian Macedonian Human Rights Committee (AMHRC), launched a campaign placing advertisements in newspapers and billboards across Macedonia "demanding an end to all negotiations with Greece over its name". Reports were released saying that Antonis Samaras, the leader of New Democracy, would be summoned to the Hague trial issued by Skopje on Greece for breaking the 1995 Interim Agreement, after evidence was found of him addressing the Greek parliament and clearly stating that his Government (New Democracy then in power) vetoed the invitation of the Republic of Macedonia at the 2008 Bucharest NATO summit. Also in this year the dispute was inflamed by the erection of a statue in Skopje of a mounted warrior which copies a portrait of Alexander the Great attributed to the ancient Greek sculptor Lysippus, and the inauguration of a sports stadium named after Alexander's father Philip II. In his farewell speech to the Parliament, the outgoing prime minister George Papandreou listed the immediate settlement of the name issue as one of the 3 priorities of the next government. On 5 December, the International Court of Justice ruled 15-1 (the Greek judge being the sole dissenter) that Greece had breached the 1995 Interim Accord and thus was wrong to block its neighbor's application for NATO membership at the Bucharest NATO Summit in 2008. However, the court also affirmed that it did not have jurisdiction to order Greece not to bring the issue up in other fora as it should be assumed that states "act in good faith." After nearly two years of separate meetings between UN Mediator Matthew Nimetz and the two negotiators, a joint round of negotiations occurred in the UN Headquarters in New York. The UN mediator presented recommendations and ideas to both parties to consider; however, these proposals were not disclosed to the general public. In April 2013, Matthew Nimetz proposed the name 'Upper Republic of Macedonia' which was backed by EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fule. This proposal came after the Republic of Macedonia had previously rejected the 'Republic of Upper Macedonia' as a name. Greece has indicated that it would allow the Republic of Macedonia to join the EU and NATO if the word 'Upper' was included in its official name. In October 2013, Greece's chief negotiator in the naming dispute, Adamantios Vassilakis, proposed the name 'Slavic-Albanian Macedonia' to end the dispute. According to the Greek newspaper Kathimerini, Vassilakis's remark however had been misinterpreted, as he had only launched "Slavic-Albanian Macedonia" as a theoretical suggestion—and not a real serious suggestion—in order to describe the complexity of the problem from the Greek viewpoint. In November 2013, the Liberal Party of Macedonia proposed a draft law to ban the use of the Vergina Sun for civil purposes within the Republic of Macedonia, as "a positive step that will result in the promotion of good neighborly relations between Macedonia and Greece". Greece claims the Vergina Sun as an exclusive national state symbol and lodged a claim for trademark protection of it with the WIPO in 1995. The draft law required the use of the symbol to be banned from use in the Macedonian president's office, events organized under state administration, public Macedonian institutions or political parties, NGOs, media, as well as individuals in the Republic of Macedonia. However, the draft was rejected in December 2013 by the VMRO-DPMNE-led majority of the Macedonian Parliament. In February 2014, the European Parliament passed a resolution stating that according to the parliament's assessment, the Copenhagen criteria were fulfilled sufficiently for the country to start its negotiations for EU accession, and called for the Council of the European Union to confirm the date for the start of accession negotiations straight away, as bilateral disputes must not be an obstacle for the start of talks—although they must be solved before the accession process. However, whether or not the Council agreed with the parliament's opinion, it made no mention of Macedonia's accession negotiations at its meeting in June 2014. The UN mediator, Matthew Nimetz, also invited the parties for a new round of "name dispute" negotiations to begin on 26 March 2014. The invitation was accepted by both the Greek and Macedonian authorities. According to Nimetz, the two countries had managed at the latest stranded talks in October 2013, to reach consensus of adding a "geographic term" to the disputed "Republic of Macedonia" name, to be used internationally as the new official country name. Nimetz stressed however, that substantial disagreement still existed in regards of "where the geographic term should be placed", but hoped a new round of negotiations could end with a mutually agreed name. According to the newspaper coverage of the previous 2013-negotiations, Macedonia had favored using the name "Upper Republic of Macedonia" while Greece insisted it could only approve "Republic of Upper Macedonia", while disagreement also existed towards the scope of using the new official name—with Macedonia only being ready to accept its use in bilateral affairs involving Greece and not ready to accept the Greek demand of using it "obligatory for all purposes". After successive defeats of the nationalist VMRO-DPMNE in both the general and municipal elections of the Republic of Macedonia, and the arrival to power of the pro-solution coalition led by the SDSM and DIU, efforts for the resolution of the naming dispute gained a new momentum, with the new prime minister Zoran Zaev vowing his determination to resolve the decades-old dispute with Greece. Efforts between the governments of the two countries for resolving the name dispute intensified, and on 17 January 2018, UN-sponsored negotiations had resumed. The ambassadors Adamantios Vassilakis of Greece and Vasko Naumovski of Macedonia met in Washington with the UN Envoy, who suggested any of the following five names in his proposal, all containing the name Macedonia transliterated from Cyrillic: "Republika Nova Makedonija" (Republic of New Macedonia) "Republika Severna Makedonija" (Republic of North Macedonia) "Republika Gorna Makedonija" (Republic of Upper Macedonia) "Republika Vardarska Makedonija" (Republic of Vardar Macedonia) "Republika Makedonija (Skopje)" (Republic of Macedonia (Skopje)) High-level contacts between the governments of the two countries also intensified, with the Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister visiting Athens for the name talks on January 9, and the Macedonian PM Zaev meeting with his Greek counterpart Alexis Tsipras on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum at Davos, Switzerland, on January 24. In the Davos meeting, the first of its kind in seven years, there appeared to be some resolution between the two PMs to end the naming dispute and to improve the relations between the two countries. In this context, the Macedonian PM agreed to take initiatives that could soothe Greek concerns over antiquisation policies, while the Greek PM agreed to consent on Macedonia's bid to regional initiatives or agreements. After the Davos meeting, Zaev announced that streets and locations such as the Alexander the Great airport in Skopje which were named by the nationalist VMRO-DPMNE after ancient Macedonian heroes and figures such as Alexander the Great, could be renamed as a sign of goodwill towards Greece. Specifically, Zaev declared that the Alexander the Great Highway, the E-75 motorway that connects Skopje to Greece, could be renamed to "Friendship Highway". In exchange, the Greek PM announced that Greece could consent to Macedonia's bid to the Adriatic-Ionian Cooperation Agreement and the Hellenic Parliament could ratify the second phase of the FYROM – European Union Association Agreement as part of the Accession of Macedonia to the European Union which was blocked in 2009 by Greece owing to the name dispute. The two PMs also agreed that the name talks would be promoted to the Foreign Ministerial level instead of the Ambassadorial, with the foreign ministers of the two countries, Nikola Dimitrov of Macedonia and Nikos Kotzias of Greece, replacing Naumovski and Vasilakis respectively. Furthermore, the two governments agreed to confidence-building measures that could help improve the relations between the two countries. The latest options put forward by Skopje in February 2018 were "Republic of North Macedonia", "Republic of Upper Macedonia", "Republic of Vardar Macedonia" and "Republic of Macedonia (Skopje)". In late February 2018, the government and institutions of the Republic of Macedonia announced the halt of the Skopje 2014 program, which aimed to make Macedonia's capital have a "more classical appeal" and begun removing its controversial monuments and statues. The Macedonian Ministry of Culture also has set up a Commission to envisage the possibility of removing the rest of them, such as of Alexander the Great and Philip II of Macedon. In Spring 2018, extensive negotiations in a bid to resolve the naming dispute were held in rounds, with frequent meetings of the foreign ministers of Greece and Macedonia achieving tangible progress on the naming dispute. Eventually, on May 17, at the sidelines of the EU-Western Balkan summit of Sofia, Bulgaria, the prime ministers of the two countries met, and discussed a new name, in addition to the 5 other names already proposed by UN Envoy Nimetz: "Republika Ilindenska Makedonija" (Republic of Ilinden Macedonia) The Macedonian PM Zoran Zaev said that the Macedonian side was willing to accept this name and have it be used for all purposes, which is one of the Greek conditions for resolving the naming dispute. On 1 November 2018, Greece resumed air travel to Macedonia for the first time in 12 years. The first flight was an Olympic Air flight from Athens to Skopje, which included the Macedonian deputy prime minister Bujar Osmani, who was returning from talks in Greece. The same day, he tweeted that Greece had become Macedonia's "greatest ally", and noted the reestablishment of air travel as a sign of improved relations. On 12 June 2018, Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras announced that an agreement had been reached with his Macedonian counterpart Zoran Zaev on the dispute, "which covers all the preconditions set by the Greek side". The proposal would result in the Republic of Macedonia being renamed the Republic of North Macedonia (Macedonian: Република Северна Македонија, romanized: Republika Severna Makedonija; Greek: Δημοκρατία της Βόρειας Μακεδονίας), with the new name being used for all purposes (erga omnes), that is, domestically, in all bilateral relations and in all regional and international organizations and institutions. The agreement was signed at Lake Prespa, a body of water which is divided between the Republic of Macedonia, Greece and Albania. The deal includes recognition of the Macedonian language in the United Nations, noting that it is within the group of South Slavic languages, and that the citizenship of the country will be called Macedonian/citizen of the Republic of North Macedonia. Also, there is an explicit clarification that the citizens of the country are not related to the ancient Macedonians. Specifically, Article 7 mentions that both countries acknowledge that their respective understanding of the terms "Macedonia" and "Macedonian" refers to a different historical context and cultural heritage. When reference is made to Greece, these terms denote the area and people of its northern region, as well as the Hellenic civilization, history and culture of that region. When reference is made to Republic of North Macedonia, these terms denote its territory, language and people, with their own, distinctly different, history and culture. Additionally, the agreement stipulates the removal of the Vergina Sun from public use in the Republic of Macedonia and the formation of a committee for the review of school textbooks and maps in both countries for the removal of irredentist content and to align them with UNESCO and Council of Europe's standards. These changes were put to a referendum for citizens of the Republic of Macedonia in the autumn of 2018. The Prespa agreement, which replaces the Interim Accord of 1995, was signed on 17 June 2018 in a high-level ceremony at the Greek border village of Psarades on Lake Prespa, by the two foreign ministers Nikola Dimitrov and Nikos Kotzias and in the presence of the respective prime ministers, Zoran Zaev and Alexis Tsipras. The meeting was attended by the UN's Special Representative Matthew Nimetz, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo, the EU's High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Federica Mogherini, and the European Commissioner for Enlargement and European Neighbourhood Policy Johannes Hahn, among others. After the ceremony, the prime ministers crossed over the border to the Macedonian side of Lake Prespa for lunch at the village of Oteševo, in a highly symbolic move that marked the first time a Greek Prime Minister ever entered the neighboring country since it declared independence in 1991. On June 13, 2018, Zoran Zaev said that Macedonia would be changing the license plates of its vehicles from MK to NMK to reflect the country's new name. The Macedonian government announced that the statues of Alexander the Great, Philip II of Macedon and Olympias of Epirus, which were raised as part of the Skopje 2014 program, would be given new inscriptions with clarifications that they symbolize the Ancient Greek period and are "honouring Greek-Macedonian friendship". On June 20, the Prespa agreement was ratified by the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia with 69 MPs voting in favor of it. Opposition party VMRO-DPMNE boycotted the parliamentary session and declared the Prespa treaty as a "genocide of the legal state" and a "genocide of the entire nation". On June 25, the Greek Foreign Ministry informed the EU and NATO that Greece is no longer objecting to Macedonia's Euro-Atlantic accession under the new name. The next day, however, the Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov refused to sign the agreement and threatened the Macedonian PM Zaev and the ruling coalition's MPs with imprisonment of at least 5 years for voting in favor of an agreement which, according to Ivanov, puts the Republic of Macedonia in a subordinate position to a foreign state. "I do not accept the constitutional change aimed at changing the constitutional name [of the country]. I do not accept ideas or proposals which would endanger Macedonia's national identity, the individuality of the Macedonian nation, the Macedonian language and the Macedonian model of coexistence. In the presidential election, 534,910 citizens voted in favor of this electoral program and elected me as President of the Republic of Macedonia. The agreement goes beyond the scope of United Nations Security Council Resolutions 817 (1993) and 845 (1993), since it refers to the "difference in the name of the State" and not to the "disputes" to which the agreement refers", Ivanov said, adding that "This agreement brings the Republic of Macedonia to subordination from another country, namely the Republic of Greece. According to Article 308 of the Penal Code, "a citizen who brings the Republic of Macedonia to a state of subservience or dependence on another state is punishable by imprisonment of at least five years". The legalization of this agreement creates legal consequences that are the basis for committing a crime." The withdrawal of the Greek veto resulted in the European Union approving on June 27 the start of accession talks with the Republic of Macedonia, which are expected in 2019, under the condition that the Prespa deal was implemented and Macedonia's constitutional name was changed to Republic of North Macedonia. On July 5, the Prespa agreement was ratified again by the Macedonian parliament with 69 MPs voting in favor of it. On July 11, NATO invited Macedonia to start accession talks in a bid to become the Euro-Atlantic alliance's 30th member. On July 30, the parliament of Macedonia approved plans to hold a non-binding referendum on changing the country's name that took place on September 30. 91% of voters voted in favour with a 37% turnout, but the referendum was not carried because of a constitutional requirement for a 50% turnout. Total turnout for the referendum was at 666,344 and of those some 260,000 were ethnic Albanian voters of Macedonia. The government intended to push forward with the name change. On October 15, 2018, the parliament of Macedonia began debating the name change. The proposal for the constitutional reform requires the vote of 80 MPs, i.e. two-thirds of the 120-seat parliament. On 19 October the parliament voted to start the process of renaming the country "North Macedonia", after a total of 80 MPs voted in favour of the constitutional changes. On 3 December 2018, Macedonia's Parliament approved a draft constitutional amendment, with 67 lawmakers voting in favour, 23 voting against and 4 abstaining. A simple majority was needed at this stage. After some political wrangling over constitutional issues related to the multi-ethnic makeup of the state, all Albanian political parties of Macedonia voted in favour of the name change along with the governing Socialists and some members of the opposition. On 11 January 2019, the Parliament of North Macedonia completed the legal implementation of the Prespa Agreement by approving the constitutional changes for renaming the country to North Macedonia with a two-thirds parliamentary majority (81 MPs). The international community, NATO and European Union leaders, including Greek PM Alexis Tsipras and Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz, as well as heads of neighboring states, congratulated the Macedonian Prime Minister Zoran Zaev. The British Prime Minister Theresa May described the vote as an "historic moment", while the Kosovar President Hashim Thaçi expressed his hope that the Prespa Agreement, which resolved the Macedonia Naming Dispute, can be used as a "model" for resolving Kosovo's dispute with Serbia as well. Albanian President Ilir Meta congratulated the name change and Albanian Foreign Minister Ditmir Bushati hailed the vote by tweeting that Albanian political parties were the "decisive factor". On 25 January 2019, Greece's Parliament approved the Prespa agreement with 153 votes in favor and 146 votes against. The international community, including the Prime Ministers Justin Trudeau of Canada and Boyko Borisov of Bulgaria, President Hashim Thaçi of Kosovo, the President of the EU, Donald Tusk, the President of EU's Commission Jean-Claude Juncker, Germany's and Albania's foreign Ministers, Heiko Maas and Ditmir Bushati respectively, as well as NATO's chief Jens Stoltenberg, welcomed positively the ratification of the deal. Furthermore, the Republic of North Macedonia's Prime Minister Zoran Zaev in his congratulatory message to his Greek counterpart Alexis Tsipras whom he called "a friend", described the ratification as an "historic victory", which "ends a long-standing diplomatic conflict between Athens and Skopje". Shortly after the ratification of the deal, Greece's Foreign Minister Georgios Katrougalos signed, in the Greek Parliament, the enacted law of the Prespa Agreement. The former constitutional name of the country "Republic of Macedonia" and the short name "Macedonia", when used referring to the country, were considered offensive by some Greeks. The Greek government officially used the United Nations' provisional reference for the country ("the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"), which was also used by many other international organisations. The Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs described their concerns as follows: The issue of the name of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is not just a dispute over historical facts or symbols. It concerns the conduct of a UN member state, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, which contravenes the fundamental principles of international law and order; specifically, respect for good neighbourly relations, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The name issue is thus a problem with regional and international dimensions, consisting in the promotion of irredentist and territorial ambitions on the part of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, mainly through the counterfeiting of history and usurpation of Greece's national, historical and cultural heritage. ... The roots of the name issue go back to the mid-1940s, when, in the aftermath of the Second World War, Commander in Chief Tito separated from Serbia the region that had been known until that time as Vardar Banovina (today's Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia), giving it the status of a federal unit of the new Socialist Federal Republic of Macedonia [sic], renaming it, initially, the "People's Republic of Macedonia", and, later, the "Socialist Republic of Macedonia". At the same time, he started to cultivate the idea of a separate and discrete "Macedonian nation". George Papandreou, a former prime minister of Greece and leader of the governing PASOK party, has stated that when he was Minister for Foreign Affairs in January 2002, was[who?] next to a deal with Skopje leadership about using "Горна Македонија" ("Gorna Makedonija" – "Upper Macedonia" in Slavic). The other parties and the President of Greece, he said, were informed but the proposal failed because the 2001 Macedonia conflict had broken out. The Academy of Athens concludes: The adoption of a compound name with a geographic content and with respect for the distinction between ancient Macedonia and the state of FYROM, would serve both the truth and the present-day needs of the geographic region and of the larger area surrounding it. The Greek interest does indicate the concern of public opinion in the face of intransigent provocations on the part of Skopje that tend—as is evident even in the school textbooks—not only to appropriate but even to monopolise the history, the cultural achievements, the symbols—including the ancient ones—the monuments, and the personalities that were active in the Macedonian area in the past. It is self-evident that the expression of good will on the part of any Greek government is not sufficient to overcome the fact or the effects of nationalist excesses similar to those that were artfully cultivated during the post-war period. The historian Eugene Borza summarises historic controversy surrounding the naming dispute as "... one of the enduring characteristics of modern Greek life: a desperate attempt to regain a past glory, rooted in cultural accomplishments of antiquity and the religious and political might of Byzantium. An identification with the ancient Macedonians is part of that attempt", while on the other hand, the ethnic Macedonians, being "a newly emergent people in search of a past to help legitimise their precarious present" whose ethnicity developed in the twentieth century, had no history and needed one. Greeks argue that the name Macedonia is historically inseparably associated with Greek culture, ever since the ancient kingdom of Macedonia and the ancient Macedonians. They therefore consider that only Greeks have a historical right to use the name today, since the modern south Slavs arrived 1,000 years after that kingdom, lacking any relation to ancient Macedonia or its Greek culture. The policy of antiquization, i.e. efforts by ethnic Macedonians to construct a narrative of ethnic continuity linking them to the ancient Macedonians in various ways and symbolic actions underlining such claims, such as the public use of the Vergina sun symbol as a flag of the Republic of Macedonia, or the renaming of Skopje International Airport to "Alexander the Great Airport" met strong criticism from the Greek side, international media[citation needed] that report on the issue, and even from moderate political views in the Republic of Macedonia itself. A 22-meter-tall statue, "Man on a Horse", depicting Alexander the Great, was erected in 2011 in Skopje, the capital city of the Republic of Macedonia, as part of a historical public arts building campaign. Greece scornfully characterised the effort, with the foreign ministry commenting on the size of the statue as "inversely proportional to seriousness and historical truth". The project received criticism by the European Union, calling it "not helpful" as well as by Skopje architects and ethnic Macedonian academics and politicians commenting on the aesthetic outcome and the semantics of such a move. The Greek view also stresses that the name Macedonia as a geographical term historically used to refer typically to the southern, Greek parts of the region (including the capital of the ancient kingdom, Pella), and not or only marginally to the territory of today's Republic. They also note that the territory was not called Macedonia as a political entity until 1944. Several hundred international and Greek classical scholars have lobbied for the historical concerns regarding the name dispute to be reflected in U.S. policy. The ancient kingdom of Macedonia before Philip II (431 BC) Ancient Macedonia at the death of Philip II (336 BC) Ancient Macedonia under Philip V (200 BC) Roman province of Macedonia (146 BC – 4th century AD) Modern region of Greek Macedonia During the Greek Civil War, in 1947, the Greek Ministry of Press and Information published a book, Ἡ ἐναντίον τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἐπιβουλή (Designs on Greece), including documents and speeches on the ongoing Macedonian issue, many translations from Yugoslav officials. It reports Josip Broz Tito using the term "Aegean Macedonia" on 11 October 1945 in the buildup to the Greek Civil War; the original document is archived in "GFM A/24581/G2/1945". For Athens in 1947, the "new term, Aegean Macedonia" (also "Pirin Macedonia"), was introduced by Yugoslavs. Contextually, this observation indicates this was part of the Yugoslav offensive against Greece, laying claim to Greek Macedonia, but Athens does not seem to take issue with the term itself. The 1945 date concurs with Bulgarian sources. Tito's wartime representative to Macedonia, general Tempo (Svetozar Vukmanović), is credited with promoting the usage of the new regional names of the Macedonian region for irredentist purposes. Concerns over territorial implications of the usage of the term "Macedonian" were expressed as early as 1944 by U.S. diplomats. Greece has been concerned for decades that the Republic of Macedonia was having territorial ambitions in the northern Greek provinces of Macedonia.[citation needed] As far back as 1957, the Greek government expressed concern about reported Yugoslav ambitions to create an "independent" People's Republic of Macedonia with the Greek city of Thessaloniki as its capital. Loring M. Danforth ascribes the goal of a "free, united, and independent Macedonia" including "liberated" Bulgarian and Greek territory to a fraction of extreme Macedonian nationalists, whereas more moderate ethnic Macedonians recognise the inviolability of the borders but regard the presence of ethnic Macedonians in the neighbouring countries as an issue of minority protection. Greek analysts and politicians have expressed concerns that overseas observers tend to overlook or not to understand the severity of the perceived territorial threat and tend to misunderstand the conflict as a trivial issue over a name. The concerns are further reinforced by the fact that extremist ethnic Macedonian nationalists of the "United Macedonia" movement have expressed irredentist claims to what they refer to as "Aegean Macedonia" (in Greece), "Pirin Macedonia" (in Bulgaria), "Mala Prespa and Golo Brdo" (in Albania), and "Gora and Prohor Pchinski" (in Kosovo and Serbia). Greek Macedonians, Bulgarians, Albanians, and Serbs form the overwhelming majority of the population of each part of the region respectively. Schoolbooks and official government publications in the Republic have shown the country as part of an unliberated whole. In April 2008, Foreign Minister of Greece Dora Bakoyannis complained about the prime minister Nikola Gruevski appearing in a photograph, by a map of "Greater Macedonia" which included Thessaloniki and a great part of Northern Greece. The complaint was made inside an article published at Wall Street Journal, regarding the NATO ascension talks. According to both the official Greek position and various public demonstrations in Greece and the Greek diaspora, the Greek Macedonians felt that their right to self-determination was violated by what they regarded as the monopolisation of their name by a neighbouring country. The strong regional identity of the Macedonians was emphasised by the Prime Minister of Greece, Kostas Karamanlis, who in January 2007 during a meeting of the Council of Europe in Strasbourg declared that: I am a Macedonian, just like two and a half million Greeks. In Greece, the extreme position on the issue suggested that there must be "no Macedonia in the title" of a neighbouring country. Professor Danforth reported: From the Greek nationalist perspective, then, the use of the name "Macedonian" by the "Slavs of Skopje" constitutes a "felony", an "act of plagiarism" against the Greek people. By calling themselves "Macedonians" the Slavs are "stealing" a Greek name; they are "embezzling" Greek cultural heritage; they are "falsifying" Greek history. As Evangelos Kofos, a historian employed by the Greek Foreign Ministry told a foreign reporter, "It is as if a robber came into my house and stole my most precious jewels—my history, my culture, my identity". More moderate positions suggested that a disambiguating element should be added to the name of the neighbouring state and its people (such as "Vardar", "New", ""Upper" or "North"), so as to illustrate the distinction between not just the two, but all groups of self-identifying Macedonians. The contemporary region of Macedonia is a wider region in the Balkan peninsula that spans across several modern states, mainly Greece (Greek Macedonia), Bulgaria (Blagoevgrad province), the Republic of Macedonia, and Albania (around the Ohrid and Prespa lakes). The definite borders of the region are vague, but most contemporary geographers agree on its general location. There are several ethnic groups in this region, mostly living within their respective states, all of which are technically "Macedonians" in the regional sense. The Republic itself has a substantial minority (25.2%) of ethnic Albanians who are "Macedonians" both in the regional sense, and as legal citizens of the Republic. However, in a Balkans where ethnicity rather than nationhood defines peoples' identity, Albanians are never referred to (or refer to themselves) as Macedonians. The Greek position suggests that the monopolisation of the name by the Republic and its citizens creates semiological confusion with Macedonian Greeks, as it becomes increasingly difficult to disambiguate which "Macedonia", which "Macedonians" and what "Macedonian language" are referred to in each occasion. According to a source Bulgarians living in Blagoevgrad province (Bulgarian Macedonia) are reported to not identify themselves with their regional term "Macedonians" (Macedonian Bulgarians), so as not to be confused with the ethnic Macedonians. According to other sources the traditional use of the term "Macedonians" in Bulgaria as a regional designation continues. Aromanians are often called "Machedoni" by Romanians, as opposed to the citizens of Macedonia, who are called "Macedoneni". However, most Aromanians do not use designations such as "Machedoni", rather they have a diverse set of self-designations. While some Aromanians self-identify as ethnic Macedonians and Greek Macedonians, particularly those in North Macedonia and Greek Macedonia, only a small number call themselves terms such as Makedonji and distinguish themselves from both groups. The Greek Macedonians demonstrate a strong regional identity and identify themselves as plain Macedonians, who live in plain Macedonia, speaking a Macedonian dialect of modern Greek. According to the government in Skopje, the preservation of the constitutional name, which is also used by many other international organisations, for both domestic and international use was of the utmost importance. The country asserted that it did not lay exclusive claim to the term Macedonia either in the geographic or the historic sense. Various demonstrations and protests in the Republic of Macedonia and the ethnic Macedonian diaspora were held to support their view that their right to self-determination was violated by what they regarded as the rejection of the name from the international community. The Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts suggested: And today Slavs have been living there (Macedonia) for a period of 1,400 years. What is more natural than that the Balkanised Slavs who have lived so long and continuously in Macedonia should be called Macedonians and their language Macedonian? Ethnic Macedonians claim they are descended from both original indigenous Macedonians and from the Slavic peoples who invaded the region in the 6th-8th century AD, thereby mixing both cultures and traditions. It is observed that much of today's Greek Macedonia was only fully Hellenised by political and military means in modern times. After the division of Macedonia in 1913, Greece carried out a policy of Hellenisation of the local population, forcing geographical and personal name changes, religious affiliation, and writings of church frescoes and graves to Greek. During the Ioannis Metaxas era, Slavic-speaking Macedonians were deported or tortured for speaking or claiming to be Macedonian, and those with money were fined. Ethnic Macedonians argue that they have a more legitimate claim to the name Macedonia than modern Greek Macedonians who descend from the 638,000 Greek refugees who had emigrated from Anatolia, Epirus and Thrace and settled in Greek Macedonia during the early twentieth century. The expelled Refugees of the Greek Civil War which consisted of over 28,000 children made up by a significant portion of ethnic Macedonians (possibly the majority) had their citizenship revoked in Greece and the Greek government's actions in seizing citizenship has been "historically been used against people identifying as ethnic Macedonians". Greece eventually softened the law by allowing the return of "all Greeks by genus who during the Civil War of 1946–1949 and because of it have fled abroad as political refugees", although this further denied those who had fled Greece following the Civil War and identified as ethnic Macedonians, refusing any Greek ethnic designation to regain citizenship and resettle in their centuries-old properties. This resulted in many depopulated and devastated villages, especially in Western Macedonia with confiscated properties eventually being given to people from outside of the area. Vlachs and Greeks were given property in the resettlement programme conducted by the Greek Government from the period 1952–1958. In the 6th and 7th centuries AD, Slavic people migrated into Roman Macedonia and competed with other populations of Macedonia, although over time adopting the Eastern Orthodox Christianity and Cyrillic script from Cyril and Methodius and Slavic languages have been spoken in the area alongside Greek in the region ever since. In parts of northern Greece, in the regions of Macedonia (Μακεδονία) and Thrace (Θράκη), Slavic languages continue to be spoken by people with a wide range of self-identifications. The actual linguistic classification of the Slavic dialects of Greece is unclear, although most linguists will classify them as either Bulgarian or Macedonian taking into account numerous factors, including the resemblance and mutual intelligibility of each dialect to the standard languages (abstand), and the self-identification of the speakers themselves. As however the vast majority of these people have a Greek national identity, linguists will make their decisions based on abstand alone. The Slavic-speaking minority of northern Greece can be divided in two main groups: Orthodox Christians and Muslims, primarily the Pomaks of Eastern Macedonia and Thrace. The latter has no reported connection to ethnic Macedonians. The Christian portion of Greece's Slavic-speaking minority are commonly referred to as Slavophones (from the Greek Σλαβόφωνοι - Slavophōnoi, lit. "Slavic-speakers") or dopii, which means "locals" or "indigenous" in Greek (from Ancient Greek ἐντόπιος - entopios, "local"). The vast majority of them espouse a Greek national identity and are bilingual in Greek. They live mostly in the Periphery of Western Macedonia and belong to the Greek Orthodox Church, which in conjunction with the millet system of the Ottoman Empire which occupied the region until 1913, may explain their self-identification as Greeks. In the 1951 census, 41,017 people claimed to speak the Slavic language. One unofficial estimate for 2000 puts their number at 1.8% of the Greek population, that is c.200,000. This group has received some attention due to claims from the Republic of Macedonia that these people form an ethnic Macedonian minority in Greece. There is indeed a minority within the Slavophone community in Greece which self-identifies as ethnic Macedonian. The Greek Helsinki Monitor estimated that the number of ethnic Macedonians in Greek Macedonia ranged from 10,000 to 30,000 in 1999. There is a dispute over the size of this alleged minority, with some Greeks denying it outright, and some ethnic Macedonians inflating the numbers substantially. The Greek Helsinki Monitor reports that, "difficult and therefore risky it is to declare a Macedonian minority identity in such an extremely hostile if not aggressive environment in Greece". There are no official statistics to confirm or deny either claims. The Greek government has thus far refused on the basis that there is no significant community and that the idea of minority status is not popular amongst the (Greek identifying) linguistic community of northern Greece as it would have the effect of them being marginalised. Professor Danforth reported: ...Finally, the Greek government denies the existence of a Macedonian minority in northern Greece, claiming that there exists only a small group of "Slavophone Hellenes" or "bilingual Greeks," who speak Greek and "a local Slavic dialect" but have a "Greek national consciousness". A political party promoting this line and claiming rights of what they describe as the "Macedonian minority in Greece"—the Rainbow (Виножито)—was founded in September 1998; it received 2,955 votes in the region of Macedonia in the 2004 elections. However the party has had cases of having its offices ransacked, members being arrested for using bilingual signs written in both Macedonian and Greek and facing violations from the Greek government as ruled by the European Convention on Human Rights. The Albanian minority in North Macedonia did not view the name issue as an important problem. In the early 1990s Albanians of the Macedonian republic and wider region strongly opposed the suggestion of "Slavomacedonia" by the Greek side to name the country. For the Albanian community the name "Republic of Macedonia" was interpreted in territorial terms and not as having any particular Slavic associations. As such the Albanian minority held no objections toward references by Macedonian authorities to antiquity and only disagree to usage of Slavic symbols as Macedonia is perceived by them as being historically multiethnic. Albanians insisted that any new name would have to be ethnically neutral with proposals from them being "Vardar Republic", "Central Balkan Republic" and the classical name Dardania. Prior consultation on the name issue process was requested by Albanians. In the mid-1990s, then-Premier Jeff Kennett backed the Greek position over the Macedonian question in his attempts to shore up local electoral support. Kennett's stance gained him supporters from the Melburnian Greek community, whereas he was referred to as "Kennettopoulos" by the Macedonian community. At Kennett's insistence, his state government in 1994 issued its own directive that all its departments refer to the language as "Macedonian (Slavonic)" and to Macedonians as "Slav Macedonians". Reasons given for the decision were "to avoid confusion", be consistent with federal naming protocols toward Macedonians and repair relations between Macedonian and Greek communities. It was accepted that it would not impact the way Macedonians self-identified themselves. The decision upset Macedonians, as they had to use the terms in deliberations with the government or its institutions related to education and public broadcasting. The Macedonian community challenged the decision on the basis of the Race Discrimination Act. After years of litigation at the Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC), the Federal Court and High Court, previous judicial rulings were upheld that found Kennett's directive unlawful as it caused discrimination based on ethnic background and was struck down from usage in 2000. The name of the modern Macedonian language, as used by its speakers and defined in the constitution of the Republic of Macedonia is "Makedonski jazik" (Mакедонски јазик). The term "Macedonian language" is used by several international bodies, such as the United Nations and the World Health Organization. It is also used by convention in the field of Slavic Studies. However, because this language is a South Slavic Indo-European language, and not descended from Ancient Macedonian, which was a Hellenic Indo-European language, several other terms remain in use. Some of the names use the family to which the language belongs to disambiguate it from ancient Macedonian, or from the homonymous dialect of modern Greek; sometimes the autonym "Makedonski" is used in English for the modern Slavic language, with "Macedonian" being reserved for the ancient language. Affirmation of the classification of Macedonian as a separate language is an important issue for the ethnic Macedonian self-view. Critics often treat it as a dialect of Bulgarian, due to their close structural affinity and mutual intelligibility in both written and spoken forms; they also point to Macedonian's recent emergence as a separate standard language, and the political motivation behind its promotion in the mid-20th century. Macedonian is applied to the present-day Greek dialect spoken by Macedonian Greeks. The origins of the ancient Macedonian language are currently debated. It is as yet undetermined whether it was a Greek dialect which was part of or closely related to the Doric and/or Aeolic dialects, a sibling language of ancient Greek forming a Hellenic (i.e. Greco-Macedonian) supergroup, or an Indo-European language which was a close cousin to Greek and also related to Thracian and Phrygian languages. The scientific community generally agrees that, although some sources are available (e.g. Hesychius' lexicon, Pella curse tablet) there is no decisive evidence for supporting any of these hypotheses. The surviving public and private inscriptions found in Macedonia indicate that the written language in ancient Macedonia was Ancient Greek. Attic Greek, a form of the Greek language, eventually supplanted the ancient Macedonian entirely in Macedonia from the 5th Century BC, and it became extinct during the first few centuries AD. Attic Greek evolved into Koine Greek, then into Byzantine Greek and later into modern Greek. Greece portal North Macedonia portal Macedonia (region) Macedonia (terminology) Macedonian Question Ireland–United Kingdom naming dispute List of homonymous states and regions See: See: See: See: See: See: The figure is the total number of Aromanians in the Balkans, therefore including those who reside outside of Macedonia. See: Floudas, Demetrius A. "Pardon? A Name for a Conflict? FYROM's Dispute with Greece Revisited" in: Kourvetaris et al (eds.), The New Balkans, New York: Columbia University Press (2002), 85–117. Heraclides, Alexis. "The settlement of the Greek–Macedonian naming dispute: the Prespa agreement." Bezbednosni dijalozi 11.2 (2020): 49–60. online in English Nimetz, M. (2020). The Macedonian "Name" Dispute: The Macedonian Question – Resolved? Nationalities Papers, 48(2), 205–214. Shterbani, Shefki. "The Macedonia Name Dispute: ICJ's Decision and its Legal Approach." Acta Universitatis Danubius Juridica 14.1 (2018): 101–112. online Tziampiris, Aristotle. "The Macedonian name dispute and European Union accession." Southeast European and Black Sea Studies 12.1 (2012): 153–171. Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs. "FYROM Name Issue". Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Μακεδονικό Ονοματολογικό Ζήτημα: Μία ανάλυση με βάση την διεθνή ιστορική εμπειρία (Macedonia Naming Dispute: An Analysis Based on International Historical Experience) (in Greek). Bookstars (Athens). 2019. ISBN 978-960-571-324-9. "The man who has focused on one word for 23 years". BBC. 1 August 2017. "The Prespa Agreement (English)" (PDF). "Macedonia sets Sept. 30 for referendum on name deal with Greece". Channel NewsAsia. Retrieved 2018-10-19.[permanent dead link] "Macedonia name referendum fails to reach turnout threshold: election commission". reuters.com. Reuters. 2018-09-30. Retrieved 1 October 2018. "Welcome to North Macedonia: parliament votes for name change". The Guardian. 2018-10-20. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2023-02-22. Testorides, Konstantin (12 February 2019). "Call me by my new name: Balkan nation is North Macedonia now". Associated Press. Retrieved 12 February 2019. North Macedonia Joins the NATO Alliance. Press Statement. Michael R. Pompeo, US Secretary of State. March 27, 2020 The entry of the Slavs into Christendom: an introduction to the medieval history of the Slavs, A. P. Vlasto, CUP Archive, 1970, ISBN 0-521-07459-2, p. 169. By the beginning of the 9th century the theme of Macedonia, with its capital at Adrianople consisted not of Macedonian but of Thracian territories. During the Byzantine period the Macedonia proper corresponded to the themes of Thessalonica and Strymon. Brill's Companion to Ancient Macedon: Studies in the Archaeology and History of Macedon, 650 BC – 300 AD, Robin J. Fox, Robin Lane Fox, Brill, 2011, ISBN 90-04-20650-7, p. 35. When the barbarian invasions started in the fourth through seventh centuries AD in the Balkans, the remnants of the Hellenes who lived in Macedonia were pushed to eastern Thrace, the area between Adrianople (presently the Turkish city of Edirne) and Constantinople. This area would be called theme of Macedonia by the Byzantines... whereas the modern territory of Rep. of North Macedonia was included in the theme of Bulgaria after the destruction of Samuels Bulgarian Empire in 1018. Contested Ethnic Identity: The Case of Macedonian Immigrants in Toronto, 1900–1996, Chris Kostov, Peter Lang, 2010, ISBN 3-0343-0196-0, p. 48. Drezov K. (1999) Macedonian identity: an overview of the major claims. In: Pettifer J. (eds) The New Macedonian Question. St Antony's Series. Palgrave Macmillan, London, ISBN 0-230-53579-8, pp. 50–51. "What is often overlooked is how Bulgarians and Greeks collaborated unknowingly from the middle decades of the 19th century onward in breathing new life into the geographical name Macedonia, which was all but forgotten during the Byzantine and Ottoman periods. In the late Ottoman period, Macedonia as such did not exist as an administrative unit in the empire... Greek nationalism, fixated on the continuity between ancient and modern Hellenes, was keen to project the name Macedonia as a way to assert the Greek historical character of the area. In 1845, for instance, the story of Alexander was published in a Slavo-Macedonian dialect scripted in Greek characters... For their part, Bulgarian nationalists readily accepted Macedonia as a regional denomination... Macedonia had become one of the historic Bulgarian lands... and Macedonian Bulgarian turned into a standard phrase." Dimitar Bechev, Historical Dictionary of the Republic of Macedonia, Scarecrow Press, 2009, ISBN 0-8108-6295-6, Introduction, p. VII. "In 1813 Macedonia did not exist. A century later, it had become a hotly contested nationalist cause, a battlefield, and an obsession. What led to this dramatic transformation was modernity: a chilly wind of West European provenance that propelled to the Balkans concepts that few in the region understood, wanted or cared about. Among these, the idea of nationalism was the most potent, and the most lethal. Before the 1850s, Macedonia was a poverty-stricken province of the Ottoman Empire, where an Orthodox Christian and mostly peasant population speaking a variety of Slavonic idioms, Greek, or Vlach, was trying to eke out a modest living, and protect it from rapacious brigands and a decaying Ottoman administrative system. Religion was the only collective identity that most of them could make sense of, for ethnicity and language played little role in shaping their loyalties. But the winds of change quickly gathered momentum, and eventually shattered that multi-ethnic community, producing a 'Greek', or a 'Bulgarian', out of a 'Christian'." D. Livanios' review of Vemund Aarbakke, Ethnic Rivalry and the Quest for Macedonia, 1870–1913 in The Slavonic and East European Review, Vol. 83, No. 1 (Jan., 2005), pp. 141–142 The ancient name 'Macedonia' disappeared during the period of Ottoman rule and was only restored in the nineteenth century originally as geographical term. The Oxford Handbook of the History of Nationalism, John Breuilly, Oxford University Press, 2013, ISBN 0-19-920919-7, p. 192. The region was not called "Macedonia" by the Ottomans, and the name "Macedonia" gained currency together with the ascendance of rival nationalism. Collective Memory, National Identity, and Ethnic Conflict: Greece, Bulgaria, and the Macedonian Question, Victor Roudometof, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2002, ISBN 0-275-97648-3, p. 89. The Greeks were amongst the first to define these lands since the beginning of the 19th century. For educated Greeks, Macedonia was the historical Greek land of kings Philip and Alexander the Great. John S. Koliopoulos, Thanos M. Veremis, Modern Greece: A History since 1821. A New History of Modern Europe, John Wiley & Sons, 2009, ISBN 1-4443-1483-1, p. 48. Richard Clogg, A Concise History of Greece, p. 92, Cambridge, 2002: But, despite the widespread deprivation, the appeal of communism was to be critically impeded by the Comintern's insistence (between 1924 and 1935) that the Greek party should support the idea of a separate Macedonian state, the creation of which would have entailed the detachment of a large area of Northern Greece. Loring Danforth, The Macedonian Conflict: Ethnic Nationalism in a Transnational World, Princeton University Press, 1995, p. 66: "Whether a Macedonian nation existed at the time or not, it is perfectly clear that the communist party of Yugoslavia had important political reasons for declaring that one did exist and for fostering its development through a concerted process of nation building, employing all the means at the disposal of the Yugoslav state." United States Department of States, Foreign Relations Vol. VIII Washington, D.C. Circular Airgram (868.014/ 26 December 1944): U.S. Secretary of State Edward Stettinius to U.S. Missions (Washington, December 26, 1944) The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Officers The following is for your information and general guidance, but not for any positive action at this time. The Department has noted with considerable apprehension increasing propaganda rumours and semi-official statements in favour of an "autonomous Macedonia", emanating principally from Bulgaria, but also from Yugoslav Partisan and other sources, with the implication that Greek territory would be included in the projected state. This Government considers talk of Macedonian "nation", Macedonian "Fatherland", or Macedonia "national consciousness" to be unjustified demagoguery representing no ethnic or political reality, and sees in its present revival a possible cloak for aggressive intentions against Greece. The approved policy of this Government is to oppose any revival of the Macedonian issue as related to Greece. The Greek section of Macedonia is largely inhabited by Greeks, and the Greek people are almost unanimously opposed to the creation of a Macedonian state. Allegations of serious Greek participation in any such agitation can be assumed to be false. This Government would regard as responsible any Government or group of Governments tolerating or encouraging menacing or aggressive acts of "Macedonian Forces" against Greece. The Department would appreciate any information pertinent to this subject which may come to your attention. Stettinius "Radio Free Europe Archive". Osaarchivum.org. Archived from the original on 2009-08-05. Retrieved 2012-01-20. Thanos Veremis, Greece, pp. 315–316. C. Hurst & Co, 2002. ISBN 1-85065-462-X "Recognition of States – Annex 2", Declaration on Yugoslavia (Extraordinary EPC Ministerial Meeting, Brussels, 16 December 1991) Victor Roudometof (2002). Collective memory, national identity, and ethnic conflict. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-275-97648-4. Retrieved 2009-04-21. Jupp, J. The Australian People: An Encyclopedia of the Nation, Its People and Their Origins, Cambridge University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-521-80789-1, p. 147. Alia Papageorgiou (6 October 2008). "Macedonia enlarged". New Europe. No. 802. Archived from the original on 8 October 2008. Retrieved 2009-05-07. Shayne Mooney, head of SBS news in Melbourne, TV coverage of the Greek Macedonian Rally in Melbourne in 1994 Video on YouTube Theodore A. Couloumbis, Theodore C. Kariotis, Fotini Bellou, Greece in the Twentieth Century, pp. 146–147. Routledge, 2003. ISBN 0-7146-5407-8 European Council in Lisbon, 26/27 June 1992, Conclusions of the Presidency, Annex II, p. 43 Graham T. Allison, Kalypso Nicolàeidis, The Greek Paradox: Promise vs. Performance, p. 120. MIT Press, 1997. ISBN 0-262-51092-8 "Former Yugoslavia – UNPROFOR", Department of Public Information, United Nations. 31 August 1996 "Compromise Likely to Take Macedonia Into U.N.", New York Times, 26 January 1993 Repertoire of the Practice of the Security Council Twelfth Supplement 1993–1995, Chapter VII: Practice relative to recommendations to the General Assembly regarding membership in the United Nations 1993–1995 John B. Allcock, "Macedonia". In Europe Since 1945: An Encyclopedia, ed. Bernard Anthony Cook, p. 807. Taylor & Francis, 2001. ISBN 0-8153-4058-3 Tom Gallagher, The Balkans in the New Millennium: In the Shadow of War and Peace, pp. 7–8. Routledge, 2005. ISBN 0-415-34940-0 Daniel L. Bethlehem, Marc Weller, The 'Yugoslav' Crisis in International Law, p. xlv. Cambridge University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-521-46304-1 United Nations Security Council Resolution 817, 7 April 1993 "Admission of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to membership in the United Nations", United Nations General Assembly Resolution 225, 8 April 1993 Jochen Abr. Frowein, Rüdiger Wolfrum, Max Planck Yearbook of United Nations Law 1997, p. 239. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1998. Ian Jeffries, The Former Yugoslavia at the Turn of the Twenty-first Century, p. 54. Routledge, 2003. ISBN 0-415-28190-3 Robert Bideleux, Richard Taylor, European Integration and Disintegration: East and West, p. 136. Routledge, 1996. ISBN 0-415-13740-3 John Phillips, Macedonia: Warlords and Rebels in the Balkans, p. 56. I.B. Tauris, 2004. ISBN 1-86064-841-X Dennis Ernest Ager, Language, Community and the State, p. 63. Intellect Books, 1997. ISBN 1-871516-94-3 Floudas, Demetrius Andreas (1996). "A Name for a Conflict or a Conflict for a Name? An Analysis of Greece's Dispute with FYROM". Journal of Political and Military Sociology. 24 (2): 285. Retrieved 2007-01-24. "Greek Blockade, U.N. Embargo Threaten Macedonia's Future". 25 May 1994. Retrieved 14 October 2018 – via www.washingtonpost.com. Shea, John (2008). Macedonia and Greece: The Struggle to Define a New Balkan Nation. McFarland. ISBN 978-1-4766-2176-0. Retrieved 14 October 2018 – via Google Books. Во февруари 1994 година Грција воведе целосно трговско ембарго кон Македонија. Retrieved 14 October 2018. Wren, Christopher S. (14 September 1995). "Greece to Lift Embargo Against Macedonia if It Scraps Its Flag". The New York Times. Retrieved 14 October 2018. Floudas, Demetrius A. (2002). "Pardon? A Name for a Conflict? FYROM's Dispute with Greece Revisited". In Kourvetaris; Roudometof; et al. (eds.). The New Balkans: Disintegration and Reconstruction. East European Monographs. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 85. ISBN 978-0-88033-498-3. Ian Jeffries: The Former Yugoslavia at the Turn of the Twenty-First Century: A Guide to the Economies in Transition. London: Routledge, 2003, p. 240.[ISBN missing] "Interim Accord" (PDF). United Nations. 1995. Retrieved 2015-09-11. Edmund Jan Osmanczyk, "Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of", in Encyclopedia of the United Nations and International Agreements ed. Anthony Mango, p. 1355. Routledge, 2002. ISBN 0-415-93920-8 See e.g. the Agreement on a five year development cooperation programme 2002–2006 between the Government of the Party of the First Part to the Interim Accord 13 September 1995 and the Government of the Party of the Second Part to the Interim Accord 13 September 1995 "Interim Accord". United Nations. 1995. Archived from the original on 2008-11-12. Retrieved 2008-11-07. Kyriakos Kentrotis, "Echoes from the Past: Greece and the Macedonian Controversy", p. 100 in Mediterranean Politics, ed. Richard Gillespie. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1996. ISBN 0-8386-3609-8 David Turncock, The Human Geography of East Central Europe, p. 33. Routledge, 2003. ISBN 0-415-12191-4 "FYROM Name Issue". Hellenic Republic – Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 26 December 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2016. "Eleftherotypia". George's 'No' to Nimetz proposals (in Greek). Archived from the original on 2007-09-29. Retrieved 2007-06-25. "Greece considers Macedonia name". BBC News. 2005-04-08. Retrieved 2006-11-19. Nikolovski, Zoran (2005-04-14). "Nimetz Proposal For Macedonia's Name Sparks Debate". Southeast European Times. Archived from the original on 2006-09-29. Retrieved 2006-11-19. (in Greek) Skai News Archived 2011-10-02 at the Wayback Machine, Συμβιβασμός ή βέτο (Compromise or Veto), Retrieved on 2007-10-14. The source uses original quotes from an interview of MFA Dora Bakoyannis in Kathimerini newspaper where she supports a composite name solution. Hellenic Republic, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Interview of FM Ms. D. Bakoyannis in the Athens daily Kathimerini, with journalist Ms. D. Antoniou (Sunday, 14 October 2007), [full text], Retrieved on 2007-10-15 "Macedonians in Favour of NATO Accession Under Constitutional Name", A1 TV, 12 June 2004 "New Draft Resolution Won't Change US Position Towards Macedonia". Foreign Ministry. Skopje: MIA news agency. 2007-08-09. Duncan M. Perry, "The Republic of Macedonia: finding its way", in Democratization and Authoritarianism in Postcommunist Societies, ed. Karen Dawisha, Bruce Parrott, p. 270. Cambridge University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-521-59733-1 Nikos Roussis (2008-01-22). Βρήκαν τοίχο τα Σκόπια στο Συμβούλιο της Ευρώπης. Ελευθεροτυπία (in Greek). Archived from the original on 2008-04-14. «Ναι» από τη Ρωσία στο όνομα που θα συμφωνηθεί ("'Yes' from Russia in whichever name agreed"), Kathimerini Archived 2012-01-07 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-03-02. Anastasia N. Karakasidou (1997). Fields of Wheat, Hills of Blood: Passages to Nationhood in Greek Macedonia, 1870-1990. Chicago & London: University of Chicago Press. p. 265. the terms Skopia and Skopians, derived from the name of that country's capital and principal city, Skopje, have been employed in a demeaning and derogatory manner to refer to the FYROM, its government, and its population. Philip Carabott (2003). "The Politics of Constructing the Ethnic "Other": The Greek State and Its Slav-speaking Citizens, ca. 1912 - ca. 1949". Jahrbücher für Geschichte und Kultur Südosteuropas. 5: 159. [...] the seemingly neutral but hardly non-derisive Skopianoi. "Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2005". United States Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor. 2006-03-09. Retrieved 2006-11-19. Although acceptable in the past, current use of this name in reference to both the ethnic group and the language can be considered pejorative and offensive by ethnic Macedonians. In the past, the Macedonian Slavs in Greece seemed relieved to be acknowledged as Slavomacedonians. Pavlos Koufis, a native of Greek Macedonia, pioneer of ethnic Macedonian schools in the region and local historian, says in Laografika Florinas kai Kastorias (Folklore of Florina and Kastoria), Athens 1996: "[During its Panhellenic Meeting in September 1942, the KKE mentioned that it recognises the equality of the ethnic minorities in Greece] the KKE recognised that the Slavophone population was ethnic minority of Slavomacedonians. This was a term, which the inhabitants of the region accepted with relief. [Because] Slavomacedonians = Slavs+Macedonians. The first section of the term determined their origin and classified them in the great family of the Slav peoples." The Greek Helsinki Monitor reports: "... the term Slavomacedonian was introduced and was accepted by the community itself, which at the time had a much more widespread non-Greek Macedonian ethnic consciousness. Unfortunately, according to members of the community, this term was later used by the Greek authorities in a pejorative, discriminatory way; hence the reluctance if not hostility of modern-day Macedonians of Greece (i.e. people with a Macedonian national identity) to accept it." National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia. "Annual Report 2003" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on April 20, 2006. Retrieved 2006-11-19. "Matthew Nimetz Will Not Present a New Proposal on the Name". OneWorld Southeast Europe. 2005-10-14. Archived from the original on 2006-09-03. Retrieved 2006-11-19. "Kathimerini". A stir over name of Skopje's airport. 29 December 2006. Retrieved 2007-01-19. "Nimetz's talks in Athens included 'Alexander the Great'". Makfax vesnik. 12 January 2007. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 2007-01-19. "Southeast European Times". Greece to veto Macedonia's EU, NATO bids if name issue not resolved. Retrieved 2007-09-19. "Embassy of Greece – Washington, DC". Answer of FM Ms. D. Bakoyannis regarding the FYROM name issue. Archived from the original on March 2, 2007. Retrieved 11 September 2006. "United Macedonian Diaspora". Interview with Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 2 November 2006. "I Never Used the Word Veto". To Vima. 11 September 2007. Archived from the original on April 13, 2008. Retrieved 2007-01-23. "Karamanlis: No accession without a solution for the name". Eleútheros Týpos. 19 October 2007. Archived from the original on 15 February 2009. Retrieved 2007-10-25. Enet News, Ολόκληρο το κείμενο της πρότασης Νίμιτς (Whole text of the Nimetz proposal) (Automatic translation in English), Retrieved on 2008-03-06. "Macedonians Rally 'To Protect Name'" Balkan Insight, Retrieved on 2008-02-28. "Συλλαλητήριο ΛΑΟΣ την άλλη Τετάρτη στη Θεσσαλονίκη" ["LAOS Demonstration next Wednesday in Thessaloniki". Enet. Retrieved on 2008-02-28. Skai News Archived 2011-09-07 at the Wayback Machine, Εκ του σύνεγγυς στη Νέα Υόρκη (Concurrently in New York), Retrieved on 2008-02-28. Skai News Archived 2012-03-05 at the Wayback Machine, Χαμηλοί τόνοι (Low tones), Retrieved on 2008-02-29. Skai News Archived 2012-03-05 at the Wayback Machine "Ναυάγιο" στις διαπραγματεύσεις ("Shipwreck" in the talks), Retrieved on 2008-03-02. Skai News Archived 2012-03-05 at the Wayback Machine, Στην Αθήνα με "μήνυμα" ο Σέφερ (Scheffer in Athens with a "message"), Retrieved on 2008-03-02. Skai News Archived 2011-09-05 at the Wayback Machine, "Μη λύση σημαίνει μη πρόσκληση" (No Solution equals No Invitation), Retrieved on 2008-03-02. Ant1 News, Ώρα μηδέν για το Σκοπιανό (Time Zero for the Skopjan issue), Retrieved on 2008-03-02. in.gr, Στην Αθήνα τη Δευτέρα ο γγ του ΝΑΤΟ με φόντο το αδιέξοδο στο θέμα της ΠΓΔΜ (NATO Secretary in Athens on Monday after FYROM issue deadlock), Retrieved on 2008-03-02. Skai News Archived 2012-03-05 at the Wayback Machine, Υπέρ του βέτο το 84% των Ελλήνων (84% of Greeks Are For Veto), Retrieved on 2008-03-02. Skai News Archived 2011-09-06 at the Wayback Machine, Ενημέρωση για την πρόταση Νίμιτς (Briefing on Nimetz's proposal), Retrieved on 2008-03-02. BBC News, Macedonia urged to solve name row, Retrieved on 2008-03-05. Skai News Archived 2012-03-05 at the Wayback Machine, "Παραμένει το χάσμα" ("The gap remains"), Retrieved on 2008-03-05. BalkanInsight, EU Warns Over Macedonia 'Name', Retrieved on 2008-03-05. Makfax Online, Rehn requested settling of the name issue, Retrieved on 2008-03-05. Skai News Archived 2012-03-05 at the Wayback Machine, "Η Ελλάδα ανυπέρβλητο εμπόδιο" ("Greece, an insuperable obstacle"), Retrieved on 2008-03-07. Skai News Video[permanent dead link], "Λύση ή Βέτο" ("Solution or Veto"), video of Bakoyannis' press interview after the summit, Retrieved on 2008-03-07. Skai News Archived 2012-03-05 at the Wayback Machine, Επαφές στα Σκόπια (Contacts in Skopje), Retrieved on 2008-03-08. Reuters, "Albanian party threatens to bring down Macdonian govt", Retrieved on 2008-03-12 Skai News Archived 2012-03-05 at the Wayback Machine, Νέοι Ελιγμοί (New Tactics), Retrieved on 2008-03-15. Skai News Archived 2011-09-05 at the Wayback Machine, Σκόπια: Έκκληση για πολιτική συναίνεση (Skopje: Call for political cooperation), Retrieved on 2008-03-15. Skai News Archived 2011-09-04 at the Wayback Machine, Στηρίζουν Γκρουέφκσι ([They] Support Gruevski), Retrieved on 2008-03-15. Marina Stojanovska (2009-06-08). "Biljali: Macedonia's ethnic balance at risk". Southeast European Times, Skopje. Skai News Archived 2012-03-05 at the Wayback Machine, "Η εντολή του Νίμιτς παραμένει ως έχει" ("Nimetz's order remains unchanged"), Retrieved on 2008-03-18. Skai News Archived 2011-09-04 at the Wayback Machine, Ξεκίνησαν οι Συνομιλίες (The Talks Began), Retrieved on 2008-03-18. Skai News Archived 2011-09-03 at the Wayback Machine, Αισιόδοξος ο Νιμιτς (Nimetz is Optimistic), Retrieved on 2008-03-18. По Виена Нимиц е поголем оптимист за името [After Vienna Nimetz is a bigger optimist about the name]. Utrinski Vesnik (in Macedonian). 2008-03-18. Archived from the original on 2009-08-09. Retrieved 2008-05-11. Αναζητούν συμβιβασμό με "Νέα Μακεδονία" [Seeking a compromise with "New Macedonia]. To Vima (in Greek). 2008-03-19. Archived from the original on 2008-04-13. Skai News Archived 2012-03-05 at the Wayback Machine, "Όχι" από Σκόπια στις προτάσεις Νίμιτς ("No" from Skopje to Nimetz proposals), Retrieved on 2008-03-19. Skai News Archived 2011-09-05 at the Wayback Machine, Εντατικές διαπραγματεύσεις για το όνομα (Intense negotiations for the name), Retrieved on 2008-03-18. Skai News Archived 2011-09-05 at the Wayback Machine, "Δέσμευση" για το όνομα ("Commitment" for the name), Retrieved on 2008-03-22. Skai News Archived 2011-09-07 at the Wayback Machine, Νέος γύρος συνομιλιών για το όνομα (New round of talks for the name), Retrieved on 2008-03-22. Skai News Archived 2011-09-03 at the Wayback Machine, Σύσκεψη για το όνομα στα Σκόπια (Meeting for the name in Skopje), Retrieved on 2008-03-22. in.gr, Ενισχύονται οι φωνές στο εσωτερικό της ΠΓΔΜ για ένα «λογικό συμβιβασμό» στην ονομασία (Voices within FYROM for a "logical compromise" are louder), Retrieved on 2008-03-22. Πιθανή συμφωνία στο "Νέα Μακεδονία" [Possible agreement on "New Macedonia]. To Vima (in Greek). 2008-03-21. Archived from the original on 2013-04-30. Skai News Archived 2011-09-05 at the Wayback Machine, "Όνομα με γεωγραφική διάσταση" ("Name with a geographic dimension"), Retrieved on 2008-03-26. Νέα ονομασία [New name]. ΣΚΑΪ.gr (in Greek). 2008-03-26. Archived from the original on 2011-09-04. Нимиц предложи формула за решавање на спорот [Nimetz proposes a formula for solving the dispute]. A1 News (in Macedonian). 2008-03-26. Archived from the original on 2008-03-27. "Den ikanopoieí tēn Elláda ē prótasē" Δεν ικανοποιεί την Ελλάδα η πρόταση [The proposal does not satisfy Greece]. Ethnos (in Greek). 2008-03-26. Archived from the original on 2009-02-21. Retrieved 2008-03-26. Бакојани: Предлогот е далеку од целите на Грција [The proposal is far from the objectives of Greece]. A1 News (in Macedonian). 2008-03-26. Archived from the original on 2008-03-27. Македонија подготвена за разумен компромис [Macedonia prepared for a reasonable compromise]. Dnevnik newspaper (in Macedonian). 2008-03-26. Archived from the original on 2009-02-15. Има мала надеж за компромис [There is still small hope for a compromise]. Nova Makedonija (in Macedonian). 2008-03-26.[dead link] Грчко вето ќе ги прекине преговорите [A Greek veto will stop the negotiations]. Vest (in Macedonian). 2008-03-26. Archived from the original on 2013-02-19. "Macedonia police examine death threats over name dispute". International Herald Tribune. 2008-03-27. Archived from the original on 2008-05-06. Skai News Archived 2012-03-19 at the Wayback Machine, Νέα δεδομένα μετά το βέτο (New situation after veto machine translation in English), retrieved on 2008-04-03. Mega channel, ΝΑΤΟ: Μόνο με λύση η πρόσκληση (NATO: Invitation only after solution machine translation in English), retrieved on 2008-04-03. NATO 2008 Bucharest summit, Bucharest Summit Declaration Issued by the Heads of State and Government participating in the meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Bucharest on 3 April 2008 Archived 3 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine (par.20), Retrieved on 2008-04-13. Greece, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Interview of FM Ms. Bakoyannis in Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, with journalist Michael Martens Archived April 19, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, retrieved on 2008-04-06. Bakoyannis, Dora (1 April 2008). "All in a Name". The Wall Street Journal. Only a few weeks ago, the country's prime minister was photographed laying a wreath on a monument to which a map of the so-called "Greater Macedonia" was attached; the map incorporated a considerable part of Northern Greece, including Greece's second-largest city, Thessaloniki. the picture at Greeksoccer.com, retrieved on 2008-04-06. Telegraph.co.uk, Macedonia row overshadows NATO summit International Herald Tribune, Greece insists Macedonia will not be invited to join NATO if name issue is not resolved, retrieved on 2008-04-06. in.gr Στη «μάχη του Βουκουρεστίου» για το όνομα της ΠΓΔΜ ο Κ.Καραμανλής (C. Karamanlis to "Bucharest's battle" for FYROM's name English machine translation), retrieved on 2008-04-06. News.bg, Olli Rehn Condemns the Language of Hatred Against Greece and Bulgaria in Macedonian Media, retrieved on 2008-04-06. BBC News, Greek fury over swastika poster Eleftherotypia, Η επιμονή Μπους και η αλληλεγγύη των Ευρωπαίων στην Ελλάδα (Bush's insistence and the European support to Greece), retrieved on 2008-04-05. Eleftherotypia, Αρνηση, χωρίς χρονοδιάγραμμα και με ήπιες αντιδράσεις Archived 2008-04-14 at the Wayback Machine (Refusal, without time frame and with moderate reactions), retrieved on 2008-04-05. Skai News Archived 2012-03-19 at the Wayback Machine, Σωστό το βέτο για το 95% (Veto correct for 95% English machine translation), retrieved on 2008-04-06. Washington Times, In the name of a common future, Retrieved on 2008-04-30. Boris, Georgievski (October 27, 2009). "Ghosts of the past endanger Macedonia's future". BalkanInsight. Comparative Archaeologies: A Sociological View of the Science of the Past (ch. The Macedonian Question), Ludomir R. Lozny, Springer, 2011, p.427 [1] Macedonia statue: Alexander the Great or a warrior on a horse? The Guardian, Sunday 14 August 2011 Is Macedonia's capital being turned into a theme park? CNN International, October 10, 2011 Athens complains about Skopje arch, Kathimerini, Thursday Jan 19, 2012 Greece slates Skopje's provocative Alexander statue Sinisa Jakov Marusic, Balkan Insight, 15 June 2011 [2] Skai News Archived 2012-03-19 at the Wayback Machine, Πρόωρες εκλογές στη ΠΓΔΜ (Early elections in FYROM English machine translation), Retrieved on 2008-04-12. Skai News Archived 2012-03-19 at the Wayback Machine, Συνεχίζονται οι διαπραγματεύσεις (Negotiations continue English machine translation), Retrieved on 2008-04-12. Southeast European Times, Macedonia, Greece continue name dispute talks in New York, Retrieved on 2008-05-27. Dnevnik, Интегралната верзија на предлог-документот од медијаторот Нимиц (Comprehensive version on name-documents by mediator Nimetz), Retrieved on 2008-10-10. Ta Nea, Παράθυρο για διπλή ονομασία Archived 2008-10-11 at the Wayback Machine (Α window for double naming), Retrieved on 2008-10-10. Makfax Online, internet daily newspaper[dead link], "Kathimerini, English edition". Ekathimerini.com. Retrieved 2012-01-20. "(in Greek)". in.gr. Retrieved 2012-01-20. Θα τα περάσουμε όλα σιωπηλά [We will get everything through quietly]. Ethnos (in Greek). 2008-10-19. Archived from the original on 2008-10-22. Retrieved 2008-10-20. Meletis, Nikos (2008-10-19). Οι ιδέες ήταν τελικά της Ράις [The ideas were ultimately Rice's]. Ethnos (in Greek). Archived from the original on 2008-10-21. Retrieved 2008-10-20. "Macedonia Denies 'Secret Work' with US". Balkan Insight. 2008-10-20. Archived from the original on October 22, 2008. Retrieved 2008-10-22. Απροκάλυπτη παρέμβαση [Blatant interference]. Ethnos (in Greek). 2008-10-19. Archived from the original on 2008-10-22. Retrieved 2008-10-20. "Sofia News Agency". Novinite.com. Retrieved 2012-07-08. "International Court of Justice: Press Release 2011/35 – The Court to deliver its Judgment on Monday 5 December 2011 at 10 a.m, 24.11.2011" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2012. Retrieved 2012-01-20. "eACI_Press_Communiques_2011-37_20111205_03p" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-01-11. Retrieved 2012-01-20. ICJ rules Greece 'wrong' to block Macedonia's Nato bid, BBC News, 5 December 2011 "The Economist, 11 Dec. 2011". Economist.com. 2011-12-10. Retrieved 2012-01-20. Κουμουτσάκος: Η ΠΓΔΜ επιβεβαιώνει ότι δεν ενδιαφέρεται για επίλυση [Koumoutsakos: FYROM confirms that it is not interested in a solution]. Kathimerini (in Greek). 2008-11-17. Archived from the original on 2012-08-04. Retrieved 2008-11-18. "Greece Pans Macedonia Over World Court Bid" balkaninsight.com 18 November 2008 Link accessed 18/11/08 "Сарачини: Размената на искуства неопходна за создавање конкурентна економија". Влада на Република Северна Македонија. February 3, 2012. Archived from the original on August 3, 2009. "EU Quiet on Macedonia's World Court Bid" balkaninsight.com 18 November 2008 Link accessed 18/11/08 Macedonian Information Agency – Czech Republic keeps supporting Macedonia's accession to NATO. MIA. Retrieved on 2010-08-14. Τσερβένκοφσκι: Χάσιμο χρόνου η προσφυγή στο Διεθνές Δικαστήριο [Crvenkovski: Recourse to the World Court a waste of time]. Kathimerini (in Greek). 2008-12-01. Archived from the original on 2012-08-03. Retrieved 2008-12-01. "Macedonian Information Agency". Mia.com.mk. 1993-04-08. Archived from the original on 2011-11-04. Retrieved 2012-01-20. "Macedonian Information Agency". Mia.com.mk. Archived from the original on 2009-08-05. Retrieved 2012-01-20. "Macedonian Government web site". Archived from the original on August 3, 2009. "Macedonian Information Agency -Greece rejects FM Milososki's initiative". Mia.com.mk. Archived from the original on 2011-11-04. Retrieved 2012-01-20. "Makfax News Agency of Macedonia – Greece – Good proposal over name finally on table".[permanent dead link] "Balkan Sight, No Progress in Macedonian Name Row". Archived from the original on 2009-06-27. Retrieved 2019-01-14. "Kathimerini, Foreign Minister Bakoyannis calls for FYROM shift". Ekathimerini.com. Retrieved 2012-01-20. "Second Indictment Against Zeljko Jukic". March 14, 2012. Archived from the original on August 23, 2009. "Macedonian negotiator meets with Nimetz". Macedoniadaily.blogspot.com. Retrieved 2012-01-20. "Kanal 5: Matthew Nimetz plans to freeze Greek-Macedonian talks for a few months". Focus-fen.net. Archived from the original on 2012-03-08. Retrieved 2012-01-20. "Greece could accept name Northern". Retrieved April 6, 2010.[dead link] MEGA ΓΕΓΟΝΟΤΑ - Όχι Γκρούεφσκι στο Βόρεια Μακεδονία - κόσμος. Mega Tv (2010-04-24). Retrieved on 2010-08-14. "Macedonia to add 'Vardar' to its name". Euractiv.com. 2010-06-16. Archived from the original on 2010-06-19. Retrieved 2012-01-20. "Towards an agreement for the name "Macedonia of Vardar"". Greece.greekreporter.com. 2010-06-14. Retrieved 2012-01-20. Kathimerini, Solution in sight for name dispute Our Name is Macedonia Archived 2010-07-11 at the Wayback Machine. Mhrmi.org. Retrieved on 2010-08-14. "Macedonia will Summon Fast Talking Samaras as Witness". Macedonian International News Agency. 29 January 2011. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 2 November 2011. Pop, Valentina (9 November 2011). "Greek government collapse not helping Macedonia, 9.11.2011". EU Observer. Retrieved 2012-01-20. The Guardian, Monday 5 December 2011 "JUDGMENT of ICJ ON THE APPLICATION OF THE INTERIM ACCORD OF 13 SEPTEMBER 1995" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 September 2013. Retrieved 2012-01-20. "MINA Breaking News - UN mediator Nimetz to meet with Jolevski and Vassilakis in New York". macedoniaonline.eu. Archived from the original on 2018-09-30. Retrieved 2012-11-20. "New proposal reportedly tabled in Macedonia name dispute". B92 English. 15 April 2013. Retrieved 24 December 2013. Barber, Tony (3 December 2013). "Macedonia calls for pressure on Greece in name dispute". Financial Times. Retrieved 24 December 2013. "Greece suggest "Slavic-Albanian Macedonia" to end dispute". B92 English. 29 October 2013. Retrieved 24 December 2013. "Ex-Mediator Says Macedonia 'Name' Talks Failed". BalkanInsight. 4 November 2013. Retrieved 22 March 2014. "European Parliament passes the Resolution on FYR Macedonia". Independent Balkan News Agency. 6 February 2014. Retrieved 22 March 2014. "Utrinski Vesnik, Macedonia: Matthew Nimetz sets new round of name issue talks". FOCUS News Agency. 21 March 2014. Archived from the original on 8 July 2018. Retrieved 22 March 2014. "UN mediator tables new proposal for Macedonia's name". EurActiv. 16 April 2013. Retrieved 22 March 2014. "UN Mediator: Gaps Remain on Greece-Macedonia Name Deal". Balkan Open Report. 13 September 2013. Archived from the original on 23 March 2014. Retrieved 22 March 2014. "Macedonia's Ruling SDSM Claims Victory In Municipal Elections After Early Results". Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Macedonia's PM hopes for quick solution to name dispute with Greece". Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Macedonia naming dispute: Balkan nation set to resolve 25-year-old row with Greece for seats in NATO, EU". Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Macedonia and Greece appear close to settling 27-year dispute over name". Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Nimetz: Term 'Macedonia' to be included in name proposal". Kathimerini. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "UN presents new proposals on Greece-Macedonia name dispute". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 17 January 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Here are the 5 name variations UN Envoy Nimetz proposed to Greece and FYROM". KeepTalkingGreece. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Greece and FYROM called to decide among five names". NeosKosmos. Retrieved 24 January 2018. Τα υπέρ και τα κατά των προτάσεων Νίμιτς για την ΠΓΔΜ [Pros and cons of Nimetz proposals on FYROM]. NewsIn. Retrieved 25 January 2018. Αυτά είναι τα πέντε ονόματα της πρότασης Νίμιτς σύμφωνα με ιστοσελίδα των Σκοπίων [These are the five names of the Nimetz proposal according to a Macedonian website]. Top Radio. Archived from the original on 26 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "OI PROTASEIS NIMITS STO TRAPEZI – Poiá eínai ta onómata pou proteínei" ΟΙ ΠΡΟΤΑΣΕΙΣ ΝΙΜΙΤΣ ΣΤΟ ΤΡΑΠΕΖΙ – Ποιά είναι τα ονόματα που προτείνει [THE NIMETZ PROPOSALS ON THE TABLE - What are the names he is proposing]. NewsMacedonias. Archived from the original on 26 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Five variations on name Macedonia tabled by Nimetz". ToVima. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "FYROM media reports UN mediator's name proposals". Kathimerini. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Macedonian Deputy PM In Athens For Talks On Name Dispute". RFERL. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Greece and FYROM PMs to meet over 'Macedonia' name dispute". Retrieved 24 January 2018. "PMs to meet after 'Macedonia' name dispute rally in Greece". Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Tsipras and Zaev unblock Euro-integration process". Archived from the original on 25 January 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Macedonia Extends Olive Branch To Greece In Name Dispute". Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Public awareness campaign the next step, following the positive Tsipras - Zaev meeting in Davos". BalkanEU. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Macedonia to rename airport amid name row with Greece". SBS. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "PMs of Macedonia, Greece Announce Concessions on Name Dispute". BIRN. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Zaev agrees to change name of Skopje's Alexander the Great Airport, Tsipras to advance FYROM-EU ties". In.gr. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Zaev – Tsipras: "Alexander the Great" highway to be renamed "Friendship"". European Western Balkans. Retrieved 24 January 2018. Ανακοίνωση Ζάεφ: Αλλάζουμε όνομα σε αεροδρόμιο και δρόμους [Zaev's announcement: we are changing the name of the airport and the roads]. Eleftheros Typos. Retrieved 24 January 2018. Τσίπρας: Πρώτα επίλυση του αλυτρωτισμού - Ζάεφ: Αλλάζουμε όνομα στο αεροδρόμιο [Tsipras: First a solution to irredendism - Zaev: We change name at airport]. Kathimerini. 24 January 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2018. Τσίπρας για πΓΔΜ: "Πρώτα να αντιμετωπίσουμε τον αλυτρωτισμό, μετά το όνομα". Ζάεφ: "Θα αλλάξουμε το όνομα στο αεροδρόμιο των Σκοπίων" [Tsipras for Macedonia: "First we deal with the irredendism, then the name". Zaev: "We will change the name at Skopje airport"]. Huffington Post. 24 January 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Tsipras, Zaev pledge herald steps to show good will, set red lines". Kathimerini. Retrieved 25 January 2018. Οι αντιδράσεις των Σκοπιανών κομμάτων για τη συνάντηση Τσίπρα-Ζάεφ [The reactions of the Macedonian political parties to the Tsipras-Zaev meeting]. To Proto Thema. 25 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Macedonia to rename airport to end decades' long feud with Greece". Reuters. Retrieved 6 March 2018. "Macedonia—it's complicated". EuroNews. Retrieved 6 March 2018. "Kotzias, Dimitrov note progress, ply ahead with settlement talks". To Vima. Retrieved 6 March 2018. "Why Macedonians and Greeks Should Work Together". BalkanInsight. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Kotzias announced revision of Macedonian textbooks from November". Retrieved 24 January 2018. Κινητικότητα με ΠΓΔΜ με επίκεντρο τα ΜΟΕ [Mobility with FYROM focusing on Confidence-Building Measures]. Kathimerini. 30 September 2017. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Macedonia puts four options forward to resolve name dispute". The Guardian. "City of Skopje starting to take action on Skopje 2014 project: Mayor". Macedonian Information Agency. Archived from the original on 10 March 2018. Retrieved 9 March 2018. "A "Skopje 2014" monument is removed". IBNA. Retrieved 9 March 2018. "Macedonia Removes the Skopje 2014 Statue of Andon Kyoseto". EUscoop. Archived from the original on 10 March 2018. Retrieved 9 March 2018. "Skopje starts removal of 'irredentist' statues put up by Gruevski government". AMNA. Retrieved 9 March 2018. "Removal of monuments in Skopje, whose turn is next?". IBNA. Retrieved 9 March 2018. "Skopje authorities start to tear down nationalistic statues". Proto Thema. Retrieved 9 March 2018. "Divisive Revolutionary's Statue Vanishes from Macedonian Capital". BIRN. Retrieved 9 March 2018. "New Dimitrov - Kotzias meeting in Thessaloniki this week". Republika.mk. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 20 May 2018. "Kotzias and Dimitrov report progress after name talks, say process is continuing". ANMA. Retrieved 20 May 2018. "Dimitrov-Kotzias Ohrid meeting: Progress made, but the hardest issues remain". nezavisen.mk. Archived from the original on 20 May 2018. Retrieved 20 May 2018. "Republic Of Where? New Name In Play As Macedonia, Greece Seek To End Dispute". Radio Free Europe - Radio Liberty. Retrieved 20 May 2018. "Tsipras holding talks with Zaev in Sofia". Kathimerini. Retrieved 20 May 2018. "Athens and Skopje Discuss the Name "Republic of Ilinden Macedonia"". NoInvite.com. Retrieved 20 May 2018. "Skopje said to have proposed 'Republic of Ilinden Macedonia'". Kathimerini. Retrieved 20 May 2018. "Zaev Cites Agreement With Greeks On 'Ilinden Macedonia' Name". Radio Free Europe - Radio Liberty. Retrieved 20 May 2018. "Greece resumes flights to Macedonia". BBC News. 2018-11-01. Retrieved 2018-11-02. "'We have a deal,' Greek PM says over FYROM name row | Kathimerini". ekathimerini.com. Η Καθημερινή. 12 June 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2018. "p. 3" (PDF). Retrieved 2019-01-14. "Greece ends 27-year Macedonia name row". BBC News. 12 June 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2018. "Republic of North Macedonia with Macedonian language and identity, says Greek media". Meta.mk. Meta. 12 June 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2018. Κλείδωσε το "Βόρεια Μακεδονία" - Το διάγγελμα Τσίπρα για τη συμφωνία (Agreed on "Northern Macedonia" - Tsipra's speech to the nation about the deal). kathimerini.gr (in Greek). Kathimerini. 12 June 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2018. Την ίδια στιγμή -και ίσως αυτό να έχει τη μεγαλύτερη ιστορική βαρύτητα και αξία για την Ελλάδα- στη Συμφωνία που καταλήξαμε, για πρώτη φορά προβλέπεται ότι οι Βόρειοι Γείτονές μας δεν έχουν και δεν μπορούν να διεκδικήσουν στο μέλλον καμία σχέση με τον αρχαίο ελληνικό πολιτισμό της Μακεδονίας. Ο όρος Μακεδόνας της ελληνικής ιστορικής κληρονομιάς, ο οποίος έλκει την καταγωγή του από τον αρχαίο ελληνικό πολιτισμό διαχωρίζεται ρητά και κατηγορηματικά από τον όρο Μακεδόνας όπως τον χρησιμοποιούν και στη βάση του οποίου αυτοπροσδιορίζονται οι πολίτες της γειτονικής μας χώρας. Χάνεται και "ο Ηλιος της Βεργίνας": Τι ορίζει η συμφωνία για το σήμα [Also the "Sun of Vergina" is being lost: what the agreement]. Crash Online. 14 June 2018. Archived from the original on 30 September 2020. Retrieved 22 June 2018. "Final Agreement for the Settlement of the Differences as Described in the United Nations Security Council Resolutions 817 (1993) and 845 (1993), the Termination of the Interim Accord of 1995, and the Establishment of a Strategic Partnership Between the Parties" (PDF). Kathimerini. Retrieved 13 June 2018. "UPDATE: Macedonia, Greece sign historic name-change deal". eNCA. 17 June 2018. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 17 June 2018. "Greece, Macedonia sign pact to change ex-Yugoslav republic's name". Reuters. 17 June 2018. Retrieved 17 June 2018. "Greece, Macedonia sign historic deal to end name row". Economic Times. 17 June 2018. Archived from the original on 2018-06-17. Retrieved 17 June 2018. "Macedonia, Greece Sign 'Historic' Name Deal". Balkan Insight. 17 June 2018. Retrieved 17 June 2018. "High Representative/Vice-President Federica Mogherini and Commissioner Johannes Hahn to attend the signing ceremony of the agreement on the name issue at Prespa lake". Europa.eu. 17 June 2018. Retrieved 17 June 2018. Πρέσπες: Ο Αλέξης Τσίπρας είναι ο πρώτος Έλληνας πρωθυπουργός που επισκέφθηκε την πΓΔΜ [Prespa: Alexis Tsipras is the first Greek prime minister to visit Macedonia]. Huffington Post. 17 June 2018. Retrieved 17 June 2018. "Tsipras: a patriotic and mutually beneficial agreement for the two countries". ERT. 17 June 2018. Archived from the original on 17 June 2018. Retrieved 17 June 2018. Αλλάζουν τις πινακίδες των οχημάτων στην ΠΓΔΜ [License plates to be changed in the Republic of Macedonia]. EfSyn.gr. 13 June 2018. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2018. "Zaev: License plates NMK to avoid any provocations in Greece". Republika.mk. 12 June 2018. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2018. "Βόρεια Μακεδονία it is – Αλλάζουν πινακίδες και διαβατήρια – Όλο το χρονοδιάγραμμα". NewsIT. 13 February 2019. "Macedonia to Rename Divisive Statues That Irked Greece". BalkanInsight. 15 June 2018. Retrieved 15 June 2018. "Macedonia's Parliament Ratifies Historic Deal With Greece". Balkan Insight. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "Macedonian assembly adopts amid tensions draft law on name deal with Greece". Xinhua. 19 June 2018. Archived from the original on June 22, 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2018. Стоилковски: Дали сега граѓаните ќе може да ја пеат химната "Денес над Македонија се раѓа"? [Stoilkovski: Are citizens now able to sing the anthem "Today over Macedonia is born"?]. MakFax. 21 June 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2018. "Macedonia President Refuses to Sign Greece Name Deal". Balkan Insight. 26 June 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2018. Σκοπιανό: Τι θα γίνει με την συμφωνία μετά το μπλόκο του Ιβάνοφ [Macedonian dispute: What's next with the agreement after Ivanov's blockade]. Eleutheros Typos. 26 June 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2018. Με ποινή φυλάκισης 5ετών απειλεί τον Ζάεφ ο πρόεδρος της πΓΔΜ) [The President of the Republic of Macedonia threatens Zaev with a 5-year prison sentence]. News247. 26 June 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2018. European Western Balkans (26 June 2018). "Ivanov fails to sign law ratifying name agreement". European Western Balkans. Retrieved 26 June 2018. "Macedonia, Albania Hail EU Approval for Accession Talks". Balkan Insight. 27 June 2018. Retrieved 27 June 2018. "Macedonia's parliament endorses name deal with Greece for second time". Reuters. 5 July 2018. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "NATO Invites Macedonia to Join the Western Alliance". Balkan Insight. 11 July 2018. Retrieved 13 July 2018. "Macedonia to hold name-change referendum on September 30". SBS News. 30 July 2018. Retrieved 31 July 2018. "iVote DEMOKRA - Integrated Election Information System of the State Election Commission of the Republic of Macedonia". referendum.sec.mk. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2018. "Macedonia name referendum fails to reach turnout threshold: election commission". reuters.com. Reuters. 30 September 2018. Retrieved 1 October 2018. "FYROM referendum: the day after". www.neoskosmos.com. Neos Kosmos. 5 October 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2019. Trpkovski, Goce (3 October 2018). "Albanian Vote Not Crucial in Macedonia Referendum Shortfall". www.Balkaninsight.com. Balkaninsight. Retrieved 4 October 2018. "Referendumi/ Mbi 260 mijë shqiptarë votuan pro marrëveshjes". www.balkanweb.com. BalkanWeb. Retrieved 25 January 2019. Sekularac, Ivana. "Macedonia leader vows to press on with name change despite..." Reuters. Retrieved 1 October 2018. Stanev, Yoan. "'North' Macedonia parliamentary debates hit deadlock". Emerging Europe. Retrieved 17 October 2018. "Macedonia parliament to vote on name change". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 2018-10-18. πΓΔΜ:Το VMRO αποχώρησε από την συζήτηση για την Συνταγματική Αναθεώρηση (in Greek). 17 October 2018. Retrieved 2018-10-18. Agencies (2018-10-20). "Welcome to North Macedonia: parliament votes for name change". The Guardian. Retrieved 2018-10-20. "Macedonian Lawmakers OK Draft Language For Name-Change Amendment". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 4 December 2018. Retrieved 5 December 2018. Marusic, Sinisa Jakov (11 January 2019). "Macedonia MPs Pass Amendments to Change Country's Name". www.Balkaninsight.com. Balkaninsight. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "Macedonian parliament agrees to change country's name". www.aljazeera.com. Al Jazeera. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "Emri i Maqedonisë/ Parlamenti miraton ndryshimet kushtetuese, shqiptarët votojnë 'pro'". www.panorama.com.al. Panorama. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "The Latest: Macedonia backs name change to North Macedonia". Associated Press. 11 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "The constitutional revisions passed by the Macedonian parliament (original: Υπερψηφίστηκε η συνταγματική αναθέωρηση από τη Βουλή της ΠΓΔΜ". Kathimerini. 11 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "Congratulations by NATO and EU to Zoran Zaev for the approval of the Prespa Agreement (original: Συγχαρητήρια ΝΑΤΟ και ΕΕ σε Ζάεφ για την επικύρωση της Συμφωνίας των Πρεσπών". Kathimerini. 11 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "Congratulations by Tsipras to Zaev for the approval of the Agreement (original: Συγχαρητήρια Τσίπρα στον Ζάεφ για την κύρωση της συμφωνίας". Kathimerini. 11 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "Macedonia MPs Pass Amendments to Change Country's Name". Balkan Insight. 11 January 2019. Retrieved 12 January 2019. "The reactions after the approval of the Prespa Agreement (original: Οι αντιδράσεις μετά την έγκριση της Συμφωνίας των Πρεσπών)". gazzetta.gr. 12 January 2019. Retrieved 12 January 2019. "UK MP May: Positive vote for Prespa Agreement - historic moment for Macedonia". mia.mk. 12 January 2019. Archived from the original on 13 January 2019. Retrieved 13 January 2019. "Thaçi: the Prespa Agreement, a model for Kosovo (original: Θάτσι: Πρότυπο για το Κόσοβο η Συμφωνία των Πρεσπών)". ethnos.gr. 12 January 2019. Retrieved 12 January 2019. "Meta përshëndet marrëveshjen për emrin e Maqedonisë: Vjen në momentin e shumëpritur". www.balkanweb.com. BalkanWeb. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "Υπερψηφίστηκε με 153 "ναι" η συμφωνία των Πρεσπών". www.kathimerini.gr. Kathimerini. 25 January 2019. Retrieved 2019-01-25. "Canada "welcomes" the Prespa agreement (Original: "Ο Καναδάς "χαιρετίζει" τη συμφωνία των Πρεσπών")". www.kathimerini.gr. Kathimerini. 25 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Jens Stoltenberg welcomes the Prespa agreement's ratification (Original:"Την υπερψήφιση της συμφωνίας των Πρεσπών χαιρετίζει ο Γενς Στόλτενμπεργκ")". www.kathimerini.gr. Kathimerini. 25 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Joint Declaration by Juncker, Mogherini and Commissioner Hahn on Prespa (Original: "Κοινή δήλωση Γιούνκερ, Μογκερίνι και του Επιτρόπου Χαν για τις Πρέσπες")". www.kathimerini.gr. Kathimerini. 25 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Tusk's and Moskovski's messages on the ratification of the Prespa agreement (Original: "Τα μηνύματα Τουσκ και Μοσκοβισί για την ψήφιση της συμφωνίας των Πρεσπών")". www.kathimerini.gr. Kathimerini. 25 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "German Foreign Minister: The approval of the Prespa agreement, an amazing news for Europe (Original: "Γερμανός υπ. Εξωτερικών: Καταπληκτική είδηση για την Ευρώπη η έγκριση της συμφωνίας των Πρεσπών")". www.kathimerini.gr. Kathimerini. 25 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Bulgaria's PM hails Greek Parliament decision to ratify Prespa Agreement". www.mia.mk. MIA. 25 January 2018. Archived from the original on 26 January 2019. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Albania, Kosovo applaud name deal adoption that will stabilize region". www.ekathimerini.com. Ekathimerini. Retrieved 26 January 2019. "Zaev: Historic Victory (Original: Ζάεφ: Ιστορική νίκη)". www.naftemporiki.gr. Naftemporiki. 25 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Zaev for Prespes: Congratulations Alexis, we have achieved an historic victory (Original: "Ζάεφ για Πρέσπες: Συγχαρητήρια φίλε μου Αλέξη, πετύχαμε ιστορική νίκη")". www.skai.gr. Skai. 25 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "George Katroungalos signed the enacting law of the Prespa Agreement (Original: "Υπέγραψε τον κυρωτικό νόμο της Συμφωνίας Πρεσπών ο Γ. Κατρούγκαλος")". www.kathimerini.gr. Kathimerini. 25 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. Danforth, Loring M. How can a woman give birth to one Greek and one Macedonian?. Archived from the original on 2007-06-02. Retrieved 2007-01-02. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help) "United Nations". Admission of the State whose application is contained in document A/47/876-S/25147 to membership in the United Nations. Retrieved 17 July 2006. Floudas, Demetrius Andreas (30 January 2019). "Katanoontas to Neo-Makedoniko" Κατανοώντας το Νεο-Μακεδονικό [Understanding the Neo-Macedonian Problem]. Insider.gr (in Greek). "The Academy of Athens public position on the Macedonian Issue". Academyofathens.gr. Archived from the original on 2011-07-19. Retrieved 2012-01-20. Titchener, Frances B.; Moorton, Richard F. (1999). The eye expanded: life and the arts in Greco-Roman antiquity. Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 259. ISBN 978-0-520-21029-5. On the other hand, the Macedonians are a newly emergent people in search of a past to help legitimize their precarious present as they attempt to establish their singular identity in a Slavic world dominated historically by Serbs and Bulgarians. One need understand only a single geopolitical fact: As one measures conflicting Serb and Bulgarian claims over the past nine centuries, they intersect in Macedonia. Macedonia is where the historical Serb thrust to the south and the historical Bulgarian thrust to the west meet. This is not to say that present Serb and Bulgarian ambitions will follow their historical antecedents. But this is the Balkans, where the past has precedence over the present and the future. The twentieth-century development of a Macedonian ethnicity, and its recent evolution into independent statehood following the collapse of the Yugoslav state in 1991, has followed a rocky road. In order to survive the vicissitudes of Balkan history and politics, the Macedonians, who have had no history, need one. "Official site of the Embassy of the Republic of Macedonia in London". An outline of Macedonian history from Ancient times to 1991. Archived from the original on 9 July 2004. Retrieved 19 October 2006. "Kathimerini". A stir over name of Skopje's airport. Retrieved 2007-01-02. Kiro Gligorov, first president of the Republic of Macedonia: "We are Slavs who came to this area in the sixth century ... we are not descendants of the ancient Macedonians". (Foreign Information Service Daily Report, Eastern Europe, 26 February 1992, p. 35) - "We are Macedonians but we are Slav Macedonians. That's who we are! We have no connection to Alexander the Greek and his Macedonia ... Our ancestors came here in the 5th and 6th century (AD)". (Toronto Star, 15 March 1992) Gyordan Veselinov, diplomat of the Republic of Macedonia: "We are not related to the northern Greeks who produced leaders like Philip and Alexander the Great. We are a Slav people and our language is closely related to Bulgarian ... There is some confusion about the identity of the people of my country". (Ottawa Citizen, 24 February 1999) Denko Maleski, foreign minister of the Republic of Macedonia from 1991 to 1993, and ambassador to the United Nations from 1993 to 1997: "The idea that Alexander the Great belong to us, was at the mind of some outsider political groups only! These groups were insignificant the first years of our independence but the big problem is that the old Balkan nations have been learned to legitimate themselves through their history. In Balkans, if you want to be recognised as a nation, you need to have history of 3000 years old. So since you made us to invent a history, we invent it! ... You forced us to the arms of the extreme nationalists who today claim that we are direct descendants of Alexander the Great!" (In an interview for Greek TV channel Mega, November 2006) Smith, Helena (2011-08-14). "Macedonia statue: Alexander the Great or a warrior on a horse?". The Guardian. Retrieved 2015-05-24. Kakissis, Joanna (2015-05-24). "To Build Up Its Historical Image, Macedonia Is Going Baroque". NPR. Retrieved 2015-05-24. Konstantin Testorides & Elena Becatoros. "Alexander the Great's statue stirs Balkan passions". Associated Press.[dead link] Jasmina Mironski. "Macedonia's great Alexander statue vexes Greece". The Sydney Morning Herald.[dead link] Athens News Agency, "Scholars dismiss Skopje claims as 'silliness' in letter to Obama" Note: referring to this Invitation to Classical Scholars Greek Macedonia "not a problem", The Times (London), 5 August 1957 Dora Bakoyannis, Macedonia and NATO: The View from Athens, International Herald Tribune, 31 March 2008. Patrides, Greek Magazine of Toronto, September–October, 1988, p. 3. Simons, Marlise (3 February 1992). "As Republic Flexes, Greeks Tense Up". The New York Times. Lenkova, M.; Dimitras, P.; Papanikolatos, N.; Law, C. (1999). "Greek Helsinki Monitor: Macedonians of Bulgaria" (PDF). Minorities in Southeast Europe. Greek Helsinki Monitor, Center for Documentation and Information on Minorities in Europe – Southeast Europe. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2006. Retrieved 24 July 2006. "Rainbow – Vinozhito political party". The Macedonian minority in Albania. Archived from the original on February 20, 2006. Retrieved 22 July 2006. "Makedonija – General Information". Retrieved 22 July 2006. MIA (Macedonian Information Agency), Macedonia marks 30th anniversary of Dimitar Mitrev's death, Skopje, 24 February 2006 The Macedonian Times, semi-governmental monthly periodical, Issue number 23, July–August 1996:14, Leading article: Bishop Tsarknjas Facts About the Republic of Macedonia – annual booklets since 1992, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia Secretariat of Information, Second edition, 1997, ISBN 9989-42-044-0. p.14. 2 August 1944. Liotta, P. H. and Simons, A. Thicker than Water? Kin, Religion, and Conflict in the Balkans Archived November 25, 2006, at the Wayback Machine, from Parameters, Winter 1998, pp. 11-27. ERT online[permanent dead link] Stark message to Skopje, 2007-01-24. Retrieved on 2007-01-25 "Ελληνικές Γραμμές (Hellenic lines – official site of the LA.O.S. party)". Η Μακεδονία είναι μόνο Ελληνική (Macedonia is only Greek). Archived from the original on 5 June 2004. Retrieved 27 December 2006. Wilkinson, H. R. (1951). Maps and Politics; a review of the ethnographic cartography of Macedonia. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. pp. 1–4. OCLC 244268. LCC DR701.M3 W5. "State Statistical Office of the Republic of North Macedonia" (PDF). 2002 census. p. 34. Retrieved 21 July 2006. "International Constitutional Law". Macedonia – Constitution. Archived from the original on 16 June 2006. Retrieved 20 July 2006. Eastern Europe. Tom Masters, Lonely Planet Publications, 2007. ISBN 1-74104-476-6. Page 472 Official state number "Иванов, Любомир. Размисли за българите в Република Македония (Ivanov, Lubomir. Reflections on the Bulgarians in Republic of Macedonia)" (PDF).[permanent dead link] "Macedonian Tribune". www.makedonskatribuna.com. Archived from the original on 2009-01-19. Retrieved 2009-11-16. Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009. Retrieved 9 September 2006. {{cite encyclopedia}}: |work= ignored (help) "General Secretariat of National Statistical Service of Greece". 2001 census (in Greek). Archived from the original (zip xls) on September 10, 2006. Retrieved 21 July 2006. "Ethnologue". Report for Macedo-Romanian language. Retrieved August 3, 2006. "Eurominority". Macedonians protest Council of Europe decision on their Country's name. Archived from the original on 2007-07-08. Retrieved 2007-01-02. Council for Research into South-Eastern Europe of the Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, 1993 About the Hellenization of Southern (Aegean) Macedonia - A Review of "Hills of Wheat, Fields of Blood" by Antonio Milososki, University of Duisburg. Pollitecon.com Rossos, Andrew (2008). Macedonia and the Macedonians (PDF). Hoover Institution Press. p. 145. ISBN 978-0-8179-4883-2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-01-28. Retrieved 28 January 2019. The regime deported many Macedonians from their native villages near the Yugoslav border to Aegean islands; interned many on uninhabited islands, where they perished; and tortured tens of thousands in prisons or police stations. Their 'crime' was to identify themselves as Macedonians, to speak or be overheard speaking Macedonian, or to belong to or sympathize with the KKE, the only party to take any interest in their plight. Karatsareas, Petros (19 April 2018). "Greece's Macedonian Slavic heritage was wiped out by linguistic oppression – here's how". The Conversation. "Διδακτικά Βιβλία του Παιδαγωγικού Ινστιτούτου". www.greek-language.gr. Cowan 2000, p. 5. Danforth, Loring M. (1997). The Macedonian Conflict. Princeton University Press. p. 54. ISBN 0-691-04356-6. Simpson, Neil (1994). Macedonia Its Disputed History. p. 92. "Macedonians in Greece". Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 27 October 2015. Minahan, James (2000). One Europe, Many Nations: A Historical Dictionary of European National Groups. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 440. ISBN 0-313-30984-1. Frucht, Richard (2000). Eastern Europe: An Introduction to the People, Lands, and Culture. ABC-CLIO. pp. 599. ISBN 1-57607-800-0. "Country Report on Human Rights Practices in Greece". U.S. Department of State. 2008-03-11. Retrieved 27 October 2015. "Greece". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 27 October 2015. "Greece". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 27 October 2015. "Greece's invisible minority - the Macedonian Slavs". 2019-02-24. Retrieved 2024-03-19. Cowan, Jane K. (2000). Macedonia: the politics of identity and difference. London: Pluto Press. p. 37. ISBN 0-7453-1589-5. Macedonia. (2006). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 16 June 2006, from Encyclopædia Britannica Premium Service: [3][dead link] ἐντόπιος, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Encyclopædia Britannica, World Data Greece. Called "Macedonians" in this source. Danforth, L. (1995) The Macedonian Conflict: Ethnic Nationalism in a Transnational World ISBN 0-691-04357-4 "Greek Helsinki Monitor" (PDF). Greece against its Macedonian minority The "Rainbow" trial. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-12-09. Retrieved 2007-01-02. Hill, P. (1999) "Macedonians in Greece and Albania: A Comparative study of recent developments". Nationalities Papers Volume 27, Number 1, 1 March 1999, pp. 17-30(14) "Eurominority". Macedonians in Greece. Archived from the original on 2005-03-28. Retrieved 2007-01-02. Smith, Helena (2003-10-17). "The Guardian". Bittersweet return for Greek civil war's lost victims. London. Retrieved 2007-01-02. Report about Compliance with the Principles of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities (Greece) – GREEK HELSINKI MONITOR (GHM) Archived 23 May 2003 at the Wayback Machine Cowan, Jane K.; Dembour, Marie-Bénédicte; Wilson, Richard A. (29 November 2001). Culture and Rights. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-79735-1. Retrieved 18 March 2015. "Rainbow – Vinozhito political party". Greek Diplomats and Members of the Greek Parliament Lie to the Council of Europe. Archived from the original on January 3, 2006. Retrieved 2007-01-02. "Ministry of Interiors, Greece". 2004 Election results (in Greek). Retrieved 2007-01-03. Greek Helsinki Monitor & Minority Rights Group- Greece; Greece against its Macedonian minority Archived 2006-12-09 at the Wayback Machine Amnesty International; Greece: Charges against members of the "Rainbow" party should be dropped "Greece". Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor. Retrieved 27 October 2016. Poulton 1995, p. 187. Poulton, Hugh (1995). Who are the Macedonians?. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. p. 178. ISBN 978-1-85065-238-0. Danforth, Loring M. (1997). The Macedonian conflict: Ethnic nationalism in a transnational world. Princeton University Press. p. 172. ISBN 9780691043562. Jakubowicz, Andrew (26 June 1995). The State, Multiculturalism and Ethnic Leadership in Australia (PDF). Joint Seminar - Institute of Commonwealth Studies, Australian Studies Centre, and the Centre for Multicultural Education. University of London. p. 3. Clyne & Kipp 2006, p. 27. Mulheron 2020, p. 294. Mulheron, Rachael (2020). Class Actions and Government. Cambridge University Press. pp. 293–294. ISBN 9781107043978. Clyne & Kipp 2006, p. 28. Clyne, Michael G.; Kipp, Sandra (2006). Tiles in a Multilingual Mosaic: Macedonian, Filipino and Somali in Melbourne (PDF). Pacific Linguistics. p. 29. ISBN 9780858835696. "Republic of Macedonia – Constitution". Archived from the original on 2000-08-19. Retrieved 2012-01-20. "Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights – FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA: PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION – OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission – Final Report" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 August 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2018. "Microsoft Word – Whole_Compendium.doc" (PDF). Retrieved 2012-01-20. Sussex, R. (2006) The Slavic Languages (Cambridge : Cambridge University Press) ISBN 0-521-22315-6 Joseph, B. (1999) Romanian and the Balkans: Some Comparative Perspectives In S. Embleton, J. Joseph, & H.-J. Niederehe (eds.) The Emergence of the Modern Language Sciences. Studies on the Transition from Historical-Comparative to Structural Linguistics in Honour of E.F.K. Koerner. Volume 2: Methodological Perspectives and Applications. Amsterdam: John Benjamins (1999), pp. 218-235 Ανδριώτης (Andriotis), Νικόλαος Π. (Nikolaos P.) (1995). Ιστορία της ελληνικής γλώσσας: (τέσσερις μελέτες) (History of the Greek language: four studies) (in Greek). Θεσσαλονίκη (Thessaloniki): Ίδρυμα Τριανταφυλλίδη. ISBN 960-231-058-8. Vitti, Mario (2001). Storia della letteratura neogreca. Roma: Carocci. ISBN 88-430-1680-6. Masson, Olivier (2003) [1996]. S. Hornblower; A. Spawforth (eds.). The Oxford Classical Dictionary (revised 3rd ed.). U.S.: Oxford University Press. pp. 905–906. ISBN 0-19-860641-9. Hammond, N.G.L. (1989). The Macedonian State. Origins, Institutions and History. Oxford University Press. pp. 12–13. ISBN 0-19-814927-1. Ahrens, Franz Heinrich Ludolf (1843). De Graecae linguae dialectis (in German). Göttingen: apud Vandenhoeck et Ruprecht. Hoffmann, O. (1906). Die Makedonen. Ihre Sprache und ihr Volkstum (in German). Göttingen: Göttingen Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht. Joseph, B. (2001). "Ancient Greek". In J. Garry; et al. (eds.). Facts about the world's major languages: an encyclopedia of the world's major languages, past and present. Mallory, J.P.; Adams, D.Q., eds. (1997). Encyclopedia of Indo-European culture. Taylor & Francis Inc. p. 361. ISBN 1-884964-98-2. Dubois L. (1995). Une tablette de malédiction de Pella: s'agit-il du premier texte macédonien? Revue des Études Grecques (REG) (in French). pp. 108:190–197. Brixhe C.; Panayotou A. (1994). Bader (ed.). Le Macédonien in: Langues indo-européennes (in French). Paris. pp. 205–220.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Joseph Roisman; Ian Worthington (7 July 2011). A Companion to Ancient Macedonia. John Wiley & Sons. p. 94. ISBN 978-1-4443-5163-7. Many surviving public and private inscriptions indicate that in the Macedonian kingdom there was no dominant written language but standard Attic and later on koine Greek. Lewis, D. M.; Boardman, John (2000). The Cambridge ancient history, 3rd edition, Volume VI. Cambridge University Press. p. 730. ISBN 978-0-521-23348-4. Brian D. Joseph. "Greek, Modern". Ohio State University, Department of Linguistics.