Logan is a 2017 American superhero film starring Hugh Jackman as the titular character. It is the tenth film in the X-Men film series and the third and final installment in the Wolverine trilogy, following X-Men Origins: Wolverine (2009) and The Wolverine (2013). The film, which takes inspiration from the "Old Man Logan" comics storyline by Mark Millar and Steve McNiven, follows an aged Wolverine and an extremely ill Charles Xavier who must defend a young mutant named Laura from the Reavers led by Donald Pierce and Zander Rice. The film is produced by 20th Century Fox, Marvel Entertainment, TSG Entertainment and The Donners' Company, and distributed by 20th Century Fox. It is directed by James Mangold, who co-wrote the screenplay with Michael Green and Scott Frank, from a story by Mangold. In addition to Jackman, the film also stars Patrick Stewart, Richard E. Grant, Boyd Holbrook, Stephen Merchant, and introducing Dafne Keen in her film debut as Laura. Logan was designed to look like the near future, with slight updates to technology and the social environment and was written with a dark and violent tone closer to the western genre than the traditional superhero genre. Principal photography began in Louisiana on May 2, 2016, and wrapped on August 13, 2016, in New Mexico. The locations used for Logan were mainly in Louisiana, New Mexico, and Mississippi. The film was given the false title of Juarez to lower visibility during production. Logan premiered at the 67th Berlin International Film Festival on February 17, 2017, and was theatrically released in the United States on March 3, 2017. The film received critical acclaim, with praise for its emotional depth, screenplay, action sequences, uncompromising tone, thematic profundity, and the performances of Jackman, Keen and Stewart. It became the best-reviewed film in the X-Men franchise, with some critics calling it one of the greatest superhero films ever made, and it was selected by the National Board of Review as one of the top ten films of 2017. It was nominated for Best Adapted Screenplay at the 90th Academy Awards, becoming the first live-action superhero film to be nominated for screenwriting. It grossed $619.2 million worldwide and became the third-highest-grossing R-rated film at the time of its release. In 2029, no mutants have been born in 25 years, and an aging Logan suffers as his healing ability is failing. Working as a limousine driver in El Paso, Texas, he and mutant tracker Caliban take care of 97-year-old Charles Xavier, founder of the X-Men, in an abandoned smelting plant in northern Mexico. Xavier suffers from dementia that causes him to have destructive telepathic seizures, one of which injured 600 people and killed several X-Men the year prior. Logan reluctantly agrees to escort Gabriela López, a former nurse for biotechnology corporation Alkali-Transigen, and a young girl named Laura to Eden, a supposed refuge near the American-Canadian border. After finding Gabriela dead, Logan is confronted by her killer Donald Pierce, who is Transigen's cyborg chief of security. Pierce is looking for Laura, who has stowed away in Logan's limo and has powers similar to his. She, Logan, and Xavier escape from Pierce and his Reavers, but Caliban is captured. Pierce tortures Caliban into tracking Laura. Xavier and Logan watch a video on Gabriela's phone, revealing that Transigen created Laura and other children from mutant DNA to become weapons. The children proved challenging to control and were to be executed, but Gabriela and other nurses helped some escape. Xavier reveals to Logan that Laura was created from Logan's DNA and calls her Logan's daughter. In Oklahoma City, Logan discovers that Eden appears in Laura's X-Men comic and tells her it is fictional. The Reavers arrive, but Xavier has a seizure that incapacitates everyone except Logan and Laura, who kill the attackers and inject Xavier with his medication. As they flee, Dr. Zander Rice, the head of Transigen, arrives to help Pierce. Logan, Laura, and Xavier help farmer Will Munson and his family after a traffic incident, accepting an offer of dinner at their home, where Logan drives off enforcers from a corporate farm. Rice unleashes X-24, a mindless clone of Logan in his prime created as Transigen's ultimate weapon. X-24 murders Will's family and Xavier before capturing Laura. Caliban sets off grenades, killing himself and several Reavers but only injuring Pierce. Logan is outmatched by X-24, but Will pins X-24 with his truck before dying from his injuries. Logan and Laura escape with Xavier's body. After burying Xavier, Logan passes out. Laura takes him to a doctor and persuades him to prove that the site in North Dakota is not Eden. There, they find Rictor and other Transigen children preparing to cross into Canada. Laura finds an adamantium bullet that Logan has kept since he escaped from the Weapon X facility, which he once considered using to commit suicide. Logan decides not to accompany them, to Laura's dismay. When the Reavers ambush the children, Logan takes an overdose of a serum given to him by Rictor that temporarily enhances his healing abilities and boosts his strength. With Laura's help, he slaughters most of the Reavers before the serum wears off. As Pierce holds Rictor at gunpoint, Rice tells Logan, who killed Rice's father years ago at the Weapon X facility, that no new mutants have been born due to genetically engineered crops created by Transigen and distributed through the world's food supply. Logan, having found a gun, shoots Rice dead and injures Pierce. X-24 fights Logan as the children combine their powers to kill Pierce and the remaining Reavers. Rictor uses his powers to flip a truck onto X-24, but X-24 frees himself and impales Logan on a large tree branch, mortally wounding him. Laura loads Logan's revolver with the adamantium bullet and shoots X-24 in the head, killing him. Near death, Logan tells Laura not to become the weapon she was made to be, and after she tearfully acknowledges him as her father, Logan dies peacefully in Laura's arms. She and the children bury Logan, and before they depart, Laura tilts the cross on his grave marker to create an X. Hugh Jackman as Logan / X24: A former member of the X-Men and a physically enhanced mutant with accelerated healing. Charles Xavier's former pupil and Laura's biological father, dealing with his age and ailment. He is one of Charles Xavier's caregivers, alongside Caliban. Mangold spoke of Logan's age influencing his regenerative capabilities, which he stated may no longer produce soft skin, "so we imagined he heals quickly, still, but it leaves a scar. The simple idea was that his body would start to get a little more ravaged with a kind of tattooing of past battles, lacerations that remain of previous conflicts." On the second page of the screenplay, Mangold spoke of Logan as "... he's older now and it's clear his abilities aren't what they once were. He's fading on the inside and his diminished healing factor keeps him in a constant state of chronic pain—hence booze as a painkiller." In 2015, Jackman requested fan input for the direction Wolverine's story should go in the next film while seeming to confirm that the project would serve as his farewell to Logan. To prepare for his role, Jackman ate a minimum of six meals per day when working with trainer Mike Ryan. Ryan stated that an average workout session for Jackman lasts up to three hours, beginning at 4:00 a.m. Jackman stated, "It's going to be very different. Very different in tone and hopefully different to anything we've done." Regarding the more personal tone, Jackman noted, "That's always been really his dilemma, coming to terms with who he is". Jackman has also explained that comedian Jerry Seinfeld was indirectly responsible for his decision to stop playing Logan after 17 years, with Jackman stating, "I was having a chat with [Seinfeld] about a year ago ... he was talking about why he finished Seinfeld ... He said he'd always had this feeling and belief that you never know when either your energy or the audience's energy is going to dip over into people [saying] 'Oh, please go.'" Jackman accepted a pay reduction to ensure that the film would be produced to receive an R-rating. Additionally, Jackman portrays Logan's clone, X-24. Patrick Stewart as Charles: A mutant who is the world's most powerful telepath, who is founder and former leader of the now-defunct X-Men and formerly known as Professor X. Charles's telepathic abilities have become unstable due to age (over 90 years) and an unknown brain disease, and at times, he does not recognize Logan. During the events of Logan, Xavier is cared for by Logan and Caliban. Regarding Xavier and the themes of aging and loneliness, Mangold said, "We've seen these characters in action, saving the universe. But what happens when you're in retirement and that career is over? ... The really interesting thing to me, or a place to dig that hadn't been dug, was the idea of mutants when they're no longer useful to the world, or even sure if they can do what they used to do. Their powers are diminished like all of ours are by age ... Our Charles is a very sweet character in this film. I think he's always been an incredibly sweet character. With the addition of his own physical fragility in this movie, he becomes an incredibly powerful paternal figure in the movie. Logan is more of a reluctant one, I think you can easily guess." Stewart remarked that "... this is probably the end of this franchise for me. But the thing about science fiction and fantasy is that you can never, ever say it's the end, it's over." Dafne Keen as Laura: A mysterious young girl, who is "very much" like Logan as well as Logan's biological daughter. She is also subject "X-23". On Keen's portrayal of Laura, Mangold mentioned, "If anyone could steal a movie from [Jackman], it would be Dafne. She carries, all the time, a slight strangeness." In an interview with Digital Spy, Mangold stated, "... [Keen] was 11 years old when we were shooting. She's a remarkable kid. Her parents are actors, and she's kind of a very modern kid. Very physically capable. Incredibly gifted as an actress. I mean, it was a huge risk for Fox to allow me to make a movie where the third point of the triangle was built upon someone so young." Mangold stated that the worldwide search for an actress to portray Laura was one in which he was seeking "someone who was bilingual because I wanted a Latina kid—one who was between 10 and 12, and was a credible child." He later stated of Laura that: "She's an 11-year-old girl equipped with all the volatility, instability, mood swings, shadows and potential violence of our hero." Co-writer Scott Frank pushed for the character to speak as little as possible when he joined the project to avoid making her into a typical kid sidekick, explaining, "I read a few other drafts of the script that Jim worked on, and in all those drafts she was talking from the beginning and had an attitude. I thought that was a giant mistake." 11-year-old Nayah Murphy served as Dafne's stunt double. Millie Bobby Brown auditioned for the role before Keen was cast. Logan was Keen's film debut. Boyd Holbrook as Pierce: Transigen's relentless, calculating, and intense head of security and leader of the militant Reavers, who is sent to retrieve Laura, which brings him into conflict with Wolverine. Holbrook said of the character, "He's an innovative engineer and he's a big fan of Wolverine. He just wants to hang out with him ... There's a lot of surprising stuff in it." Mangold praised Holbrook's performance, saying that "[he] is just a fabulous actor. I wanted this film to feel intimate and real and truthfully acted, and I wanted very much to break away from the kind of bloated feeling I've gotten from a lot of comic-book movies." Stephen Merchant as Caliban: An albino mutant who can sense and track other mutants, who is helping Logan take care of Xavier. On Merchant taking the role, Mangold mentioned, "I'm always interested to find the thing that looks most interesting on the actors. Stephen is a huge man. One of the things that is so wonderful filming with him for a character like this is that he's a good six inches taller than Logan, and huge over Patrick. The little kid in the movie would come up to basically his knee. So there's a wonderful sense of scale—but he has heart too." Mangold concluded by stating, "... So that was a wonderful energy to enter the movie, and someone who instead of turning things into their own energy kind of joined ours." A younger Caliban was previously portrayed by Tómas Lemarquis in X-Men: Apocalypse. Richard E. Grant as Dr. Rice: The surgical head of Transigen, whose father was killed by Logan during his escape from Weapon X Headquarters at Alkali Lake. On the character of Rice, Mangold stated, "He's the puppet master behind Pierce and the Reavers, and has a much larger role in the sense that he's actually the kind of brilliant mind that is trying to grow mutants." Eriq La Salle, Elise Neal, and Elizabeth Rodriguez appear as Will Munson, Kathryn Munson, and Gabriela, respectively. Doris Morgado, David Kallaway, Han Soto, Jason Genao, Krzysztof Soszynski, and Alison Fernandez appear as Maria, Rhodes, Valet, Rictor, Mohawk, and Delilah, respectively. In the commentary to X-Men: Apocalypse, director Bryan Singer had stated that his film's post-credits scene would directly connect with the on-screen debut of X-Men antagonist Mister Sinister in Logan. In January 2017, Mangold stated that the character would not appear in this film. However, the DNA from several mutants, including Logan, in that film was used to create the clones that are seen in this film. Hugh and I have been talking about what we would do since we were working on the last one, and for both of us it was this requirement that, to be even interested in doing it, we had to free ourselves from some assumptions that had existed in the past, and be able to change the tone a bit. Not merely to change for change's sake, but also to make something that's speaking to the culture now, that's not just the same style—how many times can they save the world in one way or another? How can we construct a story that's built more on character and character issues, in a way as if it almost wasn't a superhero movie, yet it features their powers and struggles and themes? —James Mangold, on the development and approach of Logan In November 2013, 20th Century Fox initiated discussions over another solo film starring Wolverine, with James Mangold in negotiations to write the treatment for the film and Lauren Shuler Donner returning to produce under The Donners' Company. At the time, Hugh Jackman neither confirmed nor denied his reprisal of Logan in a new film. Jackman clarified that his lapsing contract with Fox, which reportedly would need to be renegotiated after X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014), did not mean he was leaving the franchise, as he had been working movie-by-movie since X2 (2003). He also stated, "I do want to do it with Jim and with [producer] Lauren Shuler-Donner because we had such a great experience. I'm really proud of The Wolverine (2013)." Later in the month, Mangold announced that the pre-production aspect of the film had not yet begun, nor the writing process, though he furthered this by stating, "... I would say I'm not there yet. But I have taken finger to key. Let's say that. There's been typing. And ideas. And talking amongst all the principles." Shortly after the release of The Wolverine, Mangold spoke of a potential sequel with the aim of not converting it into a "Will the world survive?" film, while also stressing his need "... not to make the same picture again." In December 2013, Jackman spoke of nearing the end of his tenure as the character, while stating that the film was in the very early stages of development. Jackman also revealed that Mangold and he had begun speaking of potential ideas, adding, "... Jim Mangold and I were literally on the phone last night talking about ideas but there is no script and no writer yet so it's a way off." Mangold would later reveal that Jackman was very involved in developing the story, saying, "Hugh and I have been friends for almost twenty years now, and he was there every step of the way. For Hugh and I, the first goal was to construct something more intimate. Hugh often brought up The Wrestler and Unforgiven as examples. I used those references as well as others. I pitched to both Hugh and the studio that I had an idea for an extremely bloody, existential Little Miss Sunshine." By March 2014, a decision was made to begin shooting after Bryan Singer's X-Men: Apocalypse (2016), with the tentative plan to shoot the films back-to-back, with producer Hutch Parker stating, "... the goal will be X-Men: Apocalypse for 2016, which means at the latest [filming begins] in summer 2015, and then the same thing with Wolverine, either before or after, but based on the script." Also in March, 20th Century Fox set a release date of March 3, 2017, Mangold boarded the project as director, Jackman signed on to reprise his role, and David James Kelly was hired to pen the screenplay. In April 2014, Jackman spoke about his ambitious feelings for the character of Logan while mentioning that they can go further than what they achieved in The Wolverine. Jackman also expressed his feelings of finality with portraying the character of Logan, while in terms of storyline, he explained that nothing had been decided as of yet. Jackman concluded by highlighting that the success of the script development would determine whether Jackman would return at all: "I haven't signed on. I'm genuinely at that point where unless it's better than the last one I'm not going to do it. I think it has to be better. I can still see where we can improve on the last one. I love the intimacy of that story, I liked the small stuff, I liked that it was a little unexpected." In February 2015, Patrick Stewart spoke of discussions about the third Wolverine film, centering around a team-up between Jackman's Wolverine and himself as Charles Xavier, with Stewart stating to Marc Mohan that "... we have been talking about a Wolverine movie, which would team Hugh Jackman and myself together ... That would be a very different sort of X-Men from the four movies that I've already done." By April 2015, Michael Green had taken over screenwriting duties, with Mangold still actively overseeing the script development process. In September 2015, Jackman spoke of the writers being halfway through the script, and that the story would delve into the relationship between Wolverine and Professor X, to which he added, "I think it's a really important relationship but I want to see signs of that quasi-father/son sort of relationship that has not been seen before, and sides of particularly Professor X that have not been seen before." Jackman spoke of Mangold's plan to start filming the next year, though he expressed uncertainty as to filming locations. Also in September, Mark Millar, creative consultant for Fox, confirmed that Mangold's film would be a loose adaptation of the "Old Man Logan" story he had written in 2008, something that was hinted at earlier by Jackman. In October 2016, the title of the film was announced as Logan. In January 2016, Jackman confirmed that Mangold had a full screenplay, albeit not complete. The following month, Liev Schreiber expressed interest in returning to portray Victor Creed / Sabretooth, with Jackman himself mentioning Mangold's vision to Schreiber. After the film's release, it was revealed by Jackman that originally the script had the character play a role in the film, but that Sabretooth was excluded from the final screenplay. By April 2016, Mangold had chosen Boyd Holbrook to portray the main antagonist of the movie, the chief of security for a global corporation that is pursuing Wolverine. Also by April, Richard E. Grant was cast as a villainous mad scientist, and Stephen Merchant had also been cast. In May, Eriq Lasalle and Elise Neal were cast supporting roles, and Elizabeth Rodriguez entered negotiations for a small but key role. Also in May, producer Simon Kinberg revealed that filming had already begun, and confirmed that the movie would be R-rated; regarding the setting and tonality, he stated, "It takes place in the future, and as you and others have reported, it is an R-rated movie. It's violent, it's kind of like a western in its tone. It's just a very cool, different film." The film included some vintage X-Men comic books, used both to advance the plot and as a metafictional reference. The director clarified that Marvel Comics allowed this on the condition that they could use actual characters and designs, but not use any real comic book issues. As a result, the comic book covers and pages seen in the film were made specifically for it, by writer Joe Quesada and artist Dan Panosian. Mangold commented that "The reality was that, like in Unforgiven, when [Clint] Eastwood runs into Richard Harris, who's writing these fictional accounts of the great Western heroes, or Pat Garrett in Billy the Kid, where you've got these aging heroes who kind of are twilight versions of their own legends — I think that idea, of being a kind of celebrity, or like a sports star long past your heyday, was really interesting for me to investigate with this kind of world." Panosian made 10 fake comic book covers, and interior arts were unused. He pointed that the arts had to resemble the style used in the Bronze Age of Comic Books, and pointed out that they also served to contrast their campy style with the darker tone of the live-action film itself. He said that "The colors and art itself juxtaposed against the raw and savage world in the film capture just how much innocence has been lost over time". On March 5, 2015, James Mangold anticipated that filming would begin "early next year." Prior to filming, the film was given the false title of Juarez to lower the visibility of production, but the local media eventually uncovered the ruse. On March 1, 2016, The Times-Picayune had confirmed that Mangold's film was preparing to shoot in New Orleans, Louisiana, with a starting schedule of May. Producers Kinberg, Shuler Donner and Parker chose to film in Louisiana because of its popularity in filmmaking locations, as well as its filming incentive, which includes a 40% tax credit for movie productions, though it requires a minimum expenditure of US$300,000. Principal photography was confirmed to have begun in New Orleans, with an original shooting schedule occurring from April 25 to August 13, 2016, albeit shooting was altered to start on May 2, 2016. On May 23, 2016, filming took place at the NASA Michoud Plant in New Orleans East, with Jackman being spotted, not far from Slidell, shooting a fight scene outdoors on the property. On May 26, 2016, the intersection of LA 16 at US 51 was closed for a time due to filming, with local store fronts donning faux signage to transform Amite City, and east of Amite near Bell Road. It was revealed that scenes were filmed prior in Husser on May 25, 2016, with a scheduled daytime shoot to occur at the Greenlawn Cemetery in Hammond on May 27, 2016. Filming took place from June 9, 2016, until June 10, 2016, in New Orleans and Metairie, respectively. On June 1, 2016, it was confirmed that 20th Century Fox had applied to film exterior scenes for Juarez on Louisiana Highway 15 between Ferriday and Clayton from June 12, 2016, up until June 16, 2016, at the Ferriday Plaza Shopping Center, while a portion of U.S. Route 425 between Ferriday and Clayton would be closed for a five-day period in connection with Fox's production. On June 1, 2016, The Concordia Sentinel revealed that Sicily Island High School and a house in Sicily Island would be used in the production, while a crash scene would be shot on U.S. Route 425 just outside of Ferriday. Producers Kinberg, Shuler Donner and Parker chose to film in Ferriday, Louisiana, because of Concordia Parish's beautiful countryside and green cornfields. On June 16, 2016, Juarez was originally scheduled to move on toward Sicily Island, however, additional periods of shooting were added. Natchez, Mississippi, had been chosen by producers of Juarez as the next filming location, for an upcoming scene which required the casting truck drivers, that would be filmed between June 14 up until June 28, 2016. On July 12, 2016, the Albuquerque Journal confirmed that Juarez would move on to its third major filming location—New Mexico, which ran through August in Albuquerque, Rio Rancho, Abiquiú, Tierra Amarilla and Chama. The New Mexico Film Office revealed that the production employed about 130 New Mexican crew members and two New Mexican cast members, as well as 600 extras throughout the production, the film office stated. On July 17, 2016, it was reported that the production of Juarez was in the process of casting to work on a scene filmed on July 22, 2016, in Albuquerque, New Mexico. On July 25, 2016, it was reported that filming had begun in the Northern Meadows neighborhood of Rio Rancho, while a few miles further down King Boulevard there was an elaborate set built with a toppled water tower, that would be used for exterior shots until June 27, 2016. On August 11, 2016, it was reported that the production of Juarez were in the process of seeking worn out cars to work on an upcoming scene filmed on August 12, 2016, in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Principal photography was confirmed to have ended in New Mexico on August 13, 2016, with an altered shooting schedule occurring from May 2 to August 13, 2016. Post-production began subsequent to filming closure on August 23, 2016. Film editor Michael McCusker was finishing work on Mangold's Logan, during the period of October 7, 2016, wherein he spoke of going through the dailies and breaking them down, and figuring out the structure of one scene which he described as a "complicated, multi-component scene". McCusker spoke of the task being rather time-consuming, on the front end, albeit stating, "I am looking at the back end experience with [Mangold] as the more important experience. I don't want to be searching for stuff for him, I want to be working towards getting the cut right." McCusker concluded by stating that another editor on Logan has use for post-production. Chas Jarrett was the overall visual effects supervisor and visual effects company Image Engine worked on most of the visual effects on Logan. In July 2016, Cliff Martinez was announced as the composer of Logan's musical score. In December 2016, Mangold announced that Marco Beltrami, who had previously collaborated with Mangold on 3:10 to Yuma (2007) and The Wolverine (2013), would take over from Martinez and score Logan instead. Beltrami's musical score received critical acclaim, praising the composition and the minimalistic approach. Jonathan Broxton, in his critical review, wrote "there will be a significant disconnect between it and those who grew up listening to Michael Kamen, John Ottman, and John Powell's X-Men scores, because Beltrami's Logan is just so different from anything we have heard in a super-hero movie before. On the one hand, this is commendable; bucking expectations and taking an entirely new approach to a well-defined musical genre is not an easy thing to do, but that's exactly what Beltrami has done here. On the other hand, listeners will still need to be comfortable with music that shifts between being dissonant, ambient, and jazzy, and which has more in common with the work of Ennio Morricone, Jerry Fielding, Elliot Goldenthal, and Bernard Herrmann, than anyone who has scored a super-hero movie before. If you're cool with that, then Logan will find a way to at least entertain you and allow you to experience its unusual tonal palette. If not, then you may find yourself recoiling in horror like Caliban from the sun, or experiencing a psychic attack of your own." The film takes visual, tonal and thematic inspiration from classic western and noir cinema, with director James Mangold having stated that Logan's influences included "visual reference points" of cinema, citing Shane (1953), The Cowboys (1972), Paper Moon (1973), The Gauntlet (1977), Unforgiven (1992), Little Miss Sunshine (2006), and The Wrestler (2008). Mangold was also inspired by The Dark Knight trilogy, saying "It seemed to me that the only films of this ilk that did interest me, that I did admire, or to use Chris Nolan's movies as an example, the ones that have really moved me beyond just the spectacle. There was a very clear decision to apply a film genre to the material, if that makes any sense."" The film also takes tropes and themes of the cyberpunk, with focus put on automation affecting the world of a near future. Mangold spoke of visual framing, while noting that he does not necessarily think about the "comic-book" related sort, instead highlighting the variety of stylistic influences that went into Logan. These influences include film noir framings and classic Hollywood filmmaking styles, as well as the Germanic expressionist filmmaking style of the early twentieth century, which Mangold stated has a commonality with comic-book art. Mangold highlighted "Strong foregrounds, playing things in depth: you have to make an image say more within that one image." Using the image of Logan at a funeral as an example of his stylistic logic, Mangold concluded by mentioning the aspects within modern filmmaking, primarily everything in close-up format. For Logan, his aim was to set frames that are descriptive, and evocative of comic-book panels and classical filmmaking. Logan premiered at the 67th Berlin International Film Festival on February 17, 2017, in Berlin, Germany, where it was selected to be screened out of competition alongside The Bar, Final Portrait, The Midwife, T2 Trainspotting, and Viceroy's House, before screening in the United States, where it was given a wide release on March 3, 2017. In October 2015, Fox confirmed that Logan would be released in the IMAX format. In the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom, the film was preceded by a short film, Deadpool: No Good Deed. In it, Deadpool notices a man getting robbed, and springs into action—but first has to change into his costume in a phone booth. As he is finishing up, the man is shot; the short film ends with Deadpool commenting on the strangeness of the phone booth's presence, and eating the man's ice cream. The teaser met with positive reviews. Ryan Reynolds posted an extended version of the teaser via his YouTube channel the day after the film's release. Prior to the confirmation that the then-untitled Logan would be his final appearance in the X-Men film franchise, Jackman initially denied such rumors. Jackman stated that he was inspired by Michael Keaton's performance in Birdman, and wished to portray the character of Wolverine until his death. In July 2015, Jackman posted an image of Logan giving the middle finger with a claw to his Twitter. The image, coupled with the hashtag "#OneLastTime", signified that the film would be his last appearance as Logan and officially announced his decision to stop playing the character he had been portraying for the past 17 years. Eventually it earned Jackman Guinness World Record of the 'longest career as a live-action Marvel superhero'. During an appearance on The Dr. Oz Show in May 2015, Jackman clarified the confusion over the conflicting sentiments by stating bluntly that the film would be his final portrayal of the character. In an interview with Willem Dafoe on Variety Studio: Actors on Actors Jackman revealed that Jerry Seinfeld helped convince him to quit the role during a dinner after Jackman asked him why he had decided to end the show Seinfeld. Seinfeld replied "I've always believed, you should never spend everything creatively because it's almost herculean to start up again. You should always have something in the tank," with Jackman summarising his point with "Leave the party before it gets too late kind of theory." In December 2016, Ryan Reynolds revealed that he had been trying to convince Jackman to return for a crossover Deadpool film, urging fans to "convince Hugh" and campaign online. In January 2017, Reynolds and Jackman spoke about the proposed project; Jackman stated, "I'm hesitating, because I could totally see how that's the perfect fit. But the timing may be wrong." Jackman later stated that he would not reprise the role for a team-up film, specifying that he "knew two-and-a-half years ago that [Logan] was the last one". Jackman expressed interest in continuing to play Wolverine had the character been brought into the Marvel Cinematic Universe, saying that the prospect "certainly would have made [him] pause" and citing a desire to see the character interact with the Hulk and Iron Man. Amid rumors of Disney's prospective acquisition of 20th Century Fox's film division, it was revealed such a deal would indeed allow the X-Men related characters to appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. During press for The Greatest Showman in December 2017, Jackman denied that he would reprise the role if the acquisition occurred. He stated that while he noted the irony and felt some initial disappointment upon learning the news, he planned on standing by his decision and wanted to see another actor portray the character in future films. In spite of his adamancy, Reynolds confirmed that Jackman would reprise his role as Logan in Deadpool & Wolverine (2024) on September 27, 2022. Slated for release on July 26, 2024, the film will see the characters integrated into the MCU. The following month, Jackman elaborated that he wanted to return to the role after watching Deadpool, but since Logan was already being promoted as his final time portraying the character, he felt he had to honor that sentiment and "straight-up lied" to journalists about his plans. He contacted Reynolds about reprising the role in August 2022, shortly before Reynolds met with Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige to discuss a third Deadpool film. Shortly after the announcement, Reynolds and Jackman clarified that the film is set "before" Logan and would not retroactively contradict Wolverine's death. As for the other principals and their prospective futures; although Patrick Stewart had stated that Logan would be the final time he played the role of Professor X, he later said that he would be willing to return to the role in Deadpool 2 or Legion. Though Legion's producers considered casting Stewart, they ultimately chose to utilize a younger version of the character portrayed by actor Harry Lloyd. Nonetheless, Stewart would go on to portray the character again in the MCU film Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness, where he played a variant of Charles Xavier who was the leader of the Illuminati before being killed by Wanda Maximoff. In April 2016, Fox decided not to showcase its upcoming movie releases, including Logan, at Hall H at San Diego Comic-Con, as the studio felt it could not prevent the piracy of custom trailers and exclusive footage routinely screened for fans in attendance. On October 20, 2016, 20th Century Fox released a 90-second teaser trailer to promote Logan, following a six-second sneak peek the prior day. Later that day, 20th Century Fox released an international red band version of the trailer, featuring slightly more graphic violence than the original. Empire chose the trailer as the best trailer of the year. The Hollywood Reporter's Aaron Couch praised the trailer, and stated, "If Logan delivers on the promise of this trailer, it will be a true rarity in modern superhero movie making." James Dyer of Empire heralded the trailer and its director, James Mangold, by stating: "We've had a veritable feast of great trailers ... from John Wick to Rogue One, Assassin's Creed and A Cure for Wellness. But none ..., no matter how impressive, have been quite so artfully constructed as this glorious first look at [Mangold]'s Logan." Forrest Wickman of Slate called the trailer "surprisingly mournful". Logan was released on Blu-ray, DVD, and 4K on May 23, 2017, and was released on Digital HD on May 16, 2017. The film became available to stream on Disney+ on July 22, 2022, alongside Deadpool and Deadpool 2. On April 29, 2017, James Mangold announced via Twitter that a black-and-white version of the film entitled Logan Noir would have a limited theatrical run in U.S. theaters, an event set to begin on May 16, 2017. Mangold stated that Logan was shot as a color film with the awareness that it would play well as a black and white film. The film was re-graded and timed shot by shot for the Noir edition. This version of the film is included on the Digital HD release and also included in the DVD and Blu-ray Combo Pack. Logan grossed $226.3 million in the United States and Canada and $392.7 million in other countries for a worldwide gross of $619.2 million, against a production budget of $97 million. Worldwide, the film had a global debut of $247.4 million from 82 markets, as well as the second-biggest R-rated IMAX debut, with $20.6 million from 1,068 screens. The film grossed $440.9 million in its first 13 days of release, surpassing the entire theatrical gross of The Wolverine ($414.8 million). Predictions for its opening in the US and Canada were revised upwards from $55 million to $80 million or even higher. Fox, however, predicted an opening in the mid-$60 million range. Some critics said the film's R rating—the second such for a X-Men film—might hinder the film's mass appeal. Two days before the film's release, ticket selling site Fandango reported that the film was outpacing all previous X-Men movies (except Deadpool) at the same point in their sales cycle. Logan was released in 4,071 theaters, the widest release for an R-rated film (breaking American Sniper's 3,888). Five hundred and eighty theatres were premium large-format screens, including 381 IMAX theaters, setting the IMAX record for an R-rated film. Logan earned $9.5 million from Thursday night previews, which began at 7 p.m. This marked the second-biggest previews in the X-Men franchise, behind Deadpool's $12.7 million. On its opening day, the film scored the biggest R-rated March opening, with $33.1 million (breaking 300's record), as well as the third-biggest R-rated debut, after Deadpool ($47.3 million) and The Matrix Reloaded ($37.5 million). Earning a total of $88.4 million during its opening weekend, the film scored the biggest Wolverine movie opening, the biggest R-rated March opening, the fourth-biggest March opening, the fifth-largest X-Men opening, and the fifth-biggest R-rated opening overall (ninth in terms of inflation adjusted). This made it the highest opening weekend for a 2017 film at the time of its release, surpassing The Lego Batman Movie ($53 million). It was also the biggest R-rated opening weekend that did not take place on a holiday. Additionally, Logan achieved the fifth-highest opening weekend for any 20th Century Fox film, trailing only behind Deadpool ($132.4 million), Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith ($108.4 million), X-Men: The Last Stand ($102.7 million) and X-Men: Days of Future Past ($90.8 million). About 8.2% of the total ticket sales were in Canada, with premium large formats comprising $12.3 million (15%) from 558 screens, and IMAX comprising $10 million (12%) of the film's total opening weekend. The opening-weekend audience was 63% males and 83% people between 18 and 44 years old. In an opening-weekend poll conducted by Fandango, 71% of responders said that more superhero films should be rated R, while 86% were interested in seeing a more violent, adult X-Men film that weekend. Furthermore, 96% said they were excited to see Hugh Jackman, 94% were intrigued to see Patrick Stewart reprise his role as Professor X, and 76% were interested in watching newcomer Dafne Keen. In its second weekend, the film dropped 56.9%, grossing $38.1 million and finishing second at the box office behind newcomer Kong: Skull Island ($61 million). In its third weekend, it made $17.8 million, finishing in third behind Beauty and the Beast ($174.8 million) and Kong: Skull Island ($27.8 million). In its fourth weekend, it made $10.1 million, dropping 43.1% from the previous week and finishing 5th at the box office. Logan was projected to open as high as $105 million. However, US forecasters believed that it could post an even higher opening if it were to overperform in major markets—most notably China. It opened day-and-date in almost every major market except Japan, where Doraemon the Movie 2017 was released. Fox ultimately decided to postpone the film's release there in order to avoid competition. Through Sunday, the film exceeded expectations and posted a five-day opening worth $159 million from 81 markets. This is Fox International's third-biggest launch of all time, behind X-Men: Days of Future Past ($172 million) and Avatar ($164 million). It debuted at No. 1 in 80 markets, surpassing Fifty Shades of Grey ($156 million) to have the highest international opening weekend for an R-rated film. It broke the record for the biggest R-rated IMAX release ever and the biggest 2D IMAX opening, with $10.6 million on 687 screens. China is the movie's best-grossing market outside America, contributing $106 million in box office. The film was the first to feature an age-restriction warning in its marketing material, as required by a Film Promotion Law that took effect on March 1, 2017. Nevertheless, the film is still trimmed by 14 minutes, totaling 123 minutes. It is very likely that the move was due to usual censorship by the State Administration of Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television, because of the violence depicted. Despite such restrictions, the film managed to debut with a better-than-expected $48.9 million, including previews, according to data from Ent Group (Fox reported $46.3 million). This marked the second-biggest X-Men opening in the country, trailing behind only Apocalypse. Tracking showed that the film opened with 85,000 screenings on Friday, which increased to about 95,000 on Saturday and Sunday, from a 9.98 million attendance. Included within that total was $4.4 million from 388 IMAX screens. In Brazil, it recorded the biggest opening for Fox, and the seventh-biggest opening overall, with $8.2 million. The top openings were in China ($46.3 million), Korea ($8.2 million), and Russia ($7.1 million). In the UK, Logan made $11.4 million during its opening weekend, beating The Lego Batman Movie to reach the number one spot, while also achieving the second-highest opening weekend of the year, behind Sing. Meanwhile, in India, the film debuted with an estimated 17 crore ($2.5 million) net, equating to a gross of $3.4 million, on 1,400 screens. According to Fox, that was the highest debut for any X-Men title in the territory, marginally ahead of X-Men: Apocalypse. While the debut was not enough to break any significant records, it ranked as the second-biggest opening weekend for a Hollywood release in the January–March quarter, behind Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, Logan holds an approval rating of 94% based on 429 reviews, with an average rating of 8/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Hugh Jackman makes the most of his final outing as Wolverine with a gritty, nuanced performance in a violent but surprisingly thoughtful superhero action film that defies genre conventions." Metacritic, another review aggregator, assigned a weighted average score of 77 out of 100, based on 51 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak-surveyed audiences gave the film a rare five out of five. Some reviewers noted Logan as one of the greatest superhero films ever made. Critics praised the film for its emotional depth, Mangold's direction, action sequences, screenplay, uncompromising tone, thematic profundity, and the performances of Jackman, Keen and Stewart. Scott Collura of IGN gave Logan a score of 9.7/10, and called it, "an emotional, heavy picture, but it's also an uplifting one that reminds us that it's okay to fight for something more, something better", and "perhaps the best X-Men movie yet." A. A. Dowd of The A.V. Club gave an 'A−' and said that "[the film] manages to deliver the visceral goods, all the hardcore Wolverine action its fans could desire, while still functioning as a surprisingly thoughtful, even poignant drama—a terrific movie, no 'comic-book' qualifier required". Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly gave it a 'B−', and called it "both the most violent film in the series and the most sentimental one. When it's not showering you in blood, it's trying to make you spill tears." Sheri Linden of The Hollywood Reporter reacted positively, saying: "Seamlessly melding Marvel mythology with Western mythology, [director] James Mangold has crafted an affectingly stripped-down standalone feature, one that draws its strength from Hugh Jackman's nuanced turn as a reluctant, all but dissipated hero." Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave it 4/5, stating "It is more like a survivalist thriller than a superhero film, and signals its wintry quality with the title itself" and compared Wolverine's hitting of his truck during the film to Basil Fawlty from Fawlty Towers. James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave it 3.5/4 and said, "In terms of tone and content, Logan is Deadpool's polar opposite but both productions refuse to play by traditional superhero movie rules ... With his glimpse into what superhero movies can be, James Mangold has given us something sadly lacking in recent genre entries: hope." Brian Tallerico of RogerEbert.com stated, "Logan has stakes that feel real, and fight choreography that's fluid and gorgeous instead of just computer-generated effects. Most importantly, Logan has characters with which you identify and about whom you care. It's not just 'great for a superhero movie', it's a great movie for any genre." Brian Truitt of USA Today said, "Easily the best Wolverine outing, Logan is [the] Dark Knight of the mutant-filled X-franchise, a gripping film that transcends the comic-book genre by saying something important." Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave 3.5/4, and called it "a hard-ass, R-rated rager that explodes with action". Amy Nicholson of MTV called it "a phenomenal, throat-slashing, gut-stabbing superhero movie". Germain Lussier of io9 said, "Logan is beautiful, sophisticated, and still a kick-ass superhero film". Debbie Holloway of Crosswalk gave the film a rating of 4/5, praising how the "script also has several powerful themes, and is truly deft in its handling of them." Michael Roffman of Consequence of Sound called the film "A game-changing masterpiece". Matt Donato of We Got This Covered said, "It's not just one of the best superhero movies ever, it's a damn-fine cinematic representation of the human condition in all its agonizing forms." Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal said, "It's the best superhero film to come out of the comic-book world, and I'm not forgetting Christopher Nolan's 'The Dark Knight'." Jackman's acting as Wolverine has been praised, and his performance topped The Hollywood Reporter's Greatest Superhero Movie Performances of All Time list. Anthony Lane of The New Yorker was underwhelmed, commenting on the film's parallel with Shane, "These quiet images (from Shane) brand themselves on the mind, and the gunshots come as an overwhelming release, whereas when Logan and Laura unleash their furious scythes nothing feels settled or satisfied." Mara Reinstein of Us Weekly gave the movie 2.5/4 and specified, in a lukewarm review, that "[t]he film loses its way during the 20-minutes-too-long journey. For all the breathless talk about how Logan transcends the superhero genre, there's nothing groundbreaking about a road trip movie in which adults try to elude the bad guys to protect a super-special child." Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave it 2/4 and said, "Logan is deadly serious, and while its gamer-style killing sprees are meant to be excitingly brutal, I found them numbing and, in the climax, borderline offensive." Stephanie Zacharek of Time magazine said, "The grim side of human nature is all over James Mangold's Logan. But that doesn't necessarily make it a good movie." In October 2017, it was reported that director James Mangold had begun writing a sequel to Logan, tentatively titled Laura, focusing on Laura and the continuation of her story, with Logan being represented with archive footage of Jackman. After Disney's acquisition of Fox was finalized in 2019, all X-Men films in development were stalled, leaving the future of Laura uncertain. In November 2019, Mangold said he did not think the project would be happening, and that he believed the studio would be trying to figure out where to go in the future with the characters, particularly with Wolverine. As depicted in X-Men: Apocalypse (2016). "Logan". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on April 14, 2020. Retrieved February 27, 2017. "Logan". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on April 14, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2021. Faughnder, Ryan (March 1, 2017). "Hugh Zaid Mak's last movie, 'Logan,' is going to shred its box-office competition". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 14, 2020. Retrieved February 23, 2018. Alexander, Julia (October 19, 2016). "Wolverine looks old and tired in this first look from Logan". Polygon. Retrieved October 30, 2016. O'Hara, Helen (October 20, 2016). "'Logan': Wolverine 3 Key Roles Revealed (Exclusive)". Empire. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Gonzalez, Umberto (October 10, 2016). "Inside 'Logan': Wolverine 3 Plot Details Revealed (Exclusive)". TheWrap.com. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Davies, Megan (October 21, 2016). "Don't worry, Wolverine still has healing powers in Logan". Digital Spy. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Agar, Chris (October 20, 2016). "Logan Director Explains Wolverine's Scars In The Film". Screen Rant. Retrieved October 30, 2016. White, Brett (October 6, 2016). "REPORT: LOGAN FILM TO INTRODUCE X-23". Comic Book Resources. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Shepherd, Jack (October 5, 2016). "Official Wolverine 3 Script Page Reveals Some Fascinating Details". CinemaBlend. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Hugh Jackman asks for ideas from fans for his final outing as Wolverine". BBC. July 28, 2015. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Snape, Joel (March 31, 2016). "Hugh Jackman Workout: How He Got Ripped for Wolverine". Coach. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Yaneff, Jon (October 10, 2016). "Wolverine 3: Logan Actor Hugh Jackman Looks Fit for Role". Foods4BetterHealth.com. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Coggan, Devan (October 4, 2016). "Hugh Jackman teases Wolverine 3 as 'very different in tone'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Nugent, John (January 24, 2017). "Hugh Jackman Reveals Empire's Exclusive Logan Cover". Empire. Retrieved January 2, 2018. McMillan, Graeme (June 9, 2015). "Hugh Jackman Explains Why Jerry Seinfeld Is Behind the End of Wolverine". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Carissimo, Justin (December 12, 2016). "Logan: Hugh Jackman took a pay cut to make sure his final Wolverine film would be rated R". The Independent. Retrieved December 14, 2016. Singer, Matt (May 19, 2017). "Hugh Jackman Was Nervous About Playing X-24 in 'Logan'". ScreenCrush. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Brown, Brigid (October 6, 2016). "First Look: Professor X Appears Spent in 'Logan'". BBC America. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Lulic, Michelle (October 20, 2016). "Who's The Girl In The 'Logan' Trailer? X-23 Could Be Making Her Debut — VIDEO". Bustle. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Peters, Megan (October 10, 2016). "Wolverine 3: Logan Key Roles Possibly Revealed". ComicBook.com. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Fraser, Kevin (October 20, 2016). "JAMES MANGOLD BREAKS DOWN THAT FANTASTIC FIRST TRAILER FOR LOGAN". JoBlo.com. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Franklin, Garth (October 20, 2016). "Mangold Talks "Logan" Timeline And Tone". Dark Horizons. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Fletcher, Rosie (January 19, 2017). "Exclusive: Logan director James Mangold gives us a scene-by-scene breakdown of his explosive new trailer". Digital Spy. Retrieved January 20, 2017. "New Wolverine film 'probably the end of the franchise' for Sir Patrick Stewart". ITV. August 9, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Gonzalez, Umberto (October 10, 2016). "'Logan': Wolverine 3 Key Roles Revealed (Exclusive)". TheWrap.com. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Peris, Sebastian (November 25, 2016). "'Logan' Director James Mangold On Making A "Human" Wolverine Film; Praises Dafne Keen". HeroicHollywood.com. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2016. McKittrick, Christopher (March 3, 2017). "Myth vs. Man: James Mangold and Scott Frank on Logan". Creative Screenwriting. Retrieved March 10, 2017. Fantz, Christy (March 18, 2017). "11-year-old Berthoud girl worked as stunt double in 'Logan'". AP NEWS. Associated Press. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Daru, Dan (March 4, 2017). "Berthoud girl lands role of stunt double in 'Logan'". FOX31 Denver. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Rubin, Rebecca (May 30, 2017). "Millie Bobby Brown Reveals She Auditioned for 'Logan' With Hugh Jackman". Variety. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2021. Grober, Matt (July 10, 2020). "Rising Star Dafne Keen On Life In An Artistic Family, The Empowerment Of 'Logan,' & 'His Dark Materials' Highlights". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Armitage, Hugh (October 19, 2016). "Logan and the X-Men: who are the Reavers and what do they want with Wolverine?". Digital Spy. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Couch, Aaron (October 18, 2016). "'Logan' Photo Confirms Appearance of Classic X-Men Villains". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Kosin, Julie (September 12, 2016). "#MANCRUSHMONDAY: BOYD HOLBROOK ON TAKING DOWN PABLO ESCOBAR". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved October 30, 2016. McMillan, Graeme (October 17, 2016). "What Caliban's Return in 'Logan' Means for the 'X-Men' Universe". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Logan - "You will recognise Dr. Zander Rice as the son of a man Wolverine murdered during his escape from the Weapon X programme." - Empire: March 2017 Issue - Page 62 Hughes, William (May 5, 2016). "ER's Eriq La Salle to glower at Hugh Jackman in Wolverine 3". The A.V. Club. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Pollard, Andrew (May 6, 2016). "Elise Neal Joins WOLVERINE 3". Starburst. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Robinson, Will (May 18, 2016). "Wolverine 3 adding Fear The Walking Dead alum Elizabeth Rodriguez to cast". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Petski, Denise (October 20, 2016). "'Logan': First Trailer For Hugh Jackman's Latest Wolverine Turn". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Holmes, Adam (October 18, 2016). "Logan Just Confirmed More Villains for Wolverine With A Lethal New Picture". CinemaBlend. Retrieved December 13, 2023. "Han Soto - Actor". LaFilaCero. Cabin, Chris (September 12, 2016). "Mister Sinister Confirmed as Villain in 'Wolverine 3' by Bryan Singer". Collider. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Porter, Matt (September 12, 2016). "X-MEN DIRECTOR SINGER REPORTEDLY REVEALS MR. SINISTER IN WOLVERINE 3". IGN. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Otterson, Joe (September 13, 2016). "'Wolverine 3' Will Feature Villain Mister Sinister". TheWrap.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Chavez, Danette (September 11, 2016). "Wolverine 3 will introduce Mister Sinister". The A.V. Club. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Mendelson, Scott (September 12, 2016). "Mister Sinister In Third 'Wolverine' Can Save 'X-Men' From Magneto Overload". Forbes. Retrieved November 12, 2016. O'Connell, Sean (January 19, 2017). "Why Mister Sinister Really Doesn't Belong In Logan, According To The Director". CinemaBlend. Chitwood, Adam (October 20, 2016). "'Logan': James Mangold Reveals Timeline; Teases Film's Unique Tone and Family Focus". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Fleming, Mike Jr. (November 5, 2013). "James Mangold, Hugh Jackman Sinking Claws Into Another 'The Wolverine' Film". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Schedeen, Jesse (December 6, 2013). "STORYLINES WE WANT TO SEE IN WOLVERINE 3". IGN. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Variety Staff (November 5, 2013). "Hugh Jackman, James Mangold Lining Up for Another 'Wolverine' Film". Variety. Retrieved October 27, 2016. McClintock, Pamela (November 5, 2013). "'Wolverine' Sequel in the Works With James Mangold". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Glick, Martin (November 15, 2013). "The Wolverine 2: Hugh Jackman Reveals 'Cool Ideas' for Script". SciFiNow. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Plumb, Ali (November 15, 2013). "Hugh Jackman Talks Up Third Wolverine Solo Movie". Empire. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Beard, Lanford (November 13, 2013). "Hugh Jackman on 'The Wolverine' sequel, Neill Blomkamp's 'Chappie,' musicals he's eyeing". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 27, 2016. O'Brien, Lucy (November 17, 2013). "JACKMAN ON WOLVERINE SEQUEL: 'IT HAS TO BE GREAT'". IGN. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Chitwood, Adam (November 14, 2013). "Hugh Jackman Talks THE WOLVERINE Sequel; Says 'There Are Some Really Cool Ideas'". Collider. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Cook, Tommy (November 19, 2013). "Director James Mangold Talks Developing THE WOLVERINE for Fox, Depicting Japan in the Film, and the Status of THE WOLVERINE 2". Collider. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Keyes, Rob (November 21, 2013). "James Mangold Talks Wolverine 3 & Classic Yellow Costume". Screen Rant. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Weintraub, Steve (June 25, 2013). "James Mangold Talks THE WOLVERINE, Making a Different Kind of Superhero Movie, His Action Style, the Editing Process, 3D, and More". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Miller, Julie (December 5, 2013). "Hugh Jackman on Why He Shoots Wolverine Dialogue Scenes in the Morning, and What a Nice Guy Rupert Murdoch Is". Vanity Fair. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Cornet, Roth (December 6, 2013). "HUGH JACKMAN SAYS HE MAY NOT DO THE NEXT WOLVERINE MOVIE". IGN. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Goldberg, Matt (March 16, 2014). "James Mangold Says He's Planning to Shoot THE WOLVERINE 2 after Bryan Singer Films X-MEN: APOCALYPSE". Collider. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Chitwood, Adam (March 13, 2014). "Hugh Jackman Talks Leaving the Character of Wolverine Behind; Considers Whether He'd Rather Be Rebooted or Replaced". Collider. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Goldberg, Matt (May 9, 2014). "Wolverine to Appear in X-MEN: APOCALYPSE; Will Likely Shoot Back-to-Back with Next WOLVERINE Movie". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. The Deadline Team (March 20, 2014). "Fox Unveils Dates For 'Fantastic Four' & 'Wolverine' Sequels, Untitled Marvel Pic". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Bettinger, Brendan (March 20, 2014). "Fox Announces Release Dates for THE FANTASTIC FOUR 2, WOLVERINE Sequel, Untitled Marvel Film, TAKEN 3, Ridley Scott Project, and More [Updated]". Collider. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Couch, Aaron (March 20, 2014). "Fox Sets Dates for 'Wolverine,' 'Fantastic Four' Sequels". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Trumbore, Dave (March 22, 2014). "Fox Sets Screenwriter David James Kelly for WOLVERINE Sequel; Director James Mangold and Star Hugh Jackman Expected to Return". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Fleming, Mike Jr. (March 22, 2014). "Fox Sets David James Kelly To Script Next 'Wolverine'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Gilman, Greg (April 30, 2014). "Hugh Jackman '99.9 Percent' Sure 'Wolverine' Sequel Will Be His Last 'X-Men' Movie". TheWrap.com. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Cornejo, Jordianne (March 17, 2015). "'Wolverine 3' Movie Cast: Top 5 Actors Who Can Replace Hugh Jackman If He Leaves Marvel Franchise". Fashion & Style. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Pahle, Rebecca (May 1, 2014). "Comic Book Movie Roundup: (Almost) Au Revoir Hugh Jackman, TASM2 Director On the Mary Jane Scene That Almost Was". TheMarySue.com. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Goldberg, Matt (April 30, 2014). "Hugh Jackman Says the Next Solo WOLVERINE Movie Will Probably Be His Last Performance as the Character". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. McMillan, Graeme (April 30, 2014). "Hugh Jackman Teases His Final Wolverine Appearance". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Mohan, Marc (February 7, 2015). "Patrick Stewart raves about Portland while discussing his new film 'Match'". The Oregonian. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Chitwood, Adam (February 9, 2015). "Patrick Stewart Says He May Co-Star with Hugh Jackman in the Next WOLVERINE Movie". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Couto, Anthony (February 9, 2015). "Patrick Stewart Says He's Back for Next Wolverine Movie, McKellen/Magneto Joining X-Men: Apocalypse". [GN. Retrieved October 30, 2016. McMillan, Graeme (February 9, 2015). "'X-Men': Patrick Stewart Hints at Old Xavier's Return in 2017". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Geier, Thom (April 24, 2015). "Hugh Jackman's 'Wolverine' Lands 'Blade Runner 2' Writer Michael Green (Exclusive)". The Wrap.com. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Chitwood, Adam (September 24, 2015). "Hugh Jackman Says 'Wolverine 3' Explores the Professor X Father/Son Relationship". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Jao, Charline (September 25, 2015). "Hugh Jackman Says Wolverine 3 Will Explore Father/Son Relationship With Professor X". TheMarySue.com. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Hegarty, Tasha (September 26, 2015). "Wolverine 3 to focus on the father/son-like relationship with Professor X". Digital Spy. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Anderton, Ethan (September 26, 2015). "Hugh Jackman Won't Shoot 'Wolverine 3' Until the Script Is Perfect". /Film. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Yehl, Joshua (September 25, 2015). "MARK MILLAR EXPLAINS HOW A WOLVERINE: OLD MAN LOGAN MOVIE COULD WORK WITHOUT MARVEL STUDIOS CHARACTERS". IGN. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Kelley, Seth (October 5, 2016). "Hugh Jackman Reveals Title of Upcoming Wolverine Film". Variety. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Schnurr, Samantha (October 5, 2016). "Logan Is Back! Hugh Jackman Reveals Final Wolverine Title and Poster". E!. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Goldberg, Matt (January 26, 2016). "'Wolverine 3' Script Update from Hugh Jackman". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. "What Logan Was Planning To Do With Sabretooth". CinemaBlend. March 2, 2017. Bell, Crystal (February 29, 2016). "WILL LIEV SCHREIBER REPRISE 'OLD MAN SABRETOOTH' IN WOLVERINE 3?". MTV. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Romano, Nick (February 29, 2016). "'Wolverine 3': Liev Schreiber Confirms Talks of Reprising Sabretooth". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Passalacqua, Michael (February 29, 2016). "LIEV SCHREIBER HAS TALKED TO HUGH JACKMAN ABOUT RETURNING AS SABRETOOTH FOR WOLVERINE 3". IGN. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Armitage, Hugh (August 29, 2016). "Is Liev Schreiber coming back as Sabretooth for Wolverine 3?". Digital Spy. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Galuppo, Mia (April 8, 2016). "'Narcos' Star Boyd Holbrook in Talks for 'Wolverine 3' Villain". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Donnelly, Matt (April 8, 2016). "Boyd Holbrook in Negotiations to Play 'Wolverine 3' Villain". TheWrap.com. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Foutch, Haleigh (April 8, 2016). "'Wolverine 3' Recruits 'Narcos' Star Boyd Holbrook for Villainous Role". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. McNary, Dave (April 8, 2016). "Boyd Holbrook to Play Villain in 'Wolverine 3'". Variety. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Patten, Dominic (April 8, 2016). "'Wolverine 3' Sets 'Narcos' Boyd Holbrook As Chief Villain". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Kit, Borys (April 26, 2016). "'Narcos' Star Boyd Holbrook in Talks for 'Wolverine 3' Villain". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Romano, Nick (April 27, 2016). "'Wolverine 3' Adds Richard E. Grant as a Mad Scientist-Esque Villain". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Hipes, Patrick (April 27, 2016). "Stephen Merchant To Star With Hugh Jackman In 'Wolverine 3'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 30, 2016. McNary, Dave (April 27, 2016). "Stephen Merchant Joins Hugh Jackman's 'Wolverine 3'". Variety. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Loughrey, Clarisse (April 28, 2016). "Wolverine 3: Stephen Merchant goes bald for X-Men film role". The Independent. UK. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Lee, Benjamin (April 28, 2016). "Stephen Merchant joins the cast of Wolverine 3". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Barsanti, Sam (April 27, 2016). "Stephen Merchant to play some intimidating badass in Wolverine 3". The A.V. Club. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Kroll, Justin (May 4, 2016). "Eriq Lasalle Joins Cast of 'Wolverine 3'". Variety. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Kroll, Justin (May 5, 2016). "Elise Neal Joins 'Wolverine 3'". Variety. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Geier, Thom (May 18, 2016). "Boyd Holbrook to Play Villain in 'Wolverine 3'". TheWrap. Retrieved October 30, 2016. White, James (May 19, 2016). "Elizabeth Rodriguez is joining the new Wolverine". Empire. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Romano, Nick (May 25, 2016). "Rumor: 'Wolverine 3' Villains May Have Just Been Revealed". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. White, James (February 24, 2016). "Hugh Jackman's Final 'Wolverine' Movie Targets R Rating". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Chitwood, Adam (May 9, 2016). "Wolverine 3 Has Started Filming; Simon Kinberg Confirms R-Rating, Says It's a Violent, "Different Wolverine"". Collider. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Angie Han (February 16, 2017). "Interview: 'Logan' Director James Mangold on His Influences, PG-13 Violence, and the Political Relevance of the X-Men". Slash Film. Retrieved July 30, 2019. Andrew Liptak (March 6, 2017). "The story behind the custom X-Men comics in Logan". The Verge. Retrieved July 30, 2019. Mangold, James (March 5, 2015). "Filming begins early 2016". Twitter. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "PRODUCTION WEEKLY – ISSUE 983 – THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 2016 / 202 LISTINGS – 44 PAGES". Production Weekly. February 24, 2016. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2016. "Fox's New Series 'Juarez' New Orleans Open Casting Call". Project Casting. March 10, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2016. "Filmography". New Orleans. March 1, 2016. Archived from the original on November 7, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2016. "WOLVERINE 3 Secretly Started Filming in New Orleans Last Week Under the Code Name 'Juarez'". Daily SuperHero. May 8, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Scott, Mike (March 1, 2016). "Hugh Jackman's 'Wolverine 3' appears headed for a New Orleans shoot this May". The Times-Picayune. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Deehan, Tom (February 3, 2016). "Third Wolverine film to be shot in New Orleans and New Mexico". The Location Guide. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2016. "MOTION PICTURE TAX CREDIT". Opportunity Louisiana. May 8, 2016. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Gallagher, Brian (May 9, 2016). "Wolverine 3 Begins Shooting, Will Be R-Rated". MovieWeb. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Rama (February 1, 2016). "Start Dates And Filming Locations For xXx3, WOLVERINE 3, AVATAR 2, And More". Rama's Screen. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Madden, Shawn (May 8, 2016). "Production Has Kicked Off On James Mangold's Sequel To 'The Wolverine'". Action News 17. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Christine (May 26, 2016). "Hugh Jackman is shooting 'Wolverine 3' at one of New Orleans' most popular filming locations". On Location Vacations. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Nelson, Karen (May 23, 2016). "Hugh Jackman spotted filming for Wolverine 3 at NASA's Michoud plant". Sun Herald. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Rester, Jacob (May 28, 2016). "Hollywood production makes use of Hammond". The Hammond Star. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2016. "INTERSECTION OF LA 16/US 51 CLOSED FOR MOVIE FILMING THURSDAY". Action News 17. May 26, 2016. Archived from the original on May 11, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2016. John (June 7, 2016). "Casting Call For Featured Extras in 'Wolverine 3'". 2016 Auditions. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Christine (June 1, 2016). "Find out where 'Wolverine 3' is filming on June 12 – 16 in Louisiana". On Location Vacations. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Loyacano, Kaitlyn (June 3, 2016). "Parts of Wolverine Sequel set to be filmed in Concordia Parish". KNOE-TV. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Martin, Joey (June 1, 2016). "Wolverine sequel filming set in SI, Ferriday". The Concordia Sentinel. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Madden, Cain (June 4, 2016). "'Wolverine' filming near Ferriday". The Concordia Sentinel. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Martin, Joey (June 15, 2016). "'Beautiful country,' cornfields attracted Wolverine 3 producers to Ferriday". The Concordia Sentinel. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Madden, Cain (June 15, 2016). "Miss-Lou residents get excited about 'Wolverine' filming in Ferriday". The Concordia Sentinel. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Wolverine 3 Currently Casting Extras". Be a Movie Extra. June 14, 2016. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "'Wolverine 3' Mississippi Open Casting Call". Project Casting. June 6, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Gomez, Adrian (June 12, 2016). "Hugh Jackman and 'Wolverine' to film in New Mexico". The Albuquerque Journal. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Frank, Billie (August 7, 2016). "Stalking Hugh Jackman in New Mexico". Santa Fe Travelers. Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Christine (July 28, 2016). "'Wolverine 3' filming moves from Louisiana to New Mexico". On Location Vacations. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Latest installment of 'Wolverine' filming in New Mexico". KOAT-TV. June 13, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Valdez, Christa (March 14, 2016). "N.M. Film Focus: Seeing, Being Stars". ABQ Free Press. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Mitotero, El (October 24, 2016). "Trailer for new N.M.-filmed Wolverine movie 'Logan' is here". The Santa Fe New Mexican. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Cecille Ferrer, Socorro (June 17, 2016). "'Wolverine 3' production taking place in New Mexico until August". Ecumenical News International. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "'Wolverine 3' Albuquerque Casting Call for Nerds". Project Casting. July 17, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Goldsmith, Alex (July 25, 2016). ""Wolverine 3" filming exciting for most in Rio Rancho neighborhood". KRQE. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "'Wolverine 3' Albuquerque Casting Call for Hispanic Soldiers". Project Casting. June 24, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Hugh Jackman's 'Wolverine 3' Albuquerque Casting Call for Cars". Project Casting. August 11, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Today's NM Film Fix". OneHeadlightInk. August 11, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Gallagher, Brian (August 13, 2016). "Wolverine 3 Wraps in New Mexico". MovieWeb. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Christine (August 16, 2016). "Hugh Jackman wraps up 'Wolverine 3' in New Mexico". On Location Vacations. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Romano, Nick (August 20, 2016). "Watch: Hugh Jackman Celebrates the End of 'Wolverine 3' Filming with a Nice Shave". Collider. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Logan (2017)". IMDb. September 12, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "'Wolverine 3' Is In Post Production". MSN. September 12, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Chitwood, Adam (October 10, 2016). "'Logan' Villain Revealed with First Image of Boyd Holbrook in the 'Wolverine' Sequel". Collider. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Hullfish, Steve (October 7, 2016). "ART OF THE CUT WITH MICHAEL MCCUSKER, ACE, EDITOR OF "GIRL ON THE TRAIN"". ProVideo Coalition. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Logan". Image Engine. October 20, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Frei, Vincent (October 20, 2016). "LOGAN". Image Engine. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Jarrett, Chas (October 20, 2016). "Projects". Chas Jarrett. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Heath, Paul (July 1, 2016). "Cliff Martinez will score 'The Wolverine 3'". The Hollywood News. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Shirey, Paul (July 1, 2016). "COMPOSER CLIFF MARTINEZ TO SCORE JAMES MANGOLD'S UNTITLED WOLVERINE SEQUEL". Joblo.com. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Calvario, Liz (July 1, 2016). "Nicolas Winding Refn Favorite Cliff Martinez Will Score 'Wolverine 3'". IndieWire. Retrieved October 31, 2016. "Cliff Martinez to Score James Mangold's 'Wolverine' Sequel". Film Music Reporter. July 1, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2016. "Marco Beltrami to Score James Mangold's 'Logan'". Film Music Reporter. December 31, 2016. Retrieved January 16, 2017. Linden, Sheri (February 17, 2017). "'Logan': Film Review | Berlin 2017". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Broxton, Jonathan (March 7, 2017). "LOGAN – Marco Beltrami". MOVIE MUSIC UK. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Collura, Scott (December 14, 2016). "Logan Was Influenced by the Classic Western Shane". IGN. Retrieved January 12, 2017. Freeman, Molly (December 17, 2016). "Logan May be Influenced by the Western Classic Shane". Screen Rant. Retrieved January 12, 2017. White, Adam (December 9, 2016). "'The bloody, primal Wolverine movie fans always wanted': first footage of new X-Men movie Logan gets rapturous response". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved January 12, 2017. Gettell, Oliver (December 8, 2016). "Logan screens extended preview, early reactions praise gritty tone". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 12, 2017. Chand, Neerjaj (May 28, 2020). "Logan Director Talks The Dark Knight Influence on Wolverine and Subverting the Genre". MovieWeb. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Rodrigquez, Daniel (June 1, 2017). "Logan: Future As Allegory". Neon Dystopia. Retrieved December 17, 2020. Grimaud, John (October 26, 2016). "Check Out This Fan-Made Logan-Style Trailer For X2". Johnny Etc. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Outlaw, Kofi (October 21, 2016). "Wolverine 3: Director Reveals Stylistic Influences For Logan". Comic Book. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Schaefer, Sandy (October 21, 2016). "Logan Director Inspired By 'Classical Filmmaking' & Comic Panels". Screen Rant. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Maguire, Evan (October 21, 2016). "'Classical Filmmaking' Inspired James Mangold". Comic Drops. Archived from the original on May 21, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Faherty, Henry (October 21, 2016). "'Logan' director James Mangold talks Hugh Jackman's end and film style". Movie TV Tech Geeks. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Meza, Ed (February 17, 2017). "Hugh Jackman and Patrick Stewart on 'Logan,' Trump and Violence". Variety. Retrieved February 17, 2017. "PRESS RELEASES COMPETITION 67TH BERLINALE". Berlinale. January 10, 2017. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 10, 2017. Tartaglione, Nancy (January 10, 2017). "'Logan' To Premiere At Berlin Film Fest; Lineup Also Adds 'T2: Trainspotting' & More". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 10, 2017. "'Wolverine' Sequel 'Logan' to Premiere at Berlin Film Fest". The New York Times. January 10, 2017. Retrieved January 10, 2017. "'Wolverine' sequel 'Logan' to premiere at Berlin film fest". The Washington Post. January 10, 2017. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019. Retrieved January 10, 2017. "'Wolverine' sequel 'Logan' to premiere at Berlin film fest". CTV News. January 10, 2017. Retrieved December 13, 2023. Bettinger, Brendan (March 20, 2014). "Fox Announces Release Dates for THE FANTASTIC FOUR 2, WOLVERINE Sequel, Untitled Marvel Film, TAKEN 3, Ridley Scott Project, and More [Updated]". Collider. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Labrecque, Jeff (March 21, 2014). "Fox sets 'Wolverine' and 'Fantastic Four' release dates through 2018". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 12, 2016. White, James (March 23, 2014). "Fox Dates A Fantastic Four Sequel for 2017". Empire. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Ellwood, Gregory (March 21, 2014). "New 'Wolverine,' 'Fantastic Four 2' and 'Taken 3' get release dates". HitFix. Retrieved November 12, 2016. IMAX Corporation (October 30, 2015). "IMAX AND TWENTIETH CENTURY FOX SIGN KEY LONG-TERM, MULTI-PICTURE AGREEMENT". IMAX. Retrieved November 12, 2016. IMAX Corporation (October 30, 2015). "IMAX And Twentieth Century Fox Sign Key Long-Term, Multi-Picture Agreement" (Press release). PR Newswire. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Chitwood, Adam (October 30, 2015). "'Deadpool', 'Independence Day Resurgence' and More Getting the IMAX Treatment". Collider. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Aaron Couch (March 4, 2017). "'Deadpool 2': Watch the Teaser Playing Ahead of 'Logan'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 4, 2017. Harrison, Lily (February 20, 2015). "Hugh Jackman Says He Wants to Play Wolverine Until He Dies, Reveals Michael Keaton Inspires Him to Be Better". E! News. Retrieved December 21, 2016. Perry, Spencer (February 21, 2015). "Hugh Jackman Wants to Continue Playing Wolverine Until He Dies". Spencer Perry. Retrieved December 21, 2016. Percival, Ashley (July 28, 2015). "'Wolverine': Hugh Jackman Teases His Final Appearance As 'X-Men' Character". The Huffington Post. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Deen, Sarah (July 28, 2015). "Hugh Jackman gives us the finger in slick Wolverine teaser". Metro. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Hawkes, Rebecca (July 28, 2015). "Wolverine Sequel - Hugh Jackman asks fans: 'what do you want to happen?'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Hugh Jackman surprised with record title to mark 16-year Wolverine career". Guinness World Records. February 19, 2019. Loveitt, Jamie (May 7, 2015). "Hugh Jackman Confirms Wolverine 3 Will Be His Last Time As Character". ComicBook.com. Retrieved December 21, 2016. Calia, Michael (May 8, 2015). "Hugh Jackman Says His Next 'Wolverine' Movie Will Be His Last in the Role". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved March 28, 2023. "Jerry Seinfeld Convinced Hugh Jackman to Retire as Wolverine". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. November 29, 2017. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Actors on Actors: Hugh Jackman and Willem Dafoe (Full Video). Variety Studio: Actors on Actors. Penske Media Corporation. November 29, 2017. Event occurs at 6:54. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved March 31, 2023 – via YouTube. Stack, Tim (December 8, 2016). "Ryan Reynolds wants to make a Deadpool/Wolverine movie". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 21, 2016. Setoodeh, Ramin (January 3, 2017). "How 'Deadpool' Saved Ryan Reynolds". Variety. Retrieved January 3, 2017. Hood, Cooper (February 23, 2017). "Hugh Jackman Shoots Down Possible Wolverine & Deadpool Team-Up". Screen Rant. Retrieved February 24, 2017. Keyes, Rob (February 23, 2017). "If X-Men Were In MCU, Hugh Jackman Would Keep Playing Wolverine". Screen Rant. Retrieved February 24, 2017. Peters, Megan (March 2, 2017). "Patrick Stewart Would Play Professor X Again Under One Condition". ComicBook.com. Retrieved January 2, 2018. Scott, Ryan (December 5, 2017). "Disney and Fox Close in on Deal, Will X-Men Join the MCU Next Week?". MovieWeb.com. Retrieved December 11, 2017. Romano, Nick (December 11, 2017). "Hugh Jackman Shares His Reaction to the Potential Disney-Fox Merger & Wolverine Joining the Avengers". Collider. Retrieved December 11, 2017. Reynolds, Ryan [@VancityReynolds] (September 27, 2022). "Hard keeping my mouth sewn shut about this one" (Tweet). Retrieved November 4, 2022 – via Twitter. Setoodeh, Ramin (October 26, 2022). "The Story of Hugh Jackman in Five Acts". Variety. Retrieved November 4, 2022. Jackman, Hugh [@RealHughJackman] (September 28, 2022). "Some answers-ish" (Tweet). Retrieved November 4, 2022 – via Twitter. DobleArcoíris com (March 2, 2017). "Q&A: Hugh Jackman & Patrick Stewart talk "Logan" (The Wolverine)". Archived from the original on April 5, 2017 – via YouTube. "The One Thing That Would Get Patrick Stewart To Play Professor X Again". CinemaBlend. March 2, 2017. Collis, Clark (February 24, 2017). "Patrick Stewart says he's retiring from X-Men franchise: 'I'm done'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 24, 2017. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (March 7, 2017). "Patrick Stewart Would Play Charles Xavier Again for 'Legion'". ScreenCrush. Baysinger, Tim (July 8, 2019). "'Legion': Harry Lloyd Breaks Down Professor X's Big Mistake and Why He's Not the Hero". TheWrap. Archived from the original on January 14, 2023. Retrieved March 31, 2023. Vary, Adam B. (May 6, 2022). "Patrick Stewart on Playing Charles Xavier Again in 'Doctor Strange 2': 'I Was a Little Unsure at First'". Variety. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Acuna, Kirsten (May 7, 2022). "'X-Men' star Sir Patrick Stewart said he 'was a little unsure' if it was wise to reprise his beloved character in 'Doctor Strange 2'". Insider. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Chitwood, Adam (April 28, 2016). "20th Century Fox Pulls Out of This Year's Comic-Con over Piracy Concerns". Collider. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Donnelly, Matt (April 28, 2016). "Fox Movie Studio Pulls Out of Comic-Con Main Event Over Piracy Fears (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Gettell, Oliver (October 20, 2016). "Logan trailer: Hugh Jackman's Wolverine is back with a vengeance". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 2, 2016. Couch, Aaron (October 19, 2016). "First 'Logan' Footage Debuts, Trailer Coming Thursday". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Rooney, Matt (October 20, 2016). "THE WORLD IS NOT THE SAME IN THE GREEN & RED BAND TRAILERS FOR LOGAN". JoBlo.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Arrant, Chris (October 21, 2016). "First Official LOGAN [Red Band] Trailer". Newsarama. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Nugent, John (December 7, 2016). "The 15 best trailers of 2016". Empire. Retrieved January 12, 2017. Couch, Aaron (October 20, 2016). "'Logan' Promises Something Unheard of in Superhero Movies — Closure". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 3, 2016. Dyer, James (October 20, 2016). "Logan: watch the emotional first trailer". Empire. Retrieved November 2, 2016. Wickman, Forrest (October 20, 2016). "The Trailer for Hugh Jackman's Final Wolverine Film Promises a Different Kind of Superhero Movie". Empire. Retrieved November 3, 2016. "Logan DVD Release Date: May 23, 2017". New DVD Release Dates. Retrieved April 25, 2017. Lang, Brent (July 21, 2022). "Disney+ Adds R-Rated 'Deadpool' Films, 'Logan' to Streaming Service". Variety. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. O'Falt, Chris (May 17, 2017). "Hugh Jackman Talks About 'Logan Noir,' Wolverine, and Making Stephen Colbert Cry". IndieWire. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Mangold (April 28, 2017). "Won't be on a TV. And the answer is no. To make a great B&W version of a film, the whole thing's gotta be regraded & timed shot by shot". Retrieved January 2, 2018. Mangold, James [@mang0ld] (April 28, 2017). "Suggestion. Hard core B&W loving LOGAN fans should not make any plans on the evening of May 16th" (Tweet). Retrieved May 2, 2017 – via Twitter. Liptak, Andrew (April 29, 2017). "Logan's black-and-white cut is coming to theaters on May 16th". The Verge. Retrieved May 2, 2017. Nancy Tartaglione (March 5, 2017). "'Logan' Shreds $152.5M In Overseas Debut; $238M Global – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 6, 2017. "The Wolverine (2013)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved March 13, 2017. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 12, 2017). "'Kong' Beats His Chest On Saturday: Weekend Opening Now At $61M – Sunday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 12, 2017. Anthony D'Alessandro and Nancy Tartaglione (February 28, 2017). "'Logan' Looks To Roar $170M+ Around The World In First Weekend – Box Office Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 1, 2017. Faughnder, Ryan (March 1, 2017). "Hugh Jackman's last Wolverine movie, 'Logan,' is going to shred its box-office competition". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 1, 2017. Pamela McClintock (March 2, 2017). "Box-Office Preview: 'Logan' to Sink Claws Into $65M-Plus U.S. Debut". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Jeremy Fuster (March 1, 2017). "'Logan' to Launch Blockbuster Season at Box Office With $80 Million Opening". The Wrap. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Joey Nofli (March 2, 2017). "Box office preview: Logan to slash competition". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved March 3, 2017. Lang, Brent (March 1, 2017). "Box Office: 'Logan' Slicing and Dicing Toward Year's Biggest Debut". Variety. Retrieved March 2, 2017. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 1, 2017). "'Logan' Outstripping Pre-Sales Of 'X-Men' Ensemble Movies On Fandango". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 2, 2017. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 6, 2017). "'Logan' Runs To $88.4M Opening; Breaks Wolverine Series & More R-Rated Records – Monday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Dave McNarry (March 3, 2017). "Box Office: Hugh Jackman's 'Logan' Rakes in $9.5 Million on Thursday". Variety. Retrieved March 4, 2017. Anthony D'Alessandro (March 4, 2017). "'Logan' Logging Best R-Rated Opening In March With $81M+; Audiences Love 'Shack': Saturday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 5, 2017. Keith Simanton (March 5, 2017). "'Logan' Finishes Jackman's Wolverine and Kick-Starts March". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved March 6, 2017. McClintock, Pamela (March 5, 2017). "Weekend Box Office: 'Logan' Sinks Claws Into Huge $85.3M Debut". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 5, 2017. "'Logan' Roars Into Theaters with $88 Million Opening Weekend". Mendelson, Scott (March 5, 2017). "Box Office: 'Logan' Goes Berserker With Record-Slashing $85.3M Weekend". Forbes. Retrieved March 5, 2017. Mendelson, Scott (March 6, 2017). "Box Office: 'Logan' Is Even Bigger Than We Thought, With An $88M U.S. And $247M Worldwide Debut". Forbes. Retrieved March 6, 2017. Anthony D'Alessandro (March 5, 2017). "'Logan's $85.3M Debut Breaks Records For Wolverine Series & Rated R Fare; Beats 'Fifty Shades' & 'Passion Of The Christ'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 6, 2017. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 2, 2017). "More Superhero Films Should Be R-Rated, Say Moviegoers". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 3, 2017. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 21, 2017). "'Beauty And The Beast' $174.8M Opening Sparks Moviegoing Explosion; Pic Could Conquer 'Rogue One' & 'Dark Knight'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 22, 2017. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 26, 2017). "Family-Branded Films On Fire At The B.O.: 'Beauty And The Beast' Embraces $81M; 'Power Rangers' Mighty With $42M+". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 26, 2017. "Logan (2017) Foreign Gross". BoxOfficeMojo.com. Retrieved June 11, 2017. Fergus Ryan (March 1, 2017). "'Logan' Becomes First Film In China Affected By New Law". China Film Insider. Retrieved March 6, 2017. Patrick Frater (March 5, 2017). "China Box Office: Defanged 'Logan' Scores $48 Million Opening". Variety. Retrieved March 6, 2017. "Logan sinks claws into top spot at UK box office". TheGuardian.com. March 7, 2017. Archived from the original on March 7, 2024. Retrieved March 7, 2024. Don Groves (March 5, 2017). "Hugh Jackman's 'Logan' Wins The Weekend Battle With Vidyut Jammwal's 'Commando 2' In India". Forbes. Retrieved March 6, 2017. "Logan". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved January 20, 2024. "Logan". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved February 19, 2021. "Best Superhero Movies of All Time". Rotten Tomatoes. June 9, 2017. Retrieved June 9, 2017.    Wittmer, Carrie (March 4, 2017). "Why critics are calling 'Logan' the best superhero movie ever". Business Insider.    Collier, Sean (March 3, 2017). "Logan is Among the Best Comic-Book Movies Ever". Pittsburgh Magazine.    Fear, David (March 7, 2017). "Why We Needed 'Logan' to Kill the Modern Superhero Movie". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 15, 2018. Retrieved September 4, 2017.    Taylor, Michael (March 10, 2017). "How Logan Changed Comic Book Movies Forever". Screen Rant.    Levy, Damien (March 6, 2017). "'Logan' A Mature, Moving Superhero Movie". Gleaner Company. Harris, Ardua (March 3, 2017). "What the Critics are saying about Logan". Seattle Times. Retrieved January 24, 2018. Lawrence, Derek (February 17, 2017). "Logan: Here's what the critics are saying". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 13, 2023. Collura, Scott (February 17, 2017). "Logan Review". IGN. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Dowd, A.A. (February 28, 2017). "The Wolverine series gets a superb sendoff with the brutal, R-rated Logan". The A.V. Club. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Nashawaty, Chris (February 17, 2017). "Logan: EW review". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Linden, Sheri (February 17, 2017). "Logan: Film Review Berlin 2017". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Bradshaw, Peter (February 17, 2017). "Logan review – Hugh Jackman's Wolverine enters a winter of X-Men discontent". The Guardian. Berardinelli, James (March 1, 2017). "Logan (United States, 2017)". Reelviews. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Tallerico, Brian (February 27, 2017). "Logan Movie Review and Film Summary (2017)". RogerEbert.com. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Truitt, Brian (February 17, 2017). "Review: Logan gives Hugh Jackman's Wolverine a super sendoff". USA Today. Retrieved March 4, 2017. Travers, Peter (March 1, 2017). "Logan Review: Hugh Jackman's 'X-Men' Swan Song Is Bloody, Violent, Brilliant". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 4, 2017. Nicholson, Amy (March 1, 2017). "Logan Brings Heart and Horror to X-Men". MTV. Retrieved March 4, 2017. Lussier, Germain (February 17, 2017). "Logan Is Beautiful, Sophisticated, and Still a kick-ass Superhero Film". io9. Holloway, Debbie (March 2, 2017). "Logan is a Stirring - but Bloody - Finale". Crosswalk. Crosswalk.com. "Film Review: Logan". Consequence of Sound. March 2, 2017. Donato, Matt (February 17, 2017). "Logan Review". We Got This Covered. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Morgenstern, Joe (March 2, 2017). "'Logan' Review: Violence and Drama That Cut Deep". The Wall Street Journal. "50 Greatest Superhero Movie Performances of All Time". The Hollywood Reporter. March 3, 2017. Lane, Anthony (March 6, 2017). "Get Out and Logan". The New Yorker. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Reinstein, Mara (February 28, 2017). "Logan Review: Hugh Jackman's Last Outing as X-Men Wolverine Is 'Bleak' and 'Intense'". Us Weekly. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Phillips, Michael (February 28, 2017). "Logan review: Jackman's Wolverine bids farewell in ultraviolent final chapter". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Zacharek, Stephanie (February 17, 2017). "Logan review: not just the bloodiest X-Men movie, but also the saddest". Time. Retrieved February 21, 2017. Donnelly, Matt (December 12, 2017). "'Call Me by Your Name,' 'Lady Bird' Top Australian Academy Award Nominees". TheWrap. Retrieved December 12, 2017. "Oscar Nominations 2018: The Complete List". Variety. January 23, 2018. Retrieved January 23, 2018. Holub, Christian (January 23, 2018). "Logan is the first Oscar-nominated screenplay based on superhero comics". Entertainment Weekly. Time Inc. Retrieved January 25, 2018. Giardina, Carolyn (January 4, 2018). "Art Directors Guild Awards: 'Dunkirk,' 'Shape of Water,' 'Blade Runner 2049' Among Nominees". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 4, 2018. Childress, Erik (December 10, 2017). ""Call Me By Your Name" and "The Shape of Water" lead 2017 Chicago Film Critics Association Nominees". Chicago Film Critics Association. Retrieved December 11, 2017. Hammond, Pete (December 6, 2017). "Critics' Choice Awards Nominations: 'The Shape Of Water' Leads With 14; Netflix Tops TV Contenders". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 6, 2017. Giroux, Chris (December 4, 2017). "DETROIT FILM CRITICS SOCIETY announce 2017 film nominations". FilmObsession.com. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Liptak, Andrew (August 4, 2017). "The 2017 Dragon Awards are a far-ranging sci-fi and fantasy reading list". The Verge. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Liptak, Andrew (September 3, 2017). "Here are the winners of the 2017 Dragon Awards". The Verge. Retrieved December 4, 2017. "The critics have spoken - Dublin Film Critics Circle Awards announced for 2017". The Irish Independent. December 14, 2017. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Travis, Ben (March 18, 2018). "Star Wars: The Last Jedi Wins Big at Rakuten TV Empire Awards 2018". Empire. Retrieved June 4, 2019. "Golden Tomato Awards - Best of 2017". Rotten Tomatoes. January 3, 2017. Retrieved January 13, 2017. Lewis, Hilary (May 12, 2017). "Golden Trailer Awards: 'Lego Batman Movie' Leads With 11 Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 4, 2017. McNary, Dave (June 6, 2017). "'Wonder Woman' Wins Top Prize at Golden Trailer Awards". Variety. Retrieved July 24, 2017. "Hollywood Music in Media Awards Announces Nominees in Film, TV, & Video Game Music". Shoot. October 24, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. "Hollywood Music in Media Awards: Full Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. November 17, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Stone, Sasha (December 12, 2017). "Houston Film Critics Release Nominations". Awards Daily. Retrieved December 12, 2017. "BEST OF 2017 NOMINEES". IGN Awards. December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Sandberg, Bryn Elise (February 22, 2018). "'The Crown,' 'Dunkirk' Among Locations Managers Guild International Awards Nominees". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 23, 2018. Lodge, Guy (December 19, 2017). "'Three Billboards,' 'Phantom Thread' Lead London Critics' Circle Nominations". Variety. Retrieved January 2, 2018. Bell, Crystal (April 6, 2017). "HERE ARE YOUR 2017 MTV MOVIE & TV AWARDS NOMINATIONS: SEE THE FULL LIST". MTV. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Bell, Crystal (May 7, 2017). "2017 MTV MOVIE & TV AWARDS WINNERS: SEE THE FULL LIST". MTV. Retrieved May 8, 2017. "National Board of Review Announces 2017 Award Winners". National Board of Review. November 28, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017. Neglia, Matt. "The 2017 Online Film Critics Society (OFCS) Nominations". NextBigPicture. Retrieved December 18, 2017. Hipes, Patrick (December 28, 2017). "'Get Out' Named Best Picture By Online Film Critics Society". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 28, 2017. "Nebula Awards Nominees and Winners: Ray Bradbury Nebula Award for Outstanding Dramatic Presentation". Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America. Archived from the original on August 31, 2018. Retrieved August 5, 2020. "Ray Bradbury Award 2018". Science Fiction Awards Database. Locus. Archived from the original on July 1, 2020. Retrieved May 20, 2018. Pond, Steve (November 29, 2017). "'Dunkirk,' 'The Shape of Water' Lead Satellite Award Nominations". TheWrap. Retrieved December 4, 2017. McNary, Dave (March 15, 2018). "'Black Panther,' 'Walking Dead' Rule Saturn Awards Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2018. Rubin, Rebecca (December 13, 2017). "SAG Award Nominations: Complete List". Variety. Retrieved December 13, 2017. "'Blade Runner 2049' Leads the 2017 Seattle Film Critics Society Nominations". Seattle Film Critics Society. December 11, 2017. Retrieved December 11, 2017. Ceron, Ella (June 19, 2017). "Teen Choice Awards 2017: See the First Wave of Nominations". Teen Vogue. Retrieved July 6, 2017. Hatchett, Keisha (July 12, 2017). "Teen Choice Awards Reveals Full List of Nominees". TV Guide. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Tapley, Tapley (January 16, 2018). "'Wonder Woman,' 'Lost City of Z,' 'Big Little Lies' Among USC Scripter Finalists". Variety. Retrieved January 16, 2018. "The 2017 WAFCA Awards". Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association. December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017. "2018 Writers Guild Awards Screenplay Nominations Announced" (Press release). Los Angeles and New York: Writers Guild of America. January 4, 2018. Archived from the original on January 4, 2018. Retrieved January 4, 2018. Dumarog, Ana (October 24, 2017). "Logan Director is Working On X-23 Spinoff Script". Screen Rant. Retrieved December 30, 2018. Baxter, Joseph (October 25, 2017). "Logan: here's the latest on the X-23 spin-off movie". Den of Geek. Dennis Publishing Limited. Archived from the original on December 26, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2018. Couch, Aaron (October 24, 2017). "'Logan' Team on Dreaming Up a 'Laura' Spinoff and Finding the Drama in Wolverine's Goodbye". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 30, 2018. Knight, Lewis (January 13, 2019). "X-Men and Fantastic Four films 'cancelled' at Fox after Disney acquisition". Daily Mirror. Retrieved January 20, 2020. Tom Beasley (November 13, 2019). "'Le Mans 66': James Mangold says Scorsese 'generalised' on Marvel, gives X-23 update (exclusive)". Yahoo! Movies. Archived from the original on November 13, 2019. Retrieved December 13, 2023. I think it's probably – at least in the near time – gone, until I hear different Wikiquote has quotations related to Logan (film). Official website Logan at IMDb Logan at AllMovie