The Constant Vanden Stock Stadium (French: Stade Constant Vanden Stock, Dutch: Constant Vanden Stockstadion), also known as the Lotto Park for sponsorship reasons, is a football stadium in the municipality of Anderlecht in Brussels, Belgium. It is home to R.S.C. Anderlecht. It also hosted the UEFA Euro 1972 semi-final between Hungary and the Soviet Union, as well as several games of the Belgium national football team. In 1917, R.S.C. Anderlecht installed, on the border of the Meir Park (later renamed Astrid Park), a new stadium with only one wooden stand. It was originally called the Émile Versé Stadium (French: Stade Émile Versé, Dutch: Émile Verséstadion), after the industrialist Émile Versé, a generous patron of the club. Later, concrete stands were set up. Between 1983 and 1991, the stadium was completely rebuilt and renamed the Constant Vanden Stock Stadium (French: Stade Constant Vanden Stock, Dutch: Constant Vanden Stockstadion), after the club's then-chairman, Constant Vanden Stock. In 2010, the son of Constant Vanden Stock, Roger, announced together with RSC Anderlecht's manager Herman Van Holsbeeck that the club was going to build a third ring above the two existing ones in order to increase the stadium's capacity to accommodate 30,000 spectators. As of 2022, these works have not started, and it is doubtful they will, as in 2014 Anderlecht agreed to become anchor tenant of the planned 60,000+ new national stadium, thus sealing the fate of their spiritual home. In the summer of 2012, R.S.C. Anderlecht carried out work to bring the stadium up to UEFA standards. Its capacity was thus decreased to 21,500 seats but it offers more comfort, more security, as well as new VIP areas and a brand new press room. All seats in the stadium are now equipped with a backrest. The aisles have been widened by 40 cm (16 in) for safety reasons, rail seats for safe standing were fitted on the terracing behind each goal, while stand 1 is now equipped with 651 outdoor VIP seats. During European competitions, the stadium is all-seated, which decreases its capacity even more. In 2019, the stadium was officially rebranded as the Lotto Park, for sponsorship reasons. The stadium is located at 2, Avenue Théo Verbeeck/Théo Verbeecklaan, near Saint-Guidon/Sint-Guido metro station. Rival supporters must stop at Aumale metro station for UEFA Champions League matches due to security measures. The stadium hosts a former one-star restaurant (Le Saint-Guidon) and a cafeteria, as well as the official club fanshop and ticketing booths. Outside view of the Lotto Park Inside view "La sixième pelouse d'Europe" (in French). rsca.be. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2010. Een nationaal stadion stamt uit de koloniale tijd Archived 2018-09-26 at the Wayback Machine erasmix.be, 15 may 2013 "Constant Vanden Stock Stadion". Retrieved 12 December 2017. "Le stade Constant Vanden Stock officiellement rebaptisé 'Lotto Park'". RTBF (in French). Retrieved 2023-01-12. "Stade - Le RSCA restera à Anderlecht et il a opté pour un troisième anneau" (in French). rsca.be. Archived from the original on 25 October 2010. Retrieved 30 October 2010. "Belgium: Anderlecht gives CVDS a makeover – StadiumDB.com". Wikimedia Commons has media related to Stade Constant Vanden Stock. Stadium Guide Article Stadium Database Article Images of the expansion of the stadium at Jaspers-Eyers Architects