Coldplay are a British rock band formed in London in 1997. They consist of vocalist and pianist Chris Martin, guitarist Jonny Buckland, bassist Guy Berryman, drummer Will Champion and manager Phil Harvey. They initially met at University College London, calling themselves Big Fat Noises and changing to Starfish, before settling on the current name. After independently releasing an extended play, Safety (1998), Coldplay signed with Parlophone in 1999. The band's debut album, Parachutes (2000), included their breakthrough single "Yellow" and received a Brit Award for British Album of the Year, a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album and a Mercury Prize nomination. Their second album, A Rush of Blood to the Head (2002), won the same accolades and included the single "Clocks", which won a Grammy Award for Record of the Year. Their third album, X&Y (2005), which completed what the band considered a trilogy, was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album. Their fourth album, Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends (2008), won Best Rock Album. Both albums were the best-selling of their respective years, topping the charts in over 30 countries. Viva la Vida was also nominated for Album of the Year, while its title track became the first single by a British group to simultaneously reach number one in the United Kingdom and United States in the 21st century. Coldplay further diversified their sound over their next five studio albums, the most recent being Music of the Spheres (2021). Each album presented a unique theme and added new musical styles to the band's original repertoire, including electronica, ambient, pop, R&B, classical and progressive rock. They are also known for "euphoric" and "immersive" live performances, which NME said are when the band "come alive and make the most sense". In 2018, a career-spanning documentary directed by Mat Whitecross was released in cinemas to celebrate the band's 20th anniversary. With over 100 million albums sold worldwide, Coldplay are among the best-selling music acts of all time. In 2014, Fuse ranked them as the sixth-most awarded group in history, which includes having the most Brit Award wins by a band. They currently own three of the 50 highest-selling albums in the United Kingdom and the most number-one albums in the country without missing the top (nine). In 2021, "My Universe" made them the first British group to debut atop the Billboard Hot 100. Coldplay have two of the 15 highest-grossing tours of all time as well, while the British Phonographic Industry recognise the band as "one of planet's most influential and pioneering" acts. The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame later included A Rush of Blood to the Head on their 200 Definitive Albums editorial and had "Yellow" added to the Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll exhibition. In 2022, Forbes hailed the group as the standard for alternative music. Time ranked them among the most impactful climate action leaders in the world during the following year. Despite their popularity, Coldplay established a reputation as polarising cultural icons. The final name change came courtesy of close friend and fellow UCL student Tim Crompton. Tim was in the process of putting a band of old schoolmates together (later called Bettina Motive). While killing time waiting for a delayed removal van, he had considered the name after he found a copy of Philip Horky's book, Child's Reflections, Cold Play. Tim had a list of potential band names but Cold Play was quickly rejected; the future bandmates didn't like it, so they discarded it. Starfish were happy to pick it up. —Life in Technicolor: A Celebration of Coldplay, 2018 Chris Martin and Jonny Buckland first met during their orientation week at University College London, in September 1996. The pair began to write their first songs together in early 1997 and practised every night. Guy Berryman was the third member to join the band in the following months and they recorded various demos without a drummer, calling themselves Big Fat Noises by November. In 1998, Will Champion completed the line-up. He explained that Martin, Buckland and Berryman had come to his house because a roommate had a drum kit and was a good drummer, but he had not turned up, "so I just said [I would] give it a go". Champion scheduled the band's first performance only a few days after becoming part of it. They had not chosen a proper name yet and called themselves Starfish for the show, which was held on 16 January 1998 at The Laurel Tree, in Camden. Weeks later, the name Coldplay was settled. In May 1998, the band released Safety, an independent EP financed by Martin's lifelong friend, Phil Harvey. 150 out of 500 copies went to open market. Harvey sold the first one to his roommate for £3 and the rest were given away to record labels. As Martin complained about the "vice-like grip" one of the Camden promoters had on the band, Harvey suggested the group should book their own concert at Dingwalls, where they managed to sell 50 copies of Safety. The event is generally considered when the latter officially became Coldplay's manager. He eventually dropped out of his course at Trinity College, Oxford to dedicate himself to the role. More concerts were scheduled throughout the summer. Martin tried to invite Tim Rice-Oxley to play keyboard for the band, but when "[they] discussed it again a couple of weeks later, he said that the rest of the band weren't keen on adding a member". In September 1998, they performed at Manchester's In the City showcase and got discovered by A&R scout Debs Wild. Safety was followed by a cassette demo with "Ode to Deodorant" and "Brothers & Sisters". Wild informed BMG Publishing's Caroline Elleray and music lawyer Gavin Maude about the group. Elleray then talked to Dan Keeling at Parlophone, but he had already passed on them. Conversely, Maude talked to Simon Williams from Fierce Panda Records, who in turn contacted Steve Lamacq. On 3 January 1999, Coldplay became the first unsigned act in history to guest on Lamacq's Evening Session. A month later, they signed a short-term contract with Fierce Panda and re-recorded "Brothers & Sisters". Six labels offered a contract as the band's popularity grew; but they wanted Parlophone, which led Elleray to meet Keeling again. He changed his mind and the deal was signed at Trafalgar Square in April 1999, the same month in which "Brothers & Sisters" was released. The next days saw them study for UCL's final examinations. On 27 June 1999, Coldplay made their first appearance at the Glastonbury Festival in the New Bands Tent. They later recorded The Blue Room, which had 5,000 copies pressed and sold to the public. Its sessions were originally meant for Parachutes (2000), but became tumultuous due to Martin having heated discussions regarding Champion's abilities as a drummer. The singer commented that "Three days later, the rest of us were feeling miserable, [...] we asked him to come back. They made me have lots of vodka and cranberry juice in remembrance of what a nasty piece of work I was being". After working out their differences, the band decided to work as a democracy, established a new set of rules, then declared that anyone using hard drugs would be kicked out of the group immediately, a decision inspired by R.E.M. and U2. The band first planned to record their debut album, Parachutes, over the span of two weeks. However, due to tours and other live performances, the recording took place between September 1999 and April–May 2000. The album was recorded at Rockfield Studios, Matrix Studios, and Wessex Sound Studios with producer Ken Nelson, although the majority of Parachutes' tracks were recorded at Liverpool's Parr Street Studios (where they used three studio rooms). American engineer Michael Brauer in New York mixed all of the songs for the album. During that time they played on the Carling Tour, which showcased up-and-coming acts. After releasing two EPs without a hit song, Coldplay had their first Top 40 hit with the lead single from Parachutes, "Shiver", which was released in March 2000, the same week Coldplay played The Forum in Tunbridge Wells supporting the band Terris as part of the NME Premier Tour. "Shiver" peaked at the number 35 position on the UK Singles Chart. June 2000 was a pivotal moment in Coldplay's history: the band embarked on their first headlining tour, including a performance at the Glastonbury Festival. The band also released the single "Yellow"; it was Coldplay's first release to reach the top five and rose to number four on the UK Singles Chart. The minimalistic music video for "Yellow" was filmed at Studland Bay in Dorset, and featured Martin singing the song in one continuous shot as he walked along the beach. "Yellow" and "Shiver" were initially released as EPs in the spring of 2000. "Yellow" was released as a single in the United Kingdom on 26 June 2000. In the United States, it was released as the lead single from the then-untitled debut album. In October 2000, the track was sent to US college and alternative radio outlets. Coldplay released Parachutes on 10 July 2000 in the United Kingdom via their record label, Parlophone. The album debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart. It was released on 7 November 2000 by record label Nettwerk in North America. The album has been made available in various formats since its initial release; both Parlophone and Nettwerk released it as a CD in 2000, and it was also released as a Cassette by US label Capitol in 2001. In the following year, Parlophone issued the album as an LP. Four singles were released from Parachutes, including "Shiver" and "Yellow", and enjoyed popularity in the UK and US. The third single was "Trouble", which reached number 10 in the UK charts. It was released more than a year later in the US, and reached number 28 in the Alternative Songs chart. In December 2001, the band released a limited-edition CD, Mince Spies, featuring a remix of "Yellow" and the Christmas song "Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas". It was pressed to 1,000 copies, and was issued only to fans and journalists. Parachutes was nominated for the Mercury Music Prize in September 2000. Having found success in Europe, the band set their sights on North America, by releasing the album there in November 2000, and started the US Club Tour in February 2001. At the 2001 Brit Awards in February, Coldplay earned awards for Best British Group, and Best British Album. Although Parachutes was a slow-burning success in the United States, it eventually reached double-platinum status. The album was critically well received and earned a Best Alternative Music Album honours at the 2003 Grammy Awards. Chris Martin said after Parachutes was released that the album's success was meant to elevate the band's status to the "biggest, best band in the world". After single-handedly managing the band until early 2001, Harvey resigned due to the stress of having to perform duties that typically require a team of people. He became the group's creative director and is often referenced as their fifth member; Dave Holmes replaced him as manager. "The Scientist" From the album A Rush of Blood to the Head, Martin wrote "The Scientist" after listening to George Harrison's "All Things Must Pass". Problems playing this file? See media help. After the success of Parachutes, Coldplay returned to the studio in September 2001 to begin work on their second album, A Rush of Blood to the Head, once again with Ken Nelson producing. They had trouble focusing in London and decided to relocate to Liverpool, where they recorded some of the songs on Parachutes. Once there, vocalist Chris Martin said that they became obsessed with recording. "In My Place" was the first song recorded for the album. The band released it as the album's lead single because it was the track that made them want to record a second album, following a "strange period of not really knowing what we were doing" three months after the success of Parachutes. According to Martin "one thing kept us going: recording 'In My Place'. Then other songs started coming." The band wrote more than 20 songs for the album. Some of their new material, including "In My Place" and "Animals", was played live while the band were still touring Parachutes. The album's title was revealed through a post on the band's official website. The album was released in August 2002 and spawned several successful singles, including "In My Place", "Clocks", and the ballad "The Scientist", which was inspired by George Harrison's 1970 song "All Things Must Pass". Coldplay toured from 19 June 2002 to 8 September 2003 for the A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour. They visited five continents, including co-headlining festival dates at Glastonbury Festival, V2003 and Rock Werchter. Many concerts showcased elaborate lighting and individualised screens reminiscent of U2's Elevation Tour and Nine Inch Nails' Fragility Tour. During the extended tour, Coldplay recorded a live DVD and CD, Live 2003, at Sydney's Hordern Pavilion. At the 2003 Brit Awards held at Earls Court, London, Coldplay received awards for Best British Group, and Best British Album. On 28 August 2003, Coldplay performed "The Scientist" at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards at the Radio City Music Hall in New York City, and won three awards. In December 2003, readers of Rolling Stone magazine chose Coldplay as the best artist and the best band of the year. At that time the band covered the Pretenders' 1983 song "2000 Miles" (which was made available for download on their official website). "2000 Miles" was the top selling UK download that year, with proceeds from the sales donated to Future Forests and Stop Handgun Violence campaigns. A Rush of Blood to the Head won the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album at the 2003 Grammy Awards. At the 2004 Grammy Awards, Coldplay earned Record of the Year for "Clocks". Coldplay spent most of 2004 out of the spotlight, taking a break from touring and releasing a satire music video of a song from a fictional band titled The Nappies while recording their third album. X&Y was released in June 2005 in UK and Europe. This new, delayed release date had put the album back into the next fiscal year, and the late release was blamed for a drop in EMI's stock. It became the best-selling album of 2005 with worldwide sales of 8.3 million. The lead single, "Speed of Sound", made its radio and online music store debut on 18 April and was released as a CD on 23 May 2005. X&Y entered the album charts of 32 countries at the number one position and was the third-fastest-selling album in UK chart history upon release. Two other singles were released that year: "Fix You" in September and "Talk" in December. Critical reaction to X&Y was mostly positive, though slightly less enthusiastic than that of its predecessor. The New York Times critic Jon Pareles infamously described Coldplay as "the most insufferable band of the decade", whereas NME awarded the album 9/10 calling it "Confident, bold, ambitious, bunged with singles and impossible to contain, X&Y doesn't reinvent the wheel but it does reinforce Coldplay as the band of their time". Comparisons between Coldplay and U2 became commonplace. Martin said the critical review of the album by the New York Times made him feel liberated as he "agreed with a lot of the points", adding that "in a way, it was liberating to see that someone else realised that also". From June 2005 to March 2007, Coldplay went on their Twisted Logic Tour, which included festival dates like Coachella, Isle of Wight Festival, Glastonbury and the Austin City Limits Music Festival. In July 2005, the band appeared at Live 8 in Hyde Park, where they played a rendition of the Verve's "Bitter Sweet Symphony" with Richard Ashcroft on vocals. On 28 August, Coldplay performed "Speed of Sound" at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards in Miami. In September, Coldplay recorded a new version of "How You See the World" with reworked lyrics for War Child's Help!: A Day in the Life charity album. In February 2006, Coldplay earned Best Album and Best Single honours at the Brit Awards. Three more singles were released during 2006 and 2007, "The Hardest Part", "What If" and "White Shadows". In October 2006, Coldplay began work on their fourth studio album, Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends, with producer Brian Eno. Taking a break from recording, the band toured Latin America in early 2007, finishing the Twisted Logic Tour while performing in Chile, Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico. After recording in churches and other venues in Latin America and Spain during their tour, the band said the album would likely reflect Hispanic influence. The group spent the rest of the year recording most of the album with Eno. Martin described Viva la Vida as a new direction for Coldplay; a change from their past three albums, which the band felt was a "trilogy" that they had finished. He said the album featured less of his falsetto as he allowed his voice's lower register to take precedence. Some songs, such as "Violet Hill" contain distorted guitar riffs and bluesy undertones. "Violet Hill" was confirmed as the first single, with a radio release date of 29 April 2008. After the first play, it was freely obtainable from Coldplay's website from 12:15 pm (GMT +0) for one week until it became commercially available on 6 May. "Violet Hill" entered the UK Top 10, US Top 40 and charted well in the rest of the world. The title track, "Viva la Vida", was also released exclusively on iTunes, it became the band's first number-one single on both the US Billboard Hot 100, and the UK Official Charts. Coldplay performed the song live for the first time at the 2008 MTV Movie Awards on 1 June. "Viva la Vida" became iTunes' best-selling song of 2008. Upon release, Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends topped the album charts worldwide and was the world's best-selling album of 2008. It hit number one on the UK album chart despite having come on the market only three days previously. In that time, it sold 302,000 copies, being "one of the fastest-selling albums in the country's history". By the end of June, it had set a new record for most-downloaded album ever. In October 2008, Coldplay won two Q Awards for Best Album for Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends and Best Act in the World Today. On 9 November, Coldplay were named the World's Best-selling Act of 2008 at the World Music Awards in Monte Carlo. They also picked up two other awards: World's Best-selling Rock Act and Great Britain's Best-selling Act. The band followed up Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends with the Prospekt's March EP, which was released on 21 November 2008. The extended play features songs from the album sessions and was originally made available on its own, while the album got re-issued with all EP tracks included on a bonus disc. "Life in Technicolor II" was the only single released. Coldplay began their Viva la Vida Tour in June with a free concert at Brixton Academy in London. This was followed two days later by a 45-minute performance that was broadcast live from outside BBC Television Centre. Released in late 2008, "Lost!" became the third single from the album, featuring a new version with Jay-Z called "Lost+". After performing the opening set on 14 March 2009 for Sound Relief at the Sydney Cricket Ground, Coldplay headlined a sold-out concert later that same night. Sound Relief is a benefit concert for victims of the Victorian Bushfire Crisis and the Queensland Floods. On 4 December 2008, Joe Satriani filed a copyright infringement suit against Coldplay in the United States District Court for the Central District of California. Satriani's suit asserted that the Coldplay song "Viva la Vida" includes "substantial original portions" of the Satriani song "If I Could Fly" from his 2004 album, Is There Love in Space?. The Coldplay song in question received two Grammy Awards for "Song of the Year". The band denied the allegation. An unspecified settlement was ultimately reached between the parties. Coldplay were nominated for four awards at the 2009 Brit Awards: British Group, British Live Act, British Single ("Viva la Vida") and British Album (Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends). At the 51st Grammy Awards in the same year, Coldplay won three Grammy Awards in the categories for Song of Year for "Viva la Vida", Best Rock Album for Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends, and Best Vocal Pop Performance by a Duo or Group for "Viva la Vida". A live album titled LeftRightLeftRightLeft was recorded at various shows during the tour. LeftRightLeftRightLeft, released on 15 May 2009, was to be given away at the remaining concerts of their Viva la Vida Tour. It was released as a free download from their website. Following the Viva la Vida Tour, Coldplay announced another "Latin America tour" to take place in February and March 2010, in which they were to visit Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, and Colombia. In October 2009, Coldplay won Song of the Year for "Viva la Vida" at The American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP) Awards in London. In December 2009, Rolling Stone readers voted the group the fourth best artist of the 2000s, they were also included in Q's list of artists of the century. In December 2010 the band released "Christmas Lights". The song received very positive reviews, and the music video features a cameo from actor Simon Pegg, a close friend of Chris Martin, who plays a violin-playing Elvis impersonator in the background. The band finished recording the new album in mid-2011. When Martin and Champion were interviewed by BBC Radio and asked about the album's lyrical themes, Martin replied "It's about love, addiction, OCD, escape and working for someone you don't like." When asked whether or not their fifth album would be out by the summer, Martin and Champion said that there was plenty of work to be done before releasing it. They confirmed several festival appearances before its release date, including a headlining spot at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival, T in the Park, Austin City Limits Music Festival, Rock in Rio, and Lollapalooza festival. In an interview on 13 January 2011, Coldplay mentioned two new songs would be included on their upcoming fifth album, "Princess of China" and "Every Teardrop Is a Waterfall". In a February interview Parlophone president Miles Leonard told HitQuarters that the band were still in the studio working on the album and that he expected the final version would appear "towards the autumn of this year". On 31 May 2011, Coldplay announced that "Every Teardrop Is a Waterfall" was the first single for the fifth album. It was released on 3 June 2011. The band presented five new songs at festivals during the summer of 2011, "Charlie Brown", "Hurts Like Heaven", "Us Against the World", "Princess of China" and "Major Minus". On 12 August 2011, Coldplay announced via their official website that Mylo Xyloto was the new album title, and that it would be released on 24 October 2011. On 12 September the band released "Paradise", the second single from their upcoming album Mylo Xyloto. On 23 September 2011, tickets for Coldplay's European tour officially went on sale. Demand proved to be very high with most venues selling out in seconds. Mylo Xyloto was released on 24 October 2011, it received mixed to positive reviews and topped the charts in over 34 countries. On 19 October 2011, Coldplay performed songs at Apple Inc.'s private memorial for Steve Jobs, including "Viva la Vida", "Fix You", "Yellow" and "Every Teardrop Is a Waterfall". On 26 October their "Amex Unstaged" concert at the Plaza de Toros de Las Ventas in Madrid, Spain, was streamed by YouTube as a live webcast directed by Anton Corbijn. On 30 November 2011, Coldplay received three Grammy Award nominations for the 54th Annual Grammy Awards which took place on 12 February 2012 in Los Angeles, and the band performed with Rihanna at the ceremony. On 12 January 2012, Coldplay were nominated for two Brit Awards. On 21 February 2012, they were awarded the Brit Award for Best British Group for the third time. The album was the best-selling rock album in the United Kingdom, selling 908,000 copies. The album's second single, "Paradise", was also the best-selling rock single in the UK, selling 410,000 copies. At the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards, "Paradise" won the Best Rock Video award. Mylo Xyloto has sold over 8 million copies worldwide. Coldplay headlined the closing ceremony of the London 2012 Paralympic Games on 9 September 2012, where they performed alongside other artists including Rihanna and Jay-Z. To tie in with their performance at the closing ceremony, the group gave permission for bands who were participating in the Bandstand Marathon the opportunity to perform their 2008 single "Viva la Vida" to celebrate the end of the games. In October 2012, the music video for Coldplay's song "Hurts Like Heaven" was released. The video was based on the story of Mylo Xyloto, a boy who grew up in tyranny ran by Major Minus. The fictional comics titled Mylo Xyloto continued on the story portrayed in the music video when the series was released in early 2013. A concert documentary film and live album Live 2012 chronicles their tour in support of the Mylo Xyloto album. The film premiered theatrically for one night only, 13 November 2012, and was released on CD and home video on 19 November 2012. On 21 November, after a concert in Brisbane, Australia as part on the group's Mylo Xyloto Tour, Coldplay hinted they were set to take a three-year break from touring. Coldplay performed two shows with Jay-Z in the Barclays Center, Brooklyn, New York, on 30 December and New Year's Eve which ended the Mylo Xyloto Tour. The Mylo Xyloto Tour was named the fourth-highest-grossing tour worldwide of 2012 with more than $171.3 million earned in ticket sales. In an interview with Australian radio station 2Day FM, Chris Martin revealed that the title for the band's next album would be "much easier to pronounce". Martin debunked speculation that they were taking a break from touring by saying, "This three-year break idea only came about because I said at a gig in Australia that we might not be back there for three years. That's probably true, but that's just how a world tour works. No chance are we taking a three-year break." On 9 August 2013, Coldplay announced the release of their song "Atlas", which featured on the soundtrack for the film The Hunger Games: Catching Fire. Its release got pushed back to 6 September 2013 (everywhere but the UK) and 8 September (UK). In December 2013, it was announced that future Coldplay releases would be distributed by Atlantic Records in the US due to restructuring within Warner Music Group following the purchase of Parlophone Records from EMI. On 25 February 2014, the band unveiled "Midnight", a track from their yet-to-be released album. In early March 2014, it was announced that the band's sixth album, Ghost Stories, would be released 19 May 2014. Ghost Stories is a spiritually driven album that revolves around two major themes mentioned by Chris Martin. The album explores the idea of past actions, and the effects they can have on your future and one's capacity for unconditional love. The band took a different approach for their sixth studio album in contrast to their previous studio albums, with Martin inviting the band to contribute original songwriting material for the album, as opposed to building songs off his ideas as they had done during previous recording sessions. From April to July, Coldplay embarked on a six-date Ghost Stories Tour in support of the album, playing 'intimate' shows in six cities: the Beacon Theatre in New York City on 5 May, Royce Hall in Los Angeles on 19 May, Casino de Paris in Paris on 28 May, Tokyo Dome City Hall in Tokyo on 12 June, Enmore Theatre in Sydney on 19 June, and closed the tour at the Royal Albert Hall in London on 2 July 2014. The album was made available for pre-order on iTunes, alongside new single "Magic". Two more singles from the album, "A Sky Full of Stars" and "True Love", have since been released. Ghost Stories received mixed to positive reviews. The album topped the charts in the UK, the US and most major markets. It received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Vocal Album, and "A Sky Full of Stars" was nominated for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance. In December 2014, Spotify named Coldplay the most-streamed band in the world for 2014, and third most-streamed artist behind Ed Sheeran and Eminem. On 4 December 2014, Chris Martin announced in an interview with Zane Lowe on BBC Radio 1 that Coldplay were in the middle of working on their seventh studio album, A Head Full of Dreams. Martin remarked it might be the band's final album and compared it to Harry Potter: "It's our seventh thing, and the way we look at it, it's like the last Harry Potter book or something like that." He added that unlike their promotion efforts for Ghost Stories, the band will tour for the seventh record. In an interview with Jo Whiley on BBC Radio 2, Martin hinted at the style of the album by saying that the band were trying to make something colourful and uplifting, yet not bombastic. He also stated that it will be something to "shuffle your feet" to. On 11 December 2014, the band unveiled a new song, "Miracles", which was written and recorded for the World War II drama film Unbroken directed by Angelina Jolie. At the 2015 Billboard Music Awards on 17 May, Ghost Stories was named Top Rock Album. On 26 September, Coldplay performed at the 2015 Global Citizen Festival in Central Park's Great Lawn in New York, an event organised by Chris Martin advocating for an end to extreme global poverty. Coldplay, along with Beyoncé, Ed Sheeran, and Pearl Jam, headlined the festival which was broadcast on NBC in the US on 27 September and the BBC in the UK on 28 September. Speaking on Nick Grimshaw's Radio 1 Breakfast Show on the BBC on 6 November, Coldplay confirmed 4 December as the release date of A Head Full of Dreams, and a new song from the album, "Adventure of a Lifetime" premiered on the show. The album has guest appearances from Beyoncé, Gwyneth Paltrow, Noel Gallagher, Tove Lo and Barack Obama. The album reached number one in the UK, and number two in the US, Australia and Canada among others where it was kept in second place by Adele's 25. The music video for "Adventure of a Lifetime" featured the band performing as chimpanzees. They were provided consultation with renowned performance capture actor Andy Serkis. On 27 November 2015, the first dates to their 2016 A Head Full of Dreams Tour were announced. Latin American and European stops were listed, which included three dates at Wembley Stadium, London in June. The North America Tour, an extra Wembley concert, and an Oceania tour were later added. On 5 December, the band headlined the opening day of the 2015 Jingle Bell Ball at London's O2 Arena. On 7 February 2016 they headlined the Super Bowl 50 halftime show, being joined by Beyoncé and Bruno Mars. In April 2016, the band were named the sixth best-selling artist worldwide in 2015. On 26 June 2016, Coldplay closed the final day of the Glastonbury Festival in England. Their performance included a duet with Barry Gibb, the last surviving member of the Bee Gees. During the band's second night at MetLife Stadium in New Jersey on 18 July, Coldplay were joined onstage by Michael J. Fox to recreate a Back to the Future scene. Martin sang "Earth Angel" before introducing Fox onstage to join the band in performing the Chuck Berry classic "Johnny B. Goode". The band performed a full set in India for the first time as part of the Global Citizen Festival in Mumbai on 19 November 2016. This performance was attended by 80,000 people and also featured many Bollywood stars during the concert. The same month, Coldplay announced in interviews with Absolute Radio and Magic Radio in London that they would be releasing new songs in a new EP called the Kaleidoscope EP. Described as being made from a leftover "bag of ideas" from the recording of A Head Full of Dreams, Martin stated that it would be released in "a couple of months". The band officially announced that the EP was released on 14 July 2017. On 22 February 2017, the band released a long-awaited and teased collaboration track with EDM duo The Chainsmokers called "Something Just Like This". Reaching number 2 in the UK Singles Chart and number 3 on the US Billboard Hot 100, it was the lead single from Coldplay's thirteenth extended play Kaleidoscope, released on 14 July 2017. Together, they debuted the song live at the 2017 Brit Awards with Chris Martin also performing a tribute song to the late George Michael. On 2 March, Martin's birthday, the band released a track from the EP, "Hypnotised". Two further releases from the EP, "All I Can Think About Is You" and "Aliens", came out on 15 June and 6 July 2017 respectively. On 15 August 2017, Coldplay announced that a live album covering the A Head Full of Dreams Tour would be released. On 8 October 2017, Coldplay debuted live their new song called "Life Is Beautiful" at SDCCU Stadium in San Diego, California. It was written in support after the earthquake that affected Mexico on 19 September. Part of the band's show was broadcast at the end of Estamos Unidos Mexicanos, a benefit concert taken place at Mexico City's Zócalo, which included "Fix You", "Viva la Vida", "Adventure of a Lifetime" and their new song. Martin stated that the proceeds from the song and concert would be donated to relief efforts for Mexico and other countries. The A Head Full of Dreams Tour was finished in November 2017. Grossing over $523 million, in 2017 it was listed as the third-highest-grossing concert tour of all time. The promised live album, which is titled Live in Buenos Aires, came out on 7 December 2018. Its footage covers the final concert of the tour in La Plata and a second release named Love in Tokyo was made available at the same time exclusively for the Japanese market. On 30 November 2018, Coldplay released Global Citizen – EP 1 under the name Los Unidades. It includes "E-Lo", a song with Pharrell Williams featuring Jozzy. Proceeds from the EP was donated towards efforts to end global poverty. On 26 September 2019, Global Citizen announced that Coldplay would perform at Global Goal Live: The Possible Dream on 26 September 2020. On 18 October 2019, mysterious black-and-white posters began appearing in various countries around the world, with the band in vintage-style clothing and a date showing 22 November 1919. The band also changed their profile pictures on social media to a sun and moon, making fans speculate an imminent release of new material. On 19 October 2019, a cryptic 5 second teaser was released on social media with orchestral music in the background. On 21 October 2019, in a letter sent to fans, the band announced that their eighth studio album would be titled Everyday Life and that it would be a double album, with the first half titled Sunrise and the second half titled Sunset. On 23 October 2019, the album tracks were revealed in advertisements in the band members local newspapers in the UK, including north Wales' Daily Post (with whom Jonny Buckland once had a holiday job), and Exeter's Express & Echo (the newspaper of Chris Martin's hometown). "Orphans" and "Arabesque" were released as the lead singles on 24 October 2019 on the Annie Mac show on BBC Radio 1. "Arabesque" was the first Coldplay song to feature profanity. The album was released on 22 November 2019 and marked by a double concert in Amman, Jordan. The concert, which streamed live to YouTube, was performed at sunrise and sunset, corresponding with the subtitles of the album's two halves. Martin had earlier said that the band would not tour to promote the album until they could work out "how our tour can not only be sustainable (but) how can it be actively beneficial", and hope that it would be entirely carbon-neutral. However, Coldplay performed a one-off show on 25 November 2019 for the charity ClientEarth at London's Natural History Museum. The band played beneath Hope, a giant 128-year-old skeleton of a blue whale in the museum's great hall. The album debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart with 81,000 copies sold, making it the band's eighth consecutive UK number-one album. It was also the third fastest-selling album of 2019, behind No.6 Collaborations Project and Divinely Uninspired to a Hellish Extent. On 24 November 2020, Coldplay received two nominations for the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards, with one of them being Album of the Year, their first nomination in the category since Viva la Vida. On 21 December 2020, "Flags" was released internationally, the song was originally included as a Japanese bonus track of Everyday Life. On 29 April 2021, Coldplay announced a new single called "Higher Power" to be released on 7 May 2021 with a video livestream coinciding with the release of the single to be aired from the International Space Station. Chris Martin stated in an interview with Zane Lowe that the band would be working with Max Martin and his team on both the song and the new album. He said, "Max is our producer right now for everything we do". On 4 May 2021, Coldplay were announced as the opening act for the 2021 Brit Awards, where they would be performing "Higher Power". On 22 May 2021, their pre-recorded performance at Glastonbury Festival was broadcast online. The band also showcased a new song called "Human Heart", featuring R&B duo We Are King. On 8 June 2021, the "official" music video for "Higher Power", directed by Dave Meyers, premiered on YouTube, following a simpler music video featuring the band performing the song while dancing with CGI alien holograms that premiered on 7 May 2021. On 20 July 2021, Coldplay announced that their new album Music of the Spheres would be released on 15 October 2021, and also announced a track titled "Coloratura", which was released 23 July 2021. On 13 September 2021, they announced with South Korean pop group BTS the second single, "My Universe", which was released on 24 September 2021. The song debuted at number 3 on the UK Singles Chart, being their highest-peaking single since "Something Just Like This" and debuted at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100. A short documentary about the collaboration with BTS was later released on 26 September 2021 on the official BTS YouTube channel. Music of the Spheres debuted at number one the UK Albums Chart, becoming the fastest-selling album in the country since Ed Sheeran's 2019 No.6 Collaborations Project. The album debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200 chart, and reached number one on both the Top Alternative Albums and the Top Rock Albums charts. On 14 October 2021, Coldplay announced their eighth concert tour, the Music of the Spheres World Tour, which began in San José, Costa Rica, in March 2022 and will visit three continents, with more tour dates to be announced in the future. The tour is part of an ongoing effort to reduce the band's carbon footprint; Chris Martin explained in an interview with BBC that the tour would feature "kinetic flooring" that powers the concerts through the movement of concertgoers, as well as bicycles that do the same thing, meaning that "the whole show is powered from renewable energy". Martin said the band's goal is that they will have "slightly shifted the status quo of how a tour works". On 23 November 2021, "Higher Power" was nominated for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards. In December 2021, Martin said Coldplay would release three more albums until 2025 during an interview for BBC, with one of them being "kind of a musical" while their last will be a "back to the basics" self-titled record. He added, however, that the band will still be active with smaller releases and worldwide touring after 2025. On 23 February 2022, the band released a new stripped-down version of "Let Somebody Go", and a cover of Kid Cudi's 2008 single "Day 'n' Nite". Both songs were part of their Spotify Singles release. The album received three nominations at the 65th Annual Grammy Awards announced on 15 November 2022, including Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album, with "My Universe" being nominated for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance. During an interview for NME, Berryman explained the band usually have a title and concept in mind before the music arrives, which serves to provide a "framework into which we can work thematically". Martin described their way of writing new songs as "a series of doors". He brings initial ideas to Buckland and the guitarist either disapproves or gives his input; the same happens from Buckland to Berryman, then Champion, allowing all band members to express themselves artistically. However, this process is known to not always be linear, as tracks like "Magic" and "Adventure of a Lifetime" were started through the bass and guitar riffs from Berryman and Buckland, respectively. Coldplay regularly switch instruments while in the studio as well. When questioned about avoiding explicit language in lyrics, Champion affirmed swear words are "extremely useful at times", but overusing them "lessens their impact". Moreover, music critics claim the band have a pattern which alternates between "overt bids for mainstream success and more self-consciously artsy prestige pieces". Buckland stated that knowing the "big [album] is coming allows us to go a lot smaller" and be more "insular about what music we make sense". Coldplay have explored many musical styles throughout their career, with their sound being considered alternative rock, alternative pop, pop rock, post-Britpop, soft rock, and pop. After winning a Grammy Award for Best Rock Album in 2009, Martin jokingly stated in his acceptance speech that they were "limestone rock", in comparison to "hard rock". The extended plays released in 1998 and 1999 have characteristics of dream pop, setting them apart from future releases. Their first studio album, Parachutes (2000), was described as melodic pop which combined "bits of distorted guitar riffs and swishing percussion", being "exquisitely dark and artistically abrasive". Berryman called it a "quiet, polite record", while Champion has compared the lyrics to Lou Reed's "Perfect Day", as they are moody but with twists that imply optimism, ultimately making an album defined by the contrast between beautiful and happy messages and notoriously sad sounds. On the other hand, 2002's A Rush of Blood to the Head is full of "plaintive strums, weary arpeggios and pained melodies", along with a sense of urgency and heartbreak. During an interview, Martin affirmed the title means "doing something on impulse". Music critics described it as larger, darker, and colder than its predecessor, praising Coldplay for showing a newfound confidence as well. This style was kept for their third album, X&Y (2005), although now with the addition of electronic influences and extensive use of synthesisers, having a grander scale in terms of both sound and existential themes. Craig McLean from The Guardian called it "the work of an increasingly driven, punchier band", describing the melodies as "heartfelt stuff, with thumping guitar lines and emotive piano". Lyrics have been described as the ruminations on Martin's "doubts, fears, hopes, and loves", with words that "are earnest and vague, so listeners can identify with the underlying concepts in the songs". With Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends and the subsequent Prospekt's March (both released in 2008), Coldplay further diversified their style and explored new territory following the completion of what they saw as a trilogy of albums. The band experimented with numerous different instruments, including electric violins, tack pianos, santoors and orchestras, all while using more layered productions. They also tried distinct song structures and vocal identities at the suggestion of producer Brian Eno, drawing influences from oriental, Hispanic, African, and Middle Eastern sounds. The title track, "Viva la Vida", is considered baroque pop and fourth single "Strawberry Swing" was described as having psychedelic inspirations. They dabbled in shoegaze on hidden track "Chinese Sleep Chant" as well. Lyrics are more universal in comparison to previous material, with the subject matter being more collective as the band "delves into love, life, war and death". Martin commented the revolution motifs were inspired by Victor Hugo's Les Misérables (1862). Those themes, along with some of the oriental influences, remained in 2011's Mylo Xyloto, a concept album that follows the story of two characters in the style of a rock opera. It expanded the spectrum of Coldplay's sound by including more electronic elements than before and featuring mostly upbeat tones for the first time, resulting in a pop rock style with modern, urban and dance melodies. According to Champion, the band originally wanted to make an acoustic record, so when "Paradise" started to take shape, they decided to begin a separate electronic album. However, the two of them ultimately became a single body of work, with songs like "Charlie Brown" and "Us Against the World" getting reworked into their current versions. Berryman declared they approached the project with confidence. Lyrically, Martin said he was mostly inspired by old school American graffiti, the White Rose movement, and "being able to speak out or follow your passion, even if everybody seems against it". In 2013, a comic book based on the record's plot was released in partnership with Mark Osborne. For Ghost Stories (2014), Coldplay adopted a melancholic and somber style considered reminiscent of their debut, while incorporating electronica, R&B, synth-pop and ambient influences. Its melodies are also noticeably darker and more minimalistic than Mylo Xyloto, having sparse arrangements that reflect their desire to "keep a sense of space" without "being afraid of silence" or "layering too many sounds". The project is considered a break-up album as well, exploring lyrically how past events in one's life (their ghosts) affect the present. Martin called it a journey of learning about unconditional love after he divorced from Gwyneth Paltrow. A year later, A Head Full of Dreams was released with a similar style, but featuring bright and uplifting tones instead, making contrast with its predecessor while introducing elements of disco and funk, most notably in lead single "Adventure of a Lifetime". In the lyrics, they worked on subjects of unity, dreaming, parenthood, forgiveness, healing, and thankfulness. In 2017, the band made Kaleidoscope EP available as a companion piece to the album. It included a live version of "Something Just Like This", their EDM collaboration with the Chainsmokers, and Brian Eno's returning production in "Aliens". Meanwhile, tracks such as "All I Can Think About Is You" and "Hypnotised" mixed Coldplay's newfound pop style with their alternative rock roots, setting the template for Everyday Life (2019), which saw a return to the experimentation and organic sounds of Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends while having new influences from gospel, blues and classical music. Released as the lead single along with "Orphans", the song "Arabesque" drew from jazz fusion and afrobeat inspirations. The band continued their lyrical themes of positivity, equality, hope, legacy and humanity, but added loss, pain and commentaries on issues such as racism, police brutality, gun control and refugee crisis, being their first album to feature profanity. This multi-style approach was similarly present in 2021's Music of the Spheres, although leaning towards pop sounds. According to Berryman, the album "was created with one eye on the live performances" and that "shaped the overall energy levels and song selections" for it. Martin added he was inspired by the Star Wars franchise, which made him wonder what other artists could be like across the universe after watching the Mos Eisley Cantina band perform. New musical influences included "Human Heart" (an a cappella collaboration with R&B duo We Are King and Jacob Collier) and "Coloratura" (a progressive rock ballad running at 10 minutes and 18 seconds, making it the longest song the band have ever released). The phrase "Everyone is an alien somewhere" was frequently used to promote the project; Champion stated it is meant to get people to look at what brings them together instead of what keeps them apart, since "from another planet's perspective, we would be the aliens". Coldplay's music has been compared to a-ha, U2, Oasis, R.E.M. and Radiohead. They acknowledged Scottish band Travis and American singer Jeff Buckley as major influences on their early material as well, which was mostly produced by Ken Nelson. Martin is known to be a fan of Bruce Springsteen, mentioned "spending three years trying to sound like Eddie Vedder" before Buckley, and commented listening to many hymns when he was young due to his religious upbringing. In 2021, he cited Belgian singer-songwriter Stromae as another influence, affirming "He is one of our heroes you know, he is one of those people that comes along and completely inspires you all over again". Buckland, on the other hand, stated the Stone Roses were one of the reasons why he learned to play guitar. In 2020, he shared on social media playlists with some of his favorite tracks and artists from each decade, including the Velvet Underground, Carole King, Joy Division, Talking Heads, Kate Bush, Donna Summer, Björk, Beastie Boys and many others. He said during an interview in the following year his favorite song of all time is "Teardrop" by Massive Attack. Meanwhile, Berryman is known to be inspired by artists like James Brown, Marvin Gaye, Kool & the Gang and the Funk Brothers. He further added that his musical taste is difficult to condense it down, but could not live without the Beatles or Motown. As for Champion, he commented knowing how to play violin and piano since he was eight years old gave him a different perspective on drums, which he only learned to play after joining the band. During his youth, he listened to Bob Dylan, Tom Waits, Nick Cave and traditional Irish folk music. He has named Ginger Baker, Dave Grohl and John Bonham as some of his favorite drummers. For A Rush of Blood to the Head (2002), they drew inspiration from Echo & the Bunnymen, George Harrison, and Muse. Their third album, X&Y (2005), was particularly influenced by Kraftwerk and Depeche Mode. The song "Til Kingdom Come" was first written as a collaboration with Johnny Cash before he died. Aside from Nelson, Coldplay also worked with Danton Supple during recording sessions. On Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends (2008), the band moved towards art rock sensibilities, with inspirations including My Bloody Valentine, Blur and Arcade Fire. After partnering with Brian Eno and Jon Hopkins, they began to incorporate elements of ambient music and electronica into compositions. Both producers returned for Mylo Xyloto (2011), with Eno having a more direct role in the songwriting process. In 2014, Paul Epworth contributed to Ghost Stories. Producers Tim Bergling and Madeon were involved as well, which resulted in tracks like "A Sky Full of Stars" having a more "danceable flavor". Made available in the following year, A Head Full of Dreams (2015) featured producing duo Stargate. Long-time partners of the band include Davide Rossi, Bill Rakho, Rik Simpson and Dan Green. The last three are referred as The Dream Team on Everyday Life (2019) and all four have been working with Coldplay since Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends. For their ninth album, Music of the Spheres (2021), the group invited Swedish producer Max Martin. The song "People of the Pride" has an introduction inspired by a Beyoncé performance at the Global Citizen Festival, while promotional single "Coloratura" drew comparisons to Pink Floyd. Coldplay have been said to "make sure each tour is its own dazzling, light-up spectacular". Their concerts often use fireworks, lasers and confetti cannons. Furthermore, Pollstar stated they were the first artist to include LED wristbands in live performances. The group are widely credited with popularising the feature as well. Writing a review of Live in Buenos Aires (2018), Sam Sodomsky from Pitchfork hailed them as "one of the 21st century's most enduring live acts". Meanwhile, The Guardian's Alexis Petridis commented that the set lists used by the band were "a bullish reminder of how [they] got, and then stayed, huge". Both reviewers also noted how Martin usually interacts with the audience between each song's performance. For Ghost Stories Tour (2014), however, they performed intimate sets at venues like Royal Albert Hall and the Beacon Theatre. The concerts made use of new features including a laser harp and the reactable. A similar approach was taken for Everyday Life (2019) over their environmental concerns, with the band playing small shows for charity and a special livestream at the Amman Citadel in Jordan. When reviewing these shows, Dan Stubbs from NME stated "on stage is where Coldplay come alive, and where they make the most sense". In 2022, Champion said the Flaming Lips were instrumental in shaping their idea of how entertaining a concert can be, as the American band's tours have "a sense of wonder and sense of fun which we really respond to". While members of the band dress casually on their personal lives, they have adopted multiple styles and visuals for each album's promotion. Jon O'Brien from the Recording Academy observed Coldplay's fashion sense did not "extend beyond the student staple of hoodies and corduroys" during initial years. Martin often wore Make Trade Fair shirts and had multiple versions of the institution's logo written on the back of his hand. In the marketing campaign for X&Y (2005), which featured a representation of the Baudot code on its artwork, the group wore black shirts, jackets, suits and pants, accompanied by white shoes. After being questioned about it, the singer commented there was a "great security" in feeling part of a team. In 2007, they began to work with stylist Beth Fenton to make clothes fit the "universe" or the stories being told. They met her through Stella McCartney and Sara Jowett, who helped Coldplay to produce uniforms for Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends (2008). Inspirations cited include the Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band (1967) and jackets worn by French Revolution armies. The piece Martin used at Wembley Stadium in 2009 was added to the V&A Museum permanent collection as well. During recording sessions for Mylo Xyloto (2011), the band drew influence from graffiti and designed instruments, cover artworks and stages with street artist Paris. Conversely, Mila Fürstová's melancholic etchings were adopted for Ghost Stories (2014). Non-customised outfits returned, but with darker tones. Around the same period, Martin started to wear buttons from Love Button Global Movement, which became his signature accessory. The organization is focused on transforming the world through individual and collaborative "acts of kindness". Clothes made for A Head Full of Dreams (2015) then included details based on tie-dye and kaleidoscope visuals reminiscent of the 1970s decade. Berryman's jacket and shirts worn by Buckland and Champion also had the flower of life as a reference to the album cover, while Martin drew media attention for using custom-made Air Jordans. Additionally, instruments were decorated with stickers, some of which featured the names of the band's children. In 2016, Fenton stated Coldplay's pieces are typically sourced from Rag & Bone and Levi's. Three years later, a photograph of Buckland's great-grandfather spawned the old-fashioned imagery of Everyday Life (2019), characterized as "a sepia-tinged 1919 jazz band". Nods to the Arab world were prominently made as well. To promote Music of the Spheres (2021), they incorporated a "cosmic" edge to all items and photoshoots. Moreover, wardrobe pieces were provided by Applied Art Forms, a fashion label Berryman founded in the previous year. He works as its designer and takes inspiration in utilitarian, workwear, and military clothing. Coldplay are considered the most successful band of the 21st century. With over 100 million albums sold globally, they are one of the best-selling artists of all time. Parachutes (2000), A Rush of Blood to the Head (2002) and X&Y (2005) have all been listed among the 50 best-selling albums in the United Kingdom, marking the most appearances by a group in the ranking. The latter was also the third-fastest-selling record in the country's history upon release. In 2008, "Viva la Vida" became the first song by a British act to top the UK Singles Chart and Billboard Hot 100 simultaneously since Rod Stewart's "Maggie May" (1971). Moreover, its namesake album was the best-selling digital record of the 2000s decade. In 2013, Coldplay were listed as the most influential British celebrities in the world on Forbes' power list, while 2014 saw them become the first band ever to surpass a billion streams on Spotify. Their performance at the Super Bowl 50 halftime show earned the biggest audience in history for a group and helped to make them the most googled band of 2016. During the same year, Coldplay headlined Glastonbury Festival for a fourth time, the most for any musician. In 2021, "My Universe" became the first song by a British group to debut atop Billboard Hot 100. They surpassed $1 billion earned from touring in 2022, being the fifth group to achieve the milestone, after Bon Jovi, the Eagles, the Rolling Stones and U2. Both the A Head Full of Dreams Tour (2016–17) and Music of the Spheres World Tour (2022–24) are ranked among the highest-grossing concert tours of all time, with the latter being the first one by a band to gross more than $800 million. The band have received numerous accolades throughout their career as well, becoming the most awarded and nominated group of all time at the Brit Awards (nine victories from 30 nominations). They are the first act in history to win British Album of the Year thrice and British Group four times, scoring the most nominations for both categories. Coldplay have also won seven Grammy Awards from 39 nominations, receiving Song of the Year and Record of the Year once, while being nominated for the Album of the Year category three times. In January 2009, they received a NRJ Award of Honour in recognition of their career accomplishments and impact. The band were then named Songwriters of the Year at the ASCAP London Music Awards in the following year, having previously received the same honor from the Ivor Novello Awards in 2003. Their single "Atlas", which was released as part of The Hunger Games: Catching Fire (2013) soundtrack, was nominated for the 19th Critics' Choice Awards and shortlisted at the 87th Academy Awards. In 2014, Coldplay were ranked as the sixth most awarded group of all time by Fuse. Two years later, the band were chosen for NME Awards' Godlike Genius Award, which honours "careers of music icons who have been pioneers in the industry". They have earned two American Music Awards, eight Billboard Music Awards, seven MTV Video Music Awards, three Juno Awards, two silver prizes at the Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity and established 10 Guinness World Records, currently holding six of them. In May 2022, it was reported the band's estimated combined wealth – without Harvey – had surpassed £471 million. Coldplay are considered one of the most influential bands of the 21st century. Writing for Firstpost, Lakshmi Govindrajan Javeri commented they have "mastered the art of reinvention", consequently widening the "roster of artists inspired by them" and creating "a rich multi-genre legacy" which impacted a variety of mainstream and indie musicians worldwide. Songs from the group have been covered and sampled on many occasions as well. Furthermore, they were credited with bringing the sound of mainstream rock "towards something more gentle and melodic" and ushering in a "fresh timbre of songwriting" when "British music struggled to define itself". Steve Baltin from Forbes observed that the band have become the standard for the current alternative scene, while Afisha's Sergey Stepanov called them "the Beatles of the 21st century". Publications have also frequently described Coldplay as successors to U2 as the biggest band in the world. However, despite their popularity and impact, the group earned a reputation as polarising cultural icons, since they have attracted criticism as much as praise from the public and the music critics throughout their career. Michael Baumann explained for The Ringer that Coldplay's rise to fame coincided with "a decade of artistic snark and cynicism: hipsterism, the peak of pop punk, and a new rebirth of rockism", which meant their "earnest, nonthreatening, and profoundly accessible" public image was established at "the worst time of the past 40 years to be those things". In a piece for The New York Times, Jon Pareles named them "the most insufferable band of the decade". Conversely, Lanre Bakare told El País that Martin is new kind of pop star who connects with fans emotionally. In 2022, The Times' Mark Beaumont defended that Coldplay regained respect and credibility in all fields by dedicating themselves to stadium spectacles. Felipe Branco Cruz from Veja credited them with reinventing the concept of arena rock by turning fans into protagonists of the concert instead of mere spectators, which included popularising the use of interactive LED wristbands on live performances. With the Music of the Spheres World Tour (2022–24), the group became "pioneers for sustainability" in live entertainment, reducing CO2 emissions by 47% in comparison to their previous concert run. They were listed as one of the most influential climate action leaders in the world by Time as well. Moreover, the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) attributed increases in British music exports to Coldplay's global success in several occasions. The band were also praised for having creative and "forward-thinking" marketing strategies, with their use of the internet as a tool for promotion being considered revolutionary in the early 21st century. In 2016, Q ranked their first five albums among the best of the last 30 years. The second, A Rush of Blood to the Head (2002), was added to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Rolling Stone's definitive editorials. As another result of their impact and legacy, the group have spawned various tribute albums, events and acts. Coldplay donates 10% from all of their profits to charity. The fund is held in a bank account none of the band members can access. They currently endorse more than thirty organizations, including Amnesty International, Migrant Offshore Aid Station and Global Citizen Festival. In 2003, an acoustic cover of the single "2000 Miles" was released to raise funds for Stop Handgun Violence and Future Forests, with all proceeds being donated to the two organizations. Two years later, the group partnered with the Make Poverty History movement and were featured in one of their campaigns. Coldplay have also auctioned significant memorabilia for Kids Company in 2009, including Martin's first guitar, the globe from the Parachutes (2000) album cover and costumes worn on Viva la Vida Tour (2008–10). They additionally became patrons for ClientEarth. The band performed a modified version of "A Message" (named "A Message 2010") at Hope for Haiti Now, a telethon which raised money for the victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake. Berryman mentioned that "You can make people aware of issues. It isn't very much effort for us at all, if it can help people, then we want to do it". In 2012, Album Artists staged an exhibition with artworks from Mylo Xyloto (2011) era to raise £610,000 for Kids Company. Two years later, Martin joined Band Aid for a second time and provided vocals to a new version of "Do They Know It's Christmas?", which focused on aiding the Ebola crisis. In 2017, Coldplay made a donation of undisclosed value to the Centre for Cancer Immunology at University of Southampton, the first and only centre dedicated to cancer immunology research in the United Kingdom. The organisation reunited cancer scientists worldwide to enable the development of clinical trials and lifesaving drugs. In the following year, the band contributed to the Plastic Oceans Album from Artists' Project Earth, which was released on 20 February at London's Ocean Plastics Crisis Summit to raise awareness and funds to counter plastic pollution. Still in 2018, they made Global Citizen – EP 1 available under the pseudonym Los Unidades, with royalties being directed to the institution's endeavours of education and advocacy towards the end of extreme poverty. In 2020, the music video of "Trouble in Town" was inspired by George Orwell's Animal Farm (1944) and had all of its proceeds from streaming and publishing donated to Innocence Project and the African Children's Feeding Scheme. Coldplay declared support to the Ocean Cleanup as well, sponsoring two watercrafts that collect plastic from polluted rivers in Malaysia. According to The Times, the band donated more than £2.1 million to environmental causes through their J Van Mars Foundation on 2021. As part of their efforts to make touring more sustainable, they collaborated with One Tree Planted and funded a tree for each ticket sold on the Music of the Spheres World Tour (2022–24). Following their first live performance in Indonesia, Coldplay announced that their partnership with the Ocean Cleanup was renewed and the second watercraft would be deployed in Jakarta. The band have been vocal about fair trade and supported Oxfam's Make Trade Fair campaign by collecting more than 70,000 signatures for their Big Noise petition on A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour (2002–03) and Twisted Logic Tour (2005–07). Martin, who lives in the United States, criticised the 2003 invasion of Iraq during a show for Teenage Cancer Trust at Royal Albert Hall, encouraging people at the venue to "sing against war". He has also backed Democratic presidential candidates John Kerry in 2004 and Barack Obama in 2008. Coldplay take part in Meat Free Mondays as well, the campaign launched by Paul McCartney attempts to help slow climate change by having at least one meat free day a week. In 2011, they endorsed the song "Freedom for Palestine" by posting the music video on their social media and received over 12,000 comments debating the message in less than a day. Some fans threatened to boycott the band, launching a group that demanded an apology to Israel. The post was later removed from their page; One World's Frank Barat said that Facebook deleted it because numerous people and computer generated posts reported the content as "abusive". Coldplay have supported the LGBT community as well, sparking controversy with their Super Bowl 50 halftime show performance. The band were accused by conservatives of promoting a "gay agenda" at the end, when rainbow-coloured placards were flipped to form the phrase "Believe in Love". American magazine The Advocate ranked it among the most memorable LGBTQ moments of the event. In 2016, they favoured "Vote Remain" at the United Kingdom European Union membership referendum. Following Brexit, Martin stated the "decision does not represent us or indeed most of our generation and the generation following us". A year later, the group appeared at One Love Manchester, a benefit concert organised by Ariana Grande in response to the Manchester Arena bombing which raised funds to help victims of the attack. Coldplay were also special guests at Concert for Charlottesville, a show focused on aiding the victims of the Unite the Right rally. In 2019, the band released Everyday Life, which saw them voicing more prominently their stance against racism, police brutality and gun violence. Two years later, they were among the artists who signed a public letter endorsing the Equality Act. In 2023, the Malaysian Islamic Party attempted to cancel the group's concert at Bukit Jalil National Stadium, as Martin often waves the pride flag during performances. Despite their worldwide popularity, Coldplay have remained notoriously protective of how their material appears in media. The band allow songs to be used in television shows and movies regularly, but most commercials are forbidden. In 2002, NME reported they turned down over $85 million in contracts from companies including Gatorade, Diet Coke and Gap. Martin stated "We would not be able to live with ourselves if we sold the songs' meanings like that". The first time one of their songs were used for advertisements was with "Viva la Vida" in 2008, the group signed a deal with Apple to promote the exclusive availability of the single on iTunes Store. In 2010, Martin appeared at the company's annual special event. Following the death of Steve Jobs, Coldplay performed on his memorial service at Apple Campus, posthumously thanking his support. Six years later, they took part in a Target commercial which promoted the exclusive deluxe edition of Ghost Stories (2014). Meanwhile, the music video for "Adventure of a Lifetime", which was directed by Mat Whitecross and recorded at The Imaginarium, had a Beats product placement. The company was allowed to use some parts of the video on their commercials as a return for covering the budget. In 2018, director Jon M. Chu revealed he sent a letter directly to the band laying out all his reasons in order to get a permission for using "Yellow" on Crazy Rich Asians. After it was granted, a Chinese-language cover of the track was commissioned as well. In 2021, Coldplay announced a major partnership with German multinational BMW as part of their efforts to make touring as sustainable as possible. They commented the company's technology, which includes the first recyclable car batteries in the world, is able to power live performances almost entirely from renewable energy. As part of the deal, the band contributed on the marketing of two electric cars from the company and allowed "Higher Power" to be used in advertisements. In 2022, DHL became Coldplay's freight partner for the Music of the Spheres World Tour (2022–24) in order to reduce the logistical impact of the shows and avoid the use of fossil fuels. Jonny Buckland – lead guitar, backing vocals, keyboards (1997–present) Chris Martin – lead vocals, keyboards, piano, rhythm guitar, harmonica (1997–present) Guy Berryman – bass, backing vocals, keyboards, synthesizers, percussion (1997–present) Will Champion – drums, backing vocals, keyboards, piano, percussion (1998–present) Phil Harvey – manager (1998–2002; 2022–present), creative director (2006–present) Parachutes (2000) A Rush of Blood to the Head (2002) X&Y (2005) Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends (2008) Mylo Xyloto (2011) Ghost Stories (2014) A Head Full of Dreams (2015) Everyday Life (2019) Music of the Spheres (2021) How We Saw the World – Live in Toronto (2006) A Head Full of Dreams (2018) Everyday Life – Live in Jordan (2019) Reimagined (2020) Music of the Spheres: Live at River Plate (2023) Parachutes Tour (2000–2001) A Rush of Blood to the Head Tour (2002–2003) Twisted Logic Tour (2005–2007) Viva la Vida Tour (2008–2010) Mylo Xyloto Tour (2011–2012) Ghost Stories Tour (2014) A Head Full of Dreams Tour (2016–2017) Music of the Spheres World Tour (2022–2024) List of people associated with University College London List of British Grammy winners and nominees List of best-selling music artists List of highest-grossing live music artists List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart List of Billboard Hot 100 number-ones by British artists Coldplay officially recognise Harvey as their fifth member. He has been listed as such in their albums' liner notes since A Rush of Blood to the Head. The term "records" is for album and single sales combined. Coldplay, however, sold 100 million copies in albums alone, while Parlophone have not disclosed the amount of records. As per The Guardian, The New York Times, Stereogum, and The Telegraph. "Non-Performing Band Members: From Coldplay to The Grateful Dead". Tedium. 28 June 2018. Archived from the original on 15 September 2023. Retrieved 15 September 2023. "Everyday Life Booklet" (PDF). Warner Music Group UK. 22 November 2019. p. 22. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay's 10 Best Songs". Consequence. 13 October 2021. Archived from the original on 24 October 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "Coldplay Review – A Barrage of Hits and Eye-popping Spectacle". The Guardian. 13 August 2022. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Inside Coldplay's Spectacular Sermon On The Mount In Jordan". NME. 25 November 2019. Archived from the original on 11 March 2020. Retrieved 5 January 2022. "What's The Difference Between A Record And An Album? 5 Things To Know". The Sound of Vinyl. 30 March 2021. Archived from the original on 15 December 2021. Retrieved 15 December 2021. "Coldplay Re-Ups with Warner Music Group for Long-Term Deal Via Parlophone". Variety. 6 October 2021. Archived from the original on 8 January 2022. Retrieved 6 October 2021. "Acts Who Have Reached Number 1 With All Their Studio Albums". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 24 October 2021. Retrieved 7 January 2022. "Billboard Boxscore Top 10 Tours of All Time: Beyoncé Breaks Ground". Billboard. 13 October 2023. Archived from the original on 17 October 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "BPI Announce First Artist Recipients of New and Prestigious BRIT Billion Award". BPI. 4 May 2023. Archived from the original on 3 July 2023. Retrieved 14 July 2023. "Experience The Music: One Hit Wonders and The Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. 28 June 2011. Archived from the original on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 21 April 2021. "Love Them or Hate Them? Are These the Most Polarising Bands?". BBC. 17 August 2018. Archived from the original on 27 August 2023. Retrieved 27 August 2023. (Wild & Croft 2018, p. 16) "Coldplay's Quiet Storm". Rolling Stone. 25 August 2005. Archived from the original on 4 February 2022. Retrieved 3 February 2022. (Wild & Croft 2018, p. 111) (Wild & Croft 2018, pp. 13–16) "Will Champion: Just Right for Coldplay". Drum!. 21 February 2012. Archived from the original on 6 December 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "The Live Debut". Coldplay Timeline. 16 January 1998. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2022. "They Played a Tiny Café... There Were Four People in the Audience". Music Business Worldwide. 26 February 2018. Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 7 January 2022. (Wild & Croft 2018, pp. 18–20) "We Interview Coldplay's Manager" (PDF). Coldplay E-Zine. April 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 November 2007. Retrieved 31 December 2021. (Wild & Croft 2018, pp. 20–23) "Manchester's In the City Showcase". Coldplay Timeline. 14 September 1998. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2023. "Interview: Debs Wild on Discovering Coldplay". Coldplay Timeline. 12 December 2018. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2023. "Steve Lamacq Live Session on Radio 1". Coldplay Timeline. 3 January 1999. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2023. (Wild & Croft 2018, pp. 30–35) (Wild & Croft 2018, p. 38) "Glastonbury Festival". Coldplay Timeline. 27 June 1999. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2023. (Roach 2003, p. 28) (Wild & Croft 2018, pp. 42–45) "Coldplay's Will Champion Reflects On Getting Kicked Out of the Band". Uproxx. 23 June 2021. Archived from the original on 1 February 2022. Retrieved 1 February 2022. "Coldplay: Inspiring Stories About Famous Musicians and Bands Who Started to Perform in College". Making Music. 5 December 2019. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2023. (Roach 2003, p. 45) Sam Inglis (October 2000). " Recording Coldplay's Parachutes" Archived 11 August 2005 at the Wayback Machine. SOS. Retrieved 9 September 2008. Verrico, Lisa (21 January 2000). "NME Carling Premier Tour – Arts". The Times. UK: 44. NME (14 January 2000). "HEADLINE: BRATS 2000 - BRING IT ON!". NME. Archived from the original on 29 May 2023. Retrieved 19 October 2022. (Roach 2003, p. 35) (Roach 2003, p. 42) Basham, David (16 October 2000). "Coldplay Escapes City For "Yellow" Single, Video". MTV. Archived from the original on 13 January 2009. Retrieved 3 May 2020. Bogdanov, Vladimir; Woodstra, Chris; Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (2002). All Music Guide to Rock: The Definitive Guide to Rock, Pop, and Soul Archived 4 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine. Backbeat Books. p. 235. ISBN 087930653X. Retrieved 7 September 2008. Basham, David (16 October 2000). "Coldplay Escapes City For "Yellow" Single, Video" Archived 13 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Retrieved 9 September 2008. Cohen, Jonathan (2 August 2000). "Nettwerk To Release Coldplay Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on 3 November 2012. Retrieved 15 September 2008. "Discography – Coldplay: Parachutes". Billboard. Archived from the original on 5 April 2013. Retrieved 30 September 2008. Leahey, Andrew. "Coldplay > Biography". Allmusic. Archived from the original on 26 May 2012. Retrieved 20 February 2016. "Official Singles Chart Top 100 29 October 2000 – 4 November 2000". Official Charts. Archived from the original on 4 June 2016. Retrieved 20 February 2016. "Artists: Coldplay – 45 Charts – Alternative songs". Billboard. Archived from the original on 13 April 2016. Retrieved 20 February 2016. Moss, Corey (18 December 2001). "Coldplay Ready Second Album As 'Trouble' Heats Up" Archived 14 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Retrieved 22 September 2008. "Coldplay's Q for success". BBC News. BBC. 16 October 2000. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2009. (Roach 2003, p. 76) Basham, David (1 August 2000). "Coldplay Finds American Home For "Parachutes"". MTV News. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 15 October 2009. "Coldplay: The Brit Awards". Brits.co.uk. Archived from the original on 20 October 2014. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Caims, Dan (17 December 2000). "Albums of the year – On record". The Sunday Times. UK: 18. They [Coldplay] began 2000 as unknowns, and ended it with a double-platinum album [Parachutes] and America their oyster "2003 Grammy Award Winners". The New York Times. 25 February 2003. Archived from the original on 23 April 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2022. (Spivack 2004, p. 8) Heffernan, Virginia (23 July 2008). "Coldpage". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on 3 February 2022. Retrieved 17 December 2017. Cumberbatch, Franklin (13 August 2002). "Coldplay: Going Out of My Head" Archived 20 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine. VH1. MTV Networks. Retrieved 14 September 2008. Nelson, Chris (12 February 2001). "Coldplay Warm Up On U.S. Tour Opener" Archived 15 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Retrieved 14 September 2008. Luerssen, John D. (25 April 2002). "Coldplay Sets Album Title, June Gigs" Archived 27 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Billboard. Retrieved 14 September 2008. "On The Record: How George Harrison inspired The Scientist". Rapid City Journal. 11 December 2014. Archived from the original on 2 October 2017. Retrieved 5 January 2022. Wener, Ben (22 August 2005). "Still a few steps short of greatness". The Orange County Register. Danby, Andrew (4 September 2003). "Coldplay Go Live". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 24 May 2008. Retrieved 25 April 2008. Concert album due in November "2003 MTV Video Music Awards". Mtv.com. Archived from the original on 16 January 2007. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Coldplay's 10 Best Songs". TimeForGig.com. 24 January 2023. Archived from the original on 7 June 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2023. "Rock on the Net: Coldplay". Rockonthenet.com. Archived from the original on 10 December 2015. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Orshoski, Wes (29 January 2004). "Coldplay Enter London Studio To Begin Work on Third Album". MTV News. Archived from the original on 25 August 2005. Retrieved 15 October 2009. "Complete list of Grammy Award winners". USA Today. 24 February 2003. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008. Retrieved 1 May 2008. "Complete List of 46th Annual Grammy Winners and Nominees". Chicago Tribune. 4 December 2003. Archived from the original on 6 October 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2022. Maclean, Graeme. "Changing the World at UKULA". Ukula. Archived from the original on 10 December 2007. Retrieved 24 April 2008. "BBC – Rock/Indie Review – Coldplay, X&Y". BBC. 20 November 2005. Archived from the original on 31 March 2008. Retrieved 25 April 2008. "EMI shares hit by profit warning". BBC News. 7 February 2005. Archived from the original on 25 December 2008. Retrieved 23 April 2008. "Coldplay's X&Y is 'album of year'". BBC News. 9 December 2005. Archived from the original on 25 December 2008. Retrieved 25 April 2008. "Coldplay tops worldwide sales for 2005". CBC News. 31 March 2006. Archived from the original on 17 June 2008. Retrieved 15 October 2009. Morford, Mark (17 June 2005). "Is Coldplay The New Jesus? Martin & Co. make moms smile and girls swoon and offend no one in their quest to love all puppies". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 15 September 2005. Retrieved 25 April 2008. Sherwin, Adam (30 April 2005). "Coldplay's new single breaks sound barrier". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on 2 April 2007. Retrieved 25 April 2008. Dwyer, Michael (30 June 2006). "Cold comfort". The Age. Melbourne. p. 1. Archived from the original on 6 November 2012. Retrieved 11 January 2010. "Leona Lewis tops singles charts as Take That go in at Number-One in the album charts – both breaking records in the process". Daily Mirror. UK. 8 December 2008. Archived from the original on 26 April 2010. Retrieved 11 January 2010. "The Case Against Coldplay". The New York Times. 6 June 2005. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 12 July 2022. Retrieved 25 December 2021. "NME Album Reviews – Coldplay : X&Y". NME.COM. 12 September 2005. Archived from the original on 5 August 2012. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Lamb, Bill (5 June 2005). "Coldplay Discography". Top 40. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved 3 May 2008. Kreps, Daniel (6 October 2011). "Coldplay Hire U2's Favorite Director for Webcast". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 22 January 2012. Reynolds, Simon (18 June 2008). "Coldplay 'liberated' by 'X&Y' criticism". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 3 February 2009. Retrieved 18 October 2008. "The Daily Wrap 2005 ACL Music Festival". Austin City Limits. Archived from the original on 20 April 2008. Retrieved 25 April 2008. "BBC – The Live 8 Event – Line Up and Artists". BBC. Archived from the original on 9 March 2008. Retrieved 25 April 2008. "MTV Video Music Awards 2005". Mtv.com. Archived from the original on 28 August 2008. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Rush to download War Child album". BBC News. BBC. 12 September 2005. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 15 October 2009. "Triple Brits success for Kaisers". BBC News. BBC. 15 February 2006. Archived from the original on 4 January 2009. Retrieved 29 April 2009. "Coldplay Reveal New Album Details, Timbaland Producing Ashlee Simpson, Courtney Love Blamed for Jack Osbourne's Drug Problem". Rolling Stone. 10 September 2007. Archived from the original on 19 April 2008. Retrieved 24 April 2008. "Coldplay promise song of 'genius'". BBC News. BBC. 5 March 2007. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011. Retrieved 26 August 2009. Tyrangiel, Josh (9 June 2008). "Coldplay, Viva la Vida". Time. Vol. 171, no. 67. p. 23. Montgomery, James (9 June 2008). "Coldplay Give Track-By-Track Tour of Viva la Vida, Explain Handclaps, Tack Pianos and the Number 42. The album was released in 2008". MTV. Archived from the original on 11 March 2010. Retrieved 18 October 2008. Serpick, Evan (27 February 2008). "Coldplay at Work on "Something Different" for Upcoming Album – Chris Martin talks about trilogy and change". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 18 April 2008. Retrieved 24 April 2008. "News Ticker: Guns N' Roses, Britney Spears, Coldplay". Rolling Stone. 21 April 2008. Archived from the original on 22 April 2008. Retrieved 24 April 2008. "BBC News: Coldplay song downloaded 2m times". BBC. 6 May 2008. Archived from the original on 11 May 2008. Retrieved 17 July 2008. "Coldplay giving away new single". BBC. 28 April 2008. Archived from the original on 1 May 2008. Retrieved 28 April 2008. "Coldplay". Coldplay. 28 April 2008. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 28 April 2008. Collis, Roland. "UKC". Iomusic News. p. 2. Archived from the original on 4 February 2009. Retrieved 22 November 2008. "The Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on 21 November 2021. Retrieved 3 September 2008. "BBC News: Coldplay's new single tops chart". BBC. 22 June 2008. Archived from the original on 25 December 2008. Retrieved 17 July 2008. Kreps, Daniel (2 June 2008). "MTV Movie Awards Reunites Wayne and Garth, Features First TV Performance of New Coldplay Single". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 5 June 2008. Retrieved 12 November 2008. Kreps, Daniel (2 December 2008). "Coldplay, Leona Lewis Top iTunes 2008 Sales Chart". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 4 December 2008. Retrieved 10 December 2008. "Coldplay top 2008's global chart". News.bbc.co.uk. Archived from the original on 11 August 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "BBC News: New Coldplay album tops UK chart". BBC. 15 June 2008. Archived from the original on 4 May 2014. Retrieved 17 July 2008. "Most Album Downloads Ever". Hyper-Stars. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 3 September 2008. "Yahoo! Chart Watch: Viva La Download Or Death And All His CDs". Yahoo!. 29 June 2008. Archived from the original on 15 July 2008. Retrieved 3 September 2008. "Double Q Award win for Coldplay". BBC News. BBC. 6 October 2008. Archived from the original on 3 January 2009. Retrieved 29 December 2008. Martin, Dan (11 November 2008). "Coldplay named top-selling act in the world". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Coldplay Crowned World's Biggest Act". Cbsnews.com. 10 November 2008. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Geoghegan, Kev (16 June 2008). "BBC Newsbeat: Coldplay make their live return". BBC. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 17 July 2008. "BBC News: Coldplay play open air gig at BBC". BBC. 18 June 2008. Archived from the original on 12 December 2008. Retrieved 17 July 2008. Mitchell, Geraldine (24 February 2009). "Coldplay, Kings of Leon to headline bushfire relief concerts". Herald Sun. Australia. Archived from the original on 25 February 2009. Palathingal, George (25 December 2009). "Tickets pleased". The Sydney Morning Herald. p. 1. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 30 December 2009. "Grammy Awards". grammy.com. Archived from the original on 27 July 2010. Retrieved 2 August 2010. "Coldplay – Joe Satriani". Coldplay Official Website. 9 December 2008. Archived from the original on 18 October 2011. Retrieved 10 December 2008. "Guitarist Satriani sues Coldplay". BBC News. 5 December 2008. Archived from the original on 20 February 2009. Retrieved 17 March 2011. "Coldplay copyright case 'settled'". BBC News. 16 September 2009. Archived from the original on 11 August 2012. Retrieved 6 May 2010. Fitzmaurice, Larry (19 February 2009). "Video: Duffy, Kings of Leon Win, Coldplay Snubbed at Brit Awards". Spin. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 29 April 2009. Kreps, Daniel (8 February 2009). "Plant & Krauss, Lil Wayne, Coldplay Win Big at 2009 Grammy Awards". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 11 February 2009. Retrieved 9 February 2009. du Lac, J. Freedom (9 February 2009). "The Gang's All Here". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 13 November 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2009. "Coldplay To Give Away Live Album". Coldplay Official Website. 1 May 2009. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2009. "Latin America Stadium Tour Announced". Coldplay Official Website. 1 October 2009. Archived from the original on 3 October 2009. Retrieved 1 October 2009. Paine, Andre (14 October 2008). "McCartney, Coldplay honored at ASCAP awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on 27 May 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2008. "Green Day Named Top Artists of the Decade By Rolling Stone Readers". MTV News. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "UK's 'Q' Magazine Lists Their Artists Of The Century!". Thelifefiles.com. Archived from the original on 5 October 2011. "12 Great Coldplay Songs You Probably Don't Know". Rolling Stone. 18 December 2017. Archived from the original on 23 November 2017. Retrieved 18 December 2017. Ziegbe, Mawuse (8 January 2011). "Coldplay's New Album About 'Addiction,' 'OCD'". MTV News. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014. Retrieved 10 January 2011. "Glastonbury Festival 2011 – Coldplay". BBC. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "T in the Park 2011 – Coldplay". BBC – T in the Park – 2011. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Coldplay Debut Another New Song At 'Austin City Limits' Taping". MTV News. Archived from the original on 30 August 2013. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Coldplay and Maroon 5 Rock in Rio: Daily". The Rio Times. 2 October 2011. Archived from the original on 18 June 2023. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Coldplay performs in Grant Park at Lollapalooza 2011!". Los Angeles Times. 6 August 2011. Archived from the original on 14 November 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Coldplay Album Update". Clashmusic.com. 13 January 2011. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 8 November 2011. "Interview with Miles Leonard". HitQuarters. 7 February 2011. Archived from the original on 9 June 2012. Retrieved 16 February 2011. "Coldplay se defiende de las acusaciones de plagio". Los40.com. Archived from the original on 6 February 2012. Retrieved 3 July 2011. "Coldplay: News – New album, Mylo Xyloto, out on October 24". Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 12 August 2011. "Coldplay Arena Tour Sells Out in a Minute". Entertainmentwise. 23 September 2011. Archived from the original on 26 October 2011. Retrieved 8 November 2011. Michaels, Sean (11 July 2012). "Coldplay to launch Mylo Xyloto comics". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Gwyneth Paltrow Called a Great Beard by Chris Martin". Popsugar.com. 27 October 2011. Archived from the original on 15 July 2014. Retrieved 2 April 2012. "Coldplay's new album 'Mylo Xyloto' getting mostly positive reviews". Blog.Zap2it.com. 24 October 2011. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 11 April 2012. Wingfield, Nick (19 October 2011). "Coldplay and Norah Jones Play at Memorial for Jobs". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 September 2015. Retrieved 8 March 2012. ""Coldplay streaming live Anton Corbijn directed performance"". Archived from the original on 1 August 2013. Carlson, Erin (19 January 2012). "Rihanna, Coldplay to Perform Together at Grammy Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012. Retrieved 4 February 2012. "Grammy Nominations 2012 in full". The Telegraph. 1 December 2011. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2012. "Adele, Coldplay Lead BRIT Award Nominations". Rolling Stone. 12 January 2012. Archived from the original on 1 July 2014. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Brit Awards 2012: List of winners". BBC News. 21 February 2012. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Coldplay, Noel Gallagher and Foo Fighters revealed as biggest selling rock acts of 2011". NME. 17 January 2012. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Coldplay Basks In 'Paradise' With 2012 VMA Best Rock Win". MTV News. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Coldplay joined by Rihanna, Jay-Z at Paralympic closing ceremony". NME. 9 September 2012. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016. Retrieved 5 October 2012. "Bands across the UK to perform Coldplay hit in closing event of the London 2012 Festival". London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games. 7 September 2012. Archived from the original on 28 August 2012. Retrieved 5 October 2012. "Coldplay Live 2012 tour film announced". 25 September 2012. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 6 February 2016. "Hiru urtez agertokietatik kanpo egongo da Coldplay" (in Basque). eitb.com. Archived from the original on 27 May 2013. Retrieved 28 November 2012. "Madonna, Lady Gaga And Coldplay Among 2012's Top Grossing World Tours". Capital FM. 31 December 2012. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2013. "Coldplay: 'Our next album title will be pronounceable'" Archived 26 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine. NME. Retrieved 20 March 2020 "Coldplay begin work on new record". Irish Examiner. 30 November 2012. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2021. "New song, Atlas, for The Hunger Games: Catching Fire Soundtrack". Coldplay Official Website. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 9 August 2013. "Coldplay, David Guetta Go To Atlantic Records; Radiohead & Pink Floyd Catalogs, Kylie Minogue, Damon Albarn To Warner Bros: WMG's US Plans for Parlophone (Exclusive)". Billboard. 18 December 2013. Archived from the original on 6 July 2014. Retrieved 10 May 2014. "Coldplay – Midnight". Indie Shuffle. Archived from the original on 31 December 2021. Retrieved 25 February 2014. "Coldplay announce new album Ghost Stories, release first single "Magic"". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 3 March 2014. Chris Martin BBC Radio 1 interview with Zane Lowe, April 2014 Wilson, Jess (4 May 2014). "Chris Martin was desperate for his bandmates to write Coldplay songs for Ghost Stories". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on 5 May 2014. Retrieved 17 March 2015. "Coldplay announce six 'intimate' shows". NME. IPC Media. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 2 March 2015. "Coldplay – Magic". Indie Shuffle. Archived from the original on 5 December 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2014. "Reviews for Ghost Stories by Coldplay – Metacritic". Metacritic. 19 May 2014. Archived from the original on 3 May 2022. Retrieved 6 August 2014. Wyatt, Daisy (3 July 2014). "Coldplay's Ghost Stories named best-selling album of 2014 so far". The Independent. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 4 December 2014. Caulfield, Keith (28 May 2014). "Coldplay's 'Ghost Stories' Starts at No. 1 With Biggest Debut of 2014". Billboard. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 4 December 2014. "Sam Smith nabs Grammy nominations". BBC News. 6 December 2014. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 11 December 2014. "Ed Sheeran is Spotify's most-streamed artist of 2014" Archived 4 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine. BBC. Retrieved 4 December 2014 "Coldplay reveal new album title" Archived 2 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine. BBC. Retrieved 4 December 2014 "Welcome to the new Timeline. Note from the studio as the band work on their new album (and confirm its title)". Archived from the original on 15 May 2015. Retrieved 12 May 2015. "Coldplay Hint at 'Final' Album 'A Head Full of Dreams'". Rolling Stone. 5 December 2014. Archived from the original on 10 December 2014. Retrieved 7 December 2014. "Coldplay: Uplifting tunes on way". Belfast Telegraph. 13 February 2016. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 13 February 2016. Payne, Chris (11 December 2014). "Hear Coldplay's New Slow Jam 'Miracles' From 'Unbroken' Soundtrack". Billboard. Archived from the original on 22 July 2021. Retrieved 12 December 2014. "Billboard Music Awards 2015: See the Full Winners List". Billboard. 17 May 2015. Archived from the original on 29 July 2015. Retrieved 22 August 2015. Hampp, Andrew (9 July 2015). "Beyoncé, Coldplay, Pearl Jam to Headline New York's 2015 Global Citizen Festival". Billboard. Archived from the original on 31 July 2015. Retrieved 5 August 2015. "Coldplay reveal 'final' album, A Head Full of Dreams". BBC News. BBC. 6 November 2015. Archived from the original on 19 August 2022. Retrieved 6 November 2015. Caulfield, Keith (13 December 2015). "Adele's '25' Rules for Third Week at No. 1, Coldplay Debuts at No. 2 on Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on 5 March 2019. Retrieved 13 December 2015. "ARIA Albums : Adele Blocks Coldplay From A Number-One Debut". Noise 11. 19 December 2015. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. Retrieved 19 December 2015. "Coldplay Monkeys Around in 'Adventure of a Lifetime' Video: Watch". Billboard. 27 November 2015. Archived from the original on 30 November 2015. Retrieved 28 November 2015. "First legs of 2016 tour announced – extra dates added!". Coldplay. 27 November 2015. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2015. "That... Was... EPIC! Coldplay Kick Off Capital's Jingle Bell Ball With Coca-Cola!". Capital FM. 8 December 2015. Archived from the original on 24 July 2022. Retrieved 8 December 2015. "Coldplay will perform at Pepsi Super Bowl 50 Halftime Show" (Press release). National Football League. 3 December 2015. Archived from the original on 7 December 2015. Retrieved 31 December 2015. "Beyoncé and Bruno Mars join Coldplay for the Super Bowl 50 halftime show". Vox. Archived from the original on 19 January 2016. Retrieved 13 June 2017. "Global Music Report" (PDF). International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. 12 April 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 March 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2016. "Coldplay close Glastonbury 2016, with help from the Bee Gees". BBC. 27 June 2016. Archived from the original on 11 June 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "Michael J Fox joins Coldplay to recreate Back to the Future scene". The Guardian. 28 July 2016. Archived from the original on 31 December 2021. Retrieved 28 July 2016. "Coldplay, Jay Z Rock the House at Global Citizen Festival India's Historic Debut". Billboard. 20 November 2016. Archived from the original on 22 July 2021. Retrieved 21 November 2016. "Highlights: Coldplay, AR Rahman, Jay Z perform at the Global Citizen Festival". The Times of India. 20 November 2016. Archived from the original on 21 November 2016. Retrieved 21 November 2016. Coldplay at the London Palladium: Interview with Chris Martin and Jonny Buckland. 11 November 2016. Archived from the original on 20 June 2023. Retrieved 20 June 2023 – via YouTube. Coldplay Announce That They Have a New EP. 22 November 2016. Archived from the original on 20 June 2023. Retrieved 20 June 2023 – via YouTube. "Coldplay to Release New 'Kaleidoscope' EP in 2017". Billboard. 29 November 2016. Archived from the original on 22 October 2021. Retrieved 21 April 2020. "The Chainsmokers & Coldplay Deliver Live Debut of 'Something Just Like This' at 2017 Brit Awards". Billboard. 22 February 2017. Archived from the original on 9 March 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020. "Coldplay announces new EP on Chris Martin's birthday; first song 'Hypnotised' released". 2 March 2017. Archived from the original on 15 August 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2017. "Hear 'All I Can Think About You' + Kaleidoscope EP release details". 15 June 2017. Archived from the original on 8 July 2017. Retrieved 24 June 2017. "Coldplay: A L I E N S – Music on Google Play". play.google.com. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 5 December 2018. "Coldplay to debut new song for Estamos Unidos Mexicanos concert". 4 October 2017. Archived from the original on 22 April 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2017. Connick, Tom (17 November 2017). "Coldplay's 'A Head Full of Dreams' world tour becomes third highest-grossing of all time". NME. Archived from the original on 26 April 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2017. Lukarcanin, Emina (27 November 2018). "Global Citizen to Release First EP: Watch Pharrell Williams & Coldplay's 'E-Lo' Lyric Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 27 November 2018. Ehlrich, Brenna (26 September 2019). "Metallica, Billie Eilish, Miley Cyrus to Play 10-Hour Worldwide Concert". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 29 September 2019. Retrieved 26 September 2019. Skinner, Tom (18 October 2019). "More mysterious posters teasing Coldplay's supposed new album appear across the world". NME. Archived from the original on 9 July 2022. Retrieved 30 April 2021. "Coldplay Just Announced a Double Album in the Most Old-Fashioned Way Possible". Billboard. 21 October 2019. Archived from the original on 22 October 2019. Retrieved 30 April 2021. "Coldplay look to be teasing a new double album, according to a letter sent to fans". Dork. 21 October 2019. Archived from the original on 21 October 2019. Retrieved 22 October 2019. "Coldplay reveal new album tracks in local paper". BBC. Archived from the original on 11 June 2022. Retrieved 24 October 2019. Strauss, Matthew (24 October 2019). "Coldplay Share New Songs "Orphans" and "Arabesque": Listen". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on 24 October 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2019. Shaffer, Claire (1 November 2019). "Coldplay Announce 'Everyday Life – Live in Jordan' Livestream". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 19 August 2022. Retrieved 23 November 2019. "Coldplay Announce 'Everyday Life' Live Stream in Jordan". Billboard. Archived from the original on 5 November 2019. Retrieved 23 November 2019. "Coldplay axes tour plans over pollution fears". RTL Today. 21 November 2019. Archived from the original on 25 April 2022. Retrieved 26 November 2019. "Coldplay prove they're not fossils as they play Natural History Museum gig". BBC. Archived from the original on 16 June 2022. Retrieved 26 November 2019. Copsey, Rob (29 November 2019). "Coldplay's Everyday Life beats Robbie Williams's Christmas album to Number 1 on the Official Albums Chart". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 29 December 2021. Retrieved 2 December 2019. "2021 GRAMMYs Awards Show: Complete Winners & Nominees List". Recording Academy Grammy Awards. 24 November 2020. Archived from the original on 14 March 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2021. "Flags, Everyday Life Japanese Bonus Track, out now worldwide". Coldplay Official Website. 21 December 2020. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2020. Minsker, Evan (29 April 2021). "Coldplay Releasing New Song 'Higher Power' Next Week". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on 29 April 2021. Retrieved 1 May 2021. "Coldplay to premiere 'Higher Power' with link-up to International Space Station". NME. 5 May 2021. Archived from the original on 6 February 2022. Retrieved 6 May 2021. Coldplay: Higher Power, Max Martin, and Eco-Friendly Tour. 7 May 2021. Archived from the original on 20 June 2023. Retrieved 20 June 2023 – via YouTube. "Coldplay announced as opening act for 2021 BRIT Awards". NME. 4 May 2021. Archived from the original on 16 June 2022. Retrieved 6 May 2021. "Glastonbury Festival announces livestream with Coldplay, Damon Albarn, HAIM and more". The Music Network. 31 March 2021. Archived from the original on 6 February 2022. Retrieved 6 May 2021. "Watch Coldplay Debut New Song Human Heart With We Are KING On Glastonbury Livestream". Stereogum. 23 May 2021. Archived from the original on 12 July 2022. Retrieved 12 July 2022. "Coldplay Dance Through a Dystopia in New Higher Power Video". Rolling Stone. 8 June 2021. Archived from the original on 20 June 2023. Retrieved 20 June 2023. "Coldplay Shoot for the Stars with Their Cinematic New Track Coloratura". NME. 23 July 2021. Archived from the original on 5 July 2023. Retrieved 5 July 2023. White, Jack (13 September 2021). "Coldplay and BTS announce new collaborative single My Universe". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 7 October 2021. Retrieved 13 September 2021. "Official Singles Chart Top 100 | Official Charts Company". Officialcharts.com. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021. Retrieved 3 October 2021. "Coldplay & BTS Congratulate Each Other as My Universe Debuts at No. 1 on Hot 100". Billboard. 5 October 2021. Archived from the original on 2 January 2022. Retrieved 1 January 2022. "BTS & Coldplay Take Fans Inside the Making of My Universe in New Documentary". Billboard. 26 September 2021. Archived from the original on 21 June 2023. Retrieved 21 June 2023. "Official Albums Chart Top 100 | Official Charts Company". www.officialcharts.com. Archived from the original on 14 May 2022. Retrieved 30 October 2021. "Coldplay claim fastest-selling album of 2021 so far". www.officialcharts.com. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2021. "Coldplay". Billboard. Archived from the original on 26 March 2022. Retrieved 30 October 2021. "Coldplay Dominates Billboard Rock Albums & Alternative Albums Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. Retrieved 30 October 2021. Brownlie, Lauren (14 October 2021). "Coldplay announce Glasgow show as part of new world tour". Glasgow Times. Archived from the original on 9 June 2022. Retrieved 14 October 2021. "Coldplay: Band ready for backlash over eco-friendly world tour". BBC News. 14 October 2021. Archived from the original on 16 August 2022. Retrieved 27 March 2022. "Grammy Nominations 2022: See the Full List Here". Pitchfork. 23 November 2021. Archived from the original on 9 December 2021. Retrieved 23 November 2021. Brandle, Lars (23 December 2021). "Coldplay's Chris Martin Hints at Retirement". Billboard. Archived from the original on 19 August 2022. Retrieved 23 December 2021. "Jo Whiley, Christmas With Christ Marton". BBC Radio 2. Archived from the original on 23 December 2021. Retrieved 23 December 2021. Spotify Singles, 23 February 2022, archived from the original on 13 August 2022, retrieved 26 February 2022 "Grammy Awards 2023: The Full List of Nominees". The New York Times. 15 November 2022. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 15 November 2022. Retrieved 15 November 2022. "Coldplay: This Is Our Period of Having No Fear". NME. 15 October 2021. Archived from the original on 24 December 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2022. Everyday Life Q&A From Jordan. 21 November 2019. Event occurs at 4:19 to 6:40. Archived from the original on 27 September 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2022 – via YouTube. Chris Martin. Zane Lowe. The Full Interview. 16 May 2014. Archived from the original on 20 December 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2022 – via YouTube. The Creation of Adventure of a Lifetime by Coldplay (A Head Full of Dreams Documentary). 8 January 2021. Archived from the original on 5 January 2022. Retrieved 5 January 2022 – via YouTube. Coldplay [@coldplay] (14 March 2023). "I try to play the piano occasionally. Often in the studio we change instruments, with varying degrees of success. I also have a very high-pitched hand clap. Jonny" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 3 April 2023. Retrieved 3 April 2023 – via Twitter. "Review: Coldplay Obey Their Thirst for Pop Relevance on Music of the Spheres". Stereogum. 14 October 2015. Archived from the original on 26 December 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2022. "Coldplay's Music of the Spheres Is Spinning: Stream It Now". Billboard. 15 October 2021. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2021. "Coldplay Biography by Neil Z. Yeung". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2022. "Coldplay's Up&Up Video Turns The Everyday Into The Extraordinary". Spin. 16 May 2016. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "Coldplay – LeftRightLeftRightLeft". Pitchfork. 1 June 2009. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "Album Reviews: Coldplay, Harry Nilsson and Harmony Woods". The Philadelphia Inquirer. 5 December 2019. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "An Uncoupling, But The Band Plays On". The New York Times. 6 May 2014. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 10 August 2022. "Science Supports Coldplay/Limestone Comparison". Washington City Paper. 10 February 2009. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "Artists / Coldplay". The Vogue. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "Parachutes Review by MacKenzie Wilson". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 25 November 2021. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "The Importance of Being Earnest". The Guardian. 27 May 2005. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2022. "Coldplay Opens Up Parachutes For US Audiences". MTV News. 29 September 2000. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay Bleed for Beauty on A Rush of Blood to the Head". MTV News. 27 August 2002. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "Revisiting Coldplay's A Rush of Blood to the Head: Retrospective Tribute". Albumism. 26 August 2017. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "Coldplay: A Rush of Blood to the Head". PopMatters. 6 September 2002. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "A Rush of Blood to the Head Review by Neil Z. Yeung". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 24 December 2021. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay's X&Y Album Review". Hybrid Magazine. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "Coldplay, X&Y". The Guardian. 27 May 2005. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2022. "Coldplay – X&Y". Paste. 30 June 2008. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "X&Y Review by Stephen Thomas Erlewine". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 24 December 2021. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay at Work on "Something Different" for Upcoming Album". Rolling Stone. 27 February 2008. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay Give Track-by-Track Tour of Viva la Vida, Explain Handclaps, Tack Pianos and the Number 42". MTV News. 9 June 2008. Archived from the original on 19 May 2014. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "10 Years Later: Exploring Coldplay's Viva la Vida". Medium. 19 April 2018. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Chris Martin – The Rolling Stone Interview". Rolling Stone. 26 June 2008. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Every Single Coldplay Song Ranked In Order of Greatness". NME. 10 July 2020. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2021. "Coldplay – Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends (Review 2)". Sputnik. 18 March 2011. Archived from the original on 3 June 2014. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay's Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends Turns 10: Anniversary Retrospective". Albumism. 12 June 2018. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. Coldplay – Boombox All Access. 21 July 2011. Event occurs at 11:50 to 12:40. Archived from the original on 7 March 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2022 – via YouTube. "Coldplay's Mylo Xyloto Track-by-Track Review". Billboard. 20 October 2011. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay: Mylo Xyloto is a Concept Album About Love Conquering All". NME. 15 October 2011. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay Call Mylo Xyloto A Schizophrenic Album". MTV News. 24 October 2011. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "New Coldplay Album Inspired by Graffiti". The Guardian. 26 November 2010. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay's Mylo Xyloto Comic Book Series Goes Digital". Billboard. 17 April 2013. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay Chat With Jo Whiley". BBC Radio 1. 21 February 2013. Archived from the original on 30 December 2021. Retrieved 30 December 2021. "Ghost Stories Review". The Hollywood Reporter. 20 May 2014. Archived from the original on 4 November 2016. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay Ghost Stories Album Review". Time. 14 May 2014. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay Consciously Uncouple From Trademark Bathos On Appealing Ghost Stories". Spin. 17 May 2014. Archived from the original on 5 July 2015. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay's Haunted Ghost Stories Album: Track-by-Track Review". Billboard. 14 May 2014. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Album Review: Coldplay – Ghost Stories". TimesLIVE. Archived from the original on 10 December 2014. Retrieved 3 January 2022. Sky Arts: Coldplay – The Making of Ghost Stories (Part 1). 17 January 2015. Event occurs at 1:58 to 3:00. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 3 January 2022 – via YouTube. "Chris Martin Says Gwyneth Paltrow Split Inspired New Coldplay Album". Billboard. 28 April 2014. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay's Ghost Stories Adds To Canon of Great Break-up Albums". The Guardian. 14 May 2014. Archived from the original on 11 December 2014. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Music Review: Coldplay's A Head Full of Dreams in and of Itself is a Dream". Los Angeles Times High School Insider. 14 December 2015. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay – Adventure Of A Lifetime". Stereogum. 6 November 2015. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Review: Coldplay Continue Mood of Tranquil Satisfaction on Latest EP". Rolling Stone. 26 July 2017. Archived from the original on 18 July 2018. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay – Kaleidoscope EP Review". NME. 12 July 2017. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Single Review: Coldplay – All I Can Think About Is You". Redbrick. 21 June 2017. Archived from the original on 21 June 2017. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "Coldplay's Everyday Life Is A Surprising Return To Form". Paste. 26 November 2019. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay's New songs Orphans and Arabesque Reviewed: Jazzier! Classic rock-ier! Fun-er!". NME. 24 October 2019. Archived from the original on 26 October 2019. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay Get Admirably Real on the Organically Expansive Everyday Life". Rolling Stone. 26 November 2019. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Everyday Life Review: A Confounding Experiment From A Deceptively Forward-thinking Band". NME. 22 November 2021. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 26 December 2021. "Music of the Spheres Review by Neil Z. Yeung". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 3 January 2022. Salmon, Chris (2023). Music of the Spheres World Tour Book. Amsterdam: Parlophone. pp. 11–12. "Coldplay's New Album Was Inspired by Star Wars". RTÉ. 9 June 2021. Archived from the original on 20 June 2023. Retrieved 25 February 2023. "Album Reviews: Biffy Clyro | Coldplay | Duran Duran | Lola in Slacks". The Scotsman. 15 October 2021. Archived from the original on 5 April 2023. Retrieved 25 February 2023. "Coldplay Discover Pink Floyd, Share 10 Minute Prog Rock Single Coloratura". Louder. 23 July 2021. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "Corné Klijn Interviewt Coldplay Over Music of the Spheres" [Corné Klijn Interviews Coldplay About Music of the Spheres]. NPO Radio 2 (in Dutch). 17 October 2021. Archived from the original on 25 February 2023. Retrieved 25 February 2023. "10 Bands That Inspired Coldplay". WXRT. 6 September 2013. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 3 January 2002. "Martin: Travis Invented Coldplay". Contact Music. 20 January 2007. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay on Jeff Buckley". Clash Music. 18 December 2008. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 12 December 2019. "Coldplay's Comeback – The Full Story". NME. 12 January 2005. Archived from the original on 5 January 2022. Retrieved 4 January 2022. "Coldplay Discuss & Perform Songs Off Everyday Life For SiriusXM". Billboard. 16 January 2020. Archived from the original on 11 February 2022. Retrieved 11 February 2022. Studio Brussel Interview – Coldplay. 26 November 2021. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 4 January 2022 – via YouTube. "Coldplay Hypnotised by Brian Eno During Making of Mylo Xyloto". NME. 27 October 2011. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 4 January 2022. Coldplay [@coldplay] (8 April 2020). "Hi everyone. Hope you're all doing ok. I made a playlist of (mainly) 1960s songs to give you something to listen to while we're (mainly) all stuck at home. JB" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 16 September 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2022 – via Twitter. Coldplay [@coldplay] (28 April 2020). "Hi everyone. I've made another playlist for you, this time with some of my favourite 1970s songs" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 6 May 2020. Retrieved 4 January 2022 – via Twitter. Coldplay [@coldplay] (13 May 2020). "Hi everyone. I've reached the 1980s with my playlists. Quite tricky to make something coherent for such a seismic decade in music" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 15 May 2020. Retrieved 4 January 2022 – via Twitter. Coldplay [@coldplay] (21 May 2020). "Here's my 90s playlist. (Surely it's time for an Electronic reunion?) JB" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 21 May 2020. Retrieved 4 January 2022 – via Twitter. StuBru [@stubru] (26 November 2021). "Chris Martin van Coldplay heeft al gekozen! Nu jij nog. Stem op jouw drie favoriete platen aller tijden voor" [Chris Martin of Coldplay has already chosen! Now you. Vote for your three favorite records of all time for DeTijdloze 100] (Tweet) (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 27 November 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2022 – via Twitter. (Spivack 2004, p. 23) "Collecting Stories: Coldplay's Guy Berryman". Christies. 15 July 2020. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 4 January 2022. "Guy Berryman – The Style Council". Mr Porter. Archived from the original on 17 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022. (Wild & Croft 2018, p. 14) Will Champion Coldplay | Rare Interview | The Lost Tapes. Archived from the original on 17 May 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2022 – via YouTube. "Will Champion: Just Right For Coldplay". Drum!. 21 February 2012. Archived from the original on 6 December 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Echo & The Bunnymen's Ian McCulloch Taks Influencing Friend Chris Martin". Yahoo! Entertainment. 3 January 2019. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay – Going Out of My Head". VH1. 13 August 2002. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Chris Talk Us Through A Rush of Blood to the Head" (PDF). Coldplay E-Zine. November 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 April 2008. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "X&Y from A to Z". Yahoo! Music. 11 March 2006. Archived from the original on 12 December 2008. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay Goes Back To Basics On New Album". Billboard. 12 January 2005. Archived from the original on 5 January 2022. Retrieved 4 January 2022. "Viva la Vida Biography". Coldplay Official Website. 24 May 2008. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Nice Tunes From Nice Boys: As You Were, Coldplay". The Observer. 7 June 2008. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Brian Eno Reveals The Creative Secrets Behind His New Art". Red Bull. 14 June 2018. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Meet Jon Hopkins – The Next Brian Eno". The Guardian. 4 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay's Mylo Xyloto Has Mass Appeal". NPR. 24 October 2011. Archived from the original on 17 January 2015. Retrieved 16 October 2021. "Coldplay Work With Producer Paul Epworth On New Album Ghost Stories". NME. 7 March 2014. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Top 5 Madeon Songs You Didn't Know He Produced". Billboard. 17 August 2016. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Listen: Coldplay's New Song A Sky Full of Stars, Produced by Avicii". Consequence. 29 April 2014. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "Coldplay A Head Full of Dreams Album Review". Rolling Stone. 4 December 2015. Archived from the original on 13 July 2018. Retrieved 4 January 2022. "Coldplay Musical Collaborator Davide Rossi Performs with Band in a Rare On-Stage Appearance at Glastonbury Music Festival". Globe Newswire (Press release). 28 June 2016. Archived from the original on 25 February 2023. Retrieved 25 February 2023. "Coldplay Producers Rik Simpson and Dan Green on Global Production and Nailing Live Streams". MusicTech. 11 March 2021. Archived from the original on 25 February 2023. Retrieved 25 February 2023. "Coldplay Announce New Album Music of the Spheres". Pitchfork. 20 July 2021. Archived from the original on 20 July 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2022. "Coldplay on BTS, Beyoncé, and How Their New Max Martin-produced Album Came To Be". Entertainment Weekly. 12 October 2021. Archived from the original on 13 October 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2022. "Concert Review: Coldplay Bursts Into Consol With A Colorful Concert". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. 5 August 2016. Archived from the original on 7 January 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "Coldplay – Live in Buenos Aires". Pitchfork. 13 December 2018. Archived from the original on 20 October 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2022. "Coldplay Review: Charge of the Bright Brigade". The Guardian. 16 June 2017. Archived from the original on 30 May 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2022. "Coldplay's Greener Pastures: With Music of the Spheres, One of the Most Successful Touring Bands Ever Kicks Off a New Era of Sustainable Touring". Pollstar. 20 October 2021. Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 25 September 2023. "Coldplay's Plastic Problem: What Will Become of Those Glowing Wristbands?". The Telegraph. 3 December 2019. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 9 August 2022. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Coldplay Review – Lasers, Confetti and Ed Sheeran In Extravagant Return". The Guardian. 13 October 2021. Archived from the original on 5 December 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2022. "Coldplay Announces 2014 Tour Dates". Consequence. 17 April 2017. Archived from the original on 5 January 2022. Retrieved 5 January 2022. "Chris Martin Floats Above The Crowd of 800 To Preview The Album's May 19 Release". The Hollywood Reporter. 24 March 2014. Archived from the original on 5 January 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "XL Creates A Sky Full of Video For Coldplay". AV Magazine. 17 July 2014. Archived from the original on 5 January 2022. Retrieved 5 January 2022. "Coldplay To Pause Touring Until Concerts Are Environmentally Beneficial". BBC News. 21 November 2019. Archived from the original on 23 June 2020. Retrieved 21 November 2019. "Coldplay Review – Still The Masters of the Sweeping Statement". The Guardian. 26 November 2019. Archived from the original on 21 October 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2022. Going Green: How Coldplay Made Their Latest Stadium Tour One of the Most Sustainable Ever. 6 June 2022. Event occurs at 9:40 to 10:25. Archived from the original on 10 June 2022. Retrieved 10 June 2022 – via YouTube. "Coldplay Emboba en Barcelona: Pop Épico y Un Despliegue Tecnológico Deslumbrante" [Coldplay Stunned in Barcelona: Epic Pop and a Dazzling Technological Display]. El País (in Spanish). 24 May 2023. Archived from the original on 29 May 2023. Retrieved 17 June 2023. "Coldplay Review: Ed Sheeran Joins the Stadium Titans for a Rousing, Intimate, Homecoming". The Telegraph. 13 October 2021. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2022. "How Coldplay's Parachutes Ushered in a New Wave of Mild-Mannered Guitar Bands". Grammy (Use the "Reader Mode" extension to see the archived page in full). 10 July 2020. Archived from the original on 11 January 2023. Retrieved 11 January 2023. "El Estilo de Chris Martin" [Chris Martin's Style]. GQ España (in Spanish). 25 October 2011. Archived from the original on 17 June 2023. Retrieved 17 June 2023. "Chris Martin Neurotic Before Meeting Jay-Z". The New Zealand Herald. 19 September 2011. Archived from the original on 17 June 2023. Retrieved 17 June 2023. "Coldplay's Album Cover Decoded (And You Thought the Lyrics Were Geeky...)". MTV News. 8 June 2005. Archived from the original on 18 June 2023. Retrieved 18 June 2023. "Behind the Image: Beth Fenton on Clothes Speaking for You". Models. 19 November 2020. Archived from the original on 16 June 2023. Retrieved 16 June 2023. "Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends: Behind Coldplay's Sonic Revolution". Dig!. 12 June 2023. Archived from the original on 18 June 2023. Retrieved 18 June 2023. "Coldplay Turns Up the Heat with Viva la Vida". Los Angeles Times. 22 June 2008. Archived from the original on 4 January 2023. Retrieved 18 June 2023. "Chris Martin's Viva la Vida Costume". Victoria and Albert Museum. 30 June 2010. Archived from the original on 18 June 2023. Retrieved 18 June 2023. "Interview: Paris, Coldplay's Artist in Residence (Pt 2)". Coldplay Official Website. 4 April 2012. Archived from the original on 18 June 2023. Retrieved 18 June 2023. "Pass Notes: Mila Fürstová". Harper's Bazaar. 6 March 2014. Archived from the original on 18 June 2023. Retrieved 18 June 2023. Coldplay (2014). Ghost Stories (CD liner notes). Europe: Parlophone. 825646305919. "Jennifer Lawrence Spotted Wearing Chris Martin's Love Button". Now to Love. 17 October 2014. Archived from the original on 18 June 2023. Retrieved 18 June 2023. "Coldplay Levará Pessoas em Situação de Rua para Assistir ao Show da Banda em São Paulo" [Coldplay Will Take Homeless People to Watch Their Show in São Paulo]. CNN Brasil (in Portuguese). 16 March 2023. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 31 May 2023. "Chris Martin de Coldplay Tiene Exactamente 8 Prendas en Su Armario" [Coldplay's Chris Martin Has Exactly 8 Pieces in His Closet]. GQ (in Spanish). 29 December 2017. Archived from the original on 16 June 2023. Retrieved 20 June 2023. Coldplay: A Head Full of Dreams (film). United Kingdom: Trafalgar Releasing. 2018. "The Story Behind Chris Martin's Signature Air Jordans". Footwear News. 18 August 2016. Archived from the original on 16 June 2023. Retrieved 16 June 2023. "Coldplay 酷玩樂團 / 偉大日常" [Coldplay / Everyday Life]. Warner Music Taiwan (in Chinese). 22 November 2019. Archived from the original on 21 June 2023. Retrieved 21 June 2023. "Noch Ein Musiker Mit Einem Modelabel?" [Another Musician with a Fashion Label?]. Welt (in German). 16 October 2023. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "Coldplay Bassist Guy Berryman on Launching a Label". Irish Examiner. 29 January 2022. Archived from the original on 29 May 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2022. "Coldplay, Wembley Stadium, Review: Chris Martin's Infectious Joy Is Impossible To Resist". The Telegraph. 13 August 2022. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "The Best-selling Albums of All Time on the Official UK Chart". Official Charts Company. 11 April 2019. Archived from the original on 9 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "50 Fastest-Selling Albums Ever". NME. 27 April 2011. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 28 December 2021. "Coldplay Top Singles and Albums Charts in a Week of Firsts". The Times. 23 June 2008. Archived from the original on 21 August 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2023. Davide Rossi [@daviderossimusic] (30 March 2021). "Showing off the essential..." Archived from the original on 4 December 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2021 – via Instagram. "Coldplay Most Influential British Celebrities". ITV News. 26 June 2013. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Celebrating a Decade of Discovery on Spotify". Spotify – For the Record. 10 October 2018. Archived from the original on 1 December 2022. Retrieved 6 December 2022. "Here Are the Top 10 Most-Watched Super Bowl Halftime Shows". Billboard. 13 February 2024. Archived from the original on 16 February 2024. Retrieved 16 February 2024. "Google Reveals 2016's Most Searched Artists and Songs". Complex. 14 December 2016. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Glastonbury Announces Special Alternative To This Year's Festival". The Independent. 31 March 2021. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Here are All the Hits That Have Debuted at No. 1 on the Hot 100". Billboard. 22 November 2021. Archived from the original on 1 January 2022. "Coldplay Hits $1 Billion in Career Touring Grosses". Billboard. 16 June 2022. Archived from the original on 16 June 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2022. "Coldplay to Open the 2021 BRIT Awards". Official Charts Company. 4 May 2021. Archived from the original on 10 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "BRITs Hall of Fame: The 20 Biggest BRIT Awards Winners in History". Capital FM. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Will BTS Finally Win a Brit Award? (And More Burning Questions About the 2022 Brits)". Billboard. 19 December 2019. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Jonny Buckland". Grammy. 15 November 2022. Archived from the original on 11 January 2023. Retrieved 11 January 2023. "NRJ Awards: Katy Perry Given Rihanna's Award by Mistake". The Guardian. 19 January 2009. Archived from the original on 7 November 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Coldplay Win ASCAP Songwriting Award". NME. 14 October 2010. Archived from the original on 26 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Ivor Novello Awards 2003 Winners". BBC News. 22 April 2003. Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Atlas é Indicada ao Critics' Choice Awards 2014" [Atlas Is Nominated For The 2014 Critics' Choice Awards]. Coldplay Brasil (in Portuguese). 16 December 2013. Archived from the original on 26 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Coldplay, Lorde, Lana Del Rey Make Best Original Song Oscar Shortlist". Rolling Stone. 13 December 2014. Archived from the original on 19 May 2020. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "100 Most Award-Winning Artists". TV Tango. 6 March 2014. Archived from the original on 5 January 2022. Retrieved 12 September 2020. "NME Just Gave Coldplay Their Godlike Genius Award and Not Everyone Is Happy About It". The Independent. 18 January 2016. Archived from the original on 24 December 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2021. "Coldplay's Chris Martin Net Worth". The Times. 20 May 2022. Archived from the original on 22 May 2022. Retrieved 3 June 2022. "Coldplay". Seattle Weekly. 30 April 2012. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2021. There are still 88 years and eight months remaining in the 21st century, but thus far, they are the most influential band of it "Twenty Years On, Coldplay Refuses To Take Its Voice Seriously". Firstpost. 23 October 2021. Archived from the original on 16 July 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2022. "Holy Hell! Parachutes Turns 20". Spectrum Culture. 22 July 2020. Archived from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "Coldplay Set the Direction of Mainstream Rock". The Guardian. 11 June 2011. Archived from the original on 14 September 2015. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Coldplay and Avril Lavigne Lead a Stacked Alternative Scene at iHeart's Alter Ego Show in Los Angeles". Forbes. 16 January 2022. Archived from the original on 17 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022. "20 Лет A Rush of Blood to the Head: Сергей Степанов – О Главном Aльбоме Coldplay" [20 Years of A Rush of Blood to the Head: Sergey Stepanov – About the Main Album of Coldplay]. Afisha (in Russian). 26 August 2022. Archived from the original on 26 August 2022. Retrieved 26 August 2022. "Coldplay/Under 1 Roof – Review". The Guardian. 20 December 2013. Archived from the original on 4 August 2023. Retrieved 4 August 2023. "25 Songs That Tell Us Where Music Is Going". The New York Times Magazine. 10 March 2016. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 27 December 2021. Retrieved 27 December 2021. "Premature Evaluation: Coldplay Everyday Life". Stereogum. 21 November 2019. Archived from the original on 4 August 2023. Retrieved 4 August 2023. "Coldplay Review: The Old Ones Are Still the Best". The Telegraph. 17 June 2008. Archived from the original on 4 August 2023. Retrieved 4 August 2023. "We Are All Coldplay". Consequence. 2 December 2015. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 25 December 2021. "Coldplay – and Especially Fix You – Deserve a Better Legacy". The Ringer. 2 December 2021. Archived from the original on 4 August 2023. Retrieved 4 August 2023. "Coldplay: Why Such An Irritating Band Can Fill More Venues Than Any Other on the Planet". El País. 28 September 2022. Archived from the original on 5 August 2023. Retrieved 9 August 2023. "How It Became Cool to Like Coldplay". The Times. 25 August 2022. Archived from the original on 25 August 2022. Retrieved 2 April 2023. "Com Show no Rock in Rio, Coldplay Reinventa o Conceito de Rock de Arena" [With Rock in Rio Show, Coldplay Reinvents the Concept of Arena Rock]. Veja (in Portuguese). 11 September 2022. Archived from the original on 11 September 2022. Retrieved 11 September 2022. "Coldplay Work Towards Net Zero on Sustainable Tour". Sustainability. 11 July 2023. Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. "The 100 Most Influential Climate Leaders in Business 2023". Time. 16 November 2023. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "British Music Exports Rise in 2016". BPI. 7 September 2017. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 17 June 2021. "Streaming Powers British Music Exports to New High in 2020". BPI. 16 June 2021. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 17 June 2021. "Why Coldplay Is One of the Most Successful UK Bands". Obscure Sound. 2 February 2023. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 15 August 2023. "The Greatest Albums of the Last 30 Years". Q (30th Birthday Special Issue). 2016. Archived from the original on 8 August 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2023. "Definitive 200". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. 10 April 2007. Archived from the original on 19 September 2009. Retrieved 21 April 2021. "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time". Rolling Stone. 22 September 2020. Archived from the original on 1 October 2020. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Jay-Z and Coldplay Mixtape: Viva la Hova". Beats Per Minute. 31 October 2008. Archived from the original on 27 May 2023. Retrieved 27 May 2023. "Blitz Apresenta Coldplay em Portugal, a Exposição" [Blitz Presents Coldplay in Portugal, the Exhibition]. Expresso (in Portuguese). 30 March 2023. Archived from the original on 3 April 2023. Retrieved 3 April 2023. "Meet Leading Coldplay Tribute Band, Coldplace". The Jakarta Post. 29 November 2016. Archived from the original on 19 August 2023. Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Coldplay's Slow-Burning Success". BBC News. 5 May 2005. Archived from the original on 5 August 2019. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "ClientEarth Reaction: Coldplay Announce Music of the Spheres Word Tour". Client Earth. 14 October 2021. Archived from the original on 29 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Coldplay to Donate 10th of Earnings to Charity". Irish Examiner. 4 January 2003. Archived from the original on 29 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Coldplay: Charity Work & Causes". Look to the Stars. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 18 May 2021. "Coldplay Brings 20 Years of Music and Charity to Global Citizen Germany". Global Citizen. 17 March 2017. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Coldplay – 2000 Miles". Coldplay Official Website. 2003. Archived from the original on 5 May 2005. Retrieved 8 April 2021. "What Happened to the Make Poverty History Movement?". The Sydney Morning Herald. 6 September 2014. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Coldplay's Chris Martin to Auction His First Guitar for Charity". NME. Archived from the original on 20 December 2009. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Coldplay Become Patrons of ClientEarth". Coldplay Official Website. 16 November 2010. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 3 June 2022. "Hope For Haiti Now Concert YouTube Broadcast Info". Coldplay Official Website. Archived from the original on 24 January 2010. Retrieved 29 December 2021. (Roach 2003, p. 78) Coldplay [@coldplay] (3 December 2012). "Take a bow Coldplay fans. An incredible £610,000 raised so far from the Mylo art sale @AlbumArtists @KidsCo_Tweets. PH" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 16 January 2022 – via Twitter. "Band Aid 30: One Direction Among Celebrity Line-up". The Telegraph. London. 10 November 2014. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 8 December 2015. "Coldplay Support University Cancer Campaign". University of Southampton. 19 July 2017. Archived from the original on 1 February 2022. Retrieved 1 February 2022. "Artists Project Earth – Description". The Ocean Conference. Archived from the original on 3 May 2017. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Stream Coldplay's New Collaborative EP as Los Unidades". Spin. 30 November 2018. Archived from the original on 13 February 2019. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Coldplay Bring Animal Farm to the Present on Trouble In Town Video". Rolling Stone. 12 March 2020. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Coldplay Sponsors Watercraft To Clean Up Polluted Rivers In Malaysia". NME. 30 March 2021. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "One Tree Planted To Fulfill Coldplay's Reforestation Targets Around Music of the Spheres World Tour". One Tree Planted. 14 October 2021. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Coldplay Sumbang Kapal Pembersih Sampah di Sungai Cisadane" [Coldplay Donates Garbage Cleaning Boat at Cisadane River]. CNN Indonesia (in Indonesian). 17 November 2023. Archived from the original on 17 November 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. "During Second Leg of US Tour, Coldplay Campaigns to Make Trade Fair". Oxfam America. 23 March 2006. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Liam Gallagher Slams Chris Martin's Anti-war Stance". NME. 23 March 2003. Archived from the original on 16 November 2009. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Kerry, On A Roll". CNN. 9 February 2004. Archived from the original on 18 August 2011. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Chris Martin Shows Obama Support". Clash. 29 January 2009. Archived from the original on 3 February 2009. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Coldplay Back Meat Free Monday". Coldplay Official Website. 18 June 2009. Archived from the original on 20 June 2009. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Coldplay Angers Fans by Telling Them to Check Out Freedom for Palestine Video". The Washington Post. 3 June 2011. Archived from the original on 5 November 2015. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Palestine Campaign Song Generates Controversy Ahead of Release". The Guardian. 9 June 2011. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Coldplay & Beyoncé Accused of Gay Propaganda in Last Night's Super Bowl Halftime Show". The Daily Dot. 8 February 2016. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Super Bowl 50's Pro-Gay Marriage Moment Sends A Beautiful Message About Love". Bustle. 8 February 2016. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "8 Super Bowl Moments LGBTs are Still Talking About". The Advocate. 8 February 2016. Archived from the original on 13 May 2023. Retrieved 13 May 2023. "Coldplay's Chris Martin Appeals for Unity After Brexit". Digital Spy. 28 July 2016. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Ariana Grande's Manchester Benefit Concert to Air Live on BBC One". Evening Standard. 30 May 2017. Archived from the original on 13 June 2017. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "A Concert for Charlottesville: Thousands Pack Stadium for Unity Concert". USA Today. 25 September 2017. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Artist Letter in Support of the Equality Act". The Ally Coalition. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "PAS Questions Government Allowing Coldplay to Perform Live Concert in Malaysia". New Straits Times. 10 May 2023. Archived from the original on 13 May 2023. Retrieved 13 May 2023. "Top 5 Things You May Not Know About Coldplay". ABC News. 1 March 2012. Archived from the original on 6 January 2022. Retrieved 19 August 2021. "Countdown for Clocks" (PDF). Coldplay E-Zine. March 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2005. Retrieved 13 June 2022. "No Trouble for Adverts". NME. 24 August 2002. Archived from the original on 6 January 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "Coldplay iTunes Ad Debuts on US TV". Music Week. 21 May 2008. Archived from the original on 26 May 2012. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "Apple Special Event September 2010". Apple Inc. 1 September 2010. Archived from the original on 3 September 2010. Retrieved 28 December 2021. "Watch The October 19th, 2011 Apple Event Celebrating Steve Jobs". TidBits. 24 October 2011. Archived from the original on 1 December 2021. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "There's a Sky Full of (Paper) Stars in Coldplay's Target Commercial". Target. 5 May 2014. Archived from the original on 6 January 2022. Retrieved 11 June 2021. "Bands & Brands: The New Music Business". Campaign. 10 March 2016. Archived from the original on 6 January 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "Crazy Rich Asians: Read the Letter That Convinced Coldplay to Allow Yellow in the Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. 19 August 2018. Archived from the original on 6 January 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "The First-ever BMW iX and the First-ever BMW i4: Joint Global Campaign Plays to the Rhythm of Coldplay's New Hit". Press BMW Group. 11 June 2021. Archived from the original on 6 January 2022. Retrieved 13 June 2021. "Coldplay's New Tour Powered by BMW Batteries". Luxury Boutique. 18 December 2021. Archived from the original on 6 January 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "Coldplay Concert Film Featuring BTS' Jin Sets April Release Dates". Variety. 1 March 2023. Archived from the original on 1 March 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2023. "Coldplay Investe em Biocombustível, Tecnologia e Materiais Reutilizáveis por Turnê Mais Sustentável" [Coldplay Invest in Biofuel, Technology and Reusable Materials for More Sustainable Touring]. Exame (in Portuguese). 15 March 2023. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. Wild, Debs; Croft, Malcolm (2018). Life in Technicolor: A Celebration of Coldplay. ECW Press. ISBN 9781787391093. Roach, Martin (2011). Viva Coldplay: A Biography. Music Sales. ISBN 9780857125941. Spivack, Gary (2004). Coldplay: Look at the Stars. Pocket Books. ISBN 9780743491969. Roach, Martin (2003). Coldplay: Nobody Said It Was Easy. Omnibus Press. ISBN 9780711998100. Coldplay at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Coldplay Official Website Coldplay at AllMusic Coldplay discography at Discogs Coldplay at IMDb  Coldplay discography at MusicBrainz Portals:  Biography  Music  United Kingdom