FC Gintra is a Lithuanian women's football club from Šiauliai. It is the team of the local Šiauliai University. The club plays in the highest Lithuanian league, the A Lyga and has won 13 championships so far. The fourth one in 2005 and every championship since then. After its championships, the club played in the UEFA Women's Cup and from 2009 onwards in the UEFA Women's Champions League. The club participated only in the qualifying rounds though, playing 3 games each season, and the best result achieved was 1 win, 1 tie and 1 loss thus failing to move on to the next round. The club took part in the 2010–11 UEFA Women's Champions League qualifying round and managed a good 2nd place after beating ZFK Borec (Macedonia), drawing to Klaksvikar Itrottarfelag (Faroe Islands) and only losing to England's Everton. All games were hosted by Gintra in Lithuania. In the 2014/15 edition they finished as best runners-up and advanced to the round of 32 for the first time in ten seasons. A Lyga (22): 1999, 2000, 2003, 2005 to 2023 Lithuanian Women's Cup (12) : 2005 to 2016 Lithuanian Women's Supercup (1) : 2006 Baltic League (1): 2017 As of 19 March 2024 Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality. Lithuania: Raimonda Bložytė-Lukoševičienė, Viktorija Budrytė, Gintare Burokaitė, Oksana Imanalijeva, Rasa Imanalijeva, Rasa Jackunaitė, Gitana Kerpiėnė, Indrė Kirjanovaitė, Raimonda Kudytė, Rimantė Kunickaitė, Anika Kyžaitė, Justina Lavrenovaitė-Perez, Jurgita Mačikunytė, Rita Mažukėlytė, Brigita Partikaitė, Alina Petrauskaitė, Klaudija Savickaitė, Marija Stasiulytė, Olga Švaikevič, Kamilė Vaičiulaitytė, Liucija Vaitukaitytė, Tatjana Veržbickaja, Dovilė Gailevičiūtė, Simona Petravičienė, Algimantė Mikutaitė, Greta Lukjančukė, Vestina Neverdauskaitė, Meda Šeškutė, Paulina Sarkanaitė, Gabija Toropovaitė, Rimantė Jonušaitė, Meda Šeškutė, Lolita Žižytė, Samanta Karasiovaitė, Paulina Sarkanaitė Azerbaijan: Ina Boyko, Narmina Rzayeva Belarus: Lyubov Gudchenko, Anna Pilipenko Bulgaria: Kristina Petrunova Chile: María José Rojas Equatorial Guinea: Laetitia Chapeh, Gloria Chinasa Jamaica: Toriana Patterson Latvia: Guna Āboliņa, Sintija Greijere, Olga Ivanova, Ņina Maksimova, Karlīna Miksone, Anastasija Ročāne Mexico: Christina Murillo Moldova: Ina Budestean, Carolina Țabur, Elena Turcan Namibia: Zenatha Coleman Nigeria: Florence Ajayi Serbia: Jelena Čubrilo, Nikoleta Nikolić South Africa: Jermaine Seoposenwe, Leandra Smeda, Nothando Vilakazi Thailand: Miranda Nild Ukraine: Anastasia Filenko, Tetyana Kozyrenko Ina Boyko and Ina Budestean are the same person "Gintra win tenth consecutive title" (in Lithuanian). delfi.lt. 26 September 2014. Retrieved 27 September 2014. "„Gintra-Universitetas" užsitikrino čempionių titulą". Lithuanian Football Federation. 25 October 2017. Club at UEFA.com v t e