BTS (Korean: 방탄소년단; RR: Bangtan Sonyeondan; lit. Bulletproof Boy Scouts), also known as the Bangtan Boys, is a South Korean boy band formed in 2010. The band consists of Jin, Suga, J-Hope, RM, Jimin, V, and Jungkook, who co-write or co-produce much of their material. Originally a hip hop group, they expanded their musical style to incorporate a wide range of genres, while their lyrics have focused on subjects including mental health, the troubles of school-age youth and coming of age, loss, the journey towards self-love, individualism, and the consequences of fame and recognition. Their discography and adjacent work has also referenced literature, philosophy and psychology, and includes an alternate universe storyline. BTS debuted in 2013 under Big Hit Entertainment with the single album 2 Cool 4 Skool. BTS released their first Korean and Japanese-language studio albums, Dark & Wild and Wake Up respectively, in 2014. The group's second Korean studio album, Wings (2016), was their first to sell one million copies in South Korea. By 2017, BTS had crossed into the global music market and led the Korean Wave into the United States, becoming the first Korean ensemble to receive a Gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for their single "Mic Drop", as well as the first act from South Korea to top the Billboard 200 with their studio album Love Yourself: Tear (2018). In 2020, BTS became one of the few groups since the Beatles (in 1966–1968) to chart four US number-one albums in less than two years, with Love Yourself: Answer (2018) becoming the first Korean album certified Platinum by the RIAA; in the same year, they also became the first all-South Korean act to reach number one on both the Billboard Hot 100 and Billboard Global 200 with their Grammy-nominated single "Dynamite". Follow-up releases "Savage Love", "Life Goes On", "Butter", and "Permission to Dance" made them the fastest act to earn four US number-one singles since Justin Timberlake in 2006. As of 2023[update], BTS is the best-selling musical act in South Korean history according to the Circle Chart, having sold in excess of 40 million albums. Their studio album Map of the Soul: 7 (2020) is the fourth best-selling album of all time in South Korea, as well as the first in the country to surpass both four and five million registered sales. They are the first non-English-speaking and Asian act to sell out concerts at Wembley Stadium and the Rose Bowl (Love Yourself World Tour, 2019), and were named the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry's (IFPI) Global Recording Artist of the Year for both 2020 and 2021. The group's accolades include multiple American Music Awards, Billboard Music Awards, Golden Disc Awards, and nominations for five Grammy Awards. Outside of music, they have addressed three sessions of the United Nations General Assembly and partnered with UNICEF in 2017 to establish the Love Myself anti-violence campaign. Featured on Time's international cover as "Next Generation Leaders" and dubbed the "Princes of Pop", BTS has also appeared on Time's lists of the 25 most influential people on the internet (2017–2019) and the 100 most influential people in the world (2019), and in 2018 became the youngest recipients of the South Korean Order of Cultural Merit for their contributions in spreading the Korean culture and language. On June 14, 2022, the group announced a scheduled pause in group activities to enable the members to complete their 18 months of mandatory South Korean military service, with a reunion planned for 2025. Jin, the oldest member, enlisted on December 13, 2022; the others followed in 2023. BTS stands for the Korean phrase Bangtan Sonyeondan (Korean: 방탄소년단; Hanja: 防彈少年團), which translates literally to 'Bulletproof Boy Scouts'. According to member J-Hope, the name signifies the group's desire "to block out stereotypes, criticisms, and expectations that aim on adolescents like bullets". In Japan, they are known as Bōdan Shōnendan (防弾少年団). In July 2017, BTS announced that their name would also stand for "Beyond the Scene" as part of their new brand identity. This extended the meaning of their name to encompass the idea of growth "from a boy to an adult who opens the doors that are facing forward". BTS was formed in 2010, after Big Hit Entertainment CEO Bang Si-hyuk wanted to form a hip hop group around RM (Kim Nam-joon), an underground rapper well known on the music scene in Seoul. At the time, physical album sales were on the decline and digital revenues were not yet high enough to compensate. Seeing a need for diversified income streams, Bang decided to form an idol group instead, because of the potential for live concert performances and passionate support from fans of such groups. Many trainees refused to become part of an idol group, but J-Hope, RM, and Suga remained. Bang chose to vary from the usual, highly regimented idol groups and create one where the members would be individuals rather than an ensemble and free to express themselves. Auditions were held in 2010 with plans to launch the following year. The band members lived together, practicing up to 15 hours a day, and first performed before a small crowd of industry insiders in 2013. We started to tell the stories that people wanted to hear and were ready to hear, stories that other people could not or would not tell. We said what other people were feeling—like pain, anxieties and worries. That was our goal, to create this empathy that people can relate to.  —Suga BTS's representation by Big Hit, rather than one of the three agencies that dominated K-pop at the time, allowed the individual members leeway to express their individuality and have input into the music. On June 12, 2013, BTS released their debut single album 2 Cool 4 Skool, along with the lead single "No More Dream", neither of which sold particularly well at the time. On June 13, 2013, BTS made their stage debut on M Countdown with the single, "No More Dream". Nevertheless, according to Kathy Sprinkel in her book on BTS, that single was "spotlighting young people's anxiety in the face of lofty parental expectations, sent shock waves through the K-pop ranks. Here was a musical act that wasn't pulling any punches. More specifically, they had a point of view, and they weren't afraid to take on topics that are considered taboo in South Korean society and elsewhere." The album reached the top five on South Korea's Gaon Music Chart. In 2 Cool 4 Skool, BTS employed an old-school hip-hop sound from the 1990s. The album's release was followed by appearances on Korean music shows, which caught the attention of reviewers and viewers. In September 2013, BTS released the second entry in their "school trilogy": the EP, O!RUL8,2?. The album was released alongside the single "N.O." Similarly to 2 Cool 4 Skool, the new release had a theme of students feeling under pressure and needing to sacrifice their dreams and aspirations. According to scholar Kyung Hyun Kim, many of BTS's earlier works such as "N.O." and "No More Dreams" were "expressions of rebellion against the establishment that tapped into Korean teenagers' frustrations with the country's educational system" and, he stated, helped them build a fan base among young people in North America and Europe. That same month, BTS starred in their own variety show, SBS MTV's Rookie King Channel Bangtan, in which members parodied variety shows such as VJ Special Forces and MasterChef Korea. At the end of the year, BTS was recognized with several New Artist of the Year awards in South Korea. The last entry in BTS "school trilogy", the Skool Luv Affair EP, was released in February 2014. The release topped the Gaon Album Chart, and appeared on Billboard's World Albums Chart for the first time, peaking at number three. The EP was supported by two singles: "Boy in Luv" and "Just One Day". Following Skool Luv Affair's release, BTS played at their first fan meeting in Seoul, selecting the name A.R.M.Y. for the fan club. In July 2014, BTS hosted a concert in West Hollywood, their first show in the United States, and in August, they appeared at KCON in Los Angeles. In August 2014, BTS released the album Dark & Wild, which reached number two in South Korea. It was supported by two singles: "Danger" and "War of Hormone". The group embarked on their first concert tour, 2014 BTS Live Trilogy Episode II: The Red Bullet, which lasted from October to December 2014. The band launched their first Japanese studio album, Wake Up, in December 2014; the release peaked at number three on the Oricon Albums Chart. After the album's release, BTS held their 1st Japan Tour 2015 Wake Up: Open Your Eyes in February 2015. The Red Bullet Tour that had begun on October 17, 2014, in South Korea was resumed on June 6, 2015, in Malaysia and toured Australia, North America and Latin America before ending in Hong Kong that August. In all, the entire tour attracted 80,000 spectators at 18 cities in 13 countries. BTS experimented with other styles of music besides hip-hop in The Most Beautiful Moment in Life, Pt. 1, released in 2015. BTS wanted to express the beauty and anxiousness of youth and settled on the title of "花樣年華" (Korean: 화양연화; RR: Hwayangyeonhwa), loosely interpreted to define "youth" metaphorically as "the most beautiful moment in life". The album served as an introduction to their youth trilogy, a triptych of albums dedicated to the struggles of young people. The single "I Need U" was a top-five hit in South Korea and garnered the group a win on SBS MTV's The Show. The second single "Dope (Korean: 쩔어; RR: Jjeoreo)" reached number three on Billboard's World Digital Song Sales chart and its music video was viewed over 100 million times on YouTube. The group began the world tour extension of their Red Bullet Tour in June, titled 2015 Live Trilogy Episode II: The Red Bullet, visiting cities throughout Asia, Oceania, North America, and Latin America. "For You", in Japanese, was released together with Japanese versions of "War of Hormone" and "Let Me Know" on June 17, 2015, and immediately topped Oricon's daily chart. In November, BTS commenced their third concert tour, 2015 BTS LIVE "The Most Beautiful Moment in Life: On Stage", which began with three sold-out shows in Seoul, and was extended to Japan. Thematically, the EP focused more on the serious and speculative aspects of youth, touching on the pursuit of success, loneliness, affection for their origins, and the suffering of the younger generation due to unfavorable conditions in current society. The album topped the weekly Gaon Album and Billboard World Albums charts. It also marked their first appearance on the Billboard 200 chart, making it for one week at number 171, and eight of the tracks appeared on Billboard's World Digital Song Sales chart. Their compilation album and the finale to their "youth trilogy", The Most Beautiful Moment in Life: Young Forever was released on May 2, 2016. With 300,000 presold copies, it included three new singles: "Epilogue: Young Forever", "Fire", and "Save Me", which debuted in the top three spots on the Billboard World Digital Charts. The album topped the Gaon Album Chart in South Korea for two consecutive weeks and reached number 107 on the Billboard 200. The Most Beautiful Moment in Life: Young Forever won Album of the Year at the 2016 Melon Music Awards. BTS embarked on their Asia tour extension, 2016 BTS LIVE "The Most Beautiful Moment in Life On Stage: Epilogue" from May to August 2016. Tickets for the 14 shows in 10 Asian cities sold out, some in as little as five seconds. In September 2016, BTS released their second Japanese studio album Youth. The album sold 44,547 on the first day of its release, and charted 1st in the Oricon Daily Album Chart. The album was eventually certified Gold with sales of roughly over 100,000 in Japan. It was followed one month later in October, by their next studio album Wings, which combined the themes of youth presented in their previous "youth trilogy" with temptation and adversity. The album and its tracks, including the single "Blood Sweat & Tears" immediately rose to the top on eight music charts, including the Gaon Music Chart, and led the iTunes album charts in 23 countries. Wings opened at number 26 on the Billboard 200, with 16,000 album-equivalent units in the US for the week of its release, the best week ever there for a K-pop album. It became the best-selling album in Gaon Album Chart history. In February 2017, BTS released the repackaged edition of Wings entitled You Never Walk Alone. The 700,000 pre-orders of it (an increase from the 500,000 pre-orders of Wings) helped break the record for most albums sold in a month in South Korea, as it reached 1.49 million copies by the end of its first month. The lead single was "Spring Day" and it won Best Song of the Year at the 2017 Melon Music Awards. BTS's second world tour, 2017 BTS Live Trilogy Episode III: The Wings Tour, began in February. On the tour, BTS played arenas in the US, such as New Jersey's Prudential Center and California's Honda Center. Tickets for the North American leg sold out within hours and two shows were added. After completing the North American leg, BTS attended the 24th Billboard Music Awards in May and won Top Social Artist, the first K-pop group to win a Billboard award. BTS fans cast over 300 million votes for the band and broke a six-year winning streak held by Justin Bieber, a performer with 100 million Twitter followers. This caused the international media to focus on the ability of BTS's fandom to propel the group to such a victory. BTS released a remake of Seo Taiji's "Come Back Home" (1995) in July 2017, giving it new lyrics but maintaining the theme of urging societal change. Later that year, BTS embarked on their "Love Yourself" album series, with theme of the enlightenment of self-love through the "起承轉結" (Korean: 기승전결; RR: Giseungjeongyeol) narrative sequence of "beginning, development, turn, and conclusion." BTS released its first part, their fifth EP, Love Yourself: Her, on September 18. RM considered "DNA", the lead single from that album, as "taking BTS to new ground. We tried to apply new grammar and perspectives." He said of the album, "I believe it's going to be the starting point of a second chapter of our career; the beginning of our Chapter Two." Sonically, the EP served as "a dual exploration of the group's electro-pop and hip-hop leanings". Love Yourself: Her debuted at number seven on the Billboard 200. The album had 1,664,041 sales in May 2017 to lead the Gaon Chart, and was the first in 16 years to exceed 1.2 million copies sold since g.o.d's fourth album Chapter 4 (2001). "DNA" was released simultaneously with the EP, and its music video accumulated 21 million views in its first 24 hours. It became BTS's first entry on the Billboard Hot 100, charting at number 85, making them the first K-pop boy band to reach that chart. The single rose to number 67 the following week and became the highest-charting song on the Hot 100 for any K-pop group. A remix of "Mic Drop" from the album, featuring Desiigner, was released as a single and peaked at number 28, the first time a K-pop group had cracked the top forty. Both singles attained Gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in early 2018. "Mic Drop" achieved Platinum status in the US later that year. In November 2017, BTS became the first K-pop group to perform at the American Music Awards. BTS won Artist of the Year at the 19th Mnet Asian Music Awards in December, winning for the second consecutive year. They released "DNA" and "Mic Drop" together with a new song "Crystal Snow" as a single album in Japan on December 6, 2017, though the songs were made digitally available elsewhere. It topped the Oricon Chart for the week of its release. It was the only album by a foreign artist to be certified Double Platinum in Japan in 2017. Later that month, they made their Japanese television prime time music show debut on Music Station Super Live, and ended the year by performing on Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve. In 2017, BTS partnered with UNICEF on the "Love Myself" campaign, intended to help end violence, abuse, and bullying, and to promote self-esteem and well-being among young people. Both Big Hit and the group pledged money to promote the campaign, and BTS sold special "Love Myself" merchandise and set up dedicated booths at concert venues. The campaign was renewed in 2021, with UNICEF deeming it to have been successful. BTS won major awards at the Golden Disc and Seoul Music Awards in January 2018. In March, the group premiered an eight-episode documentary titled Burn the Stage that offered a behind-the-scenes look at their 2017 Wings Tour, exclusively on YouTube Premium. Their third Japanese studio album, Face Yourself, was released on April 4, 2018, and quickly reached the top 5 of the U.S. iTunes Albums chart. A nine-minute short film, titled Euphoria: Theme of "Love Yourself: Wonder" and featuring the song "Euphoria", followed the next day as a prelude to the group's third Korean-language studio album, Love Yourself: Tear. BTS promoted Tear's May 18, 2018, release with an appearance at the 25th Billboard Music Awards two days later, where they made their initial BBMA performance with their single, "Fake Love". The group also won Top Social Artist for a second consecutive time. The album coincided with the "轉" or "turn" of the series, touching on the tortuous enlightenment of loving without being loved, the pains and sorrows of separation, and providing encouragement to those without dreams. Love Yourself: Tear debuted at number one its first week on the Billboard 200, becoming BTS's first number-one album in the US and the first K-pop album to top the US albums chart. It also became BTS's first top-10 release in Britain, reaching number eight on the UK Albums Chart. "Fake Love" became BTS's top-10 single on the Hot 100, the first time a song sung mostly in a language other than English had debuted in the top 10. BTS released their compilation album Love Yourself: Answer in August, 2018. The album was supported by the single "Idol" and its alternative digital release featuring Nicki Minaj. Love Yourself: Answer sold over 1.9 million copies on the Gaon Album Chart in August 2018. The album became BTS's second number-one on the Billboard 200 and led to their highest US sales week in the country to that point with 185,000 album equivalent units. In November 2018, Love Yourself: Answer became the first Korean language album to be certified Gold by the RIAA. "Idol" and Love Yourself: Answer both received Platinum certifications in the US, with sales of more than 1 million. In conjunction with Love Yourself: Answer's release in August 2018, BTS commenced their world tour, BTS World Tour: Love Yourself, with two concerts in the Seoul Olympic Stadium, which sold out in a matter of seconds, as did others of the 22 shows in 12 countries. In October, BTS released their collaboration with Steve Aoki "Waste It on Me", their first all-English language feature. For the final stop of the North American leg, the group performed at Citi Field in New York City, marking the first time a Korean act performed at a US stadium. According to StubHub, BTS was the second best-selling concert act outside the US, behind only Ed Sheeran. That October, BTS renewed their contract with Big Hit Entertainment through 2026. In early November 2018, a popular Japanese music show cancelled BTS's performance, citing a T-shirt a member wore the year before, bearing a photograph of a mushroom cloud following the bombing of Nagasaki. In the same month, the Jewish human rights organization Simon Wiesenthal Center (SWC) stated that BTS owed an apology for that shirt, and for clothing and flags with Nazi symbolism. Big Hit Entertainment issued an apology, explaining that the images were not intended to be hurtful to the victims of Nazism or atomic bombings and that the group and management would take steps to prevent future mistakes. They also stated the flags were meant to be a commentary on the Korean school system. The apology was accepted by SWC and the Korean Atomic Bomb Victim Association. John Lie, in his scholarly article on BTS, opined that the Nazi incident showed that the group is not tightly controlled, as are other K-pop ensembles, whose every move seems scripted, and that the members have opinions and are not afraid to express them. At the 20th Mnet Asian Music Awards, BTS won Artist of the Year and ranked number eight on Billboard's year-end Top Artist Chart and were also the number two act of the year in the Duo/Group ranking, only behind Imagine Dragons. They were also listed as one of the 50 most influential people by Bloomberg for their "willingness to address social issues, mental health, and politics, despite being in a genre often painted as bubble gum pop". In February 2019, BTS, for the first time, were presenters at the Grammy Awards. In April, Time named them one of the Time 100, the most influential people of 2019. Their EP, Map of the Soul: Persona, was released on April 12 with the single "Boy with Luv" (Korean: 작은 것들을 위한 시; RR: Jageun geotdeureul wihan si), featuring American singer Halsey. The EP's release was followed by a performance on Saturday Night Live, the first K-pop act to appear there. Map of the Soul: Persona became the first Korean-language album to reach the number one position in both the UK and Australia, and the group's third album to top the Billboard 200 in less than a year. Map of the Soul: Persona became the best-selling album ever in South Korea in terms of physical copies sold, with more than 3.2 million sales in less than a month. "Boy with Luv" debuted at number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 in April 2019, the highest placement ever for a K-pop song. Following their two wins at the 26th Billboard Music Awards in May, including for Top Duo/Group, BTS embarked on their world tour stadium extension, Love Yourself: Speak Yourself. Due to the demand, BTS added more shows after tickets for the first dates sold out within two hours. In the lead up to the release of their mobile game BTS World, in June 2019 BTS released "Dream Glow" featuring Charli XCX, "A Brand New Day" with Zara Larsson, and "All Night" with Juice Wrld. The group released the song "Heartbeat" with a music video from the game's official soundtrack, titled BTS World: Original Soundtrack. The soundtrack was certified Double Platinum by Gaon. On July 3, 2019, pre-orders for the single "Lights" crossed one million copies, marking the first time a foreign artist had accomplished this in Japan since Celine Dion in 1995. "Lights" debuted at number 81 on the Billboard Japan Hot 100 for the chart issue date of July 8, 2019, and reached number one the following week. On August 8, 2019, "Lights" received Million certification from the RIAJ, denoting shipments of one million copies. Love Yourself: Her and Love Yourself: Tear both crossed 2 million copies in August. All three albums of the Love Yourself series have sold more than 2 million copies each in South Korea. Love Yourself: Tear gained silver certification by the BPI for sales in the UK, becoming their third album to do so following Love Yourself: Answer and Map of the Soul: Persona. For the final stop of their record-breaking Love Yourself: Speak Yourself World Tour, the group played Seoul's Olympic Stadium. BTS was the third top-grossing touring musical act of 2019. That same month, they released a remix version of the song "Make It Right" featuring Lauv. In November, BTS won three times at the 2019 American Music Awards, for Best Tour, Favorite Duo or Group – Pop/Rock, and Favorite Social Artist (the second consecutive year). In December, they attended both the 2019 Melon Music Awards and the 2019 Mnet Asian Music Awards. In each case, they became the first group to sweep the four major awards. At the 34th Golden Disc Awards, BTS became the first artists in history to win grand prizes in both the physical and digital categories in a single year. Map of the Soul: Persona was named the second best-selling physical album of 2019 in the US by Nielsen Music behind Taylor Swift's Lover and was ranked sixth overall on the chart of Top 10 Albums (Total Sales) in the US. BTS wrapped 2019 as the fourth-highest-ranked group on Billboard's Top Billboard 200 Artists–Duo/Group ranking, behind Queen, Imagine Dragons and the Beatles. Map of the Soul: Persona was named as the third best-selling album of 2019 by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI), making BTS the first Korean artist to be listed on the Global Top 10 Album Chart in consecutive years. The IFPI named BTS as one of the best-selling artists of 2019 for a second consecutive year, making them the first non-English speaking act to achieve this. In January 2020, BTS released "Black Swan" along with a choreography art film performed by MN Dance Company of Slovenia as the first single from their album Map of the Soul: 7. Album distributor Dreamus reported that stock pre-orders of the album reached a record-breaking 4.02 million. Later that month, BTS performed at the 62nd Annual Grammy Awards, making BTS the first Korean act to perform at the Grammys. Map of the Soul: 7 was released on February 21 to favorable reviews. The album was supported by the single "On" and an alternative digital release of it featuring Australian singer Sia. According to Gaon Chart, Map of the Soul: 7 sold over 4.1 million copies in nine days after its release, surpassing Map of the Soul: Persona to become the best-selling album in South Korean history and the first album to be certified quadruple million. The album debuted atop the US Billboard 200, making BTS the fastest group to earn four number one albums since the Beatles in 1966–1968. "On" debuted at number four on the Billboard Hot 100, giving BTS its first top-five hit, and the most Hot 100 top-10 entries of any Korean act, with three. BTS planned to support the Map of the Soul album series with a concert series, Map of the Soul Tour, beginning in April, but this was indefinitely postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In April 2020, BTS became the first K-pop artist to sell more than 20 million albums cumulatively, making them the best-selling artist in South Korean history. That month, amid the pandemic restrictions, BTS held a two-day online streaming concert event titled Bang Bang Con, where the group shared footage of past concerts on their YouTube channel. On June 7, BTS headlined YouTube's Dear Class of 2020 online graduation event, performing "Boy with Luv", "Spring Day", and "Mikrokosmos". Their commencement speeches highlighted their own graduations and offered "messages of hope and inspiration for the class of 2020 in both Korean and English". On June 14, BTS held an online live concert, Bang Bang Con: The Live, as part of the seventh anniversary of their debut. It garnered peak viewership of 756,000 live viewers in 107 countries and territories, setting the record for the largest audience for a paid virtual concert. On June 19, BTS released the Japanese single, "Stay Gold", from their fourth Japanese album, Map of the Soul: 7 – The Journey, which was released worldwide on July 14. It surpassed 564,000 copies in its first week, breaking the record for highest first week album sales by male foreign artists in Japan. BTS released their first English-language single, "Dynamite", on August 21. "Dynamite" debuted at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart, earning BTS their first chart topper and making them the first all-South Korean act to earn a number one single in the US. The single also topped Billboard's new Global 200 for the week ending September 24, as well as Global Excluding US charts, becoming the first single to top both simultaneously. "Dynamite" peaked at number five on the US Mainstream Top 40 and on the. Billboard Pop Singles chart, becoming their first Top 10 on each and the former the highest-charting entry by a Korean act. On August 31, BTS made their MTV Video Music Awards (VMAs) debut with the first live performance of "Dynamite" and won four awards: Best Group, Best Choreography, Best Pop Video, and Best K-pop (the last three for their music video for "On"). On October 14, they performed the single at the 2020 Billboard Music Awards and won the Top Social Artist award for a fourth consecutive year. On October 2, 2020, BTS released a remix of Jawsh 685 and Jason Derulo's single "Savage Love (Laxed – Siren Beat)". It topped the Hot 100. On October 10 and 11, BTS hosted a two-day virtual pay-per-view concert at KSPO Dome in Seoul, called Map of the Soul ON:E, which drew 993,000 viewers from 191 countries and territories. On November 20, BTS released their fifth Korean studio album Be, led by the single "Life Goes On". "Life Goes On" debuted at number one on the Hot 100, BTS's third consecutive US number-one single in three months and the first song performed primarily in Korean to top the chart. On November 24, 2020, BTS became the first Korean pop artists recognized by the Recording Academy when "Dynamite" received a nomination for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards. The group won the Special International Music Award at the 62nd Japan Record Awards. Kim, in his book on the influence of Korean popular culture, suggested that 2020, the worst year in many people's lives, was a noteworthy one for Korean culture, with Parasite winning the Academy Award for Best Picture and BTS posting three number-one hits on the Billboard Global 200. On March 4, 2021, the IFPI named BTS its Global Recording Artist of the Year for 2020, the first Asian and first non-English speaking act to top the ranking. BTS occupied three spots in the Global Album Sales Chart of 2020, with Map of the Soul: 7 at number one, Be (Deluxe Edition) at number two, and Map of the Soul: 7–The Journey at number eight. On the newly launched Global Album All Format Chart, Map of the Soul: 7 claimed first place and Be (Deluxe Edition) claimed fourth. On March 14, 2021, BTS performed "Dynamite" at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards, becoming the first Korean nominee to perform, though they did not win the award. On April 1, BTS released "Film Out", the first single from their then-upcoming Japanese compilation album, BTS, the Best. BTS held a two-day online streaming event on their YouTube channel beginning April 17, titled Bang Bang Con 21, and aired three of their previous in-person concerts. On May 21, BTS released their second English-language single, "Butter". It debuted at number one on the Hot 100—their fourth number one in nine months—making them the quickest act to achieve four chart-toppers since Justin Timberlake in 2006, and the fastest group since the Jackson 5 in 1970. Their next English-language single, "Permission to Dance", was released on July 9. It became BTS's eighth number-one on the Digital Songs chart, extending their record as the group with the most number-one entries on the ranking. On September 24, 2021, the band released the single "My Universe" with Coldplay. The single debuted at number one on the Hot 100, making it the first collaboration between two groups to debut at number one. The band held an online concert, titled Permission to Dance on Stage, on October 24, 2021, in Seoul. On November 23, "Butter" earned a Grammy nomination for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards. Between November 27 and December 2, BTS held their first live performances before an in-person audience since before the pandemic. The band played four sold-out shows at SoFi Stadium in Los Angeles as a continuation of their Permission to Dance on Stage concert series. On January 15, 2022, a fictional webtoon based on BTS, titled 7Fates: Chakho, was released. The comic surpassed 15 million views globally in its first two days of availability and became the highest-viewed title ever launched by Webtoon. The band held three limited-capacity concerts at Seoul Olympic Stadium on March 10, 12, and 13—the largest music gatherings approved by the South Korean government since the pandemic restrictions were imposed—with a total audience of 45,000 people. On April 3, BTS performed "Butter" at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards, though the song did not win the award for which it was nominated. On April 8, the band earned seven nominations at the 2022 Billboard Music Awards and won three, making them the most-nominated and the most-awarded group in the show's history. On June 10, 2022, BTS released their three-CD anthology album Proof. On June 14, during their ninth anniversary celebrations, the band announced a temporary suspension of group activities to focus on solo projects and other endeavors. Hybe Corporation, which owns Big Hit, clarified in subsequent statements that BTS was neither disbanding nor going on hiatus, but would be actively furthering their individual careers with the label's full support while still participating in group activities, including the filming of Run BTS. The incident caused Hybe Corporation's stock to decline rapidly, resulting in a decrease in market value of US$1.7 billion. On August 24, Billboard magazine reported that BTS would be performing in Busan on October 15 in a benefit concert in support of the city's efforts to have a World Exposition in 2030, participating under the banner Yet to Come. In spite of the announcement of the October 2022 benefit concert, Hybe Corporation's stock prices dropped to below its original IPO amid continuing market speculation about the implications of the upcoming mandatory military enlistment of the band's members. Under South Korean laws, all able-bodied males must complete between 18 and 21 months of military service, usually by age 28. Bloomberg News reported the concert as a success but also indicated that there were no further concert dates scheduled. It was estimated that if the band members completed their service, Hybe Corporation would lose nearly US$10 billion over ten years, with the loss to the South Korean economy at nearly US$39 billion. In October 2022, Big Hit confirmed that Jin, the band's oldest member, aged 29, had withdrawn his enlistment deferral request. The other members planned to enlist later, with the group planning to reunite in 2025 following discharge. At the end of October 2022, BTS earned five nominations for the 2022 MAMA Awards, with the band members receiving eight further nominations as solo artists. On November 15, BTS earned three nominations at the 65th Annual Grammy Awards, including a nomination for Best Music Video for "Yet to Come". "My Universe" was nominated for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance, making BTS the only act to be nominated three years in a row in this category since its introduction in 2011. The band was also nominated for Album of the Year as featured artists on Coldplay's Music of the Spheres. Jin enlisted as an active duty soldier on December 13. On February 26, 2023, Big Hit Music announced that J-Hope had requested cancellation of the postponement of his military service. Following their scheduled separation, the band's BTS 'Yet to Come' in Busan concert film was released on February 1, 2023. During a trip to Spain, RM told EFE that BTS "will come together again when we finish our military service, and we will look for new synergies between us to enter a second phase." Hybe chairman Bang Si-hyuk stated on March 15, 2023, that their comeback might not occur in 2025 since it was hard to target a specific date, and that they had not discussed their contract renewal yet. J-Hope enlisted as an active duty soldier on April 18. On May 12, BTS released a soundtrack "The Planet" for the South Korean animated series Bastions. To commemorate their tenth anniversary, the group released the song "Take Two" on June 9. On September 20, 2023, Hybe confirmed through a press release that BTS would renew their exclusive contracts. The members will sign these agreements sequentially, considering their military service, after a board resolution with Big Hit Music, solidifying their commitment to future projects starting from 2025 onwards. Hybe expressed their anticipation for supporting BTS' group endeavors and pledged unwavering support to enhance their worldwide influence, ensuring the group's continuity even after completing their military service. Additionally, Big Hit Music announced a donation of ₩1 billion (US$874,164.08) to the Korean Committee for UNICEF in appreciation of BTS and their fanbase, ARMY. The contribution is part of the "Love Myself" campaign, a joint effort launched with BTS in November 2017. On September 22, 2023, Suga enlisted as a social worker. RM and V enlisted on December 11, 2023, followed by Jimin and Jungkook on December 12. BTS have cited Seo Taiji and Boys, Nas, Eminem, Kanye West, Drake, Post Malone, Charlie Puth, and Danger as musical inspirations. They have also cited Queen as an influence, saying they "grew up watching videos of Live Aid". During their concert at Wembley Stadium in London, Jin paid tribute to Queen by leading the crowd in a version of Freddie Mercury's "ay-oh" chant. "Hip Hop Phile" which was released when BTS's hip-hop concept was at its height, pays homage to the artists who influenced them, including the South Korean group Epik High, Jay-Z, Biggie, CL Smooth, and others. Their 2016 album Wings was inspired by Hermann Hesse's coming of age novel, Demian. Their song "Blood Sweat & Tears" quotes Friedrich Nietzsche's Thus Spoke Zarathustra, and its music video features visual references to Herbert James Draper's The Lament for Icarus, Pieter Bruegel's Landscape with the Fall of Icarus, and Bruegel's The Fall of the Rebel Angels. Among the literary and other sources that have inspired their works are those by Haruki Murakami, Ursula K. Le Guin, Carl Jung, George Orwell and Nietzsche. The Love Yourself series was influenced by Erich Fromm's The Art of Loving, and their 2018 song "Magic Shop" from Love Yourself: Tear was inspired by James R. Doty's memoir Into the Magic Shop. Since their inception, BTS have emphasized hip hop as their musical base, largely due to the influence of RM and Suga's background as underground rappers; during early visits to the US, the group received mentoring from American rappers. Bang Si-hyuk previously acknowledged that K-pop as a whole draws from black music, and author Crystal S. Anderson stated, "BTS's rising popularity in the US represents the continuation of the ways that K-pop functions as part of a global R&B tradition." T.K. Park and Youngdae Kim of Vulture deemed the track "Outro: Her" from Love Yourself: Her as the best example of the group's understanding of old-school hip hop, with raps inspired by Chuck D and Tupac and jazzy chords from the 1990s to create a classic hip hop sound. "Mic Drop" (Steve Aoki remix) (2017) The remix version of "Mic Drop" features EDM synth and trap beat over hip hop melody. "Boy With Luv" (2019) Their single "Boy With Luv" is described as an upbeat electro-pop song with catchy hooks. Problems playing these files? See media help. The release of "Blood Sweat & Tears" in 2016 accelerated BTS's transition from a hip hop to a pop group. Park and Kim noted that the song draws from dancehall, reggaeton, and moombahton but opts for a "baroque mysticism" rather than the "partylike atmosphere of its influences". The group also began incorporating traditional Korean elements into their music. For example, their single "Idol" (2018) features an adlib from Pansori, a Korean form of operatic storytelling, and vocal imitations of the sounds of Korean janggu drums. While BTS maintains roots in hip hop, their sound has diversified. They first experimented with R&B, rock and jazz hip hop on Dark & Wild in 2014; EDM in their The Most Beautiful Moment in Life album series; moombahton and tropical house on Wings and You Never Walk Alone ; future bass and Latin pop in their Love Yourself album series; slow-dance ballads, emo rap, Afro pop, funk, trap, pop rock, and hip pop in their Map of the Soul album series; and disco in their single "Dynamite". The band members have explored different genres on solo tracks, such as neo soul on V's "Stigma" and flowing R&B on Jimin's "Lie". Since their formation, BTS have believed that telling their own stories is the best way for the younger generation to relate to their music. Writing many of their own lyrics, the group discusses universal life experiences such as sadness and loneliness in their work and turn them into something lighter and more manageable. RM stated that BTS tries to avoid a preaching or reprimanding tone in their songs "because that's not the way that we want to spread our message ... We're born with different lives, but you cannot choose some things. So we thought that love, the real meaning of it, starts with loving ourselves and accepting some ironies and some destinies that we have from the very start." When asked if it is difficult to write about things like mental health, Suga responded, We feel that people who have the platform to talk about those things really should talk more, because they say depression is something where you go to the hospital and you're diagnosed, but you can't really know until the doctor talks to you ... More and more, I think artists or celebrities who have a voice should talk about these problems and bring it up to the surface. Themes explored in BTS's discography range from exploring "the troubles and anxieties of school-age youth" to "themes like love, friendship, loss, death, and more." Early BTS songs, such as "No More Dream" and "N.O" from their school trilogy, were described by Tamar Herman as motivated by personal experiences with South Korea's rigid approach to education and called for change to the educational system and societal expectations. The members' experiences with South Korean youth culture also inspired the songs "Dope" and "Silver Spoon" (Korean: 뱁새; RR: Baepsae) from their youth trilogy. These songs reference generational disparity and millennials giving up romantic relationships, marriage, children, proper employment, homes, and social life in the face of economic difficulties and societal ills while facing condemnation from the media and older generations. The group's label dubbed The Most Beautiful Moment in Life: Young Forever, the conclusion to their youth trilogy, "a special album that marks the conclusion of the epic journey of the series, containing the last stories told by young people who, despite an uncertain and insecure reality (The Most Beautiful Moment in Life Pt. 1) continue to surge forward (The Most Beautiful Moment in Life Pt. 2)." Wings focused on mental health, criticisms of the K-pop "idol" scene, and delivering a female empowerment message. The Love Yourself series introduced new themes regarding youth culture in South Korea, including the excitement of love, pain of farewell, and enlightenment of self-love. According to Kathy Sprinkel, BTS's 2020 "quarantine album" Be "chronicles the group's coming to terms with a suddenly new reality and offers support for their listeners going through the same upheaval and uncertainty". BTS's lyrics have also addressed topics outside youth culture. The song "Am I Wrong" from Wings questioned societal apathy towards changing the status quo; the lyric "We're all dogs and pigs / we become dogs because we're angry" appeared to reference South Korean Ministry of Education official Na Hyang-wook, who advocated a caste system for the country and who reportedly described average people as "dogs and pigs". BTS released the song amid the 2016 South Korean political scandal that resulted in the impeachment of president Park Geun-hye. RM and Suga's personal struggles with mental health have inspired some of their music. "Not Today" from 2017's You Never Walk Alone is an anti-establishment anthem, urging "all the underdogs in the world" to keep fighting, and "Spring Day" honored the victims of the Sewol Ferry tragedy. Journalist Jeff Benjamin praised BTS in Fuse for "speak[ing] honestly about topics they deem important, even in a conservative society". Former South Korean president Moon Jae-in said: "Each of the seven members sings in a way that is true to himself and the life he wants to live. Their melody and lyrics transcend regional borders, language, culture, and institutions." On April 29, 2019, Time magazine named BTS one of the 100 most influential people of the year, labeling them the "Princes of Pop". Billboard executive Silvio Pietroluongo compared the group's influence to that of the Beatles. MRC Data executive Helena Kosinski noted that "although BTS weren't the first to open the doors to K-Pop worldwide, they were the first to become mainstream. They don't just appeal to young people but also to the 50s and 60s age demographic." The first non-English speaking artist to make the Global Artist Chart in 2018, BTS was the second best-selling artists worldwide across multiple media platforms, second only to Drake. In 2020, BTS became the first non-western and non-English speaking artist to be named IFPI's Global Recording Artist of the Year. In South Korea, BTS accounted for 41.9 percent of album sales in the first half of 2019, up from their market share of 25.3 percent the previous year. In 2022, Youna Kim described BTS as having spearheaded the Korean Wave, representing the global expansion of Korean culture as effectively as Psy did in the previous decade and with the strength of influence that the Academy Award-winning South Korean film Parasite had in 2020. South Korea's central bank, the Bank of Korea, found in 2021 that BTS, including a "ripple effect" that included increased tourism to South Korea; increased interest in Korean culture, movies, and study of the Korean language; and added approximately US$5 billion per year to South Korea's economy, a growth of about 0.5 percent. A 2018 study showed that, on average, 800,000 foreigners per year had visited South Korea over the past four years for BTS-related reasons. Writers identified BTS as leaders even among other highly influential K-pop groups such as Girls' Generation, Super Junior, Exo, Twice, and Blackpink and note that BTS's success shows the importance of a strong, active fan base in the age of social media, where fan campaigning can be as important as musical quality to a song's success. The group has also distinguished themselves at the forefront of the business side of the K-pop industry by pursuing less restrictive contracts with their management company to maximize their artistic originality and creativity. With this newer approach to career management, BTS created closer ties to the South Korean youth and encourage individuality and authenticity among their audience. In his 1990 essay Soft Power, political scientist Joseph Nye developed the concept of a second type of power different from traditional authoritarianism. Nye wrote, "This second aspect of power – which occurs when one country gets other countries to want what it wants – might be called co-optive or soft power in contrast with the hard or command power of ordering others to do what it wants." Researchers such as Maud Quessard have applied the concept of soft power to BTS and their influence on entertainment diplomacy and international relations. Youna Kim and Maud Quessard all read the currency of soft power as including culture, political values, and foreign policy, which applies to BTS's ability to be co-optive in their approach to spreading their message of harmony, acceptance, and addressing life's setbacks via their broad appeal on the international stage. BTS was invited to address the United Nations General Assembly in New York in September 2018. That same year they performed in Paris before an audience of 400, including President Moon Jae-in and other officials, at the 2018 Korea-France Friendship Concert, a summit celebrating the friendly relations between France and South Korea. That year, BTS became the youngest recipients of the Order of Cultural Merit. Despite cultural medals traditionally being given to recipients with over 15 years of achievement, Moon recognized the group, five years into their career, for their contributions in spreading Korean culture and language worldwide. In September 2019, BTS were mentioned by Moon while announcing strategies for the content industries, for having pioneered innovative business models through direct communication with fans. In 2020, BTS received the James A. Van Fleet Award in recognition of their outstanding contributions to the promotion of US-Korea relations, the youngest honorees to receive the award. In July 2021, they were appointed Special Presidential Envoy for Future Generations and Culture by President Moon. In their role as envoys, they help to "raise awareness on global agendas, such as sustainable development, to our future generations and to strengthen the nation's diplomatic power across the world" and appear at international events such as the 76th United Nations General Assembly. On May 31, 2022, BTS visited US President Joe Biden at the White House to discuss the recent rise in anti-Asian hate crimes and discrimination. According to Kyung Hyun Kim, BTS's rise was facilitated by a great increase in music video programming and consumption on YouTube and the coming of an idol empire, including merchandising of nonmusical products, games, and fantasy fiction, as well as an expansion of online music fandom. The group has a large, highly organized, online community of fans known as ARMY (Adorable Representative M.C. for Youth), which translates the group's lyrics and social media posts into other languages and matches charitable contributions of BTS's members. As of 2020, some 40 million ARMY members subscribe to the band's YouTube channel, with more than 30 million following the official BTS Twitter and Instagram accounts. The fan community helps generate BTS's number-one chart rankings via coordinated campaigns on streaming platforms, as well as pushes to feature BTS's music on radio stations and television. Some ARMY members may even surpass the group itself in influence among BTS fans. BTS interacted and engaged with their followers from their earliest days via social media, as well as via BTS Universe, an alternate storyline involving the members told through music videos, mobile games, books, short films, and more that gives fans room to theorize. Kim suggested that ARMY are drawn to BTS since the members are seen as underdogs, originating from the Korean countryside and a relatively minor Korean entertainment company, which allows young fans to identify with them. BTS's lyrics speak to social values, and fans respond by trying to improve the world. As a result, the fandom regularly embraces activism on charitable causes and socio-political issues such as refugee crises, racial discrimination, children's rights, climate change, and the COVID-19 pandemic. Feedback from ARMY to BTS affects the group's actions and lyrics; BTS has eliminated certain Korean words that sound like American racial slurs from their songs and ended collaboration with a Japanese producer when Korean ARMY members deemed his views extreme. Per South Korean author Jiyoung Lee, the relationship between BTS and ARMY is "a mutual exchange between artists and their fans" that is about more than merely "ensuring the band's primacy", but also "extending the band's message of positivity into the world". Lee opines that BTS and ARMY are "a symbol of change in zeitgeist, not just of generational change". The band members themselves agree and have long acknowledged their fans' role in their success. According to Sarah Keith, "BTS embody a moment of generational transformation. ARMY represents a 'coming of age' for the young, in which cultural production and influence are global and meaningful, and where the youth are politically and socially engaged." BTS partnered with Puma beginning in 2015, initially as Puma Korea's brand ambassadors before expanding to global ambassadors in 2018, and promoting the remix of Puma's "Turin" and "Sportstyle" line worldwide. In 2019, BTS signed with Fila to endorse its sportswear. BTS has also served as global brand ambassadors for LG Electronics' smartphones, and Hyundai Motors' 2019 flagship SUV the "Palisade" and hydrogen fuel cell electric SUV, the "Nexo". BTS became global ambassadors of the electric street racing series Formula E to promote how electric vehicles can help combat climate change. In 2020, BTS partnered with Samsung Electronics, releasing a limited BTS-themed version of the Galaxy S20+ and Galaxy Buds+. As the first male pop group ever to collaborate with Dior, BTS sported ensembles from Kim Jones' Pre-Fall 2019 collection at their concert at Stade de France. The band became global brand ambassadors for Louis Vuitton in April 2021. BTS are known for their philanthropic endeavors. Several members of the band have been inducted into prestigious donation clubs, such as the UNICEF Honors Club and the Green Noble Club, in acknowledgement of the size and frequency of their donations. They have also received awards for their donations, with one member receiving a Patron of the Arts Award for donations to the arts, and BTS as a whole receiving a UNICEF Inspire Award for their Love Myself campaign. They often donate privately, with their patronage later being made public by the organizations they support and the media. The band's efforts have motivated their fans to also engage in various charitable and humanitarian activities, and on occasion even match their donations. BTS have received numerous awards throughout their career. They have consecutively won the Billboard Music Award for Top Social Artist since 2017; are the only K-pop group to win Top Duo/Group, at the 2019 Billboard Music Awards; and are the most-awarded group in BBMA history as of 2022, with 12 wins overall. BTS are also the only K-pop group to win Favorite Duo or Group – Pop/Rock and Favorite Social Artist at the American Music Awards, and became the first Asian act in the show's history to win Artist of the Year in 2021. They are the first Korean pop act to receive a Grammy Award nomination, and the first Korean artist to be nominated for a Brit Award. With 30 awards overall, including a record four consecutive wins for Artist of the Year (Asia), BTS are the most-awarded foreign artist in the history of the Japan Gold Disc Awards. They have also received a total of 50 trophies at the MAMA Awards. Jin (진) – vocalist Suga (슈가) – rapper J-Hope (제이홉) – rapper RM (알앰) – leader, rapper Jimin (지민) – vocalist V (뷔) – vocalist Jungkook (정국) – vocalist Films Burn the Stage: The Movie (2018) Love Yourself in Seoul (2019) Bring the Soul: The Movie (2019) Break the Silence: The Movie (2020) BTS: Permission to Dance on Stage – LA (2022) BTS: Yet to Come in Cinemas (2023) Online shows Run BTS (2015–present) BTS In the Soop (2020–2021) Beyond the Story (2023) The Red Bullet Tour (2014–2015) Wake Up: Open Your Eyes Japan Tour (2015) The Most Beautiful Moment in Life On Stage Tour (2015–2016) The Wings Tour (2017) Love Yourself World Tour (2018–2019) Map of the Soul Tour (2020; cancelled) Permission to Dance on Stage (2021–2022) 15,000 attendees per day シングル「血、汗、涙」を5月10日にリリース！ [The single "Blood, Sweat, Tears" will be released on May 10th!] (in Japanese). Universal Music Japan. March 23, 2017. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017. Kim, Hyun-shik (June 9, 2023). 빌보드 석권·매출 1조…'K팝 선봉장' BTS가 일군 기적들[BTS 10주년]① [Sweeping Billboard, 1 trillion won in sales… The miracles accomplished by BTS, the leader of K-pop [BTS 10th anniversary]①] (in Korean). EDaily. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Jin, Yu Young (December 12, 2023). "K-Pop in Uniform: All 7 BTS Members Are Doing Military Service". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 13, 2023. Retrieved December 13, 2023. Kang, Hee-jung (June 22, 2015). 방탄소년단 "팀명 후보, 빅키즈 영네이션 있었다"(야만TV) [BTS "Team name candidates, Big Kids Young Nation" (Yaman TV)] (in Korean). Newsen. Archived from the original on May 5, 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2018. Trabasso, Giovanna (May 29, 2016). "BTS Is Tackling Problems That Are Taboo". Affinity Magazine. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved September 4, 2019. ＴＳが初のドラマ主題歌！フジ坂口健太郎が刑事役 [BTS' first drama theme song! Kentaro Sakaguchi plays a detective] (in Japanese). Nikkan Sports. March 8, 2018. Archived from the original on March 8, 2018. Retrieved June 4, 2021. Seong, Jeong-eun (July 5, 2017). 방탄소년단, 팬클럽 아미와 연결된 새 BI 공개 "문을 열고 나아가는 청춘" [BTS unveils new BI linked to fan club ARMY, "Youth who opens the door and moves forward"] (in Korean). Star Today. Archived from the original on August 12, 2017. Retrieved July 5, 2017 – via Naver. "BTS Brand eXperience Design Renewal". Behance. September 26, 2017. Archived from the original on October 11, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2018. "The Mastermind Behind BTS Explains the K-Pop Group's Success". Time. October 8, 2019. Archived from the original on January 8, 2020. Retrieved September 18, 2023. Romano, Aja (September 26, 2018). "BTS, the band that changed K-pop, explained". Vox. Archived from the original on May 7, 2020. Retrieved January 17, 2019. Sprinkel, pp. 40–43. Park, Young-woong (September 2, 2010). 방시혁, 오디션 통해 힙합그룹 '방탄소년단' 제작 [Bang Sihyuk makes hip-hop group "BTS" through auditions] (in Korean). Star News. Archived from the original on April 22, 2017. Retrieved April 22, 2017. Baek, Sol-mi (July 13, 2011). '나는 래퍼다' 방시혁, 13년만에 랩 도전 ["I'm a rapper" Bang Sihyuk, trying to rap after 13 years] (in Korean). My Daily. Archived from the original on May 18, 2017. Retrieved April 22, 2017. Sprinkel, pp. 46–47. Bruner, Raisa (October 10, 2018). "Backed by Passionate Fans, BTS Takes K-PopWorldwide". Time. Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2019. Lie, p. 125. Benjamin, Jeff (April 11, 2020). "BTS' Debut Album & Single Return to the Charts After Fan-Led April Fools' Day Joke". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 12, 2020. Retrieved February 17, 2022. Kim, Min-ji (June 4, 2023). 방탄소년단의 탄생…데뷔 쇼케이스 때 "롤모델은 빅뱅" [BTS 10주년 특집]① [Birth of BTS... During the debut showcase, “The role model is BIGBANG” [BTS 10th Anniversary Special]①] (in Korean). News1. Archived from the original on August 14, 2023. Retrieved August 14, 2023 – via Naver. Sprinkel, p. 148. 2013년 31주차 Album Chart [Album Chart – Week 31 of 2013]. Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). Archived from the original on June 8, 2015. Retrieved November 12, 2014. Kim 2019a, pp. 25–31, Review 01. Sprinkel, p. 135. Park, Jeong-sun (June 13, 2013). '엠카' 방탄소년단, 데뷔 무대부터 압도적 '강렬 군무' ['M-ca' BTS, "Strong group dance" from the debut stage] (in Korean). OSEN. Archived from the original on June 28, 2019. Retrieved February 12, 2019. Park, Hyun-min (June 15, 2013). 2AM 정진운, 방탄소년단과 '뮤뱅' 대기실 인증샷 '훈훈' [2AM Jinwoon Jeong and BTS 'Heartwarming' "Music Bank" waiting room proof shot] (in Korean). OSEN. Archived from the original on April 21, 2019. Retrieved February 12, 2019. Khadija (May 2, 2022). "BTS Albums in Order: A Complete List with All Song Names". Archived from the original on November 29, 2022. Retrieved July 20, 2022. "Circle Chart" 2013년 38주차 Digital Chart [Digital Chart – Week 38 of 2013]. Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). Archived from the original on January 16, 2019. Retrieved October 27, 2018. Kyung Hyun Kim 2021, p. 59. Lee, Jung-hyuk (August 28, 2013). 방탄소년단, '신인왕 채널방탄'으로 리얼 버라이어티 도전 [Real Variety Challenge with 'Rookie King Channel Bangtan']. The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved July 20, 2018. "2013 Melon Music Awards" (in Korean). Melon. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 26, 2019. Retrieved February 22, 2018. "The 28th Golden Disc Awards Winners". isplus.live.joins.com. Ilgan Sports. Archived from the original on February 24, 2018. Retrieved June 12, 2018. "23rd Seoul Music Awards Winners". Seoul Music Awards. January 23, 2014. Archived from the original on February 23, 2018. Herman, Tamar (May 14, 2018). "How BTS Took Over the World: A Timeline of The Group's Biggest Career Moments". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved July 20, 2018. "Skool Luv Affair". BTS. Big Hit Music. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved July 20, 2022. "Circle Chart" 2014년 18주차 Album Chart [Album Chart – Week 18 of 2014]. Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). Archived from the original on September 28, 2015. Retrieved September 19, 2015. Benjamin, Jeff (February 21, 2014). "SISTAR's Soyu & Junggigo Send 'Some' to No. 1 on K-Pop Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved June 17, 2022. Field, Sonya (July 16, 2021). "BTS songs, albums list: A complete guide to every single tune in order". Hypable. Retrieved July 20, 2022. Kwon, Ji-young (March 31, 2014). 방탄소년단, 3천 명 팬과 첫 번째 팬클럽 창단식 [BTS Holds First Fan Club Inauguration Ceremony with 3000 Fans] (in Korean). OSEN. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved June 17, 2022 – via Naver Star. Benjamin, Jeff (August 13, 2014). "BTS Announces Free, Surprise L.A. Concert". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 18, 2020. Retrieved April 20, 2019. Brown, August (May 22, 2014). "K-Pop stars Girls' Generation, Bangtan Boys headline KCON 2014". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 9, 2014. Retrieved October 14, 2014. "Circle Chart" 2014년 35주차 Album Chart [Album Chart – Week 35 of 2014]. Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). Archived from the original on June 12, 2016. Retrieved September 19, 2017. Lee, Jung-ah (August 31, 2015). 방탄소년단, 홍콩 콘서트로 11개월 간 월드투어 '성황리 마무리' 출처 [BTS, 11-month world tour 'successfully finished' with Hong Kong concert] (in Korean). SBS News. Archived from the original on May 18, 2017. Retrieved April 22, 2017. References for Wake Up on the Oricon Albums Chart: 防弾少年団のアルバム売上ランキング [BTS Ranking] (in Japanese). Oricon Style. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved June 17, 2022. 【オリコン】防弾少年団、アルバム初首位 自己最高売上もマーク [【Oricon】 BTS, First in Album Ranking and their Highest Sales Mark] (in Japanese). Oricon. September 13, 2016. Archived from the original on June 28, 2019. Retrieved May 13, 2018. Jeon, Su-mi (February 23, 2015). "BTS Wraps Up Concert Tour in Japan Gathering 25,000 Fans". Translated by Jung, Yeawon. Mwave. Archived from the original on February 24, 2015. Retrieved June 17, 2022. Hong, Grace Danbi (February 9, 2015). "BTS to Hold Second Exclusive Concert in Seoul". Mwave. Archived from the original on January 6, 2017. Retrieved May 2, 2017. Kim 2019a, p. 109, Review 06. Choi, Jin-sil (April 29, 2015). 방탄소년단이 말하는 '화양연화' (인터뷰①) [BTS's "The Most Beautiful Moment in Life" interview] (in Korean). Ten Asia. Archived from the original on July 19, 2019. Retrieved January 10, 2022. Sprinkel, pp. 157, 169. "Circle Chart" 2015년 19주차 Digital Chart [Digital Chart – Week 19 of 2015]. Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). Archived from the original on January 12, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2017. Mark, Jae-min (May 13, 2015). 방탄소년단, '쇼챔피언' 1위..벌써 5개 트로피 [BTS,'Show Champion', Number 1..5 Trophies] (in Korean). OSEN. Archived from the original on May 16, 2018. Retrieved January 7, 2018. "World Digital Songs: July 11, 2015". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 3, 2017. Retrieved April 22, 2017. "BTS' 'Dope' music video hits over 100 million views". Yonhap News Agency. October 25, 2015. Archived from the original on October 30, 2016. Retrieved May 2, 2017. デイリー CDシングルランキング 2015年06月18日付 [Daily CD Single Ranking dated June 18, 2015] (in Japanese). Oricon. Archived from the original on June 20, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2018. Shapiro, pp. 39–40. Kim 2019a, pp. 116–122, Review 07. "Circle Chart" 2015년 50주차 Album Chart [Album Chart – Week 50 of 2015] (in Korean). Gaon Music Chart. Archived from the original on December 11, 2015. Retrieved January 10, 2022. Benjamin, Jeff (January 5, 2016). "BTS' 'Most Beautiful Moment in Life, Pt. 2' Returns to No. 1 on World Albums". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. Retrieved January 10, 2022. Benjamin, Jeff (December 7, 2015). "BTS Break Into Billboard 200 With 'The Most Beautiful Moment in Life, Pt. 2'". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 9, 2015. Retrieved January 10, 2022. "BTS Chart History: Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 27, 2023. Retrieved September 20, 2023. Sprinkel, p. 186. Shapiro, pp. 41–42. Hwang, Hye-jin (April 27, 2016). '컴백 D-5' 방탄소년단 트랙리스트 공개, 리믹스버전까지 무려 23곡 ["Comeback D-5" BTS track list released, 23 songs including remix versions.] (in Korean). Newsen. Archived from the original on January 13, 2018. Retrieved January 10, 2022. "Circle Chart" 2016년 19주차 Album Chart [Album Chart – Week 19 of 2016]. Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). Archived from the original on September 2, 2020. Retrieved January 10, 2022. "Circle Chart" 2016년 20주차 Album Chart [Album Chart – Week 20 of 2016]. Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). Archived from the original on September 2, 2020. Retrieved January 10, 2022. "BTS Billboard Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Chung, Joo-won (November 19, 2016). "BTS, EXO, TWICE top 2016 Melon Music Awards". Yonhap News Agency. Archived from the original on April 22, 2017. Retrieved April 22, 2017. Lee, Eun-ji (June 25, 2016). 방탄소년단, 아시아투어 10개 도시 14회 전석 매진 [BTS, all 14 shows in 10 cities of Asia tour are sold out] (in Korean). Herald Business. Archived from the original on June 15, 2020. Retrieved January 10, 2022 – via Naver. 防弾少年団 日本2ndアルバム『YOUTH』リリースより新ビジュアル公開！ [New visuals released for BTS' 2nd album YOUTH!]. Billboard Japan (in Japanese). July 13, 2016. Archived from the original on June 18, 2022. Retrieved June 18, 2022. =デイリー CDアルバムランキング 2016年09月06日付. Oricon. Archived from the original on September 8, 2016. Retrieved September 8, 2016. 방탄소년단 日 정규 2집, 오리콘·타워레코드 차트 1위 기염. Naver. Archived from the original on July 23, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2016. Shapiro, p. 48. Kim 2019a, pp. 149–159, Review 10. "Bangtan Boys second EP 'Wings' tops 8 music charts". Yonhap News Agency. October 11, 2016. Archived from the original on March 21, 2019. Retrieved January 10, 2022. "Circle Chart" 2016년 42주차 Digital Chart [Digital Chart – Week 42 of 2016]. Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved January 10, 2022. Benjamin, Jeff (October 17, 2016). "BTS' 'Wings' Sets New US Record for Highest-Charting, Best-Selling K-Pop Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 19, 2016. Retrieved October 10, 2016. Choi, Seung-hae (October 30, 2017). "Kpop News – BTS' 'Wings' Becomes Highest Selling Album on Gaon Chart". Mwave. Archived from the original on November 22, 2016. Retrieved June 18, 2022. Kyung, Sun-mi (February 10, 2017). 방탄소년단 '윙스 외전', 선주문 70만장 돌파..사상 최다 [BTS Wings Extension: You Never Walk Alone Reaches 700K Pre-orders] (in Korean). OSEN. Archived from the original on February 13, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2017. Choi, Na-young (March 9, 2017). 방탄소년단, '윙스' 시리즈 149만장 판매..사상 최고 [BTS 'Wings' series sold 1.49 million copies, the highest ever] (in Korean). OSEN. Archived from the original on May 12, 2017. Retrieved June 18, 2022. Lee, Chae-yoon (December 3, 2017). 방탄소년단, 2017 MMA '올해의 베스트송' 수상...2년 연속 대상 (BTS, 2017 MMA 'Best Song of the Year' award). Sports Today. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved December 8, 2017. Seong, Ji-yeon (November 19, 2016). 방탄소년단, 서울→브라질→미국 횡단 월드투어 시작, 전세계 팬 공략 [BTS, Seoul→Brazil→US crossing world tour begins, targeting fans around the world] (in Korean). Osen. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022 – via Naver. Liu, Marian (September 20, 2017). "K-pop group's record breaking album conquers three continents". CNN. Archived from the original on August 5, 2020. Retrieved April 27, 2019. Herman, Tamar (December 16, 2016). "BTS Adds 2 New Shows to Sold-Out Wings Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved December 24, 2016. Lipshutz, Jason (May 21, 2017). "BTS Thanks Fans For Top Social Artist Win at Billboard Music Awards 2017: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 21, 2019. Retrieved April 22, 2019. Sun, Mi-kyung (August 24, 2017). [공식입장] 방탄소년단, 9월18일 컴백 확정..'Love Yourself' 발매 [[Official position] BTS to return with 'Love Yourself' on September 18] (in Korean). OSEN. Archived from the original on August 25, 2017. Retrieved June 18, 2022 – via Naver. Moon, Kat (November 18, 2020). "Inside the BTS ARMY, the Devoted Fandom With an Unrivaled Level of Organization". Time. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved June 3, 2022. Herman, Tamar (July 5, 2017). "BTS Remakes Iconic Seo Taiji & Boys' 'Come Back Home': Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved April 23, 2019. Kim 2019a, pp. 186–195, Review 11. Kim, So-yeon (September 11, 2017). "The Chainsmokers collaborates with BTS for 'Love Yourself'". The Korea Herald. Archived from the original on September 12, 2017. Retrieved September 11, 2017. Herman, Tamar (September 18, 2017). "BTS Unveils 'Love Yourself: Her' Album & 'DNA' Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 19, 2017. Retrieved October 20, 2017. Benjamin, Jeff (September 20, 2017). "BTS Explain Concepts Behind 'Love Yourself: Her' Album: 'This Is the Beginning of Our Chapter Two'". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved June 18, 2022. Benjamin, Jeff; Caulfield, Keith (September 24, 2017). "BTS Score Top 10 Debut on Billboard 200 With 'Love Yourself: Her' Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 25, 2017. Retrieved October 2, 2017. Cho, Yoo-sun (June 8, 2018). "역시 방탄소년단!…14일 만에 166만장 돌파 '大기록'" [Also BTS!… 16.6 million in 14 days Breakthrough 'Great record']. Sports Chosun (in Korean). Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "[스브수다]'120만장 돌파' 방탄소년단, 이런 디지털 소비 시대에 던진 의미". SBS funE. Archived from the original on January 31, 2018. Retrieved October 13, 2017. Kim, Eun-ae (October 10, 2017). "방탄소년단, 16년만에 단일앨범 120만장 돌파 대기록..가요계 대역사". Osen (in Korean). Archived from the original on January 31, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2018. Kelley, Caitlin (September 20, 2017). "BTS Smashes K-Pop Records With 'DNA' Music Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 25, 2017. Retrieved November 9, 2017. Trust, Gary; Benjamin, Jeff (September 25, 2017). "BTS Earns First Billboard Hot 100 Hit With 'DNA'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved September 26, 2017. Trust, Gary; Benjamin, Jeff (October 2, 2017). "BTS Scores Highest-Charting Billboard Hot 100 Hit for a K-Pop Group With 'DNA'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 3, 2017. Retrieved October 3, 2017. Gary, Trust (December 4, 2017). "BTS Mic Drop in Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2017. "BTS ranks 28th on Billboard Hot 100 with 'Mic Drop'". Yonhap News Agency. December 4, 2017. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved July 24, 2022. Herman, Tamar (February 12, 2018). "BTS' 'DNA' & 'Mic Drop' Get Certified Gold by RIAA". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 3, 2020. Retrieved February 12, 2018. Herman, Tamar (November 21, 2018). "BTS Recognized by RIAA for First Platinum Single & First Gold Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved November 21, 2018. Ming, Cheang (December 29, 2017). "How K-pop made a breakthrough in the US in 2017". CNBC. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2018. Steger, Isabella (November 20, 2017). "The Unlikely Meteoric Rise of BTS, the Biggest Name in K-Pop Right Now". Quartz. Archived from the original on May 28, 2018. Retrieved March 13, 2018. "BTS wins Artist of the Year at MAMA for second year". Yonhap News Agency. December 1, 2017. Archived from the original on August 5, 2018. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Herman, Tamar (December 6, 2017). "BTS Unveil Sentimental New Japanese Song'Crystal Snow'". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 7, 2017. Retrieved June 18, 2022. 【オリコン】BTS(防弾少年団)"海外歌手初"シングル初週30万枚超え 前作12万枚増 (in Japanese). Oricon. December 12, 2017. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2022. Kim, Young-rak (January 15, 2018). "해외 아티스트 유일"...방탄소년단 日싱글, '더블 플래티넘' 달성 ["The only foreign artist"...BTS Japanese Single achieves Double Platinum] (in Korean). Sports Chosun. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018 – via Naver. BTS(防弾少年団)、『Mステ』初登場!! 生放送で投げキス宣言 [BTS, M-Station first appearance, announce kiss on live broadcast]. Billboard Japan (in Japanese). December 18, 2017. Archived from the original on March 23, 2018. Retrieved June 20, 2022. Herman, Tamar (December 12, 2017). "BTS performing in Dick Clark New Years Rockin Eve 2018". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 12, 2017. Retrieved January 2, 2018. Ferber, Taylor (December 31, 2017). "Twitter Has Questions About BTS' NYE Performance". Bustle. Archived from the original on March 7, 2023. Retrieved July 26, 2022. "UNICEF and BTS celebrate success of 'groundbreaking' LOVE MYSELF campaign" (Press release). Seoul and New York: UNICEF. October 5, 2021. Archived from the original on March 15, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2022. Kim, Myung-shin (January 11, 2018). 방탄소년단, 2018 골든디스크 대상...'4연속 본상' [BTS, 2018 Golden Disc Awards..."Fourth consecutive Bonsang"] (in Korean). Dailian. Archived from the original on July 15, 2020. Retrieved June 20, 2022 – via Naver. Sungmyung, Kyungji (January 26, 2018). 방탄소년단, 대상 4관왕 달성.."인생의 황금빛 분기점" [BTS achieves four Daesangs.. "Golden turning point of life"] (in Korean). OSEN. Archived from the original on July 8, 2020. Retrieved June 20, 2022 – via Naver. Lee, So-dam (February 13, 2018). 방탄소년단X유튜브 레드, 리얼 성장 다큐 28일 첫 선 ([NEWS] BTS x YouTube Premium, 8 episode documentary of BTS to be revealed on 28 March) (in Korean). OSEN. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved March 20, 2018 – via Naver. Herman, Tamar (March 14, 2018). "BTS Documentary Series 'Burn The Stage' to Air on YouTube Premium". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 18, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2018. "BTS Japan Official Fanclub" 全米で大ブレイク中！BTS (防弾少年団)、待望の日本オリジナルアルバム4月4日発売決定！世界中で大ヒットした楽曲に、日本制作楽曲含む新録４曲を収録！初回限定盤には来日ドキュメンタリーほか、映像も収録！ [[NEWS] BTS Japan 3rd album "FACE YOURSELF", April 4 is decided on sale!] (in Japanese). BTS Japan Official. February 1, 2018. Archived from the original on June 14, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2018. Herman, Tamar (April 5, 2018). "BTS Tease Next Album In 'Love Yourself' Series With 'Euphoria' Theme Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2020. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Herman, Tamar (May 18, 2018). "BTS Releases Expressive 'Love Yourself: Tear' Album: Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 8, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2018. "Global Sensation BTS to Perform World Television Premiere of New Single at the "2018 Billboard Music Awards" on NBC". Billboard. April 24, 2018. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved June 4, 2021. Weatherby, Taylor (May 20, 2018). "BTS Put on Epic Performance of 'Fake Love' at the 2018 Billboard Music Awards: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 18, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Hwang, Seo-yeon (April 17, 2018). "방탄소년단, 또 다시 미국 行?...2018 빌보드 뮤직 어워드 노미네이트". TVDaily. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved April 17, 2018. "BTS Wins Top Social Artist Award at the 2018 Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2018. Kim 2019a, pp. 222–230, Review 13. Kreps, Daniel (May 27, 2018). "On the Charts: BTS Become First K-Pop Act To Reach Number One". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 28, 2018. Retrieved May 28, 2018. "Official Albums Chart Top 100". Official Charts Company. May 26, 2018. Archived from the original on May 2, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Zellner, Xander (May 29, 2018). "BTS' 'Fake Love' Becomes 17th Primarily Non-English-Language Top 10 on Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Herman, Tamar (July 16, 2018). "BTS to Release New Album 'Love Yourself: Answer' in August: Update". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 18, 2018. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Viray, Patricia Lourdes (August 24, 2018). "Watch: BTS drops 'Idol' music video". The Philippine Star. Archived from the original on February 15, 2021. Retrieved September 25, 2018. Yam, Kimberly (August 24, 2018). "K-Pop Band BTS Drops Song With Nicki Minaj, And The Internet Has No Chill". HuffPost. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved September 25, 2018. Lee, Jung-ho (September 6, 2018). "방탄소년단, 8월 가온차트서 193만장 앨범차트 1위" (in Korean). Star News. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved September 6, 2018 – via Naver. Caulfield, Keith (September 2, 2018). "BTS Scores Second No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Love Yourself: Answer'". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved September 3, 2018. Herman, Tamar (January 23, 2020). "BTS' 'Love Yourself: Answer' Becomes First South Korean Album Certified Platinum by RIAA". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 25, 2020. Retrieved January 25, 2020. Herman, Tamar (August 17, 2018). "BTS' Citi Field Show Sells Out Within Minutes". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 25, 2018. "Bangtan Boys Kick off World Tour with Concerts in Seoul". The Chosun Ilbo. August 27, 2018. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2018. Shapiro, pp. 62–63. Gemmill, Allie (November 19, 2018). "BTS Releases First English-Language Song "Waste It On Me"". Teen Vogue. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved December 9, 2018. Yang, Rachel (November 19, 2018). "Steve Aoki Drops Music Video Starring BTS, Ken Jeong and All-Asian Cast (Watch)". Variety. Archived from the original on November 4, 2020. Retrieved December 9, 2018. Herman, Tamar (August 8, 2018). "BTS Add Date at NYC's Citi Field Become First-Ever K-Pop Act to Play US Stadium". MSN. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2018. McDermott, Maeve (December 4, 2018). "2018's best-selling live artists are Ed Sheeran, Bruce Springsteen and BTS, per Stubhub". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 3, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Lee, Min-ji (October 18, 2018). 빅히트 "방탄소년단과 재계약 체결, 최고의 대우"(공식입장) (in Korean). Newsen. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved April 24, 2019. Qin, Amy (November 9, 2018). "K-Pop Band BTS Is Dropped From Japanese TV Show Over T-Shirt". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved November 23, 2018. "Popular Korean Band Whose Japan Performance Was Cancelled For T-Shirt Mocking A-Bomb Victims, Once Posed With Nazi SS Death Head Symbols, Flew Nazi-Like Flags At Concert". Simon Wiesenthal Center. November 11, 2018. Archived from the original on November 12, 2018. Retrieved November 23, 2018. Kim, Hyung-jin (November 13, 2018). "BTS' agency apologizes for boy-band members' atomic-bomb shirts, swastika hat". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 14, 2020. Retrieved November 23, 2018. McCurry, Justin (November 14, 2018). "BTS: Korean band's managers apologise over Nazi photos". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 15, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2022. "Wiesenthal Center Welcomes K-Pop Group's Apology For Incidents Offensive To Jewish And Japanese Victims Of WWII". Simon Wiesenthal Center. November 13, 2018. Archived from the original on November 23, 2018. Retrieved November 23, 2018. Kim, Sun-kyung (November 16, 2018). 방탄소년단 소속사, 티셔츠 논란에 원폭 피해자 찾아 공식 사과 (in Korean). Naver. Archived from the original on November 6, 2020. Retrieved November 23, 2018. Lie, p. 126. Boram, Park (December 12, 2018). "Winning big at Mnet Asian Music Awards brings tears to eyes of BTS". Yonhap News Agency. Archived from the original on November 23, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Benjamin, Jeff (December 6, 2018). "The Year in K-Pop on the Charts: BTS Breaks Genre Barriers While the Scene Expands Its Reach". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 6, 2018. Retrieved December 6, 2018. Kim, Sohee. "The Bloomberg 50". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved December 6, 2018. Nickolai, Nate (February 10, 2019). "BTS Makes History at the Grammys as First K-Pop Presenters". Variety. Archived from the original on February 11, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Velez, Jennifer (November 20, 2019). "BTS' 2019 GRAMMY Suits On Display At GRAMMY Museum". The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on October 20, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Halsey (April 17, 2019). "BTS: The 100 Most Influential People of 2019". Time. Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Kim, Jin-sun (April 12, 2019). 방탄소년단 '작은 것들을 위한 시' 공개즉시 음원순위'싹쓸이' Halsey도 관심 폭발 [Bulletproof Boy Scouts 'Poetry for the Little Things' Revealed Immediately] (in Korean). SEDaily. Archived from the original on August 31, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Delgado, Sara (March 14, 2019). "Emma Stone and BTS Will Be on SNL and People Are Making Whitewashing Jokes". Teen Vogue. Archived from the original on June 12, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. "BTS become first Korean artists to top UK chart". BBC News. April 19, 2019. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Brandle, Lars (April 22, 2019). "BTS Make Chart History as 'Map Of The Soul: Persona' Bows at No. 1 In Australia". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. "BTS Meets the Beatles and the Monkees in Billboard Chart History With 'Map of the Soul: Persona'". Billboard. April 21, 2019. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Kim, Ha-jin (May 9, 2019). 방탄소년단, 가온차트 음반·다운로드 1위 '2관왕' [BTS, Gaon Music Chart No. 1] (in Korean). Ten Asia. Archived from the original on June 24, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019 – via Naver. Herman, Tamar (June 25, 2019). "BTS' 'Map of the Soul: Persona' Confirmed as Best-Selling Album in South Korean History: Guinness World Records". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Trust, Gary (April 23, 2019). "Lil Nas X's 'Old Town Road' Leads Billboard Hot 100 for Third Week; Sam Smith & Normani, BTS & Halsey Hit Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Lynch, Joe (May 1, 2019). "2019 Billboard Music Awards Winners: The Complete List". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Retrieved July 24, 2022. Ginsberg, Gab (February 19, 2019). "BTS Add Additional 2019 Stadium Tour Stops: See the New Dates". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 22, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Herman, Tamar (March 1, 2019). "BTS Sell Out 'Love Yourself: Speak Yourself' Stadium Dates in England, France & US". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 2, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Park, Joon-young (June 7, 2019). 방탄소년단 매니저 게임 'BTS월드', 첫 번째 OST 'Dream Glow' 공개 [BTS manager game 'BTS World' to release first OST 'Dream Glow'] (in Korean). NewsWorks. Archived from the original on June 12, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Herman, Tamar (June 14, 2019). "BTS' J-Hope & V Usher In 'A Brand New Day' In Collab with Zara Larsson: Stream It Now". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 14, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Herman, Tamar (June 21, 2019). "BTS' RM and Suga Team Up With Juice WRLD For 'All Night': Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Herman, Tamar (July 28, 2019). "BTS Release 'BTS World' Soundtrack Album Including New Track 'Heartbeat': Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Kim, Soo-kyung (August 8, 2019). 백현 '시티 라이츠', 가온차트 솔로 앨범 월간 최다판매량 기록 [Baekhyun 'City Lights' recorded the highest monthly solo album sales of Gaon Chart] (in Korean). Ten Asia. Archived from the original on August 31, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. ＢＴＳ新曲初100万枚出荷！欧米などから予約殺到 (in Japanese). Nikkan Sports. Archived from the original on July 4, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019. Lee, Min-ji (July 3, 2019). 방탄소년단, 日 싱글 'Lights/Boy With Luv' 오리콘 데일리 차트 1위 [BTS ranked No1 on Oricon daily chart with Japan single 'Lights/Boy With Luv'] (in Korean). Newsen. Archived from the original on July 2, 2020. Retrieved July 3, 2019 – via Naver. "Billboard Japan Hot 100 2019/07/08". Billboard Japan (in Japanese). Archived from the original on June 26, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2019. "Billboard Japan Hot 100 2019/07/15". Billboard Japan (in Japanese). Archived from the original on July 2, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2022. "BTS becomes million seller in Japan with their single album". The Dong-A Ilbo. August 10, 2019. Archived from the original on August 10, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2020. Lee, Jae-eun (August 9, 2019). 한일 갈등에도 방탄소년단, 日서 싱글음반 100만장 돌파 [Despite the conflict between Korea and Japan, BTS broke through 1 million single albums in Japan]. The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Archived from the original on July 2, 2020. Retrieved July 2, 2020 – via Naver. "BTS Single 'Lights/Boy With Luv' Gets 'Million' Certification in Japan". Variety. August 9, 2019. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2020. Love Yourself: Her & Love Yourself: Tear's cumulative sales: "Gaon Album Chart–2017 (see #1)" (in Korean). Gaon Music Chart. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved August 31, 2019. "Gaon Album Chart–2018 (see #2 & #11)" (in Korean). Gaon Music Chart. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved August 31, 2019. "Gaon Album Chart–July 2019 (see #6 & #11)" (in Korean). Gaon Music Chart. Archived from the original on August 8, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Kim, Min-ji (April 9, 2020). 방탄소년단, 음반 총 판매량 2032만장...韓 가요 역사상 처음 [Bulletproof Boy Scouts, total sales of 20.32 million albums... 韓 It's the first time in history] (in Korean). News1. Archived from the original on April 10, 2020. Retrieved April 10, 2020 – via Naver. "BTS Love Yourself–Tear". British Phonographic Industry (BPI). January 10, 2020. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved January 10, 2020. "BTS Love Yourself–Answer". Bpi. British Phonographic Industry (BPI). May 31, 2019. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved January 10, 2020. "BTS Map of the Soul: Persona". British Phonographic Industry (BPI). June 28, 2019. Archived from the original on July 6, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Benjamin, Jeff (October 31, 2019). "Here's What Went Down at BTS' 'The Final' World Tour Concert in Seoul". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Retrieved December 12, 2019. Frankenburg, Eric (December 5, 2019). "The Year in Touring Charts 2019: Ed Sheeran Meets The Rolling Stones in Boxscore History". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 6, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Herman, Tamar (October 18, 2019). "BTS' Epic Music Video for 'Make It Right' With Lauv Is a Homage to ARMY: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 6, 2019. Retrieved December 12, 2019. Grein, Paul (November 15, 2019). "Taylor Swift, BTS & More Record-Setters at the 2019 American Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 26, 2019. Retrieved December 4, 2019. Lee, Ho-yeon (November 30, 2019). [MMA 종합] 방탄소년단, 대상 4개 석권·총 8관왕 "아미 '보라'해". Hankook Ilbo (in Korean). Archived from the original on December 2, 2019. Retrieved December 5, 2019. Park, Yoon-jin (December 4, 2019). [2019 마마] "올해의 가수는 방탄소년단!"...4개 대상 싹쓸이 '9관왕' [종합] (in Korean). My Daily. Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved December 5, 2019. "BTS Makes Historic Win At 2019 MAMA!". ABS-CBN. Archived from the original on December 6, 2019. Retrieved December 6, 2019. Herman, Tamar (January 6, 2020). "Here's How BTS Won Big at South Korea's 34th Golden Disc Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 7, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. "Nielsen Music – Year-end Music Report US 2019" (PDF). Billboard. pp. 29–30. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 10, 2020. Retrieved February 9, 2020. "Billboard 200 Artists – Duo/Group". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 28, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2021. "Best Sellers and Global Artists of the Year–IFPI–Representing the recording industry worldwide". IFPI. Archived from the original on March 19, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2020. Lee, Jaehyun (March 20, 2020). 방탄소년단, IFPI '글로벌 앨범차트' 3위...한국 최초 '2년연속 톱10' [BTS, IFPI 'Global Album Chart' 3rd place... Korea's first 'Top 10 in two consecutive years'] (in Korean). Newsis. Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2020 – via Naver. Lee, Ho-yeon (March 20, 2020). 방탄소년단, 韓 가수 최초 2년 연속 IFPI '글로벌 앨범 차트' 톱 10 [BTS, first Korean Singer for two consecutive years, IFPI 'Global Album Chart' Top 10]. Hankook Ilbo (in Korean). Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2020 – via Naver. Lee, Jae-hoon (March 3, 2020). 방탄소년단, 국제음반산업협회 '톱10'...非영어권 최초 2년연속 [BTS, International Music Industry Association 'Top 10'... the first Non-English speaking for 2 consecutive years] (in Korean). Newsis. Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2020 – via Naver. Lee, Ho-yeon (March 3, 2020). "비영어권 최초" 방탄소년단, 2년 연속 IFPI 선정 '글로벌 아티스트' 톱 10 ["First non-English speaking" BTS, Top 10 'Global Artist' by IFPI for 2 consecutive years]. Hankook Ilbo (in Korean). Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2020 – via Naver. Strauss, Matthew (January 17, 2020). "Listen to BTS' New Song 'Black Swan'". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on February 22, 2020. Retrieved January 18, 2020. Zemler, Emily (January 17, 2020). "Watch BTS' Dance-Inspired Art Film For New Single 'Black Swan'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 21, 2020. Retrieved January 18, 2020. Kim, Hyun-rok (February 18, 2020). '컴백 D-3' 방탄소년단 새 역사 썼다...선주문 402만 돌파 '역대최다'[공식] [[Official] 'Comeback D-3' BTS write new history...Pre-orders exceed 4.02 million. "It's the best."] (in Korean). Sports TV News. Archived from the original on October 31, 2020. Retrieved July 31, 2020 – via Naver. "2020 Grammys: Lil Nas X, BTS & More To Perform". The Recording Academy. January 23, 2020. Archived from the original on January 25, 2020. Retrieved January 23, 2020. Kim, Hyo-jeong (January 24, 2020). 방탄소년단, 그래미 어워즈서 공연...한국 가수 최초 [BTS, Grammy Awards Performance First Korean singer] (in Korean). Yonhap News Agency. Archived from the original on June 6, 2020. Retrieved January 24, 2020. "Map of the Soul: 7 by BTS". Metacritic. Archived from the original on February 22, 2020. Retrieved February 23, 2020. Cho, Na-young (February 24, 2020). "방탄소년단 좋아한 것이 최고의 선택임을 증명한 앨범"..美-英 해외 유력매체 '극찬' (in Korean). OSEN. Archived from the original on February 24, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2020. Herman, Tamar (February 21, 2020). "BTS Unveil Fierce Manifesto Music Video for 'Map of the Soul: 7' Single 'ON': Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 21, 2020. Retrieved March 1, 2020. Kim, Yeon-ji (March 12, 2020). 방탄소년단 'MAP OF THE SOUL : 7', 판매량 411만 장..韓 가수 신기록 [BTS 'Map of the Soul: 7', sales volume 4.11 million copies] (in Korean). Daily Sports. Archived from the original on March 12, 2020. Retrieved November 26, 2021 – via Naver. Caulfield, Keith (March 1, 2020). "BTS Achieves Fourth No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Map of the Soul: 7'". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 17, 2020. Retrieved March 1, 2020. Trust, Gary (March 3, 2020). "BTS Sets New Career Best on Hot 100 as 'On' Blasts in at No. 4; Roddy Ricch's 'The Box' Rules For Eighth Week". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 11, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2020. Herman, Tamar (January 21, 2020). "BTS Announce 'Map of the Soul' Tour Dates". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 23, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. Dams, Tim (April 28, 2020). "BTS Postpone North American 'Map of the Soul' Tour Amid Coronavirus Pandemic". Variety. Archived from the original on May 19, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2020. "BTS breaks 20 million album sales record in S. Korea". The Dong-a Ilbo. April 10, 2020. Archived from the original on April 10, 2020. Retrieved April 10, 2020. "BTS becomes bestselling K-pop singers". Yonhap News Agency. April 9, 2020. Archived from the original on April 10, 2020. Retrieved April 10, 2020. Kim, Jae-ha (April 17, 2020). "BTS Gifts Fans With 24 Hours of Bang Bang Con: Five Moments to Look For". Variety. Archived from the original on April 21, 2020. Retrieved April 21, 2020. William, Chris (June 7, 2020). "BTS Brings a Bounty of Hits to Close Out 'Dear Class of 2020' (Watch)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2022. "BTS's Speech At YouTube Dear Class Of 2020: Watch". Billboard. June 7, 2020. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Daly, Rhian (June 15, 2020). "BTS live in Seoul: more like a hang out with friends than a super-slick livestreamed gig". NME. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved July 22, 2022. Jin, p. 142. Frater, Patrick (June 14, 2020). "BTS' 'Bang Bang Con: The Live' Claims Record Viewership for Online Concert". Variety. Archived from the original on June 15, 2020. Retrieved June 14, 2020. BTS、新曲「Stay Gold」を全世界同時に先行配信決定 [BTS to pre-deliver new song "Stay Gold" simultaneously worldwide]. Billboard Japan (in Japanese). June 11, 2020. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 26, 2020. Rowley, Glenn (July 14, 2020). "Get Ready For A 'Journey,' Because BTS' New Japanese Album Has Arrived: Stream it Now". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved November 25, 2021. BTS、海外男性アーティストのアルバム初週売上歴代1位に 今年度最高初週&累積売上も【オリコンランキング】 [BTS ranks No. 1 in sales for the first week of albums by overseas male artists. Highest first Week of the Year and Cumulative Sales of the Year [Oricon Rankings]] (in Japanese). Oricon News. July 21, 2020. Archived from the original on July 20, 2020. Retrieved July 20, 2020. Porterfield, Carlie (August 21, 2020). "BTS Breaks YouTube One-Day Record With 'Dynamite' Debut". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 30, 2020. Retrieved August 28, 2020. Trust, Gary (August 31, 2020). "BTS' 'Dynamite' Blasts in at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100, Becoming the Group's First Leader". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 1, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2022. "BTS: K-pop stars become first all-South Korean act to top US singles charts". The Guardian. September 1, 2020. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2022. Trust, Gary (September 28, 2020). "BTS' 'Dynamite' Dominates Both of Billboard's New Global Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 4, 2020. Retrieved September 29, 2020. "Chart History BTS". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved October 20, 2020. Trust, Gary (November 2, 2020). "'This One Has That Staying Power': BTS Achieve First Top 10 on a Billboard Radio Airplay Chart With 'Dynamite'". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 3, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2020. Unterberger, Andrew (August 30, 2020). "BTS Make Explosive VMAs Debut With 'Dynamite' at 2020 MTV VMAs". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 15, 2020. Retrieved June 4, 2021. Yonhap (August 31, 2020). "BTS wins 4 awards at MTV VMAs, performs 'Dynamite'". The Korean Herald. Archived from the original on December 17, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Daw, Stephen (October 15, 2020). "BTS Blow the Crowd Away With 'Dynamite' Performance at the 2020 Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 15, 2020. Retrieved October 15, 2020. "BTS wins fourth Top Social Artist prize at Billboard Music Awards". The Korea Herald. October 15, 2020. Archived from the original on February 4, 2023. Retrieved July 22, 2022. Rowley, Glenn (October 2, 2020). "BTS Add Charm to Jason Derulo and Jawsh 685's 'Savage Love' Remix". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2020. Trust, Gary (October 12, 2020). "Jawsh 685, Jason Derulo & BTS' 'Savage Love' Soars to No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 5, 2021. Retrieved October 13, 2020. Willman, Chris (October 12, 2020). "BTS' Weekend Virtual Concerts Sell 993,000 Tickets". Variety. Archived from the original on October 12, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Son, Jin-ah (October 8, 2020). 방탄소년단 온라인 콘서트, 준비 기간만 1년...관전포인트 셋 (in Korean). MK Sports. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved October 10, 2020. Hwang, Hye-jin (September 25, 2020). 빅히트 측 "방탄소년단 10월 오프라인 콘서트 취소, 온라인만 진행"(공식) (in Korean). Newsen. Archived from the original on October 16, 2020. Retrieved October 10, 2020. Peters, Mitchell (October 30, 2020). "BTS Announces the Title For Lead Single on New Album 'BE (Deluxe Edition)'". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2020. Trust, Gary (November 30, 2020). "BTS' 'Life Goes On' Launches as Historic No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Cruz, Lenika (November 30, 2020). "BTS's 'Life Goes On' Did the Impossible". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved December 2, 2020. Trust, Gary (November 30, 2020). "BTS' 'Life Goes On' Launches as Historic No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved December 2, 2020. Ban, D.K. (November 25, 2020). "(Lead) BTS wins Grammy nomination for best pop duo/group performance". Yonhap News Agency. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved April 2, 2021. "BTS wins special award at Japan Record Awards". Yonhap News Agency. December 31, 2020. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022 – via The Korea Herald. Kyung Hyun Kim 2021, p. xi. Lee, Cydney (November 22, 2021). "BTS Delivers Smooth Performance of 'Butter' to Cap Off 2021 AMAs". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2022. Brandle, Lars (March 4, 2021). "BTS Crowned IFPI Global Recording Artist of 2020". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 4, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2021. Brandle, Lars (March 11, 2021). "BTS Bag 'Unprecedented' 1-2 on IFPI's Global Album Sales Chart For 2020". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 11, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. "BTS' Map of the Soul: 7 announced as first ever winner of IFPI's newly launched Global Album All Format Chart". International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. March 10, 2021. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Lee, Minji (March 15, 2021). "(Lead) BTS lights up Grammys with stellar performance of 'Dynamite'". Yonhap News Agency. Archived from the original on March 18, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. Mulenga, Natasha (April 2, 2021). "BTS's "Film Out" Music Video Sparks BU Fan Theories". Teen Vogue. Archived from the original on May 5, 2021. Retrieved April 4, 2021. "BTS' Bang Bang Con 21: K-pop group kicks off third concert amid pandemic on BangtanTV". Firstpost. April 17, 2021. Archived from the original on April 17, 2021. Retrieved April 17, 2021. Kaufman, Gil (April 26, 2021). "BTS Announce Second English-Language Single 'Butter': See When It's Dropping". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Trust, Gary (June 1, 2021). "Smooth Start: BTS' 'Butter' Blasts In at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 1, 2021. Retrieved June 1, 2021. Mamo, Heran (July 9, 2021). "BTS Releases 'Permission to Dance' From 'Butter' CD Single: Stream It Now". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 4, 2023. Retrieved July 9, 2021. Trust, Gary (July 19, 2021). "BTS Blasts Onto Hot 100 at No. 1 With 'Permission to Dance,' The Kid LAROI & Justin Bieber Bow at No. 3 With 'Stay'". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 19, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2021. Jones, Damian (September 13, 2021). "Coldplay and BTS announce new single 'My Universe'". NME. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved September 13, 2021. Trust, Gary (October 4, 2021). "Coldplay & BTS' 'My Universe' Blasts Off at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved October 10, 2021. "BTS to hold online concert next month". The Korea Times. September 15, 2021. Archived from the original on September 25, 2022. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Shim, Sun-ah (November 24, 2021). "BTS nominated for Grammy award for best pop group performance". Yonhap News Agency. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved November 23, 2021. Bowenbank, Star (April 3, 2022). "BTS Channels James Bond for Undercover 'Butter' Performance at the 2022 Grammys". Billboard magazine. Archived from the original on April 4, 2022. Retrieved April 4, 2022. Murphy, Eryn (December 7, 2021). "Review: BTS Reclaim Their Future With Permission to Dance On Stage – LA Show". Showbiz Cheat Sheet. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved January 2, 2022. Perry, Kevin (November 30, 2021). "BTS review, Los Angeles: They came, they sang, they conquered". The Independent. Archived from the original on December 6, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Frankenberg, Eric (December 3, 2021). "BTS Scores the Biggest Boxscore in Almost a Decade, Thanks to Four Nights at SoFi Stadium". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved December 13, 2021. Baek, Jae-hwan (November 4, 2021). "슈퍼캐스팅, 방탄소년단" 네이버웹툰, 하이브 오리지널 콘텐츠 라인업 공개 ["Super Casting, BTS" Naver Webtoon, HYBE Original Content Line-up Revealed] (in Korean). KBS Media. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved January 19, 2022 – via Naver. Ramanchandran, Naman (January 19, 2022). "BTS Online Comic '7Fates: CHAKHO' Hits 15 Million Views – Global Bulletin". Variety. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved January 24, 2022. Yoon, John (March 10, 2022). "BTS performs live in Seoul for the first time in over two years". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 10, 2022. Retrieved March 13, 2022. Yoon, Dasl (February 16, 2022). "BTS Returns From Break With First South Korean Concerts Since 2019". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 13, 2022. Retrieved March 13, 2022. Horton, Adrian (April 4, 2022). "Grammy awards 2022: Olivia Rodrigo wins big and Ukraine's Zelenskiy makes cameo". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 4, 2022. Retrieved April 5, 2022. Lee, Jian (April 10, 2022). "BTS receives seven nominations for Billboard Music Awards". Korea JoongAng Daily. Archived from the original on April 10, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Gilmore, Kelly (May 15, 2022). "BTS Makes History at 2022 Billboard Music Awards With Smooth Like Butter Wins". E! News. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Sachdeva, Maanya (May 16, 2022). "BTS break Destiny's Child record for winning most Billboard Music Awards ever". The Independent. Archived from the original on September 21, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Morin, Natalie (June 10, 2022). "BTS Celebrate Their Brilliant Past and Look Toward a Bright Future on 'Proof'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Rhian, Daly (May 6, 2022). "BTS announce new single 'Yet To Come (The Most Beautiful Moment)'". NME. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved May 6, 2022. Carras, Christi (April 17, 2022). "BTS ends Las Vegas concert series with a major announcement". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 21, 2022. Retrieved April 17, 2022. Hwang, Hye-jin (June 14, 2022). 방탄소년단, 단체활동 잠정중단 선언 "팬들에게 죄짓는 기분" 눈물[종합] [BTS announces temporary suspension of group activities "I feel like I'm sinning against the fans" Tears [Summary]]. Newsen (in Korean). Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2022 – via Naver. Kaufman, Gil (June 14, 2022). "BTS Announce They're 'Going on Hiatus': 'We Have to Accept That We've Changed'". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2022. Lee, Minji (May 21, 2021). "BTS company Hybe unveils music museum dedicated to fans, artists". Yonhap News Agency. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. "Label says BTS plan for solo projects plan is not a hiatus". AP. June 14, 2022. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2022. Hwang, Hye-jin (June 15, 2022). 방탄소년단 제이홉, 솔로앨범 첫 주자 확정 '개별활동 본격화'[공식]. Newsen (in Korean). Archived from the original on June 15, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2022 – via Daum. Lee, Youkyung (June 15, 2022). "BTS Pop Band Triggers $1.7 Billion Stock Rout on Shift to Solos". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on August 15, 2022. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Choi, Soo-Hyang (October 17, 2022). "K-pop stars BTS to serve military duty". Reuters.com. Archived from the original on December 27, 2022. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Brandle, Lars (August 24, 2022). "BTS Unveils Date and Venue for Concert In Busan". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 30, 2023. Retrieved August 24, 2022. Aveek Bhowmik (September 28, 2022). "BTS Managing Agency Hybe's Stock Slumps Below IPO Price For 1st Time – Loses $10B In Market Value Since Peak". Benzinga. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved October 2, 2022. Kim, Sohee (October 15, 2022). "K-Pop Sensation BTS Gives What Could Be Last Concert for Years". Bloomberg News. Retrieved October 15, 2022. Krol, Charlotte (October 16, 2022). "BTS' Jin announces solo album, says new single "will come out soon"". NME. Archived from the original on October 16, 2022. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Kim, Sooyoung (October 17, 2022). 방탄소년단 맏형 진, 군대 간다…입영 연기 철회 [Jin, the eldest of BTS, to enter military following withdrawal of enlistment postponement]. The Korea Economic Daily (in Korean). Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved October 17, 2022. "Pop stars BTS to take time out for military duty". BBC News. October 17, 2022. Archived from the original on March 28, 2023. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Bowenbank, Starr (October 23, 2022). "BTS, J-Hope, BLACKPINK & More Nominated for 2022 MAMA Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 24, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Grein, Paul (November 15, 2022). "BTS Scores Three 2023 Grammy Nominations". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 15, 2022. Retrieved November 21, 2022. Anderson, Daniel (November 25, 2022). "Military enlistment date for BTS's Jin revealed". NextShank. Archived from the original on December 13, 2022. Retrieved November 27, 2022. Hwang, Mi-hyun (February 26, 2023). 방탄소년단 제이홉, 진 이어 BTS 멤버 중 두번째 군복무…입영 연기 취소 신청 [BTS J-Hope, the second member of BTS after Jin... Application for cancellation of postponement of enlistment] (in Korean). News 1. Archived from the original on February 26, 2023. Retrieved February 26, 2023 – via Naver. Borah, Prabalika (January 31, 2023). "Yet to come; in cinemas on February 1 BTS concert film to hit cinemas for a limited time in many Indian cities". NextShank. Archived from the original on February 2, 2023. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Diaz, Rosa (March 7, 2023). "BTS leader isn't thinking about future, but would like to work with Rosalía". EFE. Archived from the original on April 11, 2023. Retrieved March 21, 2023. Paul, Larisha (March 8, 2023). "BTS' Contract Renewal and Proposed 2025 Comeback Are Both Currently Uncertain, HYBE Says". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023. Retrieved March 15, 2023. Park, Sang-hoo (April 18, 2023). 방탄소년단 제이홉, 오늘(18일) 육군 현역 입대 "잘 다녀올게요" [BTS J-Hope, enlisted in the army today (18th) "I'll be back"] (in Korean). JTBC. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. Retrieved April 18, 2023 – via Naver. Kim, Eun-jung (May 12, 2023). "BTS to release animation OST 'The Planet' with full lineup". Yonhap News Agency. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2023. Hicap, Jonathan (June 10, 2023). "BTS releases song 'Take Two' to celebrate 10th anniversary". Manila Bulletin. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved June 21, 2023. Legaspi, Althea (September 20, 2023). "BTS Renew Contract with HYBE and BIGHIT Music". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved September 22, 2023. Lee, Tae-soo; Kim, Ye-na (September 20, 2023). BTS, 하이브와 두 번째 재계약…2025년 이후도 함께한다 [BTS renews contract with Hybe for the second time...We will be together after 2025] (in Korean). Archived from the original on September 22, 2023. Retrieved September 22, 2023. Lee, Seung-rok (September 20, 2023). [공식] 빅히트뮤직, 방탄소년단과 재계약 체결 전격발표…"2025년 이후에도 함께한다" [[Official] Big Hit Music Announces Re-signing With BTS..."Let's stay together after 2025"]. My Daily (in Korean). Archived from the original on September 22, 2023. Retrieved September 22, 2023. Blistien, Jon (September 22, 2023). "BTS' Suga Begins Mandatory Service in South Korea, But He Won't Be Joining the Military". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 23, 2023. Retrieved September 23, 2023. Kang, Da-yoon (January 16, 2024). 방탄소년단 RM·뷔, 최정예 훈련병 됐다…신병교육 수료 [MD★스타] [BTS RM and V become elite trainees... Completion of new recruit training [MD★Star]]. MyDaily (in Korean). Archived from the original on January 31, 2024. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Oh, Ji-won (September 24, 2017). [시선강탈] '아는 형님' 방탄소년단 뷔 "서태지 선배님 아버지라고 부른다" ['Knowing Bros' BTS V "We call Seo Taiji father"] (in Korean). TV Daily. Archived from the original on June 28, 2020. Retrieved August 7, 2020 – via Daum. McRady, Rachel (June 25, 2018). "BTS Names Their Musical Inspiration and Their Most Unexpected Celebrity Fan". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Savage, Mark (June 2, 2019). "BTS are the first Korean band to headline Wembley Stadium". BBC News. Archived from the original on June 4, 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Morin, Charles Aaron,Riddhi Chakraborty,Divyansha Dongre,Kristine Kwak,Althea Legaspi,Natalie; Aaron, Charles; Chakraborty, Riddhi; Dongre, Divyansha; Kwak, Kristine; Legaspi, Althea; Morin, Natalie (March 18, 2022). "The 100 Best BTS Songs". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 12, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2022.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Shim, Yeon-hee (October 17, 2016). [문화광장] 외신 주목한 '제 2의 싸이', 방탄소년단 [[Culture Plaza] 'Second Psy', BTS attract foreign media attention] (in Korean). KBS News. Archived from the original on June 17, 2020. Retrieved August 7, 2020. "Chapter 5. Blood, Sweat & Tears". Wings Concept Book (in Korean). Republic of South Korea: Big Hit Entertainment. June 29, 2017. p. 114. 0728303093672. Glasby, Taylor (October 11, 2018). "How BTS became the world's biggest boyband". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Hwang, Hye-jin (March 12, 2019). 4월12일 컴백 방탄, 新메시지 #영혼의 지도 #페르소나 뭐길래[뮤직와치] [[Music Watch] BTS Comeback April 12, New Message #Soul Map #Persona What Is It] (in Korean). Osen. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Cafolla, Anna (June 8, 2018). "The book that inspired a BTS song is now a bestseller in Korea". Dazed. Archived from the original on June 11, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Song, Myeong-seon (2016). 힙합하다 1: 한국, 힙합 그리고 삶 [Let's Do Hiphop: Korea, Hiphop, and Life] (in Korean). Annapurna. ISBN 979-1-186-55911-6. Anderson, p. ix. Anderson, p. 26. Anderson, p. xxii. Park, T.K.; Kim, Young-dae (April 19, 2019). "Your Guide to BTS and Their Musical Universe in 25 Songs". Vulture. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Herman, Tamar (November 24, 2017). "BTS and Steve Aoki Drop 'Mic Drop' Remix Feat. Desiigner: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "'All hail the kings!': BTS begins new chapter with 'Map of the Soul: Persona'". Kpop Herald. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved January 22, 2023. Yoo, Noah (October 9, 2018). "BTS: How the Biggest Boy Band in the World Stays Radically Korean". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved January 1, 2023. Daly, Rhian (April 29, 2020). "Every BTS song ranked in order of greatness". NME. Archived from the original on April 29, 2020. Retrieved June 14, 2020. Kim 2019a, pp. 60–61, Review 04. Bruner, Raisa (November 17, 2020). "A Comprehensive Look Back at BTS' Seven-Year Journey to the Top". Time. Archived from the original on April 1, 2022. Retrieved December 31, 2022. Kim, Seon-geun (October 10, 2016). V앱 방탄소년단, 피 땀 눈물 "날아오를 준비 됐다"...지민, 솔로곡 '라이(LIE)' "거짓말과 유혹에서 빠져 나가기 위해서 노력하는 곡" [BTS V-app, Blood Sweat and Tears "Ready to fly"...Jimin, solo song 'LIE' "a song that strives to escape lies and temptations"] (in Korean). Global Economic. Archived from the original on October 14, 2016. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Sheffield, Rob (February 24, 2020). "BTS Ambitiously Show off Their Pop Mastery On 'Map of the Soul: 7'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 24, 2020. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Daly, Rhian (February 21, 2020). "BTS–'Map Of The Soul: 7': Korea's global heavyweights come of age and survey their already enormous legacy". NME. Archived from the original on March 10, 2020. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Herman, Tamar (February 21, 2020). "BTS' New Album 'Map of the Soul: 7' Shines Light On Shadows and the Act's Career". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 20, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2020. Dodson, P. Claire (August 21, 2020). "BTS's Disco Dream "Dynamite" Reminds Us Things Can Still Be Fun". Teen Vogue. Archived from the original on August 21, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2021. Singh, Surej (July 7, 2021). "BTS share teaser for 'Permission To Dance' music video". NME. Archived from the original on July 7, 2021. Retrieved September 5, 2021. Hwang, Hyo-jin (April 1, 2019). "BTS pledges to 'tell the story of our generation with our lyrics'". IZE. Archived from the original on April 10, 2019. Retrieved April 20, 2019. Bennett, Colette (May 12, 2016). "How BTS is changing K-pop for the better". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved August 7, 2020. "Kpop group BTS gaining global recognition". Manila Bulletin. December 26, 2016. Archived from the original on January 2, 2017. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Greenblatt, Leah (March 29, 2019). "BTS' RM and Suga talk mental health, depression, and connecting with fans". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2021. Herman, Tamar (August 17, 2017). "What To Know About BTS' 'Love Yourself' Series". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 20, 2017. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Herman, Tamar (February 13, 2018). "BTS' Most Political Lyrics: A Guide to Their Social Commentary on South Korean Society". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 14, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Sprinkel, pp. 192–193. Benjamin, Jeff (October 21, 2016). "How Korean Boy Band BTS Broke a US K-pop Chart Record–Without Any Songs in English". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 22, 2016. Retrieved October 22, 2016. Kim 2019a, p. 258, Review 14. Sprinkel, p. 232. Herman, Tamar (February 20, 2017). "BTS Aims to Survive in 'Not Today' Music Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 20, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2019. Choi, Ji-ye (February 18, 2017). '월드투어' 방탄소년단이 밝힌 #빌보드 핫100 #세월호 #유리천장(종합) ["World Tour" BTS reveal #Billboard Hot 100 #Sewol Ferry #Glass Ceiling (Comprehensive)] (in Korean). My Daily. Archived from the original on February 14, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2020 – via Naver. Benjamin, Jeff (December 4, 2015). "BTS: Kpop's social conscience". Fuse. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2021. Peters, Mitchell (May 28, 2018). "South Korean President Moon Jae-in Congratulates BTS on First No. 1 Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 29, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Halsey (2019). "The 100 Most Influential People". Time (published April 29, 2019). p. 60. ISSN 0040-781X. Park, Se-yeon (September 26, 2019). ""BTS, 비틀즈만큼 영향력 있는 팀"(세지포)" (in Korean). Star Today. Archived from the original on December 8, 2019. Retrieved October 1, 2019. Park, Se-yeon (September 26, 2019). ""BTS, 글로벌 시장에 K팝 주류화 시켰다"(세지포)" (in Korean). Sports Today. Archived from the original on December 7, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. Hwang, Hye-jin (February 27, 2019). 방탄소년단, 2018년 드레이크 다음으로 많이 팔았다 '국제음반산업협회 차트 2위' (in Korean). Newsen. Archived from the original on August 18, 2019. Retrieved August 18, 2019 – via Naver. "BTS ranks second in 2018 artist chart by intl recording federation". Yonhap News Agency. February 27, 2019. Archived from the original on June 27, 2020. Retrieved August 18, 2019 – via The Korea Herald. "The Greatest Showman soundtrack named best-selling album of 2018". IFPI. March 13, 2019. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Park, Seung-won (July 15, 2019). 상반기 앨범 1290만장 판매...BTS 나홀로 '열일' 했다 (in Korean). Herald Economics. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved August 18, 2019. Youna Kim, pp. 1–2. Vanek Smith, Stacey (August 6, 2021). "How BTS Is Adding An Estimated $5 Billion To The South Korean Economy A Year". National Public Radio. Retrieved June 5, 2022. Kyung Hyun Kim 2021, p. 247. Youna Kim, p. 13. Kyung Hyun Kim 2021, p. 83. Elberse, Anita; Woodham, Lizzy (June 8, 2020). "Big Hit Entertainment and Blockbuster Band BTS: K-Pop Goes Global". Harvard Business Review. Kyung Hyun Kim 2022, pp. 114–117. "K-pop legends and kings of 'soft power': South Korea's BTS". France24. June 15, 2022. Retrieved July 1, 2022. Nye, Joseph S. Jr. (Autumn 1990). "Soft Power". Foreign Policy. JSTOR 1148580. Retrieved June 4, 2022. Quessard, pp. 279–296. Allaire, Christian (September 24, 2018). "Watch BTS Address the United Nations With an Emotional Speech About Self-Acceptance". Vogue. Archived from the original on September 25, 2018. Retrieved September 25, 2018. Chakraborty, Riddhi (September 24, 2018). "BTS at the UN: 'Our Fans' Stories Constantly Remind Us of Our Responsibility'". Rolling Stone India. Archived from the original on September 24, 2018. Retrieved September 24, 2018. Herman, Tamar (October 14, 2018). "BTS Performs at Korea-France Friendship Concert in Paris with South Korean President in Attendance". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 27, 2020. Retrieved October 15, 2018. Yoon, Min-sik (October 8, 2018). "BTS to get medal for spreading Korean culture: presidential office". The Korea Herald. Archived from the original on June 28, 2020. Retrieved October 8, 2018. Kim, Yeon-ji (October 18, 2018). BTS '최연소' 문화훈장, 유재석·김남주 등 대통령표창...어떻게 선정됐나. Daily Sports. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved September 20, 2019. Choi, Kyung-min (September 17, 2019). [전문]文, 콘텐츠산업 3대 혁신전략.."마음껏 상상하고 도전". Money Today (in Korean). Archived from the original on May 11, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2019. "2020 Annual Gala – Van Fleet Award Honorees". The Korea Society. August 7, 2020. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. Im, Rara (August 10, 2020). “음악으로 이끈 유대”…방탄소년단 '밴플리트 상' 수상에 주한미국대사관도 나섰다. Top Star News (in Korean). Archived from the original on July 18, 2022. Retrieved July 18, 2022. Chin, Carmen (July 21, 2021). "BTS appointed special presidential envoy for culture by Moon Jae-in". NME. Archived from the original on July 21, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Maresca, Thomas (July 21, 2021). "BTS named special presidential envoy by South Korea". UPI. Archived from the original on July 21, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Blair, Elizabeth (May 31, 2022). "K-Pop stars BTS went to the White House to talk about anti-Asian hate crimes". NPR. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved June 25, 2022. Kyung Hyun Kim 2021, pp. 56–57. Hunt & McKelvey, p. 325. Ju, p. 26. Kyung Hyun Kim 2021, p. 60. Kyung Hyun Kim 2022, p. 115. Ohandjanian, Sevana. "Welcome to BTS' Universe: Join us for a deep-dive into the BTS Bantan Universe". Acclaim. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Kyung Hyun Kim 2021, pp. 61–62. Chang, WoongJo; Park, Shin-Eui (December 10, 2018). "The Fandom of Hallyu, A Tribe in the Digital Network Era: The Case of ARMY of BTS". Kritika Kultura (32). Quezon City: 260–287. doi:10.13185/KK2019.03213. S2CID 226946079. Lee, Wonseok; Kao, Grace (October 15, 2021). ""Make It Right": Why #BlackLivesMatter(s) to K-pop, BTS, and BTS ARMYs". IASPM Journal. 11 (1): 70–87. doi:10.5429/2079-3871(2021)v11i1.7en. S2CID 244593575. Jin, p. 143. Ju, pp. 25–27. Sprinkel, pp. 140–141. Sprinkel, p. 144. Keith, p. 164. Ejiofor, Annette (March 1, 2018). "BTS Are Puma's New Ambassadors And We Will Buy All The Athletic Gear". HuffPost Canada. Archived from the original on May 15, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Lee, Eun-ho (October 19, 2015). 방탄소년단, 푸마 새 모델 발탁...시크한 겨울 화보 공개 [BTS, Puma's New Model...a chic winter pictorial] (in Korean). Ten Asia. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Oh, Myung-joo (February 27, 2018). "우리가 바로, 앰배서더"...BTS, '푸마' 글로벌 모델 발탁 ['We are ambassadors'.. BTS selected as PUMA global models] (in Korean). Dispatch. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2019 – via Naver. Pace, Lily (October 1, 2019). "BTS Are Now Global Brand Ambassadors For Fila". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 2, 2020. Retrieved October 7, 2019. "BTS becomes new models for LG Electronics' smartphones". Yonhap News Agency. April 3, 2018. Archived from the original on November 5, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Unger, Emerson (November 26, 2018). "Hyundai Motor Appoints BTS as Global Brand Ambassadors of the All-New Flagship SUV 'Palisade'". MUSE. Archived from the original on June 15, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2019. '넥쏘' 탄 BTS...현대차 글로벌 홍보대사로 ['Nexo' Tan BTS... As a Global Ambassador for Hyundai] (in Korean). Herald Corporation. January 27, 2020. Archived from the original on June 27, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2020. Herman, Tamar (December 18, 2019). "BTS Teams Up With Formula E to Combat Climate Change". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 25, 2020. Retrieved December 19, 2019. "Samsung signs partnership with BTS to boost marketing". The Korea Herald. February 19, 2020. Archived from the original on February 19, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2020. Kaufman, Gil (June 15, 2020). "Samsung Rolling Out BTS-Themed Phones & Earbuds". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 15, 2020. Retrieved June 23, 2020. Suen, Zoe; Guilbault, Laure (June 9, 2019). "What Dior's BTS Stage Looks Mean for Luxury". Imran Amed. Archived from the original on June 7, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Chan, Tim (April 23, 2021). "Fashion Kings BTS Announced as the Newest Louis Vuitton Ambassadors". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 23, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Lee, Min-ji (May 31, 2019). 방탄소년단 진, 기부금 1억원 돌파…유니세프 아너스클럽 회원(공식) [BTS Jin, over 100 million won in donations...Membership of UNICEF Honors Club (Official)]. Newsen (in Korean). Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. Retrieved October 22, 2021 – via Naver. Hong, Seong-young (February 18, 2019). 방탄소년단 제이홉, 오늘 생일 맞아 1억 기부…총 2억5천만원 [공식입장] [BTS J-Hope Donates 100 Million for his birthday...Total 250 million won [Official]]. Sports Donga (in Korean). Archived from the original on August 5, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2019 – via Naver. Yeon, Hwi-seon (October 13, 2021). BTS 지민·청하·김소연♥이상우, 1억원 고액기부자 그린노블클럽 가입 [공식] [BTS Jimin, Chung Ha, Kim So Yeon ♥ Lee Sang Woo, 100 million won donors joined the Green Noble Club. [Official]]. Osen (in Korean). Archived from the original on October 18, 2021. Retrieved October 12, 2021 – via Naver. Hwang, Hye-Jin (December 21, 2020). '미술관 1억 기부' 방탄소년단 RM, 2020 올해의 예술후원인대상 수상 ['100 Million Won Art Museum Donation, BTS RM awarded 2020 Patron of the Arts Award]. Newsen (in Korean). Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved December 26, 2020 – via Naver. Park, Dae-sung (August 24, 2020). BTS 지민, 전남교육청에 장학기금 1억 몰래 기부 [BTS Jimin secretly donated 100 million won scholarships to Jeonnam Office of Education]. Herald Economic News (in Korean). Retrieved October 27, 2021 – via Naver. Tubiera, Alecsandra (December 11, 2020). "When BTS members donate to charity they inspire fans to do the same – the 'Army' raised US$1 million for Black Lives Matter and US$83,000 for Typhoon Vamco victims". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Herman, Tamar (February 10, 2019). "BTS Make First Appearance On Grammys Stage, Present H.E.R With R&B Album Of the Year Award". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 11, 2019. Retrieved June 5, 2019. Goggins, Joe (May 16, 2022). "BTS set new record at 2022 Billboard Music Awards". Rolling Stone UK. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Grein, Paul (November 15, 2019). "Taylor Swift, BTS & More Record-Setters at the 2019 American Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 26, 2019. Retrieved March 17, 2020. Dongre, Divyansha (November 22, 2021). "BTS Becomes The First Asian Act In AMAs History To Win Artist Of Year". Rolling Stone India. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved November 22, 2021. B, D.K. (November 25, 2020). "(LEAD) BTS wins Grammy nomination for best pop duo/group performance". Yonhap News. Archived from the original on April 3, 2021. Retrieved April 2, 2021. Lee, M (April 1, 2021). "BTS becomes 1st Korean artist to be nominated for Brit Awards". Yonhap News Agency. Archived from the original on April 1, 2021. Retrieved April 2, 2021. "BTS creates HISTORY at MAMA Awards: Clinches 50 trophies and secures 6th consecutive 'Worldwide Icon of the Year' win". The Times of India. November 29, 2023. ISSN 0971-8257. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Herman, Tamar (June 30, 2017). "Get To Know BTS: Jin". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Herman, Tamar (June 30, 2017). "Get To Know BTS: Suga". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Herman, Tamar (June 30, 2017). "Get To Know BTS: J-Hope". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 3, 2017. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Herman, Tamar (June 30, 2017). "Get To Know BTS: Rap Monster". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 9, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Herman, Tamar (June 30, 2017). "Get To Know BTS: Jimin". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 2, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Herman, Tamar (June 30, 2017). "Get to Know BTS: V". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Herman, Tamar (June 30, 2017). "Get To Know BTS: Jungkook". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 12, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2019. 방탄소년단 첫 단독콘서트, 2분 만에 전석 매진…1회 추가 공연. TV Report (in Korean). September 11, 2014. Retrieved May 27, 2019. =방탄소년단, 첫 콘서트 성황리 마쳐…후속 활동 돌입. Maeil Business (in Korean). October 20, 2014. Archived from the original on February 28, 2024. Retrieved May 27, 2019. 방탄소년단, 일본 투어 콘서트 성황리에 종료.. '한국 콘서트도 곧'. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved August 3, 2015. 방탄소년단, 日 4개 도시 투어 성황리 마쳐. February 23, 2015. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved August 3, 2015. 防弾少年団1st Japan Tour 2015「Wake Up: Open Your Eyes」ライブ・ビューイング実施決定！！ | プレスリリース | BARKS. www.barks.jp. January 19, 2015. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved August 3, 2015. 방탄소년단, 11월 콘서트 포스터 공개..가을 분위기 물씬. Ten Asia (in Korean). September 14, 2019. Archived from the original on February 28, 2024. Retrieved May 27, 2019. Hong, Dam-young (December 11, 2017). "BTS presents tearful, beautiful finale of 'Wings' tour in Seoul". The Korea Herald. Archived from the original on June 30, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. Herman, Tamar (April 26, 2018). "BTS Announces World Tour With Stops In Six North American Cities". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 26, 2018. Retrieved April 26, 2018. "BTS Finish Love Yourself: Speak Yourself Tour With $116 Million". Billboard. November 14, 2019. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved November 16, 2019. Anderson, Crystal S. (2020). Soul in Seoul: African American Popular Music and K-pop. University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-4968-3009-8. Hunt, Robert; McKelvey, Fenwick (2019). "Algorithmic Regulation in Media and Cultural Policy: A Framework to Evaluate Barriers to Accountability". Journal of Information Policy. 9: 307–335. doi:10.5325/jinfopoli.9.2019.0307. JSTOR 10.5325/jinfopoli.9.2019.0307. S2CID 213521720. Jin, Dal Yong (2022). "Transnational Cultural Power of BTS: Digital Fan Activism in the Social Media Era". In Kim, Youna (ed.). The Soft Power of the Korean Wave: Parasite, BTS and Drama. Routledge. pp. 142–154. ISBN 978-1-00310-248-9. Ju, Hyunshik. "Premediating a Narrative of Growth: BTS, Digital Media, and Fan Culture". Popular Entertainment Studies: 19–33. ISSN 1837-9303. Archived from the original on March 21, 2022. Retrieved June 7, 2022. Keith, Sarah (2022). "BTS as Cultural Ambassadors". In Kim, Youna (ed.). The Soft Power of the Korean Wave: Parasite, BTS and Drama. Routledge. pp. 152–167. ISBN 978-1-00310-248-9. Kim, Kyung Hyun (2021). Hegemonic Mimicry: Korean Popular Culture of the Twenty-first Century. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-1-4780-1358-7. Kim, Kyung Hyun (2022). "BTS and the World Music Industry". In Kim, Youna (ed.). The Soft Power of the Korean Wave: Parasite, BTS and Drama. Routledge. pp. 107–117. ISBN 978-1-00310-248-9. Kim, Youna (2022). "Introduction: Popular Culture and Soft Power in the Social Media Age". In Kim, Youna (ed.). The Soft Power of the Korean Wave: Parasite, BTS and Drama. Routledge. pp. 1–38. ISBN 978-1-00310-248-9. Kim, Young-dae (2019a). BTS–The Review: A Comprehensive Look at the Music of BTS. Translated by H.J. Chung. RH Korea. ISBN 978-8-925-56582-8. Lie, John (2022). "BTS, the Highest Stage of K-Pop". In Kim, Youna (ed.). The Soft Power of the Korean Wave: Parasite, BTS and Drama. Routledge. pp. 118–128. ISBN 978-1-00310-248-9. Quessard, Maud (2020). "Entertainment Diplomacy". In Balzacq, Thierry; Charillon, Frédéric; Ramel, Frédéric (eds.). Global Diplomacy: An Introduction to the Theory and Practice. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 279–296. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-28786-3_21. ISBN 978-3-03028-785-6. S2CID 211355635. Shapiro, Marc (2018). Burn the Stage: The Rise of BTS and Korean Boy Bands. Riverdale Avenue Books. ISBN 978-1-62601-490-9. Sprinkel, Katy (2021). BTS: One. Triumph Books. ISBN 978-1-64125-643-8. Suk-Young Kim, ed. (2023). "Part V: The Band That Surprised the World". The Cambridge Companion to K-Pop. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-108-94478-6. Wikimedia Commons has media related to BTS. Official website