Orgazmo is a 1997 American superhero sex comedy film written, directed and edited by Trey Parker and produced by Matt Stone, Jason McHugh, and Fran Rubel Kuzui. It stars Parker, Stone, Dian Bachar, Robyn Lynne, and Michael Dean Jacobs. The plot follows Joe Young (Parker), a devout Mormon missionary who, to pay for his and his fiancée's dream wedding and home, acts in a pornographic film. Orgazmo is Parker's second film, after 1993's Cannibal! The Musical. Mormon missionary Joseph Young, assigned with his mission partner to Los Angeles, finds the city to be a hostile and unenthusiastic place for their work. The problems worsen when they knock on the door of sleazy porn director Maxxx Orbison and several security guards are sent to dispose of them. Joe defeats them all singlehandedly with a variety of martial arts skills. Impressed by his performance and bored by his current project's lead actor, Orbison attempts to hire Joe to play the title character and lead of his pornographic superhero film, Orgazmo. Joe is conflicted because of his religious beliefs, but the salary offered would pay for a wedding in the temple in Utah where his fiancée Lisa has expressed a strong desire to wed. Joe reluctantly accepts despite being given a sign from God. Joe finds the crew of the film intimidating but befriends co-star Ben Chapleski, a technical genius and MIT alumnus who works in the pornographic industry to satiate his overactive libido. He plays Orgazmo's sidekick Choda Boy, who assists Orgazmo with specially designed sex toys, including Orgazmo's signature weapon, the Orgazmorator, a ray gun that forces orgasm upon whomever it is fired. Ben invites Joe to his home and shows Joe a real Orgazmorator he has built, and he and Joe spend an evening using it on unsuspecting citizens for amusement. At a sushi bar owned by Ben's Japanese friend G-Fresh, the two witness a group of thugs vandalizing the bar to force out G-Fresh so their dance club next door can expand. Later, when Ben and Joe are gone, G-Fresh is coerced to leave after the same thugs assault him. Upon finding this out, Joe and Ben don costumes and use their film props and the Orgazmorator to sneak into the club and steal back the contract G-Fresh was forced to sign. Joe is agitated after nearly being shot in the head, but Ben is excited by being a real superhero. Orgazmo becomes an amazing success, both financially and critically, and Orbison withholds Joe's paycheck to keep him in town long enough to announce a sequel. Tempted by a doubled salary, Joe is confronted by Lisa, who has found out what he has been doing and leaves him. Facing production difficulties and harassment from Orbison's unsympathetic nephew A-Cup, Joe tries to back out of the project, but Orbison refuses. When Joe stands up to him, Orbison has Lisa kidnapped. Ben realizes the thugs who assaulted G-Fresh work for Orbison, and he joins Joe in storming Orbison's mansion before Lisa can be forced to perform in one of Orbison's films. Fighting through Orbison's group of henchmen, Joe and Ben meet their match in A-Cup. Joe encourages Ben to unleash his long-repressed Hamster Style discipline of martial arts, allowing Ben to beat A-Cup. After repairing his damaged Orgazmorator, Joe repeatedly shoots Orbison with it, incapacitating him and capturing all the henchmen. Ben blows up the mansion with another device, the "Cock Rocket", destroying Orbison's base of operations. Joe and Lisa reconcile, and she gives him her blessing to remain in Los Angeles and continue being a hero alongside Ben. A doctor tells Orbison that after so many orgasms in a row, his testicles have swollen to the size of oranges, and surgical removal is the only option. A now insane Orbison declares revenge on Orgazmo and becomes the personification of A-Cup's character, who is immune to the Orgazmorator: Neutered Man. Trey Parker as Joe Young/Orgazmo Dian Bachar as Ben Chapleski/Choda Boy Robert Lansing as Young Ben Robyn Lynne Raab as Lisa Michael Dean Jacobs as Maxxx Orbison Matt Stone as Dave The Photographer Masao Maki as G-Fresh Toddy Walters as Georgi Ron Jeremy as Clark/Jizzmaster Zero David Dunn as A-Cup/Neutered Man Chasey Lain as Candi Juli Ashton as Saffi Shayla LaVeaux as Greek porn actress Jill Kelly as Nurse Lloyd Kaufman as Doctor Max Hardcore as Award show presenter Christi Lake Jeanna Fine Jacklyn Lick Mike Eaton as Meatfish Melissa Hill Serenity Orgazmo premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival in 1997. The Motion Picture Association of America gave the film an NC-17 rating, resulting in a very limited release in the US. An unrated version was released on the two-sided DVD set along with the theatrical version; it is two minutes shorter than the original 94-minute release. The film was released via Blu-ray on May 12, 2015. This includes both versions of the film and all the features from the DVD. As of September 2022, the review-aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 48% and an average rating of 4.90/10 based on 33 reviews. The website's critical consensus read: "More juvenile than provocative, Orgazmo may have enough good-natured raunch to satisfy writer-director Trey Parker's fans, but its satire is too soft to compete with the South Park co-creator's best work." As of September 2020, the film had a score of 48 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 17 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Roger Ebert gave the film half a star out of four, arguing that Orgazmo had little of the clever wit Parker and Stone brought to South Park and calling it "callow, gauche, obvious and awkward, and designed to appeal to those with similar qualities". On the other hand, James Berardinelli gave the film three out of four stars, calling it "crude, rude, profane, and funny" and the kind of movie that makes "for a great event at parties". Orgazmo has been deemed a cult film, mostly by fans of South Park, which Parker and Stone subsequently released to critical acclaim. Its reception and rating by the MPAA is discussed in the 2006 documentary This Film Is Not Yet Rated. Film portal Latter Day Saint movement portal Portrayals of Mormons in popular media "Orgazmo (1998)". AFI Catalog of Feature Films. Retrieved March 17, 2021. "ORGAZMO (18)". British Board of Film Classification. Retrieved June 19, 2013. "Orgazmo (1998)". Box Office Mojo. Internet Movie Database. November 26, 1998. Retrieved July 28, 2015. Hartl, John (October 23, 1998). "'Orgazmo': Porn Story Of Corrupted Innocence Fumbles, Is Repetitious". The Seattle Times. Retrieved July 30, 2018. Cox, Dan (October 8, 1998). "MPAA: 'Orgazmo' stays NC-17". Variety. Retrieved July 30, 2018. "Orgazmo". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved September 18, 2020. "Orgazmo (1998)". Metacritic. Retrieved September 18, 2020. Ebert, Roger (October 23, 1998). "Orgazmo". Chicago Sun Times. Retrieved June 4, 2010. Berardinelli, James. "Orgazmo". ReelViews. Retrieved June 4, 2010. Robinson, Tasha (April 26, 2005). "Orgazmo: Unrated Special Edition". The A.V. Club. Retrieved April 8, 2018. Olson, Christopher J. (2018). 100 Greatest Cult Films. United States: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 34. ISBN 9781442208223. Wikiquote has quotations related to Orgazmo. Orgazmo at IMDb