The 2019 IIHF World Championship Division III was an international ice hockey tournament run by the International Ice Hockey Federation. The Group A tournament was held in Sofia, Bulgaria from 22 to 28 April and the qualification tournament in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates from 31 March to 6 April 2019. Both Kyrgyzstan and Thailand made their debut in the World Championships, with each winning their first game (Kyrgyzstan won all five of its games, but the first four were changed to forfeits due to an ineligible player). Bulgaria earned promotion to Division II, while the United Arab Emirates won the qualification tournament and were promoted. South Africa finished last and were demoted to the qualification tournament. 4 referees and 7 linesmen were selected for the tournament. Source: IIHF Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal difference; 4) head-to-head number of goals scored; 5) result against closest best-ranked team outside tied teams; 6) result against second-best ranked team outside tied teams; 7) seeding before tournament. (H) Host; (P) Promoted; (R) Relegated All times are local (UTC+3). Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goalkeeper: Dimitar Dimitrov Best Defenseman: Shen Yen-lin Best Forward: Miroslav Vasilev Source: IIHF.com List shows the top skaters sorted by points, then goals. GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; +/− = Plus/minus; PIM = Penalties in minutes; POS = Position Source: IIHF.com Only the top five goaltenders, based on save percentage, who have played at least 40% of their team's minutes, are included in this list. TOI = Time on ice (minutes:seconds); SA = Shots against; GA = Goals against; GAA = Goals against average; Sv% = Save percentage; SO = Shutouts Source: IIHF.com 4 referees and 7 linesmen were selected for the tournament. Source: IIHF Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal difference; 4) head-to-head number of goals scored; 5) result against closest best-ranked team outside tied teams; 6) result against second-best ranked team outside tied teams; 7) seeding before tournament. (H) Host; (P) Promoted Notes: United Arab Emirates 11–1 Hong Kong Kyrgyzstan 0–5 (forfeit) Kuwait All times are local (UTC+4). Kyrgyzstan played its first four games, all wins, with Russian born player Aleksandr Titov in their lineup. Before their final game, also a win, when it was found that Titov was not yet eligible to play for Kyrgyzstan, he was disqualified from the tournament and Kyrgyzstan forfeited their first four games. All statistics from Kyrgyzstan's first four games were not counted by the IIHF, including their opponents scoring and goaltending details. List shows the top skaters sorted by points, then goals. GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; +/− = Plus/minus; PIM = Penalties in minutes; POS = Position Source: IIHF.com Kyrgyz players Vladimir Nosov (23 points), Vladimir Tonkikh (16), Mikhail Chuvalov (16), Islambek Abdyraev (10) and Maksim Egorov (10) do not appear in this list because their statistics from their first four games were deemed invalid. Only the top five goaltenders, based on save percentage, who have played at least 40% of their team's minutes, are included in this list. TOI = Time on ice (minutes:seconds); SA = Shots against; GA = Goals against; GAA = Goals against average; Sv% = Save percentage; SO = Shutouts Source: IIHF.com "Kazakhstan, Japan get top events". new-iihf.com. 18 May 2018. Archived from the original on 18 May 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. "Bulgaria storms to another gold". iihf.com. 28 April 2018. "Emirates win on home ice". iihf.com. 6 April 2018. Assignments Qualification assignments KGZ stats from four forfeited games Official website Qualification website