This article contains Urdu text. Without proper rendering support, you may see unjoined letters running left to right or other symbols instead of Urdu script. Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi (Urdu: عمران خان , pronounced [ɪmɾaːn ɛɦməd xaːn nɪjaːziː]; born 5 October 1952) is a Pakistani politician and former cricketer who served as the 22nd prime minister of Pakistan from August 2018 until April 2022. He is the founder and former chairman of the political party Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) from 1996 to 2023. He was the captain of the Pakistan national cricket team throughout the 1980s and early 90s. Born in Lahore, Khan graduated from Keble College, Oxford. He began his international cricket career in a 1971 Test series against England. Khan played until 1992, served as the team's captain intermittently between 1982 and 1992, and won the 1992 Cricket World Cup, Pakistan's only victory in the competition. Considered one of cricket's greatest all-rounders, Khan was later inducted into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame. Founding the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) in 1996, Khan won a seat in the National Assembly in the 2002 general election, serving as an opposition member from Mianwali until 2007. PTI boycotted the 2008 general election and became the second-largest party by popular vote in the 2013 general election. In the 2018 general election, running on a populist platform, PTI became the largest party in the National Assembly, and formed a coalition government with independents with Khan as prime minister. As prime minister, Khan addressed a balance of payments crisis with bailouts from the IMF. He presided over a shrinking current account deficit, and limited defence spending to curtail the fiscal deficit, leading to some general economic growth. He enacted policies that increased tax collection and investment. His government committed to a renewable energy transition, launched Ehsaas Programme and the Plant for Pakistan initiative, and expanded the protected areas of Pakistan. He presided over the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused economic turmoil and rising inflation in the country, threatening his political position. In early 2022, in what became known as Lettergate, Khan alleged that the United States encouraged his removal from office. In April, during the ensuing constitutional crisis, Khan became the first Pakistani prime minister to be removed from office through a no-confidence motion. In August, he was charged under anti-terror laws after accusing the police and judiciary of detaining and torturing an aide. In October, Khan was disqualified by the Election Commission of Pakistan from taking office for the current term of the National Assembly of Pakistan, regarding the Toshakhana reference case. In November, he survived an assassination attempt during a political rally in Wazirabad, Punjab. On 9 May 2023, Khan was arrested on corruption charges at the Islamabad High Court by paramilitary troops who smashed their way into the courthouse. Protests broke out throughout Pakistan, resulting in the arrests of thousands of Khan's supporters along with military installations being ransacked. After his release, he blamed the Chief of Army Staff Asim Munir for his arrest. He was sentenced to a three-year jail term on 5 August 2023 after being found guilty of misusing his premiership to buy and sell gifts in state possession that were received during diplomatic visits abroad. On 29 August 2023, a Pakistani appeals court suspended Khan's three-year prison term and granted him bail, but he remained incarcerated in connection with the Lettergate diplomatic cypher, for which he was accused of leaking state secrets and violating the Official Secrets Act. On 30 January 2024, a special court sentenced Khan to 10 years in prison after finding him guilty of those charges. Khan was born in Lahore on 5 October 1952. Earlier, some reports suggest he was born on 25 November 1952. It was reported that 5 October was wrongly mentioned by Pakistan Cricket Board officials on his passport. He is the only son of Ikramullah Khan Niazi, a civil engineer, and his wife Shaukat Khanum, and has four sisters. Long settled in Mianwali in northwestern Punjab, his paternal family are of Pashtun descent and belong to the Niazi tribe, and one of his ancestors, Haibat Khan Niazi, in the 16th century, "was one of Sher Shah Suri's leading generals, as well as being the governor of Punjab." Khan's maternal family has produced a number of cricketers, including those who have represented Pakistan, such as his cousins Javed Burki and Majid Khan. Maternally, Khan is also a descendant of the Sufi warrior-poet and inventor of the Pashto alphabet, Pir Roshan, who hailed from his maternal family's ancestral Kaniguram town located in South Waziristan in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. His maternal family was based in Basti Danishmanda, Jalandhar in Punjab, India for about 600 years, and migrated to Lahore after the independence of Pakistan. A quiet and shy boy in his youth, Khan grew up with his sisters in relatively affluent, upper middle-class circumstances and received a privileged education. He was educated at the Aitchison College and Cathedral School in Lahore, and then the Royal Grammar School Worcester in England, where he excelled at cricket. In 1972, he enrolled in Keble College, Oxford where he studied philosophy, politics and economics, graduating in 1975. An enthusiast for college cricket at Keble, Paul Hayes, was instrumental in securing the admission of Khan, after he had been turned down by Cambridge. Khan had numerous relationships during his bachelor life. He was then known as a hedonistic bachelor and a playboy who was active on the London nightclub circuit. Many girlfriends are unknown and were called "mysterious blondes" by British newspaper The Times. Some of the women with whom he has been associated include Zeenat Aman, Emma Sergeant, Susie Murray-Philipson, Sita White, Sarah Crawley, Stephanie Beacham, Goldie Hawn, Kristiane Backer, Susannah Constantine, Marie Helvin, Caroline Kellett, Liza Campbell, Anastasia Cooke, Hannah Rothschild, and Lulu Blacker. His first girlfriend, Emma Sergeant, an artist and the daughter of British investor Sir Patrick Sergeant, introduced him to socialites. They first met in 1982 and subsequently visited Pakistan. She accompanied him on various Pakistani cricket team tours including in Peshawar and Australian tour. After long separations, his relationship with Sergeant was broken in 1986. He then had a short relationship with Susie Murray-Philipson whom he invited to Pakistan and had dinner with in 1982. She also made various artistic portraits of Khan during their relationship. In a book published in 2009, Christopher Sandford claimed that Khan and former Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto had a close relationship when both were students in Oxford. He wrote that Bhutto at the age of 21 first became close to Khan in 1975. They remained in a relationship for about two months. His mother also tried to have an arranged marriage between them. He further claimed that they had a "romantic relationship", which was refuted by Khan who said they were only friends. Khan allegedly has a daughter, Tyrian Jade, with his ex-girlfriend Sita White, daughter of the British industrialist Gordon White. Born in June 1992, Tyrian became a subject of dispute as Khan denied paternity and willed for a paternity test in Pakistan, stating he would accept the decision of the Pakistani courts. Legal actions in 1997 led to a California court declaring Khan as the father without a DNA test. After Sita White's death in 2004, Jemima, Khan's wife at the time and Sita's friend, was designated as Tyrian's legal guardian by Sita in her will. Khan stated that Tyrian would be welcome to join their family in London, leaving the decision entirely up to her, given her established relationship with his and Jemima's sons. Khan's former wife, Reham Khan, alleged in her book that he had told her that he had four other children out of wedlock in addition to Tyrian White. Allegedly, some of his children had Indian mothers and the eldest was aged 34 in 2018. Reham subsequently conceded that she did not know the identities of Khan's children or the veracity of his statements and that "you can never make out whether he tells the truth." Reham's book was published on 12 July 2018, 13 days before the 2018 Pakistani general election, leading to claims that its publication was intended to damage Imran Khan's electoral prospects. On 16 May 1995, Khan married Jemima Goldsmith, in a two-minute ceremony conducted in Urdu in Paris. A month later, on 21 June, they were married again in a civil ceremony at the Richmond registry office in England. Jemima converted to Islam upon marriage. The couple have two sons, Sulaiman Isa and Kasim. On 22 June 2004, it was announced that the couple had divorced, ending the nine-year marriage because it was "difficult for Jemima to adapt to life in Pakistan." In January 2015, it was announced that Khan had married British-Pakistani journalist Reham Khan in a private Nikah ceremony at his residence in Islamabad. Reham Khan later states in her autobiography that they in fact got married in October 2014 but the announcement only came in January the year after. On 22 October 2015, they announced their intention to file for divorce. In mid-2016, late 2017 and early 2018, reports emerged that Khan had married his spiritual mentor (murshid), Bushra Bibi. Khan himself, alongside PTI aides, as well as members of the Manika family, denied the rumour. Khan termed the media "unethical" for spreading the rumour, and PTI filed a complaint against the news channels that had aired it. On 7 January 2018, the PTI central secretariat issued a statement that said Khan had proposed to Manika, but she had not yet accepted his proposal. On 18 February 2018, PTI confirmed Khan has married Manika. According to Khan, his life has been influenced by Sufism for three decades, and this is what drew him closer to his wife. The Mufti who conducted the marriage later testified to a court that Khan's nikah had been conducted twice. The first nikah was conducted on 1 January 2018, while his to-be wife was still in her Iddat, as Khan believed he would become prime minister if he married her on that date. Khan resided in his sprawling farmhouse at Bani Gala. As of 2018, he owned five pet dogs, who resided in his estate. Khan made his debut at the age of 16 in Lahore. By the start of the 1970s, he was playing for his home teams of Lahore A (1969–1970), Lahore B (1969–1970), Lahore Greens (1970–1971), and eventually Lahore (1970–1971). Khan was part of the University of Oxford's Blues Cricket team during the 1973–1975 seasons. Khan played English county cricket from 1971 to 1976 for Worcestershire. During this decade, other teams represented by Khan included Dawood Industries (1975–1976) and Pakistan International Airlines (1975–1976, 1980–1981). From 1983 to 1988, he played for Sussex. Khan made his Test cricket debut against England in June 1971 at Edgbaston. Three years later, in August 1974, he debuted in the One Day International (ODI) match, once again playing against England at Trent Bridge for the Prudential Trophy. After graduating from Oxford and finishing his tenure at Worcestershire, he returned to Pakistan in 1976 and secured a permanent place on his native national team starting from the 1976–1977 season, during which they faced New Zealand and Australia. Following the Australian series, he toured the West Indies, where he met Tony Greig, who signed him up for Kerry Packer's World Series Cricket. His credentials as one of the fastest bowlers in the world started to become established when he finished third at 139.7 km/h in a fast bowling contest at Perth in 1978, behind Jeff Thomson and Michael Holding but ahead of Dennis Lillee, Garth Le Roux, and Andy Roberts. During the late 1970s, Khan was one of the pioneers of the reverse swing bowling technique. He imparted this trick to the bowling duo of Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis, who mastered and popularised this art in later years. As a bowler, Khan initially bowled with a relatively chest-on action, at medium-pace; however, he worked hard to remodel his action to a more classical type, and to strengthen his body, to enable fast bowling. Khan attained his prime as a fast bowler in January 1980 till 1988 when he became out and out fast bowler. During this span Imran picked 236 test wickets at 17.77 apiece with 18 five-wicket hauls and 5 10 wicket hauls. His bowling average and strike rate were better than Richard Hadlee (19.03), Malcolm Marshall (20.20), Dennis Lillee (24.07), Joel Garner (20.62), and Michael Holding (23.68). In January 1983, playing against India, he attained a Test bowling rating of 922 points. Although calculated retrospectively (International Cricket Council (ICC) player ratings did not exist at the time), Khan's form and performance during this period ranks third in the ICC's All-Time Test Bowling Rankings. Khan achieved the all-rounder's triple (securing 3000 runs and 300 wickets) in 75 Tests, the second-fastest record behind Ian Botham's 72. He also has the second-highest all-time batting average of 61.86 for a Test batsman playing at position 6 in the batting order. He played his last Test match for Pakistan in January 1992, against Sri Lanka at Faisalabad. Khan retired permanently from cricket six months after his last ODI, the historic 1992 Cricket World Cup Final against England in Melbourne, Australia. He ended his career with 88 Test matches, 126 innings and scored 3807 runs at an average of 37.69, including six centuries and 18 fifties. His highest score was 136. As a bowler, he took 362 wickets in Test cricket, which made him the first Pakistani and world's fourth bowler to do so. In ODIs, he played 175 matches and scored 3709 runs at an average of 33.41. His highest score was 102 not out. His best ODI bowling was 6 wickets for 14 runs, a record for the best bowling figures by any bowler in an ODI innings in a losing cause. At the height of his career, in 1982, the thirty-year-old Khan took over the captaincy of the Pakistan cricket team from Javed Miandad. As a captain, Khan played 48 Test matches, of which 14 were won by Pakistan, 8 lost and the remaining 26 were drawn. He also played 139 ODIs, winning 77, losing 57 and ending one in a tie. In the team's second match, Khan led them to their first Test win on English soil for 28 years at Lord's. Khan's first year as captain was the peak of his legacy as a fast bowler as well as an all-rounder. He recorded the best Test bowling of his career while taking 8 wickets for 58 runs against Sri Lanka at Lahore in 1981–1982. He also topped both the bowling and batting averages against England in three-Test series in 1982, taking 21 wickets and averaging 56 with the bat. Later the same year, he put up a highly acknowledged performance in a home series against the formidable Indian team by taking 40 wickets in six Tests at an average of 13.95. By the end of this series in 1982–1983, Khan had taken 88 wickets in 13 Test matches over a period of one year as captain. This same Test series against India also resulted in a stress fracture in his shin that kept him out of cricket for more than two years. An experimental treatment funded by the Pakistani government helped him recover by the end of 1984 and he made a successful comeback to international cricket in the latter part of the 1984–1985 season. In 1987 in India, Khan led Pakistan in its first-ever Test series win and this was followed by Pakistan's first series victory in England during the same year. During the 1980s, his team also recorded three creditable draws against the West Indies. India and Pakistan co-hosted the 1987 Cricket World Cup, but neither ventured beyond the semi-finals. Khan retired from international cricket at the end of the World Cup. In 1988, he was asked to return to the captaincy by the President of Pakistan, General Zia-Ul-Haq, and on 18 January, he announced his decision to rejoin the team. Soon after returning to the captaincy, Khan led Pakistan to another winning tour in the West Indies, which he has recounted as "the last time I really bowled well". He was declared Man of the Series against West Indies in 1988 when he took 23 wickets in 3 Tests. Khan's career-high as a captain and cricketer came when he led Pakistan to victory in the 1992 Cricket World Cup. Playing with a brittle batting line-up, Khan promoted himself as a batsman to play in the top order along with Javed Miandad, but his contribution as a bowler was minimal. At the age of 39, Khan took the winning last wicket himself. He holds as a captain the world record for taking most wickets, best bowling strike rate and best bowling average in Test, and best bowling figures (8 wickets for 60 runs) in a Test innings, and also most five-wicket hauls (6) in a Test innings in wins. After retiring, Khan admitted to ball tampering during his early cricketing days when playing domestic cricket. Khan had said that, during matches, he "occasionally scratched the side of the ball and lifted the seam". Khan defended his actions in the same interview, arguing his conduct was commonplace at the time, even that spin bowlers would lift the seam (i.e. mildly ball tamper); further Khan argued that as he did not lift the seam of the ball above the normal level he was not violating the rules and spirit of the game within the rules defined whilst he was a player. Further, Khan argued that umpires in his 21 years of cricket had not complained about his conduct; Khan remarked that "The sole judge of fair and unfair play on the cricket field is the umpire". He had also added, "Only once did I use an object. When Sussex was playing Hampshire in 1981 the ball was not deviating at all. I got the 12th man to bring out a bottle top and it started to move around a lot." In 1996, Khan successfully defended himself in a libel action brought forth by former English captain and all-rounder Ian Botham and batsman Allan Lamb over comments they alleged were made by Khan in two articles about the above-mentioned ball-tampering and another article published in an Indian magazine, India Today. They claimed that, in the latter publication, Khan had called the two cricketers "racist, ill-educated and lacking in class." Khan protested that he had been misquoted, saying that he was defending himself after having admitted that he tampered with a ball in a county match 18 years ago. Khan won the libel case, which the judge labelled a "complete exercise in futility", with a 10–2 majority decision by the jury. Also, Khan had served as a domestic league coach. Since retiring, Khan has written opinion pieces on cricket for various British and Asian newspapers, especially regarding the Pakistani national team. His contributions have been published in the Indian magazine Outlook, The Guardian, The Independent, and The Daily Telegraph. Khan occasionally appeared as a cricket commentator on Asian and British sports networks, including BBC Urdu and the Star TV network. In 2004, when the Indian cricket team toured Pakistan after 14 years, he was a commentator on TEN Sports' special live show, Straight Drive, while he was also a Sify columnist for the 2005 India-Pakistan Test series. He has provided analysis for every cricket World Cup since 1992, which includes providing match summaries for the BBC during the 1999 Cricket World Cup. On 23 November 2005, Khan was appointed as the chancellor of University of Bradford, succeeding Betty Lockwood. On 26 February 2014, University of Bradford Union floated a motion to remove Khan from the post over Khan's absence from every graduation ceremony since 2010. Khan announced that he would step down on 30 November 2014, citing his "increasing political commitments". Brian Cantor, the university's vice-chancellor, said Khan had been "a wonderful role model for our students". During the 1990s, Khan also served as UNICEF's Special Representative for Sports and promoted health and immunisation programmes in Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Thailand. While in London, he also works with the Lord's Taverners, a cricket charity. Khan focused his efforts solely on social work. By 1991, he had founded the Shaukat Khanum Memorial Trust, a charity organisation bearing the name of his mother, Mrs. Shaukat Khanum. As the Trust's maiden endeavour, Khan established Pakistan's first and only cancer hospital, constructed using donations and funds exceeding $25 million, raised by Khan from all over the world. On 27 April 2008, Khan established a technical college in the Mianwali District called Namal College. It was built by the Mianwali Development Trust (MDT), and is an associate college of the University of Bradford in December 2005. Imran Khan Foundation is another welfare work, which aims to assist needy people all over Pakistan. It has provided help to flood victims in Pakistan. Buksh Foundation has partnered with the Imran Khan Foundation to light up villages in Dera Ghazi Khan, Mianwali and Dera Ismail Khan under the project 'Lighting a Million Lives'. The campaign will establish several Solar Charging Stations in the selected off-grid villages and will provide villagers with solar lanterns, which can be regularly charged at the solar-charging stations. Basing his wider paradigm on the poet-philosopher Muhammad Iqbal, the Iranian writer-sociologist Ali Shariati and the British diplomat-convert Charles Le Gai Eaton he came across in his youth, Khan is generally described as a Pakistani nationalist, as well as a populist. Khan's proclaimed political platform and declarations include Islamic values, to which he rededicated himself in the 1990s; liberal economics, with the promise of deregulating the economy and creating a welfare state; decreased bureaucracy and the implementation of anti-corruption laws to create and ensure a clean government; the establishment of an independent judiciary; overhaul of the country's police system; and an anti-militant vision for a democratic Pakistan. After the result of 2018 Pakistani general election, Khan said he would try to remake Pakistan based on the ideology of Muhammad Ali Jinnah. During his government, Khan addressed a balance of payments crisis with a bailout from the IMF. He presided over a shrinking current account deficit, and limited defence spending to curtail the fiscal deficit, leading to some general economic growth. He enacted policies that increased tax collection in Pakistan, as well as investments, and the energy policy of Pakistan under Khan saw his government committed to a renewable energy transition. Khan's government also launched the social safety net and poverty alleviation Ehsaas Programme and the Plant for Pakistan initiative, which expanded the protected areas of Pakistan, and he presided over the COVID-19 pandemic in Pakistan, which caused economic turmoil and rising inflation in the country and threatened Khan's political position. Khan's failure to revive the economy of Pakistan and the rising inflation rate caused him political problems. Despite his promised anti-corruption campaign, the perception of corruption in Pakistan worsened during his rule. He was accused of political victimisation of opponents and clamping down on freedom of expression and dissent. On 10 April 2022, Khan became the country's first prime minister to be ousted through a no-confidence motion vote in parliament. On 22 August 2022, Khan was charged by the Pakistani police under anti-terror laws after Khan accused the police and judiciary of detaining and torturing his close aide. In foreign relations, he dealt with border skirmishes against India, strengthened relations with China and Russia, while relations with the United States cooled. In 2010, Khan said in an interview: "I grew up hating India because I grew up in Lahore and there were massacres of 1947, so much bloodshed and anger. But as I started touring India, I got such love and friendship there that all this disappeared." Khan views the Kashmir issue as a humanitarian issue, as opposed to a territorial dispute between two countries (India and Pakistan). He also proposed secret talks to settle the issue as he thinks the vested interests on both sides will try to subvert them. He ruled out a military solution to the conflict and denied the possibility of a fourth war between India and Pakistan over the disputed mountainous region. Khan publicly demanded a Pakistani apology towards the Bangladeshi people for the atrocities committed in 1971. He called the 1971 operation a "blunder" and likened it to today's treatment of Pashtuns in the war on terror. He repeatedly criticised the war crimes trials in Bangladesh in favour of the convicts. In August 2012, the Pakistani Taliban issued death threats if he went ahead with his march to their tribal stronghold along the Afghan border to protest US drone attacks, because he calls himself a "liberal" – a term they associate with a lack of religious belief. On 1 October 2012, prior to his plan to address a rally in South Waziristan, senior commanders of Pakistani Taliban said after a meeting headed by the Taliban leader Hakimullah Mehsud that they now offered Khan security assistance for the rally because of Khan's opposition to drone attacks in Pakistan, reversing their previous stance. His sympathetic position toward the Pakistani Taliban and Afghan Taliban, as well as his criticism of the US-led war on terror, has earned him the moniker "Taliban Khan" in Pakistani politics. He believes in negotiations with Taliban and the pull out of the Pakistan Army from Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA). He is against US drone strikes and plans to disengage Pakistan from the US-led war on terror. Khan also opposes almost all military operations, including the Siege of Lal Masjid. In 2014, when Pakistani Taliban announced armed struggle against Isma'ili Muslims, denouncing them as non-Muslims, and the Kalash people, Khan released a statement describing "forced conversions as un-Islamic". He has also condemned the incidents of forced conversion of Hindu girls in Sindh. Following the Taliban takeover of Kabul in 2021, Khan congratulated the Taliban for their victory in the 2001–2021 war, and urged the international community to support their new government. He also said that his government was negotiating a peace deal with the Pakistani Taliban (TTP) with the help of the Afghan Taliban. On 8 January 2016, Khan visited the embassies of Iran and Saudi Arabia in Islamabad and met their head of commissions to understand their stances about the conflict that engulfed both nations after the execution of Sheikh Nimr by Saudi Arabia. He urged the Government of Pakistan to play a positive role to resolve the matter between both countries. After parliament passed a unanimous resolution keeping Pakistan out of the War in Yemen in April 2015, Khan claimed that his party was responsible for "many critical clauses" of the resolution. In July 2018, the Saudi-based Islamic Development Bank activated its $4.5 billion oil financing facility for Pakistan. Khan's support for Pakistan's blasphemy laws carried over into relations with the West. In 2021 he called on "Muslim countries to pressure Western governments to make insulting" the Islamic Prophet Muhammad a crime, "likening this measure to laws against Holocaust denial". He urged Muslims to launch a boycott on products of countries that do not punish "insult" to "the honour of the prophet". Blasphemy is a "sensitive subject" in Pakistan—at least 78 people have been murdered in mob violence and targeted attacks related to blasphemy accusations since 1990. French president Emmanuel Macron became a lightning rod after defending a "publication's right to republish caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad", which many Pakistanis consider blasphemous. Khan was offered political positions more than a few times during his cricketing career. In 1987, president Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq offered him a political position in Pakistan Muslim League (PML) which he politely declined. Khan was also invited by Nawaz Sharif to join his political party. In 1993, Khan was appointed as the ambassador for tourism in the caretaker government of Moeenuddin Ahmad Qureshi and held the portfolio for three months until the government dissolved. In 1994, Khan joined the Jamiat-e-Pasban, a breakaway faction of Jamaat-e-Islami, of Hamid Gul and Muhammad Ali Durrani. On 25 April 1996, Khan founded a political party, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI). He ran for the seat of National Assembly of Pakistan in 1997 Pakistani general election as a candidate of PTI from two constituencies – NA-53, Mianwali and NA-94, Lahore – but was unsuccessful and lost both the seats to candidates of PML (N). Khan supported General Pervez Musharraf's military coup in 1999, believing Musharraf would "end corruption, clear out the political mafias". According to Khan, he was Musharraf's choice for prime minister in 2002 but turned down the offer. Khan participated in the October 2002 Pakistani general election that took place across 272 constituencies and was prepared to form a coalition if his party did not get a majority of the vote. He was elected from Mianwali. In the 2002 Pakistani referendum, Khan supported military dictator General Musharraf, while all mainstream democratic parties declared that referendum as unconstitutional. He also served as a part of the Standing Committees on Kashmir and Public Accounts. On 6 May 2005, Khan was mentioned in The New Yorker as being the "most directly responsible" for drawing attention in the Muslim world to the Newsweek story about the alleged desecration of the Qur'an in a US military prison at the Guantánamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba. In June 2007, Khan faced political opponents in and outside the parliament. On 2 October 2007, as part of the All Parties Democratic Movement, Khan joined 85 other MPs to resign from Parliament in protest of the presidential election scheduled for 6 October, which general Musharraf was contesting without resigning as army chief. On 3 November 2007, Khan was put under house arrest, after president Musharraf declared a state of emergency in Pakistan. Later Khan escaped and went into hiding. He eventually came out of hiding on 14 November to join a student protest at the University of the Punjab. At the rally, Khan was captured by student activists from the Islami Jamiat-e-Talaba and roughly treated. He was arrested during the protest and was sent to the Dera Ghazi Khan jail in the Punjab province where he spent a few days before being released. On 30 October 2011, Khan addressed more than 100,000 supporters in Lahore, challenging the policies of the government, calling that new change a "tsunami" against the ruling parties, Another successful public gathering of hundreds of thousands of supporters was held in Karachi on 25 December 2011. Since then Khan became a real threat to the ruling parties and a future political prospect in Pakistan. According to an International Republican Institute's survey, Khan's Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf tops the list of popular parties in Pakistan both at the national and provincial level. On 6 October 2012, Khan joined a vehicle caravan of protesters from Islamabad to the village of Kotai in Pakistan's South Waziristan region against US drone missile strikes. On 23 March 2013, Khan introduced the Naya Pakistan Resolution (New Pakistan) at the start of his election campaign. On 29 April The Observer termed Khan and his party Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf as the main opposition to the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz. Between 2011 and 2013, Khan and Nawaz Sharif began to engage each other in a bitter feud. The rivalry between the two leaders grew in late 2011 when Khan addressed his largest crowd at Minar-e-Pakistan in Lahore. From 26 April 2013, in the run up to the elections, both the PML-N and the PTI started to criticise each other. On 21 April 2013, Khan launched his final public relations campaign for the 2013 Pakistani general election from Lahore, where he addressed thousands of supporters at the Mall. Khan announced that he would pull Pakistan out of the US-led war on terror and bring peace to the Pashtun tribal belt. He addressed different public meetings in various cities of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and other parts of country, where he announced that PTI will introduce a uniform education system in which the children of rich and poor would have equal opportunities. Khan ended his south Punjab campaign by addressing rallies in various Seraiki belt cities. Khan ended the campaign by addressing a rally of supporters in Islamabad via a video link while lying on a bed at a hospital in Lahore. The last survey before the elections by The Herald showed 24.98 percent of voters nationally planned to vote for his party, just a whisker behind former prime minister Nawaz Sharif's PML-N. On 7 May, just four days before the elections, Khan was rushed to Shaukat Khanum hospital in Lahore after he tumbled from a forklift at the edge of a stage and fell headfirst to the ground. The 2013 Pakistani general election was held on 11 May throughout the country. The elections resulted in a clear majority of Pakistan Muslim League (N). Khan's PTI emerged as the second-largest party by popular vote nationally, including in Karachi. Khan's party PTI won 30 directly elected parliamentary seats and became the third-largest party in National Assembly behind Pakistan People's Party, which was second. Khan led Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf became the opposition party in Punjab and Sindh. Khan became the parliamentary leader of his party. On 31 July 2013, Khan was issued a contempt of court notice for allegedly criticising the superior judiciary, and his use of the word shameful for the judiciary. The notice was discharged after Khan submitted before the Supreme Court that he criticised the lower judiciary for their actions during the May 2013 general election while those judicial officers were working as returning officers. Khan's party swooped the militancy-hit northwestern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and formed the provincial government. PTI-led Khyber Pakhtunkhwa government presented a balanced, tax-free budget for the fiscal year 2013–14. During his provincial government, Khan was criticised for his support for Sami-ul-Haq, the "Father of the Taliban," and giving funds to his seminary, Darul Uloom Haqqania. Khan believed that terrorist activities by the Pakistani Taliban could be stopped through dialogue with them and even offered them to open an office in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. He accused the United States of sabotaging peace efforts with the Pakistani Taliban by killing its leader Hakimullah Mehsud in a drone strike in 2013. He demanded the government to block NATO supply line in retaliation for the killing of the TTP leader. On 13 November 2013, Khan, being party leader, ordered Pervez Khattak to dismiss ministers of Qaumi Watan Party (QWP) who were allegedly involved in corruption. Bakht Baidar and Ibrar Hussan Kamoli of Qaumi Watan Party, ministers for Manpower and Industry and Forest and Environment, respectively, were dismissed. Khan ordered Chief Minister Khyber Pakhtunkhwa to end the alliance with QWP. The Chief Minister also dismissed Minister for Communication and Works of PTI Yousuf Ayub Khan due to a fake degree. A year after elections, on 11 May 2014, Khan alleged that 2013 general elections were rigged in favour of the ruling PML (N). On 14 August 2014, Imran Khan led a rally of supporters from Lahore to Islamabad, demanding Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's resignation and investigation into alleged electoral fraud. On its way to the capital Khan's convoy was attacked by stones from PML (N) supporters in Gujranwala; however, there were no fatalities. Khan was reported to be attacked with guns which forced him to travel in a bullet-proof vehicle. On 15 August, Khan-led protesters entered the capital and a few days later marched into the high-security Red Zone; on 1 September 2014, according to Al Jazeera, protesters attempted to storm Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's official residence, which prompted the outbreak of violence. Three people died and more than 595 people were injured, including 115 police officers. Prior to the violence that resulted in deaths, Khan asked his followers to take law into their own hands. By September 2014, Khan had entered into a de facto alliance with Canadian-Pakistani cleric Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri; both have aimed to mobilise their supporters for regime change. Khan entered into an agreement with the Sharif administration to establish a three-member high-powered judicial commission which would be formed under a presidential ordinance. The commission would make its final report public. If the commission found a country-wide pattern of rigging proved, the prime minister would dissolve the national and provincial assemblies in terms of the articles 58(1) and 112(1) of the Constitution – thereby meaning that the premier would also appoint the caretaker setup in consultation with the leader of the opposition and fresh elections would be held. He also met Syed Mustafa Kamal, when he was in the opposition.[citation needed] Khan contested the 2018 Pakistani general election from NA-35 (Bannu), NA-53 (Islamabad-II), NA-95 (Mianwali-I), NA-131 (Lahore-IX), and NA-243 (Karachi East-II). According to early, official results, Khan led the poll, although his opposition, mainly PML-N, alleged large-scale vote rigging and administrative malpractices. On 27 July, election officials declared that Khan's party had won 110 of the 269 seats, giving PTI a plurality in the National Assembly. At the conclusion of the count on 28 July, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) announced that the PTI had won a total of 116 of the 270 seats contested. Khan became the first person in the history of Pakistan elections who contested and won in all five constituencies, surpassing Zulfikar Ali Bhutto who contested in four but won in three constituencies in 1970. In May 2018, Khan's party announced a 100-day agenda for a possible future government. The agenda included sweeping reforms in almost all areas of government including creation of a new province in Southern Punjab, fast tracking of merger of Federally Administered Tribal Areas into Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, betterment of law and order situation in Karachi, and betterment of relations with Baloch political leaders. A number of opposition parties have alleged "massive rigging" in Khan's favor amid allegations of military interference in the general elections. Nawaz Sharif and his PML-N party, in particular, claimed that a conspiracy between the judiciary and military had influenced the election in favour of Khan and PTI. The Election Commission rejected allegations of rigging, and Sharif and his PML-N later conceded victory to Khan, despite lingering 'reservations' regarding the result. Two days after the 2018 general elections were held, the chief observer of the European Union Election Observation Mission to Pakistan Michael Gahler confirmed that the overall situation of the general election was satisfactory. During his victory speech, he laid out the policy outlines for his future government. Khan said his inspiration is to build Pakistan as a humanitarian state based on principles of the first Islamic state of Medina. He described that his future government will put the poor and commoners of the country first and all policies will be geared towards elevating the standards of living of the lesser fortunate. He promised an investigation into rigging allegations. He said that he wanted a united Pakistan and would refrain from victimizing his political opponents. Everyone would be equal under the law. He promised a simple and less costly government, devoid of showy pompousness in which the prime minister's house will be converted into an educational institute and governor houses will be used for public benefit. On foreign policy, he praised China and hoped to have better relations with Afghanistan, United States, and India. On Middle East, he said his government will strive to have a balanced relationship with Saudi Arabia and Iran. On 6 August 2018, PTI officially nominated him as the candidate for prime minister. Delivering a speech during his nomination, he said that he will present himself for public accountability for an hour every week in which he will answer questions put forward by masses. After the election, Khan made some appointments and nominations for national and provincial level public office holders as the head of the winning party. Asad Umar was designated finance minister in the future government of Khan in the center. Khan nominated Imran Ismail for Governor of Sindh, Mahmood Khan as future Chief Minister of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Chaudhry Muhammad Sarwar as Governor of Punjab, Asad Qaiser as Speaker of the National Assembly of Pakistan, and Shah Farman as Governor of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. In Balochistan, his party decided to support Balochistan Awami Party which nominated Jam Kamal Khan for chief minister and former chief minister Abdul Quddus Bizenjo for speaker. Khan's party nominated Pakistan Muslim League (Q) leader and former Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan, Pervaiz Elahi for the slot of Speaker of the Punjab Assembly. Abdul Razak Dawood was nominated to be the advisor to prime minister on economic affairs. Qasim Khan Suri was nominated for deputy speaker of national assembly slot. Mushtaq Ahmed Ghani and Mehmood Jan were nominated as speaker and deputy speaker of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa assembly respectively. Dost Muhammad Mazari was nominated as Deputy Speaker for the Provincial Assembly of Punjab. Khan nominated Sardar Usman Buzdar for Chief Minister of Punjab. Announcing the nomination, Khan said that he chose Buzdar because he belongs to the most backward area of Punjab. According to some sources, Buzdar was nominated as a makeshift arrangement because it will be easier to remove a lesser-known individual when Shah Mahmood Qureshi is ready to become chief minister. On 17 August 2018, Khan secured 176 votes and became the 22nd Prime Minister of Pakistan and took the oath of office on 18 August 2018. Khan ordered top-level reshuffling in the country's bureaucracy, including the appointment of Sohail Mahmood as Foreign Secretary, Rizwan Ahmed as Maritime Secretary, and Naveed Kamran Baloch as Finance Secretary. His first major appointment in the Pakistan Army was that of Lieutenant General Asim Munir to the key slot of Director-General of Inter-Services Intelligence. Khan announced his cabinet soon after taking oath, choosing to keep the Ministry of Interior to himself. Though he later appointed Ijaz Ahmed Shah as interior minister. Many of his appointees were previously ministers during Musharraf era, although some were defectors from the left-wing People's Party. In 2019, Khan committed to a major cabinet reshuffle in the ministries of interior, finance, information and planning. Khan stated that, despite the assassination of Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi, Pakistan must prioritize good relations with Saudi Arabia due to an economic crisis. He also added that U.S. sanctions against Iran are affecting neighboring Pakistan, stating "The last thing the Muslim World needs is another conflict. The Trump administration is moving towards that direction." Khan prioritised close ties with China, saying he "did not know" much about concentration camps for China's Muslims, though Khan confirmed he had raised the matter "privately" in discussions with China. Khan was named one of Time magazine's 100 Most Influential People of 2019, in the section "Leaders". In domestic economic policy, Khan inherited a twin balance of payments and debt crisis with a large current account deficit and fiscal deficit in 2018, Khan's government sought a bailout from the IMF. In exchange for the bailout, Khan's government slashed subsidy spending in the energy sector and unveiled an austerity budget to curb the fiscal deficit and limit government borrowing. The IMF also demanded that the Pakistani government depreciate the rupee and improve tax collection. Khan's government decided to raise import tariffs to collect higher tax revenues and devalued the currency, this alongside the heavy import duty helped to curtail the current account deficit (import substitution). Pakistan's overall balance of payment's position improved significantly following record-high remittances in 2020, which stabilised the central bank's foreign exchange reserves. The fiscal deficit narrowed to less than 1% of GDP by 2020 due to the government's austerity policies, and the rate of debt accumulation had significantly slowed. At the same time, Pakistan's debt remained high due to the high borrowing of previous governments in which the current government had to allocate $24 billion to pay off loans taken during the tenure of previous governments. Aside from IMF-mandated reforms, Khan's government introduced policies to improve the business operating climate. As a result, Pakistan climbed 28 places higher on the World Bank's ease of doing business index. Pakistan ranked amongst the top 10 most improved countries in 2019. Pakistan's tax collection also hit record highs in 2019. As the government raised more revenue from domestic taxes with no increase in tax revenue from import taxes (given import compression had lowered the quantity being imported so the government collected less tax revenue from imports). This trend continued into 2020, albeit at a slower pace. The fiscal deficit was also controlled to less than 1% of GDP in the second half of 2020, Pakistan recorded a primary surplus (excluding interest payment and principal repayment of previous debt), but was in deficit once the interest payment on debt was accounted for, albeit the deficit was smaller. Economists primarily pinned this reduction in the fiscal deficit on an increase in non-tax revenues rather than an increase in tax revenues. For example, from the higher prices, consumers paid for oil from state-owned oil companies. Nevertheless, tax revenues also went on an upward trajectory with Pakistan's tax agency (FBR) both exceeding its tax collection target and collecting a record amount for the first quarter of the fiscal year 2021 in the calendar year 2020. In economic policy with respect to international trade, from January 2020 Khan's government implemented the second phase of the China–Pakistan Free Trade Agreement these renegotiations with China led to concessionary rates by China on Pakistani exports of goods and services to mainland China such as reduced tariffs or zero tariffs. The negotiations were termed a "significant milestone" in the country's foreign policy by expanding trade relations in a relationship traditionally dominated by defence and security matters. In June 2018 (before Khan became Prime Minister), the FATF placed Pakistan onto its grey list and demanded a series of actions be taken by Pakistan to remedy terror financing laws. Khan's government had initially used constitutional provisions of Presidential power held by Arif Alvi to issue ordinances (temporary legislation via Presidential decree) and the country became compliant with 14 points on the FATF agenda. Subsequently, a series of bills were presented in Pakistan's Parliament to ensure the legislation would permanently remain in place beyond a temporary Presidential decree. Minor parts of the legislation passed both the lower house and upper house of Pakistan's parliament with the support of Khan's ruling coalition and part of the opposition parties too. The opposition-dominated Senate did not pass a significant portion of the FATF bills and walked out on crucial moments, creating hurdles for Khan's government. Subsequently, Khan summoned a joint session of both upper and lower house of parliament in which the bills passed given the government held a majority and without the support of the opposition. By October 2020, Pakistan became successfully compliant on 21 out of 27 points on the FATF agenda, an increase from the 14 points in February 2020, with the remaining 6 points outstanding reviewed in February 2021. In FATF's February 2021 review, Khan's government had successfully implemented about 90% of the FATF agenda with 24 out of 27 points 'largely addressed' and the remaining 3 out of 27 points 'partially addressed'. The FATF President remarked that as Pakistan was progressing with its action plan so it "is not the time to put a country on the blacklist". In FATF's June 2021 review, the Khan government implemented more progress, the FATF found that Pakistan has now largely addressed 26 out of the 27 action items, US State Department spokesperson Ned Price praised Pakistan's progress but encouraged Pakistan to tackle its remaining action item saying: "We do recognise and we support Pakistan's continued efforts to satisfy those (first action plan) obligations. Pakistan has made significant progress on its first action plan with 26 of 27 action items largely addressed — We encourage Pakistan to continue working with the FATF and the international community to swiftly complete the remaining action item by demonstrating that terrorism financing, investigations and prosecutions target senior leaders and commanders of UN-designated groups." On 8 April 2022, the Khan government made progress on its remaining action plan by sentencing Hafiz Saeed a mastermind of the 2008 Mumbai attacks and a UN-designated terrorist to 31 years in prison. Due to the efforts of Hammad Azhar, Pakistan eventually made it out of the FATF greylist in October 2022. In national security policy, Khan's government presided over an improved overall security climate with foreign investors expressing greater confidence in the security of their investments in Pakistan. On 5 March 2019, the Khan government formally banned the Hafiz Saeed-led Jamaat-ud-Dawa and its affiliate Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation under the Anti Terrorism Act 1997. On 25 June 2020, Khan came under criticism, both in the international press and from the domestic opposition, for calling al-Qaeda founder and 9/11 mastermind Osama bin Laden a martyr. On a previous occasion during a local television interview, he had refused to call bin Laden a terrorist. In October 2020, Khan spoke out about what he considered growing extremism and violence against Muslims across the world. In a letter posted on Twitter, he urged Facebook's CEO Mark Zuckerberg to ban Islamophobic content on its platform. In July 2021, the Project Pegasus revealed a spyware surveillance list that included at least one number once used by Khan. In 2019, Pakistan arrested Hafiz Saeed, a mastermind of the 26/11 Mumbai attacks and also a UN-designated terrorist. On 8 April 2022, he was sentenced to 31 years in prison. In social policy, Khan's government has taken steps to restore religious sites belonging to religious minorities; this included the Kartarpur Corridor. Khan's government took a significantly different position on the policy of minorities than the main opposition party, the PML-N, who had opposed the building of the corridor for Indian pilgrims. Khan's government also instituted reforms to education and healthcare on a national and regional level, respectively. Khan's government introduced reforms to Pakistan's social safety net and the system of welfare in Pakistan more broadly. This included broadening welfare payments which was initially for widows only, to include the disabled as well as provide health insurance coverage. In June 2021, Khan explained a surge of publicly known rape cases in Pakistan with what he called "common sense", namely that women who wear "very few clothes" will "have an impact on the men unless they are robots". His comments lead to outrage by female rights activists. Khan pushed for an increase in renewable energy production, and also halted coal power from future construction, working toward an aim to make Pakistan mostly renewable by 2030. In 2020, Khan's government commenced building work for the Diamer-Bhasha Dam, as part of his government's investment in renewable energy projects. The World Bank loaned Pakistan $450mn for investment in renewable energy projects as part of the government's stated aim of making Pakistan a renewable-energy reliant economy and reducing greenhouse gas emissions to combat climate change. The government introduced an electric vehicle (EV) policy, the first in South Asia. Further efforts to combat climate change consisted of re-foresting Pakistan with over 10 billion trees under the Plant for Pakistan project with the government on course to plant 3.3 billion trees in the first three and a half years of Khan's government, the reforestation programme includes an agreement with the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and others to independently monitor the projects in order to maintain transparency about funding. Khan also expanded national parks under a protected areas initiative. Khan's government introduced reforms to Pakistan's bloated public sector. The public sector consisted of state-owned enterprises that were consistently making losses and accumulating debt for decades, including national services such as railways, airlines, postal services as well as other state-owned companies such as Pakistan's state-owned steel company. In 2019, Pakistan International Airlines reached breakeven in operating profit; however, the halt in air travel in the following year due to COVID-19 meant further reforms had to be made. This led to a proposal to cut the airline's workforce almost by half in order to save costs and thus help the state-owned airline breakeven on a net profit level in addition to the operating profit level. The national airline confirmed it would layoff employees in phases as part of PIA's restructuring plan in line with the government's policy of reversing the losses at state-owned companies. Khan's government is set to axe many PIA workers due to the fact that those appointments were politically motivated to reward loyalty to previous governments. In 2019, Khan's government launched an anti-corruption campaign, which was premised on the basis that no amnesty (known as NRO or National Reconciliation Ordinance in Pakistani political parlance) would be given to politicians or relatives who benefitted from a politician's patronage. The campaign has been criticised for targeting Khan's political opponents. Nevertheless, Khan's supporters argue that the campaign is genuine, as senior members of Khan's own ruling party, including Jahangir Khan Tareen and Aleem Khan, have faced investigation or prosecution, with Khan going as far as rejecting the formation of a "judicial commission" demanded by supporters of Tareen. Under Khan's premiership, the performance of Pakistan's anti-corruption agency, the National Accountability Bureau improved significantly when measured in terms of recovery of money in cases involving plea bargains and/or convictions. The recovery of the anti-corruption agency had risen to Rs. 487 billion over three years from the start of 2018 to the beginning of 2021. This recovery was significantly higher than the anti-corruption agency's 10-year performance from 2008 to 2018 prior to Khan's government taking office. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Khan's government rolled out the largest welfare programme in Pakistan's history, with a fund of almost $1 billion aimed at the country's poorest segment of the population. The PM's advisor Dr. Sania Nishtar confirmed that the programme would use pre-existing data of other welfare programmes under 'Ehsaas' system and the much smaller Benazir Income Support Programme which provided a more limited safety-net, while the Ehsaas programme targeted lower-income households more broadly. Following a drop in COVID-19 cases, declining positivity rates, and falling hospitalisations, Khan's government lifted lockdown restrictions. In a Gallup survey released in 2021, 7 out of 10 (or roughly 70%) of Pakistanis had a favourable view of the government's handling of the coronavirus pandemic. Economically, a V-shaped recovery was observed in both business confidence and expected employment index. The current account was in surplus for 3 out of 4 months after June 2020 although this was due to higher remittances (which tend to be volatile) offsetting decrease in exports. Fiscal prudence meant Pakistan's debt-to-GDP ratio remained broadly unchanged in 2021 according to the IMF, Pakistan defied the trend of rising debt, as most emerging/developing economies had witnessed a substantial rise in the debt-to-GDP ratio in order to deal with the pandemic with other developing countries seeing a 10% rise in debt-to-GDP on average. Furthermore, credit rating agency Fitch forecasted a fall in Pakistan's public debt to GDP ratio, reflecting lower debt incurred by the incumbent government and higher GDP growth in 2021. In economic policy, Khan's government presided over a recovery in Pakistan's textile sector, with demand measured by the number of orders pending hitting historic highs. Khan's government facilitated the textile sector by offering concessionary rates on utilities such as electricity as well as reducing the electricity tariff during peak hours. Furthermore, the Asian Development Bank stated that it sees an "economic recovery" in Pakistan. Signs of recovery emerged as exports reached pre-COVID-19 levels towards the end of 2020. Following the recovery in the textile sector, export growth was almost in double-digits by February 2021, with a 9% growth in exports – especially value-added textile exports. In early 2021, Pakistan's apparel exports to the US had surged upwards in value and volume outperforming India and Bangladesh, both of which are the nearest regional economies similar to Pakistan's in South Asia. Khan's government facilitated the textile sector by removing all import tariffs on cotton yarn, in order to address a shortfall in the main raw material input of textiles and apparel. This policy of tax concessions was codified at least in the short term when Khan's government unveiled its budget for 2021–22 which had reduced customs duty on imports of inputs (raw materials) for final manufactured goods. In foreign policy, Khan voiced support for the 2019 Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria against the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces. On 11 October 2019, Khan told the Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan that "Pakistan fully understands Turkey's concerns relating to terrorism". Khan's foreign policy towards neighbouring Afghanistan consists primarily of support for the Afghan peace process and also inaugurated a 24/7 border crossing with Afghanistan to facilitate travel and trade. He said that Pakistan will never recognize Israel until a Palestinian state is created, a statement in line with the vision of Pakistan's founder Muhammad Ali Jinnah. According to the British newspaper The Independent, Khan's government had improved Pakistan's reputation abroad by stepping into its role as a 'world player'. In 2019, Khan was included in the Time 100, Time's annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world. Khan pursued a reset in ties with Gulf Arab states, such as the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Saudi Arabia, with the UAE agreeing to roll over Pakistan's debt on an interest-free loan. Subsequently, Khan embarked on a three-day visit to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in order to reset ties, where he was personally received at the airport by Mohammad bin Salman. The ties had become tense previously due to the unwillingness of Pakistan to contribute militarily to the Saudi Arabian–led intervention in Yemen. Saudi Arabia's ambassador to Pakistan confirmed that the Saudi government had approved a concessionary loan for building a hydroelectric dam, the Mohmand dam. Khan's government also improved ties with the Gulf state of Kuwait, as Kuwait confirmed it had lifted a ten-year visa ban on Pakistani nationals. Khan's government enhanced economic ties with Qatar which is expected to benefit Pakistan by US$3 billion over 10 years by renegotiating terms in an energy supply deal which saw a significant reduction in Pakistan's energy import bill compared to the previous deal. Khan was mediating between Iran and Saudi Arabia in an effort to end the war in Yemen, which is part of an Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict. On 9 May 2021, Khan condemned the Israeli police actions at Al-Aqsa, stating that such actions violated "all norms of humanity and [international] law". Also, Khan has been vocal on the Kashmir issue, and his government adopted the foreign policy stance that no talks will be held with India on the Kashmir dispute until autonomy was restored in Indian-held Kashmir. Khan's national security adviser Moeed Yusuf confirmed that backdoor contacts with India, ostensibly brokered by the UAE, had broken down after India had refused to restore the region's autonomy. In August 2021, Khan celebrated the departure of the United States from Afghanistan, describing it as Afghans breaking "the shackles of slavery". After twenty-three years without a prime minister of Pakistan visiting Moscow, Khan became the first such official of the century when he landed in the Russian capital on 23 February, 2022, for a two-day trip, where he planned to discuss "key issues of bilateral interest with top leadership," according to the Foreign Office of Pakistan. Nawaz Sharif, in March 1999, was the last to visit Moscow until then. The meeting between the two heads of state was planned months in advance, and the Russian president Vladimir Putin met with Khan just hours after the Russian "special military operation" into the Donbas, which was an attack on neighboring Ukraine, during the second day of Khan's visit. Radio Pakistan reported the two discussed "economic and energy cooperation", namely a several billion dollar Pakistan Stream Gas Pipeline project, which Russian enterprises partnered in developing southward from Karachi to Punjab. The pipeline, which was begun in 2020, is the result of a 2015 agreement for a 1,100 km pipeline with a designed capacity ranging from 12.4 to 16 billion cubic meters, with Russia financing 26% of costs, which ranged from US$1.5–3.5 billion. It was expected that, even under sanctions against Russia, Pakistan could still import up to 14 billion cubic meters of liquid natural gas (LNG) from the vast Russian reserves to the "energy-starved power plants" in Pakistan. The Eurasian Pipeline Consortium and pipeline supplier TMK were tasked with the completion of the pipeline. Of the timing on the talks, Khan explained that he was invited by Putin months in advance and that he was not interested in joining any "blocs", and welcomed neutrality in hopes of "peace and harmony within and among societies." During the UN General Assembly emergency meeting on the invasion he expressed regret for the situation while abstaining on a resolution condemning Russia's invasion of Ukraine, and called for de-escalation with adherence to international law as laid out in the UN Charter. On 6 March, Khan addressed a political rally where he criticised the heads of 22 diplomatic missions who had released a letter urging Pakistan to support the UN resolution. According to a leaked classified Pakistani cypher, at a 7 March 2022 meeting between the Pakistani ambassador to the United States, Asad Majeed Khan, and two State Department officials, including Donald Lu, the US State Department encouraged the Pakistani government to remove Khan from office because of his neutrality on the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In the meeting Lu said "I think if the no-confidence vote against the Prime Minister succeeds, all will be forgiven in Washington because the Russia visit is being looked at as a decision by the Prime Minister. Otherwise, I think it will be tough going ahead". On 8 March 2022, the opposition parties submitted a motion of no confidence against Khan to the National Assembly's secretariat. On 27 March Khan displayed a letter at a rally saying it contained evidence of a "foreign conspiracy" to remove his government. On 10 April 2022, Khan sent the diplomatic cypher to Chief Justice of Pakistan Umar Ata Bandial, saying that the US had used Pakistan's ambassador to send a threatening message. On 1 April 2022, Prime Minister Khan announced that in context of the no-confidence motion against him in the National Assembly, the three options were discussed with the establishment in Pakistan to choose from viz: "resignation, no-confidence [vote] or elections". On 3 April 2022, President Arif Alvi dissolved the National Assembly of Pakistan on Khan's advice, after the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly rejected and set-aside the motion of no confidence; this move would have required elections to the National Assembly to be held within 90 days. On 10 April, after a Supreme Court ruling that the no-confidence motion was illegally rejected, a no-confidence vote was conducted and he was ousted from office, becoming the first prime minister in Pakistan to be removed from office by a vote of no confidence. Khan claimed the US was behind his removal because he conducted an independent foreign policy and had friendly relations with China and Russia. His removal led to protests from his supporters across Pakistan. In November 2022, when asked about the conspiracy to remove him, Khan said "it’s behind me. The Pakistan I want to lead must have good relationships with everyone, especially the United States. Our relationship with the US has been as of a master-servant relationship, or a master-slave relationship, and we’ve been used like a hired gun. But for that I blame my own governments more than the US". The Pakistan Democratic Movement's MNAs brought the Toshakhana case against Khan in August 2022 because he failed to disclose the specifics of the Toshakhana presents in his yearly asset report to the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP). The investigation was started by the ECP, which then made its final determination on 21 October 2022, disqualifying Imran from holding public office for engaging in dishonest behavior, fabricating information, and making an inaccurate declaration in the reference under Article 63(1)(p) of the constitution of Pakistan. Following the verdict, Khan organized the Azadi March II to protest. On 3 November 2022, Khan was shot in the leg or in the foot by a gunman while giving a speech to supporters at a rally in Wazirabad, Punjab, and leading a march to the capital Islamabad to demand snap elections after he was ousted. Automatic gunfire was heard in footage aired on local news channels which also showed Khan being carried away and put in a car, with a bandage visible on his leg. Khan's conditions were not described as critical. A PTI party's supporter was killed during the shooting, and eight other people were also wounded. The perpetrator was arrested at the scene and claimed that he wanted only to target Khan for "spreading hatred and misleading the people". As a result of an arrest warrant issued by the district and sessions court in Islamabad, the Islamabad Police and Lahore Police started an operation to arrest Khan on 14 March 2023. On 9 May, Khan was arrested at the Islamabad High Court by paramilitary forces; this was over his alleged role in the Al-Qadir Trust case, after which PTI-party members had called for nationwide protests. His arrest led to widespread protests and the May 9 riots. The arrest was later declared illegal by the Supreme Court. Following the 9 May riots, many PTI members deserted Khan and founded the Istehkam-e-Pakistan Party under the leadership of Jahangir Tareen. On 12 May, the Islamabad High Court declared the arrest illegal and mandated Khan's immediate release. Khan was granted protected bail and released on the same day, meaning he could not be re-arrested on those charges for two weeks. On 5 August 2023, Khan was arrested for the second time and sentenced to three years in prison after being found guilty of misusing his premiership from 2018 to 2022 to buy and sell gifts in state possession that were received during visits abroad and worth more than 140 million rupees. On 29 August 2023, an appeals court suspended Khan's corruption conviction and three-year prison term, and granted bail. Despite the suspended conviction in the corruption case, a special court in Islamabad ordered that he remain incarcerated in connection with the "cypher case": Khan has repeatedly alleged that he received a cypher, or diplomatic cable, which contained proof that there was a US led conspiracy with Pakistan's military establishment to oust him from office. The Federal Investigation Agency registered a case against Khan for sharing information on the alleged cypher and leaking state secrets, and thereby violating the Official Secrets Act. On 30 January 2024, Khan was convicted and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment over the case. Khan reacted by urging voters to "take revenge for every injustice with your vote" in the 2024 Pakistani general election on 8 February. One of his lawyers called the decision illegal, and his legal team planned to appeal the decision. Many observers alleged that the sentence was part of a campaign to sideline Khan and the PTI before the 2024 elections; Khan himself described all the charges against him as "politically motivated". His then-foreign minister and deputy in the PTI, Shah Mahmood Qureshi, was also sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment over the case. Khan's sister Aleema said that prosecutors had sought the death penalty for her brother. The next day, Khan was convicted and sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment for the Toshakhana case, which involved the illegal sale of state gifts given to him and his wife, Bushra Bibi, when he was prime minister. The sentence was suspended on 1 April pending an appeal. On 3 February, Khan and his wife were convicted and sentenced to an additional seven years in prison and fined 500,000 rupees ($1,800) each following a criminal complaint by Bushra Bibi's former husband, Khawar Maneka, saying that Bushra did not complete her Iddat before marrying Khan in 2018. On 16 February, his legal team filed an appeal against the three consecutive convictions. Since his arrest in August, Khan has been held in the Adiala Prison in Rawalpindi, where his trial was also held. On 8 February, a PTI official said Khan had been allowed to vote in prison for the 2024 Pakistani general election using a postal ballot. On 12 March 2024, authorities imposed a two-week ban on visits to the prison, citing intelligence reports about a possible attack on the facility. Khan has been mentioned as a possible candidate to be Chancellor of the University of Oxford, following the announcement of the retirement of the incumbent, Chris Patten. In 2003, Khan had a house in Zaman Park, Lahore worth Rs. 29 million (US$100,000). He was also an investor, investing more than Rs. 40 million (US$140,000) in various businesses. He was owner of agriculture land of 39 kanals (5 acres) at Talhar, Islamabad, and 530 kanals (66 acres) at Khanewal and had a share in 363 kanals (44 acres) of other agricultural land that he had inherited. Khan paid Rs. 10.19 million (US$35,000) to buy two apartments at Shahra-e-Dastoor in Islamabad. Other assets in 2017 included furniture worth Rs. 0.6 million (US$2,100) and livestock valued at Rs. 0.2 million (US$690). He then had no vehicle registered in his name. In 2017, Khan owned a 300-kanal mansion in Bani Gala, Islamabad, worth Rs. 750 million (US$2.6 million), which he declared as a gift in his statement to the Election Commission of Pakistan. The mansion is located within a gated enclosure and is accessible through a private driveway. In November 2019, using FBR statements, Pakistani media revealed how much tax Khan had paid in 37 years. Khan paid Rs. 103,763 (US$360) of tax in 2017, and, over 37 years, he paid a total of Rs. 4 million (equivalent to Rs. 20 million or US$71,000 in 2021) in tax up to 2019. The documents released by the FBR also state that, during this period, he was exempted for some years from paying tax. On 3 January 2022, FBR released its 2019 tax directory for parliamentarians and it was revealed that Khan had paid Rs. 9.8 million (US$33,942) in taxes in 2019. After the May 2013 elections, Mohammed Hanif writing for The Guardian, termed Khan's support as appealing "to the educated middle classes but Pakistan's main problem is that there aren't enough educated urban middle-class citizens in the country". Pankaj Mishra writing for The New York Times in 2012, characterised Khan as a "cogent picture out of his—and Pakistan's—clashing identities" adding that "his identification with the suffering masses and his attacks on his affluent, English-speaking peers have long been mocked in the living rooms of Lahore and Karachi as the hypocritical ravings of "Im the Dim" and "Taliban Khan"—the two favored monikers for him." Mishra concluded with "like all populist politicians, Khan appears to offer something to everyone. Yet the great differences between his constituencies—socially liberal, upper-middle-class Pakistanis and the deeply conservative residents of Pakistan's tribal areas—seem irreconcilable." His critics have often called him "Fitna Khan" and "Zinayi Khan". On 18 March 2012, Salman Rushdie criticised Khan for refusing to attend the India Today Conference because of Rushdie's attendance. Khan cited the "immeasurable hurt" that Rushdie's writings have caused Muslims around the world. Rushdie, in turn, suggested that Khan was a "dictator in waiting." In 2011, while writing for The Washington Post, Richard Leiby termed Khan as an underdog, adding that he "often sounds like a pro-democracy liberal but is well known for his coziness with conservative Islamist parties." Ayesha Siddiqa, in September 2014, writing for The Express Tribune, claimed that "while we can all sympathise with Khan's right to change the political tone, it would be worthwhile for him to envision how he would, if he did become the prime minister of this country, put the genie back into the bottle." H. M. Naqvi termed Khan as a "sort of a Ron Paul figure", adding that "there is no taint of corruption and there is his anti-establishment message." During the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, Khan was a popular sex symbol. He became known as a socialite in English high society, and sported a playboy image amongst the British press and paparazzi due to his "non-stop partying" at London nightclubs such as Annabel's and Tramp, although he claims to have hated English pubs and that he never drank alcohol. British heiress Sita White, daughter of Gordon White, Baron White of Hull, became the mother of his alleged lovechild daughter, Tyrian Jade White. A judge in the United States ruled him to be the father of Tyrian due to his failure to appear in court, but Khan has denied paternity and asked for the case to be open in Pakistani courts. Later in 2007, Election Commission of Pakistan ruled in favour of Khan and dismissed the ex parte judgment of the U.S. court, on grounds that it was neither admissible in evidence before any court or tribunal in Pakistan nor executable against him. About his lifestyle as a bachelor, he has often said that, "I never claim to have led an angelic life." Declan Walsh in The Guardian newspaper in England in 2005 described Khan as a "miserable politician", observing that "Khan's ideas and affiliations since entering politics in 1996 have swerved and skidded like a rickshaw in a rainshower... He preaches democracy one day but gives a vote to reactionary mullahs the next." Khan has also been accused by some opponents and critics of hypocrisy and opportunism, including what has been called his life's "playboy to puritan U-turn". Political commentator Najam Sethi, stated: "A lot of the Imran Khan story is about backtracking on a lot of things he said earlier, which is why this doesn't inspire people." Author Fatima Bhutto has criticised Khan for "incredible coziness not with the military but with dictatorship" as well as some of his political decisions. Nevertheless, Khan's approval rating since he became Prime Minister remained comparatively robust for an officeholder in Pakistani politics, with a majority approving (51%), compared to 46% disapproval and 3% undecided. Other polls suggested his approval was as high as 57%. During his cricketing days, Khan featured in many advertisements and television commercials as a celebrity brand endorser. These included Pepsi Pakistan, Brooke Bond, Thums Up (along with Sunil Gavaskar), and the Indian soap brand Cinthol, at a time when Bollywood legend Vinod Khanna was also endorsing the same product. His popularity in India was such that it was "unmatched in an era when there were no smartphones to take selfies. He was mobbed everywhere he went." The late veteran Bollywood actor Dev Anand even offered him a role in his sports action-thriller movie Awwal Number (1990), that of a cricket star in decline opposite an upcoming cricketer essayed by Aamir Khan, and as he refused, citing his lack of acting skills, the role eventually went to Aditya Pancholi. In 2010, a Pakistani production house produced a biographical film based on Khan's life, titled Kaptaan: The Making of a Legend. The title, which is Urdu for "Captain", depicts Khan's captaincy and career with the Pakistan cricket team, which led them to victory in the 1992 cricket world cup, as well as events which shaped his life; from being ridiculed in cricket to being labelled a playboy; from the death of his mother to his efforts and endeavours in building the first cancer hospital in Pakistan; from being the first Chancellor of the University of Bradford to the building of Namal University. Canadian rock band Nickelback released a music video for its politically themed single "Edge of a Revolution", featuring a short clip of a Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) rally among other protests. The brief clip from the PTI rally shows red-and-green party flags along with a poster of PTI Chairman Imran Khan, who was the most popular opposition leader. In his virtual address at the 76th Session of the United Nations General Assembly on 24 September 2021, Khan remarked that many Pakistani Pashtuns "had strong sympathies with the Afghan Taliban, not because of their religious ideology, but because of Pashtun nationalism." His comments prompted outrage among many Pashtuns, who called on him to apologise. Khan made similar comments also on 11 October, which triggered a protest in Peshawar the next day by the leftist Mazdoor Kisan Party (MKP). The Awami National Party (ANP) and the Pashtun Tahafuz Movement (PTM) also condemned Khan for "linking the Pashtuns with terrorists." During his keynote address at the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation's (OIC) Extraordinary Session of Foreign Ministers on 19 December 2021, which was held in Islamabad to discuss the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, Khan said that not allowing girls to study was part of Afghan culture, and that the world should respect that. His remarks were criticised by many people from Afghanistan and Pakistan, including former Afghan president Hamid Karzai. Nobel laureate Malala Yousafzai also slammed Khan's remarks, saying: "I nearly lost my life fighting against the Taliban's ban on girls' education." Khan has published six works of non-fiction, including an autobiography co-written with Patrick Murphy. He has also written about the modern history of Pakistan in his book Main Aur Mera Pakistan published in 2014 in Urdu and Hindi. The book contains details about Pakistan's wars with India in 1965 and 1971, the impact of 1979 Iranian Revolution and capture of terrorist Osama bin Laden at Abbottabad in 2011. He periodically writes editorials on cricket and Pakistani politics in several leading Pakistani and British newspapers. It was revealed in 2008 that Khan's second book, Indus Journey: A Personal View of Pakistan, had required heavy editing from the publisher. The publisher Jeremy Lewis revealed in a memoir that when he asked Khan to show his writing for publication, "He handed me a leather-bound notebook or diary containing a few jottings and autobiographical snippets. It took me, at most, five minutes to read them; and that, it soon became apparent, was all we had to go on." Khan's most recent book was published in 2011, an autobiography about his transition from cricketer to politician, as well as the challenges he faced in his philanthropic work. Khan has also penned op-eds in various media outlets, including CNN where he advocated for conversation and restoration of damaged natural ecosystems. Khan, Imran (1975). West and East. Macmillan Publishers. ISBN 978-0-333-90059-8. Khan, Imran; Murphy, Patrick (1983). Imran: The Autobiography of Imran Khan. Pelham Books. ISBN 978-0-7207-1489-0. Khan, Imran (1989). Imran Khan's Cricket Skills. London: Golden Press in association with Hamlyn. ISBN 978-0-600-56349-5. Khan, Imran (1991). Indus Journey: A Personal View of Pakistan. Chatto & Windus. ISBN 978-0-7011-3527-0. Khan, Imran (1992). All Round View. Mandarin. ISBN 978-0-7493-1499-6. Khan, Imran (1993). Warrior Race: A Journey Through the Land of the Tribal Pathans. Chatto & Windus. ISBN 978-0-7011-3890-5. Khan, Imran (2011). Pakistan: A Personal History. Bantam Press. ISBN 978-0-593-06774-1. Khan, Imran (2014). Main Aur Mera Pakistan. Orient Paperback. ISBN 978-81-222056-8-8. Cricket portal Pakistan portal Politics portal Goldsmith family Pets of Imran Khan List of international cricket five-wicket hauls by Imran Khan Player of the Match awards (cricket) List of sportsperson-politicians List of international prime ministerial trips made by Imran Khan Tim McGirk (15 April 1995), "Imran's Dangerous New Game" Archived 27 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine, The Independent. 27 August 2018. Walsh, Aoife (5 August 2023). "Pakistan ex-PM Khan given three-year jail sentence". BBC News. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "Pakistan's Imran Khan sentenced to three years in prison, arrested". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 17 December 2023. "Pakistani court suspends former Prime Minister Imran Khan's conviction, sentencing". Fox News. 23 August 2023. Retrieved 29 August 2023. Goldbaum, Christina (29 August 2023). "Imran Khan's 3-Year Sentence Is Suspended by Pakistan Appeals Court". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 August 2023. Adil, Hafsa (29 August 2023). "Imran Khan live news: Ex-Pakistan PM to remain in jail for 'cypher' hearing". AlJazeera. Retrieved 29 August 2023. Hussain, Abid. "Despite bail order, Imran Khan remains in jail over 'cypher case'". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 17 December 2023. "Pakistan court indicts jailed ex-PM Imran Khan in state secrets case". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 17 December 2023. "Imran Khan, Shah Mahmood handed 10-year sentence in cipher case". Daily Pakistan Global. 30 January 2024. Archived from the original on 30 January 2024. Retrieved 1 February 2024. Peshiman, Gibran Naiyyar; Shahid, Ariba (30 January 2024). "Pakistan court jails ex-PM Imran Khan for 10 years ahead of election". Reuters. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "#HappyBirthdayIK: PTI Chairman Imran Khan turns 62". Dawn (newspaper). 5 October 2014. Archived from the original on 5 June 2023. Retrieved 5 June 2023. "Newsmaker: Imran Khan". The National. 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 22 October 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2016. "What song was No. 1 the day you were born?". The Express Tribune. 28 February 2015. Archived from the original on 22 October 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2016. "Twitter alert: Happy Birthday Imran Khan – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 25 November 2012. Archived from the original on 23 October 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2016. "Imran Khan". dawn.com. Dawn. 13 January 2012. Archived from the original on 23 September 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2016. "Imran Khan celebrates his 70th birthday". Bol News. 5 October 2022. Archived from the original on 5 June 2023. Retrieved 5 June 2023. Khan, Imran (1993). Warrior Race. London: Butler & Tanner Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7011-3890-5. Adams, Tim (2 July 2006). "The path of Khan". Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 30 August 2013. Retrieved 5 November 2007. Encyclopaedia Asiatica, Comprising Indian Subcontinent, Eastern and Southern Asia: H. Jangtang By Edward Balfour Published by Cosmo Publications, 1976 Item notes: v. 4 Original from the University of Michigan Page 188 Catriona Luke (3 August 2018), "The enigma inside a paradox wrapped in a conundrum" Archived 3 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine, The Friday Times. Retrieved 3 August 2018. Khan, Imran (2012). Pakistan: A Personal History. Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-85750-064-9. Will Imran Khan go to Kaniguram? Archived 26 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine The Express Tribune. 8 September 2012. "Imran Khan's Jalandhar connect". The Tribune Chandigarh. 27 July 2018. Archived from the original on 31 July 2018. Retrieved 30 July 2018. "Imran Khan's Connection With the City of Jalandhar". The Quint. Archived from the original on 30 July 2018. Retrieved 30 July 2018. Ali, Syed Hamad (23 July 2008). "Pakistan's Dreamer". New Statesman. UK. Archived from the original on 2 August 2008. Retrieved 5 August 2008. "Imran Khan ─ from flamboyant cricketer to prime minister". Dawn. 18 August 2018. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 1 September 2018. Christopher Sandford (6 August 2009). Imran Khan: The Cricketer, The Celebrity, The Politician. HarperCollins Publishers. pp. 68–. ISBN 978-0-00-734104-7. Imran had, meanwhile, left Aitchison College, whose vaunted enthusiasm for sports seems not to have extended to sharing one of their own with a professional cricket team. He spent his sixth-form year at the nearby Cathedral School. "The Interview: Anything he Khan't do?". The Oxford Student. 1999. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 30 October 2018. Ivo Tennant, "Excellence exhausted", espncricinfo.com, 4 September 2008 Hutchins & Midgley 2015. "The cricket hero who could be Pakistan's next PM". Bbc.com. 25 July 2018. Archived from the original on 2 August 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2018. Brook, Danae (26 July 2018). "Imran Khan: from playboy to politician". Telegraph.co.uk. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Tennant, Ivo (30 July 2018). "VIP clubs and 'mystery blondes': Imran Khan's party years". Thetimes.co.uk. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 10 August 2018. "5 Pakistani stars who tore barriers and found love across the border – The Express Tribune". 26 October 2017. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018. Retrieved 10 August 2018. "The rise and rise of Imran Khan ‹ The Friday Times". Thefridaytimes.com. 29 September 2017. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 9 August 2018. "Bowling maidens over: The love life of cricket superstar Imran Khan". India Today. Archived from the original on 30 July 2018. Retrieved 8 August 2018. "Newsmaker: Imran Khan". thenational.ae. 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 21 August 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2018. Adams, Tim (1 July 2006). "The path of Khan". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 August 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2018. "Emma Sergeant (B. 1960), Imran Khan". Christies.com. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 10 August 2018. "Emma's brush with marriage". Telegraph.co.uk. 16 November 1996. Archived from the original on 10 October 2012. "Biography claims Imran Khan and Benazir Bhutto were romantically involved". Telegraph.co.uk. 19 August 2009. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Morgan 2012. "Two judicial verdicts that exposed Imran, Qadri". Thenews.com.pk. Archived from the original on 26 July 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2018. "Imran Khan may take custody of daughter" Archived 26 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine, hellomagazine.com. Retrieved on 1 August 2018 "Khan willing to have paternity test in child case". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 11 April 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "USA: LOS ANGELES: COURT RULES THAT IMRAN KHAN IS FATHER OF 5 YEAR OLD | AP archive". www.aparchive.com. Archived from the original on 26 July 2018. Retrieved 1 September 2018. "Khan willing to have paternity test in child case". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 31 December 2018. Retrieved 30 December 2018. "Imran will welcome Tyrian". standard.co.uk. 13 April 2012. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. "Imran Khan has five illegitimate children, some of them Indian: Reham Khan". dnaindia.com. 12 July 2018. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2018. "Imran Khan has 5 illegitimate children, some Indian: Ex-wife Reham Khan in new book". Deccanchronicle.com. 12 July 2018. Archived from the original on 14 July 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2018. "Indians among Imran Khan's five illegitimate kids, claims ex-wife Reham Khan". hindustantimes.com. 13 July 2018. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 9 August 2018. Tagore, Vijay (15 July 2018). "Exclusive Interview: Reham Khan on ex-husband Imran Khan's secret drug use and why she chose to release her explosive autobiography before the elections in Pakistan". Mumbai Mirror. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. "Reham Khan's book 'available in paperback in UK'". The News (Pakistan). 12 July 2018. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 25 July 2021. Reham's book, published online today, has triggered debate on social media with many saying that she is doing all this on the behest of Pakistan Muslim League Nawaz to tarnish the image of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf Chairman Imran Khan just before the July 25 polls. Goldsmith, Annabel (2004). Annabel: An Unconventional Life: The Memoirs of Lady Annabel Goldsmith. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-82966-9. "Imran Khan and Jemima divorce". BBC. 22 June 2004. Archived from the original on 26 August 2007. Retrieved 5 October 2007. "Imran and Reham Khan tied the knot in Bani Gala". Dawn News. 8 January 2015. Archived from the original on 8 January 2015. Retrieved 8 January 2015. Jon Boone (8 January 2015). "Imran Khan marries ex-BBC journalist". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 9 January 2016. "Imran, Reham decide to part ways after 10 months of marriage". arynews.tv. 30 October 2015. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 9 January 2016. "Putting to rest: Rumours of third marriage are baseless, says Imran Khan – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 13 July 2016. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018. "Will celebrate publicly when I get married: Imran Khan – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 12 July 2016. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018. "Imran Khan marries again?". thenews.com.pk. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018. "Imran Khan ties the knot again: report". pakistantoday.com.pk. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018. Butt, Shafiq (3 August 2017). "What brings PTI chief to a remote town?". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018. "Manika family clears the air on Imran's third marriage – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 14 July 2016. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018. "Imran slams media for sharing pictures of women he's 'never met' – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 13 July 2016. Archived from the original on 7 January 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018. "Imran's third marriage: PTI files complaint against media for spreading 'disinformation' – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 13 July 2016. Archived from the original on 7 January 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018. "Imran Khan has proposed marriage to Bushra Maneka: PTI". geo.tv. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2018. "PTI confirms Imran Khan's marriage with Bushra Maneka". geo.tv. 18 February 2018. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 18 February 2018. "PTI confirms Imran Khan's marriage to Bushra Manika". dawn.com. 18 February 2018. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 18 February 2018. "I know more about physical attraction than anyone else: Imran Khan on his third marriage". Dawn. 22 July 2018. Archived from the original on 19 August 2018. Retrieved 19 August 2018. "Imran married Bushra during Iddat, Mufti tells court". DAWN.COM. 13 April 2023. Archived from the original on 13 May 2023. Retrieved 13 May 2023. "PTI publishes Imran's asset declaration". The Express Tribune. 29 August 2012. Archived from the original on 30 August 2012. Retrieved 29 August 2012. "Sheru died years ago: Imran dismisses viral reports". Geo News. Archived from the original on 6 August 2018. Retrieved 6 August 2018. "Imran Khan". Cricket Archive. Archived from the original on 15 January 2008. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Profile of Imran Khan". Opf.org.pk. Overseas Foundation Pakistan. 4 October 2007. Archived from the original on 4 October 2007. Retrieved 22 October 2016. Kuchibhotla, Akshaj (14 August 2014). "Imran Khan's debut in International cricket". Archived from the original on 26 September 2018. Retrieved 26 September 2018. "Cricketing legends: Jeffrey Thomson". Compare Infobase Ltd. Archived from the original on 22 October 2007. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Pakistan cricket's need for speed". Deccan Herald. Archived from the original on 3 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "Swing and seam bowling". BBC News. 19 August 2005. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 1 September 2018. "When Imran Khan blew me away". Cricinfo. Archived from the original on 24 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Schoolboy Imran". Cricinfo. Archived from the original on 22 September 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "For the love of Snow". Cricinfo. Archived from the original on 21 September 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "A giant among allrounders". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 18 November 2021. Retrieved 18 November 2021. "Records – Most wickets in a calendar year". ESPNcricinfo. 1 January 1970. Archived from the original on 9 February 2013. Retrieved 31 March 2013. "ICC Player Rankings". ICC. Archived from the original on 27 January 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2009. Basevi, Travis (11 October 2005). "Best averages by batting position". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Imran Khan". Cricinfo. Archived from the original on 28 March 2017. "Records / One-Day Internationals / Bowling records / Best figures in an innings when on the losing side". stats.espncricinfo.com. Archived from the original on 25 July 2017. Pakistan Test Captaincy record Archived 1 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Cricinfo. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "Pakistan – Imran Khan". ABC. 23 May 2006. Archived from the original on 5 December 2007. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Imran: Wrong time to tour". BBC. 1 May 2001. Archived from the original on 13 January 2009. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Cricket: The Top 10 All-Rounders of All Time". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Imran Khan is One of the Greatest Captains the Game Has Seen- Ravi Shastri". 4 September 2021. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Bowling records | ESPN Cricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 2 March 2014. Retrieved 1 July 2013. "All-round records | Cricinfo Statsguru". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 2 March 2014. Retrieved 31 March 2013. "All-round records | Cricinfo Statsguru". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 2 March 2014. Retrieved 31 March 2013. "All-round records | Cricinfo Statsguru". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 2 March 2014. Retrieved 31 March 2013. "Watch: Former Pakistan skipper Imran Khan speaking on ball-tampering on a TV show in 1994". Scroll.in. 27 March 2018. Archived from the original on 14 February 2019. Retrieved 13 February 2019. "Cricket's sharp practice". BBC. 21 May 2003. Archived from the original on 13 January 2009. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Botham, Lamb end legal battle". BBC. 20 May 1999. Archived from the original on 12 January 2009. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Imran returns to coaching to boost Pakistan". Cricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 9 March 2019. "Sports: opinion". Outlook magazine. Archived from the original on 4 January 2013. Retrieved 21 July 2008. Khan, Imran (24 January 2003). "Who's the real villain?". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 26 August 2013. Retrieved 21 July 2008. Khan, Imran (25 February 2003). "Another poor batting display". BBC. Archived from the original on 13 January 2009. Retrieved 21 July 2008. Lancaster, John (4 July 2005). "A Pakistani Cricket Star's Political Move". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 4 June 2012. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Big Time cricket on small screen". The Financial Express. 3 March 2004. Goodbody, John (10 May 1999). "Sky and BBC join forces for coverage". The Times. UK. "Imran Khan appointed Bradford chancellor". The Guardian. 23 November 2005. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 23 December 2016. "Students want Imran Khan sacked as vice-chancellor of University of Bradford – Times of India". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. Retrieved 23 December 2016. "University defends former Pakistan cricket captain Khan". The Independent. 25 February 2014. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 23 December 2016. "Imran made to quit as chancellor of UK University". Thenews.com.pk. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 23 December 2016. "Imran Khan resigns as University of Bradford chancellor". BBC News. 2 June 2014. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 23 December 2016. "Imran Khan – University of Bradford". Bradford.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 23 December 2016. "Mr Imran Khan's Statement". World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 24 January 2008. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "UNICEF and the stars". unicef.org. Archived from the original on 15 December 2007. Retrieved 5 November 2007. Kervin, Alison (6 August 2006). "Imran Khan: 'What I do now fulfils me like never before'". The Sunday Times. UK. Archived from the original on 23 October 2016. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Imran Khan". 13 January 2012. Archived from the original on 23 September 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. "Imran Khan awarded honorary fellowship by Royal College of Physicians – The Express Tribune". 28 July 2012. Archived from the original on 23 September 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. "Imran Khan announces second Shaukat Khanum hospital". The Express Tribune. Pakistan. 9 March 2013. Archived from the original on 12 March 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. Thomas Fletcher (6 April 2012). "Imran Khan". In John Nauright; Charles Parrish (eds.). Sports Around the World: History, Culture, and Practice. ABC-CLIO. p. 231. ISBN 978-1-59884-300-2. Kamila Hyat (2012). "Khan". In Ayesha Jalal (ed.). The Oxford Companion to Pakistani History. Karachi: Ameena Saiyid, Oxford University Press. p. 282. ISBN 978-0-19-547578-4. "University delegation goes east to establish new College". University of Bradford. 22 February 2006. Archived from the original on 15 September 2018. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "TI chief plans Knowledge City". Dawn News. 22 February 2006. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Buksh Foundation partners with Imran Khan Foundation in 'Lighting a Million Lives' project". Pakistan Today. 19 March 2013. Archived from the original on 23 March 2013. Retrieved 19 March 2013. "Imran Khan Foundation provides relief for ignored Waziristan IDPs". Pakistan Today. 17 January 2013. Archived from the original on 12 December 2013. Retrieved 17 January 2013. Imran Khan, Pakistan: A Personal History, Random House (2011), p. 99 "Pakistan's Imran Khan declares victory as rivals cry foul". Reuters. 25 July 2018. Archived from the original on 4 December 2020. Retrieved 27 July 2018. Waldman, Peter (2 December 1996). "Imran Khan Bowls Them Over With Populist Pakistani Pitch". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 18 January 2017. Retrieved 16 January 2017. Farndale, Nigel (14 August 2007). "Imran Khan is ready to become political force". The Sunday Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 8 May 2008. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Imran Khan Standing for Election Again". The Guardian. UK. 26 September 2002. Archived from the original on 18 November 2007. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Imran Khan's new game". BBC. 9 July 1998. Archived from the original on 12 January 2009. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Imran Khan wants a Pakistan as Jinnah envisioned, but what Pakistan is that? – Times of India". The Times of India. 27 July 2018. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 27 July 2018. "Pakistan to get $6bn IMF lifeline to ease economic crisis". Bbc.co.uk. 13 May 2019. Archived from the original on 13 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Sherani, Tahir (2 November 2019). "Trade deficit falls by 33.5% during July–Oct of FY19-20". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 3 May 2020. Retrieved 5 July 2020. Iqbal, Shahid (22 July 2020). "CAD shrinks 78pc in 2019–20". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 22 July 2020. Retrieved 22 July 2020. "In rare move, Pakistan military agrees to budget cut amid economic woes, PM says". uk.reuters.com. 5 June 2019. Archived from the original on 6 July 2020. Retrieved 23 July 2020. "Defence budget not increased to provide relief to masses: Qureshi". dawn.com. 14 June 2020. Archived from the original on 4 July 2020. Retrieved 14 July 2020. "Pakistan beats growth target as industries, services guide V-shaped recovery". 10 June 2021. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 10 June 2021. "Pakistan beats growth target as industries, services guide V-shaped recovery". Dawn. 10 June 2021. Archived from the original on 3 November 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "FBR collects over one trillion revenues in 1st quarter". Dunya News. 14 February 2008. Archived from the original on 1 August 2021. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "FBR says tax revenue increased by 17 percent". 6 February 2020. Archived from the original on 20 September 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Saudi prince signs $20bn in Pakistan deals". Bbc.co.uk. 18 February 2019. Archived from the original on 13 June 2020. Retrieved 23 July 2020. "Pakistan: Rampant inflation piles on the pressure". Deutsche Welle. 15 November 2021. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2022. "Pakistan: Is PM Khan's government more corrupt than previous administrations?". Deutsche Welle. 26 January 2022. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2022. "Imran Khan: A year facing Pakistan's harsh realities". BBC News. 24 August 2019. Archived from the original on 26 June 2020. Retrieved 23 June 2020. "Imran Khan: Pakistan police charge ex-PM under terrorism act". BBC News. 22 August 2022. Archived from the original on 22 August 2022. Retrieved 22 August 2022. "Russia, Pakistan agree to build Pakistan Stream gas pipeline". Aa.com.tr. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2021. "I grew up hating India: Imran Khan". DAWN.COM. 14 November 2011. Archived from the original on 6 November 2021. Retrieved 7 March 2022. Naqvi, Jawed (8 December 2013). "Imran suggests secret talks on Kashmir issue". Dawn. Archived from the original on 10 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Imran demands apology from Pakistan to Bangladesh". The News International. 24 March 2011. Archived from the original on 6 October 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2013. "Pakistan learnt no lesson from 1971". The Daily Star. 15 January 2012. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2013. "Pakistan must apologise for 1971 atrocities". The Daily Star. 26 March 2011. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2013. "Plea for forgiveness Imran requested Bangladesh PM to stay hangings". Express Tribune. 24 November 2015. Archived from the original on 25 November 2015. Retrieved 5 December 2015. Alt URL Archived 5 January 2006 at the Wayback Machine "Taliban threaten to kill Imran Khan". 9 August 2012. Archived from the original on 28 February 2021. Retrieved 9 August 2012. Crilly, Rob (1 October 2012). "Pakistan Taliban offers Imran Khan protection". The Telegraph. UK. Archived from the original on 4 October 2012. Retrieved 1 October 2012. "Imran Khan opposes military action in Kala Dhaka". The Express Tribune. Pakistan. 11 May 2010. Archived from the original on 6 October 2013. Retrieved 11 May 2010. "Imran says can negotiate with Taliban if asked". Pakistan Today. Pakistan. 24 February 2012. Archived from the original on 24 August 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2012. "Why terrorists are targeting Pakistan's Ismaili community". qz.com. 14 May 2015. Archived from the original on 10 April 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2018. "Forcibly converting people un-Islamic, says Imran". Dawn. Pakistan. 14 February 2014. Archived from the original on 18 February 2014. Retrieved 20 February 2014. Ghori, Habib Khan (25 October 2017). "Imran slams incidents of forced conversion in Sindh". Dawn. Archived from the original on 10 April 2022. Retrieved 22 August 2018. "Pakistan PM Urges World to Support Taliban, Not Isolate It". Voice of America. 24 September 2021. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2022. "Pakistan's Imran Khan warns of 'civil war' in Afghanistan". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2022. "Pakistan's 'good Taliban-bad Taliban' strategy backfires, posing regional risks". France 24. 9 February 2022. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2022. "Pakistan's PM Says Peace Talks Underway With Pakistani Taliban". Voice of America. October 2021. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2022. Butt, Ahsan I. "Imran Khan's talks with the Pakistan Taliban will not bring peace". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2022. "Imran wants govt to mediate in Saudi-Iran conflict". The Nation. 9 January 2016. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016. Retrieved 9 January 2016. "Neutrality in war: Imran takes credit for parliament's verdict on Yemen | The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 12 April 2015. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 25 August 2018. "Pakistan's dilemma: Can Imran Khan afford to tilt towards Iran?". Middle East Eye. Archived from the original on 6 April 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2018. Group, International Crisis (2022). A New Era of Sectarian Violence in Pakistan. International Crisis Group. pp. Page 8–Page 14. Archived from the original on 20 July 2023. Retrieved 20 July 2023. Hashim, Asad (19 April 2021). "Pakistan PM calls for West to criminalise blasphemy against Islam". AlJazeera. Archived from the original on 16 August 2023. Retrieved 16 August 2023. "Imran Khan ─ from flamboyant cricketer to prime minister". Dawn. 17 August 2018. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Sandford, Christopher (2009). Imran Khan : the cricketer, the celebrity, the politician : the biography. HarperCollins Publishers. ISBN 978-0-00-735337-8. OCLC 610566791. "Imran Khan leads 100,000 rally against Pakistan's US alliance". The Telegraph. London. 30 October 2011. Archived from the original on 6 November 2011. Retrieved 6 November 2011. "Results election 1997" (PDF). ECP. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2017. Retrieved 30 August 2017. Walsh, Declan (31 October 2011). "Imran Khan laps up acclaim in Pakistan". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 December 2013. Retrieved 6 November 2011. Walsh, Declan (31 August 2005). "When you speak out, people react". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 29 August 2013. Retrieved 21 July 2008. Adams, Tim (2 July 2006). "The path of Khan". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 30 August 2013. Retrieved 6 November 2011. "Khan 'optimistic' about Pakistan elections". BBC News. 21 June 2002. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 6 November 2011. Lancaster, John (16 November 2002). "Pakistan's parliament sworn, after 3 years". United Press International. Retrieved 15 July 2008.[dead link] "Opposition parties may boycott referendum". dawn.com. 22 March 2002. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 19 August 2018. "Candidate details: Imran Khan". Pakistan Elections. Archived from the original on 26 October 2007. Retrieved 5 November 2007. Hendrik Hertzberg (30 May 2005). "Big News Week". Archived from the original on 13 November 2007. Retrieved 19 August 2014. "EC rejects references against Imran Khan". Associated Press of Pakistan. 5 September 2007. Archived from the original on 25 January 2008. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Pakistan MPs in election boycott". BBC. 2 October 2007. Archived from the original on 12 January 2009. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "Imran Khan escapes from house arrest". The Times of India. India. 5 November 2007. Archived from the original on 6 November 2007. Retrieved 5 November 2007. Page, Jeremy (14 November 2007). "Imran Khan comes out of hiding to lead students in street protests". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on 6 July 2008. Retrieved 15 November 2007. "Khan arrested under terror laws as Musharraf defends crackdown" Archived 1 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Walsh, Declan. The Guardian. Published 14 November 2007. Accessed 25 August 2015. Wilkinson, Isambard; Moore, Matthew (21 November 2007). "Imran Khan released from prison in Pakistan". Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. "Imran Khan's 'tsunami' sweeps Lahore". The Express Tribune. Pakistan. 30 October 2011. Archived from the original on 29 April 2012. Retrieved 10 May 2012. "Imran's dream team wows Karachi". The Express Tribune. Pakistan. 25 December 2011. Archived from the original on 9 May 2012. Retrieved 10 May 2012. "IRI survey shows PTI on top of popularity list". The News. Pakistan. 7 May 2012. Archived from the original on 10 May 2012. Retrieved 10 May 2012. "Imran Khan country's most popular leader due to his principled stance". The News International. Pakistan. 30 June 2012. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 30 June 2012. "Imran Khan leads drone protesters into volatile Pakistan region". Los Angeles Times. Pakistan. 6 October 2012. Archived from the original on 7 October 2012. Retrieved 6 October 2012. "Imran Khan: Athlete, Activist, Playboy... Prime Minister?". Feed.vocativ.com. 14 March 2013. Archived from the original on 12 April 2013. Retrieved 31 March 2013. "Imran Khan pledges to build 'Naya Pakistan'". The News International. Archived from the original on 30 March 2013. Retrieved 31 March 2013. our correspondent (29 April 2013). "Imran, not PPP, main opposition to Nawaz: Observer". The News International. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 18 April 2013. "Nawaz Sharif says Imran, Zardari are on the same side". Geo TV. 16 April 2013. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2013. "Imran challenges Nawaz to TV debate". Dawn. 23 April 2013. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2013. "Imran opens Lahore poll war front". The Nation. 18 April 2013. Archived from the original on 21 April 2013. Retrieved 18 April 2013. "Covering new ground: Imran Khan to address Karak, DI Khan". The News International. 21 April 2013. Archived from the original on 24 April 2013. Retrieved 21 April 2013. "Imran Khan vows to release Pakistan from US slavery". The Nation. 22 April 2013. Archived from the original on 23 April 2013. Retrieved 21 April 2013. Our Correspondent (27 April 2013). "Election trail: Imran Khan wraps up campaign in Seraiki belt". The Express Tribune. Archived from the original on 28 April 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2013. "Imran Khan's emotional appeal from hospital bed". NDTV. NDTV. 10 May 2013. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2013. Web Desk (10 May 2013). "Imran Khan gains in Pakistan, haggling over government expected". The Express Tribune. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2013. Omar Waraich (10 May 2013). "From Hospital Bed, Pakistani 'Change' Candidate Imran Khan Aims for Victory". Time. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2013. Mackey, Robert (7 May 2013). "Video of Imran Khan' s Fall at Election Rally in Pakistan". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 4 May 2013. "Imran falls off stage at Lahore rally; sustains serious injuries". Dawn. 7 May 2013. Archived from the original on 8 May 2013. Retrieved 4 May 2013. "Tehrik-i-Insaf sweeps Khyber Pakhtunkhwa". The Nation. 12 May 2013. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2013. "Imran's tsunami: Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa lives up to tradition". The Express Tribune. 12 May 2013. Archived from the original on 9 June 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2013. "ECP results show PTI second largest in Karachi". The Express Tribune. 12 May 2013. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2013. "PTI candidates remain runners up in Karachi's 15 constituencies". The News International. 25 May 2013. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 25 May 2013. "PTI concedes defeat in Pakistan elections". The Express Tribune. 12 May 2013. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2013. "Imran Khan's party won second most votes in Pakistan election". The Telegraph. London. 27 May 2013. Archived from the original on 8 June 2013. Retrieved 27 May 2013. "Anti polio programme: Bill gates reaches out to Imran Khan for support". The Express Tribune. 7 June 2013. Archived from the original on 8 June 2013. Retrieved 7 June 2013. "Supreme Court issues contempt notice to Imran Khan". Dawn. 1 August 2013. Archived from the original on 1 August 2013. Retrieved 1 August 2013. "SC discharges contempt notice against PTI chief Imran Khan". The News. 28 August 2013. Archived from the original on 28 August 2013. Retrieved 28 August 2013. "Imran Khan's party set to form govt in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa". Business Standard. Press Trust of India. 12 May 2013. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 14 May 2013. "PTI grabs 10 women special seats in KPK". Business Recorder. 29 May 2013. Archived from the original on 13 June 2013. Retrieved 19 May 2013. "Khyber Pakhtunkhwa makes it tax-free". The Nation. 18 June 2013. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 9 January 2016. "'Father of the Taliban' killed in Pakistan". Deutsche Welle. 2 November 2018. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2022. "Hakimullah Mehsud: Imran Khan seeks Nato blockade over killing". BBC News. 6 November 2013. Archived from the original on 11 October 2018. Retrieved 24 August 2018. "Imran Khan asks KP govt to part ways with Sherpao's party". The News International. Archived from the original on 1 December 2013. Retrieved 28 November 2013. "Fake degree: SC maintains PTI minister's disqualification". Dawn. 13 November 2013. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 28 November 2013. Imran demands new ECP, resignation of its members Archived 19 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine 12 May 2014; The News International. Retrieved 15 August 2014 Destination Islamabad: Azadi march takes off Archived 17 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine By Anwer Sumra; Published: 15 August 2014; The Express Tribune. Retrieved 16 August 2014 Azadi march attacked with stones, shoes in Gujranwala Archived 18 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine 16 August 2014; By Anwer Sumra; The Express Tribune. Retrieved 16 August 2014 Clashes in Pakistan after gun shots fired at Imran Khan's vehicle Archived 16 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine 15 August 2014; The Times of India. Retrieved 16 August 2014 Asad Hashim. "Anti-PM protesters storm Pakistan broadcaster". aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 9 January 2016. "Azadi March- PTI Leader Imran Khan openly asked workers to attack on the Police in Islamabad – Video Dailymotion". Dailymotion. 17 November 2014. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 21 August 2018. "Pakistan set for 'decisive' day of protests". aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 9 January 2016. March PTI Workers Injured After PML-N Allegedly Attacked Azadi March Archived 4 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine 15 August 2014; Dunya News . Retrieved 16 August 2014 "PTI, PML-N come together in 'national interest'". pakistantoday.com.pk. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 9 January 2016. "PTI finalises 85 NA candidates of Punjab". nation.com.pk. 4 June 2018. Archived from the original on 4 June 2018. Retrieved 5 June 2018. "Ex-cricketer Khan leads Pakistan elections in early counting". BBC News. 26 July 2018. Archived from the original on 29 May 2019. Retrieved 27 July 2018. Gannon, Kathy (26 July 2018). "Unofficial Results in Pakistan's Election Show Lead For Imran Khan, But Opponents Allege Fraud". TIME Magazine. Archived from the original on 29 July 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2018. Shah, Saeed (25 July 2018). "Ex-Cricket Star Imran Khan Headed for Pakistan Election Victory". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 19 April 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2018. "ECP declares results of 251 of 270 NA seats; Imran Khan's PTI leads with 110". Geo News. 27 July 2018. Archived from the original on 15 November 2018. Retrieved 27 July 2018. Morrison, Sean (27 July 2018). "Imran Khan wins Pakistan general election but needs to form coalition". London Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 27 July 2018. Retrieved 27 July 2018. "Voting positions: PTI won more popular votes than PPP". Express Tribune. 25 December 2011. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. Retrieved 25 March 2012. "Election 2018 results: Imran clean sweeps all five constituencies". Dunya News. 26 July 2018. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Imran makes history by winning 5 NA seats". Business Recorder. 27 July 2018. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Wasim, Amir (21 May 2018). "Imran unveils ambitious agenda for first 100 days of govt". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 6 January 2019. Retrieved 7 August 2018. "PTI unveils 'first 100 days' action plan". The Nation. 21 May 2018. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 20 August 2018. "PTI unveils agenda for first 100 days in power – Daily Times". Daily Times. 21 May 2018. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 20 August 2018. Wilkinson, Bard; Saifi, Sophia; Westcott, Ben (26 July 2018). "Imran Khan claims victory in disputed Pakistan election". cnn.com. Archived from the original on 31 July 2018. Retrieved 6 August 2018. "Nawaz Sharif: Pakistan's army yet again takes on the wrong fight – The Economic Times". economictimes.com. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2018. "Pakistan election: Party of Ex-PM Nawaz Sharif concedes to Imran Khan". BBC News. 27 July 2018. Archived from the original on 27 July 2018. Retrieved 27 July 2018. "ECP rejects political parties' claim of 'rigging' on election day". The Express Tribune. 25 July 2018. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2018. "EU mission terms election satisfactory, calls it better than 2013". DAWN. 26 July 2018. Archived from the original on 27 July 2018. Retrieved 27 July 2018. "Imran Khan's speech in full". Aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 7 August 2018. "PTI formally nominates Imran Khan as prime minister candidate". Geo.tv. 6 August 2018. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 6 August 2018. "Imran Khan to have 'one hour of accountability' every week to answer public's questions". Thenews.com.pk. 6 August 2018. Archived from the original on 6 August 2018. Retrieved 7 August 2018. "In a surprise, PTI Finance Minister designate Asad Umer hits out at America". timesofislamabad.com. 4 August 2018. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. "Imran Khan decides to appoint Imran Ismail as Sindh Governor". thenews.com.pk. Archived from the original on 6 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. "PTI chief nominates ex-sports minister Mehmood Khan for K–P CM post – The Express Tribune". tribune.com.pk. 8 August 2018. Archived from the original on 13 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. "PTI nominates Asad Qaiser for NA speaker, Chaudhry Sarwar for Punjab governor". dawn.com. 10 August 2018. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. "Imran decides to appoint Shah Farman as KP governor: sources". geo.tv. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. "Jam Kamal named Balochistan CM". nation.com.pk. 10 August 2018. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018. Retrieved 12 August 2018. "Pervaiz Elahi nominated as Punjab Assembly speaker". Paktribune. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018. Retrieved 12 August 2018. Raza, Syed Irfan (12 August 2018). "PTI chief picks economy aide as team takes shape". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 12 August 2018. Retrieved 13 August 2018. "PTI nominates Qasim Suri for NA Deputy Speaker slot". dunyanews.tv. 14 February 2008. Archived from the original on 13 August 2018. Retrieved 14 August 2018. "PTI names Mushtaq Ghani for speaker, Mehmood Jan deputy speaker in K–P Assembly – The Express Tribune". tribune.com.pk. 13 August 2018. Archived from the original on 14 August 2018. Retrieved 14 August 2018. "Imran nominates Sardar Usman Buzdar as CM Punjab". Geo.tv. 17 August 2018. Archived from the original on 17 August 2018. Retrieved 18 August 2018. "PTI nominates Sardar Usman Ahmad Khan Buzdar for Punjab CM slot – Pakistan Today". Pakistantoday.com.pk. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 18 August 2018. "PTI chief Imran Khan elected prime minister of Pakistan". Geo News. 17 August 2018. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Guramani, Nadir (18 August 2018). "Prime Minister Imran Khan: PTI chairman sworn in as 22nd premier of Pakistan". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 6 January 2019. Retrieved 18 August 2018. "High Commissioner to India Sohail Mahmood appointed new foreign secretary". dawn.com. 31 March 2019. Archived from the original on 25 August 2019. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "To rid FBR of corruption, Jahanzeb Khan appointed chairman – The Express Tribune". Tribune.com.pk. 28 August 2018. Archived from the original on 26 September 2018. Retrieved 26 September 2018. "Lt Gen Asim Munir named as new ISI chief | The Express Tribune". tribune.com.pk. 10 October 2018. Archived from the original on 8 December 2018. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "عمران خان کی وفاقی کابینہ کل حلف اٹھائے گی،اسد عمر" (in Urdu). Dailypakistan.com.pk. 18 August 2018. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 18 August 2018. Syed, Baqir Sajjad (18 April 2019). "Profile: Ijaz Shah — Imran Khan's new Interior Minister". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 10 December 2019. Retrieved 29 February 2020. "PM Imran Khan's first cabinet anything but 'Naya Pakistan' – Pakistan Today". Pakistantoday.com.pk. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 18 August 2018. "PM Imran Khan finalises names of 21-member cabinet". dawn.com. 18 August 2018. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 18 August 2018. "PM House announces major cabinet reshuffle". Samaa TV. 18 April 2019. Archived from the original on 24 September 2020. Retrieved 29 February 2020. Steele, Jonathan; Oborne, Peter (22 October 2018). "Imran Khan: Pakistan cannot afford to snub Saudis over Khashoggi killing". Middle East Eye. Archived from the original on 14 January 2019. Retrieved 21 January 2019. (updated 8 November 2018). "Where Do China-Pakistan Ties Go in the Age of Imran Khan?". The Diplomat. 14 August 2018. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 10 March 2019. "Saudi crown prince defends China's right to put Uighur Muslims in concentration camps". The Daily Telegraph. 22 February 2019. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. "Exclusive: Pakistani PM Imran Khan says escalation of Iran conflict would be 'disastrous'". Deutsche Welle. 16 January 2020. Archived from the original on 27 January 2020. Retrieved 29 February 2020. "Imran Khan: The 100 Most Influential People of 2019". Time. Archived from the original on 20 September 2020. Retrieved 22 September 2020. Findlay, Stephanie (4 July 2019). "IMF approves $6bn Pakistan bailout package after austerity budget". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Bokhari, Farhan (11 June 2019). "Pakistan unveils austerity budget in bid to secure IMF loan". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Abbas, Waheed. "Pakistan receives record $23.1 billion remittances". Khaleej Times. Archived from the original on 22 July 2020. Retrieved 22 July 2020. "Pakistan's budget deficit improves to Rs440b". The Express Tribune. 24 September 2020. Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Abbasi, Zaheer (30 September 2020). "Debt repayment, servicing for past loans: PTI government had to borrow $24 billion, MoF tells cabinet". Brecorder. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Kaptaan Khan's slog from sports icon to Pakistan's likely new leader". Dunya News. Archived from the original on 12 December 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2018. "Imran Khan: Forever the Kaptaan". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 3 August 2018. "Doing Business 2020: Accelerated Business Climate Reform Agenda Puts Pakistan Among Top 10 Improvers". World Bank. Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "FBR tax, duty collection increases by 10.4%". Samaa TV. Archived from the original on 19 May 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "FBR achieves first quarter tax target". The Express Tribune. 30 September 2020. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Second phase of Pakistan-China Free Trade Agreement comes into effect". The Nation. 2 January 2020. Archived from the original on 8 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "China-Pak ties: FTA-II a significant milestone". The Express Tribune. 4 October 2020. Archived from the original on 8 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "No more chances of entering into FATF's blacklist for Pakistan". Dunya News. 14 February 2008. Archived from the original on 23 February 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "Pakistan compliant on '14 FATF action points'". The Express Tribune. 29 July 2020. Archived from the original on 3 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Guramani, Nadir; Hussain, Javed (30 July 2020). "Senate passes Anti-Terrorism Act, UNSC amendment bills". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Guramani, Nadir (16 September 2020). "Opposition blocks another FATF-related bill in Senate". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 7 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Khan, Iftikhar A. (26 August 2020). "Opposition-ruled Senate rejects two FATF bills". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 14 June 2023. Retrieved 14 June 2023. "Opposition stage walkout as 3 FATF-related bills get passed during joint parliament session". The News International. Archived from the original on 14 June 2023. Retrieved 14 June 2023. "Joint session of parliament passes crucial FATF related bills". Dunya News. 14 February 2008. Archived from the original on 1 August 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Hussain, Fayaz (23 October 2020). "'To remain on grey list': FATF urges Pakistan to complete action plan by Feb 2021". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 22 February 2021. Retrieved 23 February 2021. "FATF keeps Pakistan on grey list till June". The Express Tribune. 25 February 2021. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 6 June 2021. "FATF keeps Pakistan on grey list until June despite 'significant progress'". dawn.com. Associated Press. 25 February 2021. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 25 February 2021. "Pakistan won't be blacklisted citing significant progress: FATF". Dunya News. 14 February 2008. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 25 February 2021. "US Tells Pakistan to "Swiftly Complete" 27-Point Action Plan on Terror". NDTV. 20 July 2021. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 6 November 2022. "With compliance on 26 points, no justification to keep Pakistan in FATF's grey list: Qureshi". www.geo.tv. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 10 April 2022. "Pakistan sentences anti-India militant leader to 31 years". ABC News. Archived from the original on 10 April 2022. Retrieved 10 April 2022. "Proud of you: Former PM Imran hails FATF decision as accomplishment of Hammad Azhar-led committee". Dawn. Archived from the original on 14 June 2023. Retrieved 14 June 2023. Junaidi, Ikram (8 January 2020). "13pc decrease in terrorist attacks observed in 2019: think tank". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 22 July 2020. Retrieved 22 July 2020. Kiani, Khaleeq (7 July 2020). "Foreign investors see improvement in security". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 13 July 2020. Retrieved 22 July 2020. "Pakistan formally bans Hafiz Saeed-led Jamaat-ud-Dawa, FIF". The Indian Express. 5 March 2019. Archived from the original on 10 April 2022. Retrieved 10 April 2022. Tyab, Imtiaz (26 June 2020). "Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan says the U.S. 'martyred' Osama bin Laden". CBS News. Archived from the original on 26 June 2020. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Pakistani PM Says Americans 'Martyred' Osama Bin Laden | Voice of America – English". Voice of America. 25 June 2020. Archived from the original on 2 July 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Imran Khan criticised after calling Osama Bin Laden a 'martyr'". BBC. 26 June 2020. Archived from the original on 26 June 2020. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Pakistani PM asks Facebook CEO to ban Islamophobic content". Reuters. 25 October 2020. Archived from the original on 13 November 2020. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Slater, Joanna; Masih, Niha (19 July 2021). "The spyware is sold to governments to fight terrorism. In India, it was used to hack journalists and others". The Washington Post. "Pakistan sentences anti-India militant leader to 31 years". ABC News. "Pakistan returns 200-year-old temple to Sikhs in Quetta". gulfnews.com. 23 July 2020. Siddiqui, Naveed (9 November 2019). "'This is the beginning': PM Imran inaugurates Kartarpur Corridor on a historic day". Dawn. "PML-N opposes, PPP supports Kartarpur Corridor initiative in NA". dawn.com. 12 November 2019. Raza, Syed Irfan (20 March 2020). "First phase of single national curriculum completed, says govt". dawn.com. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Sehat Insaf cards distributed among 7.2m families: CM". Thenews.com.pk. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "PM Khan launches Sehat Sahulat Programme in KP". 20 August 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Mahmood, Aisha (3 December 2020). "Two million families to benefit from new Ehsaas Kafaalat Policy for Special Persons: PM". Brecorder.com. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "PM visits Ehsaas Kafalat payment site initiate payment to 7 m beneficiaries". Pakistan Today. "PM Imran Khan kicks off phase I of Ehsaas Kafaalat payments". Geo.tv. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "KP govt launches Sehat Sahulat programme for all residents of province". dawn.com. 20 August 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2021. Tariq, Soofia (25 June 2021). "Outrage after Pakistan PM Imran Khan blames rape crisis on women". The Guardian. "Hydel electricity generation increased by 20pc in FY20 to highest ever level, says Asad Umar". 5 July 2020. "Pakistan Decides Against New Coal-fired Power". VOA. 12 December 2020. "Five Things Imran Khan Has Done to Improve Pakistan". CPIC Global. 25 July 2019. Retrieved 23 June 2020. "Diamer-Bhasha Dam will benefit country economically, environmentally: PM Imran". The Express Tribune. 15 July 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Ahmed, Ali (25 September 2020). "WB approves $450mn for Pakistan's renewable transition". Brecorder. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Khan, Rina Saeed (29 June 2020). "Pakistan launches electric vehicle plan with cars in slow lane". uk.reuters.com. Retrieved 3 January 2021. Khizar, Ali (20 December 2020). "EV policy – nice and cautious start". Brecorder.com. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "Pakistan first South Asian country to have electric vehicles this year: Fawad". The World News. Archived from the original on 9 January 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2021. "Pakistan first South Asian country to have electric vehicles this year: Fawad". Pakistan Today. "As a 'green stimulus' Pakistan sets virus-idled to work planting trees". reuters.com. 28 April 2020. "A 10 Billion-Tree Plan Is Restoring Pakistan's Lost Forests". Bloomberg. 17 December 2020. "Pakistan Plants 500 Million New Trees in Drive Against Climate Change | Voice of America – English". Voanews.com. 6 October 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "PM Imran announces 15 national parks as part of 'Protective Areas Initiative'". The Express Tribune. 2 July 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "ECC grants Rs19.66 billion for golden handshake scheme for PSM employees". The Nation. 30 September 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "ECC approves golden handshake plan for PSM employees: sources". 30 September 2020. "PIA reaches break-even in operating profit". The Express Tribune. 19 April 2019. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "PIA finalises plan to lay off half of its employees". The Express Tribune. 16 December 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2021. Khan, Iftikhar A.; Asghar, Mohammad (1 January 2021). "2,000 employees have applied for voluntary separation: PIA". dawn.com. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "PIA to completely shift to Islamabad by June". The Express Tribune. 21 December 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "Teach like PTV, PIA & PSM crushed by past governments through political appointments: Shibli". The Nation. 23 July 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2021. Asghar, Mohammad (17 December 2020). "Goal set to axe majority of PIA workers". dawn.com. Retrieved 3 January 2021. Jorgic, Drazen (4 July 2019). "'Government go-slow', as Pakistan's anti-corruption drive bites". Reuters.com. "NAB's victimisation of critics will be exposed: PPP". dawn.com. 8 August 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "Jahangir Tareen to be prosecuted as per law: Shahzad Akbar". The Express Tribune. 1 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. Waqar, Ali (6 February 2019). "PTI minister Aleem Khan taken into custody by NAB Lahore". dawn.com. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "PM rejects Jahangir Tareen group's request for Judicial Commission". Dunya News. 14 February 2008. "NAB recovered Rs 363 billion during last two years, says Javed Iqbal". ARY News. 13 September 2020. Retrieved 14 November 2022. "NAB Lahore shows 280pc increase in recovery". The News. "Rs 487bn ill-gotten money recovered in three years: NAB". dawn.com. 4 January 2021. "NAB's 3-year output remains remarkable". The Nation. 4 January 2021. "PM Imran Khan says NAB recovered over Rs200bn more compared to PML-N, PPP tenures". Geo.tv. Westcott, Ben; Hollingsworth, Julia; Renton, Adam; Guy, Jack; Wagner, Meg; Hayes, Mike (9 April 2020). "Pakistan rolls out largest social assistance program in nation's history to tackle Covid-19". CNN. "Distribution of funds to needy begins under Ehsaas Programme". Geo.tv. "Pakistan: Coronavirus cases fall for 5th straight day". Archived from the original on 18 September 2020. Retrieved 25 September 2020. Junaidi, Ikram (10 January 2021). "Govt optimistic of getting Covid vaccine soon". dawn.com. "Business confidence turns positive". Business Recorder. 25 September 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Current account in green". Business Recorder. 25 September 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. Aslam, Naeem. "Pakistan's Public Debt To GDP Remained Broadly Unchanged According To The IMF". Forbes. "Fitch Affirms Pakistan at 'B-'; Outlook Stable". Fitch Ratings. 27 May 2021. Ahmed, Ali (25 November 2020). "PM vows to provide full support to textile industry amid historic demand". Brecorder.com. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "Power tariff reduced for textile sector". Pakistan Today. "ADB sees economic recovery in Pakistan". The Express Tribune. 11 December 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "Pakistan's economy is recovering: ADB". Brecorder.com. 11 December 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "Exports recover to pre-Covid levels". The Express Tribune. 15 December 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "Current account deficit shrinks 75% in February". The Express Tribune. 22 March 2021. "Pakistan beats India in apparel exports to US". The Express Tribune. 20 April 2021. "Massive taxation relief to boost industrial growth". Dawn. 12 June 2021. Retrieved 14 November 2022. "PM Imran telephones Erdogan, assures full support to Turkey". TheNews. 11 October 2019. "PM Imran assures Erdogan of Pakistan's support, solidarity over Turkey's Syria operation". Dawn. 11 October 2019. "UN report warns TTP, JUA target Pakistan from Afghan bases". The Express Tribune. 26 July 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Pakistan, Afghanistan inaugurate 24/7 Torkham border crossing". Aljazeera.com. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Pakistan will not recognise Israel: PM Khan". Al Jazeera. 20 August 2020. "After a year of Imran Khan, Pakistan is finally stepping into its role as a world player". The Independent. 26 September 2019. Retrieved 23 June 2020. Rashid, Ahmed (2019). "Imran Khan". Time. Retrieved 27 May 2022. Abbas, Waheed. "UAE extends repayment of $2 billion loan given to Pakistan". m.khaleejtimes.com. Hashim, Asad. "Pakistan FM raises visa restrictions issue with top UAE officials". Aljazeera.com. "PM Imran arrives in Saudi Arabia on three-day visit". The Express Tribune. 7 May 2021. "Yemen conflict: Pakistan rebuffs Saudi coalition call". BBC News. 10 April 2015. Ansari, Irshad (9 June 2021). "Saudi Arabia pledges Rs37.4b for Mohmand dam". The Express Tribune. Retrieved 17 August 2023. "Kuwait resumes visas for Pakistani citizens after 10 year suspension". Gulf News. 31 May 2021. Retrieved 17 May 2023. "Pakistan hopes to save $3 billion in new gas deal with Qatar". AP News. 1 March 2021. "Cheaper LNG deal signed with Qatar". Thenews.com.pk. "Pakistan Mediating Between Saudi Arabia, Iran to End Yemen War". VOA News. 24 October 2018. Raza, Syed Ifran (10 May 2021). "PM slams Israeli attack, urges OIC to combat Islamophobia". Dawn. Islamabad, Pakistan. Archived from the original on 10 May 2021. "Pakistan ready to talk with India if it restores Kashmir's autonomy: PM Imran". Dunya News. 14 February 2008. "Pakistan ready for talks with India if it gives roadmap to restore Kashmir's status: PM Imran". dawn.com. 4 June 2021. "UAE brokering secret India-Pakistan peace roadmap: Officials". Aljazeera.com. "'No longer backdoor contacts with India'". 4 July 2021. "Afghans have broken 'shackles of slavery': Pakistan PM Imran Khan". Business Standard India. Press Trust of India. 16 August 2021. "Western-Led Pressure Grows on Pakistan to Condemn Russia's Invasion of Ukraine". VOA News. 1 March 2022. "Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan's first visit to Russia from Feb 23". The Hindu. 21 February 2022. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 19 July 2022. Adil, Shahzeb (23 February 2022). "'Tread with caution': Analysts comment on PM Imran's Russia trip amid Ukraine tensions". DAWN.COM. Retrieved 22 February 2024. Osborn, Andrew; Nikolskaya, Polina (24 February 2022). "Russia's Putin authorises 'special military operation' against Ukraine". Reuters. Retrieved 19 July 2022. Kalita, Jayanta (25 February 2022). "Imran Khan Meets Putin At The 'Worst Possible Time'; Why Is Pakistan So Important For Russia?". Latest Asian, Middle-East, EurAsian, Indian News. Retrieved 19 July 2022. "In the midst of Ukraine crisis, Pakistan seeks 'multi-dimensional relationship' with Russia as Imran Khan meet Putin". South Asia Monitor. Retrieved 19 July 2022. "Pak PM Imran Khan to visit Russia soon, 2 mega gas pipeline projects on agenda". The New Indian Express. 17 February 2022. Retrieved 19 July 2022. Hashim, Asad. "Pakistani PM Khan meets Putin amid Ukraine invasion". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 3 April 2022. Bigg, Matthew Mpoke (24 February 2022). "Pakistan's leader is in Moscow to meet with Putin about a gas pipeline". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 19 July 2022. "Factbox: Pakistan-Russia collaboration on gas pipeline project". Reuters. 23 February 2022. Retrieved 19 July 2022. "At UN, Pakistan refuses to condemn Russia". The Express Tribune. 2 March 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. "Pakistani premier hits out at Western envoys' joint letter on Russia". Reuters. 6 March 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. Grim, Ryan; Hussain, Murtaza (9 August 2023). "Secret Pakistan Cable Documents U.S. Pressure to Remove Imran Khan". The Intercept. Retrieved 10 August 2023. Zaman, Sarah; Saine, Cindy (9 August 2023). "Purported Text of Secret Cable Shows US Ire at Imran Khan". Voice of America. Retrieved 12 August 2023. "Opposition submits no-confidence motion against PM Imran Khan". www.geo.tv. Retrieved 9 March 2022. Shahzad, Asif (8 March 2022). "Pakistani opposition moves no-confidence motion to seek PM Khan's ouster". Reuters. Retrieved 4 April 2022. "Copy of cipher 'missing' from PM House records, cabinet told". Dawn. 30 September 2022. Malik, Hasnaat (10 April 2022). "Imran Khan sends diplomatic cypher to CJP". The Express Tribune. "All institutions were on board over former PM's Russia visit: DG ISPR". ARY News. arynews.tv. 14 April 2022. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Imran Khan advised President Alvi to dissolve assemblies". 3 April 2022. National Assembly of Pakistan (28 February 2012). "The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan" (PDF). Retrieved 10 April 2022. "Imran Khan ousted as Pakistan's PM after key vote". BBC News. 9 April 2022. "Imran Khan becomes first PM to be ousted via no-trust vote". The Express Tribune. 9 April 2022. Retrieved 9 April 2022. Chaudhry, Fahad (9 April 2022). "Imran Khan loses no-trust vote, prime ministerial term comes to unceremonious end". DAWN.COM. Retrieved 9 April 2022. "Live updates: NA votes out PM Imran Khan in a historic first for Pakistan". www.thenews.com.pk. Retrieved 9 April 2022. "No-trust motion: Imran Khan becomes first prime minister to be voted out of pow". The Nation. Retrieved 9 April 2022. "Protests in Pakistan over Khan's removal, Sharif set to be new PM". www.aljazeera.com. 11 April 2022. Retrieved 14 April 2022. Khan has claimed the US worked behind the scenes to bring him down, purportedly because of Washington's displeasure over his independent foreign policy choices, which often favour China and Russia. "Imran Khan supporters stage protests across Pakistan against his ouster as PM". The Economic Times. 11 April 2022. Retrieved 14 April 2022. "Imran Khan supporters stage protests across Pakistan against his ouster as PM". The New Indian Express. 11 April 2022. Retrieved 14 April 2022. Hussain, Abid (14 November 2022). "Imran Khan's U-turn: No longer blaming US for his ouster as PM". Al Jazeera. "Imran Khan seeks to repair ties with US; says cipher conspiracy is over". The News International. 13 November 2022. "Toshakhana reference: ECP disqualifies PTI chief Imran Khan". Brecorder. 21 October 2022. Retrieved 17 November 2022. "Imran disqualified". The Express Tribune. 21 October 2022. Retrieved 17 November 2022. "Toshakhana reference sent to trial court against Imran". The Express Tribune. 14 November 2022. Retrieved 21 November 2022. "Kaptaan marches again: What next?". The Express Tribune. 28 October 2022. Shah, Saeed (3 November 2022). "Former Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan Shot in Leg at Protest Rally". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 3 November 2022. "Imran Khan shot in leg in 'assassination attempt', former Pakistan prime minister's supporters say". Sky News. Retrieved 3 November 2022. "Pakistan ex-PM Imran Khan shot and wounded at protest march". BBC News. 3 November 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022. Hussain, Abid. "'Police here to send me to jail,' Khan says in video amid clashes". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 16 March 2023. Sophia Saifi; Tara John; Vasco Cotovio; Kathleen Magramo; Azaz Syed (14 March 2023). "Imran Khan greets supporters outside home after Pakistan police arrest operation ends in chaos". CNN. Retrieved 16 March 2023. "Imran Khan Arrested Outside Court, Whisked Away By Paramilitary Personnel". NDTV.com. Retrieved 9 May 2023. Hussain, Abid. "Former Pakistani PM Imran Khan arrested at Islamabad court". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 9 May 2023. "Zaman Park: Imran Khan's new political base". The Nation (newspaper). 12 November 2022. Retrieved 10 April 2022. "Imran Khan Arrest LIVE Updates: Former Pakistan PM taken into custody from outside Islamabad High Court". The Indian Express. 9 May 2023. Retrieved 9 May 2023. Burney, Umer (9 May 2023). "Imran Khan arrested from outside IHC in Al-Qadir Trust case". DAWN.COM. Retrieved 9 May 2023. "Imran Khan arrest live updates: PTI leaders call for nationwide protests". The Times of India. Retrieved 9 May 2023. "Imran Khan:Dozens of police seize ex-PM outside court in Pakistan". BBC News. 9 May 2023. "May 9 riots 'mastermind' Imran Khan to be tried in military court: Rana Sanaullah". Geo News. 30 May 2023. Retrieved 1 February 2024. Saifi, Sophia (11 May 2023). "Arrest of Pakistan's former Prime Minister Imran Khan was illegal, top court rules". CNN. Retrieved 6 June 2023. Samaa Web Desk (8 June 2023). "Demanding action against May 9 instigators, JKT, Aleem Khan officially launch Istehkam-e-Pakistan Party". Samaa. Retrieved 10 June 2023. "Imran Khan leaves court after being granted bail". BBC News. 12 May 2023. Retrieved 13 May 2023. "Imran Khan: Pakistan former PM jailed for 10 years in state secrets case". BBC News. 30 January 2024. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Shahid, Ariba (30 January 2024). "Reaction to Pakistan ex-PM Imran Khan's 10-year jail term". Reuters. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Former Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan gets 10 years in prison ahead of elections". Associated Press News. 30 January 2024. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Shahid, Ariba; Shahzad, Asif (31 January 2024). "Pakistan ex-PM Imran Khan jailed for 14 years a day after 10-year sentence". Reuters. Retrieved 2 February 2024. "Imran Khan: Former Pakistan PM jailed another 14 years for graft". BBC News. 31 January 2024. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "Pakistan court suspends Imran Khan's prison sentence in state gifts case". Al Jazeera. 1 April 2024. "Pakistan's ex-PM Imran Khan, wife get seven-year jail term for unlawful marriage". France 24. 3 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "Imprisoned former Pakistani premier Khan appeals 3 recent convictions". Associated Press. 17 February 2024. "Polls close in Pakistan after millions vote in election marred by violence". France 24. 8 February 2024. "Pakistani authorities bar visitors for imprisoned ex-Prime Minister Imran Khan for 2 weeks". Associated Press. 12 March 2024. Clarence-Smith, Louisa; Penna, Dominic (7 February 2024). "Rory Stewart tipped as next chancellor of Oxford University". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Lawmakers declare assets". 17 November 2003. "ECP releases details of PM's assets". Gulf-Times. 11 November 2020. "Imran Khan's net worth over a billion, yet no vehicle in his name". Samaa TV. 16 June 2017. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017. Retrieved 30 July 2017. Moatasim, Faiza (30 July 2017). "Bani Gala: Built on Illegalitiess". dawn.com. Retrieved 6 August 2018. Durrani, Fakhar (19 November 2019). "How much tax Imran paid in last 37 years?". The News International. Sherani, Tahir (3 January 2022). "FBR 2019 data: PM Imran paid Rs9.8m in taxes while PPP's Yousuf Raza Gillani paid none". Dawn.com. Retrieved 20 January 2022. Hanif, Mohammed (13 May 2013). "Pakistan elections: how Nawaz Sharif beat Imran Khan and what happens next". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 18 January 2017. Retrieved 16 January 2017. Mishra, Pankaj (16 August 2012). "Pakistan's Imran Khan Must Be Doing Something Right". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 18 January 2017. Retrieved 16 January 2017. Web Desk (23 February 2023). "'Fitna Khan' will hold long march if he loses election: Rana Sana Ullah". ARY NEWS. Retrieved 10 June 2023. Timmons, Heather (18 March 2012). "In Delhi, Rushdie Issues a Battle Cry". India Ink. Archived from the original on 14 August 2017. Retrieved 16 January 2017. "Pakistani cricket hero Imran Khan becomes a political player". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 18 January 2017. Retrieved 16 January 2017. "No room for democracy – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 18 September 2014. Archived from the original on 18 January 2017. Retrieved 16 January 2017. Chaudhry, Lakshmi (13 December 2012). "Profiling Imran Khan: The media's favourite hot, dumb blonde". Firstpost. Retrieved 29 March 2017. Tanveer, Mohsin (20 February 2017). "Imran Khan: Why This Man Isn't Really Sexy". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 29 March 2017. Forsyth, James (31 May 2005). "Khan Artist". The Weekly Standard. Archived from the original on 19 October 2015. Retrieved 5 November 2007. "USA: Los Angeles: Court Rules That Imran Khan Is Father of 5 Year Old". AP Archive. Retrieved 8 January 2019. "Imran slogs it out in the rugged world of Pakistani politics". Deccan Herald. Archived from the original on 17 November 2007. Retrieved 5 October 2007. "ECP rejects references against Imran". Dawn News. 6 September 2007. Archived from the original on 5 September 2008. Retrieved 6 September 2007. "Dr. Sher Afgan Khan Niazi Versus Mr. Imran Khan, MNA/Dr. Farooq Sattar & 9 Others. Versus Mr. Imran Khan, MNA" (PDF). Election Commission of Pakistan. 5 September 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 September 2015. Walsh, Delcan (31 August 2005). "When you speak out, people react". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 29 August 2013. Retrieved 21 July 2008. "Fatima Bhutto Blasts Imran Khan". The Wall Street Journal. 22 January 2012. "Opinions on Imran Khan's Performance: At 51%, around half of Pakistanis express a favourable opinion on Imran Khan's performance to date as Prime Minister (good/very good)". Gallup Pakistan. 25 January 2019. Khan, Iftikhar A. (17 March 2019). "IRI poll shows strong approval rating for PTI govt". Dawn.com. "5 Commercials Featuring Imran Khan!". ARY Zauq. Archived from the original on 2 September 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2018. "Blast From The Past- A Look at Imran Khan's Four Iconic Ads". Exchange4Media Magazine. 30 July 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2018. "Imran Khan: The 'Kaptaan' who changed Pakistan cricket forever". DNA India. 26 July 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2018. Correspondonent (5 December 2011), "Dev Anand wanted Imran to star in Awwal Number", Mid-Day. Retrieved 19 April 2019. Linge, Mary Kay (28 July 2018). "Meet Pakistan's playboy-turned-prime minister". Akhila, Ranganna (1 July 2011). "Kaptaan Imran on the silver screen". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 9 October 2011. "Kaptaan-The Movie at Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 29 June 2011. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011. Retrieved 9 October 2011. "Edge of Revolution: New Nickelback song features glimpse of PTI rally". dawn.com. 6 September 2014. "Talibanising Pashtuns". The News International. 27 December 2021. "Pakistan's Imran Khan Under Fire For Claiming Pashtuns Are Taliban Sympathizers". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 15 October 2021. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 24 May 2022. "Pakhtuns not terrorists, says ANP". Dawn. 13 October 2021. Chakrabarti, Angana (12 October 2021). "Pakistani Pashtuns have a message for Imran Khan—'we are not Taliban'". The Print. Zompa, Tenzin (20 December 2021). "Imran Khan defends Taliban on female education. Pakistanis say 'educate yourself'". The Print. "'I nearly lost my life…': Malala Yousafzai slams Imran Khan's 'Pashtun culture' remarks". Hindustan Times. 21 December 2021. "PM on education". Dawn. 22 December 2021. "Imran awarded Bahrain's highest civil award". The International. 17 December 2019. Retrieved 22 June 2023. "Main Aur Mera Pakistan – Imran Khan's Book in Hindi". Orient Paperbacks. Archived from the original on 14 November 2021. Retrieved 16 June 2021. "Main Aur Mera Pakistan by Imran Khan". Pakistan Library. 22 August 2017. Retrieved 16 June 2021. "It's a miracle... Imran's notes turn into book". London Evening Standard. 4 July 2008. "Pakistan: A Personal History by Imran Khan". The Independent. 3 November 2011. Retrieved 3 January 2021. Khan, Imran (5 June 2021). "World Environment Day: We must conserve and restore our ecosystems, for the sake of future generations". CNN. Hutchins, Chris; Midgley, Dominic (2015), Goldsmith: Money, Women and Power, BookBaby, p. 163, ISBN 978-0-9933566-3-6[permanent dead link] Tennant, Ivo (1996). Imran Khan. Trafalgar Square Publishing. ISBN 978-0-575-05936-8. Huzur, Frank (2011). Imran Versus Imran: The Untold Story. Falcon & Falcon. ISBN 978-8192055107. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Sandford, Christopher (2009). Imran Khan: The Cricketer, the Celebrity, the Politician. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-731888-9. Sadiq, B. J. (2017). Let There Be Justice: The Political Journey of Imran Khan. Fonthill Media. ISBN 978-1-78155-637-5. Khan, Reham (2018), Reham Khan, HarperCollins Publishers India, ISBN 978-9-35-302322-5 Morgan, Piers (2012), The Insider: The Private Diaries of a Scandalous Decade, Random House, p. 81, ISBN 978-1-4464-9168-3 Imran Khan at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Imran Khan on Twitter (English) Imran Khan on Twitter (Arabic) Imran Khan at ESPNcricinfo Column archive at The Guardian Imran Khan's journey from cricketing Playboy to Politician – Journeyman Pictures 1990s Interview, Cricketer Imran Khan at Home – thekinolibrary "Stop fighting and start talking" (video). NBC News. 14 December 2011.