Aryna Siarhiejeŭna Sabalenka (born 5 May 1998) is a Belarusian professional tennis player. She is a former world No. 1 in both singles and doubles by the Women's Tennis Association (WTA). Sabalenka has won two major singles titles, at the 2023 and 2024 Australian Opens, and two major doubles titles at the 2019 US Open and the 2021 Australian Open, both partnering Elise Mertens. She has won 20 career titles in total, 14 in singles and six in doubles. Sabalenka was relatively unknown until 2017, when she led the Belarus Fed Cup team to a runner-up finish with Aliaksandra Sasnovich, despite both of them being ranked outside the top 75 at the time. She finished both 2018 and 2019 ranked No. 11 in the world in singles. Following two major singles semifinal appearances in 2021, Sabalenka peaked at the world No. 2 ranking, but struggled to consistently maintain that success in 2022. In 2023, she won her first major singles title at the Australian Open, reached the semifinals at all four major tournaments (also finishing runner-up at the US Open), and obtained the world No. 1 ranking, being named the ITF World Champion for the season. Sabalenka also began playing doubles regularly in 2019. With Mertens as her partner, she completed the Sunshine Double by winning the two Premier Mandatory tournaments in March, the Indian Wells Open and the Miami Open. After the US Open doubles title later in the year, she also qualified for the WTA Finals for the first time. With the 2021 Australian Open doubles title, she became the world No. 1 in the discipline. Sabalenka has a very aggressive style of play, often accumulating high numbers of winners and unforced errors. With her height, she also has a very powerful serve. Sabalenka was born in Minsk, the capital of Belarus. Her father Sergey (d. 2019) was an ice hockey player. Sabalenka started playing tennis by chance. She said, "One day, my dad was just driving me somewhere in the car, and on the way he saw tennis courts. So he took me to the courts. I really liked it and enjoyed it and that's how it was. That's how it started." She began training at the National Tennis Academy in Minsk when it opened in 2014. In 2015, the Belarusian Tennis Federation persuaded Sabalenka and her team to focus on playing low-level professional events instead of junior tournaments, even though she was still eligible to compete at the junior level at the time. Sabalenka had a late start on the ITF Junior Circuit, instead competing on the U14 and U16 Tennis Europe tours at a younger age. She did not compete in the main draw of any ITF events until 2013 at the low-level Grade-4 Tallink Cup in Estonia at the age of 15. She ultimately never played in the junior Grand Slam tournaments, or any other high-level Grade-A and Grade-1 events. Without the higher point levels from these bigger tournaments, she had a career-high ranking of just No. 225. Sabalenka won her first ITF title in doubles at the lowest-level Grade-5 Alatan Tour Cup in Belarus in late 2013 with compatriot Vera Lapko as her partner. In 2014, she excelled at Grade 4 events. She reached her first singles final at the Estonian Junior Open in June and won her first singles title at the MTV Total Junior Cup in Finland in October. At the end of the season, Sabalenka defended her Alatan Tour Cup doubles title, this time with compatriot Nika Shytkouskaya, and also won the singles title. She only played in one tournament in 2015, the European Junior Championships. As a Grade B1 event, this was the highest level junior tournament she played in. She lost in the second round to top seed Markéta Vondroušová. Sabalenka began playing on the ITF Women's Circuit in 2012, even before she competed on the ITF Junior Circuit. Her first five tournaments were in her hometown of Minsk and spread out over two years, but she did not win a main draw match in any of them. She won her first professional match at the very end of 2014 in Istanbul. The following season in October, she won her first two titles in back-to-back weeks in Antalya, both at the $10k level. Sabalenka also won a $25k title the last week of the year. This title put her into the top 300 of the WTA rankings for the first time at the start of 2016. That year, she made her Fed Cup debut in April, losing her only match. She also won her two biggest titles to date at the $50k level. The first in Tianjin put her into the top 200 in May and the second in Toyota in November helped her finish the year ranked at No. 137 in the world. Despite some early season success in Fed Cup, Sabalenka had a quiet start to the year. She played in her first WTA Tour main draw in February as a qualifier at the Dubai Open; however, she did not win her first WTA Tour match until Wimbledon in July. In her Grand Slam debut, she again reached the main draw through qualifying and defeated Irina Khromacheva in the opening round. Sabalenka followed up this achievement with another win at the Washington Open over No. 34 Lauren Davis, the 2016 runner-up and the highest-ranked player she had defeated at the time. After losing in qualifying at the US Open, Sabalenka reached her first ever WTA semifinal at the Tashkent Open, defeating third seed and world No. 53, Tatjana Maria, along the way. A few weeks later, she entered the Tianjin Open as the 119th-ranked player in the world, but managed to reach her first WTA tournament final. There, she faced her childhood idol Maria Sharapova, but ultimately lost in two tight sets. With this performance, she rose to No. 76 in the rankings, entering the top 100 for the first time. After losing a tight Fed Cup final to the United States, Sabalenka finished the season by winning the biggest title of her career at the time at the Mumbai Open, a WTA 125 event. The title cemented her at No. 73 at the end of the year. After playing relatively few WTA events in 2017, Sabalenka utilized her higher ranking to play exclusively on the WTA Tour in 2018. She reached two quarterfinals to begin the year, but lost her opening-round match at the Australian Open to top-ranked Australian and world No. 18 Ashleigh Barty. She then won her first matches at a Premier tournament with a third-round appearance at the Indian Wells Open before the early-year hardcourt season came to a close, including a victory over No. 19, Svetlana Kuznetsova. Sabalenka began the clay-court season by reaching a second career final at the Ladies Open Lugano, where she finished runner-up to No. 20 Elise Mertens. This success put her in the top 50 for the first time. However, she did not win another match for the rest of the clay-court season; this included a first-round loss to No. 22 Kiki Bertens at the French Open. Sabalenka had stronger results on grass, playing in tune-ups during each of the three weeks before Wimbledon. She made it to the quarterfinals at the Rosmalen Grass Court Championships and the final at the Premier-level Eastbourne International. At the latter event, she won five consecutive three-set matches, including three over top 20 opponents and her first top-ten victory against defending champion and world No. 7 Karolína Plíšková. Sabalenka lost the final to world No. 2 Caroline Wozniacki. For the third consecutive Grand Slam event, she went out in the first round at Wimbledon. During the North American hardcourt summer season, Sabalenka continued to rise through the rankings. At the two Premier 5 tournaments, she reached the third round at the Canadian Open and the semifinals at the Cincinnati Open. In the former, she avenged her previous loss to world No. 2, Wozniacki, for the biggest win of her career, hitting 64 winners during the match. In the latter, she recorded two more top-ten wins over No. 8 Plíšková and No. 5 Caroline Garcia before losing to world No. 1, Simona Halep. Just a week later, Sabalenka won her first WTA Tour title at the Premier-level Connecticut Open with wins over world No. 9, Julia Görges, in the semifinal, and Carla Suárez Navarro in the final. Playing a fourth consecutive week, she closed out this part of the season with her best result at a Grand Slam tournament to date, making it to the fourth round at the US Open. In particular, she upset world No. 5, Petra Kvitová, in the third round before losing to the eventual champion, Naomi Osaka. She was the only player to win a set against Osaka in the tournament. After the US Open, Sabalenka earned her first No. 1 seed at the Tournoi de Québec, but lost her opening match. Nonetheless, she followed this up by winning the Premier 5 level Wuhan Open, the biggest title of her career. During the event, she upset No. 6 Elina Svitolina in the second round and did not drop a set in any of her last four matches. The following week, Sabalenka reached the quarterfinals of the China Open, a run that included a win over defending champion and No. 4, Caroline Garcia, for her eighth top-ten victory of the season. This success in China helped her climb to No. 11 in the world. At the end of the season, Sabalenka qualified for the WTA Elite Trophy, where she was grouped with Garcia and Ashleigh Barty. She defeated Barty to open the group, but lost to Garcia in the group's final match. Barty, having defeated Garcia with fewer games lost, advanced out of the group through the tiebreak criteria to end Sabalenka's season. Nonetheless, she was named the WTA Newcomer of the Year for her excellent performance in her first full year on the WTA Tour. Although Sabalenka once again struggled at the Grand Slam tournaments, she ultimately finished the year with the same year-end ranking as in 2018 on the strength of three titles, all in China. She began the season by winning her third career WTA title at the Shenzhen Open, defeating Alison Riske in the final in a tight three-set match. Due to rain delays in the earlier rounds, she needed to play both the semifinal and the final on the last day of the tournament. However, she could not build on this success in the rest of the first half of the year. Sabalenka lost to 17-year-old Amanda Anisimova in straight sets at both the Australian Open and the French Open in the third and second rounds, respectively. She had been considered the third-leading favourite for the title at the Australian Open. Nonetheless, she made her top-10 debut following the event. Sabalenka fared worse at Wimbledon, losing her opening match to No. 139 Magdaléna Rybáriková. In-between the Grand Slam tournaments, Sabalenka's best result was a semifinal loss to No. 8, Kiki Bertens, at the Premier-level St. Petersburg Trophy in February. She also made the fourth round at the Indian Wells Open. Her best result on clay was a semifinal at the Internationaux de Strasbourg in May. Sabalenka had a better second half of the season. In her first tournament following Wimbledon, she finished runner-up to Zheng Saisai at the Silicon Valley Classic, a Premier-level event. She did not perform well at either Premier 5 tournament in August or the US Open, losing in the second round at the last Grand Slam tournament of the year. Sabalenka returned to China following the US Open, and produced three strong results in four events. After a quarterfinal at the Zhengzhou Open, she defended her title at the Premier 5 Wuhan Open. During the event, she defeated No. 8 Kiki Bertens in the third round and No. 1 Ashleigh Barty in the semifinals, her first victory over a current world No. 1 player. She won the final over Alison Riske. At the end of the season, Sabalenka qualified for the WTA Elite Trophy for the second consecutive year. She swept her round-robin group of Maria Sakkari and her doubles partner Elise Mertens. In the knockout rounds, Sabalenka defeated Karolína Muchová and Bertens for her fifth career title, and her third title of the year in China. Sabalenka started the year ranked No. 73 in doubles. She began partnering with Elise Mertens in January, when the pair lost to top seeds Barbora Krejčíková and Kateřina Siniaková in the third round of the Australian Open. They had their breakthrough in March at the two Premier Mandatory tournaments. In only their second tournament together, Sabalenka and Mertens won the Indian Wells Open. They defeated three of the top five seeds in the event, including second seeds Tímea Babos and Kristina Mladenovic in the first round and top seeds Krejčíková and Siniaková in the final. The pair matched this success at their next event by winning the Miami Open to complete the Sunshine Double. They defeated three of the top six seeds, including third seeds Hsieh Su-wei and Barbora Strýcová in the second round. They won the final against sixth seeds Samantha Stosur and Zhang Shuai. With these two titles, Sabalenka rose to No. 21 in the world. Sabalenka and Mertens continued to partner together throughout the year, entering eleven events before the year-end championships. Whereas Sabalenka did not have much success in the Grand Slam singles events, she produced much better results in doubles. Sabalenka and Mertens reached the semifinals at the French Open, losing to second seeds Babos and Mladenovic. They then reached the quarterfinals at Wimbledon, losing to third seeds Hsieh and Strýcová. These were Sabalenka's first two appearances in at least the quarterfinals at a Grand Slam event. Sabalenka and Mertens had their best result of the year at the US Open. As the fourth seeds at the event, they made it to the final without having to play another top ten seeded team. In the final, they faced eighth seeds Victoria Azarenka and Ashleigh Barty, the latter of whom had won the title a year earlier with CoCo Vandeweghe. Sabalenka and Mertens defeated Azarenka and Barty in straight sets for their first career Grand Slam title in any discipline. With this title, Sabalenka made her top 10 debut in doubles at No. 6 in the world. Sabalenka and Mertens made one more final during the year, finishing runner-up at the Wuhan Open where Sabalenka won the singles title. Their three big titles helped them win the Race to Shenzhen and qualify for the WTA Finals as the top seeds. Before the event, Sabalenka and Mertens moved up to No. 2 and No. 3 in the rankings, respectively, behind only world No. 1, Barbora Strýcová. At the WTA Finals, the pair were placed in a round robin group with third seeds Babos and Mladenovic, fifth seeds Chan Hao-ching and Latisha Chan, as well as eighth seeds Anna-Lena Grönefeld and Demi Schuurs. In their opening match, they were upset by Grönefeld and Schuurs in a match tiebreak. After defeating the Chan sisters, Sabalenka and Mertens lost to Babos and Mladenovic in another match tiebreak and did not advance out of their group. Sabalenka continued on from her late season surge by reaching the semifinals in Adelaide. She came from a 3–5 final set deficit against Hsieh Su-wei before sliding past Bernarda Pera and shocking second seed Simona Halep, whom she had never won a set against before, in straight sets. She then lost in straight sets to eventual runner-up Dayana Yastremska. Despite her good start to the season, she was upset by Carla Suárez Navarro in two tie-breakers in the first round of the Australian Open. In doubles she enjoyed moderate success with Mertens reaching the quarterfinals, before losing to the Chan sisters. Her next tournament was the Dubai Tennis Championships where she made the quarterfinals with wins over Maria Sakkari and doubles partner Mertens. There she faced Simona Halep. Despite taking the first set she was unable to repeat her earlier upset falling to the eventual champion in three sets. She rebounded at the Qatar Open, reaching the final with wins over Anett Kontaveit, Maria Sakkari, Zheng Saisai and Svetlana Kuznetsova. In the final, she defeated Petra Kvitová in straight sets to claim her third Premier-5 title. After tennis resumed in August due to COVID-19, she was the second seed in Lexington where she survived Madison Brengle in three sets but then fell in a three set thriller to 16 year old Coco Gauff. Her results continued to disappoint as, seeded fifth, she crashed out in the second round of both Cincinnati and New York to Jessica Pegula and a resurgent Victoria Azarenka. She had moderate success in doubles reaching the quarterfinals of both events. Her results in singles began to improve on clay as she reached the semifinals in Strasbourg and the third round of the French Open losing to Elina Svitolina and Ons Jabeur, respectively. That was Sabalenka's last loss of the season. In Ostrava, she came from 5–2 in the decider down to avenge her Lexington loss to Gauff and lost the first ten games of her quarterfinal match against Sara Sorribes Tormo before winning the next twelve to win. In the final, she avenged her US Open loss to Azarenka, defeating her compatriot in straight sets. She then also took the Linz title by defeating Elise Mertens in the final. This gave Sabalenka the first year-end top-10 finish in her career. Sabalenka entered 2021 on a nine-match winning streak, and participated in her first tournament of the year at the Abu Dhabi Open as the fourth seed. She defeated Polona Hercog in straight sets, coming back from a 5–2 deficit in the first set, and then defeated Ajla Tomljanović and Ons Jabeur to reach the quarterfinals, similarly in straight sets. She defeated Elena Rybakina in the quarterfinals, where she dropped her first set of the week, before defeating Maria Sakkari, in straight sets. In the final, Sabalenka defeated first-time finalist Veronika Kudermetova, in straight sets, losing just four games in total. The run to the title at Abu Dhabi extended her winning streak to 15 matches, and catapulted her to a new ranking of No. 7. Sabalenka went into the Australian Open looking to make a Grand Slam singles quarterfinal for the first time in her career. She was defeated in the fourth round by 23-time Grand Slam champion Serena Williams in three sets. Sabalenka won the doubles competition with Elise Mertens. By virtue of winning the title, Sabalenka ascended to world No. 1 in the doubles rankings for the first time in her career, on 22 February 2021. As defending champion at the Qatar Open in Doha, and after receiving a first-round bye, Sabalenka was defeated in her first match by eventual finalist Garbiñe Muguruza, in three sets. At the Dubai Tennis Championships, in her first tournament since becoming No. 1 in doubles, Sabalenka and Mertens received a bye in the first round and lost their opening match to Jessica Pegula and Bethanie Mattek-Sands. Sabalenka cruised through to the quarterfinals in the singles event, defeating 15th seed Anett Kontaveit along the way, before losing to Muguruza for the second time in as many weeks, again in three sets. Sabalenka won the title at the Madrid Open where she faced Ashleigh Barty in the championship match. It was a rematch of the 2021 Porsche Tennis Grand Prix final, two week earlier, as Sabalenka faced her vanquisher, world No. 1 Ashleigh Barty. As a result of her fourth WTA 1000 title, she entered the top 5 rankings in singles at world No. 4. Sabalenka and compatriot Victoria Azarenka won the doubles event at the German Open, defeating the top seeded pair of Demi Schuurs and Nicole Melichar. Seeded second at Wimbledon, Sabalenka reached her first Grand Slam quarterfinal and semifinal, defeating 18th seed Elena Rybakina and 21st seed Ons Jabeur in straight sets, respectively. She then lost her semifinal match against Karolína Plíšková in three sets. As a result of her performance at Wimbledon she reached a career-high ranking of world No. 3 in the WTA singles rankings. Sabalenka became the third Belarusian woman to reach the last four of Wimbledon following Natasha Zvereva in 1998 and Victoria Azarenka in 2011 and 2012. Sabalenka continued her season at the Canadian Open in Montreal. She reached the semifinals but lost to Karolína Plíšková, in straight sets. She then lost her opening-round match against Paula Badosa at the Cincinnati Open. Despite the loss, Sabalenka reached a career-high ranking of world No. 2. At the US Open, Sabalenka reached her second consecutive (and second overall) major semifinal following wins over Danielle Collins, Elise Mertens, and Barbora Krejčíková. In the semifinal, she lost to Leylah Fernandez in three sets. Due to a positive COVID-19 test, Sabalenka was not able to play at Indian Wells. Sabalenka began her season at the 2022 Adelaide International 1 as the second seed. After a first-round bye, Sabalenka lost in the second round in straight sets to Kaja Juvan. Sabalenka served 18 double faults to five aces. Next, Sabalenka received a wildcard to enter the Adelaide International 2 and was seeded top, but lost her first round to a qualifier, world No. 93 Rebecca Peterson, in three sets. Once again Sabalenka struggled with her serve, recording 21 double faults for the match. She entered the Australian Open as the second seed. Sabalenka's serving struggles continued, but she managed to dig out three-set wins against world No. 128 Storm Sanders, No. 100 Wang Xinyu and No. 41 Markéta Vondroušová to advance to the fourth round for the second time in her career. She faced off against giant-killer Kaia Kanepi, who had defeated the 16th seed Angelique Kerber in the first round. Kanepi prevailed in a tight three-set match, which ended in a third set super-tiebreak. Sabalenka managed to save four match points during the match, but also served 15 double faults to Kanepi's four. She found some form reaching quarterfinals at the Qatar Open beating Alizé Cornet and Jil Teichmann, before losing to the eventual champion Iga Świątek in the semifinals. Following early exits in Indian Wells, Miami and Charleston, she reached her first final of 2022 at the Women's Stuttgart Open, defeating Bianca Andreescu, world No. 6 Anett Kontaveit and Paula Badosa, the new world No. 2, eventually losing to world No. 1, Świątek, again. Entering as the defending champion at the Madrid Open, Sabalenka was knocked out by Amanda Anisimova in the first round. At the Italian Open, after defeating Zhang Shuai, Amanda Anisimova, and Jessica Pegula, she lost to Świątek in the semifinals for the third time in 2022. At the French Open, Sabalenka lost in the third round to Camila Giorgi in three sets. Sabalenka began the grass-court season at the Libéma Open as the top seed, where she made the final, losing to Ekaterina Alexandrova. She then entered the German Open as the third seed, but lost in the first round to Veronika Kudermetova. Due to Wimbledon's ruling on Russian and Belarusian players, Sabalenka was banned from participating in the event due to the Russia's invasion of Ukraine, cutting her grass season short. She opened the US hardcourt swing in Silicon Valley Classic, losing to Daria Kasatkina in the quarterfinals. She then played the Canadian Open, losing to Coco Gauff in the third round. Her best result since Stuttgart came at Cincinnati Open, where as the sixth seed, she made the semifinals, defeating Anna Kalinskaya, Shelby Rogers, and Zhang Shuai before losing to eventual champion Caroline Garcia in three sets. She then made her best run of the season at the US Open. Seeded sixth, she defeated Catherine Harrison, Kaia Kanepi, Clara Burel, 19th seed Danielle Collins, and 22nd seed & former world No. 1 Karolína Plíšková to reach the semifinals, matching her previous best result from 2021. In her second-round match against Kanepi, Sabalenka came back from 6–2, 5–1 down to win in three sets, saving two match points in the process. In the semifinals, she was defeated by world No. 1, Iga Świątek, for the fourth time this season. At the San Diego Open, Sabalenka defeated Sloane Stephens in three sets before losing to Donna Vekić in the quarterfinals. In receipt of a first-round bye in Guadalajara, she lost to Liudmila Samsonova in the second round. However, she managed to qualify for the WTA Finals for a second straight year. There, she reached the final, defeating world No. 3 Jessica Pegula and No. 2 Ons Jabeur in the round-robin stage, and No. 1 Iga Świątek in the semifinals, but lost to Caroline Garcia in straight sets. She became the fourth woman to defeat the top 3 players at the same tournament, joining Steffi Graf (1999 Roland Garros), Serena Williams (2002 Miami Open), and Venus Williams (2008 WTA Finals). Sabalenka entered Adelaide 1 as the second seed. She reached her first final of the season by defeating Liudmila Samsonova, Markéta Vondroušová, Irina-Camelia Begu en route. Then, she defeated Czech teenage qualifier Linda Nosková to win her first title since Madrid 2021 and 11th career title without dropping a single set. Sabalenka entered the Australian Open as the fifth seed and one of the title contenders. She defeated Tereza Martincová, Shelby Rogers, former doubles partner and 26th seed Elise Mertens, and the previous week's Adelaide 2 champion and world no. 10 Belinda Bencic to reach her first-ever Australian Open quarterfinal. She then beat Donna Vekić to reached her fourth Grand Slam semifinal, and won her tenth consecutive match by beating Magda Linette to make her first ever major final. In the final, she defeated reigning Wimbledon champion Elena Rybakina in three sets to win her first major title. She became the second Belarusian to ever win a major singles title, and the first since Victoria Azarenka a decade prior. After winning the title in Melbourne, Sabalenka rose back to No. 2 in the WTA rankings. In Dubai, Sabalenka defeated Lauren Davis and Jeļena Ostapenko to reach the quarterfinals, where she fell to the eventual champion Barbora Krejčíková, in three sets. She then participated in Indian Wells, where she defeated Evgeniya Rodina and took revenge from Barbora Krejčíková for her last defeat in three sets. Then she beat Coco Gauff and Maria Sakkari to reach her first Indian Wells final, where she lost to Elena Rybakina in a rematch of the 2023 Australian Open final. In Miami, Sabalenka defeated Shelby Rogers, Marie Bouzková, and Barbora Krejčíková each in straight sets to reach the quarterfinals, where she was defeated by Sorana Cîrstea. Sabalenka started her clay court season in Stuttgart, where she defeated Barbora Krejčíková, Paula Badosa, and Anastasia Potapova to reach her fourth final of the year. In the final, which was a rematch of last year's final, she was defeated by world No. 1 Iga Świątek in straight sets for the second consecutive year. In Madrid, Sabalenka reached her second final at this tournament, defeating Sorana Cîrstea, Camila Osorio, Mirra Andreeva, Mayar Sherif, and Maria Sakkari, dropping just one set en route to the final. In the final, she would once again face Iga Świątek, and would win her third title of the year in three sets. In Rome, Sabalenka would suffer her first early defeat of the year, losing in straight sets to former Grand Slam champion Sofia Kenin. At the French Open, she would reach the semifinals without dropping a set, defeating Marta Kostyuk, Iryna Shymanovich, Kamilla Rakhimova, Sloane Stephens, and Elina Svitolina. In the semifinals, she would face Karolína Muchová. Sabalenka lost this match in three sets, despite leading 5–2 and holding match point. Sabalenka began her grass court season in Berlin, defeating Vera Zvonareva before losing to Veronika Kudermetova. Sabalenka next competed at Wimbledon, where she would reach her fourth straight major semifinal. Sabalenka defeated Panna Udvardy, Varvara Gracheva, Anna Blinkova, Ekaterina Alexandrova, and Madison Keys, before losing to Ons Jabeur, despite leading by a set and a break. Her next tournament would be Montréal, where she would defeat Petra Martić, before losing in three sets to eventual runner-up Liudmila Samsonova. She next reached the semifinals in Cincinnati, defeating Ann Li, Daria Kasatkina, and Ons Jabeur, before falling once again in three sets to Karolína Muchová. At the US Open, Sabalenka would reach the semifinals by defeating Maryna Zanevska, Jodie Burrage, Clara Burel, Daria Kasatkina, and Zheng Qinwen in straight sets, dropping just 21 games in all five matches. Following these wins, Sabalenka became the first player since Serena Williams in 2016 to reach the semifinals of all four Grand Slam events in one year. She faced Madison Keys in the semifinals, recovering from a set and break deficit and serving to stay in the match four times in the final two sets. In her second major final of the year, Sabalenka faced Coco Gauff, and would lose in three sets. Due to the loss of world No. 1 Iga Świątek in the fourth round, Sabalenka became the world No. 1 tennis player at the conclusion of the tournament. Sabalenka became the 29th player to be ranked No. 1 in the world on the WTA Tour, and the second Belarusian, after Victoria Azarenka. She was also just the eighth female player to have been ranked No. 1 in the Open Era in both singles and doubles at some point in their careers. With Sabalenka reaching the final, she became the first woman since Serena Williams to reach the semifinals or better at all four majors in a season since 2016. After the US Open, Sabalenka reached the quarterfinals of the China Open, losing to Rybakina. At the WTA Finals, she defeated Rybakina and Sakkari and lost to Pegula in the group stage. Sabalenka then lost in the semifinals to Świątek, who would go on to win the event. As a result, Świątek reclaimed the world No. 1 ranking and Sabalenka finished as year-end No. 2. In December, Sabalenka was named the ITF World Champion. Sabalenka won the 2024 Australian Open without losing a set and became the first woman to defend her title there since Azarenka in 2013. Sabalenka received praise for her consistent and dominant performances throughout the tournament. Notable victories included wins against former world No. 2, Barbora Krejčíková (9th seed), reigning US Open champion Coco Gauff (4th seed) and Zheng Qinwen (12th seed) who was playing in her first Grand Slam final. Gauff had previously defeated Sabalenka a few months prior in the final of the 2023 US Open. In the final itself, she did not commit any double faults, in stark contrast to previous performances at major tournaments. Sabalenka represented Belarus at the Junior Fed Cup in 2014, with the team finishing in sixth place. She then made her senior Fed Cup debut for Belarus in April 2016, losing a dead rubber doubles match against Russia. Nonetheless, the Belarusian team led by Victoria Azarenka and Aliaksandra Sasnovich won the tie to qualify for the top-tier World Group the following season for the first time in their history. The Belarus Fed Cup team made their debut in the World Group and ultimately reached the final, despite being the underdogs in all three ties. Little was expected from the team because they were without their veteran leader Azarenka, who missed the first two ties on maternity leave and the last because of a custody battle. Without her, Belarus was led by Sabalenka and Sasnovich, neither of whom had ever been ranked above No. 76 by the time of the final. However, they did have the advantage of playing all of their ties at home in Minsk. The ties in the quarterfinals against the Netherlands in February and the semi-finals against Switzerland in April both played out in the same way. While Sabalenka lost her opening matches to their opponents' respective top-ranked players of Kiki Bertens and Timea Bacsinszky, Sasnovich was able to give Belarus a 2–1 lead in each instance. Sabalenka then clinched both ties, with wins over Michaëlla Krajicek and No. 54 Viktorija Golubic, respectively. She was only ranked No. 125 at the time of the semifinal, with no career tour match wins outside of Fed Cup. "I've never felt so much emotion in a match. When you play at home and you are down 0–1 and you have to win and you fight with yourself... I just started crying because it was such an important match." —Sabalenka on her Fed Cup rubber win over Stephens. On the opening day of the final against the United States, Sabalenka upset the reigning US Open champion and world No. 13, Sloane Stephens, to level the tie after Sasnovich lost her first rubber to No. 10, CoCo Vandeweghe. The next day began with Sabalenka losing to Vandeweghe, before Sasnovich again levelled the tie by defeating Stephens. Sabalenka and Sasnovich were then selected for the decisive doubles rubber for the Fed Cup crown, but the duo were comprehensively defeated by Vandeweghe and Shelby Rogers. Despite finishing as runner-up, Belarus's Fed Cup success helped popularize women's tennis in Belarus, and vaulted Sabalenka and Sasnovich into international prominence. Sasnovich said, "When we played the quarterfinals and semi-finals in Minsk, a lot of people were coming to see our matches. They finally saw tennis in life, and it's like a popularization... I want my country to improve even more in tennis, because I think we can have even more from Belarus." Belarus was unable to repeat their 2017 Fed Cup success in 2018. Their quarterfinal tie was held in Minsk against Germany. Although Sabalenka won both of her singles rubbers, Sasnovich and Vera Lapko lost each of theirs to set up a decisive doubles rubber. Sabalenka and doubles specialist Lidziya Marozava were selected for the match, with Sabalenka playing on short rest directly after her last singles match. After taking the first set against Anna-Lena Grönefeld and Tatjana Maria, they ultimately lost the rubber and the tie. Their next tie was again contested in Minsk as part of the World Group play-offs, with Slovakia competing to take Belarus's place in the World Group the following season. Sabalenka and Sasnovich each split their two singles rubbers, with Sabalenka being upset by Viktória Kužmová. Doubles specialists Lapko and Marozava were chosen for the final rubber and the pair won the match to keep Belarus in the World Group for 2019. In the 2019 Fed Cup, Belarus were drawn against Germany in the quarterfinals for the second consecutive year. After Sasnovich won the opening rubber against Maria, Sabalenka won both of her singles rubbers against Andrea Petkovic and Laura Siegemund to clinch the tie. They advanced to face Australia in the semi-finals. Only two players from each team participated: Sabalenka and Azarenka for Belarus, and Ashleigh Barty and Samantha Stosur for Australia. Both Sabalenka and Azarenka defeated Stosur, but lost to Barty. In the decisive doubles rubber, Barty and Stosur won in three sets to eliminate Belarus. Sabalenka is a baseliner with a powerful, aggressive style. She has a powerful serve, and equally powerful groundstrokes, and her game is based around taking control of points and hitting winners. She has said "I hope all my shots can be strong, but my serve, I feel is the best." Sabalenka's strong serve, which can reach 200 km/h (124 mph), allows her to serve a large number of aces; in 2023, she ranked third of all players in aces served, at 401. Her serve is inconsistent, however, leading to a high double fault count; she served 166 double faults in 2020, the most of any player. Sabalenka notably suffered from the yips from the 2021 WTA Finals and into 2022, serving 152 double faults in 11 matches, an average of 14 double faults a match. Her second serve began to show improvements from August 2022, having worked with a biomechanics expert following the 2022 Canadian Open. Overall, Sabalenka served 440 double faults in 2022. Her groundstrokes are often hit with relentless pace and depth. Tennis broadcaster and former professional player Mary Carillo praised the power in her style of play along with her fierce attitude, describing her game as "big babe tennis personified". Although Sabalenka has the ability to hit a lot of winners, they can be accompanied by a lot of unforced errors. In her first career top ten victory against Karolína Plíšková, she hit 40 winners and 39 unforced errors. Her second career top ten victory against Caroline Wozniacki was similar, featuring 64 winners and 54 unforced errors. Her coach Dmitry Tursunov credited her improvement in the summer of 2018 on developing better shot selection. He said, "The major thing is she stopped trying [to] hit a winner with every shot." Sabalenka prefers playing on grass and hard courts. She commented, "This year [in 2017] I played for the first time on grass courts [during Wimbledon]. And I really liked it. I enjoyed my game on the grass courts, the feeling of grass, that's nice. I think my game is suited for grass and for hard courts." On clay, she made both the singles and doubles finals at the 2018 Ladies Open Lugano. She won her first clay court title at the 2021 Madrid Open. Sabalenka frequently accompanies her shots with loud grunting. She said, "Honestly, I don't even hear myself when I am playing." However, she expressed her hopes that her grunting has no disturbance on her opponents. At the Australian Open in 2018, the home crowd mocked her habit in a match against Australian Ashleigh Barty. Sabalenka had worked with Khalil Ibrahimov for two years up until early 2018. At this point, she began working with former Swedish professional tennis players Magnus Norman and Magnus Tideman. Dmitry Tursunov became her primary coach in time for the grass court season in 2018. Sabalenka briefly split with Tursunov after the 2019 US Open. Although they reunited later in the year, she made the split permanent at the end of the season. Sabalenka briefly worked with Dieter Kindlmann before switching coaches to her longtime hitting partner and compatriot Anton Dubrov. Sabalenka has been endorsed by Nike for apparel and shoes since the beginning of her professional career. Nike began to design custom garments for Sabalenka starting from the 2023 US Open. She is also endorsed by Wilson, specifically using the Wilson Blade range of racquets. Sabalenka has a tiger tattoo on her left arm. This tattoo has earned her the nickname "The Tiger", which she has used to refer to herself. Sabalenka has studied at the Belarusian State University in a sports-related program. Her tennis idols growing up were Serena Williams and Maria Sharapova. Sabalenka's boyfriend since 2021, Konstantin Koltsov, died of apparent suicide in March 2024 at the age of 42. Sabalenka later confirmed that the couple were separated at the time of his death. In August 2020 during the 2020–2021 Belarusian protests, Sabalenka appeared to support the government of Alexander Lukashenko in its dispersal of peaceful protests. She separately praised the Belarusian government for "everything that is done for the country in general and for sports in particular". In 2020, during widespread protests after the disputed election, Sabalenka signed an open letter which stated that sport should remain outside of politics. The letter was considered by Belarusian media to be supportive of Lukashenko, for it followed an open letter by Belarusian sporting figures demanding the election be invalidated. Following the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Sabalenka expressed support for Ukrainian people and the use of Ukraine-colored ribbons: "I feel like people need our support. I just hope they understand that we're all really concerned. I think even 'sad' isn't even the right word." In January 2023, with regard to the war and the banning of Russian and Belarusian players from the 2022 Wimbledon Championships, Sabalenka stated: "I just understand that it's not my fault." Her comments on the Russian invasion of Ukraine and situation of Ukrainian tennis players were criticized by Lesia Tsurenko's coach Nikita Vlasov and former Ukrainian player Sergiy Stakhovsky for lacking substance and compassion. Sabalenka indicated support for ending the war in Ukraine, stating: "If I could stop the war I would do it, but unfortunately that doesn't lie in my hands. I just hope for peace." During a press conference at the 2023 French Open, when asked about the war by Ukrainian journalist Daria Meshcheriakova, she said: "Nobody in this world, Russian athletes or Belarusian athletes, support the war. Nobody. How can we support the war? Nobody, normal people will never support it." She later said: "I don't want my country to be in any conflict, I don't support war, meaning I don't support Lukashenko right now." Sabalenka appears in the tennis docuseries Break Point, which premiered on Netflix on 13 January 2023. (W) winner; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (DNQ) did not qualify; (A) absent; (NH) not held; (SR) strike rate (events won / competed); (W–L) win–loss record. To avoid confusion and double counting, these charts are updated at the conclusion of a tournament or when the player's participation has ended. Belarusian: Арына Сяргееўна Сабаленка; Russian: Арина Сергеевна Соболенко, romanized: Arina Sergeyevna Sobolenko The other seven players to have been ranked No. 1 by the WTA in both singles and doubles in their career are Martina Navratilova, Arantxa Sánchez Vicario, Lindsay Davenport, Martina Hingis, Kim Clijsters, Venus Williams, and Serena Williams. To obtain data from this reference, select the corresponding year on the WTA or ITF website. "More on Sabalenka..." WTA. 19 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "Aryna Sabalenka - Overview". WTA. 19 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "Meet Aryna Sabalenka, the 19-year-old rising star from Belarus, who won her first WTA title at Mumbai Open". First Post. 27 November 2017. Retrieved 5 September 2018. Михалевич, Юрий. ""Может, мне удастся стать кем-то вроде Серены", или Что мы знаем про теннисистку Арину Соболенко". Tut.by (in Russian). Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2018. "Belarus Tennis Academy opens in Minsk". Belta.by. 22 October 2014. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Шакутин рассказал о соперничестве двух главных надежд белорусского женского тенниса". Tut.by (in Russian). Archived from the original on 17 April 2016. Retrieved 5 September 2018. "WTA Rising Stars... Aryna Sabalenka". Tennis is World. Retrieved 5 September 2018. "Aryna Sabalenka". Tennis Europe. Retrieved 5 September 2018. "Tennis Europe Junior Tour Latest". Tennis Europe. Retrieved 5 September 2018. ITF Staff (19 February 2024). "Aryna Sabalenka Juniors Singles Overview". ITF. Retrieved 23 February 2024. ITF Staff (19 February 2024). "Aryna Sabalenka Juniors Doubles Activity". ITF. Retrieved 23 February 2024. ITF Staff (19 February 2024). "Aryna Sabalenka Juniors Singles Activity". ITF. Retrieved 23 February 2024. ITF Staff (19 February 2024). "Aryna Sabalenka Women's Singles Activity". ITF. Retrieved 23 February 2024. WTA Staff (19 February 2024). "Aryna Sabalenka - Rankings History". WTA. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "Belarus scale new heights after win in Moscow". Fed Cup. Retrieved 6 September 2018. "Mondo ITF: Bogdan trionfa a Grado. Doppietta della giovane francese Gravouil". Ubi Tennis. June 2016. Retrieved 6 September 2018. "Injured aces Thanasi Kokkinakis, Oliver Anderson face race against time as Aussie summer looms". Fox Sports Australia. 20 November 2016. Retrieved 6 September 2018. "2017 Season Review: Aryna Sabalenka, a new name on the rise". Vavel. Retrieved 8 September 2018. "Wimbledon 2017: Aryna Sabalenka wins Grand Slam debut over Irina Khromacheva". Vavel. Retrieved 8 September 2018. "Teenagers Andreescu, Sabalenka score big wins in DC". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 8 September 2018. "Pliskova, Hibino, Parmentier out as 'Tashkent Open jinx' continues". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 8 September 2018. Livaudais, Stephanie (28 September 2017). "Babos, Sabalenka beat the rain for Tashkent semifinal spots". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Han, Don (14 October 2017). "WTA Tianjin: Aryna Sabalenka storms into her first WTA final with win over Sara Errani". VAVEL.com. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Juzwiak, Jason (15 October 2017). "Sharapova wins first title in two years at Tianjin Open". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Chiesa, Victoria (12 November 2017). "USA claims 2017 Fed Cup after Belarus battle". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Juzwiak, Jason (26 November 2017). "Sabalenka claims L&T Mumbai Open for biggest career title". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Dunn, Carrie (27 November 2017). "Ranking Movers: Sabalenka soars into Top 75". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 21 July 2018. "Aryna Sabalenka Statistics". Core Tennis. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Halep, Begu to square off in Shenzhen semifinals". WTA Tennis. 4 January 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Sabalenka knocks out top seed Zhang in Hobart". WTA Tennis. 10 January 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Maasdorp, James (17 January 2018). "Australian Open: Aryna Sabalenka's screams see crowd mock her grunts as Ashleigh Barty advances". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "WTA Indian Wells: Aryna Sabalenka upsets defending finalist Svetlana Kuznetsova in comfortable fashion". Vavel. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Juzwiak, Jason (15 April 2018). "Mertens captures Lugano for second title of year". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 21 July 2018. "Aryna Sabalenka Matches". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Sabalenka shocks Pliskova to reach Eastbourne semifinals". WTA Tennis. 28 June 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Livaudais, Stephanie (30 June 2018). "Wozniacki dodges Sabalenka to claim Eastbourne title". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 21 July 2018. "Wimbledon 2018 Buzărnescu, prima victorie pe tabloul principal! Svitolina e OUT de la All England Club". DigiSport (in Romanian). Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Surging Sabalenka wraps up Wozniacki comeback in Montreal". WTA Tennis. 9 August 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Halep stops Sabalenka to return to Cincinnati final". WTA Tennis. 18 August 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. McGrogan, Ed (25 August 2018). "Final-ly: Aryna Sabalenka, thrice a runner-up, wins first WTA title". Tennis.com. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Sabalenka overpowers Kvitova to storm into US Open fourth round". WTA Tennis. 2 September 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Osaka outlasts Sabalenka in US Open fourth-round thriller". WTA Tennis. 3 September 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Sabalenka savors 'special' Svitolina win in Wuhan". WTA Tennis. 25 September 2018. Retrieved 7 October 2018. "'This is one of my favorite places to play' – Sabalenka storms to Wuhan title over Kontaveit". WTA Tennis. 29 September 2018. Retrieved 7 October 2018. "'There was nothing to lose': Sabalenka stops Garcia, into Beijing quarterfinals". WTA Tennis. 4 October 2018. Retrieved 7 October 2018. "Sabalenka soars past Barty to start Zhuhai campaign". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 17 November 2018. "Garcia beats Sabalenka to send Barty to Zhuhai SF". WTA Tennis. 2 November 2018. Retrieved 17 November 2018. "2018 WTA Newcomer of the Year: Aryna Sabalenka". WTA Tennis. 19 October 2018. Retrieved 17 November 2018. "Sizzling Sabalenka sinks Riske to win Shenzhen". WTA Tennis. 5 January 2019. Retrieved 8 January 2019. Drucker, Joel (18 January 2019). "Amanda Anisimova, 17, played like a veteran in win over Sabalenka". Tennis.com. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "'It's super special ' – Anisimova shocks Sabalenka again, makes French Open third round". WTA Tennis. 30 May 2019. Retrieved 31 May 2019. "2019 WTA Australian Open Odds, Betting Preview: Serena Williams Favored in Melbourne". Action Network. 13 January 2019. Retrieved 11 February 2019. Fitzgerald, Matt. "First Wimbledon seed out: Aryna Sabalenka's struggles continue". Tennis.com. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Bertens solves Sabalenka to book St. Petersburg final spot". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Kerber survives Sabalenka surge to reach Indian Wells quarterfinals". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "'I didn't really expect to be in the final': Yastremska seals Sabalenka upset, will play for Strasbourg title". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "'I'm playing my tennis and stopped copying others' – Zheng stumps Sabalenka for first WTA title in San Jose". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "'I probably owe her two dinners' – Putintseva surges to Sabalenka upset for best US Open run". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Sabalenka blitzes Barty, returns to Wuhan final: 'It feels even better than last year'". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Back to back: Sabalenka beats Riske to defend Wuhan title". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Aryna Sabalenka edges out doubles partner Elise Mertens to take WTA Elite Trophy semi-final place". Fox Sports Asia. Archived from the original on 3 November 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "'It's really impressive' – Sabalenka slides past Bertens to claim Zhuhai championship". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Elise Mertens and Aryna Sabalenka Capture 2019 BNP Paribas Open Doubles Title". BNP Paribas Open. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Juzwiak, Jason (31 March 2019). "Mertens & Sabalenka win 10th straight match to claim Miami title and Sunshine Double". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 30 May 2019. "Mladenovic seals doubles No.1, place in French Open final with Babos". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Hsieh, Strycova finesse tames Mertens, Sabalenka firepower to reach Wimbledon SFs". WTA Tennis. 28 June 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Mertens, Sabalenka capture first Grand Slam title in women's doubles at US Open". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Kudermetova and Duan win Wuhan in team debut: 'It's an unbelievable week'". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Groenefeld, Schuurs make up for lost time at WTA Finals: 'It's something we can be proud of'". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Babos-Mladenovic move into semifinals as WTA Finals doubles draw takes shape". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Sabalenka shocks Halep in Adelaide upset". Women's Tennis Association. 16 January 2020. "Svitolina surges to Strasbourg semifinal win over Sabalenka". Women's Tennis Association. 25 September 2020. "Jabeur slips past Sabalenka at French Open". Women's Tennis Association. 3 October 2020. "Superb Sabalenka storms to third straight title in Abu Dhabi". Women's Tennis Association. "Sabalenka captures WTA World No.1 doubles ranking". Women's Tennis Association. "Garbiñe Muguruza edges Aryna Sabalenka in Doha epic". Tennis.com. 10 February 2022. Retrieved 10 February 2022. "Muguruza repeats in Sabalenka thriller, Mertens awaits in Dubai". Tennis.com. 10 February 2022. Retrieved 10 February 2022. "Sabalenka shocks Barty for Madrid title". BBC Sport. 8 May 2021. Retrieved 9 May 2021. "Sabalenka captures Madrid title in thriller over Barty". Women's Tennis Association. "Azarenka and Sabalenka Sent Out Tokyo Olympics 2021 Warnings After Claiming WTA Berlin Title". 20 June 2021. Berkok, John (12 July 2021). "Ranking Reaction: Shapovalov back in Top 10, Sabalenka up to No. 3". tennis.com. Retrieved 11 September 2023. "Sabalenka passes Jabeur test; Pliskova sails past Golubic into Wimbledon semis". WTA Tennis. 6 July 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2023. Tignor, Steve (14 August 2021). "Karolina Pliskova plays clean match to defeat Aryna Sabalenka in Montreal". Tennis.com. Retrieved 15 September 2023. "Upsets galore in Cincinnati as Aryna Sabalenka, Elina Svitolina, Iga Swiatek, Bianca Andreescu lose". 19 August 2021. Berkok, John (23 August 2021). "Ranking Reaction: Aryna Sabalenka passes Naomi Osaka for No. 2". tennis.com. Retrieved 11 September 2023. "Fearless Fernandez battles past Sabalenka into first Grand Slam final at US Open". Women's Tennis Association. "Sabalenka withdraws from Indian Wells". BBC Sport. Tennis.com. "After hitting 18 double faults, Aryna Sabalenka loses season opener to Kaja Juvan in Adelaide". Tennis.com. Retrieved 27 June 2022. "Umpire intervenes as star's serve falls apart". wwos.nine.com.au. Retrieved 27 June 2022. "Swiatek surges past Cirstea, Kanepi upsets Sabalenka to make Australian Open quarters". "Aryna Sabalenka becomes highest seed to fall at Australian Open, beaten by Kaia Kanepi in fourth round". 24 January 2022. "2022 Australian Open R16: Aryna Sabalenka vs Kaia Kanepi". tennisabstract.com. 24 January 2022. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "Ostapenko wins 9th straight match; Swiatek sweeps into Doha semis". "Sabalenka topples Badosa to reach second straight Stuttgart final". "Anisimova dethrones defending champion Sabalenka in Madrid". "World number one Swiatek into Rome Open final". BBC Sport. Retrieved 15 May 2022. "Giorgi upsets Sabalenka at French Open; Kasatkina awaits in Round of 16". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 26 June 2022. Treisman, Rachel (20 April 2022). "Wimbledon bans Russian and Belarusian players — including No. 2 Medvedev". NPR. "Cincy semis: Sabalenka vs. Garcia a showcase in power". Women's Tennis Association. "Swiatek and Sabalenka renew rivalry in US Open semifinals". Women's Tennis Association. "Vekic ousts Sabalenka in San Diego, sets Collins clash in semifinals". "Sabalenka and Kasatkina qualify for 2022 WTA Finals". Women's Tennis Association. "Road to the WTA Finals: Aryna Sabalenka". "Aryna Sabalenka stuns No. 1 Iga Swiatek to reach first final at WTA Finals". "Sabalenka upsets Swiatek to reach WTA Finals championship match". Women's Tennis Association. "Sabalenka saves seven set points, beats Samsonova in Adelaide 1". Women's Tennis Association. "Sabalenka into Adelaide 1 final, faces Czech teen Noskova". Women's Tennis Association. "Sabalenka stops Noskova for 11th career title at Adelaide 1". Women's Tennis Association. "Bencic, Sabalenka set up Round of 16 showdown in Melbourne". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 26 January 2023. "Sabalenka tops Bencic, will face Vekic in Australian Open quarterfinals". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 26 January 2023. "Three takeaways: Sabalenka into first Australian Open semifinal". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 26 January 2023. "Sabalenka defeats Linette to reach first Grand Slam final". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 26 January 2023. "How Sabalenka found her inner calm and a new level of success". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 28 January 2023. "Sabalenka holds off Rybakina to win Australian Open, first Slam title". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 28 January 2023. "10 incredible things Aryna Sabalenka achieved by winning the Australian Open". Tennis.com. "'A joy to watch': Social media reacts to Australian Open final". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 28 January 2023. "'I still feel like I'm on another planet': Sabalenka steps out with Australian Open trophy". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 29 January 2023. "Champions Corner: How Aryna Sabalenka learned a new way to fight". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 29 January 2023. Jurejko, Jonathan (28 January 2023). "Australian Open 2023: Aryna Sabalenka beats Elena Rybakina to win Melbourne title". BBC Sport. Retrieved 30 January 2022. "Sabalenka extends run; Pliskova, Krejcikova grab Top 10 wins in Dubai". WTA Tennis. 21 February 2023. Retrieved 9 September 2023. "By the numbers: Krejcikova ends Sabalenka's winning streak in Dubai". WTA Tennis. 23 February 2023. Retrieved 9 September 2023. "Sabalenka rolls past Rodina into third round of Indian Wells". WTA Tennis. 10 March 2023. Retrieved 9 September 2023. "Gauff survives Peterson; Sabalenka outlasts Krejcikova in Indian Wells". WTA Tennis. 14 March 2023. Retrieved 9 September 2023. "Sabalenka sweeps past Gauff into Indian Wells semifinals". WTA Tennis. 15 March 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. "Sabalenka cruises into third final of season at Indian Wells". WTA Tennis. 17 March 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. "Rybakina tops Sabalenka to win Indian Wells title". WTA Tennis. 19 March 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. WTA Staff (19 February 2024). "Aryna Sabalenka - Matches". WTA. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "Muchova topples Sabalenka at French Open; makes first Grand Slam final". "Rankings Watch: Sabalenka, Gauff-Pegula duo headline historic shakeup". WTA. Retrieved 11 September 2023. Shukla, Dr Balraj (1 October 2022). "9 players ranked World No. 1 in both singles and doubles ft. Martina Navratilova and Serena Williams". www.sportskeeda.com. Archived from the original on 8 December 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2023. Berkok, John (11 September 2023). "Ranking Reaction: Djokovic and Sabalenka ascend to No. 1, Coco rises to No. 3". Tennis.com. Retrieved 11 September 2023. Carayol, Tumaini (5 November 2023). "Iga Swiatek into final after dominant win over Aryna Sabalenka at WTA Finals". The Guardian. Retrieved 29 December 2023. "Iga Swiatek returns to No. 1 with WTA Finals win over Jessica Pegula". 6 November 2023. Retrieved 29 December 2023. "Novak Djokovic, Aryna Sabalenka win ITF World Champion awards". 14 December 2023. Retrieved 14 December 2023. Parry, Martin (27 January 2024). "Dominant Sabalenka crushes Zheng to defend Australian Open title". Yahoo! Sport. Retrieved 27 January 2024. Ronald, Issy (27 January 2024). "Aryna Sabalenka successfully defends women's Australian Open title, defeating Zheng Qinwen in dominant fashion". CNN. Retrieved 27 January 2024. Braidwood, Jamie (27 January 2024). "Aryna Sabalenka's dominant Australian Open defence completes a stunning transformation". The Independent. Retrieved 27 January 2024. "USA move into finals of Junior Davis Cup and Junior Fed Cup". Sportswire. Retrieved 8 September 2018. "Fed Cup Semifinals Preview: which teams will reach the final?". Tennis World USA. 22 April 2017. Retrieved 8 September 2018. "Fed Cup final Preview: Belarus v USA". Last Word on Tennis. October 2017. Retrieved 8 September 2018. "Victoria Azarenka says custody dispute keeps her out of Fed Cup final". Tennis.com. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Aliaksandra Sasnovich Rankings History". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 8 September 2018. "All square in Minsk as Sasnovich and Bertens triumph". Fed Cup. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Belarus completes surprise win over Netherlands in Fed Cup". Tennis.com. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Sabalenka sends Belarus through to first Final". Fed Cup. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Belarus stuns Switzerland to reach 1st Fed Cup final". USA Today. Retrieved 7 September 2018. Chiesa, Victoria (11 November 2017). "Belarus, USA all square after first day in Fed Cup final". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 21 July 2018. "CoCo Vandeweghe puts up three points to propel U.S. to Fed Cup glory". Tennis.com. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Azarenka leads Belarusian trio into historic third round". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Germany beats Belarus 3–2 to make Fed Cup final four". Tennis.com. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Kuzmova claws Slovakia back into contention in Minsk". Fed Cup. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Lapko and Marozava launch Belarus back into the World Group". Fed Cup. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Sabalenka blasts Belarus to a semifinal spot". Fed Cup. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Ashleigh Barty stars as Aussies clinch Fed Cup semi". ESPN. 21 April 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Stats Hub 2020". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 28 February 2021. Kane, David (18 January 2022). "Aryna Sabalenka's first serve: No. 2 seed conquers yips to survive Sanders, begin Australian Open campaign". Tennis. Retrieved 12 June 2022. "WTA Eastbourne: Aryna Sabalenka shocks Karolina Pliskova". Tennis World USA. 28 June 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Pantic, Nina. "Carillo raves about "warrior princess" Sabalenka". Tennis.com. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Aryna Sabalenka's coach Tursunov speaks about her recent success". Tennis.com. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Aryna Sabalenka Plays Two Finals in One Day, Making Steady Start on Clay". Last Word on Tennis. 15 April 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Sabalenka captures Madrid title in thriller over Barty". Women's Tennis Association. 8 May 2021. Archived from the original on 26 March 2022. Retrieved 23 April 2022. "Aryna Sabalenka: 'I don't even hear myself when I am playing'". Tennis World USA. 21 February 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Aryna Sabalenka working with former Wawrinka's coach Magnus Norman". Tennis World USA. 27 January 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Interview: Aryna Sabalenka, Round 3". US Open. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Sabalenka prepares for déjà vu clash with Wozniacki in Montréal". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Di Lorito, Paolo (22 September 2020). "È già finita la collaborazione tra Sabalenka e Kindlmann" [The collaboration between Sabalenka and Kindlmann has already ended]. Ubi Tennis (in Italian). Retrieved 27 October 2020. "Brands That Sponsor Aryna Sabalenka". 25 September 2020. "Aryna Sabalenka 'Dreaming About Tigers'". BNP Parbias Open. 12 March 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "'I'm the tiger' – Sabalenka embraces Asian Swing return after US Open trials". WTA Tennis. 20 September 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2019. Tandon, Kamakshi. "The 'Tiger' is officially back: Sabalenka repeats as Wuhan Champion". Tennis.com. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Konstantin Koltsov, former NHL player and boyfriend of Sabalenka, dead at 42". Reuters. 19 March 2024. Retrieved 19 March 2024. "Konstantin Koltsov's death ruled apparent suicide by police". ESPN. 19 March 2024. Retrieved 19 March 2024. "Aryna Sabalenka issues statement after death of former partner Konstantin Koltsov". Australian Broadcasting Corporation News. 20 March 2024. Retrieved 29 March 2024. Арына Сабаленка — сваім падпісчыкам: Якое метадычнае цкаванне! І вы хочаце, каб разумныя людзі былі з вамі? [Aryna Sabalenka to her subscribers: What methodical baiting! And you want smart people to be with you?] – Nasha Niva, 12 October 2020 "Сабаленка на заклік не маўчаць аб сітуацыі ў Беларусі: «Пара б ужо паразумнець. Ну нічога, і такіх зямля носіць, на жаль»". Nasha Niva (in Belarusian). 12 October 2020. Retrieved 10 September 2023. Соболенко подписала обращение белорусских спортсменов о том, что их «долг не выступать с политическими призывами, а побеждать на спортивных аренах» – sports.ru, 2 December 2020 Стало известно, кто подписал открытое письмо спортсменов, выступающих за власть – tut.by, 24 November 2020 (archived) Barker, Philip (18 August 2020). "Belarusian Olympic medalists sign open letter". Inside the Games. Retrieved 2 May 2023. Carroll, Rory (10 March 2022). "Russian, Belarusian players call for peace as Ukraine conflict rages". Reuters. Retrieved 25 March 2023. "Sabalenka: Anxiety and Hope for Peace Unite Tour". www.tennisnow.com. Retrieved 25 March 2023. Dahlman, Sebastian (26 January 2023). "'Still tough but it's not my fault' – Sabalenka on Ukraine war impact on her career". Tennis Infinity. Retrieved 10 March 2023. Virag, Balasz (23 March 2023). "Sabalenka slammed by Tsurenko's coach amidst Ukraine comments". Tennis Infinity. Retrieved 24 April 2023. Waite, Alex (21 April 2023). "Sabalenka criticized by Stakhovsky for empty words". Tennis Infinity. Retrieved 2 May 2023. Kane, David (26 May 2023). "Aryna Sabalenka previews tense Roland Garros first round against Marta Kostyuk". Tennis. Maine, D'Arcy (8 June 2023). "The complicated story of Aryna Sabalenka at the French Open". ESPN. Retrieved 10 July 2023. Jurejko, Jonathan (6 June 2023). "French Open 2023: Aryna Sabalenka 'does not support' Belarus president Alexander Lukashenko". BBC News. "I don't support the war or Lukashenko, says Sabalenka". Reuters. 6 June 2023. Retrieved 9 July 2023. "Tennis Docuseries 'Break Point' Is Coming to Make a Racket". Netflix Tudum. Retrieved 18 July 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aryna Sabalenka. Official website (in English) Aryna Sabalenka at the Women's Tennis Association Aryna Sabalenka at the International Tennis Federation Aryna Sabalenka at the Billie Jean King Cup Aryna Sabalenka at Olympedia