Akshay Hari Om Bhatia (born Rajiv Hari Om Bhatia; 9 September 1967), known professionally as Akshay Kumar (pronounced [əkˈʂəj kʊˈmɑːɾ]), is an Indian actor and film producer working in Hindi cinema. Referred to in the media as "Khiladi Kumar", through his career spanning over 30 years, Kumar has appeared in over 100 films and has won several awards, including two National Film Awards and two Filmfare Awards. He received the Padma Shri, India's fourth-highest civilian honour, from the Government of India in 2009. Kumar is one of the most prolific actors in Indian cinema. Forbes included Kumar in their lists of both highest-paid celebrities and highest-paid actors in the world from 2015 to 2020. Between 2019 and 2020, he was the only Indian on both lists. Kumar began his career in 1991 with Saugandh and had his first commercial success a year later with the action thriller Khiladi. The film established him as an action star in the 1990s and led to several films in the Khiladi film series, in addition to other action films such as Mohra (1994) and Jaanwar (1999). Although his early tryst with romance in Yeh Dillagi (1994) was positively received, it was in the next decade that Kumar expanded his range of roles. He gained recognition for the romantic films Dhadkan (2000), Andaaz (2003), Namastey London (2007), and for his slapstick comic performances in several films including Hera Pheri (2000), Mujhse Shaadi Karogi (2004), Phir Hera Pheri (2006), Bhool Bhulaiyaa (2007), and Singh Is Kinng (2008). Kumar won Filmfare Awards for his negative role in Ajnabee (2001) and his comic performance in Garam Masala (2005). While his career had fluctuated commercially, his mainstream success soared in 2007 with four consecutive box-office hits; it was consistent until a short period of decline between 2009 and 2011, after which he reinforced his status with several films, including Rowdy Rathore (2012) and Holiday (2014). Moreover, around this time critical response to several of his films improved; his work in Special 26 (2013), Baby (2015), Airlift (2016), and Jolly LLB 2 (2017) was acclaimed, and he won the National Film Award for Best Actor for the crime thriller Rustom (2016). He earned further notice for his self-produced social films Toilet: Ek Prem Katha (2017) and Pad Man (2018), as well as the war film Kesari (2019), and set box-office records in 2019 with Mission Mangal, Housefull 4, Good Newwz, and the 2021 action film Sooryavanshi. In addition to acting, Kumar has worked as a stunt actor. In 2008, He started hosting Fear Factor: Khatron Ke Khiladi and hosted four seasons. He also launched the TV reality show Dare 2 Dance in 2014 and his off-screen work includes ownership of the team Khalsa Warriors in the World Kabaddi League. The actor had also set up martial arts training schools for women safety in the country. Kumar is one of the India's most philanthropic actor and supports various charities. He is a leading brand endorser celebrity in India. Sometime during or after the 2011 Canadian federal election, the Conservative government granted Canadian citizenship to Kumar by invoking a little-known law[which?] which allowed circumventing the usual residency requirement for Canadian immigrants. According to a former Conservative Party minister, Tony Clement, the citizenship was awarded in return for Kumar's offer of putting his "star power to use to advance Canada-Indian relations", and Canada's "trade relations, commercial relations, in the movie sector, in the tourism sector". On 15 August 2023, Kumar confirmed he got Indian citizenship back and Canadian citizenship was withdrawn as part of Indian law. Kumar was born in Old Delhi in Delhi, India, to Hari Om Bhatia (later Brijmohan Bhatia) and Aruna Bhatia in a Punjabi Hindu family. His father was an army officer. From a young age, Kumar was very interested in sports. His father too enjoyed wrestling. He lived and grew up in Delhi's Chandni Chowk and later he moved to Bombay (present-day Mumbai) when his father left Army to become an accountant with UNICEF. Soon, his sister was born and the family lived in Koliwada, a Punjabi dominated area of Central Bombay. He received his school education from Don Bosco High School, Matunga, simultaneously learning Karate. He enrolled in Guru Nanak Khalsa College for higher education, but dropped out as he was not much interested in studies. He requested his father that he wanted to learn martial arts further, and his father somehow saved money to send him to Thailand. Kumar went to Bangkok to learn martial arts and lived in Thailand for five years learning Thai Boxing. Kumar also has a sister, Alka Bhatia. When Kumar was a teenager, his father asked him what he aspired to be. Kumar expressed his desire to become an actor. After having obtained a black belt in Taekwondo while in India, he studied martial arts in Bangkok, Thailand, where he learned Muay Thai and worked as a chef and waiter. After Thailand, Kumar went to work in Calcutta (present-day Kolkata) in a travel agency, in Dhaka in a hotel as a chef and Delhi where he sold Kundan jewellery. Upon his return to Bombay, he commenced the teaching of martial arts. During this time, the father of one of his students, himself a model co-ordinator, recommended Kumar into modelling which ultimately led to a modelling assignment for a furniture showroom. Kumar effectively made more money within the first two days of shooting than in his entire month's salary, and therefore chose a modelling career path. He worked as an assistant for photographer Jayesh Sheth for 18 months without payment to shoot his first portfolio. He also worked as a background dancer in various films. Kumar made his first screen appearance with film Aaj under his birth name 'Rajiv Hari Om Bhatia', in a bit role as a Karate instructor. Kumar further stated that he changed his name to Akshay Hari Om Bhatia and chose his stage name as Akshay Kumar, after Kumar Gaurav's character Akshay in the film. One morning, he missed his flight for an ad-shoot in Bangalore. Disappointed with himself, he visited a film studio along with his portfolio. That evening, Kumar was signed for a lead role by producer Pramod Chakravarthy for the movie Deedar. Kumar made his first appearance as the lead actor opposite Raakhee and Shantipriya in Saugandh (1991). In the same year, he acted in Kishore Vyas-directed Dancer, which received poor reviews. The following year he starred in Abbas Mustan-directed suspense thriller, Khiladi, widely considered his breakthrough role. A review in The Indian Express called the film "an engrossing thriller" and described Kumar as impressive in the lead part, noting his physical appearance, strong screen presence, and commending him for being "perfectly at ease". His next release was the Raj Sippy-directed detective film Mr. Bond, based on James Bond. His last release of 1992 was Deedar. It failed to perform well at the box office. In 1993, he acted in the Keshu Ramsay-directed bilingual film Ashaant alongside Dr. Vishnuvardhan and Ashwini Bhave. All of his films released during 1993, including Dil Ki Baazi, Kayda Kanoon, Waqt Hamara Hai and Sainik did not perform well commercially. In 1994, he appeared in 11 feature films. He played a police inspector in two films: Sameer Malkan's Main Khiladi Tu Anari and Rajiv Rai's Mohra, both among the highest-grossing films of the year. Further success came later that year when he starred in Yash Chopra-produced romance Yeh Dillagi, opposite Kajol. One of the year's biggest mainstream successes, both the film and his performance were received well by critics, with The Indian Express describing him as "always dependable" and singling out his performance. His work in the film earned him his first nomination for Best Actor at the Filmfare Awards and Star Screen award. During the same year, Kumar also had success with films like Suhaag and the low-budget action film Elaan. All these achievements established Kumar as one of the most successful actors of the year, according to Box Office India. Kumar proved to have success with what later became known as the Khiladi series. He starred in the fourth and fifth action thriller films with Khiladi in the title: Sabse Bada Khiladi (1995) and Khiladiyon Ka Khiladi (1996), both directed by Umesh Mehra and released to commercial success. He played a dual role in the former. Khiladiyon Ka Khiladi co-starred Rekha and Raveena Tandon. During the film's shooting Kumar was injured, and went on to receive treatment in United States. Shubhra Gupta of The Indian Express wrote in a year-end review, "It was Akshay Kumar in Khiladiyon Ka Khiladi who packed the aisles, no doubt about it... He shoved his hair back in a slick little ponytail, much like Steven Segal, wore ankle-length great coats, wrestled with the fearsome Undertaker, and walked away with the film." Kumar played a supporting role in Yash Chopra-directed musical romantic drama, Dil To Pagal Hai (1997), co-starring Shah Rukh Khan, Madhuri Dixit and Karisma Kapoor, for which he received his first nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actor. In the same year, he starred opposite Juhi Chawla in David Dhawan-directed comedy Mr. and Mrs. Khiladi, fifth instalment of the Khiladi series. Unlike his previous films of the series, it failed commercially. Considerable success, however, came with another dual role in the romantic action film Aflatoon. Khalid Mohamed of Filmfare, while critical of the film, approved of Kumar's effort: "Akshay Kumar comes to life. Given something even slightly different to do, he does rise to the occasion." His following releases failed in commercial terms and this caused a setback to his film career. In 1999, Kumar played opposite Twinkle Khanna in International Khiladi. The film did not do well at the box office. He received critical acclaim for his roles in the films Sangharsh and Jaanwar. Whilst the former did not make a profit at the box office, the latter turned out to be a commercial success and marked his comeback. In 2000, Kumar starred in the Priyadarshan-directed comedy Hera Pheri alongside Paresh Rawal and Suneil Shetty. The film which was a remake of Malayalam film Ramji Rao Speaking, became a commercial success and proved to be a turning point in Kumar's career. Hindustan Times noted the film's "intense portrayal of the surreality of the human condition". He also starred in the Dharmesh Darshan-directed romantic drama Dhadkan later that same year. The film performed moderately at the box office but Kumar was praised for his acting. Rediff.com's review stated that he had proved that he is "director's actor" and that "he has worked hard on his role is apparent." That same year, he performed some of his most dangerous stunts in Neeraj Vora-directed action thriller Khiladi 420, where he climbed a running plane, stood on top of the plane flying a thousand feet in the air, and jumped from the plane onto a hot air balloon. In a later scene, he is also seen being chased by a car, dodging bullets, jumping off buildings, and climbing walls. His character in the film had two names and his role received mixed reviews. Sukanya Verma wrote "Negative roles and Akshay Kumar don't go hand-in-hand. [...] Akshay is ridiculously over the top and irritating to the core. However, he manages a decent performance as the sober and suave Anand." Padmaraj Nair of Screen, however, believed it was "the best performance of his career". His first release in 2001 was Suneel Darshan-directed drama Ek Rishtaa: The Bond of Love. Kumar was praised for his performance in the film. Next, he played a negative role in the Abbas Mustan-directed film Ajnabee. While reviewing the film for Rediff.com, Sarita Tanwar termed Kumar the "surprise package" of the film. She added that he was "in total control as the bad guy." The film won him his first Filmfare Award for Best Villain and IIFA award 2002 for Performance in a Negative Role. His first release in 2002 was Dharmesh Darshan-directed romantic drama Haan Maine Bhi Pyaar Kiya. He played the role as a blind man in Vipul Amrutlal Shah and Shaarang Dev Pandit-directed heist film Aankhen, co-starring Amitabh Bachchan, Arjun Rampal, Aditya Pancholi, Sushmita Sen and Paresh Rawal. His performance in the film was critically acclaimed. Next, he starred in the Vikram Bhatt-directed comedy Awara Paagal Deewana. Rediff.com's review of the film mentioned that his sincerity and intensity seen in Hera Pheri, Ek Rishtaa – The Bond of Love and Aankhen "seems missing". His last film of the year was Rajkumar Kohli-directed supernatural horror film Jaani Dushman: Ek Anokhi Kahani alongside Manisha Koirala, Sunil Shetty, Sunny Deol, Aftab Shivdasani, Arshad Warsi, Aditya Pancholi and Armaan Kohli. The film was a remake of Kohli's former film Naagin and received mostly negative reviews from critics. Taran Adarsh wrote "only Munish[Armaan] Kohli and Akshay Kumar leave an impact." In 2003, he starred in Suneel Darshan's action film Talaash: The Hunt Begins... opposite Kareena Kapoor. While reviewing the film, Taran Adarsh wrote "Akshay Kumar is plain mediocre. The role hardly offers him scope to try out anything different." Next, he starred in Raj Kanwar-directed romantic drama Andaaz alongside Lara Dutta and Priyanka Chopra. The film received mixed reviews from critics, but turned out to be a commercial success at the box office and the first universal hit of 2003. In 2004 Kumar starred in Rajkumar Santoshi's action drama thriller Khakee alongside Amitabh Bachchan, Ajay Devgn and Aishwarya Rai. Kumar played the role of Inspector Shekhar Verma, a corrupt, morally bankrupt cop who changes himself during a mission to transfer an accused Pakistani spy Dr. Iqbal Ansari (played by Atul Kulkarni) from a remote town in Maharashtra to Mumbai. The film and Kumar's acting were positively reviewed by critics. He was nominated for the Filmfare Best Supporting Actor Award for his role in the film. His other releases included Dileep Shukla's crime film Police Force: An Inside Story. He starred alongside Raveena Tandon, Amrish Puri and Raj Babbar. The film's production was delayed following the break-up of the lead actors Tandon and Kumar. Upon release it received negative reviews from critics. Next, Kumar played Hari Om Patnaik, an IPS officer in Madhur Bhandarkar-directed Aan: Men at Work. He starred in David Dhawan-directed romantic comedy Mujhse Shaadi Karogi alongside Salman Khan and Priyanka Chopra. He played the role of Sunny, Sameer (played by Khan)'s roommate who pursuits Rani (played by Chopra)-Sameer's love interest. The film received positive reviews. Taran Adarsh praised Kumar and wrote "Akshay Kumar is a revelation [...] he surpasses his previous work. His timing is fantastic and the conviction with which he carries off the evil streak in his personality is bound to be talked-about in days to come." His performance in the film earned him his third nomination for supporting actor at the Filmfare Awards as well as a nomination for best comic role. His other films included Abbas-Mustan directed Aitraaz and S M Iqbal's Meri Biwi Ka Jawaab Nahin. In the former, Kumar played against type as a worker wrongly accused of sexual harassment by his female boss played by Chopra. According to the directors, Aitraaz was inspired by National Basketball Association player Kobe Bryant (who was accused of rape by a fan); and the film's development began when they read about his sexual-assault case in the newspapers. Talking about the character Kumar said that it is realistic and could be described as a "new-age metrosexual" man. He added that Aitraaz was the boldest film he had done. In the latter, he starred opposite Sridevi. The film was shot in 1994 but was released in 2004 after a delay of 10 years. The next year Kumar starred in Dharmesh Darshan-directed romantic drama musical film Bewafaa (2005) opposite Kareena Kapoor. He played the role of Raja, an aspiring musician who pursues his love interest Anjali (played by Kareena Kapoor) even after she is married to Aditya Sahai (played by Anil Kapoor). The film received mixed reviews from film critic but Kumar was praised for his acting. Anupama Chopra of India Today wrote that "Kareena Kapoor and Kumar stand out." Taran Adarsh wrote "Akshay Kumar does well in a role that fits him like a glove." Later that year he acted in Vipul Amrutlal Shah's family drama Waqt: The Race Against Time alongside Amitabh Bachchan, another Priyadarshan-directed comedy Garam Masala alongside John Abraham. Waqt: The Race Against Time was a family drama film. The film and Kumar's acting received mixed reviews. Vishal D'Souza wrote "Akshay shoulders an author-backed role, carrying more of the film's emotional baggage though he is distinctly uncomfortable in the soppy-weepy scenes." The films succeeded at the box office and his performance in the latter earned him his second Filmfare Award, for Best Comedian. His other films included Vikram Bhatt-directed action comedy romance film Deewane Huye Paagal and Suneel Darshan directed romantic drama Dosti: Friends Forever. In the former he starred alongside Shahid Kapoor, Sunil Shetty and Rimi Sen while in the latter he starred alongside Kareena Kapoor and Bobby Deol. Both of these films received positive reviews. Kumar's first release of 2006 was Rajkumar Santoshi-directed drama Family – Ties of Blood followed by Suneel Darshan's Mere Jeevan Saathi and Raj Kanwar's Humko Deewana Kar Gaye. Next, he starred in a sequel to Hera Pheri titled Phir Hera Pheri. As was the former, the sequel became a huge success at the box office. Later that year he starred alongside Salman Khan and Preity Zinta in the Shirish Kunder-directed romantic musical film Jaan-E-Mann. The film was a well anticipated release, and despite receiving positive reviews from critics, did not do as well as expected at the box office. The film received mostly negatively reviews. Vidya Pradhan of Rediff.com called it a "bizarre movie." Though the film under-performed, his role as a shy, lovable nerd was praised. He ended the year with Priyadarshan's comedy murder mystery film Bhagam Bhag. He starred alongside Lara Dutta, Govinda and Paresh Rawal and played the character of a theatre actor. The film received mixed reviews and Rediff.com called Kumar the real hero of the film. The film was commercially successful. The same year, he led the Heat 2006 world tour along with fellow stars Saif Ali Khan, Preity Zinta, Sushmita Sen and Celina Jaitley. 2007 proved to be Kumar's most successful year during his career in the industry, and as described by box office analysts, "probably the best ever recorded by an actor, with four outright hits and no flops." His first release, Vipul Amrutlal Shah-directed Namastey London, was critically and commercially successful, and his performance earned him a Best Actor nomination at the Filmfare. Critic Taran Adarsh wrote of his performance in the film, "he's sure to win the hearts of millions of moviegoers with a terrific portrayal in this film." Kumar's chemistry with lead actress Katrina Kaif also generated immense appreciation, with Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India describing their pairing as "refreshing." His next two releases, Sajid Khan-directed Heyy Babyy and Priyadarshan's Bhool Bhulaiyaa, were box office successes as well. In both of these films he starred opposite Vidya Balan. Kumar's last release of the year, the Anees Bazmee-directed Welcome, did extremely well at the box office, receiving a blockbuster status and simultaneously becoming his fifth successive hit. All of Kumar's films which released that year did well in the overseas market as well. Kumar appeared in a cameo role in Farah Khan directed Om Shanti Om. His role was listed as no. 3 on the Top 10 Cameos in Bollywood list of MensXP.com. Kumar's first film of 2008, Vijay Krishna Acharya-directed action thriller Tashan, marked his comeback to the Yash Raj Films banner after 11 years. Although a poll (conducted by Bollywood Hungama) named it the most anticipated release of the year, the film under-performed at the box office grossing ₹279 million (US$5.76 million) in India. His second film, Bazmee-directed Singh Is Kinng in which he starred opposite Kaif was a huge success at the box office and broke the first-week worldwide record of Om Shanti Om, the previous highest figure. His next film was the animated film Jumbo, directed by Kompin Kemgumnird. The year also saw Kumar making his small screen debut as the host of the successful show Fear Factor – Khatron Ke Khiladi. He later returned to host the show's second season in 2009. In 2009, Kumar featured opposite Deepika Padukone in the Warner Bros. and Rohan Sippy production Chandni Chowk to China. Directed by Nikhil Advani, the film was a critical and commercial failure at the box office. Kumar's next release was 8 x 10 Tasveer, an action-thriller directed by Nagesh Kukunoor that failed commercially. His next release was Sabbir Khan's battle-of-the-sexes comedy Kambakkht Ishq. Set in Los Angeles, it was the first Indian film to be shot at Universal Studios and featured cameo appearances by Hollywood actors. The film was poorly received by critics but became an economic success, earning over ₹840 million (US$17.35 million) worldwide. Kumar's film Blue was released on 16 October 2009. Blue received negative reviews and collected about ₹ 420 million at the box office. His last release in 2009 was Priyadarshan's De Dana Dan. He starred alongside Katrina Kaif, Suniel Shetty and Paresh Rawal. Kumar played a servant who plans to kidnap his owner's dog. The film received mixed reviews. He then appeared in the 2010 comedy, Housefull, directed by Sajid Khan which garnered the second-highest opening weekend collection of all time. Kumar's next release was Khatta Meetha, directed by Priyadarshan which was an average grosser. The film received negative reviews. Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN called it a schizophrenic film. He also appeared in Vipul Shah's Action Replayy, which was a box office failure. The film received mostly negative reviews. His last film of 2010 was Tees Maar Khan. Directed by Farah Khan, the film received poor critical reviews but became moderately successful. In 2011 he starred in Patiala House and Thank You. His last film of 2011 was Rohit Dhawan-directed Desi Boyz (2011), which co-starred John Abraham, Chitrangada Singh and Deepika Padukone. He also co-produced a film with Russell Peters titled Breakaway (dubbed into Hindi as Speedy Singhs) which is reminiscent of his own Patiala House. Breakaway became the highest-grossing cross-cultural movie of 2011 in Canada. Kumar dubbed for the role of Optimus Prime in the Hindi version of Hollywood, action blockbuster, Transformers: Dark of the Moon. He took the dubbing role for his son, Aarav, and did so for free. His first release of 2012 was Housefull 2, a sequel of his earlier comedy film Housefull, which became Superhit. Kumar's next film was the Prabhudeva-directed action drama Rowdy Rathore in which he played a double role opposite Sonakshi Sinha. The film earned more than ₹1.3 billion (US$24.33 million) in India. Both of these films grossed over ₹1 billion (US$18.71 million) at the box office. In 2012, he founded another production company called Grazing Goat Pictures Pvt Ltd. Joker was reportedly promoted as Kumar's 100th film, but later Akshay Kumar clarified that the 100th film landmark had been crossed long before he even signed up for Joker. "It was a miscalculation on Shirish's part. OMG is my 116th film," he said. Kumar kept himself away from the film's promotion due to differences with Kunder. Reacting to Kumar's backing out from the film's promotion Kunder tweeted "A true leader takes responsibility for his team and leads them through thick and thin. Never abandons them and runs away." He later deleted the tweet. His later release Oh My God which he produced and starred along with Paresh Rawal. It had a slow opening but because of word of mouth it picked up. His last release in 2012 was Khiladi 786, the eighth instalment in his famous Khiladi series as well as the comeback of the series after 12 years. Although film was panned by critics it grossed 700 million at the domestic box office.[citation needed] His first release in 2013 was Special 26 which earned a positive critical reception and was moderately successful at the box office. Although the movie earned him positive reviews and commercial success, trade analysts noted that the movie could have done much better business due to its good content and Kumar's high-profile. Milan Luthria chose Kumar to play the character of Shoaib Khan (based on Dawood Ibrahim) in the gangster film Once Upon ay Time in Mumbai Dobaara!, sequel to Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai. It proved to be a below average at the box office. The film was declared a "flop" by Box Office India. It received mixed reviews however Kumar's acting was praised by a majority of critics. In a review for Hindustan Times, Anupama Chopra wrote that Kumar "makes a stellar killer". Madhureeta Mukherjee of The Times of India praised Kumar's performance and said that "Bhai act with flamboyance and mojo ... He gets a chance to do what he does best – herogiri (albeit less menacing, more entertaining), with charisma and clap-trap dialoguebaazi." Al Pacino saw the film's trailer and promos and admired Kumar's portrayal of Shoaib Khan, a gangster. He said that the promos and posters reminded him of his own The Godfather. Kumar said of Pacino's response: "A touch of appreciation is always held dearly in an actor's arms, even if it's from the simplest of people like our beloved spot boys. But to have your work spoken of so kindly by the world's most admired gangster Al Pacino himself – I had goose-bumps thinking about him watching the promo! I was so humbled, not only as an actor but as a fan of his legendary work." Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN criticised Kumar for his "in-your-face flamboyance". After the film's mainly negative reviews, Kumar lashed out at critics, accusing them of lacking an understanding of the audience and the basic ideas of filmmaking. Built on an approximate budget of ₹1 billion (US$18.71 million), it was the first major Hindi language film to be shot in Oman. Kumar received a nomination for Best Actor in a Negative Role at Zee Cine Awards. His next release was Anthony D Souza's Boss alongside Shiv Panditt and Aditi Rao Hydari. The movie received mixed reviews; it performed poorly at the box office netting ₹540 million (equivalent to ₹860 million or US$11 million in 2023) domestically.[citation needed] Kumar came back strongly with Holiday: A Soldier Is Never Off Duty, the Hindi remake of the 2012 Tamil film Thuppakki. This action drama earned both critical and commercial success entering the 1 billion elite club and became the highest grosser of 2014.[citation needed] The film received critical acclaim and is Kumar's third film to gross over ₹1 billion (US$17.07 million) at the box office. He then starred in Entertainment and has sung a song for the film. Making of the song has been uploaded on YouTube. His last film of 2014 was The Shaukeens. He appeared as himself in it and produced it. He then played the lead role in the thrillers Baby and Gabbar is Back. Kumar's first collaboration with Karan Johar, Brothers was released on 14 August 2015. His next release was Singh is Bling, a quasi sequel to 2008's Singh is Kinng was released on 2 October 2015 and is produced by Grazing Goats Pictures. His first release was Airlift released on 22 January 2016 was critically and commercially successful, and second was Housefull 3 which released on 3 June 2016. Rustom which was produced by Neeraj Pandey and marked his third release of 2016. Akshay was praised for his performance in Rustom which garnered him numerous award nominations. Rustom grossed more than 2 billion at the box office. Both Airlift and Rustom earned him the National Film Award for Best Actor. His second film release in 2017 was Toilet: Ek Prem Katha. This film depicted the serious social issue of toilets in certain regions of the country. Akshay's performance was praised. Akshay Kumar dug a toilet in Madhya Pradesh to promote the film. The movie trailer was released on 11 June 2017. Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi called it a good effort to further the message of cleanliness, as per Swachh Bharat Abhiyan. In 2018, Akshay starred in another social drama film Pad Man alongside Sonam Kapoor and Radhika Apte. He later made his Tamil cinema debut in the science fiction thriller 2.0, a standalone sequel to the 2010 film Enthiran, co-starring Rajinikanth, in which he played an evil ornithologist named Pakshirajan. In 2019, Kumar appeared in Karan Johar's film Kesari opposite Parineeti Chopra, based on the story of the Battle of Saragarhi. The film grossed over ₹2 billion (US$28.4 million) worldwide. He next featured in Mission Mangal with an ensemble cast of Vidya Balan, Taapsee Pannu, Nithya Menen, Sharman Joshi and Sonakshi Sinha. The film is about the story of scientists at Indian Space Research Organisation who contributed to the Mars Orbiter Mission, which marked India's first interplanetary expedition. Housefull 4, directed by Farhad Samji, was released in October 2019. His next release in December 2019 was Karan Johar's and his own production Good Newwz, a romantic comedy about surrogacy, opposite Kareena Kapoor Khan. All of his four films were commercially successful this year with three consecutive domestic 200 Crore Club net films alongside Mission Mangal, Housefull 4 and Good Newwz. His only release in 2020 was the horror comedy Laxmii, directed by Raghava Lawrence, an official remake of the Tamil film Kanchana opposite Kiara Advani. It was released on 9 November on Disney+ Hotstar, and was not released theatrically in India due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The film revolves around a man who gets possessed by the ghost of a transgender. It received mixed to negative reviews from critics, praising the performance of Kumar, but criticised the writing and screenplay of the film. In 2021, Kumar had three releases, namely, Bell Bottom, a spy thriller inspired from real life hijacking events in India by Khalistani separatists during the 1980s, directed by Ranjit M Tewari, Sooryavanshi, a Cop Universe continuation of Singham and Simmba, directed by Rohit Shetty and Aanand L. Rai's Atrangi Re along with Sara Ali Khan in dual roles opposite him and Dhanush on Disney+ Hotstar, were released in 2021. In 2022, Kumar's first release was Bachchhan Paandey, a remake of Jigarthanda, where he played the titular role of a gangster, a name derived from Kumar's character in the 2008 film Tashan. The film paired him with Kriti Sanon, and also features Jacqueline Fernandez and Arshad Warsi. Despite an ensemble cast and hype among fans, Bachchhan Paandey gathered negative critical reception and was not successful at the box office. His next release was the historical film Samrat Prithviraj, which was based on life of the Hindu warrior Prithviraj Chauhan. It also starred Sonu Sood, Sanjay Dutt and debutant Manushi Chhillar. Released theatrically on 3 June 2022, the film opened to mixed reviews. Anuj Kumar of The Hindu wrote 'In order to tone down his body language and accent, Kumar has lost much of his trademark energy and could not develop the gravitas required to play the celebrated ruler. He growls like a lion who has lost his bite and despite all the air-brushing, doesn't look like the boy who became a Samrat in his 20s'. Made on a budget of 150–300 crore, the film failed to perform well at the box office. His another movie Rakshabandhan which was released on the extended weekend of 5 days on 11 August received mixed reviews. The Hindu wrote ''The film's engaging powerful anti-dowry sentiments, along with Akshay's brilliant comic timing, ensures that there is enough to keep the audience tied for two hours''. The Indian Express rated the film 1.5 out of 5 stars and wrote "Do the filmmakers truly believe that such low-rent family dramas, with their uneasy mix of humour and crassness". The film couldn't manage to impress the audience and scored poorly at the Indian ticket windows. The film managed to earn mere $4.2 million over the extended weekend. His another release in 2022 was Cuttputlli, which was again a remake of Ratsasan. The movie was released directly on Disney+ Hotstar. The Hindustan Times wrote "Akshay Kumar got a golden opportunity in the film Ram Setu by Abhishek Sharma released on 25 October 2022, as his character is unlike anything he has done in the recent past. Ram Setu embraces the best of the Indiana Jones and National Treasure schools of storytelling with desi action" With the poor performance of Ram Setu, 2022 proved to be one of the worst years for Kumar in recent times. His first release of 2023 was Selfiee, an official remake of Driving Licence, which also starred Emraan Hashmi, Diana Penty and Nushrratt Bharuccha. The film bombed at the box office continuing the streak of flops for the actor. Kumar next appeared in OMG 2 – Oh my God 2, a spiritual successor to OMG – Oh My God!, where he played a messenger of Lord Shiva. Ganesh Aaglave of Firstpost stated, "Akshay's character as the messenger of Lord Shiva seems to be an extended cameo. However, the actor impresses with his expressions and dialogues and delivers one of his best performances in recent times." The film became a box office hit. Kumar next appeared opposite Parineeti Chopra as Jaswant Singh Gill, a brave and diligent mining engineer in the disaster thriller Mission Raniganj. It received mixed to positive response from critics, but flopped at the box office. Kumar's projects in 2024 include the official remake of Soorarai Pottru and Vedat Marathe Veer Daudle Saat, his Marathi debut. Akshay is currently shooting for Bade Miyan Chote Miyan, which also stars Tiger Shroff. Akshay also started shooting for multiple projects set to release in 2024 which also include the much awaited Hera Pheri sequel. In 2004, Kumar presented seven-part miniseries Seven Deadly Arts with Akshay Kumar for free, played master and learner as he introduces viewers to each of the seven part of martial arts-kalaripayattu, Shaolin Kung Fu, karate, taekwondo, aikido, Muay Thai, capoeira, the show aired on every following Sunday. The following year Kumar was awarded the highest Japanese honour of "Katana" and a sixth degree black belt in Kuyukai Gōjū-ryū karate. Since 2008, Kumar started India's stunt/action reality game show – "Fear Factor: Khatron Ke Khiladi". He hosted Season 1, Season 2 and Season 4. The show was widely accepted and appreciated, became hugely successful in popular culture. It is still being run by Rohit Shetty. In 2011, Kumar hosted India's first MasterChef television show on Star Plus, was viewed by 18.2 million viewers and went to prove that Indian audiences are open to experimenting and look forward to innovations in television entertainment. In 2014, He hosted another reality show Dare 2 Dance as a mentor, which aired on Life OK from 6 September. It broke the norms of a regular dance format with a commitment of a 'first of its kind. A dance show where trained and famed dancers wasn't judged only on the basis of their dance performances, but they had to perform stunts.survive on the dance floor. In 2014, Kumar also produced a successful television serial Jamai Raja (2014), starring Ravi Dubey and Nia Sharma, which established them leading actors in Indian television industry. In 2017, he judged The Great Indian Laughter Challenge with Mallika Dua, Hussain Dalal and Zakir Khan, later they were replaced by Sajid Khan and Shreyas Talpade. The show made many popular names including Vishwash Chauhan and Shyam Rangeela. Kumar joined Bear Grylls for an episode in "Into The Wild", which aired on Discovery channel on 14 September 2020. The episode was second highest-rated show in the infotainment genre (Discovery Channel) in terms of TRP. 1.1 crore people watched the premiere on Discovery Network channels. Kumar promotes health fitness and exercising, stays in shape with a combination of kickboxing, basketball, swimming and Parkour as well as working out. While in standard eighth he had started practising Karate. He intended to open a martial arts school and the state government of Maharashtra allotted land for the school in Bhayandar. He helped Khanna with editing the drafts of her debut book Mrs Funnybones. He is a teetotaller but has endorsed for a liquor brand in the past. Half of the sum was given for daan (charity work), of which he has been doing more of in recent times. In 2013, one of his fan travelled from Haryana to Mumbai, to meet him. The journey took him 42 days. When he reached Kumar's building, he was informed that Kumar was in Casablanca. The fan stayed outside the building for one week before Kumar met him. Kumar has come out in support and lauded the Sports Minister Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore for his stand against corruption. The minister said that the government entrusted CBI in the investigation against the corrupt officials in sports department. On 9 August 2014, Kumar performed at his 500th live show. The show was held in O2 Arena in London as part of the inaugural function of the World Kabaddi League. His first live show was held in 1991 in Delhi. Kumar owns Bengal Warriors a team in the Indian Kabbadi League. Akshay Kumar sets himself on fire at his upcoming The End series launch with Prime Video, says he's a stuntman first and actor later. During late 90s, Kumar was dating actress Raveena Tandon. Although they were engaged, they later parted ways. Kumar married Twinkle Khanna, the daughter of actors Rajesh Khanna and Dimple Kapadia, on 17 January 2001. Together they have a son, and a daughter. He is known as a protective father and keeps his children away from the media. He stated that he wants to "give them a normal childhood." In 2009, while performing at a show for Levis at Lakme Fashion Week, Kumar asked Twinkle to unbutton his jeans. This incident sparked a controversy which led to a police case being filed against them. Kumar was initially a religious, practising Shaiva Hindu who regularly visited shrines and temples across the country, including the famed Vaishno Devi Mandir, but in March 2020 he stated, "I don't believe in any religion. I only believe in being Indian". Sometime during or after the 2011 Canadian federal election, the Conservative government there granted Canadian citizenship to Kumar by invoking a little-known law which allowed circumventing the usual residency requirement for Canadian immigrants. According to a former Conservative Party minister, Tony Clement, the citizenship was awarded in return for Kumar's offer of putting his "star power to use to advance Canada-Indian relations," and Canada's "trade relations, commercial relations, in the movie sector, in the tourism sector." Although Kumar had earlier appeared in a campaign event for Conservative Prime Minister Stephen Harper in Brampton, Ontario, a city with a large Indo-Canadian population, and praised Harper, Clement denied that the citizenship was a reward for partisan support. Kumar had received an honorary doctorate degree from the University of Windsor, and in a 2010 interview with the Economist claimed he had "dual citizenship." He was one of the 15 international celebrities invited for the Olympics torch-bearer rally to Canada. In December 2019, Kumar stated that he has applied for an Indian passport and plans to give up his Canadian citizenship. On 15 August 2023, on the occasion of Independence Day, Kumar confirmed he got Indian citizenship back and Canadian citizenship was withdrawn as part of Indian law. In Indian media, Kumar is referred as Khiladi or Khiladi Kumar for doing so many dangerous stunts by himself and also because of his Khiladi film series. In 2009, Madame Tussauds wanted to make his wax figure next because he has an international fan following. But he declined and said,"he don't want to be waxed because he does not think it is of that great importance". From 2015, he was continuously featured in Forbes's highest paid actors top 10 list. In 2019, he was fourth highest paid actor in the world behind Dwayne Johnson, Chris Hemsworth and Robert Downey Jr.. On the Forbes US list of World's 33rd Highest Earner with $65M. In 2020, He ranked sixth and only Indian actor in top 10 of highest paid actors list with $48.5M. Kumar is the first Indian film actor, whose films' domestic net lifetime collections crossed ₹20 billion (US$341.31 million) by 2013, and ₹30 billion (US$446.46 million) by 2016. Kumar was named "Sexiest Man Alive" by People Magazine in 2008. Kumar was awarded with NDTV Imagine Best Entertainer of the Year 2007 by the Apsara Film & Television Producers Guild Awards (FTPGI). In 2009, he was awarded the highest Japanese honour of "Katana" and a sixth degree Black Belt in Kuyukai Gojuryu Karate. He was one of the 15 international celebrities invited for the Olympics torch-bearer rally to Canada in 2009. Kumar bagged the Ultimate Man of the Year at the prestigious GQ Awards in 2015. He won the HT Hottest Trendsetter (Male) award at the HT India's Most Stylish in 2019. Kumar has great brand value and holds strong credibility in the advertising world. In 2020, Kumar has topped the list with brand value of $118M he has seen a jump of 13% by previous years. According to Duff and Phelps, Kumar was third most valued celebrity with $139M in 2021. Kumar has endorsed brands including Thums Up, Honda, Tata Motors, Dollar, Harpic, Sparx, Livguard Battery, and Kajarai Tiles. He was also brand ambassador of Canada Tourism. Kumar ranked number 1 on TAM's list of most visible stars in TV ads with an average visibility of 37 hours per day across all channels since 2019 to 2022. Kumar has significant fan following in Indian diaspora as well as in European and African countries. As of September 2022, He is most followed Indian actor on social media including Facebook, Twitter and Instagram. Memes from his comedy movies, especially his face expressions are hugely popular on social media. In 2019, interviewed Modi on TV, which concluded as controversies in social media, later he clarified that it was a personal interview as a common man, not political. Since 2013, Kumar has been the Hindi film industry's highest advance taxpayer for six consecutive years. He paid ₹190 million (US$3.24 million) as advance tax payment in that year. In August 2022, he got a certificate from Income Tax department for being highest tax payer. Kumar has criticised award functions and doesn't believe in it saying, "Organizers have asked me to perform at award nights. They said that they would pay me half the price and they would also give me an award. I replied saying, 'You pay me the whole amount and keep your award.'" He called National Film Award, most prestigious award of the country. Kumar holds the Guinness World Records for the most 184 Selfies taken in three minutes at a promotional event of his film Selfiee in Mumbai. He talked to the media and termed it as a 'way of paying tribute' to his fans. In March 2023, Kumar performed in various cities in the United States for "The Entertainers" tour, alongside Disha Patani, Mouni Roy, Nora Fatehi, Sonam Bajwa, Aparshakti Khurana, Stebin Ben and Zahrah S Khan. Kumar is one of India's most philanthropic celebrities, does a lot of helps and donations, continues the good work offscreen with his philanthropy and services. He and his co-star Tamannaah Bhatia donated all the clothes from their film 2014 Entertainment to an animal welfare charity. Youth Organisation in Defence of Animals (YODA) is an organisation which works for the welfare of street animals. He has also donated ₹5 million (US$93,567.08) to Salman Khan's Being Human Foundation. Kumar also had donated a sum of ₹9 million to drought hit farmers in Maharashtra in 2015, Khan himself tweeted on Twitter. Kumar also helped a contestant of TV reality show Khatron Ke Khiladi by giving him Rs. 25 lakh after knowing that the contestant needed the prize money of the show for his father's cancer treatment. He has also donated ₹5 million to aid drought affected people through the Maharashtra government's Jalyukt Shivar Abhiyan. In March 2013, he started a 30-bed cancer shelter for policemen in Naigaon. In December 2013, Vishwas Nangre Patil, Additional Commissioner of Police, West Mumbai visited his gym along with several trainee officers. Acid attack survivor Laxmi Agarwal, on whose life Deepika Padukone's Chapaak was based is also an activist. Some years ago, she was struggling to make ends meet. Kumar came to her rescue and transferred Rs. 5 Lakh into her account so that she could fend for herself until she found a job, because medals, awards and certificates don't pay the bills. He launched an insurance scheme for the registered stunt directors in 2017. The family of deceased stunt director Abdul Sattar Munna has received a compensation of Rs. 20 lakh under the same scheme. Now, the actor has been asked to help those stunt choreographers who are above 55 years of age and therefore, aren't eligible to have insurance in their name. During the promotions of Rustom, Kumar expressed his wish of serving the nation but destiny held something else in store for him. He has played a soldier in Holiday and Kesari, a special agent in Baby and a naval officer in Rustom. The actor was applauded by many for showing his concern towards the families of 12 slain jawans of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) who were killed in Chhattisgarh's Sukma district on Saturday, 11 March 2017. He donated Rs. 1.08 crore to the families of the martyred jawans. In August 2016, Kumar had donated Rs. 80 lakh to the families of army men. He gave Rs 5 lakh to each family and said our soldiers need money along with "samman". In October 2016, Akshay donated Rs. 9 lakh to the family of a martyred BSF jawan. He also donated Rs. 1.5 crore to build the shelter for transgender persons in Chennai. He is supporting the construction of the home. Laxmii's director Raghava Lawrence shared the "good news" of the actor's new initiative with friends and fans along with some pictures on Facebook. Kumar endorses Swachh Bharat Mission, Builds Toilets in Madhya Pradesh, he had previously posted a video on social media, talking about the importance of having individual toilets at home, His movie Toilet was also based on Toilet's importance. He was named Uttarakhand's brand ambassador for 'Swachhta Abhiyaan'. In 2017, Kumar launched the Bharat Ke Veer app, with the help of the home ministry. The platform lets people send money directly to the bank accounts of family members of soldiers martyred in the line of duty. On The Kapil Sharma Show, Akshay said that he was only carrying out his responsibility as a citizen with the app. "Hum yeh kahenge, ki hum apna kartvaya nibhate hai… Jo shaheed hote hai, unka nuksaan hum kabhi bhar nahi paayenge. That is for sure. Sarkar unko jo deti hai, woh deti hai. Lekin, as a civilian, humara bhi toh kuch kartavya banta hai. Yeh aisa app hai… Na iske beech mein koi NGO hai, na koi sarkar hai," he said. In the aftermath of Pulwama terror attack on the CRPF jawans, Kumar came forward to help the families of those sacrificed their lives in the attack. He donated Rs. 15 Lakh to a martyred jawan's family and even urged his fans to do the same. He further pledged to donate Rs. 5 crore through 'Bharat Ke Veer' app. He additionally donated Rs. 9 Lakh each to the families of 12 CRPF jawans who were killed in Chhattisgarh. In Mid-2020 when Kerala, Assam and Chennai were left devastated as they were hit by floods that severely affected several families as they lost their houses, land, crops, many people died. Kumar donated a sum of Rs. 1 crore each to not just Kerala but also Assam and Chennai. CM Sonowal thanks Kumar. Kumar was one of the first personalities from Bollywood to contribute to the PM CARES Fund right at the start of the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, He donated Rs. 25 crores to the Prime Minister's Fund and another crore to ex-cricketer Gautam Gambhir's charity for the same cause. The former cricketer revealed on Twitter that Akshay Kumar had donated Rs. 1 crore to his foundation during the deadly second wave to help people affected by the novel coronavirus. Gambhir wrote, "Every help in this gloom comes as a ray of hope. Thanks a lot Akshay Kumar for committing Rs 1 crore to #GGF for food, meds and oxygen for the needy! God bless." In 2021, Kumar donated ₹1 crore for construction of a school building in Neeru Village of Bandipora district in Jammu and Kashmir. Kumar has been recipient of two Filmfare Awards from 13 nominations: Best Villain for Ajnabee (2002) and Best Comedian for Garam Masala (2006), and a National Film Award for Best Actor for the films Rustom and Airlift (both 2016). In 2008, the University of Windsor conferred an honorary Doctorate of Law on Kumar in recognition of his contribution to Indian cinema. The following year, he was awarded the Padma Shri by the Government of India. In 2011, The Asian Awards honoured Kumar for his outstanding achievement in Cinema. has often performed stunts in his films, which has earned him the sobriquet "Indian Jackie Chan". Though Britannica denotes his birthplace as Amritsar in Punjab, India. "Akshay Kumar gets Indian citizenship, shares proof on Twitter: 'Dil aur citizenship, dono Hindustani'". Hindustan Times. 15 August 2023. Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Retrieved 15 August 2023. Sparks, Karen Jacobs, ed. (2010). Britannica Book of the Year 2010. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. p. 95. ISBN 978-1-61535-366-8. OCLC 799040256. Archived from the original on 15 July 2014. Retrieved 23 October 2016. m.filmfare.com/news/bollywood/decoding-akshay-kumar-we-break-down-the-evolution-of-khiladi-kumar-on-his-birthday-55405.amp "Khiladi Kumar completes 30 years on screen". Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 29 October 2023. *"Akshay Kumar might well be the new king of Bollywood. Here is why". The Indian Express. 31 August 2016. Archived from the original on 31 August 2016. Retrieved 31 August 2016. "10 years, 37 films: Akshay Kumar's ridiculously high success rate in graphs". Hindustan Times. 12 August 2017. Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 12 August 2017. *"Akshay Kumar might well be the new king of Bollywood. Here is why". The Indian Express. 31 August 2016. Archived from the original on 31 August 2016. Retrieved 31 August 2016. "Hit Count Actor All Time". 15 July 2016. Archived from the original on 12 July 2016. Retrieved 15 July 2016. "Akshay Kumar now worth Rs 2,000 crore". Hindustan Times. 18 February 2013. Archived from the original on 19 February 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Akshay Kumar Has A Historic Year". Box Office India. Box Office India Trade Network. 8 January 2019. Archived from the original on 26 February 2020. Retrieved 8 January 2019. List of highest-paid celebrities by Forbes: Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (2015). "Celebrity 100: The World's Highest-Paid Superstars Of 2015". Forbes. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (2016). "Full List: The World's Highest-Paid Celebrities Of 2016". Forbes. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley. "Full List: The World's Highest-Paid Celebrities 2017". Forbes. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "The World's Highest-Paid Actors 2018". Forbes. Archived from the original on 16 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022. List of highest-paid actors by Forbes: "The Highest-Paid Actors 2019: Dwayne Johnson, Bradley Cooper and Chris Hemsworth". Forbes. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. Basu, Nilanjana (5 June 2020). "Akshay Kumar Is The Only Indian On Forbes 2020 List Of 100 Highest-Paid Celebs, Just Like Last Year". NDTV.com. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. Basu, Nilanjana (12 August 2020). "Akshay Kumar Is The Only Bollywood Celeb On Forbes List Of 10 Highest Paid Actors". NDTV.com. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. Kaushik, Mansvini (13 August 2020). "Akshay Kumar Only Bollywood Star On Forbes List Of Highest-paid Actors". Forbes India. Archived from the original on 25 December 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "Akshay Kumar meets Jackie Chan in Hong Kong". Bollywood Hungama. 20 May 2004. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008. Retrieved 11 April 2011. "Akshay Kumar to expand his martial arts training centre". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 10 November 2022. Retrieved 10 November 2022. "Akshay Kumar to set up more branches of his training school". 12 April 2015. Archived from the original on 10 November 2022. Retrieved 10 November 2022. "Akshay Kumar". Forbes. Archived from the original on 7 March 2023. Retrieved 7 March 2023. Blackwell, Tom (21 May 2019), "Bollywood actor who campaigned for Stephen Harper was granted Canadian citizenship by Conservative government", Nationalpost, National Post, archived from the original on 29 May 2020, retrieved 29 May 2020, In the thick of the 2011 federal election, Stephen Harper appeared in the Indo-Canadian heartland of Ontario with a ringer. At a campaign stop in Brampton, Bollywood mega-star Akshay Kumar praised the then prime minister, danced on stage with his wife, Laureen Harper, and thrilled the audience. And at some point, the Harper government invoked a little-known law to grant the actor Canadian citizenship, circumventing the usual, stringent residency requirements for would-be Canadians, says a former Conservative cabinet minister. MP Tony Clement, who as industry minister met with Kumar in Mumbai, says the citizenship grant was just a thank you for the actor's help in promoting Canadian tourism and trade to a huge emerging economy – not a reward for partisan support. 'Basically, he had offered to put that star power to use to advance Canada-India relations, our trade relations, our commercial relations, in the movie sector, in the tourism sector,' said Clement. "Akshay Kumar renounces Canadian citizenship, becomes Indian national again". 15 August 2023. Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Retrieved 15 August 2023. "Akshay Kumar gives up Canadian citizenship, confirms registration as citizen of India: Dil aur citizenship, dono Hindustani". The Times of India. 15 August 2023. Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Retrieved 15 August 2023. S. Irfan (3 June 2014). Guftagoo with Akshay Kumar. Guftagoo. Rajya Sabha TV. 3:35 minutes in. Archived from the original on 4 September 2023. Retrieved 9 September 2023. Mohammad, Khalid (22 March 2007). "Akshay Kumar is a Punjabi by nature". Hindustan Times. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 25 December 2013. Retrieved 17 June 2014. Verma, Sukanya (5 September 2007). "40 things you didn't know about Akki". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 19 February 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2008. Ritika Handoo (8 September 2015). "Lesser known facts about Akshay Kumar". Zee News. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2016. "Notable Alumni | Don Bosco High School". donboscomatunga.com. Archived from the original on 17 August 2020. Retrieved 6 June 2020. Gupta, Priya (13 August 2013). "I've got more than what I had ever dreamt of: Akshay Kumar". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 19 August 2015. "Akshay, Twinkle at pre-Karva Chauth bash". NDTV. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Unplugged: Akshay Kumar". The Times of India. 21 September 2009. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Retrieved 9 October 2014. AS, Sashidhar (8 September 2012). "Akshay obtained a black belt in Taekwondo". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 29 November 2015. "Lesser known facts about Akshay Kumar". Zee News (in Latin). 8 September 2015. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 29 November 2015. Siddique, Habibulla; Khan, Rupak (9 October 2019). "He chopped vegetables in the kitchen – Akshay Kumar's brief stint in Dhaka's Purbani hotel". The Business Standard. Archived from the original on 30 July 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2021. "Akshay before he became a star". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 30 March 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2016. Upala KBR (12 October 2010). "There and back again for Akshay". mid-day. Archived from the original on 24 January 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2016. "So what if I play Akshay Kumar's dad?: Jackie Shroff". Daily News and Analysis. Mumbai. 8 October 2014. Archived from the original on 11 November 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2014. Singh, Prashant (29 June 2016). "This is how Rajiv Bhatia became Akshay Kumar". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 27 October 2023. Verma, Sukanya. "Star of the Week – Akshay Kumar". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. Singh, Prashant (10 January 2014). "Karisma Kapoor is Akshay Kumar's lucky charm?". Hindustan Times. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 5 April 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. Singh, Prashant (8 July 2012). "Akshay Kumar offers to act in student's film". Hindustan Times. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 12 August 2012. Retrieved 29 July 2014. Verma, Sukanya (28 November 2011). "The Ten Worst Films of Akshay Kumar (Dancer)". Rediff.com. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014. Retrieved 8 November 2014. "Movie review: Khiladi 786 is a leave-your-brains-at-home kinda comedy". Firstpost. Network 18. 8 December 2012. Archived from the original on 27 February 2015. Retrieved 31 July 2014. "Akshay Kumar- The Khiladi superstar". Zee News. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 2 August 2014. PR (10 July 1992). "Engrossing Thriller". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 26 January 2024. Retrieved 31 October 2020. In the lead role Akshay Kumar is impressive as Raaj. Tall, with a good physique and a strong screen presence, he is perfectly at ease. "Bombay Bond – Akshay Kumar to play lead in Raj Sippy's film Mr Bond". India Today. 30 September 1991. Archived from the original on 13 November 2014. Retrieved 8 November 2014. Srinivasan, V S (11 August 1998). "Akki up front". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 8 November 2014. "Akshay Kumar, the Entertainment Khiladi, Turns 47 (Slide 6)". NDTV. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 6 October 2014. "After 20 years, Akshay to set new record with Special Chabbis". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2012. "Box Office 1994". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 4 April 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2008. PR (3 June 1994). "Gentle comedy". The Indian Express. p. 6. Archived from the original on 26 January 2024. Retrieved 31 October 2020. "The nominations-1994". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 3 January 2013. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Top Actor". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 23 March 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2008. "Box Office 1995". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 4 April 2008. Retrieved 11 July 2014. "Box Office 1996". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 4 April 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2008. "Akshay Kumar, the Entertainment Khiladi, Turns 47 (Slide 8)". NDTV. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 6 October 2014. Gupta, Shubhra (24 April 1997). "Formula Fatigue". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 24 April 1997. Retrieved 20 April 2020. "The Nominations – 1997". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 9 July 2012. Retrieved 18 June 2014. "Box Office 1997". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 4 April 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2008. Mohamed, Khalid. "Hiss Story". Filmfare. Times Group. Archived from the original on 1 October 1999. "I started my career with B-grade films: Akshay Kumar". Oneindia.in. 5 June 2012. Archived from the original on 15 July 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014. "Box Office 1999". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 4 April 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2008. "Happy Birthday Akshay Kumar: Bollywood's Khiladi turns 46". The Indian Express. Indian Express Group. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2014. "Siddique's not teaming up with Priyadarshan for Hera Pheri 3". The Times of India. 17 January 2013. Archived from the original on 14 September 2015. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Box Office 2000". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 23 March 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2008. Jha, Subhash K. (23 May 2014). "Akshay Kumar teams up with Priyadarshan again". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Kumar Choudhury, Arnab (2000). "Hera Pheri". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 9 June 2001. Retrieved 19 April 2020. Nair, Padmaraj (18 August 2000). "The good ol' 60s revisited". Screen. Archived from the original on 7 October 2002. Retrieved 19 April 2020. Raheja, Dinesh (2000). "Dhadkan — Misses a beat". India Today. Archived from the original on 22 February 2001. Retrieved 9 May 2020. "The Dhadkan review". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Akshay Kumar's Top 5 Stunts". DesiHits. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 11 April 2011. Adarsh, Taran (30 December 2000). "Movie review: Khiladi 420". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 16 August 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Verma, Sukanya (29 December 2000). "Action?Thriller". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 15 March 2013. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Nair, Padmaraj (12 January 2001). "Desi version of Surrogate Mother". Screen. Archived from the original on 6 December 2002. Retrieved 19 April 2020. Someshwar, Savera R (18 May 2001). "Movie review: Ek Rishtaa: The Bond of Love". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Akshay Kumar: 'I want to do more villain roles'". Digital Spy. 23 May 2014. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2014. "Happy Birthday Akshay Kumar: Bollywood's Khiladi turns 46". The Indian Express. Indian Express Group. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 3 August 2014. Tanwar, Sarita. "The Rediff Review: Ajnabee". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 23 August 2014. "IIFA 2002". Archived from the original on 28 May 2012. Retrieved 21 July 2012. "The Winners – 2001 – The 51st Filmfare Awards". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 9 July 2012. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Aankhen". Bollywood Hungama. 5 April 2002. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Aankhen takes you on a roller-coaster ride". BBC. 12 April 2002. Archived from the original on 28 October 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Ganapati, Priya (5 April 2002). "Movie review: Aankhen". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Anjum, N (21 June 2002). "Akshay, Sunil, Aftab's star power fails, Paresh Rawal steals the show". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Kulkarni, Ronjita (17 August 2002). "Jaani Dushman – Ek Anokhi torture". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 12 May 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Movie Review: Jaani Dushman – Ek Anokhi Kahani". Sify. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Adarsh, Taran (16 August 2002). "Movie review: Jaani Dushman". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 19 July 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Adarsh, Taran (3 January 2003). "Movie review: Talaash... The Hunt Begins". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Magotra, Ashish (24 May 2003). "'Andaaz': Flight to boredom". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 27 February 2015. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Shah, Kunal. "Andaaz: Old story, fresh faces". Sify. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Box Office 2003". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 21 January 2011. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Adarsh, Taran (29 August 2003). "'Andaaz' Celebrations: Rocking". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 16 October 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. ""Khakee"". The Hindu. The Hindu Group. 6 February 2004. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Verma, Sukanya (24 January 2004). "Khakee is money's worth. What more do you want?". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 25 November 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Elley, Derek (31 January 2014). "Review: 'Khakee'". Variety. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Roy, Deb (15 October 2013). "10 Best Action Movies of Akshay Kumar (Slide 1)". MensXP.com. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 5 October 2014. "Akki, Raveena join forces!". Rediff.com. 16 February 2004. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Adarsh, Taran (28 May 2004). "Movie review : Police Force". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Fernandes, Vivek (27 May 2004). "Akshay: It's payback time!". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Verma, Sukanya (30 July 2004). "'Mujhse Shaadi Karogi' is another 'Main Hoon Na'". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 1 November 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Adarsh, Taran (28 July 2004). "Mujhse Shaadi Karogi". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Nominees of 50th Filmfare Awards- The 51st Filmfare Awards". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Akshay Kumar plays a rapist!". Sify. 13 July 2004. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Akshay has a lot of experience: Abbas-Mustan". Sify. 8 November 2004. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Jha, Subhash K (12 November 2004). "'Aitraaz' is my boldest film: Akshay Kumar". Sify. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Chopra, Anupama (14 March 2005). "Old refashioned". India Today. Archived from the original on 7 September 2014. Retrieved 7 September 2014. Adarsh, Taran. "Movie Review : Bewafaa". Sify. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 7 September 2014. Pandohar, Jaspreet (14 April 2005). "Waqt: The Race Against Time (2005)". BBC. Archived from the original on 6 October 2009. Retrieved 30 August 2014. D'Souza, Vishal (22 April 2005). "Waqt loses the race". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 20 October 2013. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Box Office 2004". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 4 April 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2008. "Box Office 2005". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 4 April 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2008. N, Patcy (25 November 2005). "Deewane Hue Paagal: Good fun". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 27 January 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2014. Adarsh, Taran. "Movie Review : Dosti – Friends Forever". Sify. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 7 September 2014. "Box Office 2006". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 21 February 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2008. Pradhan, Vidya (23 October 2006). "Jaan-E-Mann is a bizarre movie". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 13 October 2014. Retrieved 7 September 2014. Adarsh, Taran (20 October 2006). "Jaan-E-Mann Review". IndiaFM. Archived from the original on 3 April 2007. Retrieved 14 April 2007. Singh, Gullu (22 December 2006). "Bhagam Bhag: Akshay top, Govinda flop". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2014. Kazmi, Nikhat (22 December 2006). "Bhagam Bhaag". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 8 November 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2014. "Akshay Kumar & Preity Zinta in Bollywood New York Shows for Aron Govil Productions". Business Wire India. 10 March 2006. Archived from the original on 23 March 2006. Retrieved 14 March 2008. "The Toppers of 2007". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 15 January 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2007. "I am kind to everyone, but trust no one: Akshay Kumar". The Times of India. 29 August 2011. Archived from the original on 17 September 2015. Retrieved 21 August 2014. Mishra, Somen (2 January 2008). "Akshay Kumar crowned 2007 King of Bollywood". Mumbai: CNN-IBN. Archived from the original on 13 November 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2014. Singh, Mauli; Shah, Jigar (15 August 2008). "Khiladi is King". The Hindu. The Hindu Group. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 6 November 2014. "Akshay- the undisputed king of Bollywood, bags Rs 72 crore deal". Mumbai: Zee News. 22 August 2008. Archived from the original on 6 November 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2014. Adarsh, Taran (23 March 2007). "Review of Namastey London". IndiaFM. Archived from the original on 5 April 2007. Retrieved 5 April 2007. Kazmi, Nikhat (24 March 2007). "Namastey London". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2014. Adarsh, Taran (15 September 2007). "Top 5: 'Dhamaal' average, 'Darling' slumps!". IndiaFM. Archived from the original on 15 October 2007. Retrieved 14 March 2008. Adarsh, Taran (10 November 2007). "Top 5: 'J.W.M.' steady, despite pre-Diwali dull phase". IndiaFM. Archived from the original on 15 November 2007. Retrieved 10 November 2007. Adarsh, Taran (1 January 2008). "Midweek: 'Welcome', 'TZP' continue to rock!". IndiaFM. Archived from the original on 8 January 2008. Retrieved 1 January 2008. "Overseas Earnings (Figures in Ind Rs)". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 17 March 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2008. Saikia, Priyankee. "Top 10 Cameos in Bollywood". MensXP.com. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "The Most Awaited movies of 2008". Bollywood Hungama. 8 February 2008. Archived from the original on 26 January 2009. Retrieved 19 May 2009. "Box Office 2008". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 20 January 2009. "Box Office 2008". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 15 January 2008. Retrieved 28 January 2009. Khanna, Niyati (31 January 2014). "Tracing The Journey of Fear Factor – Khatron Ke Khiladi; Season 5 Back with a Bang". Business of Cinema. Archived from the original on 1 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Priyanka Chopra to host 'Fear Factor, Season 3'". The New Indian Express. Express Publications. 8 August 2010. Archived from the original on 14 August 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Kazmi, Nikhat (15 January 2009). "Chandni Chowk to China". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 9 November 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Sen, Raja (16 January 2009). "Hindi Chini Why Why?". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Ten Releases Five Disasters". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 13 February 2009. Retrieved 5 March 2009. "Nadiadwala takes Akshay Kumar to Hollywood". Hindustan Times. Indo-Asian News Service. 14 March 2008. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 27 May 2012. Pal, Chandrima (16 October 2009). "Blue: Blistering Barnacles!". Rediff.com. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Chopra, Anupama (16 October 2009). "Blue". NDTV. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Chopra, Sonia. "Review: Blue is a damp squib". Sify. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Adarsh, Taran (27 November 2009). "De Dana Dan". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 16 October 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Chopra, Anupama (27 November 2009). "De Dana Dan". NDTV. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Kazmi, Nikhat (26 November 2009). "De Dana Dan". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 9 November 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Vinod Marani (3 May 2010). "Housefull gets biggest opening since 3 Idiots". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 16 May 2010. Retrieved 17 May 2010. Adarsh, Taran. "Khatta Meetha". Sify. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Masand, Rajeev (31 July 2010). "Masand: 'Khatta Meetha', a schizophrenic film". CNN-IBN. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Boxofficeindia.com". Box Office India. 8 November 2010. Archived from the original on 29 March 2012. Retrieved 9 June 2011. Kazmi, Nikhat (4 November 2010). "Action Replayy". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 9 November 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Shekhar, Mayank (4 November 2010). "Mayank Shekhar's review: Action Replayy". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 16 January 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Rao, Renuka (23 December 2010). "Review: Tees Maar Khan is not worth even a free ticket". Daily News and Analysis. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 12 October 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Kazmi, Nikhat (23 December 2010). "Tees Maar Khan". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 9 November 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Akshay Kumar will woo Katrina Kaif on-screen for the seventh time". NDTV. 14 January 2013. Archived from the original on 22 August 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2014. "Tees Maar Khan". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 5 April 2022. "Akshay Kumar, Russell Peters' Breakaway Gets Media Attention". Sawfnews.com. 6 June 2011. Archived from the original on 8 June 2011. Retrieved 9 June 2011. "Bollywood Superstar, Akshay Kumar Superhero for his Son". Dubai Chronicle. Archived from the original on 1 October 2011. Retrieved 29 July 2011. "Rowdy Rathore gets thumbs up from critics". Hindustan Times. 1 June 2012. Archived from the original on 2 June 2012. "Barfi! joins INR1 billion club". The Express Tribune. Lakson Group. 4 October 2012. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. "Akshay Kumar gets a Grazing Goat". The Times of India. 28 November 2011. Archived from the original on 11 April 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014. "First Look: Akshay Kumar's 100th film 'Joker'". CNN-IBN. 11 July 2012. Archived from the original on 8 December 2013. Retrieved 22 November 2012. "Joker trailer to release with Cocktail". Sify. 9 July 2012. Archived from the original on 24 January 2014. Retrieved 22 November 2012. "'Joker' trailer to release with 'Cocktail'". Mid-Day. 9 July 2012. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 22 November 2012. "Akki's back in the game". Deccan Chronicle. Deccan Chronicle Holdings. 19 September 2012. Archived from the original on 20 September 2012. Retrieved 19 September 2012. "Top 5 Reasons: Why Akshay Kumar fell out with Shirish Kunder". Hindustan Times. New Delhi. 31 August 2012. Archived from the original on 3 June 2013. Retrieved 23 August 2014. "Box Office Earnings 28/09/12 – 04/10/12". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved 22 November 2012. "Satyagraha Average Opening Chennai Express Hits 200 Crore". Box Office India. Archived from the original on 3 September 2013. Retrieved 6 October 2014. Chopra, Anupama (16 August 2013). "Anupama Chopra's review: Once Upon A Time In Mumbaai Dobaara!". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 17 August 2013. Mukherjee, Madhureeta (15 August 2013). "Once Upon Ay Time in Mumbai Dobaara! : Movie Review". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 15 August 2013. Das, Anirban (28 July 2013). "Al Pacino praises Akshay Kumar's work". Hindustan Times. New Delhi. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014. Retrieved 6 October 2014. "Al Pacino's thumbs up to Once Upon Ay Time in Mumbaai Dobaara". Bollywood Hungama. 29 July 2013. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 6 October 2014. Masand, Rajeev. "'Once Upon Ay Time in Mumbai Dobaara' review: It is like getting a root canal". CNN-IBN. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 6 October 2014. "Akshay Kumar breathes fury at Once Upon A Time in Mumbai Dobaara critics". India Today. New Delhi. 22 August 2013. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 6 October 2014. Indo-Asian News Service (14 August 2013). "Once Upon Ay Time in Mumbai Dobaara: Another film to hit the jackpot?". New Delhi: CNN-IBN. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 6 October 2014. Times News Network (8 October 2012). "Once Upon sequel – first film shot in exotic Oman". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 6 October 2014. Mudi, Aparna (6 February 2014). "Zee Cine Awards 2014: Complete list of nominations". Zee News. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 18 October 2014. "Boss: Critic Review". Bollywood Hungama. 15 August 2013. Archived from the original on 20 October 2013. "Review: Akshay Kumar's Boss: All title, no thunder!". Rediff.com. 16 October 2013. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014. "Movie review: Boss is all about masala and Akshay Kumar". Hindustan Times. 16 October 2013. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2014. Bawa, Jyoti Sharma (14 June 2014). "Akshay impresses in Holiday's action sequences". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 17 June 2014. Retrieved 18 June 2014. "Holiday – A Soldier Is Never Off Duty". The Times of India. 5 June 2014. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2014. "Holiday enters the 100 crore club!". The Times of India. 23 June 2014. Archived from the original on 10 June 2015. Retrieved 20 August 2014. "Akshay Kumar's Holiday one of the biggest hits of 2014". Hindustan Times. 11 June 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2014. "Akshay Kumar sings for 'Entertainment'". The Indian Express. Mumbai: Indian Express Group. 27 July 2014. Archived from the original on 23 August 2014. Retrieved 23 August 2014. Tarannum, Asira (27 September 2014). "Akshay Kumar doesn't want to over-promote himself for 'The Shaukeens'". Mid-Day. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2015. Press Trust of India (4 December 2014). "Akshay Kumar's 'Baby' trailer released". The Indian Express. Mumbai: Indian Express Group. Archived from the original on 17 December 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2015. "Watch: Sholay style teaser of Akshay Kumar's 'Gabbar Is Back'". Daily News and Analysis. Mumbai. 13 March 2015. Archived from the original on 15 March 2015. Retrieved 1 May 2015. Indo-Asian News Service (18 April 2015). "Akshay Kumar wraps up 'Brothers' shooting". The Economic Times. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 1 May 2015. Akshay Kumar's 'Singh is Bliing' mints Rs.54.44 crore in three days Archived 6 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine. The Indian Express. 5 October 2015 Dani, Arti (2 April 2015). "Akshay Kumar shooting in Ras Al Khaimah". Khaleej Times. Dubai: Galadari Printing and Publishing. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 1 May 2015. "Akshay, Riteish, Abhishek begin shooting Housefull 3". The Times of India. Press Trust of India. 17 August 2015. Archived from the original on 20 August 2015. Retrieved 6 October 2015. Akshay Kumar 's romantic thriller 'Rustom' to release on I-Day weekend – The Times of India Archived 11 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. The Times of India. (9 September 2015). Retrieved 29 September 2015. Jha, Subhash K. (7 April 2017). "Akshay Won National Award For 'Rustom' & 'Airlift': Priyadarshan". The Quint. Archived from the original on 9 February 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2019. "Akshay Kumar Toilet ek Prem katha first look, HD Wallpapers story, star cast, released date". santabantawallpaper.co.in. 11 May 2017. Archived from the original on 19 July 2017. Retrieved 30 July 2017. "Toilet Ek Prem Katha Wiki, Star Cast & Release Date". MissMahi. 12 June 2017. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017. Retrieved 12 June 2017. "PM Narendra Modi Lauds Akshay Kumar Toilet Ek Prem Katha's Trailer; Calls It a Good Effort to Further the Message of Cleanliness". News18. 13 June 2017. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. "PM Narendra Modi impressed with Akshay Kumar's 'Toilet Ek Prem Katha' trailer". The Times of India. 12 June 2017. Archived from the original on 15 December 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. "Pad man Official Theatrical Trailer". Bollywood Hungama. 15 December 2017. Archived from the original on 23 December 2017. Retrieved 23 December 2017. Iyer, Meena. "Akshay Kumar plays the villain in 'Robot 2'". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 24 December 2018. Retrieved 15 September 2018. "Rajinikanth's 2.0 first look to be out on November 20". The Hindu. 10 October 2016. Archived from the original on 24 December 2018. Retrieved 28 October 2016. Bureau, City. "2.0 is set to go where no Indian film has gone before". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 23 December 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2017. "Rajnikanth's 2.0 vs Aamir Khan's Thugs of Hindostan – There Could Be A Clash This Diwali!". BookMyShow. Archived from the original on 23 December 2018. Retrieved 27 February 2018. "Bollywood Top Grossers Worldwide Bollywood Hungama". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 18 November 2019. Retrieved 20 April 2019. "BREAKING: Parineeti Chopra signed opposite Akshay Kumar for Karan Johar's Kesari". Bollywood Hungama. 10 January 2018. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018. Retrieved 11 January 2018. "Akshay Kumar's Mission Mangal will star Vidya Balan, Taapsee Pannu, Nithya Menen, Sonakshi Sinha, Manish Borundia". Hindustan Times. 5 November 2018. Archived from the original on 5 November 2018. Retrieved 5 November 2018. Basu, Nilanjana (10 July 2018). "Housefull 4 Begins. Akshay Kumar, Bobby Deol, Riteish Deshmukh Have A Warning For You". NDTV. Archived from the original on 11 August 2019. Retrieved 29 August 2018. "'Good News'! That's the title of Kareena Kapoor Khan's next with Akshay Kumar". DNA India. 31 July 2018. Archived from the original on 1 February 2019. Retrieved 14 February 2019. "'Good Newwz' box office collection Day 3: Akshay Kumar and Kareena Kapoor Khan starrer witnesses a good Sunday". The Times of India. 30 December 2019. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. "Akshay Kumar, Kareenaas Kapoorwell Khan'sas Good News to release on December 27". Hindustan Times. 27 April 2019. Retrieved 27 December 2019. "Good Newwz Box Office". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 24 December 2019. Retrieved 22 February 2020. "Is Akshay Kumar starrer Kanchana remake titled Laaxmi Bomb? Here's how we might know". 24 April 2019. Archived from the original on 24 April 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2019. "Akshay Kumar and Raghava Lawrence begin shooting of Kanchana Hindi remake Lakshmi". Archived from the original on 24 April 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2019. "Laxmmi Bomb teaser: Akshay Kumar film to release on Nov 9 on Disney+ Hotstar, actor promises a big blast on Diwali". Hindustan Times. 16 September 2020. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 12 November 2020. Dey Purkayastha, Pallabi (10 November 2020). "Laxmii Movie Review". The Times of India. Retrieved 25 March 2024. Torkham, Sulabha (1 October 2020). "Bell Bottom becomes first film to start and finish shooting during coronavirus pandemic". India Today. Archived from the original on 1 October 2020. Retrieved 1 October 2020. "Ranveer Singh and Ajay Devgn join Akshay Kumar as 'Sooryavanshi' shoot kickstarts". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 10 May 2019. Retrieved 6 May 2019. "Sara Ali Khan to star with Akshay Kumar and Dhanush in Atrangi Re. Shooting starts on March 1". India Today. 30 January 2020. Archived from the original on 31 January 2020. Retrieved 1 October 2020. "BREAKING: Yash Raj Films announces theatrical release dates for Bunty Aur Babli 2, Prithviraj, Jayeshbhai Jordaar and Shamshera!". Bollywood Hungama. 26 September 2021. Archived from the original on 12 November 2021. Retrieved 26 September 2021. "EXCLUSIVE: Akshay Kumar, Sara Ali Khan & Dhanush's Atrangi Re opts for a direct to digital premiere on Netflix". Pinkvilla. 28 September 2021. Archived from the original on 28 September 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2021. "'Bachchan Pandey': Akshay Kumar brings his 'Tashan' character back and the poster will remind you of a South Indian don". DNA. 26 July 2019. Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Akshay Kumar starrer Bachchan Pandey to release on March 18, 2022; new posters unveiled". Bollywood Hungama. 18 January 2022. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2022. "Bachchhan Paandey Box Office". Bollywood Hungama. 18 March 2022. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. "Prithviraj review by Anuj Kumar". The Hindu. 6 June 2022. Archived from the original on 5 June 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2022. "Prithviraj fails to pass the Monday test". Bollywood Hungama. 6 June 2022. Archived from the original on 6 June 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2022. Gopalan, Krishna (6 June 2022). "Bollywood's bad luck at the box office continues as Akshay Kumar's 'Samrat Prithviraj' drags". Business Today. Archived from the original on 12 June 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2022. Varsha (4 June 2022). "'बच्चन पांडे' का भी रिकॉर्ड नहीं तोड़ पाई 'सम्राट पृथ्वीराज', मिली 'मेजर' और 'विक्रम' से टक्कर". Navbharat Times (in Hindi). Archived from the original on 26 June 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023. Kumar, Anuj (11 August 2022). "'Raksha Bandhan' movie review: Akshay Kumar shines in this festival crowd pleaser". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Archived from the original on 23 August 2022. Retrieved 23 August 2022. "Raksha Bandhan movie review: A committed Akshay Kumar can't save this mothballed, melodramatic film". The Indian Express. 11 August 2022. Archived from the original on 23 August 2022. Retrieved 23 August 2022. Kaushal, Sweta. "India Box Office: 'Laal Singh Chaddha', 'Raksha Bandhan' Score Low". Forbes. Archived from the original on 23 August 2022. Retrieved 23 August 2022. "Ram Setu movie review: Akshay Kumar film is enjoyable desi take on Indiana Jones". Hindustan Times. 25 October 2022. Archived from the original on 27 November 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "Selfiee Box Office Collection: Akshay Kumar's Film Declared a Huge Flop, Collects THIS Much on Day 11". English Jagran. 7 March 2023. Archived from the original on 12 March 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2023. "Akshay Kumar starts shooting for 'OMG 2', shares first-look posters". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 12 March 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2023. "Akshay Kumar, Pankaj Tripathi & Yami Gautam Dhar's OMG 2 movie review". Firstpost. 11 August 2023. Archived from the original on 10 August 2023. Retrieved 11 August 2023. "OMG 2 Box Office". Bollywood Hungama. 21 August 2023. Archived from the original on 12 August 2023. Retrieved 12 August 2023. "Akshay Kumar's first look from the sets of 'Capsule Gill' leaked; leaves fans mighty impressed". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 11 March 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2023. Hungama, Bollywood (11 May 2023). "SCOOP: Akshay Kumar's next on the 1989 mining operation titled The Great Indian Rescue : Bollywood News – Bollywood Hungama". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 11 May 2023. Retrieved 11 May 2023. "Akshay Kumar admits Mission Raniganj 'hasn't done well' at the box office: 'I own up, but it is one of my best films'". The Indian Express. 11 October 2023. Archived from the original on 11 October 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2024. "Suriya shoots cameo with Akshay Kumar for Soorarai Pottru Hindi remake". Archived from the original on 15 June 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2023. "मराठी डेब्यू फिल्म में अक्षय कुमार बनेंगे छत्रपति शिवाजी, महेश मांजरेकर करेंगे निर्देशन". 3 November 2022. Archived from the original on 21 March 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2023. "अक्षय और टाइगर ने शुरू की फिल्म 'बड़े मियां छोटे मियां', 'खिलाड़ी कुमार' ने दिखाई झलक". 21 January 2023. Archived from the original on 12 March 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2023. "Suniel Shetty shares first update on the Paresh Rawal-Akshay Kumar film Hera Pheri 3". The Economic Times. March 2023. Archived from the original on 12 March 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2023. Fernandes, Vivek (26 April 2004). "Akshay Kumar: Winning hearts with martial arts!". Rediff.com. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 6 November 2014. Sahota, Baldev (3 November 2011). "Akshay Kumar's Karate-do a Hit". Desi Blitz. Archived from the original on 8 November 2014. Retrieved 8 November 2014. "Seven deadly arts with Akshay Kumar!". Sify. 26 April 2004. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014. Retrieved 21 October 2014. "Akshay Kumar back to Khatron Ke Khiladi season 4". CNN-IBN. 5 April 2011. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2014. "Khatron Ke Khiladi – Torchaar Gets Maximum Ratings Ever". Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Master Chef India Finale garners 4.2 TVRs". India Infoline. Archived from the original on 6 June 2021. "'Dare 2 Dance' to air on Life OK on September 6". Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Sanam Johar wins Dare 2 Dance, thanks Akshay Kumar". 28 October 2014. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. Maheshwri, Neha. "Akshay Kumar turns TV producer". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar to judge the Great Indian Laughter Challenge; releases the teaser". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 8 September 2017. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "The Great Indian Laughter Challenge TRPS get a boost with Sajid and Shreyas". 22 November 2017. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Into the Wild with Bear Grylls and Akshay Kumar episode: Key takeaways". 14 September 2020. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "'Into the Wild with Bear Grylls and Akshay Kumar' creates history on TV; here's how". Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar's 'Into the Wild with Bear Grylls' Episode Breaks Viewership Records". 25 September 2020. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. Ruhani, Faheem (17 June 2014). "Akshay Kumar lends glamour to kabaddi, buys a team". India Today. Archived from the original on 22 August 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2014. Press Trust of India (20 August 2015). "Twinkle Khanna's Mrs Funnybones is now a book". The Hindu. Mumbai: The Hindu Group. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 8 September 2015. "Akshay Kumar reveals what he feels is the true meaning of 'mandir'". Mid-Day. IANS. 2 May 2017. Archived from the original on 9 December 2018. Retrieved 11 March 2020. Thakkar, Mehul S (21 November 2012). "Teetotaller Akshay endorses alcohol but for 'charity'". The Times of India. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 6 November 2014. "An Akshay Kumar fan walked for 42 days from Haryana to Mumbai to meet the actor". Daily News and Analysis. Mumbai. 23 December 2013. Archived from the original on 6 November 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2014. "Rajyavardhan Rathore, Akshay Kumar discuss fitness during live Instagram session". The Times of India. 21 December 2018. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar lauds Sports Minister Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore for his fight against corruption in sports". Archived from the original on 14 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022. Singh, Prashant (6 August 2014). "Akshay Kumar's 500th live show in London". Hindustan Times. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 7 August 2014. Retrieved 10 August 2014. "Akshay Kumar sets himself on fire at the End launch, says he's a stuntman first and actor later". 5 March 2019. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "Raveena Tandon says she is friends with Akshay Kumar: I think of him very highly". India Today. 19 May 2023. Archived from the original on 22 May 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2024. Sharma, Dishya (13 May 2023). "Raveena Tandon talks about her broken engagement with Akshay Kumar in viral video, says 'He wanted...'". News18 India. Archived from the original on 13 May 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2024. "CONGRATS! Akshay Kumar-Twinkle Khanna blessed with a baby girl". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 25 September 2012. Retrieved 25 September 2012. "Akshay, Twinkle set to welcome their second child". The Times of India. 18 June 2012. Archived from the original on 15 July 2012. "Better to keep children away from limelight, says Akshay Kumar". India Today. Mumbai. 15 June 2014. Archived from the original on 22 August 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2014. Marwah, Navdeep Kaur (23 September 2012). "Over The Years: The rise of Mr Khiladi". Hindustan Times. New Delhi. Archived from the original on 27 October 2013. Retrieved 22 August 2014. "Akshay Kumar Proclaims He's A 'Shiv Bhakt' As Well As His Grandfather". India-West. 1 May 2015. Archived from the original on 9 December 2018. Retrieved 11 March 2020. "Pic: Akshay Kumar signs 'Mogul' at the Lord Shiva temple in Maheshwar". The Times of India. 3 April 2017. Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 11 March 2020. "Maha Shivaratri: Akshay Kumar tweeted the best Shiva message. We are already sending it to friends". The Indian Express. 24 February 2017. Archived from the original on 9 December 2018. Retrieved 11 March 2020. "Akshay Kumar: 'I don't believe in any religion, I only believe in being Indian'". Hindustan Times. Press Trust of India. 8 March 2020. Archived from the original on 10 March 2020. Retrieved 10 March 2020. Cheadle, Bruce (16 November 2009), "Harper goes Bollywood to sell Canada in India", The Star, Toronto, archived from the original on 13 July 2020, retrieved 29 May 2020, The sobering reminder of the entire region's often inflamed ethnic and religious violence stood in jarring contrast to Harper's next stop: a feel-good photo-opportunity in the penthouse of a pricey modern hotel with Akshay Kumar, an A-list Bollywood star and an Indo-Canadian, who brought out a huge throng of Indian media to an event promoting Canadian tourism. Harper also announced that Kumar, a black belt in karate, will be a torchbearer for the 2010 Winter Olympics. "The Q&A: Akshay Kumar, Bollywood ambassador". The Economist. Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 23 June 2017. "Akshay Kumar's fitness mantra". The Times of India. 1 January 1970. Archived from the original on 24 December 2011. Retrieved 2 August 2011. "Akshay Kumar: I've applied for an Indian passport but I'm hurt that I have to prove my nationality". India Today. 7 December 2019. Archived from the original on 7 December 2019. Retrieved 7 December 2019. "Akshay declines to be waxed!". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 3 June 2016. Retrieved 9 October 2022. Dahiya, Medha Shri (9 August 2015). "Akshay Kumar: Chandni Chowk to Forbes highest-paid actors". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 22 July 2020. "The Highest-Paid Actors 2019: Dwayne Johnson, Bradley Cooper and Chris Hemsworth". Forbes. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar Has A Historic Year". Box Office India. Box Office India Trade Network. 8 January 2019. Archived from the original on 26 February 2020. Retrieved 8 January 2019. "Hit Count Actor All Time". 15 July 2016. Archived from the original on 12 July 2016. Retrieved 15 July 2016. *"Forget Rs 100 crore club, Akshay Kumar is now a Rs 2,000 crore hero!". Zee News. Archived from the original on 17 February 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Akshay Kumar beats Salman Khan, Shah Rukh Khan, earns R 2000 crore". Daily Bhaskar. 16 February 2013. Archived from the original on 20 February 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. Baker, Steven (16 February 2013). "Akshay Kumar beats Salman Khan, Shah Rukh Khan to 2,000 crore – Bollywood News". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 18 February 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. Times News Network (18 February 2013). "Akshay Kumar creates history with 2000 crore league!". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 19 February 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Forget mighty Khans, Akshay Kumar is the first actor to earn Rs 2000 crore in his lifetime". India Today. 18 February 2013. Archived from the original on 18 February 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Akshay Kumar now worth Rs 2,000 crore". Hindustan Times. 18 February 2013. Archived from the original on 19 February 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Has Akshay Kumar really earned Rs 2000 crore from his films?". CNN-IBN. 18 February 2013. Archived from the original on 20 February 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Akshay Kumar: The sexiest man alive opens up". MSN. 17 December 2008. Archived from the original on 12 February 2009. Retrieved 26 January 2009. "Akshay thrilled to be honoured with Katana". ThaIndian News. Archived from the original on 16 October 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2011. "Akshay Kumar will be torch bearer from India for 2010 Olympics". Bollywood Hungama. Archived from the original on 27 September 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2011. "Akshay Kumar bags The Ultimate Man of The Year title at GQ Awards!". india.com. 27 September 2015. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 12 November 2022. "HT India's Most Stylish: Akshay Kumar says he was offered Bhaag Milkha Bhaag, regrets turning it down". 30 March 2019. Archived from the original on 10 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar: Actor's Brand Value Soars to Rs 866 Crores". 8 February 2021. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "Birthday boy Akshay Kumar keeps winning brands & hearts – Exchange4media". Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "Endorsement Fees of Top Bollywood Celebrities". 11 August 2021. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar to be brand ambassador for Canada Tourism : Bollywood News – Bollywood Hungama". Bollywood Hungama. 19 February 2011. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "TV ads 2020: Akshay Kumar, Virat Kohli top two 'most visible celebs'". 8 February 2021. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar bags top spot on TAM's list of most visible stars in TV ads, beats Alia Bhatt". 18 October 2022. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar ranks number 1 on TAM's list of most visible stars in TV ads". 18 October 2022. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "India's top 10 most-followed celebrities on Instagram". Archived from the original on 14 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar's fiery stunt for a new show inspires many memes". 6 March 2019. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar Recreates Iconic 'Phir Hera Pheri' Meme to Create 'Sooryavanshi' Hype". November 2021. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "PM Modi Interview | Akshay Kumar- PM Modi interview: PM talks about memes; offers clarification on 'strict' leader reputation". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar said that he interviewed PM Modi as a 'common man': 'Policy related questions would have looked fake'". June 2022. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. Dubey, Bharti; Pandey, Piyush (20 March 2013). "Akshay Kumar Bollywood's top advance taxpayer". The Times of India. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 6 November 2014. "Akshay Kumar on being the highest tax payer: 'Good to give back to the country…'". 3 August 2022. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "Organizers have called me to perform at award nights in exchange for an award: Akshay Kumar". 2 February 2017. Archived from the original on 10 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022. "Akshay Kumar on National Award win for Rustom: I've never cheated to win an award". 7 April 2017. Archived from the original on 10 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022. "Akshay Sets World Selfie Record!". Archived from the original on 23 February 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2023. "Akshay Kumar breaks Guinness World Record for maximum selfies, clicks 184 pics in 3 mins". The Economic Times. 22 February 2023. Archived from the original on 23 February 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2023. "OMG! Akshay Kumar breaks Guinness World Record for most selfies taken in 3 minutes". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2023. "Akshay Kumar reaches Atlanta ahead of The Entertainers tour in US, receives grand welcome". Firstpost. 1 March 2023. Archived from the original on 15 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. "Inside Akshay Kumar-led The Entertainers tour with Mouni Roy, Disha Patani and Sonam Bajwa". Indian Express. 5 March 2023. Archived from the original on 9 March 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2023. "Akshay Kumar". Forbes. "Akshay Kumar and Tamannaah Bhatia donates 'Entertainment' clothes for strays". 4 August 2014. What Akshay Kumar did for farmers will make you salute him! Archived 10 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Daily News and Analysis. Upala KBR. 30 September 2015 Akshay Kumar lends a helping hand to farmers, donates ₹90 lakhs Archived 19 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Zee News. Gayatri Shankar. 16 September 2015 "Maharashtra Drought: Bollywood Actor Akshay Kumar Donates Rs 50 Lakh For The Cause". ABP Live. 19 April 2016. Archived from the original on 20 April 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. Singh, Prashant (14 March 2013). "Akshay Kumar's tribute to his dad". Hindustan Times. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2014. Gupta, Priya (3 December 2013). "Akshay Kumar trains and impresses real cops". The Times of India. Retrieved 6 November 2014. "Akshay Kumar lends a helping hand to acid attack survivor Laxmi Agarwal – Akshay Kumar: What sets him apart from the Khans". The Times of India. "Akshay Kumar's new brainchild: An insurance scheme for stuntmen, stuntwomen". 23 April 2017. "If there was no stuntman, there would be no hero: Akshay Kumar". "Akshay Kumar donates Rs 1.08 cr to martyred jawans: 9 times he helped people in need". 17 March 2017. "Akshay Kumar's idea gets life: Web portal to donate money to martyred jawans launched by govt". The Times of India. 10 April 2017. "Akshay Kumar donates Rs 1.5 crores for 'first transgender home in India'". March 2020. "Akshay Kumar Endorses Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, Builds Toilets in Madhya Pradesh". 3 April 2017. "Akshay Kumar named Uttarakhand's brand ambassador for 'Swachhata Abhiyan'". 18 September 2017. "Akshay Kumar in tears as he launches his dream app for Indian jawans, see photo". 10 April 2017. "Akshay Kumar launches 'Bharat Ke Veer' App". 15 April 2017. "Pulwama terror attack: Akshay Kumar to donate Rs 5 cr to soldiers". 18 February 2019. "Akshay Kumar donates Rs 1cr towards Assam flood relief, CM Sonowal thanks actor". The Economic Times. "Akshay Kumar pledges ₹25 crore to PM-CARES FUND". 28 March 2020. "Bollywood actor Akshay Kumar donates ₹25 crore to fund to fight virus". The Hindu. 28 March 2020. "Akshay Kumar donates Rs 1 crore to Gautam Gambhir Foundation: 'Wish we get out of this crisis soon'". 24 April 2021. Entertainment Desk, India TV (17 June 2021). "Akshay Kumar donates Rs 1 crore for school building in J&K's LoC village". India Tv. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "64 th National Film Awards, 2016" (PDF). Directorate of Film Festivals. 7 April 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 April 2017. Retrieved 7 April 2017. "64th National Film Awards: Akshay Kumar wins Best Actor for Rustom, Shivaay wins Best VFX award". India Today. 7 April 2017. Retrieved 4 November 2020. "Canada varsity honours Akshay Kumar". Hindustan Times. 14 May 2008. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 7 September 2014. "Akshay Kumar gets honorary doctorate". The Times of India. 14 May 2008. Archived from the original on 16 July 2012. Retrieved 7 September 2014. "Overwhelmed Akshay Kumar dedicates Padmashri to fans". The Economic Times. India. 26 January 2009. Archived from the original on 30 January 2009. Retrieved 26 January 2009. "Akshay Kumar honoured at Annual Asian awards". CNN-IBN. Archived from the original on 28 February 2014. Retrieved 7 September 2014. "Superstars who have never won awards". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 17 April 2014. Retrieved 7 September 2014. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Akshay Kumar. Wikiquote has quotations related to Akshay Kumar. Akshay Kumar at IMDb  Akshay Kumar at Bollywood Hungama Akshay Kumar at DNA India Collected news and commentary at The Times of India Portals:  Biography  India  Bollywood