My Brother the Pig is a 1999 American children's fantasy comedy film directed by Erik Fleming and written by Matthew Flynn. It stars Scarlett Johansson, Eva Mendes, Judge Reinhold, and Alex D. Linz. A boy named George is magically transformed into a pig. In a dangerous and crazy adventure, the boy, his sister Kathy, his best friend Freud, and their housekeeper Matilda leave for Mexico to try to undo the witchcraft spell before their parents return from their Paris trip. While gathering ingredients in order for Matilda's grandmother, Berta, to undo the spell, Kathy grows impatient and after insulting both Matilda and Berta, storms off into town, where she befriends two Mexican girls who speak English and have satellite TV. Meanwhile, Freud accidentally loses George to Edwardo, a butcher. With Kathy and her friends, they try to rescue George, in the process angering Edwardo. They are able to get George to Coyote Mountain, under a full moon phase, where a potion has been prepared to return George back to normal. Unfortunately, Edwardo had followed them, just as the ritual had begun. Matilda and Berta dose Edwardo with the potion, turning him into a vulture, while George is restored back to normal. They soon return home and act like nothing has happened, except for the fact that George still has a pig's tail. Nick Fuoco as George Caldwell Dee Bradley Baker as the voice of Pig George Scarlett Johansson as Kathy Caldwell Eva Mendes as Matilda Alex D. Linz as Freud Judge Reinhold as Richard Caldwell Renée Victor as Grandma Marco Rodríguez as Edwardo Romy Walthall as Dee Dee Caldwell Eduardo Garcia as Luis Animal actors Bronco, Gloria, Patches, Piggy, Red, and Trouble portray Pig George. According to Michael A. Schuman, My Brother the Pig was given a brief theatrical run, after which it was "soon forgotten". The Dove Foundation gave the movie its seal of approval, writing, "The adventure the kids go on with their nanny to save Kathy's brother George is filled with fun and excitement." Kim R. Holston and Warren Hope reviewed the film, calling it "mildly entertaining but strains credulity". "Unapix Films' 'My Brother the Pig' Begins Principle [sic] Photography". Business Wire. November 23, 1998. ProQuest 446767894. Retrieved February 21, 2021. Schuman, Michael A. (2011). Scarlett Johansson: Hollywood Superstar. Berkeley Heights, New Jersey: Enslow Publishing. pp. 32–33. ISBN 978-0-7660-3556-0. "My Brother the Pig". Dove.org. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Holston, Kim R.; Hope, Warren (2021). Scarlett Johansson: The Life and Films. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company. pp. 27–28. ISBN 978-1-4766-7307-3. My Brother the Pig at IMDb My Brother the Pig at AllMovie My Brother the Pig at Rotten Tomatoes Review at Decider v t e v t e