Adventure Time is an American fantasy animated television series created by Pendleton Ward and co-produced by Frederator Studios for Cartoon Network. The series follows the adventures of a boy named Finn (Jeremy Shada) and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake (John DiMaggio)—a dog with the power to change size and shape at will. Finn and Jake live in the post-apocalyptic Land of Ooo, where they interact with Princess Bubblegum (Hynden Walch), the Ice King (Tom Kenny), Marceline (Olivia Olson), BMO (Niki Yang), and others. The series is based on a 2007 short film that aired on Nicktoons. After the short became a viral hit on the Internet, Nickelodeon's executives passed on its option before Cartoon Network commissioned a full-length series from Fred Seibert and Ward, which was previewed on March 11, 2010. The same year, the series premiered on Cartoon Network on April 5, and it ended its eight-year run on September 3, 2018. The series drew inspiration from a variety of sources, including the fantasy role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons and video games. It was produced using hand-drawn animation; action and dialogue for episodes are decided by storyboarding artists based on rough outlines. Because each episode took roughly eight to nine months to complete, multiple episodes were worked on concurrently. The cast members recorded their lines in group recordings, and the series regularly employed guest actors for minor and recurring characters. Each episode runs for about eleven minutes; pairs of episodes are often telecast to fill half-hour program slots. Cartoon Network announced on September 29, 2016, that the series would conclude in 2018, after the airing of its tenth season. The series finale aired on September 3, 2018, which was followed by the Adventure Time: Distant Lands specials and the Adventure Time: Fionna and Cake spin-off, which were released on Max. Adventure Time was a ratings success for Cartoon Network, with some of its episodes attracting over three million viewers, and despite being aimed primarily at children, the show has developed a following among teenagers and adults. Adventure Time has received universal acclaim from critics, with much praise for its originality and worldbuilding. The show won eight Primetime Emmy Awards, a Peabody Award, three Annie Awards, two British Academy Children's Awards, a Motion Picture Sound Editors Award, and a Kerrang! Award. The series has also been nominated for three Critics' Choice Television Awards, two Annecy Festival Awards, a TCA Award, and a Sundance Film Festival Award, among others. Of the many comic book spin-offs based on the series, one received an Eisner Award and two Harvey Awards. The series has also spawned various forms of licensed merchandise, including books, video games and clothing. Adventure Time follows the adventures of a boy named Finn the Human (voiced by Jeremy Shada), and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake the Dog (John DiMaggio), who has magical powers to change shape and size at will. Pendleton Ward, the series' creator, describes Finn as a "fiery little kid with strong morals". Jake, on the other hand, is based on Tripper Harrison, Bill Murray's character in Meatballs. This means that while Jake is somewhat carefree, he will "sit [Finn] down and give him some decent advice if he really needs it". Finn and Jake live in the post-apocalyptic Land of Ooo, which was ravaged by a cataclysmic event known as the "Mushroom War", a nuclear war that destroyed civilization a thousand years before the series' events. Throughout the series, Finn and Jake interact with major characters, including Princess Bubblegum (Hynden Walch), the sovereign of the Candy Kingdom and a sentient piece of gum; the Ice King (Tom Kenny), a menacing but largely misunderstood ice wizard; Marceline the Vampire Queen (Olivia Olson), a thousand-year-old vampire and rock music enthusiast; Lumpy Space Princess (Pendleton Ward), a melodramatic and immature princess made out of "lumps"; BMO (Niki Yang), a sentient video game console-shaped robot that lives with Finn and Jake; and Flame Princess (Jessica DiCicco), a flame elemental and ruler of the Fire Kingdom.: 346  According to series creator Pendleton Ward, the show's style was influenced by his time attending the California Institute of the Arts (CalArts) and his experiences working as a writer and storyboard artist on The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack, a series that ran on Cartoon Network from 2008 until 2010. In an interview with Animation World Network, Ward said he strove to combine Adventure Time's subversive humor with "beautiful" moments, using Hayao Miyazaki's film My Neighbor Totoro as inspiration for the latter. Ward has also named Home Movies and Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist as influences, largely because both shows are "relaxing" and feature "conversational dialogue that feels natural [and is neither] over the top [nor] cartoony and shrill". The series can trace its origin to a seven-minute, stand-alone animated short film of the same name (this short was later identified as the show's pilot post facto). Produced by Frederator Studios, the short was created by Ward almost entirely by himself, and its production concluded in early 2006. It was first broadcast on Nicktoons Network on January 11, 2007,: 24  and was re-broadcast as part of Frederator's anthology show Random! Cartoons on December 7, 2008. After its initial release, the video became a viral hit on the Internet.: 25  Frederator then pitched an Adventure Time series to Nicktoons Network, which rejected it five times. When Nicktoons' rights to commission a full series expired, Frederator pitched it to other channels.: 32  One of the studios that Frederator approached was Cartoon Network, which was interested in producing a full series, but would commit to a deal only if Ward could prove the pilot "wasn't a one-hit wonder". Rob Sorcher, the chief content officer at Cartoon Network, was influential in getting the network to take a chance on the show; he recognized the series as "something that felt really indie ... comic book-y [and] new".: 32  Cartoon Network asked Ward to submit a sample script for their consideration, but Frederator convinced him to rough out a storyboard instead, as "a board would give a better sense of what was on Pen's mind", according to Frederator's vice president Eric Homan. Ward and his college friends Patrick McHale and Adam Muto (the former of whom served as a writer, storyboard artist, and creative director for the show during its first few seasons, while the latter served as a storyboard artist and creative director for the show before becoming its showrunner) began developing ideas, all the while concentrating on "keep[ing] the good things about the original short [while also] improv[ing] on" them.: 83  The group's first product was a rough storyboard featuring Finn and Princess Bubblegum going on a spaghetti-supper date. Cartoon Network was not happy with this story, and so Ward, McHale, and Muto created a storyboard for the episode "The Enchiridion!", an attempt to emulate the style of the original Nicktoons short. This tactic proved successful, and in September 2008, Cartoon Network approved a first season, which was produced by Cartoon Network Studios. "The Enchiridion!" was the first episode to enter into production. Ward and his production team began storyboarding episodes and writing plot outlines, but Cartoon Network was still concerned about the direction of the new series. McHale later recalled that during the pitch of an episode titled "Brothers in Insomnia" (which, for various reasons, was scrapped) the room was filled with executives from Cartoon Network. The pitch went well, but the production staff was soon inundated with questions about the stylistic nature of the series. Around this time, Cartoon Network paused the production of the show in an attempt to resolve these creative issues.: 114  A number of writers and animators were let go, and in their place, Cartoon Network management hired three veteran animators who had worked on SpongeBob SquarePants: Derek Drymon (who served as executive producer for the first season of Adventure Time), Merriwether Williams (who served as head story editor for the show's first and second seasons), and Nick Jennings (who became the series' long-serving art director).: 114 : 35  Drymon, in particular, played a key role at this time, ensuring that both Cartoon Network and the show's production crew were on the same creative page.: 114  Thurop Van Orman, the creator of The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack, was also hired to guide Ward and his staff for the first two seasons.: 40  The storyboard for "Prisoners of Love" assuaged many of the fears some Cartoon Network executives had expressed. As production for season one progressed, more artists were brought on board. Dan "Ghostshrimp" Bandit, a freelance illustrator who had also written and storyboarded on Flapjack, was hired as the show's lead background designer; Ward told him to create background art that set the show "in a 'Ghostshrimp World'". Ghostshrimp designed major locations, including Finn and Jake's home, the Candy Kingdom, and the Ice Kingdom. The position of lead character designer was given to Phil Rynda, who held this role for two and a half seasons. The show's lead production crew (which included Ward and McHale) was initially hesitant to bring him on board, but they were soon convinced by director Larry Leichliter, who assured them Rynda was talented and could draw in a variety of styles.: 47  With the producers satisfied, Rynda quickly began designing characters that were simple but still fell in line with "Pen's natural aesthetic".: 83  Around this time, Rynda and McHale began drafting artistic guidelines for the show, so that its animation style would always be somewhat consistent.: 48  With many of the lead production roles filled, Ward turned his attention to choosing storyboard artists for the first season. He assembled a team made up largely of "younger, inexperienced people", many of whom he discovered on the Internet.: 41  Many of these individuals had backgrounds in indie comics, and Ward has called them "really smart, smartypants people" who were responsible for inserting more idiosyncratic and spiritual ideas into the series. For the show's first four and a half seasons, Ward served as the showrunner. In an interview with Rolling Stone, he said he had stepped down from this role sometime during the fifth season. As a naturally introverted person, he found interacting with and directing people every day to be exhausting. After Ward resigned from the post, Adam Muto became the showrunner. Until late 2014, Ward continued to work on the cartoon as a storyboard artist and storyline writer. After November 2014, he stopped regularly contributing to episode outlines, but still looked over stories, provided occasional input, and continued to storyboard for the series on a limited basis. Ward—a self-professed fan of ambivalent emotions, such as feeling "happy and scared at the same time"—has called the show a "dark comedy". He has also cited the fantasy role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons—of which many of the show's writers are devotees—as an inspiration for the show. In the United States, the series is rated TV-PG; Ward said he never wanted to push the boundaries of the PG rating, noting in an interview with Art of the Title that he "never really even thought about the rating ... we don't like stuff that's overly gross. We like cute stuff and nice things". Ward intended the show's world to have a coherent physical logic, and although magic exists in the story, the show's writers tried to create an internal consistency in the characters' interactions with the world. In an interview with The A.V. Club, Ward said the show's writing process usually began with the writers telling each other what they had done the previous week to find something humorous to build on. He also said, "A lot of the time, if we're really stuck, we'll start saying everything that comes to our mind, which is usually the worst stuff, and then someone else will think that's terrible but it'll give him a better idea and the ball just starts rolling like that". Because of the busy schedule of writing and coordinating a television series, the writers did not have time to play Dungeons and Dragons, but they still wrote stories they would "want to be playing D&D with". Sometimes, the writers and storyboard artists convened and played writing games. One game that was often used is called exquisite corpse; one writer starts a story on a sheet of paper, and another writer tries to finish it. But while a few episodes (such as the fifth-season episode "Puhoy" and the sixth-season episode "Jake the Brick") have been generated using this game,: 258, 260–61  Ward has said that "the ideas are usually terrible". Former storyboard artist and creative director Cole Sanchez said episode scripts are either created by expanding the good ideas produced by these writing games, or are based on an idea proposed by a storyboard artist in the hope it can be developed into an episode. After the writers pitched stories, the ideas were compiled onto a two-or-three-page outline that contained "the important beats". The episodes were then passed to storyboard artists (often called "boarders"). While many cartoons are based on script pitches to network executives, Cartoon Network allowed Adventure Time to "build their own teams organically" and communicate using storyboards and animatics. Rob Sorcher said this novel approach was sanctioned because the company was dealing with "primarily visual people", and that by using storyboards the writers and artists could learn and grow "by actually doing the work". The storyboard artists generally worked on an episode in pairs, independent from other storyboarders, which, according to freelance writer David Perlmutter in his book America Toons In, countered creative ennui and prevented episodes from being "alike in either content or tone".: 346  The storyboard artists were given a week to "thumbnail" (roughly sketch out) a storyboard and fill in the details complete with action, dialogue, and jokes. The series' showrunner and his creative directors then reviewed the storyboard and made notes. The artists were then given another week to implement the notes and to clean up the episode. Storyboard writing and revising usually took up to a month. Following the writing revisions, voice actors would record their parts for the episodes and an animatic would be compiled to reduce the running time to the necessary 11 minutes. Specialized artists then created prop, character, and background designs. According to Rynda, most of this pre-production was done in Photoshop. While the episodes' design and coloring was done at Cartoon Network Studios in Burbank, California, the actual animation was handled in South Korea by either Rough Draft Korea or Saerom Animation.: 348-49  Animating an episode often took between three and five months. The animation was hand-drawn on paper, which was then digitally composited and painted with digital ink and paint. Executive producer Fred Seibert compared the show's animation style to that of Felix the Cat and various Max Fleischer cartoons, but said its world was equally inspired by "the world of videogames [sic]". While the episodes were being handled in South Korea, the production crew in the U.S. worked on retakes, music scoring, and sound design. Upon being completed, the animation was sent back to the U.S., at which point the production crew inspected it, looking for mistakes in the animation or "things that didn't animate the way [the staff] intended". These problems were then fixed in Korea and the animation was finalized. From story outlining to broadcast, it took between eight and nine months for each episode to be created; because of this, multiple episodes were worked on concurrently. While a great majority of the series' episodes were animated by Korean animation studios, Adventure Time occasionally featured guest animators and directors. For instance, the second-season episode "Guardians of Sunshine" was partly rendered in 3-D to emulate the style of a video game. The fifth-season episode "A Glitch is a Glitch" was written and directed by Irish filmmaker and writer David OReilly and features his distinctive 3-D animation. Animator James Baxter animated select scenes and characters in both the fifth-season episode "James Baxter the Horse" as well as the eighth-season episode "Horse & Ball".: 299  The sixth-season episode "Food Chain" was written, storyboarded, and directed by Japanese anime director Masaaki Yuasa, and animated entirely by Yuasa's studio Science SARU. Another sixth-season episode, "Water Park Prank", features Flash animation by David Ferguson. The stop-motion episode "Bad Jubies", directed by Kirsten Lepore, aired near the middle of the show's seventh season. Finally, Alex and Lindsay Small-Butera, noted for their web series Baman Piderman, contributed animation to the eighth-season episode "Beyond the Grotto" and the ninth-season episode "Ketchup". The series' voice actors include Jeremy Shada (Finn the Human), John DiMaggio (Jake the Dog), Tom Kenny (The Ice King), Hynden Walch (Princess Bubblegum), and Olivia Olson (Marceline the Vampire Queen). Ward voices several minor characters and Lumpy Space Princess. Former storyboard artist Niki Yang voices the sentient video game console BMO in English, as well as Jake's girlfriend Lady Rainicorn in Korean. Polly Lou Livingston, a friend of Ward's mother Bettie Ward, plays voices the small elephant Tree Trunks.: 346  The Adventure Time cast members recorded their lines together at group recording sessions rather than individually, with the aim of recording natural-sounding dialogue. Hynden Walch has described these group recordings as akin to "doing a play reading—a really, really out there play". The series regularly employed guest actors for minor and recurring characters, and crew members cast people with whom they were interested in working. For instance, in a panel, Muto and Kent Osborne said the Adventure Time crew often sought out actors who had had roles in the television programs Star Trek: The Next Generation and The Office to play various supporting or background characters. When Ward was developing the series' title sequences, the rough draft version consisted of quick shots and vignettes that were "just sort of crazy [and] nonsensical", which alluded to the show's theme of quirky adventures. These drafts included "the characters ... just punching random ghosts and monsters, jumping through anything and everything [and] there were a bunch of atomic bombs at the end of it". Ward later called this version "really silly". He sent the draft to Cartoon Network; they did not like it and wanted something more graphical like the introduction to The Brady Bunch. Inspired by the title sequences of The Simpsons and Pee-wee's Playhouse, Ward developed a new title sequence featuring a panning sweep of the Land of Ooo while a synthesizer note rose slowly until the main theme was played. Ward's draft for this idea was handed to layout animators, who then finalized the timing for the sequence. From there, the sequence evolved; while Ward added "silly character stuff", Patrick McHale focused his attention on the Ice King's shot and gave him a "high school [year]book" smile. The crew also struggled to get the shadows in the shot featuring Marceline correct. After the panning sweep, the sequence cuts to the theme song, which plays while shots of Finn and Jake adventuring are shown. For this part of the sequence, Ward was inspired by the "simple" aspects of the introduction to the 2007 comedy film Superbad. When the theme mentions "Jake the Dog" and "Finn the Human", the characters' names are displayed next to their heads, with a solid color in the background. The sequence was finalized immediately before the series aired. The show's eponymous theme song is sung by Ward, accompanied by a ukulele. It is first heard in the pilot episode; in that version, Ward is accompanied by an acoustic guitar. For the version used in the series, Ward sang in a higher register to match the ukulele's range. The theme song's final version was originally supposed to be a temporary version. Ward said, "I recorded the lyrics for the opening title in the animatics room where we have this little crummy microphone just so that we could add it to the titles and submit it to the network. Later, we tried re-recording it and I didn't like it ... I only liked the temp one!" Because the series' finalized theme song was originally recorded as a temp track, ambient noises can be heard throughout. For instance, the sound of Derek Drymon typing can be heard while Jake is walking through the Ice Kingdom. According to Ward, much of the series' music has similar "hiss and grit" because one of the show's original composers, Casey James Basichis, "lives in a pirate ship he's built inside of an apartment [and] you can hear floorboards squeak and lots of other weird sounds". As the show progressed, Basichis's friend Tim Kiefer joined the show as an additional composer. The two now work together on its music. The show's title sequence and theme song have stayed mostly consistent throughout its run, with seven exceptions. During the episodes featuring Fionna Campbell and Cake the Cat (viz. season three's "Fionna and Cake", season five's "Bad Little Boy", season six's "The Prince Who Wanted Everything", season eight's "Five Short Tables", and season nine's "Fionna and Cake and Fionna") the series runs a different intro sequence that mirrors the original, with the major exception that all the characters are gender-bent, and the theme is sung by former storyboard revisionist Natasha Allegri. Likewise, the intro to the series' three miniseries are each unique: the introduction to the Marceline-centric Stakes (2015) places most of the emphasis on Marceline, and the theme song is sung by Olson; the introduction to Islands (2017) adopts a nautical theme, highlights the principal characters in the miniseries, and is sung by Shada; and the intro to Elements (2017) features imagery reflecting the four primary elements in the Adventure Time universe (that is: fire, ice, slime, and candy) and is sung by Hynden Walch. The introductions to the guest-animated episodes "A Glitch Is a Glitch" and "Food Chain" are each unique, featuring animation courtesy of OReilly and Yuasa, respectively. Finally, the series finale, "Come Along With Me", features an introduction offering viewers a glimpse of future Ooo, 1,000 years after Finn and Jake. This intro features the new characters Shermy and Beth and is sung by the latter (voiced by Willow Smith). The series regularly features songs and musical numbers. Many of the cast members—including Shada, Kenny, and Olson—sing their characters' songs. Characters often express their emotions in song; examples of this include Marceline's song "I'm Just Your Problem" (from season three's "What Was Missing") and Finn's "All Gummed Up Inside" (from season three's "Incendium"). While the series' background music is composed by Basichis and Kiefer, the songs sung by characters are often written by the storyboard artists. And while it is a general rarity, the show also occasionally refers to popular music. Early during the show's run, Frederator, Seibert's production company, occasionally uploaded demos and full versions of songs sung by the characters to their official website, and when the production crew set up a series Tumblr account, this tradition of publishing demos and full versions of songs to the public was revived. On November 20, 2015, the label Spacelab9 released a limited-edition 12" LP featuring many of Marceline's songs, followed by a 38-song series soundtrack in October 2016. The show is set in the fictional "Land of Ooo", in a post-apocalyptic future about a thousand years after a nuclear holocaust called the "Great Mushroom War".: 78  According to Ward, the show takes place "after the bombs have fallen and magic has come back into the world". Before the series was fully developed, Ward intended the Land of Ooo to simply be "magical". After the production of the episode "Business Time", in which an iceberg containing reanimated businessmen floats to the surface of a lake, the show became explicitly post-apocalyptic; Ward said the production crew "just ran with it". Ward later described the setting as "candyland on the surface and dark underneath", noting he had never intended the Mushroom War and the post-apocalyptic elements to be "hit over the head in the show". He limited it to "cars buried underground in the background [and other elements that do not] raise any eyebrows". Ward has said the series' post-apocalyptic elements were influenced by the 1979 film Mad Max. Kenny called the way the elements are worked into the plot "very fill-in-the-blanks", and DiMaggio said, "it's been obvious the Land of Ooo has some issues". The series has a canonical mythology—or, an overarching plot and backstory—that is expanded upon in various episodes. This mythology mainly involves the nature of the Mushroom War, the origin of the series' principal antagonist the Lich, and the backstories of several of the series' principal and recurring characters. Ward once noted that the details behind the Mushroom War and the series' dark mythology form "a story worth telling", but he also felt the show would be better off if the show "dance[d] around how heavy the back-history of Ooo is". After the September 2011 episode "What Was Missing" hinted at romantic subtext between Marceline and Bubblegum, fans began to "ship" the two, referring to the pairing as "Bubbline". Some reviewers also discussed the possible relationship, with Kjerstin Johnson of Bitch magazine expressing hope that that show's "queer cartoon subtext" would turn into "a queer cartoon subplot". Eventually, Bubblegum and Marceline's relationship was confirmed in the season finale, "Come Along With Me", which also featured the two characters kissing. While Bubblegum seems to have dated a male character named Mr. Cream Puff, her exact sexuality, unlike Marceline's, has not been confirmed. As such, reviewers have argued that she is either bisexual, non-binary, queer, lesbian, or a combination of some of the latter, as both live in a world where "sexuality is somewhat fluid." Much of the series' LGBTQ+ representation was the result of storyboard artist Rebecca Sugar, who soon after joining the production crew "became more aware of what we're really saying by excluding [LGBTQ] characters" from children's TV—a situation which felt "more and more dire" to her. She thus began working hard to put "LGBTQIA characters in G-rated content" in the years to follow. Zeroing in on the relationship between Marceline and Bubblegum, Sugar tried to foster their relationship. In a March 2021 Vanity Fair interview, Sugar said that she was encouraged by the "creative team to put their own life experiences into the character of Marceline," but when this led to a "romantic storyline between Marceline and Princess Bubblegum", Cartoon Network executives intervened. This moment led Sugar and the rest of the show's team to see the limit of what they could accomplish, in terms of representation. The writers initially responded to this roadblock by working queer themes into episodes as subtext to avoid controversy or network censorship, but later episodes would openly expand on these themes, bringing them to the forefront of the series' plot.: 43-51  During the last seasons of Adventure Time, there was talk at Cartoon Network about concluding the series. Olivia Olson, who provided the voice of Marceline, said that since this discussion wore on for a while "the ending of the show was getting stretched and stretched and stretched". Chief content officer Rob Sorcher told the Los Angeles Times of the network's decision to end the series, saying: Adventure Time was playing less and less on Cartoon Network, yet we were moving towards a large volume of episodes. And I really began thinking "[The end] can't come quickly as a sudden company decision, it needs to be a conversation over a period of time." And it did also strike me that if we don't wind this up soon, we're going to have a generation of fans graduate through the [television] demo[graphic that Cartoon Network targets] and we won't have completed a thought for them. Consequently, on September 29, 2016, Cartoon Network confirmed that the series would conclude after its tenth season. The final episode of the series is a special, titled "Come Along with Me;" the special was written and storyboarded by Tom Herpich, Steve Wolfhard, Seo Kim, Somvilay Xayaphone, Hanna K. Nyström, Aleks Sennwald, and Sam Alden, and Graham Falk. The story was developed by Herpich, Wolfhard, Ashly Burch, showrunner Adam Muto, head writer Kent Osborne, Jack Pendarvis, Julia Pott, and series creator Pendleton Ward. Former head background designer Ghostshrimp returned after having officially left the series during the fourth season. According to Osborne, Cartoon Network provided the writers with "an opportunity to spend a lot of time thinking about the finale" before production ended. In an interview with TV Guide, Muto explained that the show's writers used many of the episodes preceding the finale to conclude minor character story arcs "so we wouldn't have to cram too much in at the very end here." This allowed the finale itself to be "less dense" by simply "hitting the big [beats] and then finding vignettes for all the characters ... so we could get snapshots of where they could end up." According to Pendarvis, storyline writing for the series ended in mid-November 2016, with the last storyline meeting held on November 21. A tweet by Osborne revealed that the series' final script was pitched to storyboarders, with Alden and Nyström in attendance, on November 28. This episode was then pitched to the show's producers during the third week of December 2016. Voice recording for the episode ended on January 31, 2017, as confirmed by a number of cast members, including Maria Bamford and Andy Milonakis. The series finale aired on September 3, 2018, receiving a largely positive reception. Around a year later, on October 23, 2019, Cartoon Network announced that four hour-long specials—collectively titled Adventure Time: Distant Lands—would air on HBO Max. The specials aired between 2020 and 2021. On August 17, 2021, it was announced that a second spin-off, Adventure Time: Fionna and Cake, focusing on the gender-swapped Fionna and Cake characters, was ordered by HBO Max. Each Adventure Time episode is about eleven minutes in length; pairs of episodes are often telecast in order to fill a half-hour program time slot. Before the official debut of the first season, Cartoon Network aired both "Business Time" and "Evicted!" on March 11 and 18, respectively, advertising these showings as "previews" of the series-to-come. The show officially debuted with "Slumber Party Panic" on April 5, 2010. During the latter part of its run, the show began to experiment with the miniseries format. The first of these was Stakes (2015), which aired during the show's seventh season. The following miniseries, Islands (2017) aired as part of the eighth season. The third and final miniseries, Elements (2017), aired during the show's ninth season. The show's seventh season was originally intended to comprise 39 episodes, ranging from "Bonnie & Neddy" to "Reboot". However, when it came time to upload the seventh season onto streaming sites like CartoonNetwork.com, Cartoon Network chose to end the season with the episode "The Thin Yellow Line", for a total of 26 episodes. This new episode count for the season was cemented by the release of the complete seventh season DVD on July 18, 2017, which included episodes "Bonnie & Neddy" through "The Thin Yellow Line".: 159  As such, the episode and season number sequence is accordingly changed, as follows: For its first six seasons, episodes regularly aired once a week. Starting in November 2014, the show began to air new episodes via "bombs", or weeks in which new episodes debuted every day. This change in airing style disrupted the viewing patterns of some fans, as Dave Trumbore of Collider explained: "Back when [the show] was regularly airing in a more traditional schedule, it was a little easier to keep track of the completely insane episodes full of half-explained mythology and lots and lots of non-sequiturs. During the last few seasons, however, [when] the episodes started to arrive in more of a scattershot fashion scheduled around multi-part specials [it became easier to miss] the random airings of certain episodes". The series' initial run concluded in 2018, after the airing of its tenth season. Reruns have aired on Boomerang and Adult Swim. Upon its debut, Adventure Time was a ratings success for Cartoon Network. In March 2013, it was reported that the show averaged roughly 2 to 3 million viewers an episode. According to a 2012 report by Nielsen, the show consistently ranked first in its time slot among boys aged 2–14. The show premiered on April 5, 2010, and was watched by 2.5 million viewers. The episode was a ratings success. According to a press release by Cartoon Network, the episode's time slot saw triple-digit percentage increases from the previous year. The program was viewed by 1.661 million children aged 2–11, which marked a 110 percent increase from the previous year's figures. It was watched by 837,000 children aged 9–14, a 239 percent increase on the previous year's figures. Between the second and sixth seasons, the show's ratings continued to grow; the second-season premiere was watched by 2.001 million viewers, the third-season premiere by 2.686 million, the fourth-season premiere by 2.655 million, the fifth-season premiere by 3.435 million, and the sixth-season premiere by 3.321 million. The show's seventh-season opener took a substantial ratings tumble, being watched by only 1.07 million viewers. Likewise, the eighth-, ninth-, and tenth-season premieres were watched by only 1.13, 0.71, and 0.77 million viewers, respectively. The series finale, "Come Along with Me", was viewed by 0.92 million viewers and scored a 0.25 Nielsen rating in the 18- to 49-year-old demographic, which means the episode was seen by 0.25 percent of all individuals aged 18 to 49 years old who were watching television at the time of the episode's airing. On September 27, 2011, Cartoon Network released the region 1 DVD My Two Favorite People, which features a selection of twelve episodes from the series' first two seasons. Following this, several other region-1 compilation DVDs have been released, including: It Came from the Nightosphere (2012), Jake vs. Me-Mow (2012), Fionna and Cake (2013), Jake the Dad (2013), The Suitor (2014), Princess Day (2014), Adventure Time and Friends (2014), Finn the Human (2014), Frost & Fire (2015), The Enchiridion (2015), Stakes (2016), Card Wars (2016), and Islands (2017). All of the seasons have been released on DVD, and the first six have been released domestically on Blu-ray. A box set containing the entire series was released on DVD on April 30, 2019. On March 30, 2013, the first season of Adventure Time was made available on the Netflix Instant Watch service for online streaming; the second season was made available on March 30, 2014. Both seasons were removed from Netflix on March 30, 2015. The series was made available for streaming via Hulu on May 1, 2015. While in the United States, HBO Max becomes the primary platform to watch Adventure Time: Distant Lands, there are debuts of "BMO," the first special of the spin-off series, in different countries and regions in respective Cartoon Network channels worldwide, on different dates mainly in 2020; such as October 24 (Turkey), October 25 (France), November 21 (the United Kingdom), December 12 (Germany, Australia, and Taiwan), and December 27 (Russia). In South Korea, the debut was on January 1, 2021. "Adventure Time makes me wish I were a kid again, just so I could grow up to be as awesome as the kids who are currently watching Adventure Time will be". Entertainment Weekly staff. The show has received universal acclaim from critics. The A.V. Club reviewer Zack Handlen called it "a terrific show [that] fits beautifully in that gray area between kid and adult entertainment in a way that manages to satisfy both a desire for sophisticated (i.e., weird) writing and plain old silliness". Adventure Time has been complimented for its resemblance to cartoons of the past. In an article for the Los Angeles Times, television critic Robert Lloyd compared the series to "the sort of cartoons they made when cartoons themselves were young and delighted in bringing all things to rubbery life". Robert Mclaughlin of Den of Geek expressed a similar sentiment when he wrote that Adventure Time "is the first cartoon in a long time that is pure imagination". He complimented the show for "its non-reliance on continually referencing pop culture". Eric Kohn of IndieWire said the show "represents the progress of [cartoon] medium" in the current decade. A number of reviews have positively compared the series and its creators to other culturally significant works and individuals, respectively. In 2013, Entertainment Weekly reviewer Darren Franich called the series "a hybrid sci-fi/fantasy/horror/musical/fairy tale, with echoes of Calvin and Hobbes, Hayao Miyazaki, Final Fantasy, Richard Linklater, Where the Wild Things Are, and the music video you made with your high school garage band". Emily Nussbaum of The New Yorker praised Adventure Time's unique approach to emotion, humor, and philosophy by likening it to "World of Warcraft as recapped by Carl Jung". Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club concluded that the show was "basically what would happen if you asked a bunch of 12-year-olds to make a cartoon, only it's the best possible version of that, like if all the 12-year-olds were super geniuses and some of them were Stan Lee and Jack Kirby and the Marx Brothers". Adventure Time's willingness to explore dark, sad, and complex issues has received praise. Kohn applauded the fact that the show "toys with an incredibly sad subtext". Novelist Lev Grossman, in an interview with NPR, praised the backstory of the Ice King and the exploration of his condition in the third-season episode "Holly Jolly Secrets", the fourth-season episode "I Remember You", and the fifth-season episode "Simon & Marcy", noting that his origin is "psychologically plausible". Grossman praised the way the series was able to tackle the issues of mental illness, saying: "It's very affecting. My dad has been going through having Alzheimer's, and he's forgotten so much about who he used to be. And I look at him and think this cartoon is about my father dying". Critics have suggested that the show has grown and matured as it has aged. In a review of season four, for instance, Mike LeChevallier of Slant magazine complimented the show for "growing up" with its characters. He concluded that the series has "strikingly few faults" and awarded the fourth season three-and-a-half stars out of four. The series has been included on a number of best-of lists. Entertainment Weekly ranked it number 20 (out of 25) in a list of the "Greatest Animated TV Series". Similarly, The A.V. Club, in a non-ranked run-down of the "best animated series ever", called the series "one of the most distinctive cartoons currently on the air". The show has also received limited criticism from reviewers. LeChevallier, in an otherwise largely positive review of the third season for Slant magazine, wrote that "the short-form format leaves some emotional substance to be desired", and that this was inevitable for a series with such short episodes. The independent cartoon scholar and critic David Perlmutter, who otherwise applauded the show's voice acting and its ability to surpass its source material, argued that the show's vacillation between high and low comedy epitomizes the fact that Cartoon Network is "unsure of what direction to pursue". He noted that "while some of [Adventure Time's] episodes work well, others [are] simply confusing".: 346  The newspaper Metro cited the show's frightening situations, occasional adult themes, and use of innuendo as reasons why parents might not want their young children watching it. Several former storyboard artists and production crew members who worked on Adventure Time have gone on to create their own series, including Patrick McHale (a former storyline writer, storyboard artist, and creative director who went on to create Over the Garden Wall), J.G. Quintel (a former storyboard artist who went on to create Regular Show and Close Enough), Pete Browngardt (a former storyboard artist who went on to create Secret Mountain Fort Awesome, Uncle Grandpa, and Looney Tunes Cartoons), Rebecca Sugar (a former storyboard artist who went on to create Steven Universe), Ian Jones-Quartey (a former storyboard revisionist and supervisor who went on to create OK K.O.! Let's Be Heroes), Skyler Page (a former storyboard artist who went on to create Clarence), Julia Pott (a former storyline writer who went on to create Summer Camp Island), Kent Osborne (the show's former head story writer who went on to create Cat Agent and co-producer of Kiff for Disney Channel), and Elizabeth Ito (a former storyboard artist and supervising director who created City of Ghosts for Netflix). Heidi MacDonald of Slate has argued that the scouting of indie comic creators employed by Adventure Time (as well as several other Cartoon Network and Nickelodeon series) has led to an "animation gold rush" in which major studios are actively seeking under-the-radar talent for their shows, with her article surmising that "your favorite brilliant indie cartoonist is probably storyboarding for Adventure Time". MacDonald also pointed out that Adventure Time has influenced the tone of modern comics, noting: If anything, walking around [comic] shows like SPX, I've noticed something of an Adventure Time track among many of the small press comics now coming out: Where once young cartoonists overwhelmingly produced gloomy masculine self-absorption and misanthropy in the tradition of Daniel Clowes or Chris Ware, these days many booths feature fantasy epics with colorful characters and invented worlds heavy on the talking animals. It shouldn't be surprising that up-and-coming cartoonists are absorbing the Adventure Time aesthetic. A 20-year-old making comics now could have been watching the show since she was 15, after all. In an interview with Paste magazine, Rebecca Sugar explained that working on Adventure Time and connecting with indie and underground comic artists who worked on the show (like Ward, McHale and Muto) was a creative game-changer, as they told her to do what she would do when drawing comics and to not hold anything back. She argued that many of the recent developments in animation were inspired by what the show was able to do by being "very artist-driven" and allowing independent comic artists to have a major say in the direction of episodes. Adventure Time has attracted academic interest for its presentation of gender and gender roles. Emma A. Jane, an academic from the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia, said that the two main characters are male, and many episodes involve them engaging in violent acts to save princesses, but "Finn and Jake are part of an expansive ensemble cast of characters who are anything but stereotypical and who populate a program which subverts many traditional gender-related paradigms". She said the show features "roughly equal numbers of female and male characters in a protagonist, antagonist, and minor roles"; includes characters with no fixed gender; uses "gendered 'design elements'" such as eyelashes and hair to illustrate character traits rather than gender; equally distributes traits regardless of gender; privileges found, adoptive families or extended families; frames gender in ways that suggest it is fluid, and features elements of queer and transgender sub-text. Carolyn Leslie, writing in Screen, agrees, saying, "despite having two male leads, Adventure Time is particularly strong when it comes to questioning and challenging gender stereotypes". She uses Princess Bubblegum, BMO, and Fionna and Cake as examples of characters who refuse to be readily categorized and genderized. The first non-fiction book to scholarly study the series was Adventure Time and Philosophy (2015), edited by Nicolas Michaud. Published by Open Court Publishing Company, this work considers Adventure Time from a variety of angles, using the show as a way to explore different philosophical ideas. In July 2020, independent scholar Paul Thomas released a book entitled Exploring the Land of Ooo that explicated the show's production history; an expanded and updated version of the book was released in 2023 by the University Press of Mississippi. Since its debut, Adventure Time has developed a strong following among children, teenagers, and adults; according to A.V. Club critic Noel Murray, fans are drawn to Adventure Time because of "the show's silly humor, imaginative stories, and richly populated world". While the show is often described as having a cult following, Eric Kohn of IndieWire said that the series has "started to look like one of the biggest television phenomenons of the decade". According to Alex Heigl of People magazine, "The show's fandom is especially Internet-savvy as well, with huge communities on Reddit, Imgur and Tumblr, who swap GIFs, fan art and theories with fervent regularity". In 2016, a study by The New York Times of the 50 TV shows with the most Facebook Likes found that Adventure Time "is the most popular show among the young in our data—just over two-thirds of 'likes' come from viewers [aged] 18–24". The show is popular at fan conventions, such as the San Diego Comic-Con. Reporter Emma-Lee Moss said, "This year's [2014] Comic-Con schedule reflected Adventure Time's growing success, with several screenings [as well as] a dramatic reading with the show's voice talent". The show is also popular with cosplayers, or performance artists who wear costumes and fashion accessories to represent characters from the Adventure Time universe. Moss wrote, "Looking into the crowd, it was clear that [Finn's] distinctive blue shirt and white hat were being mirrored by hundreds of Cosplayers, male and female". In an interview, Olivia Olson (who voices the character Marceline) said, "Literally, anywhere you look, anywhere in your range, you're going to see at least two people dressed up like Finn. It's crazy". On November 19, 2011, KaBoom! Studios announced plans for an Adventure Time comic book series written by independent webcomic creator Ryan North, who wrote the series Dinosaur Comics. The series launched on February 8, 2012, with art by Shelli Paroline and Braden Lamb. In October 2014, it was revealed that North had left the comic series after three years. His duties were assumed by Christopher Hastings, the creator of The Adventures of Dr. McNinja. This comic book line ended in April 2018 with its seventy-fifth issue, which North returned to co-write. After the success of the original comic book line, several spin-off mini-series were launched. Some of the comic series are as follows: A separate line of comics officially denoted as graphic novels, have also been released. Books in this line are: Other Adventure Time-themed books have also been released. The Adventure Time Encyclopaedia, published on July 22, 2013, was written by comedian Martin Olson, father of Olivia Olson and the voice of recurring character Hunson Abadeer. This was followed by Adventure Time: The Enchiridion & Marcy's Super Secret Scrapbook!!!, which was released on October 6, 2015. Written by Martin and Olivia Olson, it is presented as a combination of the Enchiridion and Marceline's secret diary. An official Art of ... book, titled The Art of Ooo was published on October 14, 2014. It contains interviews with cast and crew members and opens with an introduction by filmmaker Guillermo del Toro. Two volumes with collections of the show's title cards have also been released, as has a cookbook with recipes inspired by the show, and a series of prose novels published under the header "Epic Tales from Adventure Time" (which includes The Untamed Scoundrel, Queen of Rogues, The Lonesome Outlaw, and The Virtue of Ardor, all of which were published under the pseudonym "T. T. MacDangereuse"). The series has spawned several major video game releases. The first game based on the series, Adventure Time: Hey Ice King! Why'd You Steal Our Garbage?!!, was announced by Pendleton Ward on his Twitter account in March 2012. The game was developed by WayForward Technologies for Nintendo DS and Nintendo 3DS, and was released by D3 Publisher on November 20, 2012. A year later, the game Adventure Time: Explore the Dungeon Because I Don't Know!, which follows Finn and Jake as they strive "to save the Candy Kingdom by exploring the mysterious Secret Royal Dungeon deep below the Land of Ooo", was released in November 2013. On November 18, 2014, Adventure Time: The Secret of the Nameless Kingdom was released for Nintendo 3DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Vita, and Microsoft Windows. In October 2015, the fourth major Adventure Time video game, titled Finn & Jake Investigations, was released for 3DS, Windows and other consoles. It is the first in the series to feature full 3D graphics. Another game, Adventure Time: Pirates of the Enchiridion, was released for the PlayStation 4, Nintendo Switch, Windows, and Xbox One in July 2018. The game was published by Outright Games, developed by Climax Studios, and features the show's original cast. That game won the award for "Performance in a Comedy, Lead" with John DiMaggio at the National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers Awards, in which Jeremy Shada was also nominated for the same category. Various other minor video games have also been released. Several, including Legends of Ooo, Fionna Fights, Beemo – Adventure Time, and Ski Safari: Adventure Time, have been released on the iOS App Store. A game titled Finn & Jake's Quest was released on April 11, 2014, on Steam. Cartoon Network also released a multiplayer online battle arena (MOBA) game titled Adventure Time: Battle Party on Cartoon Network's official site, on June 23, 2014. In April 2015, two downloadable content packs for LittleBigPlanet 3 on PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 were released; one contained Adventure Time costumes, while the other contained a level kit with decorations, stickers, music, objects, a background, and a bonus Fionna costume. A virtual reality (VR) game entitled Adventure Time: Magic Man's Head Games was also released to Oculus Rift, HTC Vive, and PlayStation VR. A second VR game, entitled Adventure Time: I See Ooo, was released on September 29, 2016. In that same month, Adventure Time characters were added to the Lego Dimensions game. Finn and Jake became playable characters in the video game Cartoon Network: Battle Crashers which was released for the Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation 4, Xbox One on November 8, 2016 and the Nintendo Switch on October 31, 2017. Finn and Jake are playable characters in the upcoming platform fighter MultiVersus. In February 2015, it was reported that a theatrical Adventure Time film was being developed by Cartoon Network Studios, Frederator Films, Vertigo Entertainment, and Warner Animation Group. According to reports, the film would be executive-produced and written by Pendleton Ward, and produced by Roy Lee and Chris McKay. In October 2015, series producer Adam Muto confirmed that series creator Pendleton Ward was "working on the premise" for the film, but that there was "nothing official to announce yet". On July 22, 2018, Muto noted that "an [Adventure Time] movie was never officially announced". On August 31, 2018, Muto said the finale of the show would not affect a potential movie, nor would the finale lead directly into a film. He also noted that "all the lore and stuff would not work for a first time viewer", suggesting that the film would have to hold well on its own to be successful. A variety of officially licensed merchandise—including action figures, role-playing toys, bedding, dishware, and various other products—have been released. Since the dramatic increase in popularity of the series, many graphic T-shirts have been officially licensed through popular clothing retailers. Pendleton Ward hosted T-shirt designing contests on the websites of both We Love Fine and Threadless. Other shirts can be purchased directly from Cartoon Network's store. A collectible card game called Card Wars, inspired by the fourth-season episode of the same name, has been released. On March 11, 2016, it was announced by Lego via Lego Ideas that an official Adventure Time Lego set from an idea by site user, aBetterMonkey, had met voting qualifications and was approved to be produced in cooperation with Cartoon Network. The set was released in January 2017. On July 21, 2013, Taiwan High Speed Rail and the Taiwan branch of Cartoon Network worked together on a project called "Cartoon Express" (歡樂卡通列車). The entire train was covered with characters from various Cartoon Network shows (including The Amazing World of Gumball, The Powerpuff Girls, Ben 10, and Regular Show), and the two sides of the train is painted with Finn and Jake respectively. Throughout the project, there were over 1,400 runs of the train and over 1.3 million passengers were transported. Near the end, the Taiwan High Speed Rail also sold postcards as souvenirs for sale since August 23, 2014, and the project eventually ended on September 9, 2014. In addition, Cartoon Network established a waterpark named Cartoon Network Amazone in Chonburi, Thailand; it opened on October 3, 2014. Promoting the waterpark, Thai Smile painted Finn, Jake, Princess Bubblegum and Marceline on the planes. The Finn train as seen in Taoyuan HSR station, Taiwan (2014) The Jake train as seen from Xinpu, Hsinchu near the railway (2013) An Airbus A320 (SL) in Khon Kaen, Thailand (2016) "Leela and the Genestalk", an episode from the seventh season of the animated Comedy Central program Futurama, features a cameo of Finn and Jake, with DiMaggio (who voices Bender in Futurama) reprising his role as Jake for the appearance. Similarly, the twenty-eighth season premiere of the Fox series The Simpsons, entitled "Monty Burns' Fleeing Circus", includes a couch gag that parodies the title sequence to Adventure Time, complete with Pendleton Ward himself singing a spoof of the Adventure Time theme song. According to Al Jean, the executive producer of The Simpsons, "[The couch gag] was the brain child of Mike Anderson, our supervising director ... It's a really beautiful, elaborate crossover". On the Portuguese talk show 5 Para A Meia-Noite, the humorist Eduardo Madeira, who portrayed a hater called Osório, used Princess Bubblegum and Marceline to mock the Eurovision Song Contest 2018's Portuguese contestants, Cláudia Pascoal and Isaura. In the 2016 horror film Better Watch Out, the two boys in the film, Luke the antagonist and his friend Garrett, are fans of the series, and after subduing Luke's babysitter and using drugs and alcohol, the two boys play Fuck, marry, kill using the "Adventure Time chicks" as options. Luke says that he would, "[f]uck Princess Bubblegum," to which Garrett replies, "Not Marceline?" Luke then gives reasons for his choice. Larry Leichliter served as director until the fifth-season episode "Bad Little Boy". After this episode, the term was phased out in favor of "supervising director", and the following have served in this role: Nate Cash (season 5), Adam Muto (seasons 5–9), Elizabeth Ito (seasons 5–9), Kent Osborne (season 6), Andres Salaff (seasons 6–8), Cole Sanchez (seasons 6, 8–10), and Diana Lafyatis (season 10). Guest directors for the series have included: David OReilly ("A Glitch Is a Glitch"), Masaaki Yuasa ("Food Chain"), David Ferguson ("Water Park Prank"), and Kristen Lepore ("Bad Jubies"). Since the first season, the show has also had an art director; Nick Jennings (seasons 1–6) and Sandra Lee (seasons 6–10). 282 regular, plus one special. Ten shorts (i.e., mini-episodes roughly two minutes in length) were also produced. In its first season, the series was often billed as Adventure Time with Finn & Jake because the producers were unsure at the time whether they could secure the rights to the simpler title Adventure Time. Known as HBO Max until 2023. There were 12 issues in total planned, but the project was cancelled after the release of the sixth issue. The plot takes place after the finale; there was no original crew from the series involved, so the comic is considered non-canon Whalen, Andrew (January 26, 2017). "'Adventure Time: Islands' Review: Most Futures Are Dark In New Season 8 Episodes, Life". iDigitalTimes. Archived from the original on February 25, 2017. Retrieved January 30, 2017. Adventure Time: Islands stands as the full fruition of Adventure Time's slow embrace of science fiction ... At first Adventure Time was post-apocalyptic: a far-flung fantasy future in which magic has returned ... but Islands opens a new phase in the series' science fiction storytelling by confronting the human race head-on. Sava, Oliver (October 9, 2013). "Beneath Adventure Time's Weirdness Lies Surprising Emotional Complexity". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Adventure Time has become deeply entrenched in the comedy community. "Adventure Time Has Become this Era's Finest Coming of Age Story". Vox. November 22, 2015. Archived from the original on November 22, 2015. Muto, Adam [MrMuto] (February 5, 2013). "No one currently gets the "directed by" credit. And we've actually phased out the title of creative director in favor of supervising director". Archived from the original on April 12, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2013 – via Spring.me. Sava, Oliver (September 3, 2018). "Adventure Time Concludes with a Celebration of what Makes it so Special". The A.V. Club. The Onion. Archived from the original on September 4, 2018. For example, see: Lloyd, Robert (April 5, 2010). "'Adventure Time With Finn & Jake' Enters a Wild New World". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Adventure Time With Finn & Jake, a new animated series getting its official premiere Monday on the Cartoon Network ... Muto, Adam [MrMuto] (January 2014). "For a short time, we weren't sure if we'd be able to use Adventure Time (without "with Finn and Jake") as the official title for the show". Archived from the original on January 13, 2014 – via Spring.me. DeMott, Rick (April 25, 2010). "Time for Some Adventure with Pendleton Ward". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Perlmutter, David (2014). America Toons In. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company. ISBN 978-1-4766-1488-5. Clark, Noelene (November 14, 2012). "'Adventure Time': Post-Apocalyptic 'Candyland' Attracts Adult Fans". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016. "Adventure Time | Characters". Cartoon Network. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Bustillos, Maria (April 15, 2014). "It's Adventure Time". The Awl. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2014. Seibert, Fred (October 9, 2012). "From Another Era, it Seems Like". Frederator. Archived from the original on June 23, 2014. McDonnell, Chris (2014). Adventure Time: The Art of Ooo. New York: Abrams Books. ISBN 978-1-4197-0450-5. Feeney, Nolan (March 29, 2013). "The Weird World of Adventure Time Comes Full Circle". Time. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Leichliter, Larry, Hugo Morales, & Pendleton Ward (directors); Pendleton Ward (storyboard artist) (December 7, 2008). "Adventure Time". Random! Cartoons. Season 1. Episode 2b. Nicktoons. "'The Enchiridion' Storyboards". Frederator Studios. April 22, 2010. Archived from the original on August 5, 2010. Retrieved March 29, 2017. "Best of Original Cartoons: Adventure Time [2010-2018+]". FredFilms. March 11, 2021. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved March 20, 2021. "'Adventure Time' Background Development Art". Frederator. November 11, 2008. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2012. Amidi, Amid (August 29, 2008). "Cartoon Network Acquires Adventure Time". Cartoon Brew. Archived from the original on March 8, 2016. "'Enchiridion' Props in Color". Frederator. July 6, 2009. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2012. Thomas, Paul (2023). Exploring the Land of Ooo: An Unofficial Overview and Production History of Cartoon Network's Adventure Time. Jackson, MS: University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 9781496846693. DiMaggio, John; et al. (2012). "Prisoners of Love". Adventure Time: The Complete First Season (DVD commentary track). Los Angeles: Cartoon Network. Ghostshrimp. "As Seen On Television". Ghostshrimp.net. Archived from the original on August 20, 2014. Webb, Charles (April 28, 2011). "It's 'Adventure Time' With Series Creator Pendleton Ward". MTV News. Archived from the original on February 25, 2017. They're all really smart, smartypants people. They're coming up with some really bizarre ideas, which I like. I think it's putting the show on a higher level than it was first season. Strauss, Neil (October 2, 2014). "'Adventure Time': The Trippiest Show on Television". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 4, 2014. Kohn, Eric (June 18, 2015). "Kent Osborne Explains the Crazy Logic Behind 'Uncle Kent 2' and the Adventure Time Connection". IndieWire. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Examples of latter series episodes storyboarded by Ward include: Muto, Adam (supervising director); Nick Jennings (art director); Kent Osborne & Pendleton Ward (storyboard artists) (March 3, 2014). "Bad Timing". Adventure Time. Season 5. Episode 49. Cartoon Network. Ito, Elizabeth (supervising director); Sandra Lee (art director); Sam Alden & Pendleton Ward (storyboard artists) (January 25, 2017). "High Strangeness". Adventure Time. Season 8. Episode 4. Cartoon Network. Ito, Elizabeth (supervising director); Sandra Lee (art director); Graham Falk & Pendleton Ward (storyboard artists) (January 31, 2017). "Imaginary Resources". Adventure Time. Season 8. Episode 10. Cartoon Network. "'Adventure Time' Creator Talks '80s". USA Today. November 1, 2012. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Perlmutter, David (2014). America Toons In. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company. p. 346. ISBN 978-1-4766-1488-5. Drawn from different sources (Ward cited Dungeons and Dragons and video games as his main sources, while Seibert compared the animation style to that of Max Fleischer. Murray, Noel (March 21, 2012). "Adventure Time Creator Pendleton Ward". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on March 12, 2016. "TV Parental Control". Cartoon Network. Archived from the original on January 19, 2017. Ulloa, Alexander (2010). "Adventure Time (2010)". Art of the Title. Archived from the original on March 20, 2016. Zahed, Ramin (February 5, 2010). "And Now for Something Entirely Brilliant!". Animation Magazine. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Sanchez, Cole (March 19, 2013). "'Adventure Time' Cartoon Networks Story Process". Archived from the original on August 14, 2013. Retrieved July 9, 2013 – via YouTube. Graham, Bill (July 16, 2012). "Comic-Con: Adventure Time Panel Features Live Radio Play With Audio; A Brief Look At New Flame Princess Episode". Collider. Archived from the original on March 24, 2016. McKendry, David (February 4, 2013). "Q&A: "Adventure Time" Writer Dick Grunert". Fangoria. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Ristaino, Andy [skronked] (February 14, 2012). "It takes about 8 months to create an episode from start to finish. About a week to write an episode, a month to storyboard, a few days to record voices, two weeks to put together an animatic, a week to design it, a week to do clean up on the designs, a week to do color design, then it goes overseas and takes about five months to be animated. The rest of the time goes to retakes editing and music and sound design". Archived from the original on August 4, 2014 – via Spring.me. Goldstein, Rich (December 19, 2013). "This Is How an Episode of Cartoon Network's 'Adventure Time' Is Made". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Rynda, Phil [@philrynda] (October 14, 2014). "Preproduction uses a lot of photoshop. RT @achidente: @philrynda What animation software is currently used for Adventure Time?" (Tweet). Archived from the original on December 6, 2015 – via Twitter. Ristaino, Andy [skronked] (January 11, 2013). "except for a few instances, like in guardians of sunshine where we use 3d, all the animation is hand drawn". Archived from the original on August 4, 2014 – via Spring.me. Rynda, Phil [@philrynda] (October 14, 2014). "Adventure Time is animated on paper, then digitally composited. RT @achidente: @philrynda What animation software is used on Adventure Time?" (Tweet). Archived from the original on October 14, 2014 – via Twitter. Anders, Charlie (October 12, 2012). "Neil Patrick Harris Teams Up with Donald Glover for Adventure Time's Next Gender-Swapped Adventure!". io9. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Muto Adam [@MrMuto] (January 10, 2017). "and featuring the return of James Baxter as the voice/animator of James Baxter the Horse" (Tweet). Archived from the original on March 2, 2017 – via Twitter. Polo, Susana (October 28, 2014). "Our Interview with Adventure Time's Head of Story and the Voice of Flame Princess!". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. B, Jonathan (April 20, 2014). "Adventure Time Panel Wondercon 2014". Archived from the original on February 17, 2017. Sava, Oliver (May 21, 2015). "Adventure Time: "Water Park Prank"". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Lepore, Kirsten [@kirstenlepore] (October 29, 2014). "New project in the works ... #WhatTimeIsIt?" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Adventure Time to Get the Stop-Motion Treatment". Entertainment Weekly. July 10, 2015. Archived from the original on February 9, 2017. Sava, Oliver (April 9, 2016). "Adventure Time Makes a Bold Visual Shift for its Wizard Of Oz Pastich". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Small-Butera, Alex; Small-Butera, Lindsay (July 11, 2017). "Adventure Time: Ketchup". KingOfOoo. Tumblr. Archived from the original on February 28, 2018. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Livingston, Polly Lou (2012). "'Tree Trunks' [Commentary track]". Adventure Time: The Complete First Season (Interview). Los Angeles: Cartoon Network. Perlmutter, David (2014). America Toons In. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company. p. 346. ISBN 978-1-4766-1488-5. Ward also insisted on the actors recording their dialogue together as a group, a practice rarely used in television animation. Orange, B. Alan (July 27, 2011). "SDCC 2011 Exclusive: Adventure Time Cast Interviews". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on February 3, 2016. Mumford, Gwilym (September 7, 2012). "Is Adventure Time the Weirdest Kids' TV Show Ever?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 9, 2017. Bradley, Bill (October 27, 2014). "8 Facts You Didn't Know About 'Adventure Time,' Even If You Were Born In Ooo". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Seibert, Fred (September 30, 2010). "Manlerette Party Song". Frederator. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Basichis, Casey James (2012). "'Adventure Time Music With Time + Casey' [Featurette]". Adventure Time: The Complete First Season (Interview). Los Angeles: Cartoon Network. Seibert, Fred (July 25, 2011). "'Adventure Time with Fionna and Cake' Preview". Frederator. Archived from the original on February 16, 2013. Kickham, Dylan. "New York Comic Con: Adventure Time cast reveals what's in store for season 7". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 8, 2017. Adventure Time production staff (December 12, 2016). "Adventure Time: Islands – Main Title". King of Ooo. Tumblr. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Adventure Time staff (April 3, 2017). "Adventure Time | Elements Arc Theme Song". King of Ooo. Tumblr. Archived from the original on April 3, 2017. Note: Information taken from the show's official Tumblr account; animation house and storyboard artist information are in the image's tags. OReilly, David (director & storyboard artist) (April 1, 2013). "A Glitch Is a Glitch". Adventure Time. Season 5. Episode 15. Cartoon Network. Yuasa, Masaaki (director & storyboard artist) (June 12, 2014). "Food Chain". Adventure Time. Season 6. Episode 7. Cartoon Network. Adventure Time production staff (September 4, 2018). "Adventure Time: Come Along with Me – Main Title". King of Ooo. Tumblr. Archived from the original on September 5, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2018. Clark, Noelene (November 18, 2012). "'Adventure Time': Finn Actor Jeremy Shada is 'Constantly Surprised'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 28, 2016. Whittaker, Richard (April 30, 2012). "Singing with the Ice King". The Austin Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Sugar, Rebecca (September 28, 2011). "I'm Just Your Problem – Demo Track". Tumblr. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. It might seem like this episode is about friendship, but I wanted it to be about honesty! Marceline almost gets the door open because she drops her guard and tells the truth for a second while she sings this song. Sugar, Rebecca (February 14, 2012). "All Gummed Up Inside". Tumblr. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. I was really trying to get at that feeling ... that everybody's felt at some point, right? Moynihan, Jesse (December 11, 2012). "Adventure Time : Marceline's Closet". JesseMoynihan.com. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Seibert, Fred (October 11, 2010). "Rebecca Sugar's First Board (Nightosphere)". Frederator. Archived from the original on August 28, 2013. Retrieved January 27, 2013. Examples include the following: Sava, Oliver (March 25, 2013). "Adventure Time: "Simon And Marcy"". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on February 20, 2014. He doesn't sing a parody of the Cheers theme song; he sings the real thing, and it becomes a major plot point later in the episode. Zappa, Moon [@MoonZappa] (March 4, 2014). "Thank you Adventure Time and @kentisawesome for this epic honor" (Tweet). Archived from the original on March 28, 2014 – via Twitter. Sava, Oliver (November 5, 2015). "Silliness Reigns When Adventure Time Goes Back to Basics". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. That would explain the non sequitur ending where a Banana Guard breaks out singing The Shirelle's [sic] classic pop hit 'Mama Said' after throwing K.O.O. down the stairs. Examples include the following: Seibert, Fred (October 12, 2010). "The Original Nightosphere Song by Rebecca Sugar". Frederator. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Seibert, Fred (October 13, 2010). "Fry Song". Frederator. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Examples include the following: Adventure Time production staff (November 20, 2015). "The Original Demo for 'Everything Stays'". King of Ooo. Tumblr. Archived from the original on December 12, 2017. Adventure Time production staff (August 31, 2017). "My son and I wrote the lyrics ..." King of Ooo. Tumblr. Archived from the original on December 12, 2017. "Spacelab9's Licensed Vinyl LPS Hit Trade Through Retailer Exclusives". ICv2. November 19, 2015. Archived from the original on December 12, 2017. "'Adventure Time' Music Coming to Vinyl". Modern-Vinyl.com. July 19, 2016. Archived from the original on December 12, 2017. Carroll, Bart (April 8, 2011). "Pendleton Ward Interview". Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on January 9, 2017. Lamar, Cyriaque (July 17, 2012). "We Talk With the Minds Behind Adventure Time About the Sunshiny Post-Apocalypse". i09. Archived from the original on August 5, 2014. Kohn, Eric (March 26, 2013). "Why 'Adventure Time' Is the Best Sci-Fi Show on TV Right Now". IndieWire. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. 'Simon and Marcy' detailed the evolution of that relationship while fleshing out a few other murky areas of the show's mythology. Anders, Charlie Jane (November 13, 2012). "How Does Adventure Time Blend Intense Mythology with Laugh-Out-Loud Comedy?". io9. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Sava, Oliver (March 25, 2013). "Adventure Time: "Simon And Marcy"". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on February 20, 2014. Adventure Time [delivers] an episode that fleshes out the mythology of this world while diving deeper into the tragic relationship of the titular pair. Ewalt, David (November 15, 2011). "It's Adventure Time! Pendleton Ward Talks About His Hit Cartoon". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 23, 2013. Nichols, Brittani (September 30, 2011). ""Adventure Time"'s Animated Lesbian Subtext Is Too Hot for TV'". Autostraddle. Archived from the original on May 5, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2019. Ewart, Asia (July 10, 2015). "Four cartoons that are leading the way in LGBT visibility". Metro. Archived from the original on July 4, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Johnson, Kjerstin (October 4, 2011). "Adventure Time Gay Subtext: "Spicy" or Adorbz?". Bitch. Archived from the original on March 27, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Rude, Mey Valdivia (March 11, 2014). ""Marceline and The Scream Queens" is Punk Rock and Precious". Autostraddle. Archived from the original on February 1, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Karlan, Sarah (August 14, 2014). ""Adventure Time" Actor Confirms Princess Bubblegum And Marceline The Vampire Queen Once Dated". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on August 25, 2018. Retrieved August 25, 2018. Adegoke, Yomi (October 1, 2019). "Move over, Disney! Meet the woman leading the LGBT cartoon revolution". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 7, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2020. Krell, Jason (June 6, 2014). "Finn Is Lost In The Darkness On This Weeks' Adventure Time". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on June 26, 2016. Retrieved July 27, 2020. Moen, Matt (August 5, 2020). "In Conversation: Rebecca Sugar and Noelle Stevenson". Paper Magazine. Archived from the original on August 9, 2020. Retrieved August 10, 2020. Curve Staff (September 25, 2020). "5 Best LGBTQ+ Characters On Kids TV And Why They Matter". Curve. Archived from the original on November 14, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Fleenor, S.E. (June 19, 2019). "The awesome (and unexpected) queering of Adventure Time". Syfy. Archived from the original on April 29, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Soussan, Arielle (July 15, 2019). "The 50 Most Relatable Lesbian and Bisexual Characters On TV". AfterEllen. Archived from the original on December 15, 2019. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Zachary, Brandon (September 25, 2020). "Adventure Time's Princess Bubblegum & Marceline May Be TV's Best LGBT Romance". CBR. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020.See page 1 . Romano, Nick (August 22, 2018). "From Steven Universe to Voltron: The fight to bring LGBTQ characters to kids' shows". EW. Archived from the original on July 7, 2019. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Costa, Bo (September 18, 2018). "Six Degrees of Rebecca Sugar: The Long Road to Bubbline and Beyond". The Fandomentals. Archived from the original on April 12, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Mention, Bry'onna (Winter 2020). "Rebecca Sugar Talks "Steven Universe" Success, Queer Visibility In Children's Cartoons, and Own Non-Binary Identity". Bust. Archived from the original on March 28, 2020. Retrieved April 21, 2020. Robinson, Joanna (March 5, 2021). "Raya and the Last Dragon's Kelly Marie Tran Thinks Her Disney Princess Is Gay". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on March 7, 2021. Retrieved March 14, 2021. Weekes, Princess (November 18, 2020). "Adventure Time: Distant Lands – Obsidian Features PB and Marcy Not Just as a Queer Couple, but as Queer Characters". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on December 2, 2020. Retrieved December 15, 2020. Lloyd, Robert (August 23, 2018). "As 'Adventure Time' Wraps, a Look Back at How the Series Broke Barriers and Changed the Genre". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 23, 2018. Dutton, Sophie (November 4, 2016). "Interview with 'Adventure Time' Head Writer Kent Osborne". Skwigly. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2016. Sanchez, Cole and Diana Lafyatis (supervising directors); Sandra Lee (art director); Tom Herpich, et al. (storyboard artists) (September 3, 2018). "Come Along with Me". Adventure Time. Season 10. Episode 13–16. Cartoon Network. Ghostshrimp (January 31, 2017). "Rumor has it that I will be doing some new backgrounds for the final story arc of Adventure Time!". Facebook. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved February 1, 2017. Kulzick, Kate (September 3, 2018). "Adventure Time Is Going Out with an Epic, Emotional Finale". TV Guide. Archived from the original on September 4, 2018. Retrieved September 3, 2018. Germain, Siomara (November 1, 2016). "Brockport Welcomes Adventure Time Writer Jack Pendarvis". The Stylus. Archived from the original on November 4, 2016. Retrieved November 2, 2016. Pendarvis, Jack [@JackPendarvis] (November 21, 2016). "Starting my last ADVENTURE TIME meeting in about half an hour. Bah, I say! But also I'm excited about the story! But also my stomach hurts" (Tweet). Retrieved November 22, 2016 – via Twitter. Osborne, Kent [@kentisawesome] (November 28, 2016). "Last Adventure Time handout meeting :(" (Tweet). Retrieved November 29, 2016 – via Twitter. Alden, Sam [@samalden] (December 8, 2016). "@HannaKtweet @kikutowne my board however is going to be hot garbage, ruin the show, etc" (Tweet). Retrieved December 12, 2016 – via Twitter. Nyström, Hanna K [@HannaKtweet] (December 8, 2016). "hold me tight and tell me this board will be good. rock me to sleep" (Tweet). Retrieved December 12, 2016 – via Twitter. Alden, Sam (December 26, 2016). "Pitched my last Adventure Time storyboard last week". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved December 26, 2016. Muto, Adam [@MrMuto] (December 26, 2016). "from last week's final Adventure Time storyboard pitch" (Tweet). Retrieved December 28, 2016 – via Twitter. Franich, Darren (September 4, 2018). "Adventure Time Finale Review: One of the Greatest TV Shows Ever Had a Soulful, Mind-Expanding Conclusion". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2018. Schindel, Daniel (September 4, 2018). "Adventure Time Finale Review: 'Come Along with Me'". IGN. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2018. Hysen, Dylan (August 27, 2018). "'Come Along With Me' is a Fantastic Conclusion and Perfect Encapsulation of Adventure Time". Overly Animated. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2018. Sava, Oliver (September 3, 2018). "Adventure Time Concludes with a Celebration of What Makes It So Special". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on September 4, 2018. Retrieved September 3, 2018. Hibberd, James (August 17, 2021). "'Adventure Time' Spin-Off Series 'Fionna and Cake' Ordered by HBO Max". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 17, 2021. Retrieved August 17, 2021. Seibert, Fred (September 28, 2010). "Tell Us What You Think". Frederator. Archived from the original on March 27, 2016. Homan, Eric (March 11, 2010). "'Business Time' Sneak Preview Tonight". Frederator. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Homan, Eric (March 18, 2010). "Get 'Evicted' Tonight". Frederator. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Lloyd, Robert (April 5, 2010). "'Adventure Time With Finn & Jake' Enters a Wild New World". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Staff writers (February 19, 2015). "Cartoon Network Unveils Upfront Slate For 2015–2016". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 19, 2015. "Adventure Time Islands Is a New Mini-Series Event Debuting this January". The Slanted. December 12, 2016. Archived from the original on December 14, 2016. Alexander, Julie (March 30, 2017). "Cartoon Network to Debut New Adventure Time Miniseries, Six New Shows This Year". Polygon. Archived from the original on April 1, 2017. Thomas, Paul (2020). Exploring the Land of Ooo: An Unofficial Overview and Production History of Cartoon Network's Adventure Time (Supplemental Materials). Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Libraries. pp. 271–300. hdl:1808/30572. ISBN 9781936153190. Retrieved July 12, 2020. "Adventure Time | Video | Season 7". Cartoon Network. Archived from the original on October 23, 2016. Retrieved May 12, 2017. "Adventure Time | Video | Season 8". Cartoon Network. Archived from the original on October 12, 2016. Retrieved May 12, 2017. "Adventure Time | Videos". Cartoon Network. Archived from the original on November 29, 2017. Muto, Adam [MrMuto] (June 28, 2018). "I think officially AT is in its 10th season because of how CN decided to group the episodes after the fact". Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018 – via Ask.fm. Adventure Time production staff (November 13, 2014). "Coming Soon". King of Ooo. Tumblr. Archived from the original on November 13, 2014. Retrieved August 29, 2018. Trumbore, Dave (August 27, 2018). "'Adventure Time: The Final Seasons' DVD Review: Revisit the Series Finale Again and Again". Collider. Archived from the original on August 29, 2018. Retrieved August 29, 2018. Pedersen, Erik (September 29, 2016). "Cult Hit Animated Series 'Adventure Time' To End In 2018". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 2, 2016. "TV Schedule for Boomerang". TV Passport. Archived from the original on March 15, 2021. Retrieved February 5, 2019. DeMarco, Jason [Clarknova] (January 30, 2019). "Nope! That's real". Archived from the original on February 6, 2019. Retrieved February 5, 2019 – via Ask.fm. Seidman, Robert (April 6, 2010). "Monday Cable: Pawning & Picking Good for History; "Damages " & "Nurse Jackie" Damaged". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Seidman, Robert (April 6, 2010). "Cartoon Network's 'Adventure Time' Premieres Big; 13 Additional Episodes Ordered". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2017. Gorman, Bill (October 12, 2010). "Monday Cable Ratings: Monday Night Football Up; 'Real Housewives of Atlanta,' 'American Pickers' Slip, MLB Playoffs & More". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on November 25, 2010. Retrieved March 29, 2017. "Monday's Cable Ratings: 'Pawn Stars' Tops Heated Race". The Futon Critic. July 13, 2011. Archived from the original on February 16, 2013. "Cartoon Network's 'Adventure Time' Season 4 Premiere Tops Monday Ratings". TV by the Numbers. April 4, 2012. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2017. Bibel, Sara (November 13, 2012). "Monday Cable Ratings: 'Monday Night Football' Wins Night, 'WWE Raw', 'Teen Moms II', 'Pawn Stars', 'Catfish', 'Real Housewives' & More". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on November 2, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2017. Kondolojy, Amanda (April 22, 2014). "Monday Cable Ratings: NBA Playoffs Lead Night + WWE Raw, 'Basketball Wives', 'Blank Ink Crew' & More". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2017. Metcalf, Mitch (November 3, 2015). "Top 100 Monday Cable Originals & Network Update: 11.2.2015". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on January 11, 2016. Porter, Rick (March 29, 2016). "Saturday Cable Ratings: 'Family Guy' Tops a Quiet Day". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Metcalf, Mitch (April 24, 2017). "Top 100 Friday Cable Originals & Network Update: 4.21.2017". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on April 25, 2017. Metcalf, Mitch (September 19, 2017). "Top 150 Sunday Cable Originals & Network Finals: 9.17.2017". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on September 19, 2017. Metcalf, Mitch (August 9, 2018). "Top 150 Sunday Cable Originals & Network Finals: 9.3.2018". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on September 5, 2018. "Adventure Time on DVD". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved March 1, 2017. "Adventure Time: My Two Favorite People". Barnes & Nobles. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. "Cartoon Network: Adventure Time: The Final Seasons". Amazon. Archived from the original on June 17, 2018. Retrieved June 17, 2018. Milligan, Mercedes (January 31, 2019). "Watch: CN Announces 'Adventure Time: The Complete Series' with New Theme Video". Animation Magazine. Archived from the original on February 1, 2019. Kurp, Josh (January 14, 2013). "A Bunch Of Great Animated And Adult Swim Shows (And 'Dallas'!) Will Soon Be Added To Netflix". Uproxx. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Cruz, Gilbert (March 4, 2014). "What's New on Netflix Streaming This Month: March 2014". Vulture. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Rackham, Casey (February 24, 2015). "Netflix's March 2015: 'Glee' Season 5 and 'Mad Men' Season 7 Coming, 'Adventure Time' Going". Zap2it. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Baldwin, Roberto (April 23, 2015). "Hulu's Turner Deal Gives it Adventure Time, Venture Bros. and More". Engadget. Archived from the original on June 1, 2016. "Adventure Time hayranlarına güzel haber". Mahalli Gündem. October 22, 2020. Archived from the original on December 26, 2020. Retrieved December 16, 2020. Cartoon Network FR. "Pour cette toute nouvelle aventure spatiale, c'est sur ⭐ #Beemo ⭐ qu'il va falloir compter ! RDV demain à 8h45 pour #BMO, #AdventureTime le pays magique !". Twitter. Archived from the original on March 15, 2021. Retrieved December 17, 2020. Mohamed Mir (October 24, 2020). "Adventure Time Distant Lands: BMO sera diffusé en France". Comic.Systems. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved December 17, 2020. "Adventure Time: Distant Lands Series 1 Episode 1: BMO". TV24.co.uk. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved December 27, 2020. "Interview BMO: Adventure Time: Ferne Länder – BMO". Filmzeugs. December 5, 2020. Archived from the original on March 15, 2021. Retrieved December 26, 2020. "The first Adventure Time: Distant Lands special 'BMO' premieres on SATURDAY at 3:30pm!". Facebook. Cartoon Network Australia. Archived from the original on June 3, 2022. Retrieved December 27, 2020. "華納媒體旗下頻道與App十二月強檔推薦". 熊報Bearpost. November 30, 2020. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2020. "【HBO台灣12月強檔片單】台劇《戒指流浪記》上演！《高校十八禁》推出特別篇". DramaQueen電視迷. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved December 2, 2020. "Cartoon Network - программа передач канала на сегодня". December 27, 2020. Archived from the original on December 27, 2020. Retrieved February 2, 2021. "카툰네트워크 편성표". Naver. December 31, 2020. Archived from the original on December 30, 2020. Retrieved December 31, 2020. "The 25 Greatest Animated TV Series: You Ranked 'Em!". Entertainment Weekly. July 15, 2011. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Handlen, Zack (June 4, 2012). "Adventure Time: "Goliad"". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Mclaughlin, Robert (April 13, 2011). "The Geek Appeal of Pendleton Ward's Adventure Time". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Kohn, Eric (November 13, 2012). "Why 'Adventure Time,' Now In Its Fifth Season, Is More Groundbreaking Than You May Realize". IndieWire. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Franich, Darren (February 21, 2013). "Adventure Time". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 9, 2017. Nussbaum, Emily (April 14, 2014). "Castles in the Air: The Gorgeous Existential Funk of Adventure Time". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Ulaby, Neda; Grossman, Levtitle (June 17, 2013). "An 'Adventure' For Kids And Maybe For Their Parents, Too". NPR. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. LeChevallier, Mike (May 13, 2012). "Adventure Time: Season Four". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on January 21, 2015. Lambert, David (November 23, 2011). "Adventure Time – Press Release, Box for 'It Came From the Nightosphere'". TVShowsOnDVD.com. Archived from the original on March 31, 2012. Adams, Erik; et al. (February 15, 2015). "The Best Animated Series Ever, from Adventure Time to Whatever The Zeta Project Is". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. LeChevallier, Mike (August 3, 2011). "Adventure Time: Season Three". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Wright, Alice (March 16, 2017). "A Parent's Guide to Adventure Time: What Is it about and Should Your Children Be Watching It?". Metro. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. McBride, Ryan (June 13, 2015). "Interview with Pat McHale (Adventure Time, Over the Garden Wall writer)". Crackplot. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. White, Pete (March 22, 2021). "Looney Tunes Cartoon EP Pete Browngardt Strikes Overall Deal With Warner Bros. Animation & Cartoon Network Studios". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 13, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2021. Kohn, Eric (November 1, 2013). "'Adventure Time' Writer Rebecca Sugar on 'Steven Universe,' Being Cartoon Network's First Female Show Creator And Why Pop Art Is 'Offensive'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Frank, Allegra (March 9, 2017). "Capy Games Returns for Project with Cartoon Network (Update)". Polygon. Archived from the original on March 10, 2017. Milligan, Mercedes (December 13, 2012). "Cartoon Network Greenlights Clarence". Animation Magazine. ISSN 1041-617X. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Petski, Denise (January 30, 2017). "'Summer Camp Island' Series Gets Greenlight From Cartoon Network". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 30, 2017. Kohn, Eric (February 24, 2017). "'Adventure Time' Is Slowly Going Off the Air, And Everyone's Moving On". IndieWire. Archived from the original on May 3, 2018. Milligan, Mercedes (January 24, 2023). "'Kiff' Brings Nutty Animated Comedy to Disney Channel March 10". Animation Magazine. Archived from the original on February 4, 2023. Petski, Denise (May 23, 2019). "Netflix Orders 'City Of Ghosts' Kids Animated Series From 'Adventure Time' Alum". Deadline. Archived from the original on March 3, 2021. Retrieved April 5, 2021. MacDonald, Heidi (November 2, 2015). "The Indie Comics Animation Gold Rush". Slate. Archived from the original on November 11, 2015. Jane, Emma (March 27, 2015). ""Gunter's a Woman?!"—Doing and Undoing Gender in Cartoon Network's Adventure Time". Children and Media. 9 (2): 231–47. doi:10.1080/17482798.2015.1024002. S2CID 143659358. Leslie, Carolyn (Winter 2015). "Adventure Time and Gender Stereotypes". Screen (78): 44–47. ISSN 1449-857X. OCLC 5905032712. Michaud, Nicolas, ed. (2015). Adventure Time and Philosophy: The Handbook for Heroes. Chicago, IL: Open Court Publishing Company. ISBN 9780812698589. Exploring the Land of Ooo. University Press of Mississippi. 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Sims, David (March 18, 2014). "'Adventure Time' Just Finished One of the Most Ambitious Seasons of Television Ever". The Wire. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Kohn, Eric (October 17, 2013). "Does the Obsessive 'Adventure Time' Fandom Overlook the Depths of Pendleton Ward's Cartoon Network Hit?". Indiewire. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016. Heigl, Alex (September 14, 2016). "How Adventure Time Quietly Conquered the Animation World". People. Archived from the original on November 12, 2016. Katz, Josh (December 27, 2016). "'Duck Dynasty' vs. 'Modern Family': 50 Maps of the U.S. Cultural Divide". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Moss, Emma-Lee (July 27, 2014). "Oh my Glob! Adventure Time's Upbeat Imagination Inspires Devotees". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 29, 2014. Chevat, Zoe (August 2, 2013). "The Mary Sue Interview: Olivia Olson, Voice of Marceline the Vampire Queen". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on August 6, 2013. Burlingame, Russ (December 27, 2011). "It's Adventure Time at Boom! in February". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Goellner, Caleb (November 19, 2011). "'Adventure Time' Comic Series Coming From Boom! in February". Comics Alliance. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Terror, Jude (December 21, 2010). "Adventure Time Goes KaBoom! this February!". Theouthousers.com. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved December 28, 2011. Sims, Chris (December 21, 2010). "Ryan North Talks 'Adventure Time' Comic: "The Zombies Represent Friendship" [Interview]". TheOuthousers.com. Archived from the original on May 25, 2012. Sims, Chris (October 22, 2014). "Ryan North Leaves 'Adventure Time' Comic After Three Years, Will Be Replaced By Christopher Hastings". Comics Alliance. Archived from the original on March 17, 2016. "Adventure Time #75 (Preview)". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on May 3, 2018. Polo, Susana (April 17, 2012). "Adventure Time's Marceline Gets Her Own Comicbook Spinoff, by the Creator of Octopus Pie". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. "Adventure Time: Fionna and Cake #01". KaBoom! Studios. Archived from the original on February 17, 2014. "Series: Adventure Time: Candy Capers". KaBoom! Studios. Archived from the original on February 25, 2017. Pitts, Lan (January 2, 2014). "Adventure Time Goes 'Freaky Friday' in Boom!'s Flip Side Mini-series". Newsarama. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Osborne, Kent (2015). Adventure Time: Banana Guard Academy. Los Angeles: KaBoom! Studios. ISBN 978-1-60886-486-7. Brown, Tracy (October 16, 2015). "Exclusive 'Adventure Time's' Ice King Is Getting His Own Comic Book Series". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. "Preview: Adventure Time: Marceline Gone Adrift #1". The Comic Book Critic. January 12, 2015. Archived from the original on January 29, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2021. "Adventure Time: Marceline Gone Adrift #6". League of Comic Geeks. Archived from the original on June 3, 2022. Retrieved January 23, 2021. "Adventure Time with Fionna & Cake: Card Wars Coming in July". Comicosity.com. June 11, 2015. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2021. "Adventure Time: Fionna & Cake - Card Wars #6". League of Comic Geeks. Retrieved January 23, 2021. Tye Bourdony (January 4, 2016). "'Adventure Time: Ice King' to be released January 2016". SciFiPulse.Net. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2021. "Adventure Time: Ice King #6". Comic Vine - GameSpot. Archived from the original on January 30, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2021. "Review: ADVENTURE TIME/REGULAR SHOW #1". Comicosity.com. August 2, 2017. Archived from the original on June 3, 2022. Retrieved January 23, 2021. "BOOM! STUDIOS · RELEASED JAN 10TH, 2018 Adventure Time / Regular Show #6". League of Comic Geeks. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2021. Ted Anderson. ""It's true, the series has been canceled. Issue 6 will be the final issue."". Tumblr. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2021. "Ted Anderson's Adventure Time Season 11 AMA". Tumblr. April 2019. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved December 4, 2020. Mueller, Matthew (July 21, 2018). "'Adventure Time' Season 11 Is Coming To Comics". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 22, 2018. Retrieved July 22, 2018. Muto, Adam [MrMuto] (July 21, 2018). "No. No one from the show is involved in them so they're their own thing. Calling it Season 11 feels like a stretch". Archived from the original on July 22, 2018. Retrieved July 22, 2018 – via Ask.fm. Mueller, Matthew (October 15, 2018). "'Adventure Time: Marcy & Simon' Series Announced". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on October 15, 2018. Retrieved October 15, 2018. Corsetto, Danielle (June 14, 2013). Adventure Time Original Graphic Novel Vol. 1: Playing with Fire. Los Angeles: KaBoom! Studios. ISBN 978-1782760252. Corsetto, Danielle (December 10, 2013). Adventure Time Original Graphic Novel Vol. 2: Pixel Princesses. Los Angeles: KaBoom! Studios. ISBN 978-1-60886-329-7. Smith, Zack (December 11, 2013). "Exclusive: Kate Leth heads to Nightosphere with new Adventure Time Graphic Novel". Newsarama. Archived from the original on April 14, 2016. Leth, Kate (November 11, 2014). Adventure Time Original Graphic Novel Vol. 4: Bitter Sweets. Los Angeles: KaBoom! Studios. ISBN 978-1-60886-430-0. Corsetto, Danielle (May 12, 2015). Adventure Time Original Graphic Novel Vol. 5 Graybles Schmaybles. Los Angeles: KaBoom! Studios. ISBN 978-1-60886-484-3. Goulet, Tyler (October 14, 2015). "Kate Leth and Bridget Underwood Party-Hop in Adventure Time: Masked Mayhem Original Graphic Novel". All-Comic. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Trujillo, Josh (May 17, 2016). Adventure Time Original Graphic Novel Vol. 7: Four Castles. Los Angeles: KaBoom! Studios. ISBN 978-1-60886-797-4. Trujillo, Josh (September 27, 2016). Adventure Time Original Graphic Novel Vol. 8: President Bubblegum. Los Angeles: KaBoom! Studios. ISBN 978-1-60886-846-9. Trujillo, Josh (March 28, 2017). Adventure Time Original Graphic Novel Vol. 9: Brain Robbers. Los Angeles: KaBoom! Studios. ISBN 978-1-60886-875-9. Sorese, Jeremy (July 18, 2017). Adventure Time Original Graphic Novel Vol. 10: The Ooorient Express. Los Angeles: KaBoom! Studios. ISBN 978-1-60886-995-4. Sorese, Jeremy (January 30, 2018). Adventure Time Original Graphic Novel Vol. 11: Princess & Princess. Los Angeles: KaBoom! Studios. ISBN 978-1684150250. Sorese, Jeremy (June 2018). Adventure Time Original Graphic Novel Vol. 12: Thunder Road. Los Angeles: KaBoom! Studios. ISBN 978-1684151790. Ward, Pendleton; Williams, Leah (February 26, 2019). Adventure Time Original Graphic Novel: Marceline the Pirate Queen. ISBN 978-1684153053. Olson, Martin (October 6, 2015). The Adventure Time Encyclopaedia. New York City: Abrams Books. ISBN 978-1-4197-0564-9. Olson, Martin; Olson, Olivia (October 6, 2015). Adventure Time: The Enchiridion & Marcy's Super Secret Scrapbook!!!. New York City: Abrams Books. ISBN 978-1-4197-0449-9. Adventure Time: The Original Cartoon Title Cards (Vol 1): The Original Cartoon Title Cards Seasons 1 & 2. London: Titan Books. 2014. ISBN 978-1-78329-287-5. Adventure Time: The Original Cartoon Title Cards (Vol 2): The Original Cartoon Title Cards Seasons 3 & 4. London: Titan Books. August 4, 2015. ISBN 978-1-78329-511-1. Fujikawa, Jenn (November 18, 2016). "Adventure Time Cookbook Is Tops Blooby". Nerdist Industries. Archived from the original on November 29, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2016. MacDangereuse, T. T. [Adrianne Ambrose] (2014). The Untamed Scoundrel. New York: Price Stern Sloan. ISBN 978-0843180329. MacDangereuse, T. T. [Leigh Dragoon] (2014). Queen of Rogues. New York: Price Stern Sloan. ISBN 978-0843180350. MacDangereuse, T. T. [Leigh Dragoon] (2015). The Lonesome Outlaw. New York: Price Stern Sloan. ISBN 978-0843183108. MacDangereuse, T. T. [Leigh Dragoon] (2016). The Virtue of Ardor. New York: Price Stern Sloan. ISBN 9781101995129. Pendleton, Ward [@buenothebear] (March 23, 2012). "The Adventure Time DS game will release later this year sometime  I'm gonna be working on it with @wayforwardtech" (Tweet). Archived from the original on March 29, 2017 – via Twitter. "Adventure Time Heading to Nintendo DS Later This Year". Nintendo World Report. March 23, 2012. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Seibert, Fred (May 8, 2012). "Adventure Time Art". Frederator. Archived from the original on May 11, 2012. Drake, Audrey (May 14, 2013). "New Adventure Time Game Announced". IGN. Archived from the original on February 18, 2015. "Adventure Time: The Secret of the Nameless Kingdom". IGN. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. Schuler, Erich (April 21, 2015). "Enter the Third Dimension with the New Adventure Time Game". IGN. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. "Adventure Time: Pirates of the Enchiridion Is Sailing Onto Switch in Spring 2018". Nintendo Life. December 14, 2017. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved January 30, 2018. Good, Owen S. (December 16, 2017). "Adventure Time Open-World Game Comes to Consoles and PC Next Year". Polygon. Archived from the original on December 23, 2017. "Nominee List for 2018". National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. February 11, 2019. Archived from the original on February 13, 2019. Retrieved February 20, 2019. "Winner list for 2018: God of War breaks record". National Academy of Video Game Trade Reviewers. March 13, 2019. Archived from the original on March 14, 2019. Retrieved March 14, 2019. "Mobile Games". Cartoon Network. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Parrish, Peter (April 11, 2014). "Adventure Time Game Finn and Jake's Epic Quest Appears on Steam". PC Invasion. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. "Play 'Adventure Time' Battle Party". Cartoon Network. Archived from the original on July 13, 2014. "LBP 3 Gets Adventure Time Level Kit and Costume Pack". Shop To. April 29, 2015. Archived from the original on June 12, 2016. Hayden, Scott (February 1, 2016). "'Adventure Time' Game Coming Soon to All Major VR Headsets". Road to VR. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Loveridge, Sam (September 29, 2016). "You Have to Try This Adventure Time Google Cardboard Game". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Totilo, Stephen (June 9, 2016). "Sonic, E.T., Gollum, Batman and Adventure Time Are All Going To be In The Same Video Game". Kotaku. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Martin, Liam (June 6, 2016). "Are Sonic the Hedgehog, Harry Potter and Rebooted Ghostbusters All Coming to Lego Dimensions?". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Brown, Ryan (November 14, 2016). "Cartoon Network: Battle Crashers review: a repetitive, dull game that ignores the cartoons it's based on". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on September 25, 2017. Mason, Matthew (November 7, 2017). "Cartoon Network: Battle Crashers Review". Nintendo Life. Archived from the original on January 25, 2019. McWhertor, Michael (November 18, 2021). "New fighter MultiVersus is Smash Bros. but with Bugs Bunny, Batman, and Game of Thrones". Polygon. Archived from the original on November 19, 2021. Retrieved November 18, 2021. Busch, Anita (February 27, 2015). "Cartoon Network's 'Adventure Time' Heads To Big Screen At Warner Bros". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 26, 2015. "Warner Bros. to produce 'Adventure Time' film". ABS-CBN News. February 28, 2015. Archived from the original on March 15, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2019. Frank, Allegra (October 9, 2015). "Adventure Time Creator Working on Movie, but Nothing Official Yet". Polygon. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. Muto, Adam [MrMuto] (July 22, 2018). "An AT movie was never officially announced". Archived from the original on July 23, 2018. Retrieved July 23, 2018 – via Ask.fm. Radulovic, Petrana (August 31, 2018). "Adventure Time's Finale Doesn't Impact the Rumored Movie, Says Showrunner". Polygon. Archived from the original on February 14, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2019. For a small selection of the many objects, see: "Adventure Time". Cartoon Network. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved March 7, 2017. Goellner, Caleb (August 16, 2011). "Jazwares Rolls Out 'Adventure Time' Toy Images". Comics Alliance. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. "Adventure Time Splat Ball Figure – Jake". Toys R Us. Archived from the original on June 27, 2013. "Adventure Time". Funko. Archived from the original on January 6, 2016. "Mugs & Dishware". Cartoon Network. Archived from the original on January 15, 2016. "Adventure Time Shirts". Hot Topic. Archived from the original on October 8, 2015. "Adventure Time". We Love Fine. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. "Adventure Time T-Shirt Design Challenge". Threadless. Archived from the original on July 2, 2012. "Adventure Time Design Contest". We Love Fine. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. "Shirts – Adventure Time". Cartoon Network. Archived from the original on February 24, 2017. Retrieved January 27, 2013. "Adventure Time Card Wars Princess Bubblegum vs. Lumpy Space Princess". Cryptozoic Entertainment. Archived from the original on August 3, 2014. "Lego Ideas Second 2015 Review Results". Lego Ideas. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved March 14, 2016. "Lego Adventure Time Building Set on the Way". Licensing.biz. Archived from the original on March 16, 2016. Retrieved March 14, 2016. Fox, Sarah (June 21, 2016). "Adventure Time Lego Set on the Way". The Slanted. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. "台灣高鐵歡樂卡通列車". Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved February 2, 2021. "Cartoon Network brands Taiwan train". Toy World magazine. July 24, 2013. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2021. A video of full view of all 12 trains: "台灣高鐵歡樂卡通列車12節車廂全入鏡. Taiwan High Speed Rail x Cartoon Network Theme Train". YouTube. July 24, 2013. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2020. "歡樂卡通列車說掰掰 高鐵中秋疏運再加開！". MOOK景點家. August 25, 2014. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved January 28, 2021. "老皮要跟大家說再見了！高鐵卡通列車9月9日回歸原貌". ETtoday旅遊雲. August 22, 2014. Archived from the original on March 15, 2021. Retrieved January 28, 2021. "World's First Cartoon Network Amazone Waterpark Opens on October 3, 2014". Archived from the original on August 6, 2018. Retrieved February 2, 2021. "Branded Planes and Trains for Cartoon Network Amazone". Blooloop. December 9, 2014. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021. Retrieved January 28, 2021. Hernandez, Patricia (August 8, 2013). "Watch Futurama Make Fun of Adventure Time In Last Night's Episode". Kotaku. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016. Swift, Andy (September 23, 2016). "The Simpsons Meets Adventure Time in Season Premiere Couch Gag—Watch". TVLine. Archived from the original on November 5, 2016. Carrilho, Nuno. "[VÍDEO] Portugal: '5 Para a Meia Noite' dedicado ao Festival da Canção" (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2018. "Osório acusa as vencedoras do Festival da Canção 2018 de plágio | 5 Para a Meia-Noite | RTP". YouTube (in Portuguese). RTP. Archived from the original on March 15, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2018. Duralde, Alonso (October 3, 2017). "Better Watch Out Review: Holiday Horror Comedy Plays Like Home Alone with a Body Count". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 22, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2021. Kerr, Rose (October 8, 2017). "Better Watch Out". Spectrum Culture. Archived from the original on December 22, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2021. Adventure Time at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Archive of Frederator's blog Adventure Time on Cartoon Network Adventure Time at IMDb Portals:  Cartoon Network  Animation  Cartoon  Television  United States