Inappropriate Comedy (stylized as inAPPropriate Comedy) is a 2013 American satirical sketch comedy film directed by Vince Offer. It stars Ari Shaffir (who also co-wrote), Rob Schneider, Michelle Rodriguez, Adrien Brody and Lindsay Lohan, and was released on March 22, 2013. The film was originally envisioned as a sequel to Offer's previous anthology, The Underground Comedy Movie, and called Underground Comedy 2010. Trailers for Underground Comedy 2010 were released to TV and the internet before the film being billed as Inappropriate Comedy. It is also a partial remake of Offer's previous film, recycling the sketches "Flirty Harry" and "Sushi Mama". The film was a critical and commercial failure, with some critics comparing it to the (itself critically panned) Movie 43. The framing device has Vince Offer pressing buttons on his tablet computer that open offensive applications. Psychology World A psychologist (Rob Schneider) has a session with a sex-obsessed young woman (Noelle Kenney) who wants to change. She shows him the pills that "make her wild". He takes them and passes out on the floor. Flirty Harry Flirty Harry (Adrien Brody) is a cop who, with his repertoire of frequently homoerotic double entendres, patrols the streets of San Francisco. Blackass A Jackass spoof, where Vondell (Da'Vone McDonald), Murphay (Calvin Sykes), Swade (Thai Edwards), Darnell (Chalant Phifer), and Acquon (Ashton Jordaan Ruiz) are five African American guys who go about their days causing trouble. The Porno Review J.D. (Rob Schneider), Harriet (Michelle Rodriguez), and Bob (Jonathan Spencer) (who spends most of the time masturbating) host an At the Movies-style film review series that showcases pornographic films, including the dubbed Asian film "Sushi Mama" and a homosexual parody of Swan Lake known as Sperm Lake. Things You'll Never See A beautiful young woman (Kiersten Hall) dating an old poor man (Anthony Russell). Above the Grate Lindsay Lohan stands on an air vent much like Marilyn Monroe's famous scene from The Seven Year Itch while a man (Vince Offer) watches her from underneath. The Amazing Racist A spoof of The Amazing Race. Ari Shaffir and his cameraman go around the city showcasing extremely racist and offensive stereotypes against Asians, African Americans, Arabs, Hispanics and Jews. It is heavily implied that all of Shaffir's doings were not rehearsed and done to random people on the street. Psychology World Rob Schneider as Psychologist Noelle Kenney as Patient Flirty Harry Adrien Brody as Flirty Harry Jonathan Spencer as Lt. O'Flanagan Rick Chambers as Captain Andrea Lwin as Beautician Blackass Da'Vone McDonald as Vondell Calvin Sykes as Murphay Thai Edwards as Swade Chalant Phifer as Darnell Ashton Jordaan Ruiz as Acquon Jessie Usher as Jamal Caroline Rich as Cindi The Porno Review Rob Schneider as J.D. Michelle Rodriguez as Harriet Jonathan Spencer as Bob Isaac Cheung as Sushi Papa Jia Perlich as Sushi Mama Christopher Kosek as Hillbilly Things You'll Never See Kiersten Hall as Beautiful girl Anthony Russell as Old man Above the Grate Lindsay Lohan as herself Kenneth and Sasha Mayer as Kissing couple Under the Grate Theo Von as Mountain climber Vince Offer as Peeping Tom The Amazing Racist Ari Shaffir as The Amazing Racist Dante as The Racist Assistant Lohan's scenes were shot in 2010 for Underground Comedy 2010, a production that would have mixed newly filmed sketches with sketches from the original 1997 production of The Underground Comedy Movie. The alcohol-detecting ankle monitor she was ordered to wear after she failed to show up for a court hearing is clearly visible as she stands on the street grate. A trailer for Underground Comedy 2010 was released in August of that year. The project was eventually expanded to a fully new feature film with the production of additional new sketches. Ari Shaffir's segment mixed footage with unknowing collaborators and staged action, mostly using the same people brought back "to do a little extra so we can build a story or get me some comeuppance". The film was directed by Vince Offer, who also directed The Underground Comedy Movie and, between the two films, became better known for his infomercial sales pitches (his best known product being the ShamWow absorbent towel). InAPPropriate Comedy was called “worse than Movie 43” by The Hollywood Reporter. Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 0%, based on 5 reviews. At Metacritic, it holds a score of 1 out of 100, based on 5 reviews, meaning “overwhelming dislike”. It is tied with 10 Rules for Sleeping Around, Chaos, Bio-Dome, Not Cool, The Singing Forest, The Garbage Pail Kids Movie, Death of a Nation, Hardbodies, and United Passions as the worst reviewed film on the site. Lohan was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actress for her performance in the film (also for Scary Movie 5), but lost to Kim Kardashian for Temptation: Confessions of a Marriage Counselor. The film earned $172,000 from 275 theaters, for a location average of $625 in its opening weekend. "InAPPropriate Comedy (2013)". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. "InAPPropriate Comedy Trailer, News, Videos, and Reviews". ComingSoon.net. March 22, 2013. Archived from the original on June 3, 2013. Retrieved July 24, 2013. "Lindsay Lohan takes on iconic Marilyn Monroe pose for 'InAPPropriate Comedy'". Fox News. January 8, 2013. Retrieved July 24, 2013. Someone Thought It Was a Good Idea to Spend Money On This, Rope of Silicon "Underground Comedy 2010 Trailer with Lindsay Lohan". The Daily Beast. August 2, 2010. Retrieved May 26, 2020. "InAPPropriate Comedy: Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. March 22, 2013. inAPPropriate Comedy is where laughs go to die inAPPropriate Comedy is where laughs go to die Ari Shaffir on co-writing and starring in “InAPPropriate Comedy” T.H.R. staff (March 22, 2013). "InAPPropriate Comedy: Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. The Bottom Line: This painfully unfunny assemblage of would-be comedy sketches manages to make Movie 43 look good in retrospect. "InAPPropriate Comedy (2013)". Rotten Tomatoes. Flixster. "InAPPropriate Comedy". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Pamela McClintock (March 24, 2013). "Box Office Report: 'Croods' Opens to Solid $44.7 Million; 'Olympus Has Fallen' Nabs $30.5 Million". The Hollywood Reporter. Lee, Stephan (March 24, 2013). "Box office disaster: Lindsay Lohan film 'InAPPropriate Comedy,' directed by the ShamWow guy, earns $625 per theater | Inside Movies | EW.com". Insidemovies.ew.com. Retrieved July 24, 2013. Wikiquote has quotations related to Inappropriate Comedy. inAPPropriate Comedy at IMDb inAPPropriate Comedy at Box Office Mojo inAPPropriate Comedy at Rotten Tomatoes inAPPropriate Comedy at Metacritic