Along Came Polly is a 2004 American romantic comedy film written and directed by John Hamburg and starring Ben Stiller and Jennifer Aniston. The story follows Reuben Feffer who finds his life taking a different turn when he reconnects and falls in love with his old classmate, Polly. Chaos ensues when his former wife, Lisa, returns to reconcile with him. The film was released on January 16, 2004. It received mixed reviews and grossed $178 million worldwide. Reuben Feffer, a risk-averse actuary for a large life insurance company, is celebrating his honeymoon with his new wife, Lisa Kramer, on the island of St. Barts, but catches her having sex with Claude, a French scuba instructor. Lisa claims to be in love with Claude and chooses to stay on St. Barts with him. Ruben returns home to New York alone and attempts to piece his life back together. While at an art gallery with his friend, Sandy Lyle, he runs into former Middle school classmate Polly Prince. Reuben asks Polly out and she invites him to dinner at a Moroccan restaurant, which he agrees to despite having irritable bowel syndrome. The date ends badly when Reuben clogs Polly's toilet, but she gives him a second chance and the two go salsa dancing together. Polly dances provocatively with her friend Javier, and Reuben admits to being uncomfortable, explaining that he actually hates spicy food and generally avoids "risky" behaviors that she clearly enjoys. Despite this, Polly takes him home and they have sex. Polly and Reuben continue to see each other regularly, and Reuben finds himself challenged by Polly to experience new things as well as by Leland Van Lew, an adventurous CEO who wants Reuben's company to insure him so that he can maintain control of his company. Reuben also asks Javier to teach him to dance salsa, which allows him to surprise and charm Polly when they return to the salsa club. When Lisa returns hoping to reconcile with Reuben, Polly is spooked by Reuben referring to her as his girlfriend. Reuben is torn between the free spirited but noncommittal Polly and the safe and familiar Lisa. He enters information about them both into a computer insurance program which measures risk, but tilts the program towards Polly. The computer tells him that, despite his numerous blunders with her, she is the least risky choice for Reuben. Van Lew brings Reuben and Polly along on a sailing trip. As the two of them take shelter below deck during a storm, Polly discovers the risk assessment and argues with Reuben. She rejects his proposal to move in together, telling him that he would be better off going back to Lisa. Back home, Reuben is despondent over losing Polly and invites Lisa to Sandy's opening show, where he learns that Polly is leaving New York in a few hours and at the same time is urgently called into work to give his risk analysis presentation on Van Lew. After a speech given by his father, Irving, to Sandy about not living in the past, Reuben realizes he wants to be with Polly and not Lisa, and he rushes to her apartment to stop her from leaving. Meanwhile, Sandy fills in for Reuben for his risk analysis presentation on Leland and successfully convinces the board to insure him. Reuben catches up with Polly and tries to persuade her to stay. She still isn't sure they're compatible, so he eats food off the ground to prove he is capable of taking risks. Polly is finally convinced and ends up dating Reuben, but they both agree they will take their relationship step-by-step and not rush into marriage. A year later, Reuben and Polly vacation on the same beach in St. Bart's. It's clear that he has loosened up more, while Polly has become more comfortable with commitment. They encounter Claude, but instead of being angry, he thanks him for setting off the course of events that led him here before heading nude into the water with Polly to join Leland on his new boat. Ben Stiller as Reuben Feffer Jennifer Aniston as Polly Prince Philip Seymour Hoffman as Sandford "Sandy" Lyle Debra Messing as Lisa Kramer Hank Azaria as Claude Bryan Brown as Leland Van Lew Alec Baldwin as Stanley "Stan" Indursky Michele Lee as Vivian Feffer Bob Dishy as Irving Feffer Missi Pyle as Roxanne Jsu Garcia as Javier Judah Friedlander as Dustin Kevin Hart as Vic Masi Oka as Wonsuk Kym Whitley as Gladys Cheryl Hines as the Catering Manager Todd Stashwick as the Security Officer Christine Barger as the JCS Singer/Mary Magdalene Along Came Polly opened at #1 at the box office in the United States, earning US$27,721,185 in its opening weekend, ending the month long reign of The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King. The film was released in the United Kingdom on February 27, 2004, and topped the country's box office for the next two weekends. The film was a financial success, making $178 million at the box office worldwide off a $42 million budget. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a score of 27% based on 163 reviews, with an average rating of 4.8/10. The site's critics consensus reads, "Though the supporting actors are funny, Stiller and Aniston don't make a believable couple, and the gross out humor is gratuitous." Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 44 out of 100 based on 35 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale. All tracks are written by Theodore Shapiro "Along Came Polly". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 9, 2021. Kaufman, Gil (January 20, 2004). "'Along Came Polly' ... And Down Went The 'King'". MTV Movie News. Retrieved 2011-05-25. "Weekend box office 27th February 2004 - 29th February 2004". www.25thframe.co.uk. Retrieved 19 August 2020. "Weekend box office 5th March 2004 - 7th March 2004". www.25thframe.co.uk. Retrieved 19 August 2020. "Along Came Polly". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 9, 2021. "Along Came Polly (2004)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved July 7, 2023. Along Came Polly, retrieved 2018-05-13 "Find CinemaScore" (Type "Polly" in the search box). CinemaScore. Retrieved September 2, 2022. Along Came Polly at IMDb Along Came Polly at AllMovie Along Came Polly at Box Office Mojo