Derailed is a 2005 American crime thriller film based on the novel of the same name by James Siegel. The film was directed by Mikael Håfström and stars Clive Owen, Jennifer Aniston, Vincent Cassel, Giancarlo Esposito, David Morrissey, RZA and Xzibit. The story is based on the Badger Game con. This was the first film to be released by The Weinstein Company in the United States. Chicago advertising executive Charles Schine lives with his wife Deanna and their daughter Amy, who suffers from type 1 diabetes, which requires expensive medication. On a commuter train to work one morning, Charles meets Lucinda Harris, a financial advisor who is also married with a daughter. A mutual attraction develops and the two begin meeting frequently. They soon decide to consummate their affair in a run-down hotel. As Lucinda is unzipping Charles' pants, they are interrupted by an armed man who beats Charles and brutally rapes Lucinda. Not wanting their spouses to learn of their affair, Charles and Lucinda agree not to report the crime and then go their separate ways. Days later, the man, who identifies himself as Philippe LaRoche, contacts Charles and threatens to kill his family if he does not pay him $20,000. A month later, LaRoche calls again, this time demanding $100,000. Charles explains his situation to his work colleague Winston, an ex-con who works as a repairman in his building. Winston offers to scare off LaRoche for ten percentage of the payout. Charles embezzles $10,000 from his company and he and Winston plot to get the drop on LaRoche at his specified meeting location. However, LaRoche surprises him, shoots Winston dead and takes the money. Charles disposes of Winston's body and gives a false alibi when questioned by Detective Franklin Church. Charles later receives a call from LaRoche; he is holding Lucinda hostage and will kill her if he does not deliver the $100,000. Charles takes the money from an account meant for his daughter's medical treatment and makes the payoff to LaRoche and his partner Dexter. Charles then visits Lucinda at work and discovers she is actually called Jane, who worked there briefly as a temp. He goes to Jane's apartment, which is being shown to prospective renters, and finds that Jane's photograph of her supposed daughter is actually a cut-out of a stock picture from a brochure. Charles tracks Jane down and sees her kissing LaRoche, learning she was in on the scam. He also observes her seducing another unsuspecting businessman, Sam. Charles rents a room at the same hotel as before and waits for Jane to go there with Sam. Determined to retrieve his stolen money, Charles knocks LaRoche unconscious outside the hotel room door, disarms him, and reveals to Sam the scheme he has been set up for. Dexter arrives to back up LaRoche and a gunfight ensues; nearly everyone is fatally shot but Charles, who returns to his room and convinces the police he was just a bystander. Before leaving, Charles claims his briefcase and gets back the money. Later, Charles is suspended from work for the embezzlement and is sentenced to six months of community service, teaching in a prison. During one of his classes, he comes across a notebook containing a story about him written by one of the students. Charles finds LaRoche, who had survived the gunfight. LaRoche threatens to continue to disrupt Charles' life but Charles reveals that he has planned their encounter and then stabs LaRoche to death with a shank. Charles walks away from the encounter by claiming to Detective Church that LaRoche attacked him and he reacted in self-defence. He returns to his family. Clive Owen as Charles Schine Jennifer Aniston as Jane ("Lucinda Harris") Vincent Cassel as Philippe LaRoche Melissa George as Deanna Schine Giancarlo Esposito as Detective Franklin Church RZA as Winston Boyko Xzibit as Dexter Addison Timlin as Amy Schine Tom Conti as Eliot Firth Rachael Blake as Susan Davis Denis O'Hare as Jerry the Lawyer Georgina Chapman as Candy David Morrissey as Sam Griffin David Oyelowo as Patrol Officer Danny McCarthy as Correctional Officer Hank Ortis Deley as Cop Richard Leaf as Night Clerk Ray Catherine McCord as Avery Price Receptionist Derailed opened in 2,443 theaters for an opening weekend gross of $12,211,986. The film made a domestic gross of $36,024,076 and an international gross of $21,455,000, giving it a worldwide gross of $57,479,076. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 21% of 125 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 4.7/10. The website's consensus reads: "With miscast stars, a ludicrous plot and an obvious twist, Derailed embodies its name all too aptly." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 40 out of 100, based on 34 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times awarded the film two and a half out of four stars and believed that Owen's and Aniston's performances were intriguing. Ebert said, "Clive Owen was my candidate for James Bond, and can play hard and heartless rotters (see Closer), but here he is quiet and sad, with a sort of passivity. He lets his face relax into acceptance of his own bad fortune. Jennifer Aniston does that interesting thing of not being a stereotyped sexpot but being irresistibly intriguing. That works with a man like Charles. Happily married, in debt, worried about his daughter and his job, he would be impervious to a sexy slut." All tracks are written by Ed Shearmur In 2007, the novel was adapted into films in India in two languages: in Tamil as Pachaikili Muthucharam by Gautham Vasudev Menon and in Hindi as The Train. Pachakili Muthucharam was adapted into the Sinhala-language film Dakina Dakina Mal. In 2010, the film was remade in Ghana by filmmaker Frank Rajah Arase as Temptation. It stars Majid Michel and Frank Artus List of films featuring diabetes List of American films of 2005 Chang, Justin (5 November 2005). "Derailed". Variety. Retrieved 28 April 2022. "Derailed". Box Office Mojo. "Derailed". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Metacritic Ebert, Roger (November 10, 2005). "Commuters jump plot tracks". RogerEbert.com. Retrieved December 7, 2023. Derailed at IMDb Derailed at the TCM Movie Database Derailed at AllMovie Derailed at Rotten Tomatoes Derailed at Metacritic Derailed at Box Office Mojo