Estonia competed at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin, Germany. It was the last time that Estonia competed at the Summer Games as an independent nation until the 1992 Summer Olympics. After the nation was occupied by the Soviet Union in 1940, a number of Estonian athletes competed as part of the USSR delegations at the Summer Olympic games from 1952 to 1988. Estonia sent 37 athletes and 13 representatives to those games. Representatives The Estonian National Olympic Committee representative was Konrad Mauritz. Estonian team representatives were delegation heads: NOC secretary Ado Anderkopp and Harald Tammer, attaché Councillor at the Legation Georg Meri, Officer of the Honorary Service Lieutenant Refior, manager Johannes Villemson, Aleksander Paluvere in athletics, Nikolai Kursman in wrestling, Eduard Kõppo in weightlifting, Peeter Matsov in boxing, Gustav Laanekõrb in sailing, Richard Mast in swimming, Edgar Kolmpere in basketball, Aleksander Praks – massage therapist, Valentin Purre – team chef, dr. Arnold Roomere-Rõmmer – medical doctor. There were also 30 Estonian youths, led by Johan Meimer, taking part of The International Youth Encampment and 28 students took part of The International Physical Education Students’ Encampment in Berlin. Team coaches Aleksander Kolmpere – athletics, Nikolai Kursman – wrestling, Herbert Niiler – basketball. Judges Aleksei Selenoi in basketball, Peeter Matsov in boxing; Johannes Kauba, Karl Kullisaar and Johannes Villemson in wrestling Other delegations Estonians in other delegations were Kalev Kotkas (from 1936 fi: Kalevi Kotkas) for  Finland (FIN) in athletics – high jump, Leonard Einsaar for  Australia (AUS) in rowing – Men's eight, Valentin Klõšeiko (pl: Walenty Kłyszejko) coach for Polish basketball team. Press Aleksander Antson (Eesti Spordipressi Klubi and Uusi Suomi), Oskar Lõvi alias Toomas Kivi (Postimees, Päevaleht and Eesti Raadio), Aadu Adari-Adorf (Uudisleht), Vladimir Raudsepp (Uus Eesti), Ilmar Peterson (Päevaleht), Aksel Vaik (Vaba Maa), Harald Nõmmik (Rahvaleht). Newspaper columnists Artur Reisner, Eevald Äärma, Johannes Villemson, Ernst Idla etc. The International Youth Encampment coverage by R. Uustal and The International Physical Education Students’ Encampment coverage by Arved Ojari. Olympic Identity Cards The Organizing Committee issued 126 Olympic Identity Cards for Estonian participants. Men Track & road events Field events Men Estonian Team: (Artur Amon, Aleksander Illi, Robert Keres, Vladimir Kärk, Evald Mahl, Heino Veskila, Erich Altosaar, Aleksander Margiste, Bernhard Nooni, Leonid Saar, Georg Vinogradov, Coach: Herbert Niiler) Winners advanced to the second round. Losers competed in the first consolation round for another chance to move on.  Estonia v  France Winners advanced to the third round. Losers competed in the second consolation round for another chance to move on.  United States v  Estonia Winners advanced to the third round. Losers competed in the second consolation round for another chance to move on.  Philippines v  Estonia Men Estonia had one rowers participate in one out of seven rowing events in 1936. Men Open Harald Tammik – reserve, Boat name: Brandenburg No. O/G 304 Men Men Men's Freestyle Men's Greco-Roman Wikimedia Commons has media related to Estonia at the 1936 Summer Olympics. Evans, Hilary; Gjerde, Arild; Heijmans, Jeroen; Mallon, Bill; et al. "Estonia Rowing at the 1936 Berlin Summer Games". Olympics at Sports-Reference.com. Sports Reference LLC. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 3 May 2018. Official Olympic Reports International Olympic Committee results database Estonian Olympic Committee – about the Berlin 1936 Olympics (in Estonian) Antson, Aleksander (1992) [1937]. Berliini olümpiamängud 1936 (en: Berlin Olympic Games 1936). facsimile (in Estonian). Tartu: Noor-Eesti Kirjastus (facsimile: Olympia). ISBN 5-450-02427-4. Kuningas, Tiit; Tiit Lääne (2005). Olümpiamängude ajalugu II, suvemängud 1920–1944 (en: History of the Olympic Games II Summer Games 1920–1944) (in Estonian). Tallinn: Maalehe Raamat. ISBN 9985-64-255-4.