Estonia competed at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, People's Republic of China. This is a list of the results of all Estonian athletes who qualified for the Olympics and were nominated by Estonian Olympic Committee. Estonia was represented in the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games by 47 athletes in total of 13 different sporting events. The Estonian delegation, the largest in the nation's Olympic history, marched into the Beijing National Olympic stadium as the 160th nation, before Haiti and after Ireland delegations during the opening ceremony. Jüri Jaanson, who competed at his sixth Olympics, was the oldest and most experienced team member, and became Estonia's oldest Olympic medal winner with the age of 42 years, 10 months and two days. Key Note–Ranks given for track events are within the athlete's heat only Q = Qualified for the next round q = Qualified for a the next round as a fastest loser or, in field events, by position without achieving the qualifying target NR = National record N/A = Round not applicable for the event Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round Men Track & road events Field events Combined events – Decathlon Women Field events Combined events – Heptathlon * The athlete who finished in second place, Lyudmila Blonska of the Ukraine, tested positive for a banned substance. Both the A and the B tests were positive, therefore Blonska was stripped of her silver medal, and Kand moved up a position. Estonia had qualified two berths in men's and women's badminton events. Estonia had qualified three quota places in road cycling. For the first time in Olympic history, it also sent its first female road cyclist. Rein Taaramäe, who finished seventeenth in men's road race, achieved the best result for the nation's sport. Sprint Men Men Qualification Legend: FA=Final A (medal); FB=Final B (non-medal); FC=Final C (non-medal); FD=Final D (non-medal); FE=Final E (non-medal); FF=Final F (non-medal); SA/B=Semifinals A/B; SC/D=Semifinals C/D; SE/F=Semifinals E/F; QF=Quarterfinals; R=Repechage Men M = Medal race; EL = Eliminated – did not advance into the medal race; CAN = Race cancelled Men Men Women Estonia at the 2008 Summer Paralympics "OM-koondis võib paisuda kõigi aegade suurimaks". Postimees (in Estonian). 19 July 2008. "Irina Embrich tõusis Eesti kõigi aegade vanimaks olümpiavõitjaks". Õhtuleht. 27 July 2021. "Blonska thrown out of long jump". BBC Sport. 2008-08-21. Retrieved 2008-08-21. EOK – Peking 2008 (in Estonian) Qualification by 17 June 2008. Archived 12 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine (in Estonian) Delfi.ee Peking 2008 Estonian Olympic news and competitors. Archived 2008-12-02 at the Wayback Machine (in Estonian) Gallery of the 2008 Estonian Olympic Team outfit presentation by Nike (in Estonian) Image of the two times Olympic champion Erika Salumäe wearing 2008 Estonian Olympic Team outfit Baltic athletes get ready to reach for Olympic gold The Baltic Times