Estonia competed at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, United Kingdom from 27 July to 12 August 2012. This was the nation's eleventh appearance at the Summer Olympics. The Estonian Olympic Committee sent the nation's smallest delegation to the Games in the post-Soviet era. A total of 32 athletes, 22 men and 10 women, competed in 11 sports. Fifteen athletes had competed in Beijing, including two Olympic medalists (rower and silver medalist Tõnu Endrekson, and defending champion Gerd Kanter in men's discus throw). Rifle shooter Anžela Voronova, at age 43, was the oldest athlete of the team, while double sculls rower Geir Suursild was the youngest at age 17. Former Olympic bronze medalist Aleksander Tammert, who competed at his fifth Olympics, became Estonia's flag bearer at the opening ceremony. Among the sports played by the athletes, Estonia marked its Olympic return in archery after twenty-year absence, and in wrestling after an eight-year absence. Estonia left London with only two medals (one silver and one bronze), failing to win a gold medal for the second time since 2004. Defending champion Gerd Kanter, however, settled only for the bronze medal in men's discus throw, while Heiki Nabi won the nation's first ever Olympic silver medal in Greco-Roman wrestling 76 years after Kristjan Palusalu's gold medal at the 1936 Summer Olympics. Estonia qualified 1 archer. Estonian athletes achieved qualifying standards in the following athletics events (up to a maximum of 3 athletes in each event at the 'A' Standard, and 1 at the 'B' Standard): Key Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete's heat only Q = Qualified for the next round q = Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or, in field events, by position without achieving the qualifying target NR = National record N/A = Round not applicable for the event Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round Men Track & road events Field events Women Track & road events Field events Combined events – Heptathlon Men Men Qualification Legend: FA=Final A (medal); FB=Final B (non-medal); FC=Final C (non-medal); FD=Final D (non-medal); FE=Final E (non-medal); FF=Final F (non-medal); SA/B=Semifinals A/B; SC/D=Semifinals C/D; SE/F=Semifinals E/F; QF=Quarterfinals; R=Repechage Men Women M = Medal race; EL = Eliminated – did not advance into the medal race; DNF = Did not finish; DPI = Discretionary penalty imposed Estonia qualified one quota place in the Women's 50 m rifle 3 position; Women Men Women Estonia qualified in the following events. Key: VT – Victory by Fall. PP – Decision by Points – the loser with technical points. PO – Decision by Points – the loser without technical points. Men's Greco-Roman "iaaf.org – Top Lists". IAAF. Retrieved 4 June 2011. IAAF Games of the XXX Olympiad – London 2012 ENTRY STANDARDS (PDF), IAAF, archived from the original (PDF) on 7 July 2012, retrieved 4 June 2011 "Quota places by NATION and Name". ISSF. 8 March 2011. Retrieved 27 May 2011. EOK London 2012 (in Estonian)