Estonia competed at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece, from 13 to 29 August 2004. This was the nation's ninth appearance at the Summer Olympics. The Estonian Olympic Committee sent a total of 42 athletes, 31 men and 11 women, competing only in 11 different sports. Sixteen athletes had competed in Sydney, including three Olympic medalists: decathlon champion Erki Nool, and judoka and bronze medalists Aleksei Budõlin and Indrek Pertelson. Rower Jüri Jaanson participated in his fifth Olympics under two different banners (the other one with the Soviet Union) as the most experienced member of the contingent. Discus thrower Eha Rünne, aged 41, was the oldest athlete of the team, while long-distance freestyle swimmer Jelena Petrova was the youngest at age 15. Claiming the nation's first ever gold medal in athletics, Nool was appointed by the Estonian Olympic Committee to become the nation's flag bearer in the opening ceremony. Estonia left Athens with the same number of medals (one silver and two bronze) collected from the previous games, but failed to earn a single gold for the first time in history since the break-up of the Soviet Union. After finishing farther from the podium in four consecutive Olympics, Jaanson ended his medal drought by taking home the silver in the men's single sculls. Two bronze medals were awarded to discus thrower Aleksander Tammert and heavyweight judoka Indrek Pertelson, who managed to repeat it from Sydney. Estonian athletes have so far achieved qualifying standards in the following athletics events (up to a maximum of 3 athletes in each event at the 'A' Standard, and 1 at the 'B' Standard). Key Note–Ranks given for track events are within the athlete's heat only Q = Qualified for the next round q = Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or, in field events, by position without achieving the qualifying target NR = National record N/A = Round not applicable for the event Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round Men Track & road events Field events Combined events – Decathlon Women Track & road events Field events Estonia has qualified two judoka Men Qualification Legend: FA=Final A (medal); FB=Final B (non-medal); FC=Final C (non-medal); FD=Final D (non-medal); FE=Final E (non-medal); FF=Final F (non-medal); SA/B=Semifinals A/B; SC/D=Semifinals C/D; SE/F=Semifinals E/F; R=Repechage Men M = Medal race; OCS = On course side of the starting line; DSQ = Disqualified; DNF = Did not finish; DNS= Did not start; RDG = Redress given Men Estonian swimmers earned qualifying standards in the following events (up to a maximum of 2 swimmers in each event at the A-standard time, and 1 at the B-standard time): Men Women Estonia's first appearance in the Olympic triathlon resulted in a twenty-first-place finish for the nation's sole competitor in the sport. Key: VT - Victory by Fall. PP - Decision by Points - the loser with technical points. PO - Decision by Points - the loser without technical points. Men's Greco-Roman Estonia at the 2004 Summer Paralympics "Ajalugu ei näita Pekingi olümpialippur Martin Padarile medaliheitlust soosivaid kaarte" [History does not show in Beijing Olympics, and Martin Padar struggles to reach the medal podium] (in Estonian). Postimees. 2 August 2008. Retrieved 2 April 2014. Shonka, Kristy (14 October 2004). "Jaanson basks in the silver lining of Athens Olympics". The Augusta Chronicle. Retrieved 2 April 2014. "iaaf.org – Top Lists". IAAF. Retrieved June 4, 2011. "IAAF Games of the XXX Olympiad – Athens 2004 Entry Standards". IAAF. Retrieved 4 June 2011. Official Report of the XXVIII Olympiad EOK – Ateena 2004 Archived 2018-11-29 at the Wayback Machine (in Estonian)