Jair Messias Bolsonaro (Brazilian Portuguese: [ʒaˈiʁ meˈsi.ɐz bowsoˈnaɾu]; born 21 March 1955) is a Brazilian politician and retired military officer who served as the 38th president of Brazil from 2019 to 2022. He previously served in the Brazil Chamber of Deputies from 1991 to 2018. Bolsonaro began serving in the Brazilian Army in 1973 and graduated from the Agulhas Negras Military Academy in 1977. He rose to publicity in 1986 after he wrote an article for Veja magazine criticizing low wages for military officers, after which he was arrested and detained for fifteen days. He left the army and was elected to the Municipal Chamber of Rio de Janeiro two years later. In 1990, Bolsonaro was first elected to the Chamber of Deputies as a representative for the state of Rio de Janeiro. During his 27-year tenure as a congressman, he became known for his national conservatism. Bolsonaro entered the 2018 Brazilian presidential election, during which he started to advocate economically liberal and pro-market policies. He led in the 7 October first round results and defeated Fernando Haddad in the 28 October runoff. Bolsonaro focused on domestic affairs in his first months as president, dealing primarily with the fallout of the 2014 Brazilian economic crisis. The economy recovered slowly, while crime rates fell sharply during the first year. He rolled back protections for Indigenous groups in the Amazon rainforest and facilitated its deforestation. Bolsonaro's response to the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil was criticized across the political spectrum after he sought to downplay the pandemic and its effects, opposed quarantine measures, and dismissed two health ministers, while the death toll increased rapidly. In the runoff of the 2022 general election, Bolsonaro lost to Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. On 8 January 2023, his supporters stormed federal government buildings, calling for a coup d'état. On 30 June, the Superior Electoral Court blocked Bolsonaro from seeking office until 2030 for attempting to undermine the validity of the election through his unfounded claims of voter fraud, and for abusing his power by using government communication channels to both promote his campaign and to allege fraud. Testimonies from military officials showed that Bolsonaro had allegedly planned a self-coup with the military to keep himself in power. A polarizing and controversial politician, Bolsonaro's views and comments, which have been described as far-right and populist, drew both praise and criticism in Brazil. He is a vocal opponent of same-sex marriage, abortion, affirmative action, drug liberalization, and secularism. In foreign policy, he has advocated closer relations with Israel and with the United States; later in his presidency, he also made efforts to improve relations with the BRICS countries. Bolsonaro was born on 21 March 1955 in Glicério, São Paulo, in southeast Brazil, to Percy Geraldo Bolsonaro and Olinda Bonturi. His family is mostly of Italian descent, with German ancestry as well. On his father's side, he is the great-grandson of Italians from Veneto and Calabria. Bolsonaro's paternal grandfather's family comes from Veneto, more precisely Anguillara Veneta, in the province of Padua. His great-grandfather, Vittorio Bolzonaro (the surname was originally written with a "z"), was born on 12 April 1878. Vittorio's parents immigrated to Brazil when he was ten, together with his siblings, Giovanna and Tranquillo. His German ancestry came from his father's maternal grandfather, Carl "Carlos" Hintze, born in Hamburg around 1876, who immigrated to Brazil in 1883. His maternal grandparents were born in Lucca, in Tuscany, and went to live in Brazil in the 1890s. On 21 January 2022, his mother Olinda Bonturi Bolsonaro died at age 94. His father Percy Geraldo Bolsonaro died in 1995. Bolsonaro spent most of his childhood moving around São Paulo with his family, living in Ribeira, Jundiaí, and Sete Barras, before settling in Eldorado, in the state's southern region, in 1966, where he grew up with his five brothers. His first name is a tribute to Jair da Rosa Pinto, a football player for Palmeiras, with whom he shares a birthday. In his final years in high school, Bolsonaro was admitted to the Escola Preparatória de Cadetes do Exército (the prep school of the Brazilian Army), which he entered in 1973. In 1974, he went to the Academia Militar das Agulhas Negras (Brazil's main military academy), graduating in 1977 as an artillery officer. He served in the 9th Field Artillery Group, in Nioaque, Mato Grosso do Sul. Later he studied at the Army Physical Training School in Rio de Janeiro and served in the 21st Field Artillery Group and the 8th Paratrooper Field Artillery Group, from the Paratrooper Brigade, both in the same city. His superior officers said he was "aggressive" and had "excessive ambition to get financial and economical gain". The assessment referred to Bolsonaro's attempt to mine gold in Bahia state; according to him, the activity was only a "hobby and mental hygiene". In 1987, he studied in the Officers Improvement School, where he made the Artillery Advanced Course. Bolsonaro's first rise to publicity came in 1986 when he gave an interview to the news magazine Veja. He complained about low military salaries and claimed that the High Command was firing officers due to budgetary cuts and not because they were displaying 'deviations of conduct', as the command was telling the press. Despite being reprimanded by his superiors, Bolsonaro received praise from fellow officers and wives of military men, becoming a household name for hardliners and right-wingers who were growing disenchanted with Brazil's new civilian democratic government. In October 1987, Bolsonaro faced a new accusation. Veja reported that, with an Army colleague, he had plans to plant bombs in military units in Rio de Janeiro. After Bolsonaro called the allegation "a fantasy", the magazine published, in its next issue, sketches in which the plan was detailed. The drawings had allegedly been made by Bolsonaro. Official records unearthed by the newspaper O Estado de S. Paulo in 2018 detailed the case. After an investigation by an administrative military bureau named Justification Board, Bolsonaro was unanimously considered guilty. According to this board, Bolsonaro had a "serious personality deviation and a professional deformation", "lack of moral courage to leave the Army" and "lied throughout the process" when denying frequent contacts with Veja. The Supreme Military Court then analyzed the case. The general in charge of reporting the case voted to acquit Bolsonaro, arguing that he had already been penalized for the initial Veja article, that there was no testimonial evidence of his plans to plant bombs, and that there were "deep contradictions in the four graphological exams", two of which failed to conclude that Bolsonaro was the author of the sketches. Bolsonaro was acquitted by the majority of the court (9 v 4 votes). In December 1988, just after this ruling, he left the Army to begin his political career. He served in the military for 15 years, reaching the rank of captain. Bolsonaro entered politics in 1988, elected city councilor in Rio de Janeiro, representing the Christian Democratic Party (PDC). According to the biography by his son Flávio, Bolsonaro "was a candidate for councilor because it happened to be the only option he had at the moment to avoid persecution by some superiors. His entry into politics happened by chance, for his desire was to continue in his military career". Bolsonaro spent only two years in the Municipal Chamber of Rio de Janeiro. He was described as a quiet, discreet and conservative councilor, and showed little participation. His term as councilor was used mainly to give visibility to military causes, such as retirement benefits for former officers. In the 1990 elections, Bolsonaro was elected a federal deputy for the Christian Democratic Party. He served seven consecutive terms, from 1991 to 2018. He has been affiliated with several other Brazilian political parties over the years. In 2014, he was the congressman who gained the most votes in Rio de Janeiro, with 465,000. Bolsonaro's name was listed on the "Lista de Furnas [pt]", a list detailing a corruption and money laundering scheme involving the state-owned electricity company, Eletrobras Furnas. He received housing assistance for deputies who do not have residences in Brasilia despite having an apartment in the southwest of Brasilia. He has later admitted that he considers this practice of his "immoral." He has also been accused of engaging in fuel allowance fraud. In his 27 years of service in the Brazilian National Congress, Bolsonaro put forward one constitutional amendment and at least 171 bills, two of which became law. Bolsonaro, who claims to be persecuted by the left-wing parties, said most congressmen do not vote according to their agenda, but "by who the author of the bill is". In January 2018, Bolsonaro abandoned the Social Christian Party and switched to the Social Liberal Party (PSL).[citation needed] After his arrival, the PSL adopted conservative and right-wing positions, and its social liberal group Livres announced its departure from the PSL. On 22 July 2018, the PSL nominated Bolsonaro for president in the 2018 election. The Brazilian Labour Renewal Party also endorsed him. His coalition name was "Brazil above everything, God above everyone" (Brasil acima de tudo, Deus acima de todos). Though contested by two lawsuits, the Superior Electoral Court of Brazil deferred them and his candidacy was made official on 6 August. In August, Bolsonaro announced that Antônio Hamilton Mourão, a retired army general, would be his running mate. According to political pundits, Bolsonaro moderated his tone early in the campaign, taking a less aggressive and confrontational style. Economically, he started to support less government intervention in the economy (in contrast to the past, when he defended developmentalist policies). On the other hand, he maintained his tough stance on crime and his defense of "traditional family values". Bolsonaro also said he planned to cut taxes across the board, particularly on inheritances and businesses, to generate growth and tackle unemployment. He also promised more austerity measures and cuts in government spending, but had difficulty naming the areas where he would make cuts. He also said he would work to diminish the federal government's size and bureaucracy by enacting a wide variety of deregulation measures. Bolsonaro's promises to restore security amid record high crime and to stamp out Brazil's rampant political corruption won him huge popular support. In October, he announced he would name Paulo Guedes, a liberal economist, as his finance minister. On 9 August 2018, Bolsonaro attended the first presidential debate of the year, organized by the TV network Rede Bandeirantes. A week later, there was another debate at RedeTV! On 28 August, he gave an interview to Jornal Nacional, Brazil's highest-rated primetime news program, at Rede Globo. Bolsonaro was the first presidential candidate to raise over R$1 million in donations from the public during the 2018 campaign. In the first 59 days, he amassed an average of R$17,000 per day. After the Workers' Party candidate Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva was arrested in April 2018, Bolsonaro became the frontrunner according to all major opinion polls. A Datafolha poll from September showed Bolsonaro as the leading candidate in the first round with 28% of vote intentions, though runoff scenarios showed him losing to Geraldo Alckmin, Fernando Haddad, and Ciro Gomes and tying with Marina Silva. Another Datafolha poll, conducted the week before election day, showed a considerable surge for Bolsonaro, who had 40% of vote intentions, or 36% when null or blank vote intentions were included. Haddad came in second with 25% and Gomes third with 15%. The first round of the election occurred on 7 October 2018. Bolsonaro finished in first place with 46% of the popular vote (49.2 million). Since he failed to win over 50%, he faced the second-place finisher, Haddad, in a runoff held on 28 October 2018. After the first round, when his victory looked certain, Bolsonaro gave a speech by videolink to thousands of supporters who gathered at Paulista Avenue, in São Paulo. In the speech, he threatened to arrest, purge or kill "reds" and "petralhas" (a derogatory term for Workers' Party members), and promised that members of the social movements MST and MTST would be treated as "terrorists". He said: "This time, the clean-up will be even greater. This group ["reds"], if they want to stay, will have to abide by our laws ... These red outlaws will be banned from our homeland. Either they go overseas, or they go to jail ... Petralhada, you all go to the edge of the beach. It will be a cleaning never seen in the history of Brazil". The "edge of the beach", a Bolsonaro aide later confirmed, was a reference to a Navy base at Restinga da Marambaia, in Rio de Janeiro State, where the Brazilian military dictatorship tortured and killed dissidents. The speech was widely condemned by rivals, journalists and politicians. Bolsonaro won the runoff election with 55.13% of the votes, and was elected the 38th president of Brazil. He took office on 1 January 2019. During the campaign, academics repeatedly raised concerns about the consequences of Bolsonaro's rise for Brazilian democracy. In the news magazine Foreign Policy, Federico Finchelstein, a historian at the New School for Social Research who specializes in fascism, wrote, "Bolsonaro's vocabulary recalls the rhetoric behind Nazi policies of persecution and victimization. But does sounding like a Nazi make him a Nazi? Insomuch as he believes in holding elections, he is not there yet. However, things could change quickly if he gains power." Jason Stanley, a Yale philosopher who has published widely on Nazism, said that Bolsonaro "uses more tactics associated to fascism than [the] American president Donald Trump". Harvard's Steven Levitsky said that Bolsonaro "is clearly authoritarian", but not a fascist. Similar concerns were raised by analysts in Portugal and Brazil. Others, such as Marxist historian Perry Anderson, dismissed the "fascist" and "populist" labels altogether. Another highly controversial aspect of the campaign was the alleged use of illegal digital communication strategies by some of Bolsonaro's most important financial supporters. According to an investigation by Folha de S.Paulo, one of Brazil's bestselling newspapers, "Bolsonaro has been getting an illegal helping hand from a group of Brazilian entrepreneurs who are bankrolling a campaign to bombard WhatsApp users with fake news about Haddad." The suspicions led to a formal investigation by electoral authorities and the Federal Police; Bolsonaro and allies denied any wrongdoing. Another controversial point was that Taíse Feijó, an adviser in Bolsonaro's government, was among those paid to feed fake news to his supporters. Bolsonaro was stabbed in the abdomen on 6 September 2018 while campaigning and interacting with supporters in Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais. At first, his son Flávio Bolsonaro stated that his father's wounds were only superficial and he was recovering in the hospital, but he later said the wounds seemed worse than initially thought and his father most likely would not be able to start campaigning personally before the end of the first round. He tweeted about his father's condition, explaining that the perforation had reached parts of the liver, lung, and intestine. He also said that Bolsonaro had lost a large amount of blood, arriving at the hospital with severe hypotension (his blood pressure was 10/3, equivalent to 100/30 mmHg), but that he had since stabilized. The attack was condemned by most of the other candidates in the presidential race, and by then president Michel Temer. The day after the attack, Bolsonaro was transferred to the Albert Einstein Israelite Hospital in São Paulo, after a request from his family. According to the doctors, he was in an "extremely stable" condition. Police arrested the attacker and identified him as Adélio Bispo de Oliveira, who, according to security agents, claimed he was on "a mission from God". He had been a member of the Socialism and Liberty Party from 2007 to 2014. His social media posts included political criticisms of both Bolsonaro and Temer. But an initial Federal Police investigation concluded that Adélio had no help from political organizations and acted alone. A medical report produced for a second investigation concluded that Bispo is mentally disturbed, having a "permanent paranoid delusional disorder" which, according to Brazilian law, prevents him from being considered legally liable for his actions. In a May 2019 decision, the Federal Court found Bispo not liable. Bolsonaro did not appeal the decision. On 29 September, a month after the attack, Bolsonaro was released from the hospital and returned to his home in Rio de Janeiro. His condition prevented him from returning to the campaign trail for the remainder of the first round of the presidential election. The first federal police investigation into the attack concluded that the attacker acted alone, but the investigation "leaves out many issues". Bolsonaro said he did not observe "any effort by former minister Sergio Moro to resolve the matter." Joaquim de Carvalho has said that the police left out of their investigation the search for information by a mastermind of the attack or even a self-attack. For this, expert medical examination of Bolsonaro and review of the medical records would be needed. Bolsonaro's personal motto, which he established in 2016, is John 8:32: "The truth will set you free". The same weekend he left the hospital, thousands of people took the streets in dozens of cities in Brazil to protest against Bolsonaro and his political stances, chanting "Ele não" ("Not him"). There were also rallies in support of the candidate in sixteen states. Bolsonaro was sworn in as President of the Republic on 1 January 2019, succeeding Michel Temer. Bolsonaro began to get his cabinet together before his inauguration, choosing economist Paulo Guedes as his Economy minister and astronaut Marcos Pontes as his Science and Technology minister. Bolsonaro initially said his cabinet would be composed of 15 members; this figure later rose to 22 when he announced his final minister, Ricardo Salles, in December. His predecessor, Michel Temer, had a cabinet of 29 members. Bolsonaro's initial cabinet was composed of 16 ministers, two cabinet-level positions, and four presidential secretaries, including Chief of Staff Onyx Lorenzoni. Bolsonaro's ministers included Operation Car Wash judge Sérgio Moro as Justice minister and congresswoman Tereza Cristina as minister of Agriculture. Bolsonaro placed many army officers in key positions in his cabinet. Before his inauguration, he said he would fill positions in his government based only on technical qualifications and skills rather than ideological sympathy; however, many appointees clashed ideologically with the government during his presidency and fell out of favor with Bolsonaro. By June 2020, the ministers of Justice and Education, the Secretary of Government, the head of the postal service and other government officials had already resigned. Early in his administration, Bolsonaro focused primarily on domestic and economic issues, ranging from tax reform to changes in social security, but he faced an uphill battle with Congress. Bolsonaro stripped the indigenous affairs agency FUNAI of the responsibility to identify and demarcate indigenous lands, arguing that those territories have tiny, isolated populations who would be controlled by NPOs, and proposed to integrate them into the larger Brazilian society. Critics feared that such integration would force Brazilian Amerindians to suffer cultural assimilation. Argentine President Mauricio Macri was the first foreign leader Bolsonaro received on a state visit to Brasília after he became president. The second inauguration of Nicolás Maduro in Venezuela took place nine days after Bolsonaro's inauguration. The disputed results of the 2018 Venezuelan presidential election led to the Venezuelan presidential crisis, as the National Assembly rejected the results, considered Maduro an illegitimate ruler since his first term of office ended, and appointed Juan Guaidó as acting president. Bolsonaro did not attend Maduro's inauguration and recognized Guaidó as the legitimate ruler of Venezuela, alongside Mauricio Macri from Argentina and Donald Trump from the US, among others. He said that "We will continue doing everything possible to re-establish order, democracy and freedom there". After his first year in power, Bolsonaro's popularity steadily declined. A Datafolha survey, published on 21 May 2019, showed that 34% of respondents described Bolsonaro's administration as "great or good"; 26% as "regular", 36% as "bad or awful", while 4% did not respond. This was the first time more Brazilians rejected the politics of Bolsonaro than affirmed it. Meanwhile, after allegations of campaign-finance fraud, Bolsonaro fired Gustavo Bebianno, a top adviser and general secretary for the president. His party was accused of diverting public campaign funds to candidates who did not run for office. In November 2019, Bolsonaro left the Social Liberal Party due to conflicts with its leadership. He attempted to form his own party, Alliance for Brazil (Portuguese: Aliança pelo Brasil), but it failed to gather enough signatures to register at the Superior Electoral Court for the 2020 Brazilian municipal elections or the 2022 Brazilian general election, leaving Bolsonaro without a party until 2021. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil, Bolsonaro and his administration were accused of downplaying the crisis while the number of Brazilians infected by the virus climbed exponentially by mid-2020. Bolsonaro claimed that COVID-19 was no deadlier than "the flu" and that his priority was the nation's economic recovery rather than the health crisis. In fact, as of early 2021, the Brazilian economy was bouncing back, albeit somewhat slowly and inconsistently, as the pandemic was still threatening to undo any economic recovery. Bolsonaro continually accused political opponents and the press of exaggerating the threat of the virus and called it a "fantasy" created by the media. In August 2020, in the middle of the pandemic, Bolsonaro's approval rating showed signs of recovery, reaching its highest level since his inauguration. In November 2020, he said he would not take a COVID vaccine if it became available, but he later said he would support any possible vaccine if the Brazilian Health Agency deemed it safe. In the same broadcast, he called face masks "the last taboo to fall". In 2020, the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP), an international non-governmental organization that investigates crime and corruption, gave Bolsonaro its Person of the Year Award, which "recognizes the individual who has done the most in the world to advance organized criminal activity and corruption". Bolsonaro received the award for "surrounding himself with corrupt figures, using propaganda to promote his populist agenda, undermining the justice system, and waging a destructive war against the Amazon region that has enriched some of the country's worst land owners." In early 2021, Bolsonaro's approval ratings fell again, mostly due to the government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic, vaccination controversies, and the concurrent economic crisis that evolved under his watch. Days after Brazil surpassed Russia as the country worst hit by COVID, Bolsonaro held a political rally in Brasília; while surrounded by supporters and his own security guards, who were wearing masks, he did not. In June 2021, nationwide protests erupted against Bolsonaro's response to the pandemic; in São Paulo alone there were estimated to be 100,000 protesters on the streets. In July, YouTube removed videos posted by Bolsonaro for spreading false information about the virus. YouTube has reportedly removed 15 videos altogether; one that was removed had shown Brazil's former health minister, Eduardo Pazuello, comparing the virus to HIV. In other videos, Bolsonaro criticized efforts to stop the spread of the virus, such as wearing masks or taking the vaccine. By the end of June 2021, more members of the opposition started to call for his impeachment over his handling of the pandemic and spreading misinformation. The opposition signed a document with multiple accusations, such as blaming Bolsonaro for the deaths of 500,000 Brazilians from COVID-19, stating that his government had blatantly turned down expert advice on tackling the virus, and at least 20 other grievances. In July 2021, Bolsonaro claimed on Brazilian radio that his government's greatest achievement was "two and a half years without corruption". In the same month, a scandal dubbed "vaccine-gate" emerged. After months of denying offers of vaccines and bartering the costs, Bolsonaro's government made a deal to buy the unapproved Covaxin vaccine from the Indian company Bharat Biotech at a very high price. It was found that the government allegedly paid ten times the amount agreed by Bharat Biotech for the vaccine and that the irregularities were not found in the prices of the vaccines, but in a payment of $45 million to a company in Singapore. In response, the Brazilian Supreme Court authorized a criminal investigation of Bolsonaro. In March 2021, Bolsonaro replaced Defense Minister Fernando Azevedo e Silva with Walter Souza Braga Netto; like Bolsonaro, Netto lionized the 1964–1985 military dictatorship in Brazil. A day later, the leaders of the army, air force, and navy all resigned. In April, Bolsonaro declared that the Brazilian armed forces would "go into the streets" if he ordered them. In mid-August, the military conducted a ten-minute tank parade in Brasília, with Bolsonaro in attendance. The parade had been held annually in the last 30 years, but tanks had never been sent to the capital before. The parade was announced only a day in advance, and passed by the national congressional building, where lawmakers were due to vote on Bolsonaro's proposed election-related changes hours later. The lawmakers ultimately rejected the changes. On 28 July 2021, Bolsonaro appointed Ciro Noguiera, a senator who was implicated in the Odebrecht corruption case, as his chief of staff. In early August 2021, Bolsonaro threatened to respond with unconstitutional measures to an investigation over his baseless allegations of fraud vulnerabilities in Brazil's electronic voting system, because he deemed that investigation unconstitutional. Brazilian Supreme Court Justice Alexandre de Moraes had approved the investigation. In mid-August 2021, Bolsonaro warned of a potential "institutional rupture", while urging the Brazilian Senate to charge de Moraes and another Supreme Court Judge, Luis Roberto Barroso, the leader of the electoral court. On 26 October 2021, a senate committee approved a report calling for Bolsonaro to face criminal charges, including crimes against humanity, for his handling of the COVID-19 pandemic. Without a political party, Bolsonaro began to negotiate his entrance in one in preparation for the 2022 Brazilian general election (as the 1988 Brazilian Constitution does not allow independent politicians). He negotiated with the Progressistas (PP), of which he was a member from 1995 to 2003 and from 2005 to 2016, and the Social Christian Party (PSC), of which he was a member from 2016 to 2018, the Brazilian Labour Party (PTB), Brazilian Woman's Party (PMB), Christian Democracy (DC), Party of National Mobilization (PMN), the Republicans and Patriot (PATRI). On 30 November 2021, Bolsonaro and his son Senator Flávio Bolsonaro joined the Liberal Party (PL). According to political analysts, the choice represents the consolidation of the alliance of Bolsonaro with the Centrão, a large bloc of parties without consistent ideological orientation that supports different sides of the political spectrum to gain political privileges—PL being one of them. Bolsonaro previously made deals with the Centrão for support in Congress. On 23 June 2022, Bolsonaro defended his former Minister of Education, Milton Ribeiro, after the latter was arrested on corruption charges. In a runoff presidential election on 30 October, Bolsonaro was defeated by former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who took 50.9% of the votes cast. Lula had won the most votes in the first round of the election on 2 October, receiving 48.43% of the votes cast: Bolsonaro received 43.20%. In a press conference at the Palácio da Alvorada on 1 November, Bolsonaro did not acknowledge his defeat but stated that he would "comply with the Constitution". Regarding the protests by his supporters, he referred to them as "the fruit of indignation and a sense of injustice of how the electoral process unfolded", while calling on them to remain peaceful and not block roads. Shortly after his speech, the Supreme Court stated that by authorizing the transition of power he had recognized the results, paving the way for the transition two days after Lula was recognized as the winner. Bolsonaro left for the United States on 30 December to avoid taking part in the swearing-in ceremony of Lula, leaving Vice President Hamilton Mourão as the acting President. On December 30, 2022, one day before Bolsonaro's term ended, he arrived in Florida and resided in Kissimmee for a couple of months. On 8 January 2023, his supporters attacked the buildings of the Supreme Court of Brazil, the National Congress of Brazil and the Planalto Presidential Palace in an attempt to instigate a military coup d'état and reinstate Bolsonaro as president. While the riots were going on, President Lula blamed Bolsonaro in a press conference. Bolsonaro condemned the protesters in a tweet on 9 January, but denied responsibility. In February 2023, Bolsonaro announced that he would be returning to Brazil in March. This would be the first time Bolsonaro returned to the country since December 2022. Bolsonaro had entered the United States on a diplomatic visa which expired on 31 January, but the family applied for tourist visas to extend their stay in Florida. Bolsonaro returned to Brazil in March 2023 for the first time since his supporters stormed the Supreme Court, Congress, and the presidential palace two months before. Bolsonaro has stated that he returned to the country to help his party and asserted that he intended to campaign for the 2024 elections. On 14 April 2023, Supreme Court judge Alexandre de Moraes ordered Bolsonaro to submit himself for questioning with the Brazilian Federal Police over the storming of the Congress. On 30 June 2023, the Brazilian Superior Electoral Court barred Bolsonaro from running for public office until 2030 as a result of his attempts to undermine the validity of Brazil's 2022 democratic election, as well as for abuse of power with regards to using government channels to promote his campaign. The decision applies to municipal, state and federal elections for the next eight years. He was prosecuted for several allegations of fraud in the 2022 Brazilian elections and situations linked to the January 8 attack on federal government buildings. The decision came after a 5–2 vote in favor of conviction. Following the decision, Bolsonaro stated his intentions to appeal. On 31 October 2023, Bolsonaro was again convicted by the Superior Electoral Court over abuse of power for using official Brazil's Independence Day ceremony to promote himself as a candidate which is banned under the Brazilian law. Former Minister of Defence Walter Braga Netto, who also attended the ceremony, and also ran for vice president on Bolsonaro's ticket, was convicted by the Court and ruled disqualified, like Bolsonaro, to run for any office for the next eight years. In February 2024, the Brazilian Federal Police raided former government officials and ordered Bolsonaro to hand in his passport over accusations that he and his allies tried to overturn the results of the 2022 election and planned a coup d'etat. In March 2024, witness documents released by the Superior Electoral Court were made public. According to two military officials, Bolsonaro had plotted to overturn the 2022 results and presented top military officials a plan to carry out a coup with the goal of keeping him in power. In his testimony, former Brazilian Army commander Marco Antônio Freire Gomes said that he had warned Bolsonaro the army would not tolerate "any act of institutional rupture", and further added that Bolsonaro's actions could result in his arrest. Former Brazilian Air Force commander Carlos Baptista Júnior testified that he tried to dissuade Bolsonaro of "any extreme measure" and expressed his belief that Freire Gomes was instrumental in avoiding the use of a legal document that Bolsonaro presented in several meetings in December 2022 to overturn the results of the election. Baptista Júnior further said that the then Brazilian Navy commander Almir Garnier told Bolsonaro he would put his troops at his disposal, and commented: "If the commander [Freire Gomes] had agreed, possibly, a coup d'etat attempt would have taken place." In late March 2024, The New York Times released a footage from internal security cameras in the Hungarian embassy in Brasilia showing Bolsonaro and his aides and bodyguards entering the building on February 12, (after his Brazilian and Italian passaports were confiscated, and Bolsonaro was prohibited from leaving the country in the investigation about an alleged plot to carry out a military coup in Brazil) and leaving the place on February 14. Bolsonaro was welcomed by Hungarian ambassador to Brazil Miklós Halmai who reportedly sent the embassy's local employees a message to work from home during those dates. Following the report, the Brazilian Supreme Court gave Bolsonaro a 48-hours deadline to explain his stay in the embassy, and the Federal Police announced it was opening an investigation into the incident which could constitute as an attempt to escape justice via diplomatic asylum, since embassies are typically considered inviolable and hosts countries cannot enforce their law inside them without permission. Media commentators and people on social media speculated this hypothesis was likely to be true citing Bolsonaro and Hungarian prime-minister Viktor Órban are both far-right politicans who share a personal friendship, and Hungary's previous granting of asylum to sanctioned former Macedonian prime minister Nikola Gruevski. Additionally, Itamaraty (Brazil's Foreign Ministry) summoned Halmai to give explanations about Bolsonaro's two-nights stay in the embassy. Bolsonaro's political views have been described as Brazilian nationalist and right-wing populist in nature, and he himself as an advocate of far-right politics. His supporters say that his views are more aligned with traditional right-wing conservatism. His electorate is mainly formed by adults above the age of 34, the working middle to upper class (mainly in the southeast region of the country), conservatives in general, college graduates, some centrists and the Christian right. According to some polls, Bolsonaro's main support comes from the southeast, central-west, and south regions of Brazil. His voters are usually male and white, with a noticeable gender gap, with Bolsonaro polling poorly among female voters (mustering only 18% support with this demographic). Just before the 2018 election, however, it was reported that female support for him had risen to 27%. Bolsonaro is viewed as an anti-abortion, anti-establishment, and pro-gun politician, voicing opposition to most forms of gun laws in Brazil, arguing that law-abiding citizens have the right to self-defense, especially those living in rural areas. According to The Washington Post, "Homicides hit a record high of 63,880 last year ... Bolsonaro's solution is zero tolerance. He has called for police to use more lethal force and wants to relax gun laws so that average citizens can defend themselves." Bolsonaro often rejects accusations made against him of misogyny and homophobia, and says he is not far-right but simply right-wing. Bolsonaro is known for his strong opposition to left-wing politics. Most notably, he has been a vocal opponent of same-sex marriage, environmental regulations, abortion, affirmative action (particularly racial quotas), as well as immigration, particularly from Haiti, Africa and the Middle East, which he once called "the scum of humanity". He has also opposed drug liberalization, land reforms, and secularism at the federal level, among other things. Additionally, he made statements in defense of the Brazilian military regime, (a dictatorship known for constant human rights violations). He argues that torture is a "legitimate practice" and says that he would try to pass new legislation regarding the introduction of life imprisonment to the Brazilian penal code. Bolsonaro supports the privatization of state-owned companies and advocates free-market policies, although critics have stated that his policy-making record does not in fact show him to be a supporter of economic liberalism. In a 2017 interview with journalist Claudio Dantas Sequeira from O Antagonista, Bolsonaro said that his views are directly aligned with the centrist to right-wing United States citizens' views on gun ownership, abortion, gender politics, and trade, despite the "left-leaning media frenzy" against him. He reiterated that he intends to reverse some disarmament laws, improve public security, and also improve trade ties with the United States, which he said were broken during Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva's and Dilma Rousseff's administrations. During his long political career, Bolsonaro expressed views regarded as being far-right. He has made statements that some people considered insulting, homophobic, violence-inciting, misogynistic, sexist, racist, or anti-refugee. Other controversial political stances expressed by Bolsonaro have been the defense of the death penalty, which is banned under the Constitution of Brazil of 1988, and of radical interventionism in Brazil by the military, along with an imposition of a Brazilian military government. Journalist Glenn Greenwald called Bolsonaro "the most misogynistic, hateful elected official in the democratic world". News.com.au wondered whether Bolsonaro was "the world's most repulsive politician". British news magazine The Economist referred to him as a "radical", "religious nationalist", a "right-wing demagogue", and "apologist of dictators". Federico Finchelstein, scholar on fascism and populism, has considered Bolsonaro, as he would link violence to austerity and neoliberal economic ideas, to be the most similar leader to Augusto Pinochet to come out from the young South American democracies. Leonardo Fontes, a postdoctoral researcher at the Brazilian Center for Analysis and Planning, characterized Bolsonaro's economic views as authoritarian neoliberalism. Bolsonaro is an open admirer of former U.S. President Donald Trump. During Bolsonaro's campaign, some observers saw similarities between the two's ideals, hardline attacks and a reputation for incendiary rhetoric, as well as social media presence. Because of this, Bolsonaro has been called the Brazilian equivalent of Trump or the "Trump of the Tropics". On 1 May 2019, Bolsonaro awarded Olavo de Carvalho, a Brazilian conservative writer and far-right conspiracy theorist, the Order of Rio Branco honorific order. Carvalho, who wrote books about leftist politics in Brazil and modern issues in general, was openly admired by Bolsonaro and sarcastically called by journalists his guru. Carvalho was sometimes harshly critical of Bolsonaro, even calling him "dumb". Throughout his political career, Bolsonaro has made several admiring comments about the U.S.–supported Brazilian military dictatorship which ruled the country from 1964 to 1985. He said in 1993, eight years after the return of democracy, that the military regime had "led to a more sustainable and prosperous Brazil". Bolsonaro has publicly referred to the military dictatorship as a "glorious" period in Brazil's history, and that under the military dictatorship, Brazil enjoyed "20 years of order and progress". In December 2008, Bolsonaro said that "the error of the dictatorship was that it tortured, but did not kill". Bolsonaro has also repeatedly made admiring comments about a number of other Latin American dictatorships. He praised Peruvian president Alberto Fujimori as a role model for his use of military intervention via self-coup against the judiciary and legislature. In a 1998 interview with Veja magazine, Bolsonaro praised the Chilean dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet, and said the Pinochet regime, which killed over 3,000 Chilean citizens, "should have killed more people". In 1999, Bolsonaro said that Hugo Chávez represented "hope for Latin America", comments that became a matter of controversy during the 2018 campaign, when Bolsonaro presented himself as a harsh critic of Chavismo. In 2019, already in power, Bolsonaro commended Paraguayan dictator Alfredo Stroessner as a "visionary" and "statesman", drawing immediate criticism, particularly due to multiple allegations of pedophilia against Stroessner. Speaking before his vote in favor of President Dilma Rousseff's impeachment amid the massive corruption scandal, Bolsonaro paid homage to Colonel Brilhante Ustra, an agent of Brazil's military dictatorship, and announced on the floor of the Chamber of Deputies that he was dedicating his pro-impeachment vote to Ustra's memory. Ustra had headed the DOI-CODI torture unit where Rousseff was allegedly tortured during the military dictatorship. Left-wing deputy Jean Wyllys spat at him after his statement during the same session. The congressman claimed to have suffered homophobic offenses from Jair Bolsonaro and his allies. In a TV interview with Câmera Aberta in the 1990s, Bolsonaro said that if he ever became president, he would use this as an opportunity to shut down the National Congress and instigate a military coup himself. As of 2018[update], he appeared to have changed his mind, and said that if someone becomes the head of the country, it would be through voting. In March 2019, Bolsonaro stated that the 1964 coup d'état, which overthrew President João Goulart, was not a coup, and that 31 March, the day the coup was installed, should be "properly commemorated". During the 2018 presidential campaign, Bolsonaro said he would make considerable changes to Brazil's foreign relations, saying that the "Itamaraty needs to be in service of the values that were always associated with the Brazilian people". He also said that the country should stop "praising dictators" and attacking democracies, such as the United States, Israel and Italy. In early 2018, he affirmed that his "trip to the five democratic countries the United States, Israel, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan showed who we will be and we would like to join good people". Bolsonaro showed distrust towards China throughout the presidential campaign claiming they "[want to] buy Brazil", although Brazil recorded a US$20 billion trade surplus with China in 2018, and China is only the 13th largest source of foreign direct investment into Brazil. Bolsonaro said he wished to continue to do business with the Chinese but he also said that Brazil should "make better [economic] deals" with other countries, with no "ideological agenda" behind it. His stance towards China has also been interpreted by some[who?] as an attempt to curry favor with the Trump administration to garner concessions from the US. However, Bolsonaro mostly changed his position on China after he took office, saying that the two countries were "born to walk together" during his visit to Beijing in October 2019. He also said that Brazil would stay out of the ongoing China-U.S. trade war. According to Oliver Stuenkel, Bolsonaro's stance on global politics evolved from anti-China to anti-Western during his presidency. In 2022, he praised the role of BRICS during the 2007–2008 financial crisis and described BRICS cooperation as a "factor of stability and prosperity in the international situation". Bolsonaro said that his first international trip as president would be to Israel. Bolsonaro also said that the State of Palestine "is not a country, so there should be no embassy here", adding that "you don't negotiate with terrorists." The announcement was warmly received by the prime minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, who welcomed Bolsonaro to Israel in March 2019 during the final weeks of a re-election campaign, but was met with condemnation from the Arab League, which warned Bolsonaro it could damage diplomatic ties. "I love Israel," Bolsonaro said in Hebrew at a welcoming ceremony, with Netanyahu at his side, at Tel Aviv's Ben-Gurion airport. Bolsonaro also praised U.S. President Donald Trump and his foreign policy, and has been called "the tropical Trump". His son Eduardo has indicated that Brazil should distance itself from Iran, sever ties with Nicolás Maduro's government in Venezuela and relocate Brazil's embassy in Israel to Jerusalem, although he never committed to his plan to move the embassy and instead opened a trade office in the city. Bolsonaro is widely considered the most pro-American candidate in Brazil since the 1980s. PSL members said that if elected, he would dramatically improve relations between the United States and Brazil. During an October 2017 campaign rally in Miami, he saluted the American flag and led chants of "USA! USA!" to a large crowd. U.S. National Security Advisor John Bolton praised Bolsonaro as a "like-minded" partner and said his victory was a "positive sign" for Latin America. Bolsonaro had a fractious relationship with U.S. President Joe Biden, and subsequently deepened ties with Russia, emphasising his neutrality over the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. At the regional level, Bolsonaro praised Argentine President Mauricio Macri for ending the 12-year rule of Néstor and Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, which he saw as similar to Lula and Rousseff. Although he does not have plans to leave the Mercosur, he criticized it for prioritizing ideological issues over economic ones. A staunch anti-communist, Bolsonaro has condemned Cuba's former leader Fidel Castro and the current regime in that island. Bolsonaro praised British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, saying that he had learned from Churchill: "Patriotism, love for your fatherland, respect for your flag – something that has been lost over the last few years here in Brazil ... and governing through example, especially at that difficult moment of the Second World War." Bolsonaro said he's open to the possibility of hosting a U.S. military base in Brazil to counter Russian influence in the region. With the intention to persuade Trump to make Brazil a NATO member in March 2019, Bolsonaro said: "the discussions with the United States will begin in the coming months". With formal U.S. support for Brazil's entry to OECD in May 2019, Bolsonaro said, "currently, all 36 members of the organization support the entry of the country, fruit of confidence in the new Brazil being built, more free, open and fair". In October 2019, on a state visit to China, he announced the end of the need for visas for Chinese and Indian entry into Brazil. Brazil had already removed the need for visas for people from the U.S., Canada, Japan, and Australia. Brazil has the world's largest tropical rainforest in the Amazon basin. According to The Washington Post, "Bolsonaro is a powerful supporter of agribusiness ... and is likely to favor profits over preservation. ... Bolsonaro has chafed at foreign pressure to safeguard the Amazon rainforest, and he served notice to international nonprofit groups such as the World Wide Fund for Nature that he will not tolerate their agendas in Brazil. He has also come out strongly against lands reserved for indigenous tribes. Bolsonaro advisers additionally say that he plans to expand nuclear and hydroelectric power into the Amazon." Bolsonaro rejects the scientific consensus on climate change. He repeatedly threatened to withdraw from the Paris Agreement during his campaign. Even before taking office, he backed out of Brazil's offer to host the 2019 UN Climate Change Conference. Ernesto Araújo, the new Minister of Foreign Affairs appointed by Bolsonaro, has called global warming a plot by "cultural Marxists", and eliminated the Climate Change Division of the ministry. Two departments of the Ministry of the Environment dealing with climate change in Brazil and mitigation and one dealing with deforestation were also eliminated. In April 2019, the American Museum of Natural History canceled an event honoring Bolsonaro after facing heavy public criticism, including from New York Mayor Bill de Blasio. The museum's directorate justified its decision in a statement, "With mutual respect for the work and goals of our organizations, we jointly agreed that the Museum is not the optimal location for the Brazilian-Am. Chamber of Commerce gala dinner. This traditional event will go forward at another location on the original date and time." Bolsonaro supported plans to open the Reserva Nacional do Cobre e Associados (Renca) Amazonian reserve in Brazil's northern states of Pará and Amapá to commercial mining. Destruction of the Amazon rainforest increased by 88% for the month of June 2019, during Bolsonaro's first year as president, as compared with the previous year, according to the National Institute for Space Research (INPE). Bolsonaro rejected the agency's data as false. The INPE director was fired after he rebutted Bolsonaro's criticism of the institute. The Bolsonaro administration decreased government efforts to combat illegal logging, ranching and mining in the Amazon. Government enforcement actions such as fines, warnings and the confiscation or destruction of illegal equipment in protected areas decreased by 20% in the first half of 2018 compared to the first half of 2017. His damage to the Amazon has widely been described by indigenous groups, human rights groups, politicians, academics and journalists as an ecocide and a genocide. Indigenous chiefs and human rights organizations have submitted an Article 15 communication to the International Criminal Court for crimes against humanity and genocide for harm to Indigenous people and destruction of the Amazon. Another has been submitted for ecocide by indigenous chiefs. Bolsonaro is a member of the Catholic Church (while his wife and one of his sons are Evangelical Christians) and is registered as one with the Superior Electoral Court. In 2016, he had himself baptised along with three of his sons Flávio, Carlos and Eduardo in the Jordan River by a Pentecostal church. Sociologist Christina Vital of the Fluminense Federal University stated that this act was more than an expression of conversion to Evangelicalism and was meant to create an ambiguous religious identity, through which the Bolsonaro family could appeal to the various groups of voters. Bolsonaro reportedly attended a Baptist church for 10 years. In a 2017 speech, Bolsonaro stated, "God above everything. There is no such thing as a secular state. The state is Christian, and any minority that is against this has to change, if they can." He later evolved his position to keeping the country a secular state during the first round of the Brazilian presidential elections: "We are going to make a government for everyone, regardless of religion. Even for atheists. We have almost 5% of atheists in Brazil, and they have the same needs that others have." In an interview with Zero Hora in 2015, Bolsonaro argued that men and women should not receive the same salaries, because women get pregnant, adding that he believes federal law mandating paid maternity leave harms work productivity. Bolsonaro has denied saying that women should receive less than men; he claims it was statistical data by IBGE. In a public speech in April 2017, Bolsonaro said he had five children, that the first four were male and that for the fifth he produced a daughter out of "a moment of weakness". Bolsonaro provoked controversy for a series of remarks made to and about Federal Deputy and former Human Rights Minister Maria do Rosário. During a Congressional debate, Bolsonaro said that minors should be treated as adults if they commit heinous crimes such as murder or rape, to which Maria do Rosário responded by calling him a "rapist". Bolsonaro then stated that Congresswoman Rosário was "not worth raping; she is very ugly". The remarks drew considerable condemnation throughout Brazil. In the aftermath of these remarks, Bolsonaro was tried and convicted in a Federal court in September 2015 on counts of hedonic damages against Rosário. In June 2016, the Federal Supreme Court responded to a complaint filed by the Attorney General and decided to open two criminal actions against Bolsonaro. The Supreme Court ruled that he had potentially incited rape and defamed the honor of his fellow Deputy. He faced a penalty of up to six months of jail and a fine. Ultimately in August 2017, an appellate court upheld a lower court's verdict which found Bolsonaro guilty and sentenced him to pay a fine to Rosário of R$10,000 (roughly equivalent to US$2,500). This lawsuit was dismissed by the Supreme Federal Court as Bolsonaro was inaugurated as president in 2019 and acquired immunity from prosecution. In May 2002, after then-President Fernando Henrique Cardoso attended a pro-gay-marriage gathering, Bolsonaro said, "If I see two men kissing in the street, I will beat them." He later publicly defended beating gay children, saying, "If your child starts to become like that, a little bit gay, you take a whip and you change their behavior." He also said, "If a kid hangs out with someone who uses marijuana, he'll end up snorting, and if he hangs out with gay person, he definitely is going to turn into a faggot." In a June 2011 interview with Playboy, Bolsonaro said, "I would be incapable of loving a gay son", and added that he would prefer any gay son of his "to die in an accident". In an interview that same month with Jornal de Notícias, Bolsonaro linked homosexuality to pedophilia, saying, "many of the children who are adopted by gay couples will be abused by these couples". He further argued that Brazil does not need legislation specifically targeting homophobia, because "most homosexuals are murdered by their respective pimps at hours when good citizens are already asleep". In British actor Stephen Fry's 2013 documentary Out There, Bolsonaro said, "no father is ever proud of having a gay son" and "we Brazilians do not like homosexuals". In a March 2016 video interview for Vice with Elliot Page, an openly lesbian actress at the time, Page asked Bolsonaro whether he should have been beaten as a child (alluding to Bolsonaro's public statements that gay children should be beaten). Bolsonaro replied, "You are very nice. If I were a cadet in the military academy and saw you on the street, I would whistle at you. All right? You are very pretty." Bolsonaro added, "Over time, due to liberal habits, drugs, with women also working, the number of homosexuals has really increased." On 9 November 2017, the Court of Justice for the State of Rio de Janeiro sentenced Bolsonaro to pay a fine of R$150,000 for hate speech because of televised comments he made in 2011 to the CQC TV program, when Bolsonaro stated that "there is no risk" of his family producing a homosexual child because his children had a "good education". Judge Luciana Teixeira said that the deputy had abused his right of free expression to commit a wrongful act. "You cannot deliberately attack and humiliate, ignoring the principles of equality, just because you invoke freedom of expression," said the judge. However, on 11 January 2016, when he began to present himself as a pre-candidate to the Presidency of Brazil, Bolsonaro began to moderate his discourse on gay people by publishing a video on his official YouTube channel: I have nothing to do with anyone's behavior. If the man and the woman later decide to live with their partner, to form a couple, to live with a same-sex person, go and be happy. But we cannot admit that, by our omission in the Parliament, children become homosexuals in the future, or have such homosexual behavior in the future, by the influence of school. That is inadmissible. Since then, Bolsonaro states he has nothing against gays and that he fights only the "gay kit" in schools. On 4 October 2018, for example, Bolsonaro said: Each person, after a certain age, owner of their acts, will take care of their life. For six-year-old children, it cannot be. A father does not want to come home and see his son playing with a doll by the influence of school. Homosexuals will be happy if I become president. That same month, shortly before the first round of the Brazilian presidential elections, he said: "We are going to make a government for everybody. For gays, and some gays are fathers, who are mothers. It is a work for everyone". After being elected president, when asked by William Bonner in the Jornal Nacional about what he would say to those who are more prejudiced and aggressive against gays, Bolsonaro replied: "The aggression against a fellow man has to be punished in the way of law. And if [such aggression is committed] for a reason like this, you have to have your sentence increased." On multiple occasions, Bolsonaro has publicly endorsed physical violence as a legitimate and necessary form of political action. In 1999, when he was 44 years old and a representative in the Brazilian Congress, Bolsonaro said during a TV interview that the only way of "changing" Brazil was by "killing thirty thousand people, beginning with Fernando Henrique Cardoso" (then President of Brazil). During the 2018 campaign, he stated during a rally in Acre that the local "petralhas" (a derogatory term for members of the Workers' Party) would be "shot"; according to his aides, the statement was a "joke". One week before the second round, Bolsonaro said during a speech that in his administration "petralhas" and "reds" (i.e. leftists) would be arrested, purged or taken to the "corner of the beach", a term that was later revealed to mean a Navy base where dissidents of the Brazilian military dictatorship were murdered. In 1999, talking about Chico Lopes, a former president of the Brazilian Central Bank who invoked his right to remain silent during a Congress hearing, Bolsonaro declared himself in favor of torture in this sort of situation. Asked about this phrase years later, Bolsonaro said: "Ask the father of a kidnapped child what he would like him to do to discover [where the kid is]. You have to take brutal measures, which some consider torture". Throughout his political career, Bolsonaro has made numerous statements that have been described as racist. In 2011, when asked by Afro-Brazilian singer Preta Gil on TV show Custe o Que Custar (CQC) what he would do if one of his sons had a Black girlfriend, he answered that he "would not discuss promiscuity" and that there was "no such risk", because his children were "very well educated". Bolsonaro later claimed that he was misunderstood and denied promoting racism, although he stood by his attacks on gay people. In 2017, in an event at the Hebraica club in Rio de Janeiro, Bolsonaro promised to abolish all indigenous and Quilombola territories in Brazil, saying that he would not cede "a centimiter" of land to these groups. He also claimed to have visited a quilombo, a settlement formed by descendants of enslaved people, accusing Afro-Brazilians who lived there of being lazy and unproductive. The politician also claimed that the "least heavy" of the quilombolas weighed seven arrobas, a unit of measure that is used in Brazil to weigh cattle. These comments have been criticized as an attempt to dehumanize Black Brazilians. Bolsonaro is a strong opponent of affirmative action, and has criticized the Brazilian racial quotas system in universities as a way of dividing society that is at odds with equality between citizens. In 2011, he was accused of racism after questioning the capabilities of Black and indigenous graduates who benefitted from affirmative action, claiming that he would not fly on an airplane piloted by one of them, nor accept a doctor who was admitted to a university through racial quotas to perform surgery on him. Bolsonaro provoked considerable controversy for public remarks made in July 2008, where he proposed to provide poor people with birth control methods, who he suggested might be too uneducated to understand family planning education. Bolsonaro said: I wish Brazil had a family planning program. It's not even worthy to talk about education when most of these [poor] people are not prepared to receive education, therefore they won't educate themselves. Only rigid birth control can save us from chaos. An educated man and woman will hardly desire an extra child with the sole purpose of engaging in a social welfare assistance program [as it is nowadays]. We need to adopt a rigid birth control policy. We can't make demagogic speeches any longer, proposing bills and means of government to support these poor people [who] are increasingly proliferating throughout the country. ... People who aren't prepared to have children, shouldn't have them. This is what I stand for and I'm not worried about getting votes in the future. It's past time to discuss a policy to contain this demographic explosion, otherwise, we'll keep voting in this Chamber only matters such as Bolsa Família, loans for the poor, gas vouchers, etc. Methods [of birth control] have to be provided for those who, unfortunately, are ignorant and have no means to control their offspring. Because we [as upper-middle class] can control ours. Poor people don't control [theirs]. As a Congressman, Bolsonaro put forward three bills trying to remove "virtually all" legal restrictions to surgical sterilization via the public health system, including the reduction of "the minimum age of sterilization to 21 years". None of the bills were voted through. Bolsonaro has endorsed conspiracy theories of voter fraud in past elections, including claims that attempts were made to rig the 2018 presidential election against him; he has also questioned the outcome of the 2020 United States presidential election. During his presidency, he has repeatedly challenged the legitimacy of electronic voting and advocated the use of paper ballots in the 2022 election. Bolsonaro said that he would not accept the results of the 2022 election if electoral reforms were not implemented. Most experts on Brazilian politics, including Defense Minister Celso Amorim, questioned the likelihood of a coup attempt, and polls found that few Bolsonaro supporters would likely endorse a coup. In May 2022, Central Intelligence Agency director William Burns warned Bolsonaro against any further attacks on Brazil's electoral system. The 2022 election occurred days after the success of far-right politician Giorgia Meloni in the 2022 Italian general election, with analysts noting that Bolsonaro performed better than expected during the first round of elections and that his party's success had the potential to moderate Lula's government if Lula won the election. Bolsonaro has been married three times and has five children. His first wife was Rogéria Nantes Braga (with whom he has three sons: Flávio, Carlos and Eduardo). His second marriage was with Ana Cristina Valle (with whom he has a son, Renan). In 2007, he married his third and current wife Michelle de Paula Firmo Reinaldo (with whom he has a daughter, Laura). While working in Congress, Bolsonaro hired Michelle as a secretary and over the next two years she received unusual promotions and her salary more than tripled. He was forced to fire her after the Supreme Federal Court ruled that nepotism is illegal in the public administration. As of 2018[update], Bolsonaro and his wife lived in Barra da Tijuca, Rio de Janeiro. Bolsonaro has three granddaughters, two by his son Flávio and one by his son Eduardo. Eduardo and Flávio Bolsonaro are evangelical Protestant Christians and members of the Baptist Church in Brazil. On October 25, 2018, Bolsonaro was presented with an honorary black belt by Robson Gracie despite never having trained Brazilian jiu-jitsu. Grand Master and Grand Cross of the Order of Rio Branco (1 January 2019) Grand Master and Grand Cross of the Order of Defence Merit (8 January 2019) Grand Master and Grand Cross of the Order of Military Merit (16 June 2019) Grand Master and Grand Cross of the Order of Naval Merit (8 January 2019) Grand Master and Grand Cross of the Order of Aeronautical Merit (3 January 2019) Grand Collar of the Order of Labor Judicial Merit (13 August 2019) Grand Cross of the Order of Military Judicial Merit (28 March 2019) The Mauá Medal of Merit (15 August 2019) The Peacemaker Medal (5 December 2018) One of Time magazine's 100 most influential people in 2019 and 2020 Brazilian-American Chamber of Commerce's 2019 Person of the Year OCCRP's 2020 Person of the Year "for his role in promoting organized crime and corruption" On 25 October 2021, Bolsonaro was recognized as an honorary citizen by the city council of Anguillara Veneta, Italy, his paternal grandfather's hometown. This aroused reactions in Italy. Bolsonaro is the topic of the main story on the September 25, 2022 episode of Last Week Tonight with John Oliver. "Bolsonaro diz que é liberal e adota discurso que agrada investidores – 09/10/2017 – Poder". Folha de S.Paulo. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Slow economic recovery and China to be discussed at 2020 Brazilian Prospects Seminar". FVG.br. 5 March 2019. Archived from the original on 9 July 2020. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "No primeiro ano do governo Bolsonaro, estados garantem queda na criminalidade". FVG.br (in Portuguese). 5 March 2019. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "Brazil's new president makes it harder to define indigenous lands". Global News. 2 January 2019. Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 17 January 2019. "Who is Jair Bolsonaro, the man likely to be Brazil's next president?". The Washington Post. 28 October 2018. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 30 October 2018. Watson, Katy (12 June 2020). "Coronavirus: How pandemic turned political in Brazil". BBC News. Archived from the original on 6 July 2020. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "Bolsonaro é 1º presidente a perder reeleição e deixará cargo em 31 de dezembro". Folha de S.Paulo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 30 October 2022. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. Retrieved 5 November 2022. Brooke, James (25 July 1993). "Conversations/Jair Bolsonaro; A Soldier Turned Politician Wants To Give Brazil Back to Army Rule". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 24 October 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. Editorial Board (8 October 2018). "Brazilian Swamp Drainer". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 10 October 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2018. "O inquietante 'fenômeno Bolsonaro'". El País (in Portuguese). 7 October 2014. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Brazil's congress starts to reform itself". The Economist. 14 October 2017. Archived from the original on 15 October 2017. Retrieved 15 October 2017. Andrade, Claudia (5 May 2011). "Bolsonaro: após união gay, próximo passo é legalizar pedofilia". Noticias.terra.com.br. Archived from the original on 25 February 2012. Retrieved 7 September 2018. Sullivan, Zoe (29 October 2018). "LGBTQ Brazilians on edge after self-described 'homophobic' lawmaker elected president". NBC News. Archived from the original on 31 October 2018. "Bolsonaro, em Porto Alegre, confirma ser contra o aborto e a favor da redução da maioridade penal" [Bolsonaro, in Porto Alegre, confirms he is against abortion and in favor of lowering the age of criminal responsibility]. Jornal O Sul. 21 August 2015. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Para ministra da Igualdade Racial, declarações de Bolsonaro são caso explícito de racismo". Política. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Jair Bolsonaro: "Sou preconceituoso, com muito orgulho"". revistaepoca.globo.com. Archived from the original on 12 April 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. Staff (6 October 2018). "Brazil's Workers' Party likens pro-Israel presidential front-runner to Hitler". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 12 October 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2018. Wierson, Arick (7 October 2018). "Will Brazil's Jair Bolsonaro Become Trump's New Best Friend?". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on 12 October 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2018. Stuenkel, Oliver (22 September 2022). "Why Beijing Wants Bolsonaro to Win". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2022. Stargardter, Gabriel (27 February 2022). "Bolsonaro won't condemn Putin, says Brazil will remain neutral over invasion". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 March 2022. Retrieved 20 March 2023. "BRICS played decisive role in overcoming 2008 crisis, Brazil's Bolsonaro says". TASS. 23 June 2022. Godoy, Marcelo (2 April 2017). "Um fantasma ronda o Planalto". O Estado de S. Paulo. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 5 August 2018. "Ele não era de falar besteira', diz mãe de Jair Bolsonaro" Archived 3 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine, revistacrescer.globo.com. Retrieved 28 April 2018. Ferraz, Lucas (25 October 2018). "Eleições 2018: berço do clã Bolsonaro, região do norte da Itália se agita com disputa no Brasil" (in Portuguese). BBC News. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 27 October 2018. Taddone, Daniel (23 October 2018). "Taddone revela genealogia de Bolsonaro: 13 dos 16 trisavôs do candidato são italianos da Toscana, do Vêneto e da Calábria". Revista Insieme. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2018. "In Veneto il paese del probabile presidente brasiliano Bolsonaro". Il Sole 24 ore (in Italian). 26 October 2018. Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Retrieved 27 October 2018. "President Bolsonaro calls off visit to Guyana after mom's death | Loop Caribbean News". Loop News. Archived from the original on 2 February 2024. Retrieved 18 February 2022. Bolsonaro, Flávio (2017). Jair Messias Bolsonaro – Mito ou Verdade. Altadena Editora. ISBN 9788594307002. "Inspiração para o nome de Bolsonaro, Jair brilhou por Palmeiras e seleção". Veja magazine (in Portuguese). 29 October 2018. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 2 March 2020. "Craque do Palmeiras da década de 1950 inspirou nome de Jair Bolsonaro". Folha de S.Paulo (in Portuguese). 29 October 2018. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 2 March 2020. "Bolsonaro era agressivo e tinha 'excessiva ambição', diz ficha militar". Folha de S. Paulo. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "O salário está baixo" (PDF). Arqanalagoa.ufsacr.br. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 January 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Capitão Bolsonaro, a história esquecida – Observatório da Imprensa – Você nunca mais vai ler jornal do mesmo jeito". 6 April 2011. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "O julgamento que tirou Bolsonaro do anonimato – Política". Estadão. Archived from the original on 8 October 2018. Retrieved 8 October 2018. Bolsonaro, Flávio (2017). Jair Messias Bolsonaro – Mito ou Verdade (in Brazilian Portuguese). Rio de Janeiro: Altadena Editora. pp. 77–79. ISBN 9788594307002. "Como vereador, projeto de transporte gratuito para tropas – Política – Estadão". Estadão (in Portuguese). 26 November 2017. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. "Bolsonaro (PP) é o deputado federal com maior número de votos no RJ – Notícias". UOL Eleições 2014 (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2018. Nassif, Luis (10 April 2017). "Os nomes e valores da Lista de Furnas, por Stanley Burburinho". GGN (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "Bolsonaro admits he was "immoral" to benefit from aid for homeless deputies in Brasília". MSN. Archived from the original on 25 January 2023. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Fux envia à PGR notícia-crime contra Bolsonaro por superfaturamento". CNN Brasil (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 25 January 2023. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Bolsonaro aprova dois projetos em 26 anos de Congresso" Archived 12 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine (in Portuguese). Page accessed on 7 June 2018. "Câmara aprova pela primeira vez emenda de Jair Bolsonaro" Archived 18 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Page accessed on 1 August 2018. "Com chegada de Bolsonaro, Livres anuncia saída do PSL". Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Como o PSL tomou espaço da centro-direita na Câmara". Nexo Jornal. Archived from the original on 24 November 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "PSL oficializa candidatura de Jair Bolsonaro à Presidência, mas adia definição de vice". 22 July 2018. Archived from the original on 8 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Conheça a origem do slogan de Bolsonaro". Gazeta do Povo (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 1 November 2018. "Jair Bolsonaro hopes to be Brazil's Donald Trump". The Economist. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 1 November 2018. "TSE aprova por unanimidade candidatura de Bolsonaro à Presidência". G1 (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 6 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Bolsonaro anuncia general Hamilton Mourão como vice". G1. 5 August 2013. Archived from the original on 6 August 2018. Retrieved 21 August 2018. "Bolsonaro modera discurso econômico em aceno ao mercado". Isto É magazine (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. Di Cunto, Raphael (6 June 2018). "Bolsonaro quer menos fiscal em empresas e nenhum imposto sobre herança". Valor Econômico (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 9 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Em encontro com empresários, Bolsonaro promete gestão austera e e corte de impostos". G1. 4 July 2018. Archived from the original on 8 September 2018. Retrieved 8 September 2018. Long, Clara (26 October 2018). "How Women Could Win It for Bolsonaro". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 30 October 2018. "Bolsonaro anuncia nomes de três ministros em eventual governo – Política". Estadão. Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Band faz primeiro debate com candidatos ao Planalto nesta quinta". Folha.uol.com.br (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 20 August 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Oito presidenciáveis discutem propostas de governo no segundo debate da campanha eleitoral de 2018". G1 (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Jair Bolsonaro (PSL) é entrevistado no Jornal Nacional". G1 (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Bolsonaro é 1º presidenciável a arrecadar mais de R$ 1 milhão em vaquinha". UOL Eleições (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. Carazza, Bruno (12 July 2018). "Will Brazil's Next President be a Far-Right Nationalist?". Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 29 September 2018. Retrieved 30 September 2018. Brooks, Brad (5 October 2018). "A Disciple of Brazil's Dictatorship Moves Closer to the Presidency". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 October 2018. Retrieved 5 October 2018. "Bolsonaro mantém liderança mas perde para adversários no 2º turno, diz pesquisa". Estado de São Paulo. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 30 September 2018. "Datafolha para presidente, votos válidos: Bolsonaro, 40%; Haddad, 25%; Ciro, 15%; Alckmin, 8%". G1. 6 October 2018. Archived from the original on 7 October 2018. Retrieved 7 October 2018. "Jair Bolsonaro: Far-right candidate wins first round of Brazil election". BBC News. 8 October 2018. Archived from the original on 19 June 2019. Retrieved 8 October 2018. ""Esses marginais vermelhos serão banidos de nossa pátria", diz ..." Reuters. 22 October 2018. Archived from the original on 17 January 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2019. correspondent, Tom Phillips Latin America (22 October 2018). "Brazil's Jair Bolsonaro threatens purge of leftwing 'outlaws'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 February 2019. Retrieved 7 March 2019. "Bolsonaro fez referência a área de desova de mortos pela ditadura". Folha de S.Paulo. 29 December 2018. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2019. Alves, Cíntia (22 October 2018). "Fascismo e ditadura: as reações à ameaça de Bolsonaro aos adversários políticos e à Folha". Jornalggn.com. Archived from the original on 12 June 2020. Retrieved 8 March 2019. "Após Justiça demonstrar fraqueza, Bolsonaro avisa que banirá opositores". blogdosakamoto.blogosfera.uol.com.br. Archived from the original on 7 November 2018. Retrieved 8 March 2019. Mendes, Conrado Hübner (29 October 2018). "Nunca mais, nunca menos". Época. Archived from the original on 9 January 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2019. "Bolsonaro inaugura o presidencialismo de assombração, diz Renato Lessa". Folha de S.Paulo. 5 January 2019. Archived from the original on 5 March 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2019. "Brazil's far-right candidate takes big lead in presidential election". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 7 October 2018. Phillips, Tom (29 October 2018). "Jair Bolsonaro declared Brazil's next president". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 December 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. Londoño, Ernesto; Darlington, Shasta (28 October 2018). "Jair Bolsonaro Wins Brazil's Presidency, in a Shift to the Far Right". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Jair Bolsonaro sworn in as president of Brazil". Herald Sun. 2 January 2019. Archived from the original on 13 June 2020. Retrieved 2 January 2019. Finchelstein, Federico (5 October 2018). "Jair Bolsonaro's Model Isn't Berlusconi. It's Goebbels". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 26 March 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019. "Bolsonaro Uses Same Fascist Tactics As Trump, Says Yale Professor". Folha de S.Paulo. 4 October 2018. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019. Ferraz, Ricardo (19 October 2018). "Por que este professor de Harvard acredita que a democracia brasileira está em risco" (in Portuguese). BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019. Tavares, João Miguel (6 October 2018). "Bolsonaro: um fascista é um fascista". PÚBLICO. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019. "Não use a palavra 'fascismo' em vão". Nexo Jornal. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019. Anderson, Perry (7 February 2019). "Bolsonaro's Brazil". London Review of Books. 41 (3): 11–22. Archived from the original on 26 March 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019. Phillips, Tom (18 October 2018). "Bolsonaro business backers accused of illegal Whatsapp fake news campaign". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 March 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019. Ricardo della Coletta (20 October 2018). "TSE e PF vão investigar se empresas bancaram esquema ilegal pró-Bolsonaro no WhatsApp". El País (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 5 November 2018. Retrieved 9 March 2019. Nemer, David (16 August 2019). "WhatsApp Is Radicalizing The Right In Bolsonaro's Brazil". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 31 January 2020. Retrieved 23 January 2020. Londoño, Ernesto (6 September 2018). "Brazil Presidential Candidate Jair Bolsonaro Is Stabbed at Campaign Rally". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 6 September 2018. Phillips, Dom (6 September 2018). "Jair Bolsonaro: Brazil's far-right presidential hopeful stabbed at campaign rally". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 May 2020. Retrieved 6 September 2018. "Brazilian presidential front-runner is stabbed while campaigning". The Washington Post. 6 September 2018. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. "Stabbed Brazil politician 'lost 40% blood'". BBC News. 8 September 2018. Archived from the original on 9 September 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Bolsonaro, Flávio [@FlavioBolsonaro] (6 September 2018). "Infelizmente foi mais grave que esperávamos" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 6 September 2018 – via Twitter. Savarese, Mauricio; Prengaman, Peter (6 September 2018). "Brazilian candidate Jair Bolsonaro stabbed during event". ABC News. Archived from the original on 6 September 2018. Retrieved 6 September 2018. "Bolsonaro leva facada em MG: veja repercussão". G1.com (in Portuguese). 6 September 2018. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 6 September 2018. "Jair Bolsonaro é internado no Hospital Albert Einstein, em SP". G1 (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Brazilian presidential candidate stabbed at campaign rally". NBC News. 6 September 2018. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Quem é o autor do ataque a Bolsonaro". El País Brasil (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "PF conclui que agressor de Jair Bolsonaro agiu sozinho". G1. 29 September 2018. Archived from the original on 28 January 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2019. "Laudo aponta que agressor de Bolsonaro tem doença mental". G1. 7 March 2019. Archived from the original on 8 March 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2019. Maria Eduarda Pessoa (4 November 2021). "Em depoimento à PF, Bolsonaro reclama de inação de Moro na investigação de facada". O POVO (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 4 November 2021. "Bolsonaro recebe alta e deixa hospital em São Paulo". G1 (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 29 September 2018. Retrieved 30 September 2018. Paiva, Fred Melo (26 January 2019). "O que tem de verdade na 'Facada no Mito'?". CartaCapital (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 4 November 2021. Emilio, Paulo (4 November 2021). "Flavio Bolsonaro faz ataque ao 247 por causa do documentário sobre a "fakeada"". Brasil 247 (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021. Bolsonaro, Jair M. [@jairbolsonaro] (3 May 2016). "João 8:32 – " E conhecereis a verdade, e a verdade vos libertará"" (Tweet) (in Brazilian Portuguese). Retrieved 1 July 2022 – via Twitter. Minas, Estado de (26 August 2019). "Bolsonaro cita João 8:32 e afirma que revelará 'a verdade' sobre a Amazônia". Estado de Minas (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022. João 8:32 – " E conhecereis a... – Jair Messias Bolsonaro | By Jair Messias Bolsonaro | João 8:32 – " E conhecereis a verdade, e a verdade vos libertará"., archived from the original on 1 July 2022, retrieved 1 July 2022 "Thousands protest leading far-right presidential candidate in Brazil". Global News. 29 September 2018. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 30 September 2018. "Manifestações a favor de Bolsonaro ocorrem em 16 estados". G1. 30 September 2018. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 30 September 2018. "Will Bolsonaro's victory in Brazil usher right-wing ripple effects in Latin America?". NBC News. 31 October 2018. Archived from the original on 7 December 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Bolsonaro anuncia astronauta Marcos Pontes como ministro da Ciência e Tecnologia". G1. 31 October 2018. Archived from the original on 20 November 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Saiba quem são os 22 ministros da Esplanada de Bolsonaro". Poder360. 10 December 2018. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 2 January 2019. "Brazil top judge becomes justice minister". BBC News. 1 November 2018. Archived from the original on 6 December 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Bolsonaro escolhe deputada Tereza Cristina para chefiar Ministério da Agricultura – Política". Estadão. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Quem são e que cargos ocupam os militares no governo Bolsonaro" [Who and what are the jobs that the military occupy in Bolsonaro's government]. Clicrbs.com.br (in Portuguese). 9 February 2019. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 10 February 2019. "As principais baixas do governo Bolsonaro". DW.com.br (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 9 July 2020. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "What's Happening with Pension Reform in Brazil?". Wilsoncenter.org. 22 October 2019. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2021. "All Smiles in Brasilia as Macri and Bolsonaro Reset Relationship". Bloomberg L.P. 16 January 2019. Archived from the original on 20 January 2019. Retrieved 22 January 2019. Boadle, Anthony (16 January 2019). "Brazil, Argentina step up pressure on Venezuela's Maduro". Reuters. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2019. "Brazil's Bolsonaro pledges action to 'restore democracy' in Venezuela". Reuters. 17 January 2019. Archived from the original on 25 January 2019. Retrieved 24 January 2019. Marreiro, Flávia (23 May 2019). "Desaprovação do Governo Bolsonaro supera aprovação pela primeira vez, mostra pesquisa Atlas Político" [Disapproval of Government Bolsonaro exceeds approval for the first time, shows Political Atlas research]. El País. Archived from the original on 14 December 2019. Retrieved 9 November 2019. Trevisani, Paulo; Lewis, Jeffrey T. (18 February 2019). "Brazil's Bolsonaro Fires Key Adviser Amid Accusations of Campaign-Finance Fraud". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 20 February 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2019. Amaral, Luciana (12 November 2019). "Bolsonaro anuncia saída do PSL e confirma novo partido: Aliança pelo Brasil" (in Portuguese). Uol. Archived from the original on 27 February 2021. Retrieved 13 November 2019. Cruz, Isabela (27 February 2020). "Aliança não sai em 2020: quais as opções dos bolsonaristas" (in Portuguese). Nexo Jornal. Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 15 May 2020. "Bolsonaro to join right-wing Liberal Party for re-election campaign". The Brazilian Report. 8 November 2021. Archived from the original on 9 July 2023. Retrieved 1 December 2021. "Coronavirus: Bolsonaro downplays threat of pandemic to Brazil". BBC News. 25 March 2020. Archived from the original on 1 May 2020. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "Just like Trump, Brazil's Bolsonaro puts the economy ahead of his people during coronavirus". TheConversation.com. 20 April 2020. Archived from the original on 9 June 2020. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "País já recuperou 89% da perda do PIB provocada pela pandemia, mas retomada não deve ganhar ritmo". G1. 3 April 2021. Archived from the original on 9 August 2021. Retrieved 9 August 2021. Phillips, Tom (23 March 2020). "Brazil's Jair Bolsonaro says coronavirus crisis is a media trick". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 2 July 2020. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "Bolsonaro diz que 'pequena crise' do coronavírus é 'mais fantasia' e não 'isso tudo' que mídia propaga". G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 10 March 2020. Archived from the original on 22 April 2020. Retrieved 9 May 2021. "Datafolha: aprovação de Bolsonaro sobe para 37%, a melhor do mandato, e reprovação cai para 34%". G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 14 August 2020. Archived from the original on 14 August 2020. Retrieved 14 August 2020. "Brazil's Bolsonaro rejects COVID-19 shot, calls masks taboo". Associated Press News. 5 May 2021. Archived from the original on 23 September 2022. Retrieved 9 May 2021. "Person of the Year · 2020 Winner: Jair Bolsonaro". www.occrp.org. 2020. Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2020. "Crise derruba popularidade de Bolsonaro, aponta Datafolha". Folha de S.Paulo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 22 January 2021. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 9 February 2021. "Bolsonaro attends rally as Brazil political scandal heats up". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 9 May 2021. Retrieved 9 May 2021. "COVID-19: Bolsonaro doesn't believe in social distancing, masks or vaccines. That wasn't lost on those protesting". Sky News. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. "YouTube removes Bolsonaro videos for Covid misinformation". BBC News. 22 July 2021. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. Berger, Miriam. "YouTube removes videos posted by Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro that spread coronavirus misinformation". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 5 August 2021. "Fresh bid to impeach Brazil's Bolsonaro over Covid response". France 24. 30 June 2021. Archived from the original on 28 March 2022. Retrieved 6 August 2021. "Fresh bid to impeach Brazil's Bolsonaro over Covid response". Radio France Internationale. 30 June 2021. Archived from the original on 6 August 2021. Retrieved 6 August 2021. Harris, Bryan (28 July 2021). "Become an FT subscriber to read | Financial Times". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. McCoy, Terrence (5 July 2021). "As coronavirus probe deepens, Bolsonaro increasingly threatened by a corruption scandal". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 6 July 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. "CPI da Covid: Quem é quem no escândalo Covaxin" (in Brazilian Portuguese). BBC News. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. "Brazil court approves investigation into Bolsonaro over vaccine deal". euronews. 3 July 2021. Archived from the original on 6 August 2021. Retrieved 6 August 2021. "STF autoriza investigação de Bolsonaro por prevaricação no caso Covaxin". O Globo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 2 July 2021. Archived from the original on 9 September 2022. Retrieved 5 August 2021. Jeantet, Diane; Biller, David (31 March 2021). "Brazil military chiefs quit as Bolsonaro seeks their support". Associated Press News. Archived from the original on 4 April 2022. Retrieved 7 September 2021. Brito, Ricardo; Perry, Michael (24 April 2021). "Brazil's Bolsonaro says military would follow his orders to take the streets". Reuters. Archived from the original on 7 September 2021. Retrieved 7 September 2021. Alvares, Debora; Savares, Mauricio (11 August 2021). "Military display rolls into Brazil capital before tense vote". Associated Press News. Archived from the original on 28 March 2022. Retrieved 7 September 2021. Phillips, Tom (10 August 2021). "Bolsonaro's 'banana republic' military parade condemned by critics". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 September 2021. Retrieved 7 September 2021. "Bolsonaro nomeia Ciro Nogueira para Casa Civil". G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 28 July 2021. Archived from the original on 17 December 2022. Retrieved 17 December 2022. Fonseca, Pedro (5 August 2021). "Brazil's Bolsonaro rages against probe, threatens to act beyond constitution". Reuters. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 7 September 2021. Paraguassu, Lisandra (15 August 2021). "Bolsonaro attacks Brazil judges, warns of "institutional rupture"". Reuters. Archived from the original on 28 March 2022. Retrieved 7 September 2021. "Brazilian Senate Committee Approves Report Calling for Criminal Charges Against President Jair Bolsonaro Over COVID-19 Handling – October 27, 2021". Daily News Brief. 27 October 2021. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 27 October 2021. "Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil de 1988" [Constitution of the Federative Republic of Brazil, 1988]. Palácio do Planalto (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 5 May 2016. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "Bolsonaro to join right-wing Liberal Party for re-election campaign". The Brazilian Report. 8 November 2021. Archived from the original on 9 July 2023. Retrieved 1 December 2021. "Bolsonaro negocia com DC, PMN e PSC e deve anunciar novo partido este mês". O Globo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 8 March 2021. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "De partido sem ideologia a sigla dos "leões conservadores": como o PTB quer atrair Bolsonaro". Gazeta do Povo (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 21 July 2020. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "PMB é o décimo partido que muda de nome em dez anos; veja outros". O Globo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 26 April 2021. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "Bolsonaro negocia com 3 partidos além do Patriota, diz Flávio". Poder360 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 13 July 2021. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. "Bolsonaro se filia ao PL e retoma 'casamento' com o centrão". noticias.uol.com.br (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 27 October 2022. Retrieved 28 October 2022. Soares', 'Ingrid (23 July 2021). "Bolsonaro defende aliança com o Centrão: 'É pela governabilidade'". Política (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 20 November 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "Bolsonaro defends ex-education minister arrested on corruption charges". Reuters. 24 June 2022. Archived from the original on 17 December 2022. Retrieved 17 December 2022. Buschschlüter, Vanessa (31 October 2022). "Brazil election: Lula makes stunning comeback". BBC News. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2022. "Análise das Eleições 2022: Veja Detalhes dos Resultados da Votação". noticias.uol.com.br (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 30 October 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2022. "Resultados – TSE". resultados.tse.jus.br. Archived from the original on 2 November 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2022. Henrique Gomes, Pedro; Mazui, Guilherme (1 November 2022). "Bolsonaro diz que vai cumprir a Constituição; Ciro Nogueira inicia a transição" (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 1 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. Buschschlüter, Vanessa (1 November 2022). "Bolsonaro breaks silence without publicly conceding". BBC News. Archived from the original on 1 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. Nicas, Jack; Spigariol, André (1 November 2022). "Bolsonaro Agrees to Transition, Two Days After Losing Brazil Election". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 4 June 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2022. Brito, Ricardo; Ellsworth, Brian; Gaier, Rodrigo Viga (2 November 2022). "Brazil's Bolsonaro does not concede to Lula, but authorizes transition". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 May 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2022. "Jair Bolsonaro leaves Brazil for Florida, avoiding Lula handover". Al Jazeera. 30 December 2022. Archived from the original on 30 December 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022. "Brazil's Bolsonaro lands in Florida, avoiding handover to Lula". NBC News. Reuters. 31 December 2022. Archived from the original on 9 January 2023. Retrieved 10 January 2023. Dias, Isabela (8 February 2023). "Bolsonaro is living the American Dream: Retired in Florida and posting on TikTok". Mother Jones. Archived from the original on 16 February 2023. Retrieved 16 February 2023. Nicas, Jack; Spigariol, André (9 January 2023). "Bolsonaro Supporters Lay Siege to Brazil's Capital". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 9 January 2023. Retrieved 9 January 2023. "Court orders removal of Brasília governor after Bolsonaro supporters storm congress – as it happened". The Guardian. 9 January 2023. Archived from the original on 8 January 2023. Retrieved 9 January 2023. Bolsonaro, Jair M. [@jairbolsonaro] (9 January 2023). "Manifestações pacíficas, na forma da lei, fazem parte da democracia" (Tweet). Retrieved 9 January 2023 – via Twitter. Pearson, Luciana Magalhaes and Samantha (14 February 2023). "WSJ News Exclusive: Bolsonaro Says He Will Return to Brazil in March to Lead Opposition". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 15 February 2023. Retrieved 16 February 2023. Bridi, Carla (12 February 2023). "Bolsonaro says he may return to Brazil in the coming weeks". AP News. Archived from the original on 12 February 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Psaledakis, Daphne (31 January 2023). "Bolsonaro, Brazil's former president, has applied for U.S. tourist visa". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 February 2023. Retrieved 16 February 2023. Fajardo, Luis; Durbin, Adam (30 March 2023). "Jair Bolsonaro returning to Brazil for first time since 8 January riots". BBC News. Archived from the original on 30 March 2023. Retrieved 30 March 2023. "Brazil: Bolsonaro to be questioned over riots | DW". Deutsche Welle. 15 April 2023. Archived from the original on 15 April 2023. Retrieved 15 April 2023. "Brazil: Judges vote to bar Bolsonaro from office for 8 years". DW. 30 June 2023. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. Nicas, Jack (30 June 2023). "Brazil Bars Bolsonaro From Office for Election-Fraud Claims". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Brazil's Jair Bolsonaro is barred from running for office until 2030". El País. 30 June 2023. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Bolsonaro Again Ruled Ineligible to Hold Public Office by Brazil Electoral Court". Yahoo News. 1 November 2023. Archived from the original on 10 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. Nicas, Jack (8 February 2024). "Bolsonaro and Allies Planned a Coup, Brazil Police Say". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 17 March 2024. Malleret, Constance (15 March 2024). "Bolsonaro laid out plan for Brazil coup after defeat by Lula, ex-commanders say". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 17 March 2024. "Bolsonaro proposed Brazil coup plan after 2022 election loss: Court records". Al Jazeera. 15 March 2024. Retrieved 17 March 2024. El Damanhoury, Kareem; Vargas Jones, Julia (16 March 2024). "Brazil's ex-president Bolsonaro presented coup plot to top military leaders, court documents allege". CNN. Retrieved 17 March 2024. Nicas; Koettl; Coelho; Motoryn, Jack; Christoph; Leonardo; Paulo (25 March 2024). "Video: Bolsonaro, Facing Investigations, Hid at Hungarian Embassy". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 March 2024. Retrieved 27 March 2024.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Moraes dá 48h para Bolsonaro explicar por que passou duas noites na embaixada da Hungria". G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 26 March 2024. Retrieved 27 March 2024. "PF vai apurar ida de Bolsonaro à embaixada da Hungria, em Brasília". G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 25 March 2024. Retrieved 27 March 2024. "Análise: Mão amiga de Orbán que acena a Bolsonaro já deu asilo a outro aliado sem passaporte". Folha de S.Paulo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 26 March 2024. Retrieved 27 March 2024. "Hungria já se envolveu em escândalo por ajudar premiê a fugir da Macedônia". VEJA (in Brazilian Portuguese). Retrieved 27 March 2024. Phillips, Tom (25 March 2024). "Brazil summons Hungarian envoy to explain why Bolsonaro hid in embassy". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 27 March 2024. Boadle, Anthony (27 September 2017). "Far-right presidential hopeful aims to be Brazil's Trump". Reuters. London, England. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2018. Leal, Pedro Henrique (24 April 2017). "Bolsonaro and the Brazilian far right". opendemocracy.net. Archived from the original on 13 February 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2018. Watson, Katy (2 April 2018). "Brazil's rising tide of young conservatives seeks change". London, England: BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 April 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2018. "Renda, estudo e região separam eleitores de Lula e Bolsonaro". O Globo. 3 May 2017. Archived from the original on 31 July 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2018. "Nichos realçam contrastes de eleitores de Lula e Bolsonaro". Folha de São Paulo. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 30 September 2018. "Ibope mostra queda de 8 pontos de Bolsonaro na região Sul". R7. 25 September 2018. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 30 September 2018. Sims, Shannon (4 October 2018). "A Brazilian Far-Right Populist and the Women Who Like Him". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 4 October 2018. Retrieved 4 October 2018. "Jair Bolsonaro beyond the sound bites: What are his policies?". BBC News. 28 October 2018. Archived from the original on 13 August 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2019. Phillips, Tom (19 April 2018). "Trump of the tropics: the 'dangerous' candidate leading Brazil's presidential race". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 May 2019. Retrieved 27 October 2018. Rezende, Constança (14 March 2018). "Bolsonaro quer campo de refugiados em Roraima". O Estado de S. Paulo. São Paulo, Brazil: Grupo Estado. Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Atkins, Ed (29 October 2018). "Jair Bolsonaro's Brazil Is a Disaster for the Amazon and Global Climate Change". Motherboard. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 30 October 2018. "Bolsonaro vê imigrantes como "ameaça" e chama refugiados de "a escória do mundo" – Jornal Opção". 18 September 2015. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Em Mato Grosso, Bolsonaro defende radicalização dos produtores contra MST". Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Jair Bolsonaro: Pro-Torture, Anti-Gay and Brazil's Future President?". Americasquarterly.org. Archived from the original on 30 August 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Jair Bolsonaro defende golpe militar de 1964 em recepção a Yoani Sánchez". 20 February 2013. Archived from the original on 5 October 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. Phillips, Dom (14 January 2018). "Brazil's far-right presidential contender gets soft drink named after him". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Terra – ISTO GENTE – Entrevista: Jair Bolsonaro". 31 May 2013. Archived from the original on 31 May 2013. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Bolsonaro diz que é liberal e adota discurso que agrada investidores". 1.folha.uol.com.br. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2018. Alves, Cíntia (13 November 2017). "Em 7 mandatos, Bolsonaro não foi um deputado liberal nem totalmente anti-PT". Archived from the original on 12 February 2019. Retrieved 11 February 2019. "ENTREVISTA | Bolsonaro revela a O Antagonista seus planos para a Presidência". Archived from the original on 2 November 2017. Retrieved 11 January 2018 – via YouTube. Watts, Jonathan (5 May 2016). "With Rousseff on the ropes, Brazil's far right sees an opening". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 July 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Unlikely and unlikable, Jair Bolsonaro could lead Brazil". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 11 October 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2018. Globo (11 March 2016). "Ellen Page confronta Jair Bolsonaro em cena de documentário". Globo.com. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 13 September 2016. Weisbrot, Mark. "Brazil's Donald Trump?". US News. Archived from the original on 2 March 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. "Acts of Faith. A Trump-like politician in Brazil could snag the support of a powerful religious group: evangelicals". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 18 February 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. "Brazilian congressman ordered to pay compensation over rape remark". The Guardian. 18 September 2015. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 13 September 2016. Fernando, Gavin. "Is this the world's most repulsive politician?". News.com.au. Archived from the original on 13 September 2016. Retrieved 13 September 2016. Romero, Simon (7 May 2016). "Conservative's Star Rises in Brazil as Polarizing Views Tap Into Discontent". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 27 August 2017. Retrieved 1 September 2017. Londoño, Ernesto; Darlington, Shasta (20 January 2018). "Leftist Lion and Far-Right Provocateur Vie for Brazil Presidency". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 June 2018. Retrieved 7 June 2018. "The Most Misogynistic, Hateful Elected Official in the Democratic World: Brazil's Jair Bolsonaro – The Intercept". The Intercept. 11 December 2014. Archived from the original on 27 April 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Jair Bolsonaro hopes to be Brazil's Donald Trump". The Economist. 9 November 2017. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. Finchelstein, Federico (14 October 2018). "Brasil: todas las opciones son malas". Clarín. Archived from the original on 4 November 2018. Retrieved 4 November 2018. Fontes, Leonardo (22 September 2022). "Bolsonaro's authoritarian neoliberalism and the future of Brazilian democracy". London School of Economics and Political Science. Archived from the original on 14 August 2023. Retrieved 14 August 2023. "Why Brazil's president-elect Jair Bolsonaro really is the 'Trump of the Tropics'". The Telegraph. 29 October 2018. Archived from the original on 18 December 2018. Retrieved 18 December 2018. Duarte, Letícia (28 December 2019). "Meet the Intellectual Founder of Brazil's Far Right". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 10 October 2022. Retrieved 20 November 2022. "After Capitol Hill Fury, Bolsonaro 'Guru' in US Spreads Conspiracy Theories". POLYGRAPH.info. 14 January 2021. Archived from the original on 20 November 2022. Retrieved 20 November 2022. "Bolsonaro concede a Olavo de Carvalho condecoração igual à de Mourão e Moro". Folha de S.Paulo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 1 May 2019. Archived from the original on 29 June 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2022. "Jair Bolsonaro homenageia Olavo de Carvalho". Metrópoles (in Brazilian Portuguese). 2 May 2022. Archived from the original on 23 May 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2022. "Bolsonaro concede mais alta condecoração diplomática a Olavo de Carvalho". Poder360 (in Brazilian Portuguese). May 2019. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2022. "Bolsonaro concede a Olavo de Carvalho condecoração igual à de Mourão e Moro". GZH (in Brazilian Portuguese). 1 May 2019. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2022. "'Burro', 'covarde'... Bolsonaro já foi alvo de Olavo de Carvalho; confira outros ataques – Política". Estadão (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 16 August 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2022. "Vídeo. Olavo de Carvalho a Bolsonaro: "Enfia a condecoração no cu"". Metrópoles (in Brazilian Portuguese). 7 June 2020. Archived from the original on 20 May 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2022. Brasil 247, Redação (7 June 2020). "Olavo abandona Bolsonaro, diz que derruba seu governo e manda ele enfiar a condecoração". Brasil 247 (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 21 May 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Vídeo: Olavo de Carvalho xinga Bolsonaro e Luciano Hang e diz que vai derrubar governo". Revista Fórum (in Brazilian Portuguese). 7 June 2020. Archived from the original on 29 June 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2022. "Bolsonaro chama ditadura militar brasileira de "intervenção democrática"". R7.com (in Brazilian Portuguese). 31 March 2015. Archived from the original on 5 October 2018. Retrieved 13 September 2018. "Defensor da Ditadura, Jair Bolsonaro reforça frase polêmica: "o erro foi torturar e não matar" – Pânico – Jovem Pan FM São Paulo 100.9". Jovem Pan FM (in Brazilian Portuguese). 8 July 2016. Archived from the original on 4 September 2018. Retrieved 13 September 2018. "As frases polêmicas de Jair Bolsonaro". Congresso em Foco (in Brazilian Portuguese). 5 August 2017. Archived from the original on 10 September 2018. Retrieved 13 September 2018. "Entrevista de Bolsonaro ao 'Estado' com elogios a Chávez mobiliza militância – Política". Estadão. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2019. Carneri, Santi (27 February 2019). "Bolsonaro elogia ditador paraguaio Alfredo Stroessner em público". El País. Archived from the original on 27 February 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2019. "7 fatos sobre o ditador — e pedófilo reiterado — elogiado por Bolsonaro". Epoca.globo.com. 27 February 2019. Archived from the original on 9 March 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2019. "A lightning rod for attacks by Brazil's right-wing". Los Angeles Times. 28 November 2015. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. Watts, Jonathan (18 April 2016). "Dilma Rousseff: Brazilian congress votes to impeach president". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 18 April 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2016. "Folha de S.Paulo – Internacional – En – Brazil – Congressman Bolsonaro Defended New Military Coup in the 1990s". 1.folha.uol.com.br. 4 June 2018. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 4 June 2018. Kingstone, Steve (1 April 2004). "Brazil remembers 1964 coup d'etat". BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 January 2010. Retrieved 8 May 2007. "Bolsonaro determinou que Defesa faça as 'comemorações devidas' do golpe de 64, diz porta-voz". G1. 25 March 2019. Archived from the original on 26 March 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2019. Santa Rita, Bruno; Souza, Renato; Kafruni, Simone (25 March 2019). "Bolsonaro recomendou 'devidas comemorações' do golpe de 1964, diz Porta-Voz". Correio Braziliense (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 26 March 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2019. "Bolsonaro determina "comemorações devidas" do 31 de março". Terra. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2019. Campos, Ana Cristina (26 October 2018). "Veja as propostas de Bolsonaro e Haddad para a política externa". Agência Brasil. Archived from the original on 26 October 2018. Retrieved 26 October 2018. "Presidential candidates present a drastic turn in foreign policy Jair Bolsonaro (PSL) promises to break Brazil's traditional diplomatic positions while Fernando Haddad". Archived from the original on 28 October 2018. Retrieved 27 October 2018. "Os compromissos de Bolsonaro em Taiwan". Jair Bolsonaro. 4 March 2018. Archived from the original on 7 October 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2018. Spektor, Matias (27 December 2018). "Bolsonaro will regret baiting the Chinese tiger". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 28 December 2018. Retrieved 27 December 2018. Stuenkel, Oliver (6 December 2019). "Bolsonaro Placed a Losing Bet on Trump". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 6 December 2019. Retrieved 6 December 2019. "Still no hint of Brazil signing up for China's Belt and Road Initiative". South China Morning Post. 25 October 2019. Archived from the original on 6 December 2019. Retrieved 6 December 2019. Stuenkel, Oliver (22 September 2022). "Why Beijing Wants Bolsonaro to Win". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2022. "Israel hails election of Brazil's controversial Bolsonaro, who plans visit soon". The Times of Israel. 29 October 2018. Archived from the original on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 31 October 2018. Ben Zion, Ilan (31 March 2019). "Netanyahu embraces Brazil's far-right Bolsonaro in Israel". Associated Presa. Archived from the original on 6 April 2019. Retrieved 6 April 2018. "Arab League warns Brazil that Jerusalem embassy move could harm ties". The Times of Israel. 11 December 2018. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 3 May 2019. "'I love Israel' — Brazil's Bolsonaro lands in Tel Aviv". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 4 December 2019. Retrieved 5 December 2019. "Brazil's 'Tropical Trump' seeks to reset ties with White House visit". Financial Times. 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 9 November 2019. Retrieved 9 November 2019. "Brazil Should Shun Venezuela and Embrace Israel, Bolsonaro's Son Says". Bloomberg L.P. 10 October 2018. Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2018. "Brazil won't move embassy to Jerusalem, opens diplomatic office instead". The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com. 1 April 2019. Archived from the original on 18 November 2023. Retrieved 18 November 2023. Winter, Brian (9 October 2018). "What to Expect from Jair Bolsonaro". Americas Quarterly. Archived from the original on 12 October 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2018. "Jair Bolsonaro: Brazil's far-right president-elect wants to move Israel embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem". The Independent. 2 November 2018. Archived from the original on 2 November 2018. Retrieved 2 November 2018. Stargardter, Gabriel (10 January 2023). "Pressure mounts on Biden over Bolsonaro's Florida stay after Brasilia riots". Reuters. Archived from the original on 20 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. Almendariz, Alberto (11 October 2018). "Bolsonaro: "Un abrazo a Macri, que terminó con la 'Dilma Kirchner'"" [Bolsonaro: "A hug for Macri, who ended the 'Dilma-Kirchner'"]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2018. "Jair Bolsonaro denies he is a fascist and paints himself as a Brazilian Churchill". The Guardian. 30 October 2018. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 31 October 2018. "Brazil's Bolsonaro names Trump fan top diplomat as Cuba relations sour". Reuters. 3 December 2018. Archived from the original on 4 December 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2018. "Brazil military uneasy with Bolsonaro's openness to U.S. base: source". Reuters. 5 January 2019. Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 17 January 2019. "Trump says strongly considering NATO membership for Brazil". Reuters. 19 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "Trump says looking at NATO membership for Brazil". Euronews. 19 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "'Diplomacia em primeiro lugar, até as últimas consequências', diz Bolsonaro sobre Venezuela". G1.globo.com. 19 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "Em almoço fechado, Trump diz querer Brasil como membro pleno da Otan". Folha de S.Paulo. 20 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Bolsonaro, Jair M. [@jairbolsonaro] (23 May 2019). "Na reunião ministerial da OCDE que ocorre hoje em Paris, os EUA reafirmaram seu apoio ao ingresso do Brasil na organização" (Tweet) (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 19 March 2020. Retrieved 28 May 2019 – via Twitter. Embaixada EUA Brasil [@EmbaixadaEUA] (23 May 2019). "Os Estados Unidos mantêm seu apoio ao #Brasil para início do processo de adesão à #OECD (OCDE), como anunciado em 19 de março, na declaração do @POTUS, de @JairBolsonaro e pela @WHAAsstSecty" (Tweet) (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 15 August 2019. Retrieved 28 May 2019 – via Twitter. "USA Officially Supports Brazil's Candidature to The OECD". Folha de S.Paulo. 24 May 2019. Archived from the original on 8 March 2020. Retrieved 28 May 2019. "Brazil says it will no longer require visas from Chinese, Indian citizens". Reuters. 25 October 2019. Archived from the original on 25 October 2019. Retrieved 25 October 2019. Freedman, Andrew (31 October 2022). "Bolsonaro's defeat is a climate turning point". Axios. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. "Taxas de desmatamento (Deforestation rates)". TerraBrasilis. 2022. Archived from the original on 29 October 2022. "Bolsonaro diz que Brasil deixará Acordo de Paris se não forem aceitas mudanças". Reuters (in Portuguese). 12 December 2018. Archived from the original on 29 June 2019. Retrieved 29 June 2019. Escobar, Herton (22 January 2019). "Brazil's new president has scientists worried. Here's why". Science | AAAS. Archived from the original on 25 January 2019. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "Brazil's Bolsonaro nixes plans to host U.N. climate event". Reuters. 28 November 2018. Archived from the original on 25 January 2019. Retrieved 25 January 2019. Watts, Jonathan (15 November 2018). "Brazil's new foreign minister believes climate change is a Marxist plot". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 13 November 2019. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "Museum cancels event honouring Brazil's Jair Bolsonaro". BBC News. 16 April 2019. Archived from the original on 16 April 2019. Retrieved 16 April 2019. "Bolsonaro says Brazil rainforest reserve may be opened to mining". Reuters. 12 April 2019. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 17 April 2019. "Desmatamento na Amazônia em junho é 88% maior do que no mesmo período de 2018". G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 3 July 2019. Archived from the original on 21 August 2019. Retrieved 28 July 2019. "London climate change protesters daub Brazilian embassy blood red". Reuters. Archived from the original on 15 August 2019. Retrieved 15 August 2019. "Amazon deforestation: Brazil's Bolsonaro dismisses data as 'lies'". BBC News. 20 July 2019. Archived from the original on 21 August 2019. Retrieved 23 August 2019. de Campos, João Pedroso (2 August 2019). "Após rebater Bolsonaro, diretor do Inpe deixará o cargo". Veja (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 23 August 2019. Retrieved 23 August 2019. Casado, Letícia; Londoño, Ernesto (28 July 2019). "Under Brazil's Far-Right Leader, Amazon Protections Slashed and Forests Fall". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 August 2019. Retrieved 23 August 2019. Londoño, Ernesto (25 April 2021). "Imagine Jair Bolsonaro Standing Trial for Ecocide at The Hague - The New York Times". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 April 2021. Retrieved 10 July 2023. Watts, Jonathan (6 February 2023). "Investigate Bolsonaro for genocide, says Brazil's Marina Silva". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 14 July 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. "Bolsonaro should be investigated by International Criminal Court for crimes against humanity and nature". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 10 July 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. McCartin, Matthew J. (2022–2023). "The Planet v. Bolsonaro: How an International Crime of Ecocide Could Aid in Enforcing the UNFCCC". Journal of Global Rights and Organizations. 13: 1. Archived from the original on 10 July 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. "Brazil indigenous group accuses Bolsonaro of 'genocide' and 'ecocide'". The Independent. 11 August 2021. Archived from the original on 10 July 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. "Indigenous Groups Accuse Brazil's Bolsonaro of Genocide, Call on the ICC to Investigate | Sounds and Colours". soundsandcolours.com. 4 February 2022. Archived from the original on 10 July 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. "ICC climate crimes suit filed against Brazil's Bolsonaro – DW – 10/12/2021". dw.com. Archived from the original on 10 July 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. "Chiefs demand Bolsonaro's prosecution, say Amazon close to irreversible destruction". NBC News. 24 June 2021. Archived from the original on 10 July 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. Milhorance, Flávia (23 January 2021). "Jair Bolsonaro could face charges in The Hague over Amazon rainforest". The Observer. ISSN 0029-7712. Archived from the original on 24 January 2021. Retrieved 10 July 2023. "Bolsonaro, a Catholic, Expanded His Base Among Evangelicals". Folha de S.Paulo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 30 October 2018. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 1 November 2018. Carlos Albuquerque (29 September 2019). "Playing with religious identity". D+C Development and Cooperation. Archived from the original on 28 January 2023. Retrieved 13 January 2023. Polimédio, Chayenne (24 January 2018). "The Rise of the Brazilian Evangelicals". The Atlantic. Washington DC: Emerson Collective. Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2018. Johny, Stanly (3 November 2018). "Who is Jair Bolsonaro?". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 12 June 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Em última fala antes de votação, Bolsonaro faz aceno para ateus e gays". UOL. 6 October 2018. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 10 October 2018. Lima, Vanessa. "Jair Bolsonaro diz que mulher deve ganhar salário menor porque engravida". revistacrescer.globo.com (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 2 June 2018. "Bolsonaro diz que cabe à justiça acabar com a diferença salarial entre homens e mulheres". Folha de S.Paulo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 28 August 2018. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 22 October 2018. "Piada de Bolsonaro sobre sua filha gera revolta nas redes sociais". exame.abril.com.br (in Brazilian Portuguese). 6 April 2017. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 2 June 2018. "É chegada a hora de dar um "Basta!" às boçalidades de Bolsonaro, hoje o mais importante aliado da esquerda boçal: ambos se alimentam e se merecem!". Reinaldo Azevedo – VEJA.com.br. Archived from the original on 5 August 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2016. "Para rebater deputada, Bolsonaro diz que não a 'estupraria'". Márcio Falcão e Gabriela Guerreiro – Folha de São Paulo. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 1 August 2018. "Bolsonaro sobre ataque a deputada: "me acusou de estuprador"". André Naddeo – Terra. Archived from the original on 1 August 2018. Retrieved 16 August 2018. "Mônica Bergamo: Bolsonaro é condenado por dizer que Maria do Rosário 'não merece' estupro". Folha de S.Paulo (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 2 June 2018. "Bolsonaro vira réu por falar que Maria do Rosário não merece ser estuprada". Política (in Brazilian Portuguese). 21 June 2016. Archived from the original on 30 May 2018. Retrieved 2 June 2018. "STJ determina que Bolsonaro indenize Maria do Rosário por danos morais". Folha de S.Paulo. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 2 June 2018. Gragnani, Juliana (30 October 2018). "Após posse presidencial, processos contra Bolsonaro no STF serão suspensos" (in Portuguese). BBC News. Archived from the original on 15 November 2018. Retrieved 15 November 2018. Fonseca, Pedro Henrique (29 September 2018). "A look at offensive comments by Brazil candidate Bolsonaro". AP News. Retrieved 14 July 2021. "Folha de S.Paulo – Câmara: Palmada muda filho "gayzinho", declara deputado federal – 26/11/2010". 1.folha.uol.com.br. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 3 June 2018. "Bolsonaro: "prefiro filho morto em acidente a um homossexual"". Terra (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 2 June 2018. Fonseca, Pedro Henrique (21 June 2011). "Deputado Bolsonaro diz que Governo transforma gays numa classe privilegiada". Jornal de Notícias. Archived from the original on 12 August 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. novoiluminismo (17 October 2013). Entrevista – Jair Bolsonaro e Angélica Ivo [ORIGINAL]. Retrieved 3 June 2018. "WATCH: Ellen Page Confronts Brazil's Biggest Homophobe on 'Gaycation'". 12 March 2016. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 10 June 2018. "Bolsonaro é condenado a pagar R$ 150 mil por declarações contra gays". Folha de S.Paulo. Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2018. Homofobia?. Jair Bolsonaro. Archived from the original on 7 October 2018. Retrieved 1 November 2018 – via Youtube. "Bolsonaro se diz vítima de notícias falsas, mas recorre a 'fakes' sobre seu próprio passado". Folha de S. Paulo. 31 July 2018. Retrieved 10 August 2018. ""Homossexuais serão felizes se eu for presidente", diz Bolsonaro em entrevista". iG. 4 October 2018. Archived from the original on 11 October 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018. "Presidente eleito, Jair Bolsonaro é entrevistado no Jornal Nacional". Jornal Nacional. 29 October 2018. Archived from the original on 6 November 2018. Retrieved 6 November 2018. "Bolsonaro sincero quis matar FHC e sonegar impostos". Gazeta do Povo. Archived from the original on 4 April 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019. "Campanha confirma vídeo em que Bolsonaro fala em 'fuzilar petralhada do Acre': 'Foi brincadeira'". O Globo. 3 September 2018. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019. Marés, Chico; Becker, Clara; Resende, Leandro; Afonso, Nathália (31 July 2018). "Bolsonaro no Roda Viva: erros e acertos do candidato do PSL à Presidência". Lupa (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 28 December 2018. Retrieved 9 March 2019. "Veja 11 frases polêmicas de Bolsonaro". Folha de S.Paulo. 6 October 2018. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019. "Bolsonaro acumula frases preconceituosas contra diferentes alvos; relembre". Folha de S.Paulo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 7 February 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Deputado nega ser racista, mas mantém declarações homofóbicas". www.correio24horas.com.br (in Brazilian Portuguese). Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Bolsonaro diz que irá acabar com reservas indígenas se for eleito | Metrópoles". www.metropoles.com (in Brazilian Portuguese). 3 April 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "MPF-RJ move ação contra Bolsonaro por ataques a negros e quilombolas". Consultor Jurídico (in Brazilian Portuguese). 10 April 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Bolsonaro diz que política de cotas é 'equivocada' e que política de combate ao preconceito é 'coitadismo'". G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 24 October 2018. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Bolsonaro defendeu esterilização de pobres como forma de combater miséria e criminalidade". O POVO (in Brazilian Portuguese). 11 June 2018. Archived from the original on 15 June 2018. Retrieved 15 June 2018. Baynes, Chris. "'Brazil's Donald Trump' critically injured in presidential campaign rally stabbing". The Independent. Archived from the original on 16 September 2018. Retrieved 16 September 2018. "'Forced' sterilisation of Brazilian woman sparks uproar". Archived from the original on 16 September 2018. Retrieved 16 September 2018. "Bolsonaro defendeu esterilização de pobres para combater miséria e crime". Folha de S.Paulo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 11 June 2018. Archived from the original on 18 October 2018. Retrieved 18 October 2018. "Bolsonaro defendeu esterilização de pobres para combater miséria e crime". Folha de S.Paulo. 11 June 2018. Archived from the original on 18 October 2018. Retrieved 18 October 2018. "In Bolsonaro's Brazil, Trump's Deadly Capitol Riot Felt Like A Warning For The Future". HuffPost. 10 January 2021. Waldron, Travis (28 June 2022). "Bolsonaro Intensifies Push For Military Support As He Plots To Undermine Brazil's Election". HuffPost. Nugent, Ciara (28 December 2021). "Why 2022 Might Be the Year Brazil Says Goodbye to President Bolsonaro". Time. Retrieved 12 July 2023. Phillips, Tom (5 May 2022). "CIA director urged Bolsonaro to stop doubting Brazil's voting system – report". the Guardia. "Deconstructed: Bolsonaro on the Brink". The Intercept. 30 September 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022. Borges, Victor; Slattery, Gram; Slattery, Gram (3 October 2022). "Brazil election goes to runoff as Bolsonaro outperforms polls". Reuters. Retrieved 5 October 2022. Rosati, Andrew; Sanches, Isadora (2 October 2022). "Bolsonaro Has Momentum Ahead of Brazil Runoff: Analyst React". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved 5 October 2022. "A mulher dos bastidores: saiba quem é Michelle Bolsonaro, a nova primeira-dama" (in Portuguese). G1. 28 October 2018. Archived from the original on 18 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019. "ISTOÉ Gente Online". Terra.com.br. Archived from the original on 12 May 2018. Retrieved 28 April 2018. "A bela da fera". universa.uol.com.br. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Bolsonaro empregou ex-mulher e parentes dela no Legislativo". O Globo. 3 December 2017. Archived from the original on 18 October 2018. Retrieved 18 October 2018. "Bolsonaro posa com vizinhos no Rio antes de se mudar para Brasília". noticias.uol.com.br (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 2 January 2019. Retrieved 2 January 2019. "Biografia de Flávio Bolsonaro". eBiografia. 12 February 2021. "Nasce filha de Eduardo Bolsonaro com psicóloga Heloísa Wolf". Poder360. 11 October 2020. "Pastor descolado de direita e terno azul de R$ 8 mil: O casamento de Eduardo Bolsonaro e Heloísa Wolf". Extra Online. 5 May 2019. de Souza, Diogo (29 April 2023). "Robson Gracie Passes Away At 88". JitsMagazine. Retrieved 29 April 2023. "Itamaraty foge de padrão ao condecorar Eduardo e Flávio Bolsonaro". Estado de Minas. 3 March 2019. Archived from the original on 21 August 2019. Retrieved 23 October 2019. "Presidente recebe Ordem do Mérito da Defesa". Ministério da Defesa. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 27 June 2019. "Discursos, condecorações e apresentações marcam o Dia do Exército em Brasília". defesa.gov.br. 17 April 2019. Archived from the original on 16 June 2019. Retrieved 16 June 2019. "Após Aeronáutica e Exército, Bolsonaro é homenageado pela Marinha". noticias.uol.com.br (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 23 October 2019. Retrieved 27 June 2019. "TST entrega comenda da Ordem do Mérito Judiciário do Trabalho 2019 – Notícias – TST". tst.jus.br. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 19 August 2019. "Bolsonaro recebe, em Brasília, homenagem da Justiça Militar". EBC. 28 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 October 2019. Retrieved 23 October 2019. Redação, Da (15 August 2019). ""Existe abuso, mas não pode cercear o trabalho das instituições", diz Bolsonaro". Odocumento.com.br (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 19 August 2019. "Most influential people 2019". Time. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 26 April 2019. "Most influential people 2020". Time. Archived from the original on 23 September 2020. Retrieved 23 September 2020. "2019 Person of the Year Awards". Brazilcham.com. 14 May 2019. Archived from the original on 2 November 2019. Retrieved 19 September 2019. "Person of the Year · 2020 Winner: Jair Bolsonaro". OCCRP. 2020. Retrieved 30 December 2020. di Gian Antonio Stella (27 October 2021). "Bolsonaro, ad Anguillara Veneta è cittadino onorario: la scelta (discussa) della giunta leghista". Corriere della Sera. Retrieved 21 February 2022. "Bolsonaro Padova, 500 antagonisti caricati dalla polizia: idranti per fermarli – Cronaca". November 2021. Shalders, André (7 December 2017). "Como o discurso de Bolsonaro mudou ao longo de 27 anos na Câmara?" (in Portuguese). BBC News. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 2 November 2018. "Resultados das Eleições 1994 – Rio de Janeiro – deputado federal". Tse.jus.br. Archived from the original on 8 December 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Resultado da eleição de 1998". Tse.jus.br. Archived from the original on 15 August 2019. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Folha Online – Especial – 2002 – Eleições". www1.folha.uol.com.br. Archived from the original on 5 December 2019. Retrieved 22 August 2019. "Resultado da eleição 2002". Tse.jus.br. Archived from the original on 15 August 2019. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Folha Online – Especial – 2006 – Eleições – Apuração – Rio de Janeiro – Deputado Federal". eleicoes.folha.uol.com.br. Archived from the original on 16 December 2019. Retrieved 22 August 2019. "Resultado da eleição 2006". Tse.jus.br. Archived from the original on 24 November 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. Paulo, iG São (6 October 2014). "Reeleito deputado pelo Rio, Bolsonaro quase quadruplicou votos em relação a 2010 – Política – iG". Último Segundo (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 22 August 2019. Retrieved 22 August 2019. "Estatísticas das Eleições 2010". Tse.jus.br. Archived from the original on 7 December 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Confira a apuração da votação por estado". 2.camara.leg.br. Archived from the original on 7 December 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Bolsonaro". IMDB. Retrieved 8 July 2023. Horton, Adrian (26 September 2022). "John Oliver: Bolsonaro's January 6 could be a lot worse than Trump's". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 July 2023. Amaral, Oswald E. "The Victory of Jair Bolsonaro According to the Brazilian Electoral Study of 2018." Brazilian Political Science Review (2020). 14 (1): e0004 -1/13 online Bloch, Agata, and Marco Vallada Lemonte. "Introduction to the Meteoric Political Rise of Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro Under a Crisis of the 'Brazilianness'." Ameryka Łacińska. Kwartalnik Analityczno-Informacyjny 4.106 (2020): 1–22. online Archived 15 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine Boito, Armando. "Reform and Political Crisis in Brazil: Class Conflicts in Workers' Party Governments and the Rise of Bolsonaro Neo-fascism." in Reform and Political Crisis in Brazil (Brill, 2021). Burity, Joanildo. "The Brazilian Conservative Wave, the Bolsonaro Administration, and Religious Actors." Brazilian Political Science Review 15 (2021). online Casarões, Guilherme et al. "Brazilian foreign policy under Jair Bolsonaro: far-right populism and the rejection of the liberal international order." Cambridge Review of International Affairs (September 2021), p1-21. De Sá Guimarães, Feliciano, and Irma Dutra De Oliveira E Silva. "Far-right populism and foreign policy identity: Jair Bolsonaro's ultra-conservatism and the new politics of alignment." International Affairs 97.2 (2021): 345–363. online Da Silva, Antonio José Bacelar, and Erika Robb Larkins. "The Bolsonaro election, antiblackness, and changing race relations in Brazil." Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Anthropology 24.4 (2019): 893–913. online Layton, Matthew L., et al. "Demographic polarization and the rise of the far right: Brazil's 2018 presidential election." Research & Politics 8.1 (2021): 2053168021990204. online Neto, Octavio Amorim, and Gabriel Alves Pimenta. "The First Year of Bolsonaro in Office: Same Old Story, Same Old Song?." Revista de Ciencia Politica 40.2 (2020): 187–213. online Pagliarini, Andre. "Facing Bolsonaro's Brazil: A progressive US foreign policy toward Brazil must neither defer to nor confront far-right president Jair Bolsonaro. instead, it should illuminate his antidemocratic tendencies while centering key global fights against inequality and climate change." NACLA Report on the Americas 52.1 (2020): 47–52. Pereira, Frederico Batista, and Felipe Nunes. "Media Choice and the Polarization of Public Opinion About Covid-19 in Brazil." Revista Latinoamericana de Opinión Pública (2021) 1–19. online Jair Bolsonaro at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata President of Brazil (in Portuguese) Profile in the Chamber of Deputies Portals:  Biography  Brazil  Conservatism