The Brothers Grimm is a 2005 fantasy adventure film directed by Terry Gilliam. The film stars Matt Damon, Heath Ledger and Lena Headey in an exaggerated and fictitious portrait of the Brothers Grimm as traveling con-artists in French-occupied Germany, during the early 19th century. The brothers eventually encounter a genuine fairy tale curse which requires courage instead of their usual bogus exorcisms. Supporting characters are played by Peter Stormare, Jonathan Pryce and Monica Bellucci. In February 2001, Ehren Kruger sold his spec script to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM). With Gilliam's hiring as director, the script was rewritten by Gilliam and Tony Grisoni but the Writers Guild of America refused to credit them for their work. MGM eventually dropped out as distributor but decided to co-finance The Brothers Grimm with Dimension Films and Summit Entertainment, while Dimension took over distribution duties. The film was shot in the Czech Republic. Gilliam often had feuds with brothers Bob and Harvey Weinstein, which caused the original theatrical release date to be delayed nearly ten months. The Brothers Grimm was finally released on 26 August 2005 with mixed reviews and grossed $105.3 million at the worldwide box office. Will and Jake Grimm are traveling con artists who use Jake's knowledge of folklore to fool people into paying them to kill monsters along with their sidekicks Hidlick and Bunst in French-occupied Germany during the early 19th century. In Karlstadt they "kill" a witch's ghost, after tricking the village. Italian torturer Cavaldi captures them and takes them to the French General Delatombe. The girls of the small village of Marbaden are going missing and the villagers are convinced that supernatural beings are responsible, Delatombe charges The Brothers to find out who is responsible, on the assumption that it is the work of con-artists like themselves. They soon discover a real supernatural force: a beautiful, yet dangerous, 500-year-old, Thuringian Queen stealing young girls to restore her own beauty. Long ago, King Childeric I came to the forest to build a city while his Queen experiments with black magic to gain eternal life. The Bubonic plague comes and she builds a high tower to avoid it, while her husband and everyone below her perishes. She did not understand the Plague was carried by wind and soon rotted away as she decayed over the years. Her spell granted her immortal life, but not the youth and beauty to go along with it. Her youthful appearance now only exists in her mirror, the source of her life, as an illusion and nothing more. She needs to drink the blood of twelve young women to regain her beauty, ten have already been reported missing. The queen is working an enchantment to regain her beauty with the aid of her werewolf huntsman with a magic axe, crow familiars, and various creatures in the forest. The Brothers Grimm, with the help of Angelika, a knowing huntress from the village, and Cavaldi discover her tower in the woods, where the huntsman fed one of the Grimm's horse spider eggs. That night, after the group returned to the village, a girl entered the stables to pet the horse, but by then the spider eggs have hatched and took over the horse, and the horse began to spit spider web from its mouth until the girl is completely ensnared in the web, the horse then yanks her up and swallows her. The Grimm's woke up by the girls screams and saw the horse swallowing the girl and heading off into the forest. Angelika and the Grimms followed the horse, just when Delatombe appeared in the village. Failed to retrieve the horse, Cavaldi takes the Grimms and Angelika back to Delatombe. Because they have failed, Cavaldi may kill both of the Grimms, but they convince Delatombe that the magic in the forest is caused by German rebels, and he sends them back, while Cavaldi stays behind with Angelika in the village. In the forest, Jake, Hidlick and Bunst try a catapult as a possible way to get into the tower, but Hidlick and Bunst go back to the village where another girl named Sasha is getting water from the well and sees a crow fall in, she picks it up and the crow flaps its wings and sprays mud onto her face until her facial features disappear and fall into mud, giving rise to a mud monster, which swallows her before turning into the gingerbread man and jumping into the well, despite Angelika and Cavaldi’s efforts to save her. Jake successfully makes it to the roof of the tower with a rope, where he notices twelve crypts in which the twelve victims must lie. When Sasha's body comes up from a pond, the werewolf takes her to a tomb. After rescuing Sasha and taking the wolfman's magic axe, the Grimms return to the village but Sasha is a sheepish trance. The magic axe is the only thing of which the trees in the forest are afraid. Delatombe captures the Brothers and believes them to be frauds. French soldiers begin burning down the forest and Cavaldi represses his sympathy for the Brothers, but they are eventually saved by Angelika. The werewolf is revealed to be Angelika's father, who is under the Queen's command by a spell. Angelika is drowned by her father, becoming the twelfth victim. The Brothers reach the tower while the Queen breathes an ice wind which puts out the forest fire. Delatombe notices that the Grimms have escaped and goes after them with Cavaldi. When Cavaldi refuses to kill the Grimms, Delatombe shoots him, but is impaled by Will. The Mirror Queen's death is caused by Jake shattering the enchanting mirror in the tower. The werewolf transforms into Angelika's father (the woodsman) and destroys the rest of the mirror by jumping out of the window with it and Will, who was trying to destroy the werewolf at all costs. Outside, Cavaldi seems to have survived, having donned the Grimm's faux-magic armor. He recites an Italian curse and the tower falls apart. Jake awakens Angelika with a kiss, which in turn resurrects the other eleven girls and Will. With the menace gone and their daughters returned to them, the villagers of Marbaden celebrate and give their heart-felt thanks to the Brothers Grimm. Cavaldi stays in the village and joins the villagers for the feast. The Grimms decide to pursue a new profession, presumably writing fairy tales. Matt Damon as Will Grimm. Will is the older more serious brother, interested in making money and meeting women. Will is often hard on Jake and blames him for the death of their sister, but at the same time is very protective of him. Heath Ledger as Jake Grimm. Jake is the younger and more sensitive of the brothers and interested in fairy tales and adventures. Jake feels that Will doesn't care about or believe in him. Peter Stormare as Mercurio Cavaldi: Delatombe's Italian associate. Cavaldi originally has a grudge against the brothers, but eventually has a change of heart. Lena Headey as Angelika: Her father is a woodsman transformed into a werewolf huntsman by the Queen's curse. Jonathan Pryce as General Vavarin Delatombe: A cruel French military commander. Delatombe attempts to burn down the forest and kill the brothers. Tomáš Hanák as the Huntsman Julian Bleach as Letorc, Delatombe's manservant Monica Bellucci as the Mirror Queen Mackenzie Crook and Richard Ridings as Hidlick and Bunst: Duo sidekicks for the Grimms. They are eventually beheaded by French soldiers. Roger Ashton-Griffiths as The Mayor Anna Rust as Sister Grimm Ehren Kruger's screenplay was written as a spec script; in February 2001, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) purchased the script, with Summit Entertainment to co-finance the film. In October 2002, Terry Gilliam entered negotiations to direct, and rewrote Kruger's script alongside frequent collaborator Tony Grisoni. The Writers Guild of America refused to credit Gilliam and Grisoni for their rewrite work, and Kruger received sole credit. After Gilliam's hiring, production was put on fast track for a target November 2004 theatrical release date. MGM had trouble financing the film, and dropped out as main distributor. Weeks later, Bob Weinstein, under his Dimension Films production company, made a deal with MGM and Summit to co-finance The Brothers Grimm, and become the lead distributor. Projected at $75 million, this was to be Dimension Films' most expensive film ever. Johnny Depp was Gilliam's first choice for Will Grimm, but producer Bob Weinstein believed Depp was not commercially famous enough for the role. Damon joked that Weinstein "was kicking himself because half-way through production, Pirates of the Caribbean came out and Depp was all of a sudden a big sensation". Ledger met Gilliam in November 2002 when Nicola Pecorini recommended the actor to the director, comparing him to Depp. Gilliam intended to cast Ledger opposite Depp. Damon and Ledger were originally cast in opposite roles before they asked to have their characters switched. Damon had wanted to work with Gilliam for years. The actor "grew up loving [Gilliam's] Time Bandits, the way that movie created this weird but totally convincing world". Gilliam elected to have Damon wear a prosthetic nose, but Weinstein said "it would have distracted audiences from Damon's star-studded good looks". Gilliam later reasoned that "it would have been the most expensive nose job ever". Gilliam wanted Samantha Morton for the female lead but was overruled by The Weinsteins who wanted a more conventionally beautiful actress. Robin Williams was originally cast in the role of Cavaldi before dropping out, and was replaced by Peter Stormare. Nicole Kidman turned down the role of the Mirror Queen due to scheduling conflicts. The original start date was April 2003, but filming did not begin until 30 June. It was decided to shoot The Brothers Grimm entirely in the Czech Republic over budget constraints. Damon said "this is an $80 million movie, which would probably cost $120—$140 million in America". The majority of filming required sound stages and backlots from Barrandov Studios in Prague. Filming at Barrandov ended on 23 October. Location filming began afterwards, which included the Křivoklát Castle. Along with Alien vs. Predator and Van Helsing, The Brothers Grimm provided work for hundreds of local jobs and contributed over $300 million into the Czech Republic's economy. Gilliam hired Guy Hendrix Dyas as production designer after he was impressed with Dyas' work on X2. Gilliam often disputed with executive producers Bob and Harvey Weinstein during production. The Weinstein Brothers fired cinematographer and regular Gilliam collaborator Nicola Pecorini after six weeks. Pecorini was then replaced by Newton Thomas Sigel. "I'm used to riding roughshod over studio executives," Gilliam explained, "but the Weinsteins rode roughshod over me." Gilliam got so upset, filming was shut down for nearly two weeks. Matt Damon reflected on the situation: "I've never been in a situation like that. Terry was spitting rage at the system, at the Weinsteins. You can't try and impose big compromises on a visionary director like him. If you try to force him to do what you want creatively, he'll go nuclear." The feud between Gilliam and the Weinsteins was eventually settled, although Bob Weinstein blamed the entire situation on yellow journalism. Filming was scheduled to end in October, but due to various problems during filming, principal photography did not end until the following 27 November. Due to the tensions between the filmmaker and the producers during production, Gilliam said in retrospect about the film, "[I]t's not the film they wanted and it's not quite the film I wanted. It's the film that is a result of [...] two groups of people, who aren’t working well together." Regarding the Weinsteins also producing Martin Scorsese's film Gangs of New York (2002), Gilliam stated: "Marty [Scorsese] said almost the exact same quote I said, without us knowing it: 'They took the joy out of filmmaking.'" Post-production was severely delayed when Gilliam disagreed with the Weinsteins over the final cut privilege. In the meantime, the conflict lasted so long that Gilliam had enough time to shoot another feature film, Tideland. To create the visual effects, Gilliam awarded the shots to Peerless Camera, the London-based effects studio he founded in the late-1970s with visual effects supervisor Kent Houston. However, two months into filming, Houston said that Peerless "ran into a number of major issues with The Brothers Grimm and with the Weinstein Brothers". He continued that "the main problem was the fact that the number of effects shots had dramatically increased, mainly because of issues that arose during shooting with the physical effects." Meanwhile, the Queen's chamber inside the tower was actually built by the Art Department as 2 sets. One set was resplendent and new while the other was old and decrepit. The sets were joined to each other by the central mirror, a piece of transparent glass giving the illusion that a single set was reflected and used to create the effect. There were originally to be about 500 effect shots, but it increased to 800. The post-production conflict between Gilliam and the Weinsteins also gave enough time for Peerless to work on another film, The Legend of Zorro. Four different creatures were required for computer animation: a Wolfman, a mud creature, the Mirror Queen, and a living tree. John Paul Docherty, who headed the digital visual effects unit, studied the animation of the computer-generated Morlocks in The Time Machine for the Wolfman. Docherty depicted the Morlocks "as a nice mix between human and animal behaviors". The death of The Mirror Queen was the most complex effect of the film. In the sequence, the Queen turns into hundreds of shards of glass and shatters. With computerized rendering, this could not happen, as the 3D volume of the body suddenly turns into 2D pieces of glass. The problem was eventually solved due to sudden advances that occurred with Softimage XSI software. The original theatrical release date was due in November 2004 before being changed many times; the dates had been moved to February 2005, 29 July, 23 November, and finally 26 August. Executive producer Bob Weinstein blamed the pushed back release dates on budgetary concerns. To help promote The Brothers Grimm, a three-minute film trailer was shown at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival, while twenty minutes of footage was shown at the 2005 event. Miramax spent around $30 million promoting the film. The Brothers Grimm was released in the United States in 3,087 theaters, earning $15.1 million in its opening weekend in second place behind The 40-Year-Old Virgin. The film eventually grossed $37,916,267 in the United States and $67.4 million internationally, coming to a worldwide total of $105,316,267. The Brothers Grimm was shown at the 62nd Venice International Film Festival on 4 September 2005, while in competition for the Golden Lion, but lost to Brokeback Mountain, also starring Ledger. The Brothers Grimm was released to mixed reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 38% based on reviews from 182 critics, with an average score of 5.18/10. The site's consensus states: "The Brothers Grimm is full of beautiful imagery, but the story is labored and less than enchanting." On Metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 51 out of 100 based on 36 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade "C" on scale of A to F. Roger Ebert called the film "an invention without pattern, chasing itself around the screen without finding a plot. The movie seems like a style in search of a purpose, with a story we might not care about." Stephen Hunter of The Washington Post wrote that "The Brothers Grimm looks terrific, yet it remains essentially inert. You keep waiting for something to happen and after a while your mind wanders from the hollow frenzy up there with all its filigrees and fretwork." Mick LaSalle from the San Francisco Chronicle felt "despite an appealing actor in each role, the entire cast comes across as repellent. Will and Jake Grimm are two guys in the woods, surrounded by computerized animals, putting audiences to sleep all over America." Peter Travers, writing in Rolling Stone magazine, largely enjoyed The Brothers Grimm. He explained that "if you're a Gilliam junkie, as I am, you go with it, even when the script loses its shaky hold on coherence." Travers added, "even when Gilliam flies off the rails, his images stick with you." Gene Seymour of Newsday called the film "a great compound of rip-snorting Gothic fantasy and Python-esque dark comedy". Miramax owns the home video rights, while Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer holds the television rights. The DVD release of The Brothers Grimm released 20 December 2005 includes audio commentary by Gilliam, two "making-of" featurettes, and deleted scenes. The film was released on Blu-ray Disc format in October 2006. Both the DVD and Blu-ray were released by Lionsgate Home Entertainment, under license from Miramax. The film served as inspiration for the manga series Blue Exorcist. "The Brothers Grimm (2005) – Financial Information". The Numbers. "The Brothers Grimm". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Marc Graser (19 February 2003). "'Brothers Grimm' filled to brim". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Charles Lyons; Kathy Dunkley (13 February 2001). "Lion future looks 'Grimm'". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Adam Dawtrey (27 October 2002). "Inside Move: Back on his horse". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Staff (1 December 2003). "Hot Picks". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Ken P. (8 August 2005). "IGNFF Exclusive: Brothers Grimm Diary: Guy Hendrix Dyas". IGN. Archived from the original on 8 December 2006. Retrieved 12 December 2008. David Rooney (3 March 2003). "Co-prod a new Dimension". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Jeff Otto (22 August 2005). "Interview: Matt Damon and Heath Ledger". IGN. Retrieved 18 June 2019. Dan Jolin (March 2009). "A Film by Heath Ledger and Friends...". Empire. pp. 109–113.[permanent dead link] Willow Green (31 October 2005). "Grimm and Terry-fying". Empire Online. Retrieved 1 March 2022. Richard Corliss; James Inverne (1 August 2005). "Terry's Flying Circus". Time. Archived from the original on 24 July 2019. Retrieved 24 July 2019. Cathy Meils (6 July 2003). "Gilliam's 'Grimm' pic Czechs in". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Michael Fleming (21 October 2002). "'Ring' scribe turns 'Skeleton Key' at U". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. David Rooney (10 June 2003). "'Scary,' 'Grimm' casting shows a new Dimension". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Carol Memmott (11 April 2004). "Damon, Prague star in 'Grimm' fairy tale". USA Today. Retrieved 13 December 2008. Cathy Meils (23 April 2003). "Gilliam gets a 'Grimm' start date". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Cathy Meils (1 December 2003). "Czech this out". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Dana Harris (25 September 2003). "Bellucci gig gets 'Grimm'". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Charles McGrath (14 August 2005). "Terry Gilliam's Feel-Good Endings". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 May 2015. Retrieved 24 July 2019. Cathy Meils (4 December 2003). "Czech film biz at rest after active year". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Peče, Maša (2009). "You've got to work at maintaining your version of the world. So start being alone!" An Interview with Terry Gilliam, Senses of Cinema, no. 53, 2009. Retrieved 25 April 2010 Bielik, Alain (25 August 2005). "The Brothers Grimm: A Gilliam Fairy Tale". Animation World Network. Retrieved 25 April 2010. Dana Harris; Gabriel Snyder (24 August 2004). "Miramax pushing pause button". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Gabriel Snyder (3 February 2005). "Studios play summer shuffle. . .again". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. Staff (13 May 2005). "'Grimm' by the minute". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. CLAUDIA ELLER (16 August 2005). "'Great Raid' Points to Minefield for Disney". Los Angeles Times. Brandon Gray (29 August 2005). "'Virgin,' 'Grimm' Top Glum Weekend". Box Office Mojo. Staff (28 July 2005). "Venice fest has Far East flavor". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2008. "The Brothers Grimm". Metacritic. Retrieved 25 April 2010. "The Brothers Grimm". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved 2 September 2019. "Cinemascore". Archived from the original on 20 December 2018. Roger Ebert (26 August 2005). "The Brothers Grimm". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 13 January 2014. Retrieved 24 July 2019. Stephen Hunter (26 August 2005). "Gold into Dross". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 7 November 2012. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Mick LaSalle (26 August 2005). "The fakers Grimm, before they became famous storytellers". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 10 December 2008. Peter Travers (11 August 2005). "Brothers Grimm". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 21 May 2008. Retrieved 25 April 2010. Gene Seymour (16 August 2005). "These 'Brothers' are far from grim". Newsday. "The Brothers Grimm (2005)". Amazon. Retrieved 10 December 2008. "The Brothers Grimm Blu-ray (2005)". Amazon. Retrieved 10 December 2008. "Lionsgate Shop – Search Results". lionsgateshop.com. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018. Retrieved 25 February 2018. Deb Aoki (22 July 2016). "Interview: Blue Exorcist Mangaka Kazue Kato". AnimeNewsNetwork.com. Retrieved 25 October 2019. Further reading Bob McCabe (October 2006). Dreams and Nightmares: Terry Gilliam, The Brothers Grimm, & Other Cautionary Tales of Hollywood. London: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-717556-7. Film portal Wikiquote has quotations related to The Brothers Grimm (film). The Brothers Grimm at IMDb The Brothers Grimm at AllMovie The Brothers Grimm at Box Office Mojo Interview with production designer Guy Dyas; Part 2; Part 3 Interview with storyboard artist