Zoolander is a 2001 American comedy film directed by and starring Ben Stiller. The film contains elements from a pair of short films directed by Russell Bates and written by Drake Sather and Stiller for the VH1 Fashion Awards television specials in 1996 and 1997. The earlier short films and this film feature Derek Zoolander (Stiller), a dimwitted supermodel. It is the last film from Paramount Pictures with the involvement of Village Roadshow Pictures. In the film, top people in the fashion industry, Jacobim Mugatu (Will Ferrell) and Derek's agent Maury Ballstein (Jerry Stiller), are hired by other executives to assassinate the Prime Minister of Malaysia (Woodrow Asai), who will pass progressive laws that would harm their businesses. Mugatu and Ballstein plan to brainwash Zoolander into killing him. Meanwhile, Zoolander has several personal and career issues, including declining popularity, disappointment in his career choice from his family, and trying to find his true purpose which he suspects is not being a model. Through much research, journalist Matilda Jeffries (Christine Taylor) becomes aware of the planned assassination and informs Derek about it. After Derek reconciles with the competing male model Hansel McDonald (Owen Wilson), the three try to stop the Prime Minister's assassination from happening. A satire on the fashion industry, the film received generally favorable reviews from critics and was a box-office success. A sequel, Zoolander 2, was released in February 2016. An animated film, Zoolander: Super Model, was released on Netflix UK in August 2016. In New York City, male model Derek Zoolander is at a low point; he is ousted as the top male fashion model by the rising star Hansel McDonald, his roommates and colleagues are killed in a "freak gasoline-fight accident", and an attempt to reconnect with his southern New Jersey working class relatives ends with the family rejecting him. Meanwhile, fashion mogul Jacobim Mugatu and Derek's agent Maury Ballstein are charged by the fashion industry with finding a model who can be brainwashed into assassinating the new progressive-leaning Prime Minister of Malaysia, whose policies will prohibit them from retaining cheap child labor in the country. Mugatu hires Derek, whom he had never worked with, to star in the next runway show for his brainwashing plan. It involves Derek being conditioned to attempt the assassination when the song "Relax" by Frankie Goes to Hollywood is played. Matilda Jeffries, feeling responsible for Derek's downfall as she wrote a critical Time article about him, becomes suspicious of Mugatu's offer. She tells her concerns to Derek, but he ignores her. After receiving info through calls from former hand model J.P. Prewett, Matilda and Derek meet him in a cemetery. Prewett reveals that the fashion industry has been behind several of history's political assassinations, including Abraham Lincoln and John F. Kennedy and the brainwashed models are soon killed after they have completed their task. Mugatu's cronies attack the group, forcing Derek and Matilda to flee. They go to Hansel's home, the last place they believe Mugatu will think to look. Derek, Hansel, and Matilda bond, the two male models resolving their differences while partaking of Hansel's collection of narcotics and participating in group sex with Matilda and others. Derek and Hansel break into Maury's office to find evidence of the assassination plot, but they cannot operate his computer to find them. Derek goes to the runway, and Mugatu's disc jockey plays a remix version of "Relax". This activates Derek's mental programming, only for it to stop after Hansel breaks into the DJ booth and shuts off the turntable. After Hansel smashes the computer on the floor (since he took Matilda saying the incriminating files were "in the computer" literally), a guilt-ridden Maury admits to the conspiracy. Mugatu then attempts to kill the Prime Minister himself by throwing a shuriken at him, but Derek stops it by unleashing his ultimate model look, "Magnum". In Derek's rural hometown, his father Larry watches the event on television, and proudly acknowledges Derek as his son while Mugatu is arrested. A few years later, Derek, Hansel, and Maury start "The Derek Zoolander Center for Kids Who Can't Read Good and Who Wanna Learn to Do Other Stuff Good Too". Derek and Matilda have a son named Derek Zoolander Jr., who has already developed his first modeling look. Ben Stiller as Derek Zoolander Owen Wilson as Hansel McDonald Christine Taylor as Matilda Jeffries Will Ferrell as Jacobim Mugatu Milla Jovovich as Katinka Ingabogovinana Jerry Stiller as Maury Ballstein David Duchovny as J.P. Prewett Jon Voight as Larry Zoolander Woodrow Asai as Prime minister of Malaysia Vince Vaughn as Luke Zoolander Judah Friedlander as Scrappy Zoolander Alexander Skarsgård as Meekus Nathan Lee Graham as Todd Justin Theroux as Evil DJ Andy Dick as Olga the masseuse Andrew Wilson as Hansel's corner guy John Vargas as Italian designer Jennifer Coolidge as American designer Tony Kanal as French designer Patton Oswalt as Monkey photographer Mason Webb as Derek Zoolander Jr. David Bowie and Billy Zane made prominent cameos as themselves, with Bowie acting as judge for a "walk-off", and Zane appearing as a friend of Derek. Comedian Godfrey and Taj Crown appear as janitor disguises for Derek and Hansel, respectively. Also making cameos were Lance Bass, Tyson Beckford, Victoria Beckham, Emma Bunton, Stephen Dorff, Shavo Odadjian, Fred Durst, Tom Ford, Cuba Gooding Jr., Fabio Lanzoni, Theo Kogan, Lukas Haas, Tommy Hilfiger, Paris Hilton, Carmen Kass, Heidi Klum, Lenny Kravitz, Karl Lagerfeld, Lil' Kim, James Marsden, Anne Meara, Natalie Portman, Frankie Rayder, Mark Ronson, Gavin Rossdale, Winona Ryder, Garry Shandling, Christian Slater, Gwen Stefani, Donald Trump, Melania Trump, Donatella Versace, Sandra Bernhard, Amanda Lepore and Veronica Webb. Ben Stiller first created the character for a skit at the 1996 VH1 Fashion Awards. The name "Derek Zoolander" was invented by Bates while he was editing the first short film, and was inspired by the names of two male models who both worked for Calvin Klein: the Dutchman Mark Vanderloo and the American Johnny Zander. Owen Wilson was Stiller's first choice for the role of Hansel but it was uncertain if he would be available and auditions were held. Jake Gyllenhaal auditioned for the role. Andy Dick was going to play Mugatu, but was unavailable due to a previous commitment to the TV show Go Fish. Stiller had originally intended to play Derek's agent Maury as well, but was already set to play the lead role and direct the film, leading him to cast his father Jerry Stiller as Maury instead. David Bowie appeared as himself as the judge of the walk-off scene, filming his cameo in September 2000. He later stated, "It was just too funny a script to walk past. An absolute hoot!" With his entrance accompanied by a freeze-frame and a snippet of his song "Let's Dance" (1983), biographer Nicholas Pegg describes Bowie's appearance as "willingly sending up the media's image of him as the ultimate arbiter of cool." The opening scenes were filmed at the real life 2000 VH1/Vogue Fashion Awards during commercial breaks. "Derelicte" is the name given to the fashion line designed by Mugatu and is a parody of a real fashion line created by John Galliano in 2000. It is described by Mugatu in the film as "a fashion, a way of life inspired by the very homeless, the vagrants, the crack whores that make this wonderful city so unique." The fashion line in the film consists of clothing made from everyday objects that could be found on the streets of New York. Galliano used clothing worn by the destitute as an inspiration for a real-life fashion line in 2000. During the scene in which David Duchovny, as J.P. Prewett, explains the conspiracy to Derek, he finishes answering Derek's original question "Why male models?" only for Stiller, in character, to ask again, "But why male models?" Stiller improvised this line because he had forgotten what he was actually supposed to say, but Duchovny allowed it, replying in character, "You serious? I just... I just told you that a moment ago." The original ending to the film would have entailed Derek getting fatally struck by a train and ascending to heaven, but the idea was scrapped as the producers feared they could not fit it into the film's original budget. Zoolander was never shown in Malaysia, as the film depicts an attempted assassination of the Malaysian prime minister. Malaysia's censorship board deemed it "definitely unsuitable". The film was also banned in neighboring Singapore due to "controversial elements" according to the country's Board of Film Censors. It was subsequently made available in Singapore in 2006, with an NC-16 rating. In the United States, the film was originally rated R for its sexual content, profanity, and drug references, but was later re-rated PG-13 on appeal.[citation needed] In the Asian release, all references to the country of Malaysia were changed to Micronesia, the subregion which Hansel mistook for Malaysia at one point in the western version. In the United States, since the film was released on September 28, 2001 (about two weeks after the 9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center), Stiller made the executive decision to digitally remove any backgrounds that originally contained the Twin Towers in the background skyline. Stiller defended his decision to erase images of New York's World Trade Center Towers from the film, saying he did what he thought was appropriate at the time. The Twin Towers were later restored for the 2016 Blu-ray release. Glamorama, a 1998 satirical novel by Bret Easton Ellis, tells the story of a vacuous male model who becomes involved in a plot concocted by international terrorists who recruit from within the fashion industry. In 2005, Ellis stated that he was aware of the similarities between Zoolander and Glamorama and said that he attempted to take legal action. Ellis was later asked about the similarities in a 2009 BBC interview but said that he is unable to discuss the topic due to an out-of-court settlement. Zoolander earned $15.5 million during its opening weekend, ranking in second place behind Don't Say a Word. It grossed $45.2 million in the U.S. and Canada and $15.6 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $60.8 million against a budget of $28 million. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 64% based on 141 reviews, with an average rating of 6/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "A wacky satire on the fashion industry, Zoolander is one of those deliberately dumb comedies that can deliver genuine laughs." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 61 out of 100 based on reviews from 31 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "C+" on an A+ to F scale. Reviews appreciated Zoolander as an escapist, upbeat satire on New York fashion. BBC film critic Nev Pierce labeled it "sharply observed", specifically with its parody magazine covers and dialogue. Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter felt the film mostly achieved the difficult goal of being "silly and smart" at the same time. Its humor, however, was generally considered hit-and-miss. Honeycutt wrote it had both predictable "low-grade gags" and "weirdly hip and even witty ones". Pierce thought "the frenetic buffoonery does score several big laughs" but could take time for some viewers to adapt to, such as in the first hour, "where several jokes fail to click and Ferrell's camp villainy simply grates". Some reviews criticized the incorporation of child labor law themes; Roger Ebert criticized the portrayal as insensitive. McCarthy, while finding the assassin subplot clever, also found it too serious for the comical vibe. Todd McCarthy of Variety praised the performances and highlighted its many cameos. He called Stiller's performance "constantly amusing" if overplaying his "look" a little, but stated "the character's intentional superficiality wears a little thin at feature length". The journalist exclaimed Wilson "gets far more comic mileage than one could have imagined possible overlaying ruthless careerism with an affably vacant grunge/Eastern veneer". Pierce wrote how the actors contributed to the film's style; he argued Wilson's "impeccable timing in the climax elevates the sometimes bizarre material to moments that border comedy genius", and the cameos "lends an air of authenticity to the idiocy". Although praising the production design, costumes, and choice of pop songs, Todd McCarthy felt the film did not have "truly confident visual stylization" to make comic book-esque villains like Mugatu enjoyable, and that long conversations were not fluidly written and edited. He also went after the removal of the Twin Towers as "disruptive" and offending the audience's intelligence. Roger Ebert added that "to some degree, Zoolander is a victim of bad timing", referencing the film's release two weeks after September 11, 2001 and the presidential assassination plot point which he found to be in bad taste. He found some parts of the film funny and gave it a rating of one star out of four. According to Stiller, years later in private, Ebert admitted that he had changed his mind and now thought that the film was funny, and apologized to him for going "overboard". The film received votes from two critics at the Sight & Sound's Poll of the greatest films of all time. Fashion journalist Hadley Freeman categorized Zoolander as unique to other mainstream fashion films such as Designing Woman (1957), Funny Face (1957), and The Devil Wears Prada (2006); whereas they usually employ the same critiques of unintelligent models, silly clothing, and insipid business practices, Zoolander is much more surreal in how it puts these cliches together, as shown in its premise of male models being hypnotized to kill a prime minister. The soundtrack to Zoolander was released on September 25, 2001. The Kruder & Dorfmeister remix of David Holmes' song "Gone" is in the movie when Zoolander is in the day spa, shortly before his brainwashing. In 2008, Stiller said he intended to make a sequel to Zoolander, and by January 2011 a script had been completed. Filming commenced at Cinecittà studios in Rome in early 2015, and on March 10 Stiller and Wilson appeared at the Paris Fashion Week in character as Derek Zoolander and Hansel McDonald. Zoolander 2 was released on February 12, 2016. An animated film, Zoolander: Super Model was released on Netflix UK in August 2016. In late 2022, the film went viral on the short-form video hosting service, TikTok. The trend utilized a couple of scenes starring Stiller and Wilson, creating a renewed interest in the movie. "ZOOLANDER (12)". British Board of Film Classification. October 5, 2001. Retrieved December 27, 2014. "Zoolander (2001) - Financial Information". The Numbers. "Zoolander". Box office Mojo. Retrieved June 14, 2020. Morris, Daniel (March 8, 2023). "Film Talk: Looking Back – Hitting the catwalk with Zoolander". Express & Star. Retrieved April 9, 2023. "'Zoolander 2' Coming February 2016". SlashFilm. March 10, 2015. Retrieved March 10, 2015. Hughes, Josiah (November 17, 2016). "Watch the Trailer for the 'Zoolander' Cartoon Movie". Exclaim. Retrieved August 19, 2016. Kaplan, Ilana (September 28, 2021). "Zoolander at 20: How a Post-9/11 Flop Became the Comedy Everyone's Still Quoting". Esquire. Archived from the original on December 20, 2023. Bronte Lord; Logan Whiteside & Alison Kosik. "Meet the model who inspired 'Zoolander'". CNNMoney.[dead link] Foreman, Katya (February 12, 2016). "The male model: How did we get to Zoolander?". BBC Culture. Buss, Andrew (September 30, 2021). ""But Why Male Models?": An Oral History of Zoolander". Vanity Fair. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on September 30, 2021. Coy, Bronte (September 11, 2017). "16 years on: What you never knew about Zoolander". News.com.au. Retrieved March 11, 2022. Pegg, Nicholas (2016). The Complete David Bowie (Revised and Updated ed.). London: Titan Books. p. 679. ISBN 978-1-78565-365-0. "Political Threads". On the Media. February 1, 2008. Archived from the original on February 7, 2008. Retrieved February 9, 2008. "Zoolander faces Malaysian censorship controversy". TheGuardian.com. September 28, 2001. "Malaysia shuns Stiller's 'Zoolander'". Associated Press. September 27, 2001. Retrieved April 2, 2019. "Singapore bans US comedy film". BBC News. February 8, 2002. "Zoolander banned in Singapore". The Globe and Mail. February 9, 2002. Retrieved February 18, 2024. "Release dates for Zoolander (2001)". IMDb. "15 things you (probably) didn't know about Zoolander". ShortList. November 14, 2013. Retrieved December 5, 2017. "Twin Towers Removed From Zoolander Film". Sun Sentinel. October 30, 2001. Retrieved October 30, 2001. Hanson, Eric (January 30, 1999). "Ellis dissects the glitterati in 'Glamorama'". Star Tribune. Retrieved December 22, 2021. "Information Leafblower". Information Leafblower. Archived from the original on February 10, 2007. Retrieved July 21, 2009. "collective — bret easton ellis interview". BBC. Archived from the original on August 4, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2009. "Three new films lure public back to movies". The Daily Journal. October 1, 2001. p. 7. Archived from the original on July 24, 2023. Retrieved July 24, 2023 – via Newspapers.com. "Zoolander". Rotten Tomatoes. September 28, 2001. Retrieved June 24, 2022. "Zoolander". Metacritic. September 28, 2001. Retrieved December 11, 2015. McClintock, Pamela (February 12, 2016). "Box Office: Ryan Reynolds' 'Deadpool' Earns Record $47.5M Friday for Massive $130M Debut". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 10, 2022. McCarthy, Todd (September 27, 2001). "Zoolander". Variety. Retrieved April 14, 2021. "'Zoolander': THR's 2001 Review". The Hollywood Reporter. September 28, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2021. Pierce, Nev (November 12, 2001). "Zoolander (2001)". BBC Online. Archived from the original on November 13, 2001. Retrieved January 12, 2022. Roger Ebert (September 28, 2001). "Zoolander". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved January 17, 2016. Christopher Rosen (April 22, 2013). "Roger Ebert 'Zoolander' Review: Ben Stiller Says Late Film Critic Apologized For Scathing Notice". The Huffington Post. Retrieved January 1, 2021. "Votes for Zoolander (2001) | BFI". Archived from the original on April 1, 2018. Freeman, Hadley (May 2, 2007). "Zoolander is the finest film about fashion ever". The Guardian. Retrieved April 14, 2021. "Zoolander 2001 Soundtrack". TheOST.com. Retrieved December 23, 2013. "Stiller Confirms Zoolander Sequel". WENN. Retrieved March 23, 2021 – via IMDb. James White (January 14, 2011). "Ben Stiller Talks Submarine". Empire. Retrieved August 31, 2021. "Comingsoon.net - Zoolander 2 to Shoot in Rome This Spring!". February 9, 2015. "What's With The 'Zoolander' Memes And What's The 'Zoolander Song' On TikTok?". msn.com. Retrieved April 28, 2023. Wikiquote has quotations related to Zoolander. Zoolander at IMDb Zoolander at the TCM Movie Database Derek Zoolander, Male Model: The original short film and background story Derek Zoolander: Male Model at IMDb