Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams is a 2002 American spy action comedy film co-produced, written, shot, edited, co-composed, and directed by Robert Rodriguez. It is the sequel to Spy Kids (2001) and the second installment in the Spy Kids film series. The film stars Antonio Banderas, Carla Gugino, Alexa Vega, Daryl Sabara, Mike Judge, Ricardo Montalbán, Holland Taylor, Christopher McDonald, Cheech Marin, and Steve Buscemi. Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams premiered at the Grauman's Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles, California on July 28, 2002, and was released in the United States on August 7, by Dimension Films. The film received generally positive reviews from critics and grossed over $119 million worldwide against a production budget of $38 million. A sequel, Spy Kids 3-D: Game Over, was released in 2003. Carmen Cortez and Juni Cortez are now full-time agents of the OSS' new Spy Kids Division. They face fierce competition from Gary and Gerti, Donnagon Giggles' children. After the Giggles siblings outperform them on a mission to rescue the president's daughter Alexandra, Carmen defends Gary, straining her relationship with Juni. At the OSS awards banquet, Donnagon hacks into the president's teleprompter and is named director of the OSS instead of Gregorio Cortez. Shortly after, the adults are incapacitated by a group of "Magna Men", who are after the "Transmooker", a device that can shut off all electronic devices. Gary causes Juni to drop the Transmooker in a scuffle, allowing the Magna Men steal it. Gary blames Juni for the theft, causing him to be fired from the OSS. Carmen hacks into the database, reinstates Juni's agent status, and assigns to them the assignment to recover the Transmooker, which was originally assigned to Gary and Gerti. They find a mysterious island where no electronics work. Meanwhile, Gary and Gerti are rerouted to the Gobi Desert and while trying to pinpoint their position fall into a pit of camel feces, whereupon they swear revenge. Upon reaching the island, Carmen and Juni meet Romero, a scientist attempting to create miniaturized hybrid animals to sell. Instead, he accidentally doused them with a growth concoction, causing them to increase in size. He also reveals that he created the Transmooker to hide his island, meaning that the stolen Transmooker was a prototype and the real one is on the island. Too afraid of the large creatures roaming around, Romero shows Carmen and Juni the way to the real Transmooker. After being informed of their disappearance, Gregorio and Ingrid begin tracking down Carmen and Juni, joined by Ingrid's parents. Carmen is captured by a flying pig, and dropped into its nest with Gerti, who tells her that Gary is genuinely evil. When he attacks Juni, Carmen incapacitate him. Encouraged by Juni, Romero leaves his lab and finds his creatures much friendlier than he thought. Carmen and Juni eventually find and recover the Transmooker, eliminating the cloaking around the island, and are surprised when their family joins them. Donnagon then confronts the group, takes the Transmooker and, after a fight with Gregorio tries to destroy the Cortez family with it, but it malfunctions. Gerti reveals she sabotaged it and threatens Donnagon with telling everything to her mother, which he detests. Romero arrives alongside his creatures and destroys the prototype Transmooker as well. The President and his staff arrive on the island. He and his daughter fire Donnagon; Gary is temporarily disavowed, and Alexandra appoints Gregorio as director of the OSS. Even though he is offered a promotion, Juni resigns due to the impersonal treatment he had received by the OSS after being framed. As the Cortez family leaves the island, Romero gives Juni a miniature spider-monkey as a gift, and the island's inhabitants bid farewell to the Cortez family. During the credits, Isador "Machete" Cortez hosts a concert featuring Carmen (with a microphone which helps her sing, and a belt that helps her dance), and Juni (with a guitar that plays itself), but realizes too late that he never put any batteries in the devices before they went onstage. When he breaks this news to Carmen and Juni, this shocks them, realizing they have musical talent. Meanwhile, Dinky Winks, the owner of Troublemakers theme park where Juni rescued Alexandra, paddles to Romero's island to offer a business deal. Antonio Banderas as Gregorio Cortez, the father of Juni and Carmen who is now called back to the OSS Carla Gugino as Ingrid Cortez, the mother of Juni and Carmen Alexa Vega as Carmen Cortez, daughter of Gregorio and Ingrid who is now an OSS member of their spy kid division Daryl Sabara as Juni Cortez, son of Gregorio and Ingrid and Carmen's brother, also a member of the OSS's spy kid division Mike Judge as Donnagon Giggles, an OSS agent turned director who was previously rescued by Carmen and Juni, but is now seeking world domination Ricardo Montalbán as Grandfather Valentin Avellan Holland Taylor as Grandmother Helga Avellan Christopher McDonald as Neil Anami, the President of the United States Danny Trejo as Isador "Machete" Cortez, gadget inventor and Juni and Carmen's uncle Alan Cumming as Fegan Floop, host of Floop's Fooglies Tony Shalhoub as Alexander Minion, Floop's assistant Matt O'Leary as Gary Giggles, the son of Donnagon Giggles and a rival OSS agent of Juni and Carmen's love interest Taylor Momsen as Alexandra Anami, the President's daughter Emily Osment as Gerti Giggles, daughter of Donnagon Giggles and a rival OSS agent of Carmen Cheech Marin as Felix Gumm, an OSS agent Steve Buscemi as Romero Additionally, Bill Paxton appears as Dinky Winks, a theme park owner. Spy Kids 2 was filmed on a comparatively low budget of $38 million. Rodriguez requested the same budget as the first Spy Kids. In exchange, he asked for more creative freedom: "[Y]ou save so much money that you get in return ... a lot of creative freedom, I mean total creative freedom." He wanted "an old-fashioned Ray Harryhausen adventure" with a "more old-school" look. To save money, Rodriguez acted as his own production designer and cinematographer. He said no D.P. wanted to film on digital video. He re-used props and sets between shots, with editing and post-production creating the illusion of a more lavish production. For example, in the large ship that Banderas and Gugino use, there was only one captain's chair. Gugino's image was flipped; Rodriguez intentionally didn't change her hair part so audiences could notice the effect. Spy Kids 2 was filmed entirely on High Definition digital video, a crucial decision for Rodriguez. After seeing George Lucas using digital video for Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones, Rodriguez tested the technology during re shoots for the first Spy Kids film. He thought the digital video transferred to film looked better than traditional film. Rodriguez used the cameras unfiltered. Spy Kids 2 has over twice the amount of special effects than the first film. Rodriguez picked some visual effects companies who were eager and less established, as well as starting up his own Troublemaker Studios, and reemploying Hybrid, who had worked with him on the first film. Gregor Punchatz, the film's lead animator, removed motion blur for the computer generated creatures. In doing so, the clean image resembled the stop-motion work of filmmaker Ray Harryhausen, who has a cameo in the film and a "special thanks" credit. The scene with the army of live skeletons was shot on a real rock formation, with the two young actors on safety wires, and the computer generated skeletons added later to over three dozen shots. Arenal Lake, Costa Rica Austin, Texas, USA Big Bend National Park, Texas, USA Manuel Antonio, Costa Rica San Antonio, Texas, USA Six Flags Over Texas, Arlington, Texas, USA The film score was co-written by director Robert Rodriguez and composer John Debney, who had also co-written the score for Spy Kids. The sound is a mix of rock, pop, and indie rock, and includes songs performed by Alan Cumming and Alexa Vega. Unusually, the orchestral score was recorded in the auditorium of a local high school in Austin, Georgetown High School. All tracks composed by Debney and Rodriguez, and performed by the Texas Philharmonic Orchestra. "The Juggler" "Spy Ballet" "Magna Men" "Treehouse" "R.A.L.P.H." "Floop's Dream" (performed by Alan Cumming) "Escape from Dragon-spy" "Spy-parents" "Island of Lost Dreams" "Donnagon's Big Office"/"The Giggles" "Mysterious Volcano Island" "Romero's Zoo Too" "Mothership"/"SpyGrandparents" "Magna Racers" "Aztec Treasure Room" "Skeletons" "Creature Battle" "Romero's Creatures"/"SpyBeach" "SpyDad vs. SpyDad"/"Romero's Gift" "Isle of Dreams" (performed by Alexa Vega) Additional music not on the soundtrack album includes "Oye Como Spy", which is an adaptation of Tito Puente's "Oye Como Va", performed by Los Lobos (the song is on the soundtrack album from the first Spy Kids film). The film was released on VHS and DVD in the United States on February 18, 2003. The film is also available to download on iTunes. A Blu-ray re-release was scheduled for August 2, 2011 to coincide with the fourth film. Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams opened theatrically on August 7, 2002 in 3,307 venues and earned $16,711,716 in its first weekend, ranking third in the North American box office behind XXX and the second weekend of Signs. The film ended its run on January 12, 2003, having grossed $85,846,429 in the United States and Canada, and $33,876,929 overseas for a worldwide total of $119,723,358. On Rotten Tomatoes, Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams has a 75% approval score based on 136 reviews and an average rating of 6.6/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "Though the concept is no longer fresh, Spy Kids 2 is still an agreeable and energetic romp". Metacritic reports a 66 out of 100 rating based on reviews from 29 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A-" on an A+ to F scale. Roger Ebert gave the film 3 out of 4 stars and commented: "With Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams, the Spy Kids franchise establishes itself as a durable part of the movie landscape: a James Bond series for kids". Kenneth Turan of the New York Times gave it 4 out of 5 stars said: "The movie is a gaudy, noisy thrill ride -- hyperactive, slightly out of control and full of kinetic, mischievous charm". Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly wrote: "The antics are a tad more frantic, and the gizmos work overtime, as if ... Robert Rodriguez felt the hot breath of el diablo on his neck. On the other hand, the inventiveness is still superior and the network of fiends [sic] and family is extended". Michael Wilmington of Metro mix Chicago, noting how Rodriguez borrows many elements from television and earlier films, stated that "Rodriguez recycles and refurbishes all these old movie bits with the opportunistic energy of a man looting his old attic toy chest -- but he also puts some personal feeling into the movie. This is a film about families staying together, children asserting themselves and even, to some degree, Latino power". It was followed up in 2003 by a third film in the series, Spy Kids 3-D: Game Over, and in 2011 by a fourth film, Spy Kids: All the Time in the World. Talk Miramax Books released a novelization of the film in June/July 2002. The novel was written by children's book author Kiki Thorpe. The posters and end of the credits even say "Read the Talk/Miramax Books", telling the viewers to read the print retelling. "SPY KIDS 2 (U) (CUT)". British Board of Film Classification. August 6, 2002. Retrieved March 21, 2016. "Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams (2002)". Box Office Mojo. Internet Movie Database. January 13, 2003. Retrieved March 21, 2016. "Spy Kids 2 (2002)". American Film Institute. American Film Institute. Retrieved December 1, 2016. "Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams reviews". Rotten Tomatoes. Flixster. Retrieved January 22, 2013. Lee, Patrick. "Interview: Robert Rodriguez' spies on the stars of his Spy Kids sequel". Science Fiction Weekly. Archived from the original on June 3, 2008. Retrieved September 12, 2008. Fred Topel (August 2002). "Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams". Cinefantastique. Vol. 34, no. 5. pp. 46–49. Rodriguez shot SPY KIDS 2 entirely with High Definition digital cameras Savlov, Marc (August 9, 2002). "Gadgets and Gizmos". The Austin Chronicle. Retrieved September 13, 2008. Soloman, Charles (May 16, 2004). "The man who made the monsters move". SFGate: Home of the San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved September 13, 2008. "ComputerCafe Tackles 3D Challenges for Spy Kids 2". Digital Media FX. Retrieved September 12, 2008. Jakle, Jeanne (May 14, 2020). "Take a drive — or stroll — through San Antonio movie history". San Antonio Express-News. Retrieved September 6, 2022. The enchilada red facade of Central Library served as the Organization of Super Spies Junior headquarters in "Spy Kids 2." http://www.dallasfilmcommission.com/film-tourism/?doing_wp_cron=1498558564.5050749778747558593750[dead link] Savlov, Marc (September 9, 2002). "Auditorium Scores: The Sound of 'Spy Kids 2'". The Austin Chronicle. Retrieved September 14, 2008. "Weekend Box Office Results for August 9-11, 2002". Box Office Mojo. Internet Movie Database. August 12, 2002. Retrieved March 21, 2016. "Spy Kids 2: Island of Lost Dreams reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved May 2, 2020. "Home". CinemaScore. Retrieved November 13, 2022. Roger Ebert (2002). "Review by Roger Ebert". Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved January 22, 2013. Scott, A. O. (August 7, 2002). "Review (New York Times)". The New York Times. Retrieved January 22, 2013. "Review (Entertainment Weekly)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 27, 2009. Retrieved January 22, 2013. Wilmington, Michael (August 7, 2002). "Movie review, 'Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams'". Metromix Chicago. Retrieved October 28, 2009. Wikiquote has quotations related to Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams. Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams at IMDb Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams at Metacritic Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams at Box Office Mojo Spy Kids 2: The Island of Lost Dreams at Rotten Tomatoes