Eat Pray Love is a 2010 American biographical romantic drama film starring Julia Roberts as Elizabeth Gilbert, based on Gilbert's 2006 memoir of the same name. Ryan Murphy co-wrote and directed the film, which was released in the United States on August 13, 2010. It received mixed reviews from critics, but was a financial success, grossing $204.6 million worldwide against a $60 million budget. Elizabeth 'Liz' Gilbert has a husband of 8 years, a house, and a successful career – yet finds herself lost, confused, and searching for what she really wants in life. Liz asks for a divorce; her husband, Stephen, struggles to understand why and does not accept the divorce easily. In the meantime, she has a brief affair with David, a young actor. Newly divorced and at a crossroads, Liz steps out of her comfort zone, embarking on a three point trip: Italy, India and Bali, a journey that becomes a quest for self-discovery. In her travels, she discovers the pleasure of eating in Italy, enjoying pasta and gelato for four months. A new Swedish friend introduces her to a private Italian tutor, and they celebrate Thanksgiving together right before she departs for India. There, Liz heads to an ashram where she experiences the power of prayer. In addition to mass prayer sessions, honoring their guru, she is assigned the chore of scrubbing floors. 'Texas Richard' keeps her on her toes as well as supporting her. When he's ready to move on, she's reassigned to greeting and orienting new arrivals. Feeling more centered, Liz moves on to Bali, Indonesia. A year after first meeting him, she reintroduces herself to Ketut there. He gives her various tasks. While Liz is cycling, she is run off the road by Felipe, a Brazilian. She is sent to Wayan, a healer and homeopath in the village, to treat a bad gash in her leg. There she meets Brazilian Armenia. She convinces her to go back to the village that night to the Beach Shack for dancing. There, Felipe approaches Liz, apologizing for almost killing her with his jeep. Armenia then tries to set her up with young Ian, but she doesn't want another idle fling. Felipe offers her a lift. Hours later, he returns with a hangover cure and his number. They hook up, and two weeks later Liz makes an appeal to her friends to donate to Wayan's future house, coming up with over $18,000. When Felipe proposes, they travel to a remote spot to spend time together, but after a few days, Liz panics and breaks up with him. Deciding her time there is over, Liz prepares to leave and stops to say farewell to Ketut. He encourages her to embrace and not run from love. She acknowledges his advice and runs to the dock after Felipe, where she confesses her feelings to him. Finally and unexpectedly, the inner peace and balance of true love comes to her. Julia Roberts as Elizabeth "Liz" Gilbert Javier Bardem as Felipe, a Brazilian businessman Liz falls in love with on her journey James Franco as David, the man Liz has an intense relationship with while she is finalizing her divorce Richard Jenkins as Richard, a Texan Liz befriends at an Indian ashram Viola Davis as Delia Shiraz, Liz's best friend Billy Crudup as Stephen, Liz's ex-husband Sophie Thompson as Corella, a woman at the Indian ashram Mike O'Malley as Andy Shiraz, Delia's husband Christine Hakim as Wayan, Liz's best friend in Indonesia Arlene Tur as Armenia Hadi Subiyanto as Ketut Liyer, Liz's advisor in Indonesia Gita Reddy as The Guru Tuva Novotny as Sofi, Liz's Swedish best friend in Rome Luca Argentero as Giovanni, Liz's Italian tutor and Sofi's love interest Rushita Singh as Tulsi, Liz's friend at the ashram Laksmi De-Neefe Suardana and Dewi De-Neefe Suardana as the owners of Indus restaurant. Eat Pray Love began principal photography in August 2009. Filming locations include New York City (United States), Rome and Naples (Italy), Delhi and Pataudi (India), Ubud and Padang-Padang Beach at Bali (Indonesia). Hindu leaders voiced concern over the production of the film and advocated the use of spiritual consultants to ensure that the film conveyed an accurate reflection of life in an ashram. Both Salon.com and The New York Post have suggested that Gurumayi Chidvilasananda was the guru featured in the film and in the book by Elizabeth Gilbert on which the film was based, though Gilbert herself did not identify the ashram or the guru by name. The two Balinese lead characters (Ketut Liyer and Wayan) are played by Indonesian actors Hadi Subiyanto and Christine Hakim, respectively. "Flight Attendant" by Josh Rouse "Last Tango In Paris (Suite, Part 2)" by Gato Barbieri "Thank You" by Sly & the Family Stone "Der Hölle Rache kocht in meinem Herzen" (from Mozart's The Magic Flute) by Wiener Philharmoniker "Heart of Gold" by Neil Young "Kaliyugavaradana" by U. Srinivas "The Long Road" by Eddie Vedder and Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan "Harvest Moon" by Neil Young "Samba da Bênção" by Bebel Gilberto "Wave" by João Gilberto "Got to Give It Up, Part 1" by Marvin Gaye "'S Wonderful" by João Gilberto "Better Days" by Eddie Vedder "Attraversiamo" by Dario Marianelli "Dreams" by Fleetwood Mac "Boyz" by M.I.A. The film debuted at #2 behind The Expendables with $23,104,523. It had the highest debut at the box office with Roberts in a lead role since America's Sweethearts in 2001. During its initial ten-day run, revenue grew to a total of $47.2 million. The competing film The Expendables features Eric Roberts, Julia Roberts's brother, and the box office pitted Roberts versus Roberts. Hollywood.com commented that "sibling rivalry is rarely as publicly manifested" as this. The film, produced on a $60 million budget, grossed $80,574,382 in the United States and Canada and has a worldwide total of $204,594,016. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a 36% approval rating based on 210 reviews with an average rating of 5.20/10. The site's critical consensus reads "The scenery is nice to look at, and Julia Roberts is as luminous as ever, but without the spiritual and emotional weight of the book that inspired it, Eat Pray Love is too shallow to resonate." On Metacritic, it has a score of 50 based on reviews from 39 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade B on scale of A to F. Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave the film 1 out of 5 stars, beginning his review "Sit, watch, groan. Yawn, fidget, stretch. Eat Snickers, pray for end of dire film about Julia Roberts's emotional growth, love the fact it can't last for ever. Wince, daydream, frown. Resent script, resent acting, resent dinky tripartite structure. Grit teeth, clench fists, focus on plot. Troubled traveller Julia finds fulfilment through exotic foreign cuisine, exotic foreign religion, sex with exotic foreign Javier Bardem. Film patronises Italians, Indians, Indonesians. Julia finds spirituality, rejects rat race, gives Balinese therapist 16 grand to buy house. Balinese therapist is grateful, thankful, humble. Sigh, blink, sniff. Check watch, groan, slump." Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe gave the film 3 out of 4 stars while writing "Is it a romantic comedy? Is it a chick flick? This is silly, since, in truth, it's neither. It's simply a Julia Roberts movie, often a lovely one." San Francisco Chronicle film critic Mick LaSalle overall positively reviewed the film and praised Murphy's "sensitive and tasteful direction" as it "finds way to illuminate and amplify Gilbert's thoughts and emotions, which are central to the story". Negative reviews appeared in The Chicago Reader, in which Andrea Gronvall commented that the film is "ass-numbingly wrong", and Rolling Stone, in which Peter Travers referred to watching it as "being trapped with a person of privilege who won't stop with the whine whine whine." Humor website Something Awful ran a scathing review. Martin R. "Vargo" Schneider highlighted several aspects of the film that he considered completely unrealistic. Political columnist Maureen Dowd termed the film "navel-gazing drivel" in October 2010. The BBC's Mark Kermode listed the film as 4th on his list of Worst Films of the Year, saying: "Eat Pray Love... vomit. A film with the message that learning to love yourself is the greatest love of all, although I think the people who made that film loved themselves rather too much." In The Huffington Post, critic Jenna Busch wrote: Eat Pray Love is ultimately charming and inspirational. Though it doesn't have quite the impact of the book, it will likely leave you pondering your life choices and forgiving your flaws. It will certainly have you forgiving the few flaws in the film. The performances are just too fantastic, the vistas too lovely to pay too much attention to anything else. In the Italian newspaper La Repubblica, journalist Curzio Maltese wrote: How many platitudes fit in a two-hour-twenty-minutes-long movie? Several, if Eat Pray Love is anything to go by. Sure, if TV director Ryan Murphy's directing weren't so slow, even more would. For example, in the long part shot in Rome, the mandolin is conspicuously absent. There's a shower of spaghetti, Italians who gesticulate all the time and shout vulgarities as they follow foreign girls around. [...] There's lots of pizza. But no mandolin. Why? [...] Goes without saying that the story would've surprised us more if Julia had found out how well one can eat in Mumbai, how much they pray in Indonesia, and how one can fall in love even in the Grande Raccordo Anulare, possibly avoiding rush hour. The film received generally negative reviews in the Italian press. Marketers for the film created over 400 merchandising tie-ins. Products included Eat Pray Love-themed jewelry, perfume, tea, gelato machines, an oversized Indonesian bench, prayer beads, and a bamboo window shade. World Market department store opened an entire section in all of their locations devoted to merchandise tied to the movie. The Home Shopping Network ran 72 straight hours of programming featuring Eat Pray Love products around the time of the film's release. The decision to market such a wide range of products, hardly any of which were actually featured in the film, brought criticism from The Philadelphia Inquirer, The Washington Post and The Huffington Post. Julia Roberts filmography "EAT PRAY LOVE (PG)". British Board of Film Classification. August 6, 2010. Retrieved May 15, 2013. Fritz, Ben (August 12, 2010). "Movie projector: Stallone's 'Expendables' to blow away 'Eat Pray Love' and 'Scott Pilgrim'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 12, 2010. Tatiana Siegel (April 14, 2009). "Jenkins set for 'Eat, Pray, Love'". Variety. Retrieved August 29, 2009. Eat Pray Love-No Shooting In Original Ashram Archived July 17, 2010, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved May 10, 2010 'Eat Pray Love' Julia Roberts Movie Worries Hindus Archived August 12, 2018, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved May 10, 2010 Shah, Riddhi. The "Eat, Pray, Love" guru's troubling past." Salon.com, August 14, 2010. Retrieved November 22, 2011 "Eddie Vedder with Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan: The Long Road". Review. Basement Songs. March 11, 2010. Retrieved March 10, 2012. 'Expendables' Explode, 'Eat Pray Love' Carbo-Loads, 'Scott Pilgrim' Powers Down boxofficemojo.com Gray, Brandon (August 23, 2010). "Weekend Report: 'Expendables' Battle On, 'Vampires,' 'Piranha' Settle for Scraps". Box Office Mojo. Dergarabedian, Paul (August 10, 2010). "Julia Roberts vs. Eric Roberts at box office..." Hollywood.com. "Eat Pray Love Movie Reviews, Pictures". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved September 19, 2021. "Eat Pray Love Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved August 14, 2020. "CinemaScore". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved April 16, 2022. Peter, Bradshaw (September 23, 2010). "Eat Pray Love". the Guardian. Retrieved September 23, 2010. Wesley, Morris (August 13, 2010). "Eat Pray Love movie review". The Boston Globe. The New York Times Company. Retrieved September 14, 2020. LaSalle, Mike (August 13, 2010). "Movie review: "Eat Pray Love"". San Francisco Chronicle. Hearst Corporation. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Gronvall, Andrea (August 12, 2010). "Eat Pray Love Showtimes & Reviews". Chicago Reader. Creative Loafing Media. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Travers, Peter (August 12, 2010). "Eat Pray Love News and Reviews". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 14, 2020. "Something Awful – The Expendables; Scott Pilgrim vs. The World; Eat Pray Love". Dowd, Maureen (October 20, 2010). "Making Ignorance Chic". The New York Times. Retrieved October 21, 2010. Kermode Uncut: My Worst Five Films of 2010 on YouTube. Retrieved December 30, 2010. Busch, Jenna (August 13, 2010). "Jenna Busch: Eat Pray Love Review". HuffingtonPost.com, Inc. Maltese, Curzio (September 18, 2010). "Nella Roma di Julia manca solo il mandolino". La Repubblica. Tornabuoni, Lietta. "Lietta Tornabuoni: Eat Pray Love Review". L'Espresso. Archived from the original on September 21, 2010. Retrieved September 23, 2010. Ferzetti, Fabio. "Fabio Ferzetti: Eat Pray Love Review". Il Messaggero. Archived from the original on September 21, 2010. Retrieved September 23, 2010. Romani, Cinzia. "Cinzia Romani: Eat Pray Love Review". Il Giornale. Archived from the original on November 2, 2010. Retrieved September 23, 2010. ABC News article: "Eat, Pray, Love – and Spend." Forbes article: "The Eat Pray Love Industry." The Washington Post article: "'Eat Pray Love': Parsing our feelings about all those product tie-ins." World Market website: "Eat Pray Love merchandise Archived August 25, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. The Huffington Post article: "Shop, Buy, Repeat." Wikiquote has quotations related to Eat Pray Love. Eat Pray Love at IMDb Eat Pray Love at Box Office Mojo Eat Pray Love at Rotten Tomatoes Eat Pray Love at Metacritic