The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants is a 2005 American comedy-drama film directed by Ken Kwapis from a screenplay by Delia Ephron and Elizabeth Chandler, based on the 2001 novel of the same name by Ann Brashares. It stars America Ferrera, Amber Tamblyn, Blake Lively and Alexis Bledel. It follows four best friends who buy a mysterious pair of pants that fits each of them despite their differing sizes. They share the pants equally as they spend their first summer apart. It was released in the United States on June 1, 2005 by Warner Bros. Pictures. A sequel, The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants 2, was released on August 6, 2008. A third film is in development, as is a musical adaptation based on the first film. Lena Kaligaris, Tibby Rollins, Carmen Lowell, and Bridget Vreeland are teenagers from Bethesda, Maryland, who have been best friends their whole lives and are about to spend their first summer apart: Lena is visiting her grandparents in Santorini, Greece; Bridget is going to soccer camp in Baja California, Mexico; Carmen is visiting her father in South Carolina; and Tibby is staying home. While shopping together, they find a pair of jeans that inexplicably fit them all perfectly. They decide to share the jeans equally over the summer, before parting the next day. While wearing the Pants, Lena nearly drowns, but a local Greek boy, Kostas Dounas, rescues her. Lena later learns from her grandmother that her and Kostas' families are enemies. Kostas pursues Lena, saying the dispute between their families has nothing to do with them. Lena initially rebuffs his advances, but eventually begins a secret relationship with him. Later, Kostas tells Lena he loves her, but her family interrupts and drags her away before she can answer. Lena appeals to her grandfather, who agrees to let her see Kostas before he leaves for Athens. Working at a discount department store, Tibby finds a young girl, Bailey Graffman, has fainted and calls an ambulance. Later, Bailey delivers the pants to Tibby's house when they are accidentally delivered to her home by mistake. Fascinated by Tibby's self-made film, Bailey appoints herself Tibby's assistant. Initially annoyed, Tibby grows to accept Bailey, and learns that Bailey has leukemia. When Bailey again is taken to the hospital, Tibby avoids her for a while, but eventually visits her with the pants. She pleads with Bailey to take them, but Bailey says the pants have already worked their magic by bringing her and Tibby together. Tibby continues to spend time with Bailey in the hospital, and when she passes away, Tibby decides to make a film inspired by her. Carmen arrives in South Carolina, only to discover that her father, Al, is about to marry Lydia, who has two children around Carmen's age: Paul and Krista. They are blonde WASPs, unlike Carmen, who was raised by her Catholic, Puerto Rican mother. Although Carmen's father and step-family initially seem welcoming, they emotionally neglect her. Carmen feels uncomfortable with her father referring to Paul and Krista as his kids, and resents him being an enthusiastic, present father to them while he has usually been absent in her life. She is embarrassed at a dress shop when she tries on the bridesmaid dress picked out for her for the wedding. Angered when the saleswoman calls her "the other one", Carmen shouts at Lydia and runs away. She eventually takes a taxi home and sees Al and her step family happily enjoying dinner together in their dining room, apparently unconcerned that she's missing. She throws a stone through their dining room window and returns to Maryland. When she arrives, Tibby tries to help Carmen with her feelings toward her father. Carmen lashes out at Tibby, who leaves in tears, though they eventually reconcile. Tibby convinces Carmen to confront her father with a phone call, during which she finally reveals her feelings of neglect and abandonment. He apologizes sincerely, but Carmen tells him it isn't enough. Arriving at soccer camp, Bridget develops a crush on coach Eric Richman. Despite relationships between coaches and campers being forbidden, Bridget flirts with Eric and seeks his attention during games. When Bridget's turn with the Pants begins, she leads Eric to the beach at night where they have sex and she loses her virginity. Bridget becomes depressed afterwards, and isolates herself when she returns home. After hearing about what happened in a letter, Lena calls Carmen and Tibby, and they go to Bridget's house. Bridget worries she is like her mother, whose mood swings and mental issues culminated in deep depression and her suicide. However, Carmen and Tibby reassure Bridget that she is stronger than her mother and comfort her with happy memories of her mother. On his way back to Columbia University, Eric visits and apologizes to Bridget for his behavior and expresses his hope that she will give him a chance when she is older. The girls meet Lena at the airport and drive to South Carolina to attend Carmen's father's wedding, despite Carmen's reluctance. Carmen's father publicly apologizes for neglecting her. Carmen accepts his apology and joins the blended family onstage for the ceremony. Amber Tamblyn as Tabitha "Tibby" Tomko-Rollins Victoria Tennant as Young Tibby America Ferrera as Carmen Lowell Tiara Santana as Young Carmen Blake Lively as Bridget Vreeland Ashley Hale as Young Bridget Alexis Bledel as Lena Kaligaris Alanna Dawn Ekkert as Young Lena Bradley Whitford as Albert "Al" Lowell, Carmen's father Nancy Travis as Lydia Rodman, Carmen's stepmother Rachel Ticotin as Christina Jenna Boyd as Bailey Graffman Mike Vogel as Eric Richman Michael Rady as Kostas Dounas Leonardo Nam as Brian McBrian Maria Konstandarou as Yia Yia, Lena's maternal grandmother George Touliatos as Papou, Lena's maternal grandfather Kyle Schmid as Paul Rodman, Carmen's stepbrother Erica Hubbard as Soccer Pal Diana Kristie Marsden as Soccer Pal Olivia Emily Tennant as Krista Rodman, Carmen's stepsister Ernie Lively as Franz Vreeland A number of young actresses were in talks to be cast for the movie. Hilary Duff was reportedly considered for the role of Tibby, the director chose Amber instead. Producer Debra Martin Chase, also behind the Cheetah Girls and Princess Diaries films, said Ferrera was "the first one we cast." Other actresses originally included Mischa Barton, Kristin Kreuk, and Olivia Wilde. Principal photography started on May 17, 2004. Filming began on the island of Santorini, Greece. Filming then continued in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico. The film was partially shot in the Kamloops and Ashcroft area in British Columbia, Canada. Also at the Zellers Coquitlam centre location On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 82% based on 153 reviews, with an average rating of 6.7/10. The site's critical consensus reads "This adaptation of a beloved novel charms with its heartwarming tale of friendship and young adulthood; realistic portrayals of the lives of teenage girls lend the comedy drama sincerity, and may capture hearts outside the female-centric demographic." Metacritic gives the film a weighted average score of 66 out of 100 based on 34 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A-" on an A+ to F scale. Shondaland mentioned in its review of the film that Bridget's white underwear (seen in the trial scene at the beginning of the film) was iconic. On its opening weekend, the film opened #5 at the box office with $9,833,340. As of November 14, 2008, the film had grossed $42,013,878 worldwide. Demi Adejuyigbe has mentioned that he coerced director Malcolm D. Lee to have characters from the film appear as background cameos in Space Jam: A New Legacy. Though not confirmed, this was likely a joke given that Adejuyigbe comically suggested to "decide how much of this anecdote is real." The DVD and VHS were released in the US on October 11, 2005. The film has yet to be released on Blu-ray. The song album was released by Columbia Records on May 24, 2005. "These Days" – Chantal Kreviazuk (3:57) "Unwritten" – Natasha Bedingfield (4:19) "Time of Our Lives" – Paul van Dyk (3:37) "Black Roses Red" – Alana Grace (4:12) "If God Made You" (Radio Remix) – Five for Fighting (4:16) "Just for You" – William Tell (3:46) "Closer to You" – Brandi Carlile (2:54) "No Sleep Tonight" – The Faders (3:00) "I Want You to Know" – Chantal Kreviazuk (3:19) "Be Be Your Love" – Rachael Yamagata (4:14) "Sun's Gonna Rise" – Shannon Curfman (3:55) "Simple" – Katy Perry (3:39) "Always There in You" – Valli Girls (an early track involving members of HAIM)(3:46) The album of Cliff Eidelman's score was released by Varèse Sarabande on July 12, 2005. "Prologue" (3:44) "Deja Blue" (1:04) "Fate" (1:01) "Rules of the Pants" (3:26) "A Touch of Greece" (1:18) "Honey" (1:10) "The Traveling Pants" (:53) "Reflection" (2:07) "Running" (1:26) "Traveling to Baja" (:39) "The Way of the Pants" (:34) "Letter" (1:48) "Broken Heart" (1:16) "A Brave Soul" (1:15) "Last Words" (:58) "Us" (2:18) "Sisterhood Reunites" (1:14) "Together" (1:29) "The Traveling Song" (3:17) "Piano Suite" (4:03) 2006 – Won; Imagen Foundation Awards for Best Actress (America Ferrera) 2006 – Nominated; ALMA Award for Outstanding Actress in a Motion Picture (America Ferrera) 2006 – Nominated; Young Artist Award for Best Family Feature Film – Drama 2006 – Nominated; Young Artist Award for Best Performance in a Feature Film – Supporting Young Actress (Jenna Boyd) 2005 – Nominated; Satellite Award for Outstanding Actress in a Supporting Role, Comedy or Musical (America Ferrera) 2005 – Nominated; Satellite Award for Outstanding Youth DVD (Widescreen Edition) 2005 – Nominated; Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Actress: Drama (Alexis Bledel) 2005 – Nominated; Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Actress: Drama (Amber Tamblyn) 2005 – Nominated; Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Breakout Performance – Female (America Ferrera) 2005 – Nominated; Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Breakout Performance – Female (Jenna Boyd) 2005 – Nominated; Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Breakout Performance – Female (Blake Lively) 2005 – Nominated; Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Breakout Performance – Male (Michael Rady) 2005 – Nominated; Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Hissy Fit (America Ferrera) 2005 – Nominated; Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Love Scene (Alexis Bledel and Michael Rady) 2005 – Nominated; Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie: Drama "The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved November 7, 2008. "A Third "Traveling Pants" Film On The Way". Dark Horizons. April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2018. "'The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants' Stage Musical in the Works". The Wrap. July 17, 2018. Retrieved August 6, 2018. "Parenting, Baby Names, Celebrities, and Royal News | CafeMom.com". cafemom.com. Retrieved February 7, 2024. "Olivia Wilde, Mischa Barton, Kaley Cuoco and More Auditioned for Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants Roles". Peoplemag. Retrieved February 7, 2024. "THE SISTERHOOD OF THE TRAVELING PANTS – Production Notes – The Traveling Pants Makes Their Circuit". CinemaReview.com. Archived from the original on December 6, 2005. Retrieved August 19, 2013. "The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved March 14, 2023. "Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants, The reviews at". Metacritic.com. Retrieved December 16, 2009. "Home". CinemaScore. Retrieved January 2, 2023. "Brief Moments in Briefs: 5 Pairs of Iconic Film Underwear". August 3, 2018. "Box Office Weekend Grosses from 8/8 to 8/10". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved November 7, 2008. "The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved November 14, 2008. "A review of Space Jam: A New Legacy (2021)". letterboxd.com. Retrieved August 20, 2022. Weiner, Jonah (November 12, 2013). "How Haim's Three Geeky Sisters Became the Year's Coolest New Band". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 22, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2014. The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants at IMDb The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants at Rotten Tomatoes