Get Smart's Bruce and Lloyd: Out of Control is a direct-to-video film released in 2008. It is a side spin-off of the 2008 film Get Smart and was released in North America on July 1, 2008, 11 days after the parent film began its theatrical run. Directed by Gil Junger, the film is written by Tom J. Astle and Matt Ember, based upon concepts created for the original Get Smart TV series by Mel Brooks and Buck Henry. The film's DVD sales have passed 100,000 copies with $2.2 million gross. During the events of Get Smart. Bruce and Lloyd have been testing out an invisibility cloak, but during a party, Maraguayan agent Isabella steals it for the country’s dictator, El Presidente. Now, Bruce and Lloyd must find the cloak on their own because the only non-compromised agents, Agent 99 and Agent 86 (Max Smart), are in Russia. With no field experience, Bruce and Lloyd must learn how to get a girl and infiltrate the Maraguayan Embassy to prevent Maraguay from selling the cloak to KAOS. The film includes a cameo by Anne Hathaway as Agent 99 (a scene that makes reference to events in the main film), Terry Crews as Agent 91, and a brief appearance by Patrick Warburton as Hymie. Larry Miller plays a dual role as the "Underchief" in charge of the R&D department, and his twin brother, a CIA official (Miller appears as the CIA official in the theatrical film). The closing credits incorporate bloopers and deleted scenes. Masi Oka - Bruce Nate Torrence - Lloyd Jayma Mays - Nina Marika Dominczyk - Isabella Brianna Rain King as Young Isabella Patrick Warburton - Hymie Larry Miller - The Underchief and his brother Ruben Garfias - El Presidente Terry Crews - Agent 91 Amanda Tosch as Agent 34 Luisa Moraes as Woman in Dress Regan Burns - Lab Tech Kelly Karbacz - Judy the receptionist J. P. Manoux - Neil Eddie J. Fernandez - Guard Matt Kaminsky - C.I.A. Guy (as Matthew Kaminsky) Vincent M. Ward - C.I.A Agent Ernie Grunwald - Laboratory Worker Brian Gattas - Laboratory Worker Anne Hathaway - Agent 99 (uncredited cameo) Get Smart's Bruce and Lloyd Out of Control the-numbers.com. Retrieved March 21, 2014. Get Smart's Bruce and Lloyd: Out of Control at IMDb Get Smart's Bruce and Lloyd: Out of Control at AllMovie