Carnival Night (Russian: Карнавальная ночь, romanized: Karnavalnaya noch) is a 1956 Soviet musical film. It is Eldar Ryazanov's first big-screen film, Lyudmila Gurchenko's first role and also one of the most famous films starring popular comedian Igor Ilyinsky. Produced during the Khrushchev Thaw, the film became the Soviet box office leader of 1956 with a total of 48.64 million tickets sold. Today it remains a highly popular New Year's Eve classic in Russia and the post-Soviet space. It is Novy God and the employees of a House of Culture are ready with their annual New Year's entertainment program. It includes a lot of dancing and singing, jazz band performance and even magic tricks. Suddenly, an announcement is made that a new director has been appointed and that he is arriving shortly. Comrade Ogurtsov arrives in time to review and disapprove of the scheduled entertainment. To him, holiday fun has a different meaning, he imagines speakers reading annual reports to show the club's progress over the year and a lecturer speaking for 40 minutes about the possibility of life on the planet Mars. And, perhaps, a bit of serious music, something from the Classics, played by the Veterans' orchestra. Obviously, no one wants to change the program with only a few hours before the show, much less to replace it with something so boring. So everyone teams up in order to prevent Ogurtsov from getting to the stage. They manage to trap Ogurtsov by any means necessary so that the acts can perform their scheduled pieces, and celebrate New Year's Eve as originally planned. Igor Ilyinsky as Serafim Ivanovich Ogurtsov, acting club director Lyudmila Gurchenko as Lena Krylova Yuri Belov as Grisha Koltsov, electrician Andrei Tutyshkin as Fyodor Petrovich Mironov, bookkeeper Olga Vlasova as Adelaida Kuzminichna Romashkina, librarian Tamara Nosova as Tosya Burigina, Ogurtsov's secretary Georgi Kulikov as Seryozha Usikov, painter Gennadi Yudin as Jazz band Conductor Vladimir Zeldin as Nikolayev, Tip Clown Boris Petker as Nikolay Sidorov, Top Clown Sergei Filippov as Comrade Nekadilov, lecturer Shmelev Sisters as Singing Waitresses Gusakov Brothers as Step Dancers Tamara Sokolova and Petr Pomazkov as Dancers Director: Eldar Ryazanov Writers: Boris Laskin, Vladimir Polyakov Cinematography: Arkady Koltsaty Composer: Anatols Liepiņš (Anatoly Lepin) Music orchestration: Eddie Rosner, also jazz band leader (uncredited) Mosfilm's director of that time Ivan Pyryev was the one who appointed Eldar Ryazanov to direct the picture despite Ryazanov not having interest in musicals at that time. Pyryev was heavily involved in the making of the film, assisting Ryazanov every step of the way. Because the picture was Ryazanov's first directorial experience, the young director was met with severe skepticism and after seeing half of the filmed material the artistic council was convinced that the film would turn out to be a huge failure. Initially Lyudmila Gurchenko was rejected for the role of Lena Krylova by director Eldar Ryazanov and the artist council. Another actress was hired, however she could not handle the part. Then Ryazanov came to Pyryev with the appeal to hire a new actress, adding that anyone but Gurchenko should be signed up for the role of Krylova. But when Pyryev later saw Gurchenko in the Mosfilm corridor, he decided that there was something special about her. Pyryev brought her to the set and announced that she will act in the film. The film was made in five months, with most of the scenes shot in the Russian Army Theatre. All music is composed by Anatoly Lepin The song «Любовь — это счастье» ("Love is a Happiness") sung by Gurchenko was not included in the film. In 2006 Ryazanov made a sequel to the picture, called Carnival Night 2, or Fifty Years Later starring Alyona Babenko and Sergei Bezrukov. The film garnered mostly negative reviews. List of films set around New Year Anna Veligzhanina. ""Карнавальная ночь": Рязанов не хотел снимать Людмилу Гурченко". Komsomolskaya Pravda. Peter Rollberg (2009). Historical Dictionary of Russian and Soviet Cinema. US: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 130. ISBN 978-0-8108-6072-8. "Карнавальная ночь". VokrugTV. Birgit Beumers (2005). Pop Culture Russia!: Media, Arts, and Lifestyle. p. 78. ISBN 1-85109-459-8. "Карнавальной ночи" - 65 лет: как снимали музыкальную кинокомедию. In Russian "Эльдар Рязанов: Ирония судьбы, или Берегись худсовета!". Ria Novosti. Valentina Oberemko. ""Очень скучное кино!" "Карнавальную ночь" хотели забыть, как страшный сон". Argumenty i Fakty. "Эльдар Рязанов: лучшие фильмы, цитаты, диалоги". BBC. "Художественный фильм "Карнавальная ночь". Досье". Russian News Agency TASS. Denis Stupnikov. ""Карнавальная ночь" подвела жирную черту под эпохой Сталина". km.ru. Музыка к к/ф «Карнавальная ночь» at Discogs Anna Veligzhanina. ""Карнавальная ночь-2": Людмила Гурченко снова споет про "Пять минут", а ее героиню в продолжении знаменитой комедии сыграет Алена Бабенко". Komsomolskaya Pravda. "Обыкновенное чу… то есть шоу". // Известия. 2007-01-12. Archived from the original on 2018-05-24. Retrieved 2018-05-23.. In Russian Грандиозный провал. In Russian Carnival Night at IMDb Carnival Night at AllMovie v t e