Lindsey Stirling (born September 21, 1986) is an American violinist, songwriter, and dancer. She presents choreographed violin performances, in live and music videos found on her official YouTube channel, which she created in 2007. Stirling performs a variety of music styles, from classical to pop and rock to electronic dance music. Aside from original work, her discography contains covers of songs by other musicians such as Johann Sebastian Bach, Ludwig van Beethoven, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, and Antonio Vivaldi and various soundtracks. Her music video "Crystallize" finished as the eighth-most watched video of 2012 on YouTube, and her cover version of "Radioactive" with Pentatonix won Response of the Year in the first YouTube Music Awards in 2013. Stirling achieved one million singles sold worldwide by August 2014. As of May 10, 2023, her Lindseystomp YouTube channel exceeded 13 million subscribers and over 3 billion total views. Stirling has been named in Forbes magazine's 30 Under 30 in Music: The Class of 2015. Forbes notes her quarter-finalist position on America's Got Talent season five in 2010, a No. 2 position on the Billboard 200 for her second album Shatter Me in 2014, and her 11 million subscribers on YouTube. Stirling's eponymous debut album was a commercial success in Europe, selling 200,000 copies in Germany, winning a platinum certification; three additional certifications were given by Austria, Switzerland, and Poland. The album was nominated for the 2014 Billboard Music Awards for Top Dance/Electronic Albums. Stirling's second album Shatter Me won Top Dance/Electronic Album at the 2015 Billboard Music Awards. Stirling is the middle child of three daughters of Stephen and Diane Stirling. Stirling describes her childhood as being raised in a modest household and stated "I would not trade my humble childhood years for anything else." Due to her family's financial limitations, her parents could only afford to find a violin teacher who would give her half lessons. Although they were told by instructors that "a child isn't going to learn how to play in 15 minutes a week", her parents persisted, and at the age of five, she began taking violin lessons. Living in Gilbert, Arizona, Stirling attended Greenfield Junior High, and at age sixteen, Stirling attended Mesquite High School and joined four friends in a rock band called Stomp on Melvin. As part of her experience with the group, Stirling wrote a solo violin rock song, and her performance helped her to win the state title of Arizona's Junior Miss and claim the Spirit Award in the America's Junior Miss Finals competition. Stirling was also a member of Charley Jenkins Band for about a year. From a young age, Stirling had a fascination for dance and desired to take both dancing and violin lessons. In an interview with NewMediaRockstars, she said, "...ever since I was a kid, I've always wished that I could dance, but my parents said, 'You [can] choose violin or you [can] choose dance, but we can't afford both', and I chose violin. So this is kind of a fulfillment – it's funny to say, but this is something I've always wanted to do." In 2010, at the age of 23, Stirling was a quarter-finalist on season five of America's Got Talent, where she was described as a "hip hop violinist". She impressed the judges not only by mixing hip-hop, pop, and classical music on the violin, but by incorporating dancing with playing the violin, which she also does on her tours and official music videos. On a live-chat, Stirling explained, "It is very unnatural to dance while playing the violin. I had to practice so hard to learn how to do it, but now it is part of my expression and it comes naturally. I have to know a song perfectly before I can even begin to move. Once I know a song really well, I can then have fun dancing." Dancing made a huge impact not only in her performances, but also with her music: "I loved dance music so I started with that and wrote 'Transcendence', 'Electric Daisy', and 'Spontaneous Me'." Stirling's performances were dubbed "electrifying" by the judges, and won the acclaim of the audience, but after she attempted to step up the dance level in her quarter-final performance, judge Piers Morgan buzzed her. He told her: "You're not untalented, but you're not good enough, I don't think, to get away with flying through the air and trying to play the violin at the same time." Sharon Osbourne commented: "You need to be in a group. ... What you're doing is not enough to fill a theater in Vegas." In her blog, Stirling confided: "I was devastated at the results ... It was painful, and a bit humiliating; however, I had to relearn where it was that I drew my strength." Stirling decided to continue to embrace her unique style of performance, promoting herself on the Internet. In a 2012 interview she remarked: "A lot of people have told me along the way that my style and the music I do ... is unmarketable. But the only reason I'm successful is because I have stayed true to myself." Shortly after her performance on America's Got Talent, cinematographer Devin Graham contacted her in hopes of collaborating on a YouTube video. They agreed to shoot a music video for her song, "Spontaneous Me", that was filmed the week of May 9, 2011. The video boosted Stirling's popularity, and she began making music videos regularly for her YouTube channel. Stirling's channel, Lindseystomp, which she created in 2007 and named after her first band Stomp on Melvin, is the main repository for her music videos. Throughout 2011, the channel rapidly gained popularity and has since reached over 3 billion total views and over 12 million subscribers, as of November 2018[update]. Her music is featured on Pandora and Spotify. Stirling created a second YouTube channel, LindseyTime, in September 2012, in which she posts videos related to her life, vlogs, and behind-the-scenes content. Stirling has experimented in combining violin playing with hip hop and dubstep. Stirling's collaborations with other musicians and singers have included Amy Lee (Evanescence) (Love Goes On And On), Shaun Barrowes ("Don't Carry It All" – The Decemberists), Jake Bruene and Frank Sacramone ("Party Rock Anthem" – LMFAO), Tay Zonday ("Mama Economy"), Peter Hollens ("Skyrim", "A Thousand Years", "Game of Thrones" and "Star Wars"), Lzzy Hale ("Shatter Me"), Alisha Popat ("We Found Love"), John Allred ("Tomb"), Amiee Proal ("A Thousand Years"), Megan Nicole ("Starships"), The Piano Guys ("Mission Impossible"), Debi Richards (née Johanson) ("River Flows in You", "Phantom of the Opera"), Sam Tsui ("Heads Up"), Tyler Ward ("I Knew You Were Trouble", Thrift Shop"), Kurt Hugo Schneider ("Pokémon Dubstep Remix" and "A Thousand Years"), John Legend ("All of Me"), Chester See ("I Knew You Were Trouble"), and Pentatonix ("Radioactive", "Papaoutai", “Over the River”). She has also collaborated with the Salt Lake Pops orchestra and Alex Boye. Stirling's eponymous debut album was released on September 18, 2012, in conjunction with a North American tour that same month. In December 2012, YouTube announced that Stirling's song, "Crystallize", was the No. 8 most viewed video of 2012 with over 42 million views. On April 22, 2013, it was announced that Lady Gaga's manager (Troy Carter) signed a deal with Stirling after being impressed by her rise in the media. "By looking at the numbers, automatically you could see this girl knew how to move the needle and understood YouTube was a venue to engage fans both online and offline," Carter said. Stirling, who had previously refused to work with other management companies explained her new deal with Carter: "But with Atom Factory, they were up to date on current things and trying new stuff all the time, and I felt so creatively alive when I met with them." On June 21, Stirling received her first golden certification for her album, Lindsey Stirling, in Germany and in the next month, she earned golden certifications from Switzerland and Austria. On August 2, 2013, Billboard announced that Stirling's studio album had sold more than 158,000 copies in the United States and that she was the second best-selling artist on the Classical Crossover charts in 2013, behind Andrea Bocelli's album Passione. In June 2013, she performed at Miss Switzerland, and in July, she joined Nathan Pacheco, The Orchestra at Temple Square and the Mormon Tabernacle Choir at the 21,000-seat LDS Conference Center in Salt Lake City, UT for their annual Pioneer Day concert where she performed Scotland the Brave and Simple Gifts. Stirling also announced her first tour dates in Australia, South Korea and Japan. Stirling's YouTube channel reached three million subscribers on August 31 and on September 4, after almost a year of touring, she completed her first world tour with her last appearance in London. On September 12, Stirling performed at the Dreamball 2013 charity gala at Ritz Carlton in Berlin, Germany. Two weeks later, Stirling announced on her website that she had started making her second album. In October 2013, Stirling announced that she would take part in season three of Dance Showdown, a dance competition web series created by DanceOn in which the winner is awarded US$50,000. Stirling was the second of three finalists, but she did not win the fifty thousand dollars despite receiving critical acclaim on her three performances with her partner Anze Skrube. One of the three judges, Laurieann Gibson, classified her second performance as "one of the best" in Dance Showdown and the last one as the best she had ever seen. Almost a year after its official release, Stirling's self-titled studio album was re-released on October 29, 2013, as an exclusive deluxe version featuring newly recorded versions and remixes of her best-known songs such as "Crystallize", "Elements", and "Transcendence". Target carried four bonus tracks while all other retailers had two additional tracks. Stirling sold 10,000 copies of her extended-version album in the first week, a record for her, and her album surged from No. 79 to No. 23, its peak position in the Billboard 200. Days earlier, she had performed on Conan on October 24. On November 3, 2013, Stirling and Pentatonix's version of "Radioactive" won a YouTube Music Award in the category Response of the Year. Stirling also performed during the live-streamed event. On December 16, Stirling announced the first tour dates in Canada and U.S. on her 2014 World Tour; some pre-sales were sold out after the first day and the first concert to be sold out was in Portland, Oregon, on January 29. Stirling appeared on several Billboard 2013 year-end charts; notably, No. 3 on Classical Album Artists, No. 2 on Classical Albums, and No. 3 on Dance/Electronic Albums (both for Lindsey Stirling). At the beginning of 2014, Stirling's self-titled album hit gold in Poland, received its first platinum certification in Germany and later on in Austria. Stirling received her first RIAA gold certification on February 4 for her hit single "Crystallize". On February 26, Stirling released her debut album in France which entered the charts at number 17 selling 4,900 copies in its first week. On March 5, Stirling performed three concerts at the El Plaza Condesa in Mexico City, her first concerts in Latin America. In 2014, Stirling was nominated for the Echo music award in two categories: Crossover National/International and Newcomer International, receiving the Crossover National/International award on March 28. On March 12, 2014, Stirling posted a video announcing her second studio album, Shatter Me, would be released in May. She also created a PledgeMusic account where consumers could buy her new album, signed or not, and also exclusive items, such as signed posters, personalized videos, and even Skype calls with Stirling herself. At the end of the first day, the signed Shatter Me CD was already sold out. On March 25, Stirling officially released her first single from Shatter Me, entitled "Beyond the Veil", along with its accompanying music video. On April 3, Stirling posted that she collaborated with Owl City for his fifth album. The song, "Beautiful Times", was released on April 8. On April 23, 2014, Stirling released the second single from her upcoming album: "Shatter Me". The song, the album's title track, accumulated 1.3 million views on its first day online. The album was released in the U.S. on April 29 and in Europe on May 2. In the U.S., the album sold 56,000 copies in its first week and reached No. 2 on the Billboard 200, becoming Stirling's biggest sales week ever. In Europe, Shatter Me reached the Top 5 in Sweden and Germany and number one in Austria. On May 18, Stirling appeared on the Billboard Music Awards where her debut album had been nominated in the category "Top Electronic/Dance Album". Stirling performed her first single "Beyond the Veil" during the ceremony. On May 13, 2014, Stirling performed in San Diego, the first show of her second world tour which totalled 77 shows, 48 in North America and 29 in Europe. This world tour was in support of her new album Shatter Me. The crew consisted of Jason Gaviati and Drew Steen (who had been part of her First World Tour) plus two new dancers: Stephen Jones and Pter Styles and choreographer Anže Škrube. On July 2, Billboard reported that Stirling's second studio album Shatter Me had been the third dance/electronic album to have its highest sales in the first half of the year (119,000), behind only Daft Punk's Random Access Memories and Lady Gaga's Artpop. In the same chart, Stirling's debut studio album held sixth place with 108,000 copies sold in the first half of 2014. On July 27 Stirling's hit single "Crystallize" became her first music video to mark 100 million views. Six days later, on August 2, Stirling posted on her Twitter account that she had been nominated for her first ever Teen Choice award. On August 6, Stirling returned after four years to America's Got Talent to perform with Lzzy Hale their single "Shatter Me". In August, it was revealed that Stirling would be part of two collaborations. The first one was revealed on August 13, and was about Stirling collaborating for a second time with the a cappella group Pentatonix for their third studio album PTX, Vol. III on the song "Papaoutai", by Stromae. The second collaboration was revealed nine days later, on August 22, when it was announced Stirling had recorded a song with singer Jessie J for J's upcoming album Sweet Talker. On September 14, it was announced that Stirling would join a YouTube marketing campaign for a new selection of Lindt chocolate candy bars. On September 29, Stirling announced she would be joining tenor Andrea Bocelli for his UK and Ireland Tour in November 2014. On October 4, Stirling started the European leg of her second world tour in Finland, in support of her album Shatter Me. On November 24, Stirling extended her tour to the year of 2015 by adding dates in North America and Oceania. That same day Stirling performed on The Today Show to promote her album by performing "Roundtable Rival". On December 5, Stirling performed at the Video Game Awards. On the 2014 Year-End Billboard Charts, Stirling peaked in the categories of Classical Albums with Shatter Me and Classical Album Artists. Her second studio album also appeared tenth in the year-end charts of independent albums and fourth in Dance/Electronic Albums. Stirling had the second position in the Dance/Electronic Album Artists and fifth in the charts of independent artist and Top dance/electronic artists. On January 9, 2015, Stirling was featured on the Forbes list '30 Under 30' as one of the few musicians featured in the top thirty of recognized celebrities under the age of thirty. On the same day Billboard announced that Shatter Me and Lindsey Stirling had reached the first and second positions as the best-selling dance-electronic albums in 2014. On February 7, 2015, Stirling performed at the Grammy Foundation's 17th annual Legacy Concert. A few days later, Stirling announced that public television would be airing her shows from London under the name Lindsey Stirling: Live from London, starting in March. It was later added that the shows would also air in the U.S. On March 2, it was announced that Stirling had won a YouTube Music Award among other forty-nine artists. The fifty selected artists were the ones with biggest growth in views, subscribers and engagement over the last six months. This is Stirling's second YouTube Music Award. On March 23, the 2015 YouTube Music Awards were broadcast online, with thirteen artists releasing original music videos. Stirling released the music video for "Take Flight". On March 26, Stirling participated in the 2015 Echo Music Awards, winning the category of "Best Crossover Act" for the second consecutive year. Stirling also performed at the Echo Awards with artist Andreas Bourani. On April 7, the 2015 Billboard Music Awards nominated Stirling in two categories: Top Dance/Electronic Artist and Top Dance/Electronic Album, for her album Shatter Me. Stirling won the latter category, her first Billboard Music Award. On May 4, a single from Marina Kaye'e Fearless album was released under the title "Sounds Like Heaven", featuring Stirling. A day later a collaboration between Stirling and Joy Enriquez was released on iTunes. On July 1, during an interview by Billboard in New York, Stirling said that when her tour finished in August she would begin work on her third studio album: "As soon as we finish this tour, mid-August, I'm just gonna jump straight into the studio, it's pretty exciting and it's also terrifying to start thinking about a new album again. But I'm honestly so excited to see where it goes. I have a lot of ideas on directions it could go, and I'm really excited to see which way it could go. But the truth is, I don't know where it's going!" In its July 22 issue, Variety magazine ranked Stirling eleventh on its Digital Star Ranking, of the top twelve stars in the digital world. It was estimated that Stirling's annual ad income was $364,000. On August 8, 2015, Stirling released her first video album "Lindsey Stirling: Live from London", which included part of her Music Box Tour. The album reached the top ten of the German album charts, for the third consecutive time. It also reached the top position on the German music DVD charts. In the same month, Stirling played the National Anthem before the start of an Arizona Diamondbacks game at Chase Field. In late December 2015, Stirling earned her first US Billboard Hot 100 entry with "Hallelujah" debuting at number 81 on the issue dated January 9, 2016, and peaking at number one on the Hot Christian Songs Chart, being her first single in doing so as well. Stirling had announced in June 2015 that over the course of two and a half years, she had written an autobiography, The Only Pirate at the Party, to be published by Gallery Books. Co-authored by Brooke S. Passey, Stirling's sister, the book was released on January 12, 2016, and was listed at #10 on The New York Times hardcover nonfiction best-seller list for January 31, 2016. The book's title came from Stirling's diagnosis of cross-dominance in the second grade, for which an eye patch was prescribed. She was uncomfortable with the treatment until she began pretending she was a pirate. Stirling became intrigued by the pirate lifestyle, and said: Pirates don't take orders or ask permission,... They do what they want. Allow me to clarify. If your mom asks you to do the dishes, do not pull out your pirate attitude. But if someone tells you you're not good enough, says your dreams are too lofty, or claims there is no room in showbiz for a dancing violinist — well then, by all means, pull out your eye patch, my friend, and take to the high seas. In January 2016, Stirling's autobiography was released and later reached tenth place on The New York Times hardcover nonfiction best-seller list. Three days later, a collaboration between Stirling and the Swedish DJ/producer Otto Knows was released under the title "Dying for You", with its video premiering on February 1. In June 2016, Stirling announced her new studio album Brave Enough, set for release on August 19, 2016. Shortly after, she uploaded a new music video "The Arena" to her main channel. Brave Enough debuted at number one on the US Dance/Electronic Albums chart and peaked at number 5 on the Billboard 200. Stirling released an exclusive track "Firefly" with Brave Enough via Pledge Music, withStirling on vocals. The song would later be used in the movie Barbie: Star Light Adventure. In August 2016, Stirling released the song "Something Wild" which she wrote for the Disney movie, Pete's Dragon. The song played over the end credits and both Brave Enough and the movie soundtrack. Stirling appeared on several television shows in August to promote her new album, including The Today Show and ZDF's Morgenmagazin in Germany, performing The Arena live. During the same month, Stirling performed at the opening ceremony of The International 2016, a Dota 2 tournament which had the biggest prize pool in eSports history. Later Stirling also appeared in a Schön! magazine photoshoot and feature interview. In September 2016, Stirling started her Brave Enough Tour in San Diego, California that would continue worldwide for 79 dates. Stirling also performed the national anthem and a pre-game concert wearing a 49ers jersey for the San Francisco 49ers season opener against the Los Angeles Rams at Levi's Stadium. September also marked the release of three special editions of Brave Enough. All released exclusively on vinyl, there was a red swirl disc edition, a Barnes & Noble exclusive featuring the bonus track "Activate" and an Urban Outfitters edition limited to 500 copies with an autographed postcard from Stiring enclosed. Stirling was also featured on the cover of fashion & lifestyle magazine Bello for their Summer edition. In October 2016, Stirling launched a music video for the single "Prism", featuring herself as five clones named "The Violindseys". The same month, Stirling was featured on the cover of Strings Magazine. The following month, Stirling released the single Hold My Heart featuring ZZ Ward along with an Alice in Wonderland themed video. A second video was later released in collaboration with HP, featuring Stirling playing both herself and her alter-ego super fan Phelba. Stirling was one of the first artists to record for the newly launched Spotify Singles. Stirling recorded two acoustic tracks at Spotify Studios in New York City, her single, Something Wild and a cover of 7 Years by Lukas Graham. They were premiered on the streaming service on November 30, 2016. Stirling began 2017 by launching a single version and video of her song "Love's Just a Feeling" featuring Rooty. Later in the year Stirling and Rooty would perform the song on Live with Kelly and Ryan. Bebe Rexha sampled "First Light" from Brave Enough and credited Lindsey Stirling in the song Small Doses as violinist on her EP All Your Fault: Pt. 1 released in February. In April, following her performance in London for the Brave Enough Tour, Stirling gave an interview and live performance on BBC's The One Show in the UK. On the same trip, Stirling also appeared on BBC Radio 2. For Record Store Day 2017, Stirling released a limited edition vinyl copy of Brave Enough. The gatefold was signed by Stirling and limited to 650 copies worldwide. Later that month, she would perform at the Radio Disney Music Awards at the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles. Stirling performed as part of a line up with Julia Michaels and Noah Cyrus The following month, a documentary called Lindsey Stirling: Brave Enough was released as paid content via YouTube. The documentary was filmed during Stirling's Brave Enough Tour and featured concert footage, interviews and personal footage. In the same month, Stirling was featured in digital fashion and lifestyle magazine, Phoenix. In September 2017, Stirling was announced as one of the celebrities to compete on season 25 of Dancing with the Stars. She was paired with professional dancer Mark Ballas. During the course of the show, Stirling had two serious injuries that nearly ruled her out of the competition. First suffering a blunt rib injury and possible separation during training and later a knee injury during a rehearsal for a group dance. Stirling's performance in week 4 of the competition was in memory of her father, Stephen, who died in January of that year from cancer. Professional dance partner Ballas wore a hat and scarf of Stirling's father for the performance. Stirling and Ballas finished in second place, averaging a score of 27.1, and secured 5 perfect score performances across the 17 dances. In early October 2017, a Bollywood themed music video for the song "Mirage" was released featuring Raja Kumari. Later that month, Stirling released her fourth studio album "Warmer in the Winter", a holiday themed record. The album features Becky G, Trombone Shorty, Alex Gaskarth of All Time Low, and Sabrina Carpenter. The album opened at #32 on the Billboard 200, selling 15,000 copies, making her fourth Top 40 album. In November, Stirling went on her North American "Warmer in the Winter Tour celebrating the new album. The following October, Stirling released a Deluxe version of "Warmer in the Winter" which featured five additional tracks. In addition, a music video for "I Wonder as I Wander" was released. Stirling commenced her Wanderland Tour celebrating the festive album across 24 dates in North America. In November 2018 for Record Store Day's Black Friday event, Stirling released a special Holiday Edition picture disc vinyl. The record featured images of Stirling from her Warmer in the Winter photoshoot imprinted onto the vinyl record itself. The dual-sided single had two tracks - You're A Mean One Mr. Grinch and Dance Of the Sugar Plum Fairy. It was limited to 2350 copies. In 2018, she appeared on the track "Hi-Lo", the third track of Evanescence's fourth studio album Synthesis released as a single in June. Stirling toured with the band in the U.S. during that summer. Stirling also appeared at the Yamaha All-Star Concert in Anaheim in January 2018. Stirling collaborated with Alexander Jean on the song "Deeper" released in mid-2018. This made a re-connection between Stirling and her DWTS partner Mark Ballas. In late 2018, Stirling made a number of television appearances. She returned to Dancing With The Stars, for a guest appearance on the October 15, 2018, episode, dancing a "trio dance" with Bobby Bones and Sharna Burgess. Later that month, Stirling appeared in an episode of the first series of The Outpost, playing the character Pock. In November, Stirling was on the cover of French lifestyle publication, Grumpy Magazine. She would also release a video for "You're a Mean One Mr Grinch" featuring Sabrina Carpenter, originally from her 2017 album Warmer in the Winter. In December, Stirling was a guest on Darci Lynne: My Hometown Christmas. In an interview later that month, Stirling revealed in an exclusive interview with the Huffington Post, that she was invited to join the first season of America's Got Talent: The Champions but declined. On June 21, 2019, Stirling announced that her fifth album, Artemis would be launching later that year. Stirling said that she had been inspired by the Greek goddess Artemis, and drew parallels to her own experiences and challenges. The first single released from the album was "Underground". It was a joint audio and music video release. On the same day, Stirling announced her Artemis Tour. The tour began in Mexico and Europe in 2019, but was postponed during the COVID-19 pandemic. The tour returned in North America in 2021, however tour dates in Australia, Russia and Ukraine were later canceled. Alongside the album launch, it was revealed Stirling would be releasing a six-part comic book series under the title Artemis. In July 2019, Stirling performed The Upside, a single from the album, at PBS's A Capitol Fourth celebration. Later the song was re-released with vocals by Elle King, along with a music video and a television performance on Live with Kelly and Ryan. In November 2019, Stirling reprised her holiday-themed tours, embarking on the Warmer in the Winter Christmas Tour across 26 dates in North America. This was her third holiday-themed tour based around the album "Warmer in the Winter". During the tour, her video for "We Three Gentlemen" was released. Stirling was featured on the cover of Guitar Girl Magazine for their Winter 2019 issue. In November, Stirling's collaboration with Switchfoot on the song Voices was released. It was the lead single from their album Native Tongue. Across 2019, a number of Stirling's songs would be used on television and movie soundtracks. "Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy" in The Knight Before Christmas, "The Phoenix" in The Chilling Adventures of Sabrina and the "Phantom of the Opera" medley in The Umbrella Academy. In March 2020, NASA released a video of Stirling performing the song "Artemis" at the Kennedy Space Center. The song shares a name with the NASA Artemis program which has the goal to return humans to the moon in 2024, including the first woman. As part of the "Artemis" album, Stirling would release a number of music videos for tracks not released as singles that matched the storyline of the album. In June 2020, the video for "Between Twilight" was released featuring professional dancer Derek Hough. The video storyline is showing Artemis (Stirling) meeting Orion (Hough) and falling in love. Later in September 2020, a video for "Til The Light Goes Out" was released with Stirling acting as the leader of a small band of mystics living in the desert. In May 2020, Stirling launched a weekly podcast called "String Sessions" and featuring music artists. Every episode is started with a string (violin) cover of a song by the featured artist. The podcast is made available on YouTube, Spotify, and Google Podcasts. Guests have included Andy Grammer, Amy Lee from Evanescence, JP Saxe x Julia Michaels, Gabby Barrett and Johnny Rzeznik. In July 2020, Stirling celebrated 3 billion views on her YouTube channel. In August 2020, Lindsey Stirling was announced as a second-time collaborator with Evanescence for the third single, Use My Voice, alongside many rock singers as well as past collaborator Lzzy Hale. Including Stirling and Hale were Taylor Momsen from The Pretty Reckless, Sharon den Adel from Within Temptation, Deena Jakoub from Veridia and many more of Evanescence close family and friends. In the same month, Stirling released the single "What You're Made Of" featuring guest lyrics from Kiesza. The song was written for the video game, Azur Lane. In September, No Saving Me by Philmon Lee was released featuring Stirling. Stirling also collaborated with American post-hardcore band Escape the Fate on the song "Invincible" in October. A music video was also released for the song which included Stirling herself. Stirling was on the cover of Civilian Magazine for their Fall/Winter 2020 issue with an exclusive interview and photoshoot. Stirling opened 2021 releasing the single "Lose You Now" in collaboration with DJ Mako. It was based on her original song, "Guardian", from Artemis. Mako wrote the lyrics for the song, and a music video was released on January 15. The song peaked at No. 3 on the Billboard Dance/Electronic Digital Song Sales chart for the week ending January 30. In April 2021, an acoustic version of the song was also released. During the same month, Stirling released a cover and music video of the song Wild Rift from the popular video game, League of Legends. Stirling was also featured at this time in an advertising campaign for the Asus Zenbook. In July 2021, Stirling released her second ever EP for Record Store Day. Titled "Lose You Now" the five-track EP was a vinyl exclusive, limited to 2,000 copies with an etched B-Side. The same month, a video for the song "Masquerade" from Artemis was released, based around a silent movie. The video was filmed in the Orpheum Theatre in Los Angeles. Following this, Stirling released further video game collaborations. In August 2021, she performed a version of the Tales of Arise score for the opening night of Gamescom. Later a video for the battle song "Flame of Hope" was released. Stirling would also appear as a guest performer on America's Got Talent alongside two-time champion magician Shin Lim. In September, Stirling announced she was releasing a rock version of "Rage Beneath The Mountains" from Genshin Impact for its first anniversary. Stirling announced in October 2021 that she had collaborated with long-term instrument partner Yamaha to produce a limited edition "Crystallize" violin. The instrument is made from a variety of fine woods including maple, spruce, and brazilwood. The violin was limited to 100 units and as a package with Stirling branded instrument, bow, rosin and case was priced at $2,495. In the same month, a collaboration between Stirling and cosmetic company Bellapierre was announced. Intentional Beauty by Lindsey Stirling was launched, with the first product a citrine beauty palette. Stirling's music was featured as part of Disney's Walt Disney World Resort 50th anniversary celebration in the 'Harmonious' show at EPCOT, a night-time event that began in October. In November, Stirling embarked on The Lindsey Stirling Christmas Program Tour, a 22-date North American concert series. This was her fourth holiday-themed tour. Later that month, on November 28, "Lindsey Stirling: Home for the Holidays" was released in movie theaters. A mix of Christmas songs and other popular tracks by Stirling were recorded and filmed with unique choreography specifically for this release. In the same month, a special song Lords was released in conjunction with the mobile video game Lords Mobile. Stirling had been on the original line-up for Electric Forest in 2022, however her name was later absent from their announcement, alongside other notable absentees including Flume and Diplo. Stirling began 2022 by announcing she had written the theme song for the CBS series Good Sam, featuring Sophia Bush. In February, Stirling headlined the grand opening of Bell Bank Park, a new sports and leisure arena in Arizona. In March, Stirling was a guest on Season 3, Episode 111 of the Kelly Clarkson Show, performing alongside Karolina Protsenko. Following the release of the app Amp by Amazon, the company announced in a press release that Stirling would be launching a show on the platform. Her first show aired on March 30, 2022. In an interview published on March 31, 2022, with Violinist Stirling confirmed she was working on a new album. On April 2, Stirling performed at Seaworld Orlando for their Seven Seas Food Festival event in The Nautilus Theater. Later that month, it was confirmed Stirling would perform at both The Festival at Sandpoint on August 6, 2022, and at the Washington State Fair on September 17, 2022. Stirling is also scheduled to perform at Britt Festival on August 4, 2022. On April 11, it was announced Stirling had collaborated with Kluge Interactive on a DLC pack for their virtual reality music game Synth Riders to release later that month. It was announced that Stirling would be performing at the 2022 Montreal International Jazz Festival. Her concert took place at Salle Wilfrid-Pelletier on July 7, 2022. On May 3, 2022, it was announced Stirling would perform at the Pacific Amphitheatre as part of their Summer Concert Series in July. In early June, Stirling was featured on the song Maniac released by girlfriends on their album (e)motion sickness. On June 21, Stirling was part of the Disney+ live event Harmonious Live broadcast from EPCOT at Disney World. Stirling was announced as a performer for August 2022 at the Clear Summer Nights concert series in Bend, Oregon. On July 12, a music video for Love Goes On And On was released featuring Evanesence lead singer Amy Lee. On August 25, Stirling announced her new holiday-themed album named Snow Waltz. Alongside the announcement, the first track "Ice Storm" was released as a music video on YouTube. The album was recorded in Los Angeles, produced by Gladius and will release digitally in October, and on vinyl in November. In September, Stirling announced a North American tour to coincide with the release of Snow Waltz during November and December 2022. Hallmark announced in September that Stirling would be making a cameo appearance in their movie, A Fabled Holiday starring Brooke D'Orsay and Ryan Paevey, performing Joy to the World from Snow Waltz. Stirling was recruited to perform for A Plague Tale: Requiem as part of the pre-launch activities by the video games manufacturer. Stirling is featured in a music video interlaced with gameplay. In November, Stirling made a return to The Kelly Clarkson Show, performing "Joy to the World". House of Solo magazine interviewed Stirling about her album and UK tour dates from Snow Waltz in December 2022. In 2023, Stirling was announced as a performer at Lollapalooza Paris. Later, Stirling revealed a US Tour in conjunction with Walk Off The Earth. The tour includes a number of state fair dates including Iowa, Wisconsin, and Ohio. In July, Stirling released her version of Kashmir, originally by Led Zeppelin. Through the summer she would perform concerts in Europe including in Athens and Tel Aviv. In November, Stirling began her 2023 Snow Waltz Christmas Tour in Stateline, Nevada at the Tahoe Blue Event Center. Stirling confirmed in August she will be performing European dates on the tour in London, Paris, Brussels and Berlin. In mid-December, Stirling performed at the CMA Christmas special alongside Amy Grant and Trisha Yearwood. In early 2024, Stirling was a performer at the 2024 NAMM show for Yamaha. Stirling was honored at the event with a She Rocks award. On 8 March 2024, Stirling announced her latest album Duality that will release on June 16. Produced by Mako, the album led with its first single "Eye Of The Untold Her" released on the same day. On October 1, 2013, Stirling teamed with the non-profit Atlanta Music Project to help spread appreciation of music to children who might not otherwise have the chance. The Atlanta Music Project's mission was "to inspire social change by providing Atlanta's under-served youth the opportunity to learn and perform music in orchestras and choirs." For this, Stirling made available two limited-edition Lindsey Stirling/The Power of Music shirts. The money collected from the sale of those shirts went directly to the Atlanta Music Project with the combined goal of raising enough to provide music training for 50 children. On March 22, 2014, Stirling joined Cirque du Soleil for the second annual One Night for One Drop in Las Vegas. The non-profit organization presented the show in the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino in celebration of World Water Day, a day which encourages people to conserve water resources in an effort to make clean water accessible to all. During her 2017 Warmer in the Winter tour, VIP guests were encouraged to bring an unopened toy to donate to Toys for Tots. Donors received an exclusive photo laminate of Stirling and pet chihuahua Luna Latte. On December 15, 2018, as part of Ronald McDonald House Charities of Western New York's concert series, Stirling performed at Shea's Buffalo Theatre. All proceeds from the show went to Buffalo Ronald McDonald House and the Family Lounge & Happy Wheel Cart at John R. Oishei Children's Hospital. In April 2020, Stirling launched The Upside Fund a non-profit charity to support individuals struggling throughout the Covid-19 pandemic. In a July interview, it was revealed she had donated hundreds of thousands of dollars, and was broadening the scope of the charity to include anyone struggling economically at the time. Later that month, a partnership was forged with Tea North a Canadian company who would donate 100% of their online profits for a month to The Upside Fund. On August 27, 2020, Stirling announced she would be auctioning off a number of her performance outfits on eBay with all revenue donated to the charity. Stirling repeated this in May 2021 with auction lots including her Roundtable Rival music video outfit. For the 2021 festive season, Stirling partnered with Resolve Partners to drive donations through The Upside Fund to help those in need of financial support for medical bills. In November 2021, Stirling partnered with Fandiem to run an online giveaway where fans could donate and win a Yamaha Crystallize limited edition violin and a virtual lesson with her. In February 2022, Stirling ran another outfit auction to support The Upside Fund on eBay. On May 8, 2020, Stirling participated at the 320 Festival, a mental health awareness event created by Talinda Bennington and Kevin Lyman. Due to the quarantine restrictions of COVID-19, the performance was live-streamed from her sister's farm in Missouri. All net proceeds from the event were donated to its nonprofit partners. In March 2022, Stirling announced she was running an auction to support UNICEF in Ukraine following the Russian invasion. Lots included video and tour outfits, along with her violin used as a teenager. The items collectively sold for over $16,000. Stirling uses a variety of violins depending on her performance. For live performances, she mostly uses Yamaha SV-250 Silent Violin Pro and Luis and Clark "Nero" carbon fiber acoustic violin. Stirling has been using the Yamaha electric violin since 2000, and the Luis and Clark violin became famous after she used it for her cover version of "Radioactive" with Pentatonix in 2013. For studio recording, Stirling uses an early-1900s Ernst Heinrich Roth "Roth" acoustic violin most of the time and her Yamaha Silent violin for an extremely clean sound. Before using the "Nero", Stirling used her "Roth" during live performances. However, she stopped using the "Roth" live because she was sweating so much during the show. Stirling also owns three other violins: a $40 eBay violin "Ingrid", a purple Wood Viper violin "Viper" and a Yamaha Silent violin "Steampunk". "Steampunk" was her first electric violin, and "Ingrid" is used for dangerous stunts in her music videos. In an interview in August 2016 with Strings Magazine, Stirling stated that Yamaha electric violins are her "weapon of choice" while the "Roth" she calls Excalibur is her favorite. In 2020, Stirling joined Reverb to talk through her five favorite violins including David Bowie, her crossbow violin. In a 2022 video uploaded to TikTok, Stirling showed fans all of her violins. Other violins include: Cleopatra – An electric with a gem-encrusted body. Featured when performing "Master of Tides" Anastasia – A gift from Russian fans. Red body with fauna decorations on the front body. Pickles – A child's violin used for concert interludes. Violumpet – A converted stunt violin with horn attachment; featured in "Roundtable Rival". Ace – An alternative acoustic violin David Bowie – An electric with a crossbow attachment; featured in "Artemis" Arowen – An electric with a silver gem-encrusted body. Starlight – An electric with an LED light strip. Spoon – An electric Yamaha YEV104 Series in a natural wood finish. Crystallize – A signature Lindsey Stirling Yamaha electric. Pickles – a miniature violin, used during her "Snow Waltz Tour" Stirling uses the L.R. Baggs violin pickup for her "Roth" and "Nero". In March 2022, Stirling auctioned off a violin she used as a teenager for the charity Unicef. The violin sold for $7,200. Stirling attended Brigham Young University (BYU) in Provo, Utah, to study filmmaking. She later served as a missionary in New York City for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). A story she wrote about her mission was later published in the compilation Do Not Attempt in Heels: Mission Stories and Advice from Sisters Who've Been There. Stirling returned to Provo in 2009 to continue studying at BYU. She then moved back to Arizona, in December 2012, to be with her family. In August 2015, she graduated from the BYU Marriott School of Management with a Bachelor of Science degree in recreation management. At this time, Forbes estimated her net worth as $6million. She moved to Los Angeles in 2013, and in 2019 bought a Hollywood Hills property from film director John Stalberg Jr.. In December 2015, Stirling became the owner of Luna, a chihuahua. Appearing on stage and in photoshoots, Stirling credits Luna with helping her through the loss of close friends and family. In 2024, Stirling hired a private investigator to track a stalker who had previously attempted to illegally enter a property owned by Taylor Swift. For a short time she dated filmmaker Devin Graham, who had attended the same university and church. The two began dating shortly after the filming of "Crystallize" and Graham moved to Utah. The two have since ended their professional and personal relationship. In October 2017, on Dancing with the Stars Stirling revealed her year and a half relationship with Ryan Weed ended. Stirling has publicly spoken about her battle with anorexia. She discovered her disorder while working for a treatment center for troubled girls. Stirling said in an interview with Good Morning America that her song "Shatter Me" was "actually my story of overcoming my eating disorder". The cover art of the album is a reference to her struggle which showcases a "seemingly perfect-looking ballerina standing in the middle of a cracked glass globe". In 2013, Stirling was featured by the LDS Church in its I'm a Mormon campaign in which she spoke openly about how her faith helped in her battle during high school and college. On November 25, 2014, she performed and answered questions in a live world broadcast to LDS youth. A one-hour video recording of the event was featured on the LDS Church home page. Stirling is a teetotaler, and during tours, she has a ban on her team consuming alcohol on her tour bus. Stirling has a celestial body named after her, Asteroid 242516 Lindseystirling, about 2–3 km diameter, semi-major axis of 2.72AU, eccentricity of 0.051, inclined 3.7 degrees to ecliptic. Drew Steen – drums, percussion (2012–present) Ryan Riveros - keyboards, guitars (2021–present) Former Jason "Gavi" Gaviati – keyboards, samples (2012–2015); Gaviati died on November 21, 2015. Kit Nolan – keyboards, guitars and samples (2015–2021) Lindsey Stirling (2012) Shatter Me (2014) Brave Enough (2016) Warmer in the Winter (2017) Artemis (2019) Snow Waltz (2022) Duality (2024) Stirling has authored and published a number of books of music she has either performed or arranged for violin and piano. In addition, she also sells sheet music from her own online store. Lindsey Stirling released a series of comic books to pair with her album, Artemis. Stirling's first tour lasted almost a year with 122 dates around North America, Europe, Asia, and Australia. The Lindsey Stirling Tour began three days before the CD release of her first album, Lindsey Stirling. Her tour began in 2012 with dates in North America within the United States and Canada. At the beginning of 2013, Stirling continued her tour in Europe as a "test tour". Her official European leg kicked off in Russia on May 22, 2013. In August 2013, she continued her tour, adding dates around Asia and Australia. Finishing her tour, Stirling added a last date in the UK on September 4, 2013. The shows were a success in that 46 dates were sold out, and on Ticketmaster.com the audience gave a rating to the tour of 4.7 out of 5 stars. In 2014 and 2015, Stirling played the Shatter Me World Tour and The Music Box Tour. The 2014 North and European American leg of Lindsey Stirling's tour consisted of her performing 77 shows over a five-month time span. For 2015, Stirling did 67 shows over five continents. Stirling toured around North America, Europe, Asia, Oceania, and South America, being her first time presenting a show on this continent. In December 2014, it was confirmed that more than 200,000 people had attended Stirling's shows, more than half of them being from the European continent.[citation needed] After taking nine months off to record a new album, Brave Enough, which was released on August 19, 2016, Stirling returned to touring. An April 2016 announcement confirmed her Summer Tour which would encompass individual concerts and festivals across the United States of America. The announcement occurred shortly after her surprise appearance at Coachella. Following completion of her summer tour, Stirling played at four summer festivals in September 2016. She began at Electric Picnic in Ireland on September 3, before travelling to Festival du Chant Gros in Switzerland and performing on September 7. Stirling would then play Fête de l'Humanité on September 9 and Lollapalooza Germany in Berlin on September 10 before returning to start her 2016/17 Brave Enough Tour a few weeks later. Following her Summer 2016 Tour, Stirling started her 79-date world tour that would span four continents through 2016 and 2017. The tour began in San Diego, California in 2016 and ended in Guadalajara in August 2017. Stirling's first Christmas tour. Lindsey Stirling announced her 2017 Warmer in the Winter Tour, slated to kick off in the fall on November 8 in Albany, NY at Palace Theatre. It concluded in Phoenix, AZ at Comerica Theatre on December 23. Stirling broadcast the concert live on Twitter on November 28. Stirling and Evanescence announced they would be co-headlining together for the second leg of Evanescence's Synthesis Tour. They were also accompanied by a full orchestra. On September 4, 2018, Stirling announced the 2018 Christmas-themed Wanderland Tour was slated to kick off in the fall on November 23 in Reno, NV. The tour concluded on December 22 in North Charleston, SC. Stirling announced her Artemis World Tour in 2019 to support her latest album. The tour began in Mexico in 2019, before moving into Europe. The tour was scheduled to continue in 2020 through South America, Australia and later North America however these concerts were postponed due to COVID-19. The North American tour was rescheduled and began in 2021. On September 18, 2019, Stirling announced the continuation of her Christmas-themed tour from previous years. The tour was slated to commence on November 19 in Fresno, CA at the Warnors Center for the Performing Arts and conclude on December 23 in Fort Myers, FL at the Barbara B. Mann Performing Arts Hall. In October 2021, Stirling announced a U.S.-based Christmas tour. The tour would run across 22 dates. The tour began in Memphis, TN on November 26 and concluded on December 22 in Mobile, AL. In September 2022, Stirling announced via social media that she would be embarking on her fourth Christmas themed tour. The Snow Waltz Tour would take place during November and December 2022 across a number of dates in the United States, beginning in Grand Prairie, Texas and concluding in Los Angeles, California. The tour is in support of her second festive album, Snow Waltz. In early 2023, Stirling announced a US tour alongside Canadian band Walk off the Earth. The tour began in Bridgeport, CT on August 1 and concluded in Bend, OR on September 2. Stirling reprised her Christmas tour once again for 2023. It began in Stateline on November 16th, and was scheduled to run until December 31 with the final performance in Chicago. The tour was scheduled to visit five European destinations including London, Paris, and Berlin. List of female violinists List of electric violinists "About Lindsey Stirling". YouTube. "Lindsey Stirling". All Music. March 4, 2022. Archived from the original on November 19, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Caitlin Kelley (November 5, 2018). "Lindsey Stirling Talks Balancing Lightness And Darkness On Her No. 1 Christmas Album". Forbes. Retrieved December 4, 2018. "Violinist, singer, dancer Lindsey Stirling coming to Grossinger Motors Arena". Pantagraph. September 4, 2018. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Harris, Sarah (November 27, 2018). "Multi-talented Lindsey Stirling impresses fans at Maverick Center". Daily Herald. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Burgess, O'Jay (November 6, 2012). "Billboard Topping Violinist Lindsey Stirling Tours U.S. In November". Classicalite. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Matteodo, Ally (August 6, 2010). "Best TV Show of the Week: America's Got Talent on NBC". ParentsTV.org. Parents Television Council. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Silver, Curtis (April 6, 2012). "Epic Video: "The Dragonborn Comes" by Peter Hollens & Lindsey Stirling". Wired. Geek Dad. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Hurwitz, Daniel (December 21, 2012). "Watch: YouTube's most popular videos of 2012". USA Today. Retrieved November 5, 2013. Hughes, Hilary (November 3, 2013). "YouTube Music Awards: Streaming of consciousness?". USA Today. Retrieved November 3, 2013. "Lindsey Stirling y Su Éxitoso Álbum "Shatter Me" #1 en Digital y #5 en Físico", RadioMDM.com (in Spanish), Notimex, August 6, 2014, archived from the original on August 19, 2014 "Lindsey Stirling: About". youtube.com/user/lindseystomp. Retrieved September 10, 2019 – via YouTube. Self, Brooke (April 9, 2011). "Lindsey Stirling—hip hop violinist". Her Campus. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. "'America's Got Talent' Reveals the Top 48 Contestants Competing Live in Hollywood". NBC. July 8, 2010. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. "30 Under 30 In Music: The Class Of 2015". Forbes. No. 2015. Archived from the original on January 18, 2015. Retrieved January 18, 2015. "Finalist List-Billboard Music Awards 2014 (BBMA Finalist)". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 22, 2014. Retrieved April 9, 2014. Calvin Harris, DJ Snake & Lindsey Stirling Win The 2015 BBMAs. Retrieved May 20, 2015. "I'm a Mormon: Hi I'm Lindsey Stirling". Mormon.org. LDS Church. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. "Lindsey Stirling: Violin with a High Kick". Retrieved March 16, 2019. Ramey, Corinne (April 2013). "Lindsey Stirling: Flights of Fantasy". Strings. No. 216. pp. 38–42. Archived from the original on December 10, 2014. Woo, Michelle (May 22, 2005). "Individuality". The Arizona Republic. Retrieved September 14, 2013. Lindsey Stirling and the (2011). Life on the Road – Lindsey Stirling. LindseyStomp YouTube Channel. Event occurs at 1:40 minutes in. Retrieved September 14, 2013. Kliva, Jeff (October 30, 2013). "Lindsey Stirling Talks Competing on DanceOn's 'Dance Showdown' Season 3, New Album". New Media Rockstars. NewMediaRockstars. Retrieved December 5, 2014. "Who is Lindsey Stirling? 5 Things To Know About The Violinist Who Performed During The Paul Walker Billboard Awards Tribute". International Business Times. May 18, 2015. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "Overview for lindsey_stirling". Reddit.com. Retrieved January 27, 2014. Varga, George (May 13, 2014). "Lindsey Stirling bows way to the top". U-T San Diego. Retrieved March 27, 2016. Petersen, Sarah (August 5, 2014). "Lindsey Stirling to return to TV show that rejected her". Deseret News. Retrieved February 8, 2015. "Lindsey Stirling Makes Forbes 30 Under 30 in Music List". Mormon Tabernacle Choir. Corporation of the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. January 15, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2015. Comingore, Aly (November 7, 2012). "Lindsey Stirling: From Small Screens to Big Stages". Santa Barbara, California. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved November 20, 2012. The diminutive violinist may have caught her big break on television's America's Got Talent, but it was her self-run YouTube channel that ultimately helped propel her to the top. lindseystirling.com "Lindsey Stirling Blog: Back to Normal" Archived March 2, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, August 10, 2010. Retrieved September 4, 2012. "Lindsey Stirling". youtube.com/user/lindseystomp. Retrieved December 5, 2014 – via YouTube. Kelley, Tara (February 27, 2012), "Dubstep Violin: Lindsey Stirling's 'Crystalize' Experience", HuffPost Trust, Gary (April 4, 2013). "Pentatonix Covers Macklemore & Ryan Lewis' 'Thrift Shop' At Billboard HQ". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Pentatonix's new video is a collaboration with violinist (and recent Chart Beat Meet & Great spotlight artist) Lindsey Stirling, a cover of Imagine Dragons' "Radioactive," the original of which has topped Alternative Songs for seven weeks and this week bounds 15–7 on the Hot 100. The reworked "Radioactive" has garnered 775,000 YouTube views, while Pentatonix's official YouTube channel has drawn an astounding 63 million views Burger, David (July 19, 2012). "Utahns Lindsey Stirling, The Piano Guys, strike more gold on YouTube". The Salt Lake Tribune. Callaham, John (December 12, 2012). "Here are the top 10 most viewed new videos for 2012 on YouTube". NeoWin.net. Retrieved September 15, 2013. "Dubstep Violinist Lindsey Stirling Inks Deal With Lady Gaga's Manager". Billboard. April 22, 2013. Retrieved December 5, 2014. "Tijdlijnfoto's – Lindsey Stirling". Facebook. Retrieved May 4, 2014. Caulfield, Keith (August 2, 2013). "Chart Moves: Guns N' Roses 'Hits' Longevity Milestone, 'Pitch Perfect' Still Selling Strong". Billboard. Retrieved September 15, 2013. Stirling, Lindsey (June 19, 2013). "Backstage at the Ms. Switzerland Pageant Pt. 2- Lindsey Stirling". youtube.com/user/LindseyTime. Archived from the original on November 13, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2014 – via YouTube. Catherine Reese Newton (July 19, 2013). "Lindsey Stirling performs with Mormon Tabernacle Choir". The Salt Lake Tribune. Salt Lake City, Utah. Archived from the original on July 30, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2013. "Scotland, the Brave/Simple Gifts (Featuring Lindsey Stirling) | The Tabernacle Choir" – via www.youtube.com. "Tijdlijnfoto's – Lindsey Stirling". Facebook. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Photos". TWC Central. September 12, 2013. Archived from the original on September 26, 2013. Retrieved September 15, 2013. BERLIN, GERMANY – SEPTEMBER 12: Lindsey Stirling performs at the Dreamball 2013 charity gala at Ritz Carlton on September 12, 2013 in Berlin, Germany. Krug, Franziska (September 12, 2013). "Lindsey Stirling attends the Dreamball 2013 charity gala at Ritz Carlton on September 12, 2013 in Berlin, German". gettyimages.com. Getty Images. Stirling, Lindsey (September 29, 2013). "New Album Begins". lindseystirling.com. Lindsey Stirling. Archived from the original on April 4, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2014. Gutelle, Sam (October 24, 2013). "Lindsey Stirling, Sam Pepper Among 'Dance Showdown' Season 3 Guests". Tubefilter. Retrieved January 27, 2014. Stirling, Lindsey (October 7, 2013). "Album Re–Release!". lindseystirling.com. Lindsey Stirling. Archived from the original on December 29, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Chart Moves: Lindsey Stirling's Best Sales Week Ever, Johnny Mathis Scores 73rd Chart Hit". Billboard. November 8, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2014. Stevens, Abby (November 6, 2013). "Lindsey Stirling wins YouTube award, appears on 'Conan,' collaborates with John Legend". Deseret News. Retrieved January 19, 2014. Lindsey Stirling Tour Dates Tijdlijn Info. "Lindsey Stirling – Bandsintown". Facebook. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Tijdlijnfoto's – Lindsey Stirling". Facebook. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Tijdlijnfoto's – Lindsey Stirling". Facebook. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Classical Albums Artists: 2013 Year-End Charts". Billboard. January 2014. Retrieved January 27, 2014. "Classical Albums: 2013 Year-End Charts". Billboard. January 2014. Retrieved January 27, 2014. "Dance/Electronic Albums: 2013 Year-End Charts". Billboard. January 2014. Retrieved January 27, 2014. "Listy bestsellerów, wyróżnienia :: Związek Producentów Audio-Video". Zpav.pl (in Polish). Archived from the original on June 3, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Bundesverband Musikindustrie: Gold-/Platin-Datenbank". Musikindustrie.de (in German). Retrieved May 4, 2014. "IFPI Austria – Verband der Österreichischen Musikwirtschaft" (in German). Ifpi.at. Archived from the original on July 1, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Gold & Platinum Searchable Database". RIAA. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Lindsey Stirling – Lindsey Stirling". Chartsinfrance.net. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Echo 2014: Helene Fischer, Passenger, Macklemore & Ryan Lewis zählen zu den Nominierten | Musikmarkt" (in German). Musikmarkt.de. Archived from the original on May 20, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2014. Video on YouTube "Stirling's PledgeMe page". Pledgemusic.com. Archived from the original on April 27, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Beyond The Veil – Lindsey Stirling (Original Song)". Archived from the original on November 13, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2014 – via YouTube. "Owl City – Tijdlijnfoto's". Facebook. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Twitter / LindseyStirling: Wow! 1.3 million views of my". Twitter. April 25, 2014. Retrieved May 30, 2014. "Lindsey Stirling Heading for Top Debut on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. April 30, 2014. Retrieved May 30, 2014. "Lindsey Stirling: Billboard Music Awards Red Carpet 2014". Billboard (video). May 19, 2014. Retrieved August 2, 2014. "Instagram". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 26, 2021. Retrieved August 2, 2014. "Instagram". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 26, 2021. Retrieved August 2, 2014. Murray, Gordon (July 2, 2014), "Daft Punk, DJ Snake & Lil Jon Lead Mid-Year SoundScan Dance/Electronic Charts", Billboard, retrieved December 5, 2014 "Twitter / LindseyStirling: My 1st vid to hit the big". Twitter. July 27, 2014. Retrieved August 10, 2014. "Twitter / LindseyStirling: We can WIN! Im nominated for". Twitter. August 2, 2014. Retrieved August 10, 2014. Childers, Chad (August 7, 2014). "Lzzy Hale Rocks TV With Eric Church + Lindsey Stirling". Loudwire.com. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Papadatos, Markos (August 13, 2014), "Pentatonix to release first single and video from 'PTX Vol. 3'", Digital Journal, retrieved December 5, 2014 Walker, John. "Jessie J's New Album, Sweet Talker, Explained In GIFs". MTV News. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "Maker Studios' Branded Series Pairs Chocolate with YouTubers". a.list. September 14, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Lindt Teams Up With Ashley Tisdale And Maker Studios To Launch Digital Series "It Started with Hello"". PR Newswire. September 12, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Timeline Photos – Lindsey Stirling – Facebook". Facebook. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Timeline Photos – Lindsey Stirling – Facebook". Facebook. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Lindsey Stirling To Tour Australia and New Zealand In February". noise11.com. December 8, 2014. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Violinist Lindsey Stirling performs new single". Today. November 24, 2014. "Lindsey Stirling". facebook.com. Retrieved March 16, 2019. "Classical Albums : Page 1". Billboard. January 2, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Classical Albums Artists : Page 1". Billboard. January 2, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Independent Albums : Page 1". Billboard. January 2, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Dance/Electronic Albums : Page 1". Billboard. January 2, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Dance/Electronic Albums Artists : Page 1". Billboard. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Independent Artists : Page 1". Billboard. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Top Dance/Electronic Artists : Page 1". Billboard. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Forbes: Valley violinist Lindsey Stirling among music industry's best under 30". ktar.com. December 31, 1969. "Music in 2014: Taylor Takes the Year, Republic Records on Top, Streaming to the Rescue". Billboard. January 9, 2015. "Timeline Photos – Lindsey Stirling". facebook.com. Petersen, Sarah (March 2, 2015). "Lindsey Stirling's London concert to air on KBYU tonight". Deseret News. "Timeline Photos – Lindsey Stirling". facebook.com. Ward, Nick (March 2, 2015). "Martin Garrix & Lindsey Stirling Win Youtube Music Awards". Your EDM. Lindsey Stirling – Take Flight [Official Music Video – YTMAs]. March 23, 2015. Archived from the original on November 13, 2021 – via YouTube. Echo Awards 2015 Crossover Award Nominees and Winner (Lindsey Stirling). March 26, 2015. Archived from the original on November 13, 2021 – via YouTube. Andreas Bourani feat. Lindsey Stirling – Auf anderen Wegen (Echo 2015 Live Show). March 26, 2015. Archived from the original on November 13, 2021 – via YouTube. "Finalists Announced for the 2015 Billboard Music Awards". Billboard Music Awards. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved April 24, 2015. "Calvin Harris, DJ Snake & Lindsey Stirling Win The 2015 BBMAs". Your EDM. May 18, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2015. "Sounds Like Heaven" – via Amazon. "iTunes Music – Hallelujah (feat. Lindsey Stirling) – Single by Joy Enriquez". iTunes Store. May 5, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2015. Hampp, Andrew (July 1, 2015). "Lindsey Stirling Talks New Tour, Prepping Next Album & Performs 2 Songs". Billboard. Szatmari, Kate (July 22, 2015). "Lindsey Stirling: No. 11 on #Famechangers Digital Star Ranking". Variety. Retrieved July 24, 2015. "Platzierungen zu Lindsey Stirling - Live From London". Mix1.de. Retrieved August 26, 2015. "Musik-DVD Charts - aktuelle Musik-DVDs". Mix1.de. August 21, 2015. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved August 26, 2015. "Lindsey Stirling performing the National Anthem". MLB on YouTube. October 8, 2015. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Tops Hot Christian Songs Chart, Hits Hot 100 for First Time". Billboard. December 29, 2015. Retrieved December 30, 2015. "The Only Pirate at the Party". Lindsey Stirling. June 21, 2015. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2015. Lindsey Williams (January 22, 2016). "Lindsey Stirling's new book makes New York Times' best-seller list". Deseret News. Retrieved January 26, 2016. "Best Sellers – Hardcover Nonfiction". Best Sellers January 31, 2016. January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 26, 2016. Morgan Jones (January 15, 2016). "Dancing violinist Lindsey Stirling discusses her new book, LDS faith and taking a different route to stardom". Deseret News. Retrieved January 26, 2016. "Otto Knows Releases 'Dying For You,' Feat. Violinist Lindsey Stirling". Billboard. January 19, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2016. "The Arena - Lindsey Stirling". June 28, 2016. Archived from the original on November 13, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2019 – via YouTube. "Lindsey Stirling – Firefly". Discogs. July 2016. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling – Firefly". Genius. July 2016. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Andrew McMahon Teams Up With Lindsey Stirling For "Something Wild"". Hidden Jams. July 15, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Electric violinist Lindsey Stirling performs 'The Arena'". The Today Show. August 23, 2016. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "ZDF Morgenmagazin - Lindsey Stirling: "The Arena"". etwasverpasst.de. August 30, 2016. Retrieved March 11, 2022. Soper, Taylor (August 8, 2016). "Valve CEO Gabe Newell kicks off huge Dota 2 eSports championship; prize pool at $20M". GeekWire. Retrieved September 13, 2016. "Interview with Lindsey Stirling". Schon. August 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Releases Breathtaking Third Studio Album, 'Brave Enough'". YourEDM. August 16, 2016. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2022. "49ers Pregame Q&A with Lindsey Stirling". San Francisco 49ers. September 12, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Performs at 49ers Game". LDS Living. September 13, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling on Instagram". Instagram. September 12, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Brave Enough [B&N Exclusive] [Bonus Track]". Barnes & Noble. September 6, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Brave Enough". Discogs. September 6, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling - Brave Enough Limited Edition 2XLP". Urban Outfitters. September 6, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Bello Mag #131". Bello Media Coup. September 13, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Here is a sneak peek of my cover for Bello Mag". Lindsey Stirling on Facebook. September 14, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Utah-Tube: Lindsey Stirling Clones Herself In 'Prism'". Utah Valley 360. October 17, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling's New Music Video "Prism" is a Bright Spectacle". LDS Daily. October 14, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "October 2016". Strings Magazine on Twitter. August 25, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Hold My Heart". Genius. August 19, 2016. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Go Behind the Scenes of Violinist Lindsey Stirling's 'Hold My Heart' Music Video". People. November 22, 2016. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Stalks Herself in Her Video for "Hold My Heart"". Nerdist. March 23, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Excited to partner with Lindsey Stirling & the HP Sprocket". HP on Facebook. August 2016. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Spotify adds weekly in-house recordings with 'Singles'". Mashable. December 1, 2016. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling on Twitter". Twitter. November 30, 2016. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Tells A Time-Twisted Love Tale With 'Love's Just A Feeling'". Madly odd. November 13, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Love's Just a Feeling". Genius. August 19, 2016. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling on Facebook". Facebook. September 13, 2017. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling featuring Rooty – "Love's Just A Feeling"". Kelly and Ryan. September 2017. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "Bebe Rexha Small Doses". Genius. February 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2022. @BebeRexha (February 16, 2017). "Cool fact: Lindsey Sterling plays the violins on Small Doses" (Tweet). Retrieved February 18, 2017 – via Twitter. "The One Show 07 04 17". BBC. April 7, 2017. Retrieved February 27, 2022. "Nathan Lane and Lindsey Stirling". BBC. April 2, 2017. Retrieved February 27, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling - Brave Enough". Discogs. April 22, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Early Look: Julia Michaels, Lindsey Stirling, Noah Cyrus Perform At 2017 RDMA". Headline Planet. April 30, 2017. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "Radio Disney Music Awards". IMDB. April 2017. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling on Twitter". Twitter. April 30, 2017. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling: 2017 Radio Disney Music Awards". stealherstyle.net. April 30, 2017. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling: Brave Enough". May 17, 2017. Archived from the original on November 28, 2017. Retrieved February 27, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling: Brave Enough documentary to be released by Youtube". Music News. May 13, 2017. Retrieved February 27, 2022. "Meet Lindsey Stirling, the Violinist Winning Our Hearts with her Sonic Creations". Phoenix. May 20, 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2022. "'Dancing With the Stars' season 25 celebrity cast: Frankie Muniz, Barbara Corcoran, Nick Lachey and more". ABC News. September 6, 2017. Retrieved September 6, 2017. "'DWTS' Star Lindsey Stirling Suffers Rib Injury During Rehearsals". Yahoo. October 30, 2017. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "Dancing with the Stars Front-Runner Lindsey Stirling May Be Out of Competition After Suffering Rib Injury". People. October 30, 2017. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "DWTS' Contestant Lindsey Stirling Has Injured Her Knee and May Be Unable to Compete". Yahoo. November 12, 2017. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Honors Her Late Father with Moving Routine on Dancing with the Stars: 'I Felt Like I Was Dancing with My Dad'". People. October 9, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Honors Father's Loss to Throat Cancer on 'Dancing With the Stars'". Yahoo. October 10, 2017. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "'Dancing With the Stars' Crowns Season 25 Winner". November 21, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2017. "Lindsey Stirling's New Music Video For "Mirage" Gets A Bollywood Touch". Hitz. October 12, 2017. Retrieved March 8, 2022. Cirisano, Tatiana (September 14, 2017). "Lindsey Stirling Talks Joining 'Dancing With the Stars' & Shares First Holiday Album Track: Premiere". Billboard. Retrieved September 23, 2017. "Warmer In The Winter (Pre-Order) - Vinyl Record". soundstagedirect.com. Retrieved September 9, 2017.[permanent dead link] Caulfield, Keith. "Billboard 200 Chart Moves: Pentatonix's 'Christmas' Album Returns to Top 40". Billboard. Retrieved November 4, 2017. "Lindsey Stirling Announces 2017 'Warmer In The Winter Christmas Tour'". CID Entertainment. September 2017. Retrieved February 25, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Releases Deluxe Edition of "Warmer in the Winter"". Prelude Pass. October 2018. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Famous Musician Lindsey Stirling Performs "I Wonder As I Wander" Flawlessly". Madly Odd. October 2018. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Releases Expanded Version of Warmer in the Winter (Deluxe Edition)". Concord. October 2018. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling – Holiday Picture Disc". Discogs. November 2018. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "Special Release – Lindsey Stirling –Holiday Picture Disc". Record Store Day. November 23, 2018. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "Facebook". Facebook. November 22, 2018. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "Evanescence's Amy Lee Talks About Lindsey Stirling's Guest Appearance On 'Synthesis' (Video)". October 30, 2017. Blistein, Jon (March 6, 2018). "Evanescence, Lindsey Stirling Plot Co-Headlining Summer Tour". Rolling Stone. "Yamaha Turns It Up to Eleven with 'All-Star Concert on the Grand' Extravaganza Slated for 2018 NAMM Show". Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Yamaha's All-Star Concert to Return". November 29, 2018. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Alexander Jean and Lindsey Stirling Release Music Video for New Single Stampede". June 13, 2018. Retrieved April 22, 2022. "Bobby Bones and Lindsey Stirling ('Dancing with the Stars') gave us the MC Hammer cha cha we needed in these trying times". Gold Derby. October 15, 2018. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "The Outpost on IMDB". IMDb. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "The Outpost on Twitter". Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling: On her multiple lifetimes of accomplishments as an electronic violinist". Grumpy Magazine. November 26, 2018. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Releases Festive 'You're A Mean One, Mr. Grinch' Video Just in Time For the Holidays". Billboard. Retrieved August 28, 2022. Delbel, Julia (October 20, 2018). "Star-Studded Lineup Revealed for 'Darci Lynne: A Hometown Christmas'". Talent Recap. Archived from the original on October 22, 2018. Retrieved October 22, 2018. "'America's Got Talent' Asked Lindsey Stirling To Compete Again. Here's What She Said". Huffington Post. December 19, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Acclaimed electronic violinist Lindsey Stirling shares 'Underground' single". Shoot Music Promotions. July 15, 2019. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Drops New Single "Underground," Announces Upcoming Album And Tour". tubefilter. June 21, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling — The Upside + Artemis Tour Dates". Raw Ramp. August 6, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Announces 2021 Artemis Tour Dates". EDM Identity. May 12, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2022. "Important Lindsey Stirling Tour Update". TEG Dainty. February 2022. Retrieved February 23, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Releases Comic Book to Pair with Album, 'Artemis'". Nerds and Beyond. November 27, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Captivates With "The Upside"". Blast Out Your Stereo. July 9, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling releases a progressive house-inspired instrumental, entitled, "The Upside"". Bong. July 23, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling releases 'The Upside' featuring Elle King". Celebmix. August 2, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling releases music video for 'The Upside' featuring Elle King". CelebMix. September 12, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Video: Watch Lindsey Stirling Perform 'The Upside' on Live With Kelly and Ryan". Broadway World. November 1, 2019. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling is so not sorry for getting an early start on Christmas this year". AZ Central. November 20, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Unwraps New 'We Three Gentlemen' Video". Billboard. Retrieved August 28, 2022. "Guitar Girl Magazine Issue 10 – Winter 2019 – Lindsey Stirling Cover". Guitar Girl Magazine. November 2019. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Switchfoot Collaborates with Lindsey Stirling On 'Voices'". Rock On Purpose. November 7, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling - List of Songs". What Song. March 2022. Retrieved March 8, 2022. Lindsey Stirling Performs Artemis at NASA's Kennedy Space Center. NASA YouTube Channel. 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Howell, Elizabeth (March 11, 2020). "Violinist Lindsey Stirling shoots moon-themed 'Artemis' music video at NASA's Kennedy Space Center". space.com. Retrieved May 25, 2020. "Lindsey Stirling - Between Twilight". Glasse Factory. June 26, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Video of the Day: Lindsey Stirling's 'Till The Light Goes Out'". SciFi Radio. September 21, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling and Bishop Briggs Join Forces on the Track "Jekyll and Hyde" For String Sessions". MXDWN Music. mxdwn. July 26, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling – The Upside Fund charity & String Sessions with Jewel". findyoursounds.com. July 5, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "String Sessions with Lindsey Stirling". Spotify. "String Sessions with Lindsey Stirling". lindseystirling.com. May 1, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Thank You for 100 Videos and 3 Billion Views!". YouTube. July 21, 2020. Retrieved April 16, 2022. DiVita, Joe (August 28, 2020). "Evanescence Debut 'Use My Voice' Music Video". Loudwire. Retrieved December 20, 2020. "Lindsey Stirling releases new song 'What You're Made Of'". Distorted Sound Magazine. August 14, 2020. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "No Saving Me". Beat Source. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Escape the Fate Releases 'Invincible' Single Feat. Lindsey Stirling". blabbermouth.net. October 16, 2020. Retrieved December 20, 2020. "Eternally Crystallized". Civilian Magazine. December 2020. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Cover". Civilian Magazine. Vol. 2, no. 3. December 4, 2020. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling and Mako Release Emotive New Single 'Lose You Now'". Broadway World. January 15, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Dance/Electronic Digital Song Sales". Billboard. January 30, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling & Mako Release Acoustic Version of 'Lose You Now'". Broadway World. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling: League of Legends 'Wild Rift' Music Review". Studio Jake Media. April 13, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Create with Asus". petros.film. Retrieved July 28, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling – Lose You Now". Discogs. July 17, 2021. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Special Release 13433". Record Store Day. July 17, 2021. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Lose You Now". Rough Trade Records. July 17, 2021. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Presents Free-Spirited Music Video for "Masquerade"". EDM Identity. July 3, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Watch: Lindsey Stirling Performs Tales of Arise Melodies at Gamescom". Comic Book. August 25, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Tales of Arise 'Flame of Hope' Lindsey Stirling Music Video Appears". Silconera. October 13, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling is returning to the stage where judges once ripped her apart". Deseret. August 25, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Instagram Update". Instagram. September 27, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling: Genshin Impact's "Rage Beneath The Mountains" Music Review". Studio Jake Media. November 1, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Announces "Crystallize" Signature Yamaha Violin". findyoursounds.com. October 22, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2022. ""Crystallize"Lindsey Stirling Signature Yamaha Violin". Lindsey Stirling. October 22, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling announces 'Crystallize' Signature Yamaha Violin". themusicuniverse.com. October 22, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Introducing the Lindsey Stirling Citrine Palette!". Milled. October 1, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling on Twitter". Twitter. October 13, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Video: Disney Shares New Music Preview of Harmonious Featuring Fonsi, Lindsey Stirling, Karen Clark Sheard and Kierra Sheard, and More". Theme Park Tourist. August 13, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2022. "'Harmonious' Brings to EPCOT a Global Ensemble of Musical Artists from Around the World". Disney Parks. August 13, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2022. "Harmonious features the work of more than 200 musicians including Luis Fonsi, Lindsey Stirling and American Idol finalist Danny Gokey". WDW Magic. August 13, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Iahn, Buddy (October 4, 2021). "Lindsey Stirling announces 2021 Christmas tour". The Music Universe. Retrieved February 23, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling: Home for the Holidays". Iconic Events. November 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Holiday Special To Get A Theatrical Release". Forbes. November 8, 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling: Home for the Holidays". tribute.ca. November 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Electric Forest Reveals 2022 Artist Lineup: Who's New, Who's Been Replaced". YourEDM. December 8, 2021. Retrieved April 12, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling reveals she composed the theme song for good sam". January 7, 2022. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling on Facebook". Facebook. January 5, 2022. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Gilbert-raised Lindsey Stirling getting ready to perform at Bell Bank Park in Mesa". Fox 10 Phoenix. February 1, 2022. Retrieved February 21, 2022. "Carlie Hanson, Avril Lavigne, Lindsey Stirling & Karolina Protsenko Confirmed For "Kelly Clarkson Show" Performances". Headline Planet. February 24, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Run the airwaves with Amp, the live radio app from Amazon". Amazon. March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling on Instagram". Instagram. March 29, 2022. Retrieved March 30, 2022. "Interview: Lindsey Stirling Collaborates with Yamaha on New Violin". Violinist. March 31, 2022. Retrieved April 1, 2022. "Seaworld on Instagram". Seaworld. April 1, 2022. Retrieved April 3, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling at Seaworld Seven Seas Food Festival". Audacy. March 5, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Setlist". Setlist.fm. April 2, 2022. Retrieved April 3, 2022. "The Festival at Sandpoint". Facebook. April 8, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling". The Festival at Sandpoint. April 8, 2022. Archived from the original on April 8, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. "Washington State Fair on Twitter". Twitter. April 4, 2022. Retrieved April 8, 2022. "An Evening with Lindsey Stirling". Washington State Fair. April 4, 2022. Archived from the original on April 8, 2022. Retrieved April 8, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling". Britt Fest. Archived from the original on August 15, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. "Synth Riders Breaking Out the Violin with Lindsey Stirling DLC". Hardcore Gamer. April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 12, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling". Montreal Jazz Fest. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling". place des arts. April 25, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Montreal Jazz Festival – Day 8 – In Photos". canadianbeats.ca. July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "Announcing!! Lindsey Stirling will perform as part of the Toyota Summer Concert Series at Pacific Amphitheatre on July 21!". Twitter. Retrieved May 3, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling". pacamp.com. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved May 3, 2022. "girlfriends Release New Album (e)motion sickness Via Big Noise". Shorefire Media. Retrieved June 23, 2022. "Music notes: Harry Styles, Niall Horan, Jennifer Lopez, Lindsey Stirling and Camila Cabello". JAM Broadcasting. June 20, 2022. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved June 23, 2022. "More details on the Disney+ special 'Harmonious Live!' coming from EPCOT tonight". WDW Magic. Retrieved June 23, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling". clearsummernights.com. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "Evanescence's Amy Lee and violinist Lindsey Stirling go back to medieval times in video for Love Goes On and On". loudersound.com. July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Announces Snow Waltz, New Christmas LP Out October 7th Via Concord Records". Shore Fire Media. Retrieved August 25, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling announces forthcoming Christmas album". 9 News. August 25, 2022. Retrieved August 25, 2022. "Snow Waltz Tour". Twitter. Retrieved September 12, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Tour". lindseystirling.com. Retrieved September 12, 2022. "Hallmark's Countdown to Christmas Lineup Features Fan Favorites in One Movie, First Leading LGBTQ Couple and More: Schedule (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. September 22, 2022. Retrieved September 29, 2022. "lindsey-stirling-stars-in-a-plague-tale-requiems-official-music-video". gametyrant.com. October 14, 2022. Retrieved October 16, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Performs 'Joy To The World' On The Kelly Clarkson Show". Yahoo.com. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved November 8, 2022. "Christmas Distilled: How Lindsey Stirling's pop-violin LP 'Snow Waltz' is the humbug antidote". House of Solo Magazine. November 29, 2022. Retrieved December 2, 2022. "Lollaparis Programmation". Lollapalooza Paris. Retrieved January 29, 2023. "Lollapalooza Paris announces 2023 lineup". themusicuniverse.com. January 25, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2023. "Lindsey Stirling Announces 20+ Date US Summer Tour". Shore Fire Media. Retrieved March 21, 2023. "Listen to violinist Lindsey Stirling's rousing cover of Led Zeppelin classic Kashmir". loudersound.com. July 22, 2023. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "Electronic violinist to bring her choreographed strings to Tel Aviv". Time of Israel. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "Lindsey Stirling Athens July 17". ekathimerini.com. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "Violinist and Dancer Lindsey Stirling Announces 2023 North American Snow Waltz Christmas Tour". Shorefire Media. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "Lindsey Stirling Announces 2023 North American Snow Waltz Christmas Tour". Guitar Girl Magazine. August 21, 2023. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "Lindsey Stirling To Bring The Snow Waltz 2023 Christmas Tour To Europe With Added Dates". Talent Recap. September 7, 2023. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "Magical Moments Unfold As Lindsey Stirling Joins Amy Grant And Trisha Yearwood For 'Joy To The World'". Country Now. December 15, 2023. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Fans Blown Away as Trisha Yearwood Partners With Lindsey Stirling for Powerful "O Holy Night" Cover: "Slayed My Existence"". American Songwriter. December 15, 2023. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Watch Amy Grant, Trisha Yearwood, And Lindsey Stirling Perform "Joy To The World" On CMA Country Christmas". Southern Living. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Yamaha Announces Dynamic Performances at The 2024 NAMM Show". Cision. Retrieved February 3, 2024. "Lindsey Stirling, Billboard's Melinda Newman & More Added as 2024 She Rocks Awards Honorees". Billboard. Retrieved February 3, 2024. "Violinist Lindsey Stirling Announces New Studio Album – Duality – Out June 14th Via Concord Records". Shorefire Media. Retrieved March 9, 2024. Stevens, Abby (October 3, 2013). "Violinist Lindsey Stirling backs Power of Music fundraiser". Deseret News. Retrieved December 5, 2014. "Tijdlijnfoto's – Lindsey Stirling". Facebook. Retrieved May 4, 2014. Leach, Robin (March 24, 2014). "Photos: Cirque du Soleil looks ahead to third 'One Night for One Drop' benefit". Las Vegas Sun. Archived from the original on March 30, 2014. Retrieved December 5, 2014. "Warmer in the Winter Christmas Tour Experiences". Retrieved March 16, 2019. https://www.rmhconcerts.com/tickets/[permanent dead link][bare URL] "The Upside Fund Offers Support to Those in Need". Network For Good. April 1, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "The Upside Fund". CharityBuzz. April 1, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling opens her Upside Fund fan assistance program to others". Riff Magazine. July 1, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Tea North Partners With Lindsey Stirling to Give Back to Families in Need". Bevnet. July 24, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling on Twitter". Twitter. August 27, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling on Instagram". Instagram. May 21, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Resolve Partners With The Upside Fund to Fight Medical Debt". Resolve Medical Bills. December 3, 2021. Archived from the original on March 2, 2022. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "The Upside Fund: Lindsey Stirling". Lindsey Stirling. March 2, 2022. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Win a Virtual Lesson With Lindsey Stirling and a Signed Violin". Fandiem. November 1, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling@ Facebook Update Auction 2022". Facebook. February 9, 2022. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Kevin Lyman & Talinda Bennington All Set To Present 320 Festival Online; Chris Martin Of Coldplay And Kiiara Added To Lineup". pollstar.com. May 7, 2020. "320 Festival". Do250. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Lindsey Stirling on Instagram 3/7/22 2022". Instagram. March 7, 2022. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "eBay on Instagram 3/7/22 2022". Instagram. March 7, 2022. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Auction for Ukraine". ebay. March 13, 2022. Retrieved March 13, 2022. Lippert, Oliver (April 24, 2013). "Lindsey Stirling im Interview". Monsters and Critics (in German). "Yamaha Welcomes Violin Sensation Lindsey Stirling to its Artist Roster". usa.yamaha.com. Yamaha Corporation (June 9, 2016), "I Play Yamaha"- Lindsey Stirling, archived from the original on November 13, 2021 Niles, Laurie (October 1, 2014). "Violinist.com interview with Lindsey Stirling: the Scene in the Song". Violinist.com. Yamaha Performing Artist Lindsey Stirling - "Roundtable Rival" Behind The Scenes, December 14, 2014, archived from the original on November 13, 2021, retrieved March 9, 2018 Templeton, David (August 25, 2016). "Lindsey Stirling on her 'Brave' New Album and the Power of Practice". Strings Magazine. "Lindsey Stirling on the Stories Behind Her 5 Favorite Violins". Reverb. March 12, 2020. "Lindsey Stirling on TikTok". TikTok. March 7, 2022. "Lindsey's Teenage Violin". eBay. March 12, 2022. Harmer, Katie (August 8, 2012). "BYU's hip-hop violin sensation stomps to astounding 110 million YouTube views". Deseret News. Frandsen, Jacob (Summer 2012). "Violin with a High Kick". BYU Magazine. Retrieved March 19, 2013. "Contributors: Lindsey Stirling". DoNotAttemptInHeels.com. Official website of: Do Not Attempt in Heels: Mission Stories and Advice from Sisters Who've Been There. Archived from the original on October 22, 2014. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Potter, Chelsea (August 14, 2015). "Lindsey Stirling graduates from Brigham Young University, performs at convocation". Deseret News. Retrieved April 6, 2013.. "The World's Top-Earning YouTube Stars 2015". Forbes. October 14, 2015. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Stirling, Lindsey (September 10, 2013). "Going Home". Lindsey Stirling. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved September 10, 2013. "Lindsey Stirling Pays Cash for Hollywood Hills Hideaway". Yahoo. May 4, 2019. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Pays Cash for Hollywood Hills Hideaway". Variety. May 3, 2019. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling on Twitter". Twitter. December 21, 2015. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "Video: Lindsey Stirling Talks About Her Dog on Today Show". Broadway World. December 18, 2019. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "Today Show on Twitter". Today. December 30, 2019. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Hires PI To Track Alleged Stalker Linked To Taylor Swift". Yahoo. January 22, 2024. Retrieved February 3, 2024. Hoffberger, Chase (September 20, 2012). "Thrillseeker: Behind the scenes with Devin "SuperTramp" Graham". The Daily Dot. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Toone, Trent (April 18, 2013). "Hip-hop violinist Lindsey Stirling overcomes anorexia, critics to find happiness, success". Deseret News. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Krewen, Nick (June 13, 2014). "Violinist Lindsey Stirling credits YouTube with meteoric rise". Toronto Star. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Glines, Carole (October 3, 2017). "'DWTS': YouTube Violinist Lindsey Stirling reveals her split from boyfriend". Fox News. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Messer, Lesley; Kloeffler, Dan (July 16, 2014). "'All of Me' Violinist Lindsey Stirling Talks About Her Eating Disorder". ABC News. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Palmer, Brian (July 9, 2014). "Lindsey Stirling Dances to Her Own Tune". Dallas Observer. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Jones, Morgan (October 27, 2014). "Second interactive, online event for LDS teens to feature Lindsey Stirling". Deseret News. Childs, Lisa Adachi (November 28, 2014). "Face to Face with Lindsey Stirling". LDS Church News. Archived from the original on August 25, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2014. "UTubers: Lindsey Stirling reflects on blessings of not using drugs, alcohol". Deseret News. February 29, 2016. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "The IAU (International Astronomic Union) Minor Planet Center listing of the asteroid". Retrieved May 30, 2019. Roby, Steve (May 24, 2014). "Concert Review: Lindsey Stirling "Shatters" S.F. With Two Sold-Out Shows". BAM Magazine. Archived from the original on September 30, 2014. "Lindsey Stirling's Christmas Show Exudes Comfort, Joy And A Little Something Special". fiftysix. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Stirling, Lindsey (November 21, 2015). "This is so hard to say but Gavi passed away today". Facebook. "Lindsey Stirling works a high-energy, violin-dance combo". charlotteobserver. Retrieved December 4, 2017. "Duality 6.14". Lindsey Stirling's Instagram. "Breaking Through 2015". Hollywood.com. Retrieved November 23, 2015. "Lindsey Stirling Releases Comic Book to Pair with Album, 'Artemis'". Nerds and Beyond. November 27, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2022. "Issue Checklist for Creator Lindsey Stirling (b. 1986)". GCD. February 23, 2022. Retrieved February 23, 2022. Stirling, Lindsey. "Previous Performances". LindseyStirling.com. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Reviews". Lindsey Stirling Tickets. Ticketmaster. https://www.ticketmaster.com/Lindsey-Stirling-tickets/artist/1726690?page=153. Accessed: 2019-07-13. "Lindsey Stirling Has Announced Her Third Studio Album, Out This Summer". Moroni Channel. April 21, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling's Coachella Guest Appearance Was As Magical As Expected". yourEDM. April 17, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2022. "Electric Picnic 2016 Several new acts added to line-up". the Last Mixed Tape. August 19, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2022. "Le Chant du Gros unveils its program". Journal du Jura. May 23, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2022. "UTubers: Lindsey Stirling announces summer tour, upcoming album in music video". Deseret News. Deseret. April 19, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2022. "Kaiser Chiefs & Jagwar Ma Stand Out on Lollapalooza Berlin's First Day". ATL. September 11, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Releases Breathtaking Third Studio Album, 'Brave Enough'". YourEDM. August 16, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling announces UK tour dates". Music News. October 9, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2022. Kaufman, Gil (March 6, 2018). "Evanescence & Lindsey Stirling Launching Joint Summer Tour With Full Orchestra". Billboard. Retrieved May 5, 2018. Stirling, Lindsey (September 4, 2018). "Walking in a [Lindsey] Wanderland I'm so excited to announce my Christmas tour is coming back!! Hang with me this winter for #TheWanderlandTour - pre-sale begins Tue 9/11 & on-sale is 9/14. Full dates & presale SIGN UP". Retrieved March 16, 2019. "Lindsey Stirling on Instagram: "It's never too early for Christmas... right? I'm coming back with my #WarmerInTheWinterTour to a city near you this holiday season - pre-…"". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 26, 2021. "Lindsey Stirling announces dates for 2019 Warmer in the Winter Christmas Tour". "Lindsey Stirling Has Announced a Huge Christmas Tour 2021: How To Buy Tickets". IPS. October 4, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling announces 2021 Christmas tour". The Music Universe. October 4, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2022. "Lindsey Stirling Announces Christmas Snow Tour Waltz; Tickets On Sale Friday, September 16". Broadway World. Retrieved September 13, 2022. "Violinist Lindsey Stirling Sparkles and Swirls into the Winter Wonderland, Kicking Off Her North American Snow Waltz Holiday Tour". Shorefire Media. Retrieved December 14, 2023. "Violinist, singer, dancer Lindsey Stirling coming to Grossinger Motors Arena". Pantagraph. September 4, 2018. "Billboard Music Awards 2015: See the Full Winners List". Billboard Music Awards. May 18, 2015. "Billboard Music Awards Winners 2017: Complete List". Billboard Music Awards. May 21, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2019. Roxborough, Scott (February 20, 2013). "German Echo Music Awards: Avicii, Eminem, Depeche Mode Big Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 5, 2014. "Germany's Echo Awards 2015: All the winners". Music Business Worldwide. March 27, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. "SoundExchange Presents The 2016 A2IM Libera Awards". Shorefire. 2016. "2014 Teen Choice Awards Winners and Nominees – complete list". HitFix. HitFix.com. Retrieved March 27, 2015. "2015 Teen Choice Award Winners – Full List". Variety. August 16, 2015. Retrieved August 17, 2015. "3rd Annual Nominees & Winners". The Streamy Awards. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Pre-Live Stream Streamy Award Winners Announced". The Streamy Awards. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "5th Annual Winners & Nominees". The Streamy Awards. Retrieved September 20, 2015. "6th Annual Winners & Nominees". The Streamy Awards. Retrieved September 20, 2016. Lopez, Korina (November 4, 2013). "YouTube Music Awards winners list". USA Today. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Presenting the YouTube Music Awards Winners of 2015. March 2, 2015. Archived from the original on November 13, 2021 – via YouTube. Lee, Ashley (2016). "Shorty Awards: The Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Lee, Ashley (2019). "Daytime Emmy winners 2019: Full list of Creative Arts winners on Friday night". goldderby.com. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lindsey Stirling. Official website Lindsey Stirling at IMDb