Star Trek is an American science fiction media franchise created by Gene Roddenberry, which began with the eponymous 1960s television series and became a worldwide pop-culture phenomenon. Since its creation, the franchise has expanded into various films, television series, video games, novels, and comic books, and it has become one of the most recognizable and highest-grossing media franchises of all time. The franchise began with Star Trek: The Original Series, which debuted in the US on September 8, 1966, and aired for three seasons on NBC. It was first broadcast on September 6, 1966, on Canada's CTV network. The series followed the voyages of the crew of the starship USS Enterprise, a space exploration vessel built by the United Federation of Planets in the 23rd century, on a mission "to explore strange new worlds, to seek out new life and new civilizations, to boldly go where no man has gone before". In creating Star Trek, Roddenberry was inspired by C. S. Forester's Horatio Hornblower series of novels, Jonathan Swift's 1726 novel Gulliver's Travels, the 1956 film Forbidden Planet, and television westerns such as Wagon Train. The Star Trek canon includes the Original Series, 11 spin-off television series, and a film franchise; further adaptations also exist in several media. After the conclusion of the Original Series, the adventures of its characters continued in the 22-episode Star Trek: The Animated Series and six feature films. A television revival beginning in the 1980s saw three sequel series and a prequel: The Next Generation, following the crew of a new starship Enterprise a century after the original series; Deep Space Nine and Voyager, set in the same era as the Next Generation; and Enterprise, set before the original series in the early days of human interstellar travel. The adventures of the Next Generation crew continued in four additional feature films. In 2009, the film franchise underwent a reboot, creating an alternate continuity known as the Kelvin timeline; three films have been set in this continuity. The newest Star Trek television revival, beginning in 2017, includes the series Discovery, Picard, Short Treks, Lower Decks, Prodigy, and Strange New Worlds, streaming exclusively on digital platforms. Star Trek has been a cult phenomenon for decades. Fans of the franchise are called "Trekkies" or "Trekkers". The franchise spans a wide range of spin-offs including games, figurines, novels, toys, and comics. From 1998 to 2008, there was a Star Trek–themed attraction in Las Vegas. At least two museum exhibits of props travel the world. The constructed language Klingon was created for the franchise. Several Star Trek parodies have been made, and viewers have produced several fan productions. Star Trek is noted for its cultural influence beyond works of science fiction. The franchise is also notable for its progressive civil-rights stances. The Original Series included one of the first multiracial casts on US television. As early as 1964, Gene Roddenberry drafted a proposal for the science fiction series that would become Star Trek. Although he publicly marketed it as a Western in outer space—a so-called "Wagon Train to the stars"—he privately told friends that he was modeling it on Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels, intending each episode to act on two levels: as a suspenseful adventure story and as a morality tale. Most Star Trek stories depict the adventures of humans and aliens who serve in Starfleet, the space-borne humanitarian and peacekeeping armada of the United Federation of Planets. The protagonists have altruistic values, and must apply these ideals to difficult dilemmas. Many of the conflicts and political dimensions of Star Trek are allegories of contemporary cultural realities. The Original Series addressed issues of the 1960s, just as later spin-offs have tackled issues of their respective decades. Issues depicted in the various series include war and peace, the value of personal loyalty, authoritarianism, imperialism, class warfare, economics, racism, religion, human rights, sexism, feminism, and the role of technology.: 57  Roddenberry stated: "[By creating] a new world with new rules, I could make statements about sex, religion, Vietnam, politics, and intercontinental missiles. Indeed, we did make them on Star Trek: we were sending messages and fortunately they all got by the network.: 79  If you talked about purple people on a far off planet, they (the television network) never really caught on. They were more concerned about cleavage. They actually would send a censor down to the set to measure a woman's cleavage to make sure too much of her breast wasn't showing." Roddenberry intended the show to have a progressive political agenda reflective of the emerging counter-culture of the youth movement, though he was not fully forthcoming to the networks about this. He wanted Star Trek to show what humanity might develop into, if it would learn from the lessons of the past, most specifically by ending violence. An extreme example is the alien species known as the Vulcans, who had a violent past but learned to control their emotions. Roddenberry also gave Star Trek an anti-war message and depicted the United Federation of Planets as an ideal, optimistic version of the United Nations. His efforts were opposed by the network because of concerns over marketability, e.g., they opposed Roddenberry's insistence that Enterprise have a racially diverse crew. In early 1964, Roddenberry presented a brief treatment for a television series to Desilu Productions, calling it "a Wagon Train to the stars". Desilu studio head Lucille Ball was instrumental in approving production of the series. The studio worked with Roddenberry to develop the treatment into a script, which was then pitched to NBC. NBC paid to make a pilot, "The Cage", starring Jeffrey Hunter as Enterprise Captain Christopher Pike. NBC rejected "The Cage", but the executives were still impressed with the concept, and made the unusual decision to commission a second pilot: "Where No Man Has Gone Before". While the show initially enjoyed high ratings, the average rating of the show at the end of its first season dropped to 52nd out of 94 programs. Unhappy with the show's ratings, NBC threatened to cancel the show during its second season. The show's fan base, led by Bjo Trimble, conducted an unprecedented letter-writing campaign, petitioning the network to keep the show on the air. NBC renewed the show, but moved it from primetime to the "Friday night death slot", and substantially reduced its budget. In protest, Roddenberry resigned as producer and reduced his direct involvement in Star Trek, which led to Fred Freiberger becoming producer for the show's third and final season. Despite another letter-writing campaign, NBC canceled the series after three seasons and 79 episodes. After the original series was canceled, Desilu, which by then had been renamed Paramount Television, licensed the broadcast syndication rights to help recoup the production losses. Reruns began in late 1969, and by the late 1970s the series aired in over 150 domestic and 60 international markets. This helped Star Trek develop a cult following among Trekkies greater than during its original run; by 1976, the cast described Star Trek as "the most popular series in the world". One sign of the series' growing popularity was the first Star Trek convention, which occurred on January 21–23, 1972 in New York City. Although the original expectation was that a few hundred fans would attend, several thousand turned up. Fans continue to attend similar conventions worldwide. The series' newfound success led to the idea of reviving the franchise. Filmation with Paramount Television produced the first post–original series show, Star Trek: The Animated Series, featuring the cast of the original series reprising their roles. It ran on NBC for 22 half-hour episodes over two seasons on Saturday mornings from 1973 to 1974.: 208  Although short-lived, typical for animated productions in that time slot during that period, the series garnered the franchise's only Emmy Award in a "Best Series" category—specifically Outstanding Entertainment Children's Series; later Emmy awards for the franchise would be in technical categories. Paramount Pictures and Roddenberry began developing a new series, Star Trek: Phase II, in May 1975 in response to the franchise's newfound popularity. Work on the series ended when the proposed Paramount Television Service folded. Following the success of the science fiction movies Star Wars and Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Paramount adapted the planned pilot episode of Phase II into the feature film Star Trek: The Motion Picture. The film opened in North America on December 7, 1979, with mixed reviews from critics. The film earned $139 million worldwide, below expectations but enough for Paramount to create a sequel. The studio forced Roddenberry to relinquish creative control of future sequels.[citation needed] The success of the sequel, Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan, reversed the fortunes of the franchise. While the sequel grossed less than the first movie, The Wrath of Khan's lower production costs made it net more profit. Paramount produced six Star Trek feature films between 1979 and 1991, each featuring the Original Series cast in their original roles. In 1987, Paramount responded to the popularity of Star Trek feature films by bringing the franchise back to television with Star Trek: The Next Generation. Paramount chose to distribute the new series as a first-run syndication show rather than a network program. The series was set a century after the original, following the adventures of a new starship Enterprise with a new crew. Following Star Trek: The Motion Picture, Roddenberry's role was changed from producer to creative consultant, with minimal input to the films, while being heavily involved with the creation of The Next Generation. Roddenberry died on October 24, 1991, giving executive producer Rick Berman control of the franchise.: 268 : 591–593  Star Trek had become known to those within Paramount as "the franchise", because of its great success and recurring role as a tent pole for the studio when other projects failed. The Next Generation had the highest ratings of any Star Trek series and became the most syndicated show during the last years of its original seven-season run. In response to the Next Generation's success, Paramount released a spin-off series, Deep Space Nine, in 1993. While never as popular as the Next Generation, the series had sufficient ratings for it to last seven seasons. In January 1995, a few months after the Next Generation ended, Paramount released a fourth television series, Voyager. Star Trek production reached a peak in the mid-1990s with Deep Space Nine and Voyager airing concurrently and three of the four Next Generation-based feature films released in 1994, 1996, and 1998. By 1998, Star Trek was Paramount's most important property and the profits of "the franchise" funded a significant portion of the studio's operations. Voyager became the flagship show of the new United Paramount Network (UPN) and thus the first major network Star Trek series since the original. After Voyager ended, UPN produced Enterprise, a prequel series. Enterprise did not enjoy the high ratings of its predecessors and UPN threatened to cancel it after the series' third season. Fans launched a campaign reminiscent of the one that saved the third season of the Original Series. Paramount renewed Enterprise for a fourth season, but moved it to the Friday night death slot. Like the Original Series, Enterprise's ratings dropped during this time slot, and UPN canceled Enterprise at the end of its fourth season. Enterprise aired its final episode on May 13, 2005. A fan group, "Save Enterprise", attempted to save the series and tried to raise $30 million to privately finance a fifth season of Enterprise. Though the effort garnered considerable press, the fan drive failed to save the series. The cancellation of Enterprise ended an eighteen-year continuous production run of Star Trek programming on television. The poor box office performance in 2002 of the film Nemesis cast an uncertain light upon the future of the franchise. Paramount relieved Berman, the franchise producer, of control of Star Trek. In 2007, Paramount hired a new creative team to reinvigorate the franchise on the big screen. Writers Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman and producer J. J. Abrams had the freedom to reinvent the feel of the franchise. The team created the franchise's eleventh film, Star Trek, releasing it in May 2009. The film featured a new cast portraying the crew of the original show. Star Trek was a prequel of the original series set in an alternate timeline, later named the Kelvin Timeline. This gave the film and sequels freedom from the need to conform to the franchise's canonical timeline and minimized the impact these films would have on CBS's portion of the franchise. The eleventh Star Trek film's marketing campaign targeted non-fans, stating in the film's advertisements that "this is not your father's Star Trek". The film earned considerable critical and financial success, grossing (in inflation-adjusted dollars) more box office sales than any previous Star Trek film. The plaudits include the franchise's first Academy Award (for makeup). Two sequels were released. The first sequel, Star Trek Into Darkness, premiered in the spring of 2013. While the film did not earn as much in the North American box office as its predecessor, internationally, in terms of box office receipts, Into Darkness is the most successful of the franchise. The thirteenth film, Star Trek Beyond, was released on July 22, 2016. The film had many pre-production problems and its script went through several rewrites. While receiving positive reviews, Star Trek Beyond disappointed in the box office. CBS turned down several proposals in the mid-2000s to restart the franchise on the small screen. Proposals included pitches from film director Bryan Singer, Babylon 5 creator J. Michael Straczynski, and Trek actors Jonathan Frakes and William Shatner. While CBS was not creating new Star Trek for network television, the ease of access to Star Trek content on new streaming services such as Netflix and Amazon Prime Video introduced a new set of fans to the franchise. CBS eventually sought to capitalize on this trend, and brought the franchise back to the small screen with the series Star Trek: Discovery to help launch and draw subscribers to its streaming service CBS All Access. Discovery's first season premiered on September 24, 2017. While Discovery is shown in the United States exclusively on Paramount+ (formerly CBS All Access), for its first three seasons, Netflix, in exchange for funding the production costs of the show, owned the international screening rights for the show. This Netflix distribution and production deal ended right before the fourth season premiere of Discovery in November 2021. Discovery has since been exclusive to Paramount Global owned platforms. In June 2018, after becoming sole showrunner of Discovery, Kurtzman signed a five-year overall deal with CBS Television Studios to expand the Star Trek franchise beyond Discovery to several new series, miniseries, and animated series. Kurtzman wanted to "open this world up" and create multiple series set in the same universe but with their own "unique storytelling and distinct cinematic feel", an approach that he compared to the Marvel Cinematic Universe. However, the franchise would not tell a single story across multiple series, allowing audiences to watch each series without having to see all of the others. CBS and Kurtzman refer to this expanded franchise as the Star Trek Universe. The second series of the expansion of the Star Trek Universe, Star Trek: Picard, features Patrick Stewart reprising the character Jean-Luc Picard from The Next Generation. Picard premiered on CBS All Access on January 23, 2020. Unlike Discovery, Amazon Prime Video streams Picard internationally. CBS has also released two seasons of Star Trek: Short Treks, a series of standalone mini-episodes which air between Discovery and Picard seasons. A new live-action series, Star Trek: Strange New Worlds, a spinoff of the second season of Discovery and prequel to the original series, premiered on May 5, 2022. Lower Decks, an animated adult comedy series, was released on August 6, 2020, on CBS All Access. Another animated series, Star Trek: Prodigy, premiered on the rebranded service Paramount+ first on October 28, 2021, and on December 17, 2021, on Nickelodeon. Prodigy is the first Star Trek series to specifically target younger audiences, and is the franchise's first fully computer animated series. Star Trek saturation would hit a new peak in 2022, with five Star Trek series airing in the same year. The Star Trek: Picard series finale aired in April 2023. Discovery's final season will air early 2024. A Star Trek: Starfleet Academy series is in pre-production to take the place of one of these series. Star Trek: Prodigy was removed from Paramount+ in June 2023. The series was picked up by Netflix, and season 1 was made available on December 25, 2023. A new second season will air later in 2024. Paramount is also planning to create direct-to-streaming movies every two years. The first of these movies, Section 31, will star Michelle Yeoh, reprising her role as Empress Georgiou from Discovery. Twelve television series make up the Star Trek franchise: The Original Series, The Animated Series, The Next Generation, Deep Space Nine, Voyager, Enterprise, Discovery, Short Treks, Picard, Lower Decks, Prodigy, and Strange New Worlds. All series in total amount to 900 episodes across 46 seasons of television. Star Trek: The Original Series, frequently abbreviated as TOS, debuted on NBC on September 8, 1966. The show depicts the adventures of the crew of the starship USS Enterprise and its five-year mission "to boldly go where no man has gone before", under the command of Captain James T. Kirk. During the series's initial run, it was nominated for Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation multiple times, and won twice.: 231  NBC canceled the show after three seasons; the last original episode aired on June 3, 1969. A petition near the end of the second season to save the show signed by many Caltech students and its multiple Hugo nominations would, however, indicate that despite low Nielsen ratings, it was highly popular with science fiction fans and engineering students. The series later became popular in reruns and found a cult following. Star Trek: The Animated Series, produced by Filmation, ran for two seasons from 1973 to 1974. Most of the original cast performed the voices of their characters from the Original Series, and some of the writers who worked on the Original Series returned. While the animated format allowed the producers to create more exotic alien landscapes and life forms, animation errors and liberal reuse of shots and musical cues have tarnished the series' reputation. Gene Roddenberry often spoke of it as non-canon, though more recent productions have treated it as canonical.: 232  The Animated Series won Star Trek's first Emmy Award on May 15, 1975. The series briefly returned to television in the mid-1980s on the children's cable network Nickelodeon, and again on Sci-Fi Channel in the mid-90s. The complete series was released on LaserDisc during the 1980s. The complete series was first released in the U.S. on eleven volumes of VHS tapes in 1989. All 22 episodes were released on DVD in 2006. Star Trek: The Next Generation, frequently abbreviated as TNG, takes place about a century after the Original Series (2364–2370). It features a new starship, Enterprise (NCC-1701-D), and a new crew. The series premiered on September 28, 1987, and ran for seven seasons. It had the highest ratings of any of the Star Trek series and became the highest rated syndicated show near the end of its run, allowing it to act as a springboard for other series. Many relationships and races introduced in the Next Generation became the basis for episodes in Deep Space Nine and Voyager. The series earned several Emmy awards and nominations—including Best Dramatic Series for its final season—two Hugo Awards, and a Peabody Award for Outstanding Television Programming for one episode. Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, frequently abbreviated as DS9, takes place during the last years of and immediately after the Next Generation (2369–2375). It debuted the week of January 3, 1993, and ran for seven seasons. Unlike the other Star Trek series, Deep Space Nine was set primarily on a space station of the same name rather than aboard a starship. The show begins after the conclusion of the brutal Cardassian occupation of the planet Bajor, introduced in The Next Generation. The liberated Bajoran people ask the United Federation of Planets to help administer a space station near Bajor. After the Federation takes control of the station, the protagonists of the show discover a uniquely stable wormhole that provides immediate access to the distant Gamma Quadrant, making Bajor and the station a strategically important location. The show chronicles the events of the station's crew, led by Commander Benjamin Sisko (Avery Brooks), and Major Kira Nerys (Nana Visitor). Deep Space Nine stands apart from earlier Trek series for its lengthy serialized storytelling, character conflicts, and religious themes—all elements praised by critics and audiences, but which Roddenberry had forbidden as a producer of the original series and the Next Generation. Star Trek: Voyager ran for seven seasons, airing from January 16, 1995, to May 23, 2001. It features Kate Mulgrew as Captain Kathryn Janeway, the first female commanding officer in a leading role of a Star Trek series. Voyager takes place during the same time period as Deep Space Nine and the years immediately following (2371–2378). The militant renegade movement known as the Maquis, introduced on Deep Space Nine, is part of the premise of Voyager. The premiere episode has the USS Voyager and its crew pursuing a Maquis ship; both ships become stranded in the Delta Quadrant about 70,000 light-years from Earth. Faced with a 75-year voyage to Earth, the crews must work together to overcome challenges and shorten the voyage on their long and perilous journey home. Like Deep Space Nine, early seasons of Voyager feature more conflict between its crew members than seen in The Next Generation. Such conflict often arose from friction between "by-the-book" Starfleet crew and rebellious Maquis fugitives forced by circumstance to work together. The starship Voyager, isolated from its home, faced new cultures and dilemmas not possible in shows based in the Alpha Quadrant. Later seasons brought in an influx of characters and cultures from prior shows, such as the Borg, Q, the Ferengi, Romulans, Klingons, Cardassians and cast members of the Next Generation. Star Trek: Enterprise, originally titled Enterprise, is a prequel to the original Star Trek series. It aired from September 26, 2001, to May 13, 2005, on UPN. Enterprise is set about a century earlier than The Original Series, early in the fictional history of humanity's space exploration and shortly before the creation of the United Federation of Planets. The show follows the crew of an earlier starship Enterprise (NX-01) on Earth's first deep-space exploration mission. Initially, Enterprise featured self-contained episodes, much like the Original Series, Next Generation and Voyager. The third season comprised a single narrative arc. The fourth and final season consisted of several three- and four-episode arcs, which explored the origins of some elements of previous series, and resolved some continuity errors with The Original Series. Ratings for Enterprise started strong but declined rapidly. Although critics received the fourth season well, both fans and the cast reviled the series finale, partly because of the episode's focus on the guest appearance of members of the Next Generation cast. The cancellation of Enterprise ended an 18-year run of new Star Trek series, which began with the Next Generation in 1987. Star Trek: Discovery is the first series of the streaming television Star Trek revival; it begins as a prequel to the Original Series, set roughly ten years prior. It premiered September 24, 2017, in the United States and Canada on CBS. The series is shown on Paramount+ in the United States; elsewhere, Netflix distributes the series worldwide, except for Canada. Discovery is a serialized drama in which each season follows a single overarching narrative. In a departure from previous Star Trek series, the primary protagonist, Michael Burnham (portrayed by Martin-Green), is not the captain of the titular ship for the first few seasons. The first season follows a war between the United Federation of Planets and the Klingon Empire, instigated by Burnham, who is court-martialed, demoted, and assigned to the starship Discovery; later seasons follow the crew of Discovery on other adventures. Star Trek: Picard, like Discovery, is a serialized drama created for CBS All Access; it premiered on January 23, 2020. Set about 30 years after The Next Generation, the series sees Patrick Stewart reprise his TNG role of Jean-Luc Picard. The first season follows Picard in his retirement, seeking redemption for what he sees as his past failings, as he goes on an adventure to save the daughter of his late crewmate Data. Future seasons brought back more characters from the franchise, including the main Next Generation cast. Star Trek: Lower Decks is an animated adult comedy series created by the Rick and Morty writer Mike McMahan. The series follows the support crew of "one of Starfleet's least important ships". The series premiered on August 6, 2020, on CBS All Access. Lower Decks streamed its fourth season in 2024, and a fifth season is in production. Star Trek: Prodigy is an animated series created by Kevin and Dan Hageman for Paramount+, and the cable channel Nickelodeon. The series follows a group of teenagers who use an abandoned starship to search for adventure. The series premiered on October 28, 2021. Star Trek: Strange New Worlds is a spinoff of Discovery and a prequel to the Original Series, created by Akiva Goldsman, Alex Kurtzman, and Jenny Lumet for Paramount+. Premiered in May 2022, it portrays the adventures of the U.S.S. Enterprise before James Kirk's captaincy and focuses on episodic storytelling rather than the serial narrative of Discovery. The Enterprise's crew in this series features several characters introduced in the Original Series, now played by new actors, including Ethan Peck, Anson Mount, and Rebecca Romijn reprising their Discovery season 2 roles as Spock, Captain Pike and Number One respectively. A coming-of-age drama set at the Starfleet Academy was green-lit in 2023, with some casting complete and production started in 2024. In 2020, CBS and Star Trek producers Alex Kurtzman and Heather Kadin said new animated and live-action television series were in development. In February 2021, it was announced that no new series would appear until the conclusion of at least one of the current series (Discovery, Picard, Lower Decks, Prodigy, and Strange New Worlds). Star Trek: Short Treks is a short-film anthology companion series initially exploring settings and characters from Discovery. Later episodes feature the crew of the Enterprise under the command of Christopher Pike. The final episode of the second season serves as a teaser for Picard. Star Trek: Very Short Treks is a series of promotional animated short films in the style of Star Trek: The Animated Series. Made for the 50th anniversary of that series, it consists of five shorts that are two to five minutes long and feature characters and settings from all previous Star Trek series. Very Short Treks was marketed as "anything but canon", thereby establishing that the series is purely promotional in nature and not a part of the official Star Trek canon. The series is created by Casper Kelly and premiered on September 8, 2023. Paramount Pictures has produced thirteen Star Trek feature films, the most recent being released in July 2016. The first six films continue the adventures of the cast of the Original Series; the seventh film, Generations, was intended as a transition from original cast to the cast of the Next Generation; the next three films focused completely on the Next Generation cast. The eleventh film and its sequels occur in an alternate timeline with a new cast portraying the Original Series characters. Leonard Nimoy portrayed an elderly Spock in the films, providing a narrative link to what became known as the Prime Timeline. The alternate timeline was first nicknamed The Kelvin Timeline in Star Trek Encyclopedia by authors Michael and Denise Okuda, deriving its name from the starship USS Kelvin which appeared in the 2009 film; the title was later officially adapted by Paramount Picutres. While several films have had proposals, only one direct-to-streaming film has been officially greenlit, Section 31. Section 31: In April 2023, a film directed by Olatunde Osunsanmi from a script by Craig Sweeny was announced. Star Trek: Section 31 is set to star Michelle Yeoh as Emperor Philippa Georgiou, a role she portrayed in the first three seasons of Discovery. In the film, Georgiou joins the Section 31 division of Starfleet. The project originally began development as a television series in 2017. Section 31 is expected to begin filming later in 2023, for a release on the streaming service Paramount+. The studio also stated that intentions are for a new Star Trek film to release on Paramount+ every two years, as part of expanding the Star Trek universe. Many licensed products are based on the Star Trek franchise. Merchandising is very lucrative for both studio and actors; by 1986 Nimoy had earned more than $500,000 from royalties. Products include novels, comic books, video games, and other materials, which are generally considered non-canon. Star Trek merchandise generated $4 billion for Paramount by 2002. Since 1967, hundreds of original novels, short stories, and television and movie adaptations have been published. The first original Star Trek novel was Mission to Horatius by Mack Reynolds, which was published in hardcover by Whitman Books in 1968.: 131  In 1968, Gene Roddenberry cooperated with Stephen Edward Poe, writing as Stephen Whitfield, on the nonfiction book The Making of Star Trek for Ballantine Books. Among the most recent is the Star Trek Collection of Little Golden Books. Three titles were published by Random House in 2019, a fourth is scheduled for July 2020. The first publisher of Star Trek fiction aimed at adult readers was Bantam Books. James Blish wrote adaptations of episodes of the original series in twelve volumes from 1967 to 1977; in 1970, he wrote the first original Star Trek novel published by Bantam, Spock Must Die!.: xi  Pocket Books published subsequent Star Trek novels. Prolific Star Trek novelists include Peter David, Diane Carey, Keith DeCandido, J.M. Dillard, Diane Duane, Michael Jan Friedman, and Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens. Several actors from the television series have also written or co-written books featuring their respective characters: William Shatner, John de Lancie, Andrew J. Robinson, J. G. Hertzler and Armin Shimerman. Voyager producer Jeri Taylor wrote two novels detailing the personal histories of Voyager characters. Screenplay writers David Gerrold, D. C. Fontana, and Melinda Snodgrass have also penned books.: 213  A 2014 scholarly work Newton Lee discussed the actualization of Star Trek's holodeck in the future by making extensive use of artificial intelligence and cyborgs. Star Trek-based comics have been issued almost continuously since 1967, published by Marvel, DC, Malibu, Wildstorm, and Gold Key, among others. In 2009, Tokyopop produced an anthology of Next Generation-based stories presented in the style of Japanese manga. In 2006, IDW Publishing secured publishing rights to Star Trek comics and issued a prequel to the 2009 film, Star Trek: Countdown. In 2012, IDW published the first volume of Star Trek – The Newspaper Strip, featuring the work of Thomas Warkentin. As of 2020, IDW continues to produce new titles. The Star Trek franchise has numerous games in many formats. Beginning in 1967 with a board game based on the original series and continuing through today with online and DVD games, Star Trek games continue to be popular among fans. Video games based on the series include Star Trek: Legacy and Star Trek: Conquest. An MMORPG based on Star Trek called Star Trek Online was developed by Cryptic Studios and published by Perfect World. It is set during the Next Generation era, about 30 years after the events of Star Trek: Nemesis. The most recent video game was set in the alternate timeline from Abrams's Star Trek. On June 8, 2010, WizKids announced the development of a Star Trek collectible miniatures game using the HeroClix game system. On April 23, 2023, Star Trek: Resurgence, a narrative adventure video game set in the Next Generation era, was released by Dramatic Labs. Star Trek has led directly or indirectly to the creation of a number of magazines which focus either on science fiction or specifically on Star Trek. Starlog was a magazine which was founded in the 1970s.: 13  Initially, its focus was on Star Trek actors, but then it expanded its scope.: 80  Star Trek: The Magazine was a magazine published in the U.S. that ceased publication in 2003. Star Trek Magazine, originally published as Star Trek Monthly by Titan Magazines for the United Kingdom market, began in February 1995. The magazine has since expanded to worldwide distribution under the name Star Trek Explorer. Other magazines through the years included professional, as well as magazines published by fans, or fanzines. The Star Trek media franchise is a multibillion-dollar industry, owned by Paramount Global. Gene Roddenberry sold Star Trek to NBC as a classic adventure drama; he pitched the show as "Wagon Train to the Stars" and as Horatio Hornblower in Space. The opening line, "to boldly go where no man has gone before", was taken almost verbatim from a U.S. White House booklet on space produced after the Sputnik flight in 1957. Star Trek and its spin-offs have proven highly popular in syndication and was broadcast worldwide. The show's cultural impact goes far beyond its longevity and profitability. Star Trek conventions have become popular among its fans, who call themselves "trekkie" or "trekkers". An entire subculture has grown up around the franchise, which was documented in the film Trekkies. Star Trek was ranked most popular cult show by TV Guide. The franchise has also garnered many comparisons of the Star Wars franchise being rivals in the science fiction genre with many fans and scholars. The Star Trek franchise inspired some designers of technologies, the Palm PDA and the handheld mobile phone. Michael Jones, Chief technologist of Google Earth, has cited the tricorder's mapping capability as one inspiration in the development of Keyhole/Google Earth. The Tricorder X Prize, a contest to build a medical tricorder device was announced in 2012. Ten finalists were selected in 2014, and the winner was to be selected in January 2016. However, no team managed to reach the required criteria. Star Trek also brought teleportation to popular attention with its depiction of "matter-energy transport", with the famously misquoted phrase "Beam me up, Scotty" entering the vernacular. The Star Trek replicator is credited in the scientific literature with inspiring the field of diatom nanotechnology. In 1976, following a letter-writing campaign, NASA named its prototype Space Shuttle Enterprise, after the fictional starship. Later, the introductory sequence to Star Trek: Enterprise included footage of this shuttle which, along with images of a naval sailing vessel called Enterprise, depicted the advancement of human transportation technology. Beyond Star Trek's fictional innovations, its contributions to television history included a multicultural and multiracial cast. While more common in subsequent years, in the 1960s it was controversial to feature an Enterprise crew that included a Japanese helmsman, a Russian navigator, and a black female communications officer. Captain Kirk's and Lt. Uhura's kiss, in the episode "Plato's Stepchildren", was also daring, and is often mis-cited as being American television's first scripted, interracial kiss, even though several other interracial kisses (e.g. on The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour) predated this one. Nichelle Nichols, who played the communications officer, said that the day after she told Roddenberry of her plan to leave the series, she was told a big fan wanted to meet her while attending a NAACP dinner party: I thought it was a Trekkie, and so I said, 'Sure.' I looked across the room, and there was Dr. Martin Luther King walking towards me with this big grin on his face. He reached out to me and said, 'Yes, Ms. Nichols, I am your greatest fan.' He said that Star Trek was the only show that he, and his wife Coretta, would allow their three little children to stay up and watch. [She told King about her plans to leave the series.] I never got to tell him why, because he said, 'You can't. You're part of history.' — Nichelle Nichols, Detroit Free Press (2016) After the show, Nichols used this public standing to speak for women and people of color and against their exclusion from the US human space program; NASA reacted by asking her to find people for its future Space Shuttle program. Nichols proceeded and successfully brought the first non-white people and women into the US space program, working in this quality for NASA from the late 1970s until the late 1980s. In 2020, the US effort to develop a vaccine to protect against COVID-19 was named Operation Warp Speed, which was suggested by a Star Trek fan, Peter Marks. Marks leads the unit at the Food and Drug Administration which approves vaccines and therapies. Early parodies of Star Trek included a famous sketch on Saturday Night Live titled "The Last Voyage of the Starship Enterprise", with John Belushi as Kirk, Chevy Chase as Spock and Dan Aykroyd as McCoy. In the 1980s, Saturday Night Live did a sketch with William Shatner reprising his Captain Kirk role in The Restaurant Enterprise, preceded by a sketch in which he played himself at a Trek convention angrily telling fans to "Get a Life", a phrase that has become part of Trek folklore. In Living Color continued the tradition in a sketch where Captain Kirk is played by a fellow Canadian Jim Carrey. A feature-length film that indirectly parodies Star Trek is Galaxy Quest. This film is based on the premise that aliens monitoring the broadcast of an Earth-based television series called Galaxy Quest, modeled heavily on Star Trek, believe that what they are seeing is real. Many Star Trek actors have been quoted saying that Galaxy Quest was a brilliant parody. Star Trek has been blended with Gilbert and Sullivan at least twice. The North Toronto Players presented a Star Trek adaptation of Gilbert & Sullivan titled H.M.S. Starship Pinafore: The Next Generation in 1991 and an adaptation by Jon Mullich of Gilbert and Sullivan's H.M.S. Pinafore that sets the operetta in the world of Star Trek has played in Los Angeles and was attended by series luminaries Nichelle Nichols,[citation needed] D.C. Fontana and David Gerrold. A similar blend of Gilbert and Sullivan and Star Trek was presented as a benefit concert in San Francisco by the Lamplighters in 2009. The show was titled Star Drek: The Generation After That. It presented an original story with Gilbert and Sullivan melodies. The Simpsons and Futurama television series and others have had many individual episodes parodying Star Trek or with Trek allusions. Black Mirror's Star Trek parody episode, "USS Callister", won four Emmy Awards, including the Outstanding Television Movie and Writing for a Limited Series, Movie or Drama, and was nominated for three more. In August 2010, the members of the Internal Revenue Service created a Star Trek themed training video for a conference. Revealed to the public in 2013, the spoof along with parodies of other media franchises was cited as an example of the misuse of taxpayer funds in a congressional investigation. Star Trek has been parodied in several non-English movies, including the German Traumschiff Surprise – Periode 1 which features a gay version of the Original Series bridge crew and a Turkish film that spoofs that same series' episode "The Man Trap" in one of the series of films based on the character Turist Ömer.[citation needed] An entire series of films and novel parodies titled Star Wreck has been created in Finnish. The Orville is a comedy-drama science fiction television series created by Seth MacFarlane that premiered on September 10, 2017, on Fox. MacFarlane, a longtime fan of the franchise who previously guest-starred on an episode of Enterprise, created the series with a similar look and feel as the Star Trek series. MacFarlane has made references to Star Trek on his animated series Family Guy, where the Next Generation cast guest-starred in the episode "Not All Dogs Go to Heaven". Other Space is a science fiction comedy streaming series which premiered on Yahoo! Screen on April 14, 2015. Created by Paul Feig, it is set in the 22nd century and follows the dysfunctional crew of an exploratory spaceship who become trapped in an unknown universe. Until 2016, Paramount Pictures and CBS permitted fan-produced films and episode-like clips to be produced. Several veteran Star Trek actors and writers participated in many of these productions. Several producers turned to crowdfunding, such as Kickstarter, to help with production and other costs. Popular productions include: New Voyages (2004–2016) and Star Trek Continues (2013–2017). Additional productions include: Of Gods and Men (2008), originally released as a three-part web series, and Prelude to Axanar.[citation needed] Audio dramatizations such as The Continuing Mission (2007–2016) have also been published by fans. In 2016, CBS published guidelines which restricted the scope of fan productions, such as limiting the length of episodes or films to fifteen minutes, limiting production budgets to $50,000, and preventing actors and technicians from previous Star Trek productions from participating. A number of highly publicized productions have since been canceled or have gone abeyant. Star Trek has been a popular subject for documentaries reviewing the history of the franchise. Some examples include: Journey's End: Saga of Star Trek Next Generation, hosted by Jonathon Frakes, it reviewed the final season of the series and the upcoming Generations. Trekkies (1997), exploring the subculture of Star Trek fandom. Star Trek: Beyond the Final Frontier (2007), exploring a giant Christie's auction of tens of thousand of Star Trek props, hosted by actor Leonard Nimoy. The Center Seat (2016), an 85-minute special on Star Trek for its 50th anniversary, aired by the History network. For the Love of Spock (2016), focusing on the history and impact of the character Spock. What We Left Behind (2019), about the production and legacy of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine. The Center Seat: 55 Years of Star Trek (2021), an eight-episode documentary series ordered by the cable network History covering the franchise's decades-long history. It was narrated by Gates McFadden, who was also one of the executive producers. Some documentaries have been funded by the community by money raised by crowdfunding. What We Left Behind raised nearly $650,000 in this way, and a planned Voyager documentary raised $450,000 in 24 hours. Of the various science fiction awards for drama, only the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation dates back as far as the original series. In 1968, all five nominees for a Hugo Award were individual episodes of Star Trek, as were three of the five nominees in 1967, one of which won.: 231  The Next Generation won Hugo awards in 1993 and 1995. Nominations have also been received by Deep Space Nine, Enterprise, Discovery, and Lower Decks, as well as several of the Star Trek feature films and, in 2008, an episode of the fan-made series Star Trek: Phase II. One of the most successful films was Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home, which grossed a global total of $133 million against a $21 million budget.The Voyage Home garnered 11 nominations at the 14th annual Saturn Awards, tying Aliens for number of nominations. Nimoy and Shatner were nominated for best actor for their roles, and Catherine Hicks was nominated for best supporting actress. At the 59th Academy Awards, The Voyage Home was nominated for Best Cinematography, Sound (Terry Porter, David J. Hudson, Mel Metcalfe and Gene Cantamessa), Sound Effects Editing, and Original Score. The episode "The Big Goodbye" in the first season of Star Trek: The Next Generation, in recognition of its "new standard of quality for first-run syndication", the episode was honored with a Peabody Award in 1987. "The Big Goodbye" was also nominated for two Emmy Awards in the categories of Outstanding Cinematography for a Series and Outstanding Costumes for a Series, with costume designer William Ware Theiss winning the award in the latter category. Star Trek (2009) won the Academy Award for Best Makeup and Hairstyling, the franchise's first Academy Award. In 2016, the franchise was listed in the Guinness World Records as the most successful science fiction television franchise in the world. Examples: List of awards and nominations received by Star Trek: Deep Space Nine List of awards and nominations received by Star Trek: Enterprise List of awards and nominations received by Star Trek: The Next Generation List of awards and nominations received by Star Trek: The Original Series List of awards and nominations received by Star Trek: Voyager In 1996, TV Guide published the following as the ten best Star Trek episodes for the franchise's 30th anniversary: "The City on the Edge of Forever" (The Original Series) "Amok Time" (The Original Series) "Mirror, Mirror" (The Original Series) "The Doomsday Machine" (The Original Series) "Journey to Babel" (The Original Series) "11001001" (The Next Generation) "Yesterday's Enterprise" (The Next Generation) "The Best of Both Worlds" (Part I) (The Next Generation) "Tapestry" (The Next Generation) "The Visitor" (Deep Space Nine) At the 50th Anniversary Star Trek Las Vegas (STLV) convention, in 2016, the following were voted by fans as the best episodes: "The City on the Edge of Forever" (The Original Series) "In the Pale Moonlight" (Deep Space Nine) "The Inner Light" (The Next Generation) "Amok Time" (The Original Series) "Yesterday's Enterprise" (The Next Generation) "The Visitor" (Deep Space Nine) "Chain of Command" (The Next Generation) "Balance of Terror" (The Original Series) "In a Mirror, Darkly" (Enterprise) "The Magnificent Ferengi" (Deep Space Nine) Additionally, fans voted the following as the worst episodes: "These Are the Voyages..." (Enterprise) "Code of Honor" (The Next Generation) "Threshold" (Voyager) "Turnabout Intruder" (The Original Series) "Shades of Gray" (The Next Generation) "Sub Rosa" (The Next Generation) "And the Children Shall Lead" (The Original Series) "Move Along Home" (Deep Space Nine) "The Alternative Factor" (The Original Series) "Precious Cargo" (Enterprise) In 2016, The Washington Post ranked the best live-action television episodes: "The Best of Both Worlds" (The Next Generation) "Darmok" (The Next Generation) "Balance of Terror" (The Original Series) "In the Pale Moonlight" (Deep Space Nine) "Chain of Command" (The Next Generation) "Yesterday's Enterprise" (The Next Generation) "The Doomsday Machine" (The Original Series) "The Measure of a Man" (The Next Generation) "Journey to Babel" (The Original Series) "First Contact" (The Next Generation) Star Trek began as a joint-production of Norway Productions, owned by Roddenberry, and Desilu, owned by Desi Arnaz and Lucille Ball. The profit-sharing agreement for the series split proceeds between Norway, Desilu (later Paramount Television), William Shatner's production company, and the broadcast network, NBC. However, Star Trek lost money during its initial broadcast, and NBC did not expect to recoup its losses by selling the series into syndication, nor did Paramount. With NBC's approval, Paramount offered its share of the series to Roddenberry sometime in 1970. However, Roddenberry could not raise the $150,000 (equivalent to $1,176,864 in 2023) offered by the studio. Paramount would go on to license the series to television syndicators worldwide. NBC's remaining broadcast and distribution rights eventually returned to Paramount and Roddenberry sometime before 1986, which coincided with the development of what would become The Next Generation. As for Desilu, the studio was acquired by Gulf+Western. It was then reorganized as the television production division of Paramount Pictures, which Gulf+Western had acquired in 1966. Gulf+Western sold its remaining industrial assets in 1989, renaming itself Paramount Communications. Sometime before 1986, Sumner Redstone had acquired a controlling stake of Viacom via his family's theater chain, National Amusements. Viacom was established in 1952 as a division of CBS responsible for syndicating the network's in-house productions, originally called CBS Films. In 1994, Viacom and Paramount Communications were merged. Viacom then merged with its former parent, CBS Corporation, in 1999. National Amusements and the Redstone family increased their stake in the combined company between 1999 and 2005. In 2005, the Redstone family reorganized Viacom, spinning off the conglomerate's assets as two independent groups: the new Viacom, and the new CBS Corporation. National Amusements and the Redstone family retained approximately 80% ownership of both CBS and Viacom. Star Trek was split between the two entities. The terms of this split were not known. However, CBS held all copyrights, marks, production assets, and film negatives, to all Star Trek television series. CBS also retained the rights to all likenesses, characters, names and settings, and stories, and the right to license Star Trek, and its spin-offs, to merchandisers, and publishers, etc. The rights were exercised via the new CBS Television Studios, which was carved out of the former Paramount Television. Viacom, which housed Paramount Pictures, retained the feature film library, and exclusive rights to produce new feature films for a limited time.[citation needed] Viacom also retained home video distribution rights for all television series produced before 2005. However, home video editions of the various television series released after the split, as well as streaming video versions of episodes available worldwide, carried variants of the new CBS Television Studios livery in addition to the original Paramount Television Studios livery. It was unclear who retained the synchronization or streaming rights.[citation needed] Rights and distribution issues, and the fraught relationship between the leadership at CBS, Viacom, and the National Amusements' board of directors, resulted in a number of delayed and canceled Star Trek productions between 2005 and 2019. Additionally, the development and release of the new Star Trek film, in 2009, was met with resistance by executives at CBS, as was Into Darkness (2013) and Beyond (2016), which affected merchandising, tie-in media, and promotion for the new films. During this period, both CBS and Viacom continued to list Star Trek as an important asset in their prospectus to investors, and in corporate filings made to the Securities and Exchange Commission. While several attempts were made to merge Viacom and CBS, power struggles between the major stakeholders of the companies prevented this from happening. In 2019, after the resignation of CBS CEO Leslie Moonves, negotiations to merge CBS and Viacom began in earnest. These negotiations were led by Shari Redstone, chairman of National Amusements, and Joe Ianniello, CEO of CBS. On August 13, 2019, CBS and Viacom boards of directors reached an agreement to reunite the conglomerates as a single entity called ViacomCBS. National Amusements' board of directors approved the merger on October 28, 2019, which was finalized on December 4, bringing the Star Trek franchise back under one roof. ViacomCBS was renamed Paramount Global on February 16, 2022. Outline of Star Trek Outline of space science fiction franchises Timeline of science fiction Comparison of Star Wars and Star Trek Published as Star Trek Monthly from 1995 until 2003 Roddenberry co-authored two scripts for the third season. Star Trek Into Darkness premiered in Sydney, Australia, on April 23, 2013, but the film did not release in the United States until May 17, 2013 While 2022 had the most Star Trek series, each series had fewer episodes per season than when TNG, DS9 and Voyager where airing together. The episode count includes all completed and released episodes. The count also includes episodes of the Animated Series, and the unaired pilot, "The Cage". Multi-part episodes not originally broadcast as one presentation are counted individually. Ten feature-length episodes are counted as two episodes each, as they were split for foreign broadcast and syndication. Originally broadcast as Star Trek. The series was dubbed The Original Series by fans to distinguish it from its many spinoffs and films. Paramount and CBS have since used the title Star Trek: The Original Series in promotional materials and tie-in media. Film titles of the North American and UK releases of the films no longer contained the number of the film following the sixth film (the sixth was Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country but the seventh was Star Trek Generations). However, European releases continued using numbers in the film titles until Nemesis. Although the Hugo Award is mainly given for print-media science fiction, its "best drama" award is usually given to film or television presentations. The Hugo does not give out awards for best actor, director, or other aspects of film production. Before 2002, films and television series competed for the same Hugo, before the split of the drama award into short drama and long drama. Other nominees for the 1967 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation were Fahrenheit 451 and Fantastic Voyage. Eller, Claudia (December 11, 1998). "Lower Costs Energize 'Trek' Film Profit". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 12, 2015. Retrieved October 12, 2020. "Star Trek Franchise Box Office History" Archived June 12, 2020, at the Wayback Machine The Numbers "44 entertainment/character properties reach $100 m in sales of licensed merchandise; 50% of sales are Disney's. - Free Online Library". www.thefreelibrary.com. Archived from the original on October 24, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2021. "Today's TV Previews". Montreal Gazette. September 6, 1966. p. 36. Archived from the original on April 8, 2017. Retrieved September 8, 2016. Italie, Hillel (July 2, 2007). "Like 'Star Wars' and 'Star Trek,' Potter is a modern phenomenon". The Seattle Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Saadia, Manu (January 13, 2017). "Why Peter Thiel Fears "Star Trek"". The New Yorker. ISSN 0028-792X. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017. Reagin, Nancy R (March 5, 2013). Star Trek and History. Wiley Pop Culture and History. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-118-16763-2. Gibberman, Susan. "RODDENBERRY, GENE". Museum of Broadcast Communications. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Keonig, Rachel (August 29, 1986). "Roddenberry, Eugene Wesley 1921– (Gene Roddenberry)". In Commire, Anna (ed.). Something about the Author. Vol. 45. Detroit: Gale Research. pp. 168–179. ISBN 978-0-8103-2255-4. ISSN 0276-816X. Alexander, David (June 1994). Star Trek Creator: The Authorized Biography of Gene Roddenberry. New York: Roc. ISBN 978-0-451-45418-8. Simon, Richard Keller (November 23, 1999). "Star Trek, Gulliver's Travels, and the Problem of History". Trash Culture: Popular Culture and the Great Tradition. Berkeley: University of California Press. pp. 139–154. ISBN 978-0-520-22223-6. Snyder, J. William Jr (1995). "Star Trek: A Phenomenon and Social Statement on the 1960s". ibiblio.org. Archived from the original on November 27, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Johnson-Smith, Jan (January 10, 2005). American Science Fiction TV: Star Trek, Stargate and Beyond. Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press. ISBN 978-0-8195-6738-3. Grothe, DJ (May 29, 2009). "Susan Sackett – The Secular Humanism of Star Trek". pointofinquiry.org. Archived from the original on October 5, 2016. Retrieved September 27, 2016. Goulart, Woody. "Gene Roddenberry". woodygoulart.com. Archived from the original on October 31, 2011. Retrieved March 25, 2019. Whitfield, Stephen E; Roddenberry, Gene (May 1973). The Making of Star Trek. New York: Ballantine Books. ISBN 978-0-345-23401-8. Roddenberry, Gene (March 11, 1964). "Star Trek is…" (PDF). ex-astris-scientia.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2006. Retrieved June 26, 2009. Meryl Gottlieb (July 8, 2016). "Lucille Ball is the reason we have 'Star Trek' – here's what happened". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 10, 2017. Retrieved January 4, 2017. Davies, Máire Messenger; Pearson, Roberta (August 2007). "The Little Program That Could: The Relationship between NBC and Star Trek". In Hilmes, Michele (ed.). NBC: America's network. Berkeley: University of California Press. pp. 209–223. ISBN 978-0-520-25079-6. Solow, Herbert F; Justman, Robert H (June 1996). Inside Star Trek: The Real Story. New York: Pocket Books. pp. 377–394. ISBN 978-0-671-89628-7. "Bjo Trimble: The Woman Who Saved Star Trek – Part 1". StarTrek.com. August 31, 2011. Archived from the original on January 21, 2012. Retrieved January 12, 2012. Shatner, William; Kreski, Chris (October 1993). Star Trek Memories. New York: HarperCollins. pp. 290–291. ISBN 978-0-06-017734-8. Shult, Doug (July 5, 1972). "Cult Fans, Reruns Give Star Trek an out of This World Popularity". Green Sheets. The Milwaukee Journal. Vol. 90, no. 230. Los Angeles Times New Service. Retrieved October 19, 2011.[permanent dead link] Star Trek cast on Tom Snyder's Tomorrow, 1976 (Television production). Tomorrow. Retrieved March 15, 2024 – via YouTube. "Celebrating 40 Years since Trek's 1st Convention". StarTrek.com. January 20, 2012. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2013. Sackett, Susan (May 15, 2002). Inside Trek: My Secret Life with Star Trek Creator Gene Roddenberry. Tulsa, Oklahoma: HAWK Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-930709-42-3. Turnbull, Gerry, ed. (October 1979). A Star Trek Catalog. New York: Grosset & Dunlap. ISBN 978-0-441-78477-6. Ellard, Sam (May 4, 2021). "Star Trek: Why the Original Series' TV Follow-Up Never Happened". cbr.com. Archived from the original on September 24, 2023. Retrieved November 11, 2023. "Star Trek: Series and Movies". startrek.com. CBS STUDIOS INC., PARAMOUNT PICTURES CORPORATION, AND CBS INTERACTIVE INC. Archived from the original on November 11, 2023. Retrieved November 11, 2023. "STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION". startrek.com. CBS STUDIOS INC., PARAMOUNT PICTURES CORPORATION, AND CBS INTERACTIVE INC. Archived from the original on November 11, 2023. Retrieved November 11, 2023. Teitelbaum, Sheldon (May 5, 1991). "How Gene Roddenberry and his Brain Trust Have Boldly Taken 'Star Trek' Where No TV Series Has Gone Before: Trekking to the Top". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved May 11, 2011. "Star Trek – A Short History". ee.surrey.ac.uk. Transcribed press release originally distributed by Paramount Pictures. May 9, 1994. Archived from the original on December 5, 2010. Retrieved August 21, 2006.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: others (link) Poe, Stephen Edward (April 1998). A Vision of the Future. New York: Pocket Books. pp. 49–54. ISBN 978-0-671-53481-3. Levesque, John (January 6, 2001). "UPN in search of post-'Voyager' flagship". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on December 5, 2010. Retrieved June 30, 2009. "Fan Groups, Sites Rally on Behalf of Enterprise (UPDATE)". StarTrek.com. January 17, 2010. Archived from the original on January 17, 2010. Retrieved March 27, 2019. "Star Trek: Enterprise Cancelled!". StarTrek.com. February 3, 2005. Archived from the original on January 11, 2010. Retrieved October 19, 2011. "Uniting Star Trek Fans". trekunited.com. Archived from the original on February 2, 2009. Retrieved December 18, 2007. Adler, Margo (May 6, 2009). "Some Older 'Star Trek' Fans May Skip This Voyage". NPR. Archived from the original on August 2, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Hinman, Michael (June 23, 2009). "'Star Trek' Becomes Highest Grossing Franchise Film". Airlock Alpha. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Pascale, Anthony (November 23, 2011). "Star Trek Sequel To Be Released May 17, 2013 – In 3D". TrekMovie.com. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved November 25, 2011. "Box Office History for Star Trek Movies". the-numbers.com. The Numbers. Archived from the original on December 30, 2014. Retrieved December 24, 2014. McNary, Dave (December 13, 2014). "'Star Trek 3' Sets July 8, 2016, Release Date". Variety. Archived from the original on December 25, 2014. Retrieved December 24, 2014. Holmes, Brad (March 26, 2018). "Why Star Trek Beyond Wasn't A Box Office Hit, According To Simon Pegg". cinemablend.com. Archived from the original on January 29, 2019. Retrieved January 28, 2019. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (April 12, 2011). "Bryan Singer's TV Star Trek Details Emerge". UGO. Archived from the original on April 16, 2011. Retrieved January 18, 2012. Straczynski, J. Michael; Zabel, Bryce. "Star Trek, Reboot, 2004" (PDF). bztv.typepad.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 6, 2010. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (April 7, 2011). "Jonathan Frakes Talks Bar Karma, Star Trek, and Yes, Gargoyles". UGO. Archived from the original on April 11, 2011. Retrieved August 23, 2015. Goldberg, Lesley (November 2, 2015). "'Star Trek' TV Series in the Works". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved November 4, 2015. Andreeva, Nellie (June 19, 2017). "'Star Trek: Discovery' Gets September Premiere Date On CBS". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 20, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2017. Bacon, Thomas (November 6, 2018). "Star Trek: Discovery's Budget Reportedly Paid For By Netflix". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 12, 2020. Retrieved January 9, 2020. Patten, Dominic (November 16, 2021). "'Star Trek: Discovery' Exits Netflix Tonight; Set For 2022 Launch On Paramount+ Globally". Deadline. Archived from the original on November 30, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2021. Otterson, Joe (June 19, 2018). "Alex Kurtzman Sets Five-Year CBS TV Studios Pact, Will Oversee Expanded 'Star Trek' Universe". Variety. Archived from the original on July 12, 2018. Retrieved July 21, 2018. "Paramount+ Is the Home of the Star Trek Universe" (Press release). CBS Studios. February 24, 2021. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved February 28, 2021. Goldberg, Lesly (January 9, 2019). "'Star Trek: Discovery' Showrunner on Pleasing Fickle Fans and Adapting James Comey's Tell-All". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 31, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021. Vary, Adam B. (February 24, 2021). "Inside the 'Star Trek' Universe of New Shows and Kids' Fare on Paramount Plus". Variety. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2021. "Everything You Need to Know for SDCC 2019". StarTrek.com. July 12, 2019. Archived from the original on November 2, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2020. Littleton, Cynthia (May 13, 2019). "Amazon Nabs International Rights to CBS' Jean-Luc Picard 'Star Trek' Series". Variety. Archived from the original on March 7, 2020. Retrieved January 9, 2020. Drum, Nicole. "Star Trek: Prodigy Sets Nickelodeon Premiere Date". Star Trek. Archived from the original on January 28, 2022. Retrieved January 6, 2022. Sepinwall, Alan (April 20, 2023). "'Star Trek: Picard' Series Finale Sets the Stage for a Big Spinoff". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 21, 2023. Retrieved April 22, 2023. Scott Snowden (March 6, 2023). "'Star Trek: Discovery's final s will come to a close with Season 5 in 2024". Space.com. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. Retrieved April 22, 2023. "New Series Order for 'Star Trek: Starfleet Academy' Announced". Star Trek. March 30, 2023. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. Retrieved April 22, 2023. Otterson, Joe (October 11, 2023). "'Star Trek: Prodigy' Season 2 Moves to Netflix After Paramount+ Cancellation". Variety. Variety. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved November 29, 2023. "Season 1 of Star Trek: Prodigy to Stream on Netflix on December 25". www.startrek.com. Star Trek.com. October 11, 2023. Archived from the original on December 7, 2023. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Razak, Matthew (April 19, 2023). "Star Trek, Worried About Over-saturation, Is Now Committed to a TV Movie Every 2 Years". The Escapist. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. Retrieved April 22, 2023. Otterson, Joe (April 18, 2023). "Paramount+ Greenlights 'Star Trek: Section 31' Film Starring Michelle Yeoh". Variety. Archived from the original on April 18, 2023. Retrieved April 22, 2023. Andreeva, Nellie (October 11, 2023). "'Star Trek: Prodigy' Finds New Home At Netflix After Paramount+ Cancellation". Deadline. Archived from the original on October 11, 2023. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Lee, Luaine (August 18, 2006). "KRT Wire | August 18, 2006 | 'Star Trek' turns 40". San Jose Mercury News. McClatchy News. Tribune News Service. Archived from the original on September 1, 2006. Retrieved December 15, 2008. Rioux, Terry Lee (February 28, 2005). From Sawdust to Stardust: The Biography of Deforest Kelley, Star Trek's Dr. Mccoy. New York: Gallery Books. pp. 194–196. ISBN 978-0-7434-5762-0. Trimble, Bjo (October 1986). Stine, Hank (ed.). On the Good Ship Enterprise: My 15 Years with Star Trek (Reprint ed.). Norfolk, Virginia: The Donning Company. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-89865-253-6. Dursin, Andre (November 14, 2006). "The Aisle Seat by Andy Dursin". andyfilm.com. Archived from the original on October 3, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Ayers, Jeff (November 14, 2006). Voyages of the Imagination: The Star Trek Fiction Companion. New York: Pocket Books. ISBN 978-1-4165-0349-1. "Star Trek". IMDb. Archived from the original on March 21, 2016. Retrieved March 26, 2019. "Star Trek Animated – The Series that ran from 1973 – 1974". sciencefictionbuzz.com. Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011. "Cult – Star Trek – Next Generation – Trivia". BBC. Archived from the original on December 31, 2006. Retrieved March 26, 2019. "Emissary, Part I". StarTrek.com. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2006. Lense. "Review of "Inter Arma Enim Silent Leges" – Star Trek Fans". scifi.about.com. Archived from the original on April 7, 2003. Retrieved October 29, 2006. Sturgis, Amy H. "Star Trek: Voyager: 'Endgame'". Revolution Science Fiction. Archived from the original on January 16, 2004. Retrieved June 18, 2023. "Star Trek: Voyager [TV Series] Synopsis – Plot Summary". Fandango. Archived from the original on January 30, 2012. Retrieved October 19, 2011. "Star Trek: Enterprise Summary". starpulse.com. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved March 26, 2019. Lee, Patrick (May 14, 2005). "Star Trek: Enterprise Series Finale". scifi.com. Archived from the original on January 1, 2007. Retrieved January 16, 2009. Leao, Gustavo (December 17, 2005). "Anthony Montgomery Says "These Are The Voyages..." Not an Effective Finale". trekweb.com. Archived from the original on March 7, 2006. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Slotek, Jim (May 13, 2005). "Star Trek: E lamely goes away". Toronto Sun. p. E4. Ausiello, Michael; Roots, Kimberly (August 10, 2016). "'Star Trek: Discovery' Spoilers: Amanda Grayson Role in CBS Reboot". TVLine. Archived from the original on April 29, 2017. Retrieved April 30, 2017. Frankel, Daniel (December 7, 2016). "Moonves: Netflix international sales pay for entire 'Star Trek' production cost". fiercevideo.com. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2017. Spencer, Samuel (January 23, 2020). "'Star Trek: Picard' Timeline: Where Does the New Series Fit in the World of 'Star Trek'?". Newsweek. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. Andreeva, Nellie (October 25, 2018). "'Star Trek: Lower Decks' Animated Series Ordered By CBS All Access". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 25, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018. Petski, Denise (July 1, 2020). "'Star Trek: Lower Decks' Gets August Premiere Date On CBS All Access; Teaser Art Unveiled". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 1, 2020. Retrieved July 2, 2020. Otterson, Joe (February 13, 2019). "'Star Trek' Animated Kids Show in the Works at Nickelodeon – Variety". Variety. Archived from the original on February 14, 2019. Retrieved February 17, 2019. "Nickelodeon and CBS Television Studios Announce Title of Original Animated Series, Star Trek: Prodigy" (Press release). Nickelodeon. July 23, 2020. Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2020 – via The Futon Critic. Zalben, Alex (September 9, 2021). "'Star Trek: Prodigy' Reveals October Premiere Date, Full Trailer". Decider. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. Holloway, Daniel (May 15, 2020). "New 'Star Trek' Series Featuring Spock and Pike Will Be 'Optimistic and More Episodic,' Creators Say". Variety. Archived from the original on May 16, 2020. Retrieved May 16, 2019. Otterson, Joe (May 15, 2020). "'Star Trek' Series Starring Ethan Peck as Spock, Anson Mount a Capt. Pike Set at CBS All Access". Variety. Archived from the original on May 15, 2020. Retrieved May 15, 2020. Patten, Dominic (May 15, 2020). "'Star Trek: Strange New Worlds' Series Continuing Spock's Saga At CBS All Access". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 15, 2020. Retrieved May 15, 2020. Labonte, Rachel (January 13, 2020). "2 More Unannounced Star Trek TV Shows in the Works After Picard". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved February 23, 2020. Vary, Adam B. (February 24, 2021). "Inside the 'Star Trek' Universe of New Shows and Kids' Fare on Paramount Plus". Variety. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved March 14, 2021. Goldberg, Lesley (January 8, 2019). "'Star Trek': Second Animated Series, More 'Short Treks' Coming to CBS All Access (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Retrieved January 13, 2019. "Short Treks – How Children of Mars Sets Up Star Trek: Picard". Den of Geek. January 19, 2020. Archived from the original on April 12, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. Pascale, Anthony (July 21, 2023). "'Jonathan Frakes, Doug Jones, And Armin Shimerman Voicing New 'Star Trek: The Animated Celebration' Shorts". TrekMovie. Archived from the original on July 22, 2023. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Edwards, Nathan (September 5, 2023). "CBS Studios announces five "very Short Treks" in honor of Star Trek: The Animated Series". The Verge. Archived from the original on September 11, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2023. Petski, Denise (September 5, 2023). "Star Trek: Very Short Treks To Be Unveiled By CBS Studios On Star Trek Day". Deadline. Archived from the original on September 5, 2023. Retrieved September 5, 2023. "Star Trek Beyond (2016) – Release Info". IMDb. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved July 27, 2016. Agar, Chris (June 28, 2016). "J.J. Abrams Star Trek Universe Is The Kelvin Timeline". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Otterson, Joe (April 18, 2023). "Paramount+ Greenlights 'Star Trek: Section 31' Film Starring Michelle Yeoh". Variety. Archived from the original on April 18, 2023. Retrieved April 18, 2023. Goldberg, Lesley (April 18, 2023). "Michelle Yeoh's 'Section 31' Is the Start of 'Star Trek' Phase 2 at Paramount+". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 18, 2023. Retrieved April 18, 2023. Harmetz, Aljean (November 2, 1986). "New 'Star Trek' Plan Reflects Symbiosis of Tv and Movies". Section 2. The New York Times. p. 31. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved February 11, 2015. Cloud, John (January 25, 2002). "Star Trek Inc". Time. Archived from the original on March 12, 2016. Retrieved June 28, 2017. Solow, Herbert F.; Justman, Robert H. (1996). Inside Star Trek: The Real Story. New York: Pocket Books. p. 402. ISBN 978-0-671-89628-7. Lee, Newton (August 2, 2014). "From a Pin-up Girl to Star Trek's Holodeck: Artificial Intelligence and Cyborgs". In Lee, Newton (ed.). Digital da Vinci: Computers in the Arts and Sciences. New York: Springer Science+Business Media. pp. 1–22. ISBN 978-1-4939-0964-3. Marshall, Rick (April 14, 2009). "'Star Trek: The Next Generation' Goes Manga, But Will Picard Lose The Captain's Chair? » Splash Page". MTV. Archived from the original on July 14, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011. "Star Trek: The Next Generation". IDW Publishing. October 6, 2006. Archived from the original on October 25, 2006. Retrieved December 26, 2006. Warkentin, Thomas (December 25, 2012). Star Trek: The Newspaper Strip, Vol. 1. San Diego: IDW Publishing. ISBN 978-1-61377-494-6. "Star Trek Comics Checklist". startrekcomics.info. Archived from the original on February 21, 2020. Retrieved February 21, 2020. "FAQ". Star Trek Online. Archived from the original on October 12, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011. "Announcing Star Trek Based Games from WizKids". WizKids. June 8, 2010. Archived from the original on July 11, 2011. Retrieved June 8, 2010. Yin-Poole, Wesley (April 25, 2023). "Star Trek: Resurgence release date set for May". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2023. "Great Animated Adventures Episodes". StarTrek.com. Archived from the original on August 5, 2006. Retrieved August 24, 2006. Day, Dwayne. "Social History: Star Trek as a Cultural Phenomenon". Centennial of Flight Commission. Archived from the original on October 9, 2012. Retrieved May 31, 2013. "Introduction to Outer Space (1958)". Federation of American Scientists. March 26, 1958. Archived from the original on October 6, 2015. Retrieved March 26, 2019. "TREK NATION — Rich Text Format". eugene.roddenberry.com. Archived from the original (RTF) on February 5, 2005. Retrieved August 24, 2006. "Trekkies (1997)". IMDb. November 8, 2002. Archived from the original on November 4, 2007. Retrieved August 24, 2006. "TV Guide Names the Top Cult Shows Ever". TV Guide. June 29, 2007. Archived from the original on May 7, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Ewalt, David M (May 18, 2005). "Star Wars Vs. Star Trek". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved September 13, 2007. Ho, Richard (May 14, 1995). "Trekkers VS Lucasites". The Harvard Crimson. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved May 18, 2009. Kelly, Heather (September 3, 2014). "Qualcomm Tricorder X Prize: Race to create a tricorder". CNN. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved September 7, 2014. Laytner, Lance (2009). "Star Trek Tech". editinternational.com. Archived from the original on July 10, 2011. Retrieved March 26, 2019. Evangelista, Benny (March 15, 2004). "TREK TECH / 40 years since the Enterprise's inception, some of its science fiction gadgets are part of everyday life". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved May 14, 2010. Parsons, Ed (March 27, 2006). "Google Earth inspiration was Star Treks tricorder !!". edparsons.com. Archived from the original on November 23, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Quinion, Michael (August 6, 1996). "World Wide Words: Beam me up, Scotty!". worldwidewords.org. Archived from the original on December 26, 2017. Retrieved August 24, 2012. Drum, Ryan W; Gordon, Richard (August 1, 2003). "Star Trek replicators and diatom nanotechnology". Trends in Biotechnology. 21 (8). Cell Press: 325–328. doi:10.1016/S0167-7799(03)00169-0. PMID 12902165. Dumoulin, Jim (March 18, 1994). "Shuttle Orbiter Enterprise (OV-101)". Kennedy Space Center. Archived from the original on August 18, 2018. Retrieved November 17, 2012. Norman, Phil (2015). A History of Television in 100 Programmes. London: The Friday Project. p. 114. ISBN 978-0-00-757549-7 – via Internet Archive. Bently, Rick (September 5, 2016). "5-year mission became 50-year journey for 'Star Trek'". Detroit Free Press. Tribune News Service. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved September 6, 2016. "Nichelle Nichols, NASA Recruiter". NASA. Archived from the original on December 22, 2009. Retrieved January 9, 2019. From the late 1970s until the late 1980s, NASA employed Nichelle Nichols to recruit new astronaut candidates. Many of her new recruits were women or members of racial and ethnic minorities, including Guion Bluford (the first African-American astronaut), Sally Ride (the first female American astronaut), Judith Resnik (one of the original set of female astronauts, who perished during the launch of the Challenger on January 28, 1986), and Ronald McNair (the second African-American astronaut, and another victim of the Challenger accident). Arcynta Ali Childs (June 11, 2011). "Q & A: Nichelle Nichols, AKA Lt. Uhura, and NASA". Smithsonian.com. Archived from the original on June 27, 2011. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Ten years after "Star Trek" was cancelled, almost to the day, I was invited to join the board of directors of the newly formed National Space Society. They flew me to Washington and I gave a speech called "New Opportunities for the Humanization of Space" or "Space, What's in it for me?" In [the speech], I'm going where no man or woman dares go. I took NASA on for not including women and I gave some history of the powerful women who had applied and, after five times applying, felt disenfranchised and backed off. [At that time] NASA was having their fifth or sixth recruitment and women and ethnic people [were] staying away in droves. I was asked to come to headquarters the next day and they wanted me to assist them in persuading women and people of ethnic backgrounds that NASA was serious [about recruiting them]. And I said you've got to be joking; I didn't take them seriously. . . . John Yardley, who I knew from working on a previous project, was in the room and said 'Nichelle, we are serious.' I said OK. I will do this and I will bring you the most qualified people on the planet, as qualified as anyone you've ever had and I will bring them in droves. And if you do not pick a person of color, if you do not pick a woman, if it's the same old, same old, all-white male astronaut corps, that you've done for the last five years, and I'm just another dupe, I will be your worst nightmare. LaFraniere, Sharon; Thomas, Katie; Weiland, Noah; Baker, Peter; Karni, Annie (August 2, 2020). "Scientists Worry About Political Influence Over Coronavirus Vaccine Project". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 12, 2020. Retrieved August 3, 2020. Chaires, Robert; Chilton, Bradley (September 10, 2004). Star Trek Visions of Law and Justice. Dallas: University of North Texas Press. p. 61. ISBN 978-0-9668080-2-5. Porter, Jennifer E; McLaren, Darcee L (January 1999). Star Trek and Sacred Ground: Explorations of Star Trek, Religion, and American Culture. Albany, New York: State University of New York Press. p. 268. ISBN 978-0-585-29190-1. Bernardi, Daniel Leonard (February 1998). Star Trek and History: Race-ing Toward a White Future. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-8135-2465-8. Duncan, Jody; Shay, Estelle (April 2000). "Trekking into the Klaatu Nebula". Cinefex. No. 81. ISSN 0198-1056. "STAR TREK: George Takei Is Ready To Beam Up". Sci-Fi Channel. Archived from the original on March 25, 2009. Retrieved March 27, 2019. "Cult – Star Trek – Patrick Stewart – Galaxy Quest". BBC. Archived from the original on January 13, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2019. Mullich, Jon. "Welcome to madbeast.com – The Jon Mullich site". madbeast.com. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2011. "Lamplighters Music Theatre presents Our Annual Champagne Gala & Auction STAR DREK: THE GENERATION AFTER THAT" (PDF) (Press release). Lamplighters Music Theatre. October 6, 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 12, 2012. Retrieved May 5, 2013. Geraghty, Lincoln (March 30, 2007). Living with Star Trek: American Culture and the Star Trek Universe. London: I.B. Tauris. pp. 51–52. ISBN 978-1-84511-421-3. "USS Callister (Black Mirror) – Television Academy". Television Academy. Archived from the original on July 14, 2018. Retrieved July 14, 2018. Friedman, Dan (June 6, 2013). "IRS official apologizes for wasting funds on 'Star Trek' spoof video". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2016. Grier, Peter (June 4, 2013). "How much did IRS spend filming 'Star Trek' spoof?". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2016. Whitmore, Linda (November 10, 2009). "'Star Wreck,' from Finland with love". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 27, 2016. Retrieved December 18, 2017. Opam, Kwame (May 16, 2017). "The first trailer for The Orville promises Star Trek crossed with Family Guy's humor". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 18, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. Howell, Elizabeth (August 14, 2014). "'Star Trek: Axanar' Fan Film Warps Beyond Crowdfunding Goal". Space.com. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved September 24, 2014. "Fan Films". StarTrek.com. June 23, 2016. Archived from the original on January 20, 2017. Retrieved January 16, 2017. Martinelli, Marissa (July 13, 2016). "Crowdfunding gave us a golden age of amateur Star Trek—and then led to its downfall". Slate. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2017. "Star Trek: Voyager Documentary Breaks Record, Expands Crowdfunding Campaign". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on March 20, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021. "Star Trek: History Channel Orders 8-Part Docuseries Chronicling the Franchise". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021. Journey's End: The Saga of Star Trek - The Next Generation (1994), archived from the original on March 13, 2022, retrieved April 18, 2021 Weldon, Michael (1996). The Psychotronic Video Guide To Film. Macmillan. p. 531. ISBN 978-0-312-13149-4. "Star Trek: Beyond the Final Frontier". The Hollywood Reporter. February 18, 2007. Archived from the original on April 17, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021. Bastién, Angelica Jade (May 17, 2019). "What We Left Behind Boldly Argues for Star Trek: Deep Space Nine's Place in the Black TV Canon". vulture.com. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2019. Grobar, Matt (March 11, 2021). "'The Center Seat: 55 Years Of Star Trek': History Channel Sets 8-Part Docuseries From The Nacelle Company". Deadline. Archived from the original on March 20, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021. "Star Trek: Voyager Documentary Breaks Record, Expands Crowdfunding Campaign". Star Trek. Archived from the original on March 20, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021. "'Star Trek: Voyager' Doc Becomes Most Successful Documentary Crowdfunding Campaign Ever". That Hashtag Show. March 16, 2021. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 18, 2021. Eller, Claudia (December 11, 1998). "Lower Costs Energize 'Trek' Film Profits". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Pascale, Anthony (June 30, 2010). "Exclusive: Producer Ralph Winter on Star Trek V: We Almost Killed The Franchise". TrekMovie. Archived from the original on July 3, 2010. Retrieved July 1, 2010. "Former CIA chief gets shinier in mugging". St. Petersburg Times. Associated Press. August 5, 1987. p. 3A. Canby, Vincent (February 22, 1987). "Film View; Oscars Seen In a Crystal Ball". The New York Times. sec. 2; p. 1, col. 1. "Primetime Emmy Award Database". Emmys.com. Archived from the original on September 4, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2013. "Most successful sci-fi TV franchise". Guinness World Records. October 7, 2016. Archived from the original on October 23, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2016. Logan, Michael (August 24, 1996). "10 Truly Stellar Episodes". TV Guide. Vol. 44, no. 34. pp. 22–25. ISSN 0039-8543. Kooser, Amanda (August 6, 2016). "10 best Star Trek episodes, according to the fans". CNET. Archived from the original on July 25, 2019. Retrieved August 8, 2019. Kooser, Amanda (August 5, 2016). "10 worst Star Trek episodes, according to the fans". CNET. Archived from the original on November 4, 2019. Retrieved September 8, 2019. Drezner, Daniel W. "The top 10 'Star Trek' episodes ever". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Sumner, Redstone; Redstone, Shari (September 26, 2016). "National Amusements, Inc. Proposes Combination of CBS and Viacom" (PDF) (Press release). National Amusements. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved July 18, 2019. Lang, Brent (May 15, 2013). "How the Battle Over 'Star Trek' Rights Killed J.J. Abrams' Grand Ambitions". TheWrap. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved June 21, 2019. Pascale, Anthony (February 11, 2010). "Star Trek Helps Bring Big Profits To Viacom & Paramount". TrekMovie.com. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Carmon, Irin (July 9, 2019). "Shari Redstone's $30 Billion Triumph". Intelligencer. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved July 18, 2019. Baker-Whitelaw, Gavia (May 17, 2018). "New Star Trek trilogy delayed over legal battle". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved June 21, 2019. Littleton, Cynthia (June 19, 2019). "Shari Redstone, Joe Ianniello in Spotlight as CBS and Viacom Pursue Merger Talks Again". Variety. Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. Retrieved December 5, 2019. Lee, Edmund (August 13, 2019). "CBS and Viacom to Reunite in Victory for Shari Redstone". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on August 13, 2019. Retrieved August 13, 2019. Weprin, Alex (October 28, 2019). "Viacom-CBS Merger Now Expected to Close in "Early December"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 5, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2019. Szalai, Georg (November 25, 2019). "Viacom, CBS Set Date to Close Merger". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 3, 2019. Retrieved December 8, 2019. "Viacom and CBS Corp. are officially back together again". CBS News. December 4, 2019. Archived from the original on December 5, 2019. Retrieved December 4, 2019. Littleton, Cynthia (February 15, 2022). "Goodbye Viacom and CBS: ViacomCBS Changes Corporate Name to Paramount". Variety. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2023. Asherman, Allan (March 20, 1981). The Star Trek Compendium. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-671-79145-1. Barad, Judith; Robertson, Ed (December 5, 2000). The Ethics of Star Trek. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-019530-4. Ellison, Harlan (January 1996). The City on the Edge of Forever. Benson, Maryland: Borderlands Press. ISBN 1-880325-02-0. Greenwald, Jeff (June 1998). Future Perfect: How Star Trek Conquered Planet Earth. New York: Viking. ISBN 0-670-87399-3. Gerrold, David (April 12, 1973). Trouble with Tribbles. New York: Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-23402-2. Gerrold, David (May 1984). The World of Star Trek (Revised ed.). New York: Bluejay Books. ISBN 0-312-94463-2. Krauss, Lawrence M (September 1995). The Physics of Star Trek. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-00559-4. Lichtenberg, Jacqueline; Marshak, Sondra; Winston, Joan (July 1975). Star Trek Lives!. New York: Bantam Books. ISBN 0-553-02151-6. McIntee, David (March 9, 2000). Delta Quadrant: The Unofficial Guide to Star Trek Voyager. London: Virgin Books. ISBN 0-7535-0436-7. Nichols, Nichelle (October 19, 1994). Beyond Uhura. New York: Putnam Adult. ISBN 0-399-13993-1. Projansky, Sarah; Helford, Elyce Rae; Ono, Kent (August 8, 1996). Harrison, Taylor (ed.). Enterprise Zones: Critical Positions on Star Trek. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press. ISBN 0-8133-2899-3. Shatner, William; Kreski, Chris (October 1993). Star Trek Memories. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-017734-9. Shatner, William; Kreski, Chris (May 1999). Get a Life!. New York: Pocket Books. ISBN 0-671-02131-1. Shatner, William; Walter, Chip (July 30, 2002). I'm Working on That: A Trek from Science Fiction to Science Fact. New York: Pocket Books. ISBN 0-671-04737-X. Winston, Joan (November 1977). The Making of the Trek Conventions. New York: Knopf Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-13112-7. Star Trek at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Listen to this article (35 minutes) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 6 January 2010 (2010-01-06), and does not reflect subsequent edits. (Audio help · More spoken articles) Official website Star Trek at Curlie Star Trek at NASA – Enterprising Nebulae Welcome at Memory Alpha Portals:  United States  Television  Film  Science Fiction  1960s  1980s  1990s