The World Wrestling Championships are the Greco-Roman Wrestling (men's, since 1904) and Freestyle Wrestling (men's since 1951 and women's since 1987) World Championships organized by United World Wrestling (UWW). Updated after the 2023 World Wrestling Championships. Names in italic are national entities that no longer exist. The tables shows those who have won at least 5 gold medals at the World Championships. Boldface denotes active wrestlers and highest medal count among all wrestlers (including these who not included in these tables) per type. Sports portal Wrestling World Cup World Wrestling Clubs Cup List of World Championships medalists in wrestling (freestyle) List of World Championships medalists in wrestling (Greco-Roman) List of World Championships medalists in wrestling (women) List of World and Olympic Champions in men's freestyle wrestling List of World and Olympic Champions in Greco-Roman wrestling List of World and Olympic Champions in women's freestyle wrestling World Beach Wrestling Championships At the 2021 World Championships, in accordance with a ban by the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) and a decision by the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS), wrestlers from Russia were not permitted to use the Russian name, flag, or anthem. They instead participated under the name and the modified flag of the Russian Wrestling Federation (RWF). At the 2023 World Championships, in accordance with sanctions imposed following by the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, wrestlers from Russia and Belarus were not permitted to use the name, flag, or anthem of Russia or Belarus. They instead participated as "Individual Neutral Athletes (AIN)", their medals were not included in the official medal table. At the 2023 World Championships, as a result of sanctions by the UWW imposed on the Wrestling Federation of India for not conducting its elections on time, wrestlers from India were not permitted to use the name, flag, or anthem of India. They instead participated under the name and the flag of the United World Wrestling (UWW). "Sushil's Moscow gold and a Budapest triple: India at Wrestling Worlds". ESPN. Retrieved 13 October 2021. FILA Database Hosts of World Championships 2021 and 2022