Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse is a 2018 American animated superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character Miles Morales/Spider-Man, produced and distributed by Sony Pictures in association with Marvel Entertainment. It is the first animated film in the Spider-Man franchise. Directed by Bob Persichetti, Peter Ramsey, and Rodney Rothman from a screenplay by Phil Lord and Rothman, it stars Shameik Moore as Morales, alongside the voices of Jake Johnson, Hailee Steinfeld, Mahershala Ali, Brian Tyree Henry, Lily Tomlin, Luna Lauren Vélez, John Mulaney, Kimiko Glenn, Nicolas Cage, and Liev Schreiber. The film's story follows Miles as he becomes the new Spider-Man and joins other Spider-People from various parallel universes who team up to save New York City from Kingpin. Plans for an animated Spider-Man film by Phil Lord and Christopher Miller were leaked in 2014 and announced in April 2015. Persichetti, Ramsey and Rothman joined over the next two years, with Moore and Schreiber cast in April 2017. Lord and Miller wanted the film to have a unique style, combining computer animation with traditional hand-drawn comic book techniques inspired by the work of Miles Morales co-creator Sara Pichelli. The film required the largest crew of animators used by Sony Pictures Animation on a feature film. The film premiered at the Regency Village Theater in Los Angeles on December 1, 2018, and was theatrically released in the United States on December 14. The film grossed $384.3 million worldwide against a $90 million budget and received critical acclaim. The film won Best Animated Feature at the 91st Academy Awards—being the first non-Disney/Pixar film to win the award since Rango (2011). Filmmakers and animation peers have praised its aesthetics and acknowledged its influence on subsequent animated productions. It has since been regarded as one of the best animated films of the 21st century. A sequel, Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse, was released in 2023 to similar critical and greater commercial success. A third film, Spider-Man: Beyond the Spider-Verse, and a spin-off film focused on female Spider-related characters are in development. New York City teenager Miles Morales struggles to live up to the expectations of his father, police officer Jefferson Davis, who sees Spider-Man as a menace. Miles' uncle Aaron Davis takes him to an abandoned subway station to paint graffiti to cheer him up. There, Miles is bitten by a radioactive spider and gains abilities similar to Spider-Man. Returning to the station, he discovers a collider built by Kingpin, who hopes to access parallel universes to abduct alternate versions of his late wife and son. Spider-Man attempts to disable the collider while fighting Kingpin's enforcers, the Green Goblin and Prowler. Green Goblin shoves Spider-Man into the collider, causing an explosion that kills the former and wounds the latter, who then gives Miles a USB flash drive designed to disable the collider, warning that the machine could destroy the city if reactivated. After watching in horror as Kingpin murders Spider-Man, Miles flees. As the city mourns Spider-Man's death, Miles tries to honor his legacy and become the new Spider-Man but inadvertently damages the drive. At Spider-Man's grave, he meets Peter B. Parker, an older and worn-down version of Spider-Man from another dimension. The duo infiltrate Kingpin's research facility to steal data for a new flash drive. They are confronted by head scientist Olivia Octavius, who discovers that Peter will die from cellular decay if he remains in their dimension. Miles and Peter are then saved by Gwen Stacy, a Spider-Woman from another dimension. They visit Spider-Man's aunt, May Parker; she is sheltering more Spider-People who slipped into Miles' universe from other dimensions due to the collider's influence—Spider-Man Noir, Peni Parker, and Spider-Ham—who are also deteriorating. Miles offers to help the others return home but they tell him he lacks experience. Distraught, Miles retreats to Aaron's home, where he discovers his uncle is the Prowler. He flees to May's house, where the new drive is completed by Peni; he is followed by Kingpin, Aaron, Octavius, Scorpion, and Tombstone. In the ensuing brawl, he reveals his identity to Aaron. Unwilling to kill his own nephew, Aaron attempts to spare Miles, but is fatally shot by Kingpin in retaliation and dies in Miles' arms. Miles flees just as Jefferson arrives on the scene; he mistakes the new Spider-Man as his brother's murderer. The heroes regroup with a devastated Miles. Unwilling to let Miles get killed, Peter restrains Miles with his webs for his safety and chooses to sacrifice himself by staying behind and deactivating the collider. Jefferson arrives outside Miles' door and apologizes for his mistakes and expresses his faith in Miles, inspiring him. Miles manages to control his powers, escapes his restraints, and creates his own Spider-Man suit. He joins the other Spider-People in defeating Kingpin's enforcers, and uses the new drive to send them home. Kingpin fights Miles, attracting the attention of Jefferson. Realizing that Spider-Man is not the menace he saw him as, he encourages Miles, who throws Kingpin at the collider's kill switch, destroying it. The city is saved, Kingpin and his henchmen are arrested and Jefferson receives evidence of Kingpin's murders of Spider-Man and Aaron. Miles embraces the responsibilities of his new life. Later, Gwen finds a way to contact Miles from her own dimension. Elsewhere, Miguel O'Hara, also known as Spider-Man 2099, travels to Earth-67 and argues with its Spider-Man. Shameik Moore as Miles Morales / Spider-Man: An intelligent and rebellious teenager of African-American and Puerto Rican descent, who is imbued with spider-like abilities after being bitten by a radioactive spider and eventually takes up the mantle of the masked vigilante Spider-Man. Producers Lord and Miller described the character as unique among Spider-Men because of his Brooklyn upbringing, his African-American and Puerto-Rican background, and the fact that his family is still alive, with that family dynamic being central to the film's story. Jake Johnson as Peter B. Parker / Spider-Man: Miles' reluctant mentor, a disheveled, jaded, and brown-haired 38-year-old counterpart of the hero from another dimension. He is intended to be an amalgamation of all pop culture Spider-Man adaptations and interpretations. Lord and Miller envisioned him to be like The Karate Kid's Mr. Miyagi, if "Mr. Miyagi doesn't know anything," which they thought was a "really neat color to put onto Peter that we hadn't seen before." Hailee Steinfeld as Gwen Stacy / Spider-Woman: A dimension-displaced counterpart of Gwen Stacy with spider-like abilities, who takes up the alias of "Wanda" (mistaken as "Gwanda") while at Miles' school. In onscreen comic books while explaining her origin story, she is referred to as "Spider-Gwen". Mahershala Ali as Aaron Davis / Prowler: Miles' uncle, who moonlights as a masked enforcer for Wilson Fisk while keeping it a secret from his family. He is rebellious, causing him to be looked at poorly by Jefferson. Brian Tyree Henry as Jefferson Davis: Miles' African-American father, a police officer, who disapproves of Spider-Man's vigilante actions. At the age of 35, Henry had said he was too young to portray a father of a teenager, but agreed to the role after learning that Miles Morales was the only black, Latino Spider-Man. Lily Tomlin as May Parker: Peter's aunt, who is dead in Peter B. Parker's universe, and provides refuge for the other Spider-People in Miles' universe. Luna Lauren Vélez as Rio Morales: Miles' Puerto-Rican mother, a nurse. Zoë Kravitz as Mary Jane "MJ" Parker: Peter Parker's wife in Miles' universe and Peter B. Parker's former wife in his universe. John Mulaney as Peter Porker / Spider-Ham: An alternate talking animal version of Spider-Man from an anthropomorphic universe, who was once a spider, bitten by a radioactive pig. Kimiko Glenn as Peni Parker / SP//dr: A young Japanese-American girl from an alternative anime-like universe who copilots a biomechanical suit with a radioactive spider that she shares a telepathic link with. The filmmakers initially considered using Silk as their Asian-American Spider-Man, but eventually settled on Peni because of her more distinctive power set compared to the other Spider-People. Peni's designs went through a few iterations as her initial design was particularly "iffy." Production designer Justin Thompson considered Lord and Miller's desire to use an anime design and came up with the idea to portray her in an art style similar to Sailor Moon. Nicolas Cage as Peter Parker / Spider-Man Noir: An alternate version of Peter Parker from a monochromatic universe set in the 1930s. Cage based his character on the films of Humphrey Bogart, and the voices of actors from that era such as James Cagney and Edward G. Robinson. Kathryn Hahn as Doctor Olivia "Liv" Octavius: The head scientist and CEO of Alchemax, and a scientific adviser to Wilson Fisk. The character uses highly advanced tentacles and is featured in much of the marketing for Alchemax, even being seen in a documentary by Miles in school. Liev Schreiber as Wilson Fisk / Kingpin: A crime lord and the benefactor of Alchemax in Miles' dimension. His ultimate motive is to abduct alternate versions of his late wife and son, who died in a car crash escaping from him. In addition to the six main versions of Spider-Man present in the film, Chris Pine is featured as a 26-year-old, blond-haired blue-eyed version of Peter Parker's Spider-Man native to Miles' dimension. Though he offers to mentor Miles, he is murdered by Kingpin after the activation of the collider before he can do so. This version of Parker was intended to be "as competent a Spider-Man as possible," and combines elements from previous Spider-Man portrayals, but with slight differences to indicate that he is from a different universe than the others. According to Parker's eulogy, he was a graduate student and married to Mary Jane Parker. Additional voices for the film include: Lake Bell as Vanessa Fisk, Kingpin's wife, Jorma Taccone as Norman Osborn / Green Goblin, a genetically enhanced mercenary working for Kingpin, Marvin "Krondon" Jones III as Tombstone, Kingpin's silent and heavily armed bodyguard, Joaquín Cosío as Scorpion, a Mexican cyborg with prosthetic legs and a tail, and Post Malone (who contributed to the film's soundtrack) as a bystander in Brooklyn. An archival recording of Cliff Robertson from Spider-Man 2 was used for a flashback scene involving the character Ben Parker. Spider-Man co-creator Stan Lee appears in a posthumous cameo, as a character named Stan who sells a Spider-Man costume to Morales. Lord and Miller said it was important to give Lee a bigger moment in the film rather than just a passing cameo, because he was "so integral to the spirit of this movie," and the role was "extra meaningful" following Lee's death in November 2018. Lee's character also has several brief "Easter egg" cameos throughout the film, such as when he walks over Miles and Peter B. when they are lying on the streets of New York City. A young Matt Murdock from Gwen's dimension appears in an "Easter egg" cameo during Morales' final train fight scene as an alternate universe adopted son of Kingpin. Cameos during the film's post-credits include Oscar Isaac as Miguel O'Hara / Spider-Man 2099, an alternative version of Spider-Man from the Marvel 2099 imprint, Greta Lee as O'Hara's AI assistant Lyla (respectively credited as "Interesting Person #1" and "Interesting Person #2"), and Jorma Taccone as the Peter Parker / Spider-Man from the 1967 TV series (replacing Paul Soles, with the character being credited as "Last Dude"). Donald Glover appears on a background TV screen, which is displaying a scene from the episode "Anthropology 101" of Community in which Glover's character, Troy Barnes, wears Spider-Man pajamas. This scene, a reference to an unsuccessful Twitter campaign suggesting Glover be cast in the lead role of The Amazing Spider-Man, was cited by Miles Morales' creator, Brian Michael Bendis, as influencing the design and portrayal of the character. Glover had previously voiced a version of Miles Morales in the Ultimate Spider-Man animated series, and played Aaron Davis in Spider-Man: Homecoming. Miles Morales's best friend and roommate Ganke Lee appears. The character originally had a bigger role, but was rewritten due to Spider-Man: Homecoming having the similar character Ned Leeds. Pixar animator Peter Sohn was cast as Ganke before the character's dialogue was cut from the final film; Sohn would later voice the character in the sequel, Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (2023). Following the November 2014 hacking of Sony's computers, emails between then-Sony Pictures Entertainment co-chairman Amy Pascal and president Doug Belgrad were released, saying that Sony was planning to "rejuvenate" the Spider-Man franchise by developing an animated comedy film with Phil Lord and Christopher Miller. During her time as Sony's co-chairman, Pascal approached Lord and Miller about making an animated Spider-Man movie, to which Lord and Miller agreed with the condition that they could adapt Dan Slott's 2014 "Spider-Verse" comic book storyline and star Miles Morales as the protagonist. Sony executives were set to talk about the project further in a discussion regarding several Spider-Man spin-off films at a summit in January 2015. At the 2015 CinemaCon in April, Sony Pictures chairman Tom Rothman announced that the animated Spider-Man film had a July 20, 2018, release date, and would be produced by Lord and Miller, Avi Arad, Matt Tolmach, and Pascal, with Lord and Miller also writing a treatment for the film. Rothman said that it would "co-exist" with the live-action Spider-Man films; though Sony soon stated that the film would "exist independently of the projects in the live-action Spider-Man universe," as it is set in an alternate universe from those films, without the version of Spider-Man as seen in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. That December, Sony moved the film's release date to December 21, 2018. By June 2016, Lord had written a script for the film, and the studio chose Bob Persichetti to direct. Miller said the film would feel different from previous Spider-Man films, and would "stand on its own as a unique film-going experience." It was also "rumored" to focus on the Miles Morales version of Spider-Man, which Sony confirmed at a presentation for its upcoming animated films in January 2017. Peter Ramsey had joined the film as a co-director by that point. The next month, Alex Hirsch was named as a story contributor and Christina Steinberg replaced Tolmach as a producer; she previously collaborated with Ramsey on Rise of the Guardians (2012) while at DreamWorks Animation. In April 2017, the release date was pushed up one week from December 21, 2018, to December 14, 2018. Lord and Miller announced the film's full title in December and said that multiple Spider-Men would appear in the film. By then, Rodney Rothman, who had previously co-written the screenplay for Lord and Miller's 22 Jump Street (2014), was added as a co-director. The script is credited to Lord and Rothman from a story by Lord, making it the first film Lord had written without Miller. As six Spider-Man films had been made already, the team agreed they first needed to decide why this one needed to be made; their answer was to tell the story of Morales, who had yet to appear in a film. Brian Michael Bendis, co-creator of Miles Morales, consulted on the film adaptation. The first full cut of animatics and storyboards for the film was over two hours long, which is uncommon for animated films. The directors attributed this mostly to Lord and Miller, and their approach of adding as many elements to the film as they could at the outset, with the intention of seeing what it could "handle"; and then shaping the film from there. They said that the final runtime would be between 90 and 120 minutes, the standard length of an animated film. They added that a balance would have to be found between the expectations of an animated film that will have a large audience of children, and the requirements of the story. The directors felt the plot was similar to the live-action Spider-Man films, especially due to the large number of characters in the film. One year prior to its release, Lord and Rothman opted to rewrite the story as they had to "figure out how to reshape sequences we had already boarded and animated and fold them in with new stuff". They also added that they had substantially rewritten the third act. The film was originally set to feature a romance between Miles Morales and Spider-Gwen. While the idea was scrapped, Spider-Gwen was still featured prominently in the film, mostly due to the efforts of producer Christina Steinberg. By August 2018, the directors had considered what a potential post-credits scene for the film could be, given that audiences have come to expect them from Marvel films. At one point the writers wished to include a post-credits scene with cameos by all three live-action Spider-Man actors, Tobey Maguire, Andrew Garfield, and Tom Holland, but this was canceled as Sony felt such a moment at the time would cause confusion and be too risky. Holland recalled the scene was intended to include him as a passerby at a train station who says, "Hey, kid!" to Miles. Shameik Moore was cast as Miles Morales in April 2017, along with Liev Schreiber as the film's then-unspecified main villain. A month later, Mahershala Ali and Brian Tyree Henry joined the cast as Morales's uncle Aaron Davis and father Jefferson Davis, respectively. That December, Lord and Miller said that an adult Peter Parker / Spider-Man would appear in the film as a mentor to Morales. Maguire, who played Spider-Man in the Sam Raimi films, was initially considered to be cast as this version of Spider-Man, but the idea was dropped so as not to confuse the audience with the concept of the "Spider-Verse." Jake Johnson was ultimately cast in the role in April 2018. It was also announced that the characters Green Goblin, Kingpin, and Prowler would also appear, with their designs based on the Ultimate Marvel comic series. In June 2018, Sony confirmed further casting, including Schreiber playing Kingpin, Hailee Steinfeld as Spider-Gwen, Luna Lauren Vélez as Morales's mother Rio, and Lily Tomlin as Parker's Aunt May. A month later, Nicolas Cage (who was considered for the role of Green Goblin in the first Spider-Man film), John Mulaney and Kimiko Glenn were announced as the voices of Spider-Man Noir, Spider-Ham and Peni Parker, respectively. Chris Pine as the Peter Parker of Miles' universe and Oscar Isaac as Spider-Man 2099 were announced in November 2018. Pine was also involved in Ramsey's previous film, Rise of the Guardians. Lord and Miller explained that the alternate Spider-Man characters were chosen based on the comics they had read, as well as research they conducted on Marvel Comics, with the intention of including actual characters from the comics who "were as diverse as possible." Daniel Pemberton was announced as the film's composer in July 2018. A full soundtrack album was released by Republic Records on December 14, the day of the film's release, and was curated to represent what a teen like Miles Morales would listen to. Artists on the soundtrack include Jaden Smith, Nicki Minaj, Lil Wayne, Post Malone, Ty Dolla Sign, Juice Wrld, Swae Lee, Ski Mask the Slump God, Vince Staples, Thutmose, and the late XXXTentacion, who was marketed as a special guest on the Lil Wayne and Ty Dolla Sign song "Scared of the Dark". A separate album containing Pemberton's score was released by Sony Classical Records on December 17. On December 20, Sony Pictures Animation announced an extended play album, A Very Spidey Christmas, based on a throwaway joke at the beginning of the film and consisting of five Christmas songs performed by cast members Shameik Moore, Jake Johnson, and Chris Pine. The EP was released on digital platforms the next day. Elliphant recorded the song "To the End" for the film, where it served as the introduction music for Spider-Woman. The song was released as a single in January 2019. The film's animation was handled by Sony Pictures Imageworks in Vancouver, who had handled nearly all of Sony Pictures Animation's prior films, as well as visual effects for all prior Spider-Man films. According to Lord and Miller, they wanted the film to feel like the viewer had "walked inside a comic book," and were excited about telling the story in a way they believed the live-action films could not. Persichetti concurred, feeling that animation was the best medium to honor the comics, allowing the production team to adapt 70-year-old comic art techniques for the film's visual language. It took around a year for two animators to create 10 seconds of footage that reflected the producers' vision; the animation work was created from there. During initial development, the directors worked with a single animator, Alberto Mielgo, to establish the film's look. Although Mielgo was let go by Sony before the movie had been significantly produced due to artistic differences, this number eventually grew to 60 animators during production. It became clear that they could not complete the film on time, so the crew was expanded further. The number had reached 142 animators by August 2018 and at one point to 177 animators, the largest animation crew that Sony Pictures Imageworks had ever used for a film. Animation work was completed in October 2018. The CGI animation for the film was combined with "line work and painting and dots and all sorts of comic book techniques," to make it look like it was created by hand, which was described as "a living painting." This was achieved by artists taking rendered frames from the CGI animators and working on top of them in 2D, with the goal of making every frame of the film "look like a comic panel." Lord described this style of animation as "totally revolutionary," and explained that the design combines the in-house style of Sony Pictures Animation with the "flavor" of comic artists such as Sara Pichelli (who co-created Miles Morales) and Robbi Rodriguez. The film's tone and visual style also drew influence from Japanese anime and manga works such as Hayao Miyazaki films and Akira (1988). To make the film feel more like a comic book, it was animated without motion blur, instead using an older technique of 2D animation called motion smearing, as seen in the 1942 Looney Tunes short The Dover Boys. The frame rate varied between 24 images (animating on ones) and 12 images (animating on twos) per second, the latter case using the same image twice. The producers described the effect as making the animation "crunchy." Sometimes, the two frame rates would be used in the same scene, such as when Miles and Peter Parker swing through the forest; Miles was animated at 12 frames to show his inexperience while Peter was animated at 24 frame to give him smoother movement. With characters being held up for one, two and three frames, it made their motion look jittery, which was named stepped animation. To create depth of field, another technique was used: deliberately misaligned colors, as if the colors had been slightly misprinted, as happens with ink printing in real comics. Other methods to make the film look more like a comic were halftones and Ben-Day dots to create colors, tones and gradients, crisscrossed lines to create texture and shadows, Kirby Krackle to create the illusion of energy, motion lines to show movement, and onomatopoeia, words on the image, to represent sounds and motion. Rather than using animation principles like squash and stretch, the animators came up with substitute versions, "so that in texture and feel it felt different, but it still achieved the same goal—to either feel weight or anticipation or impact or things like that." Different comic styles were emulated throughout the film for the different characters, with Spider-Gwen's animation based on the designs in her comics, Spider-Man Noir having a black-and-white color scheme, Spider-Ham being designed as "cartoony" as possible, and Peni Parker being based on Japanese anime and manga such as Sailor Moon. Former Disney concept artist Shiyoon Kim served as overall character designer, while Craig Kellman designed the exaggerated look for Spider-Ham. Justin K. Thompson served as production designer after having done so on the Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs films for Lord, Miller, and Sony Pictures Animation. Danny Dimian, who had worked on both the 2002 Spider-Man film and the first Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs film while at Imageworks, served as visual effects supervisor for the film. He compared the approach the company took with Spider-Verse to the 2000 film Hollow Man. Animation co-director Patrick O'Keefe said that committing fully to each Spider's unique art style was like "making five movies." In-universe comic-books in the film were designed as a combination of the artwork of Steve Ditko and John Romita Jr. Chris Pine's Peter Parker's cover was designed by Keith Pollard while Erik Larsen designed the cover for Jake Johnson's Peter Parker, and Miles Morales's co-creator Sara Pichelli also contributed art for the film. The directors all felt that the film would be one of the few that audiences actually "need" to watch in 3D, due to the immersive nature of the animated world created, and the way that the hand-drawn animation elements designed specifically for the film create a unique experience; Persichetti described the experience as a combination of the effects of an old-fashioned hand-drawn multiplane camera and a modern virtual reality environment. One scene in Aaron Davis's apartment includes an image of Donald Glover in the background, which references Glover's part in fan campaigns to see a non-white version of Spider-Man, as well as a scene from the Community episode "Anthropology 101" where Glover's character of Troy Barnes wakes up in Spider-Man pajamas. Glover also portrayed Aaron Davis in Spider-Man: Homecoming and voiced Miles in the Ultimate Spider-Man television series. A thirty-second sizzle reel from the film was shown at a Sony Pictures Animation presentation in January 2017, revealing that the film focuses on Miles Morales. Scott Mendelson at Forbes said the footage "looked incredible [sic] stylized and resembled a cross between an Alex Ross image and a psychedelic [comic] cover," but felt the most significant element of the presentation was the confirmation of Morales, meaning "2018 will offer another comic book superhero movie featuring a hero of color, during the same year as Marvel's Black Panther." A teaser trailer for the film debuted at the 2017 Comic Con Experience, and was then released online. Chris Cabin at Collider felt the trailer "looks much better than it ever needed to. The style and design that is on display ... is vibrant and immediately engaging on a visual level, showing a genuine sense of personality to the production." io9's Julie Muncy called the trailer's visual design "elegant" and "fresh," and highlighted the use of music by Vince Staples, which was also used for the Black Panther trailers. The official trailer for the film was released online at the start of June 2018, and was praised by Chaim Gartenberg of The Verge for its "absolutely gorgeous" art style, also highlighting Miles and Gwen's appearances. For Cartoon Brew, Amid Amidi praised the trailer for focusing on drama rather than action, and for seemingly targeting "a slightly hipper, more urban, and teen-oriented crowd." He felt that animated films were usually focused on pleasing "all-ages, all-audiences," which marked this film as a "radical change for United States feature animation." Dani Di Placido of Forbes praised the trailer for inspiring interest in the Spider-Man property after several different incarnations of the character had appeared in films. He said it achieved this by leaning into the comic storyline of the Spider-Verse and having multiple versions of the character in one film, and by its "beautifully rendered" visuals, that differentiated it from other major animated films. Placido said, "it's nice to see a movie just go nuts and embrace the weirdness of comic books and their eternally shapeshifting storylines." The trailer generated 164 thousand conversations across social media platforms within a day of its release, and in three days had been viewed 44 million times, making the film one of Sony's most viral, alongside Sausage Party (2016). Sony released a second trailer for the film in October 2018, ahead of a promotional panel at New York Comic Con where the first 35 minutes of the film were shown. Lord and Miller explained that they chose not to show clips from throughout the film because they would lack context for the audience, so instead aired an extended sequence for the presentation, even though it had some unfinished animation and music. At the time, Sony's film Venom was playing in theaters, featuring another extended clip from Into the Spider-Verse as a post-credits scene. The scene confirmed that the shared universe that Venom is part of is one of the universes connected within the "Spider-Verse" multiverse. In November 2018, Sony launched Spider-Verse Web AR Experience, a mobile augmented reality experience created by 8th Wall and Trigger to run on Amazon Web Services. Inspired by the film, the AR experience allows users to include Spider-Man in photos they take of their environment. The film also received a $115 million promotional "boost" from various companies—one of the largest such campaigns for a Sony film—including the Ad Council, who included the film's characters in an anti-bullying campaign; McDonald's, with a unique Happy Meal TV spot created in the film's animation style, as well as a special "double height" Happy Meal box for Australian McDonald's locations, designed like a skyscraper that the characters can swing from; Synchrony Bank, as part of their "Save Like a Hero" campaign; Nike, who sold the Air Jordan shoes that Morales wears in the film; General Mills cereal; official toy lines from Hasbro; themed cruises with Genting Cruise Lines; a "comprehensive" social media-based campaign in China by Tencent QQ, a brand that can be seen in the film; and other technology partners eBay, Vodafone, Garmin, Adobe, and Wacom. On December 21, 2018, an unlockable costume based on the Spider-Man suit worn by the Peter Parker of Miles' universe was added to the PlayStation 4 video game Marvel's Spider-Man to promote the film. On December 29, Sony published the movie's screenplay online. Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse was released by Sony Pictures Releasing under its Columbia Pictures label on December 14, 2018. In April 2015, Sony had made its first official announcement that an animated Spider-Man film was in development, with a release date scheduled for July 20, 2018. It is the first animated Spider-Man feature film, and is independent of the timelines of other Spider-Man universe films. At the end of 2015, the release date was changed to December 21, 2018, and was moved up by one week two years later. Sony premiered the film at the Regency Village Theater in Los Angeles on December 1, 2018, and included tributes to Stan Lee and Steve Ditko. The film is dedicated to the memories of the creators of Spider-Man, Stan Lee and Steve Ditko, who both died in 2018. Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse was released on digital download by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment on February 26, 2019, with Blu-ray, Ultra HD Blu-ray, and DVD releases following on March 19. All releases were accompanied by a short film featuring Spider-Ham entitled Caught in a Ham. An extended cut called the Alt-Universe Cut, featuring 30 minutes of unreleased footage, including some scenes with Miles' roommate, Ganke, and a deleted cameo with Tom Cruise and James Cameron, was also featured on its home video release. Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse was also released in Blu-ray 3D format in several regions, outside of the United States and United Kingdom, on April 10, 2019. In the United Kingdom, it was aired on Sky Cinema Premiere in 2019. It drew 1.1 million viewers, making it the year's eighth most-watched film on pay TV channels. In April 2021, Sony signed a deal with Disney giving them access to their legacy content, including Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse and its sequels, to stream on Disney+ and Hulu and appear on Disney's linear television networks. Disney's access to Sony's titles would come following their availability on Netflix. Into the Spider-Verse had previously been available on Starz and FX. The film became available on Disney+ in the United Kingdom, Australia and Japan on June 17, 2022, and on September 9, 2022, in Ireland, Latin America and Europe. Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse grossed $190.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $194.0 million in other territories, for a total worldwide gross of $384.3 million, against a production budget of $90 million. On January 31, 2019, the film surpassed Hotel Transylvania 2 to become Sony Pictures Animation's highest-grossing film domestically, unadjusted for inflation. In the United States and Canada, Into the Spider-Verse was released on the same weekend as Mortal Engines and The Mule, and was projected to gross $30–35 million from 3,813 theaters in its opening weekend. It made $12.6 million on its first day, including $3.5 million from Thursday night previews, and went on to debut to $35.4 million, finishing first at the box office and marking the best ever December opening for an animated film. The film made $16.7 million in its second weekend, finishing fourth, behind newcomers Aquaman, Bumblebee and Mary Poppins Returns, and then $18.3 million in its third weekend, finishing fourth again. In its fifth weekend the film made $13 million, finishing in fourth for a third straight week. On March 1–3, the weekend following its Best Animated Picture win at the Academy Awards, the film was added to 1,661 theaters (for a total of 2,104) and made $2.1 million, marking a 138% increase from the week before. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 97% based on 403 reviews, with an average rating of 8.8/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse matches bold storytelling with striking animation for a purely enjoyable adventure with heart, humor, and plenty of superhero action." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 87 out of 100 based on reviews from 50 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a grade of "A+" on an A+ to F scale, and those at PostTrak gave it a 90% overall positive score, an 80% "definite recommend," and a 5 star rating. David Ehrlich of IndieWire gave the film a "B+" and called it "hilarious and ultimately even poignant," writing, "An eye-popping and irreverent animated experience from the marvelous comic minds who brought you 21 Jump Street... Into the Spider-Verse is somehow both the nerdiest and most inviting superhero film in a long time; every single frame oozes with fan service." Oliver Jones of The New York Observer gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars and wrote, "The greatest triumph and biggest surprise of the film is that it is an LSD freak-out on par with 2001: A Space Odyssey." Johnny Oleksinski of The New York Post gave the film a 3.5 rating out of 4, hailing it as "the best stand-alone film to feature the iconic character so far," and praising Miles' characterization as "more fleshed out than the usual Marvel heroes." Christy Lemire of RogerEbert.com praised the film's atmosphere and visual effects, adding that it "has a wonderfully trippy, dreamlike quality about it." Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter wrote, "the freshest and most stimulating aspect of the film is the visual style, which unites the expected Marvel mix of 'universes' (it used to be assumed there was only one universe in creation) with animation that looks both computer-driven and hand-drawn, boasts futuristic as well as funky urban elements, moves the 'camera' a lot and brings together a melting pot of mostly amusing new characters." William Bibbiani of The Wrap felt the film "represents some of the best superhero storytelling on the market," and that it "captures the sprawling interconnectivity of comic-book universes in a way that no other feature film has," calling it the best Spider-Man film since Spider-Man 2. Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times said that "What distinguishes Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse in the end is that it takes its mission seriously, even when it's being transparently silly." David Sims of The Atlantic said that the film "somehow, through sheer creative gumption, does something new in the superhero genre," particularly praising the use of comic book's "visual language" as well as the characters' dynamic, and felt that the "anarchic fingerprints" of producers Lord and Miller were "all over the movie." Katie Walsh of Tribune News Service said that the film is "unlike any other superhero or animated film that has come before," comparing the animation to "watching a comic book come to life," and feeling that the film "firmly exists in a post-Deadpool environment, where it seems the only fresh way into a century-old superhero is to skewer the tropes, make fun of the merchandising and acknowledge the cultural significance of it all in a cheeky and self-reflective manner." She added that Lord, who wrote the story and co-wrote the screenplay, was "the key to the balance of self-aware and sweet" present in the film. Actor Tom Holland, who plays Peter Parker / Spider-Man in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, praised Into the Spider-Verse as "one of the coolest films [he has] ever seen," and he would later reiterate his statement on the film in 2023, calling it "the best Spider-Man movie that's ever been made." Chris Pratt, who worked with Lord and Miller on The Lego Movie films, described it as an "emotionally moving, cutting edge, progressive, diverse, funny, meta, action-packed, silly, visually stunning masterpiece!" Comedian and actor Patton Oswalt, who worked with Lord and Miller on 22 Jump Street (2014) and appeared on Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. (2013–2020), called the film "brilliant," and continued, "This has been a non-stop year for me and I'm glad I'm ending it in such a cinematic high-note. Not only is it the best superhero film ever made, it's flat-out a game-changing MOVIE. Seeing it again tomorrow!" Kevin Smith reviewed the film on his podcast Fatman Beyond, stating, "I always liked Spider-Man but this movie made me love Spider-Man on a Batman-type level," and continued, "It just goes to show you that any character in the right hands can be a transformative experience." Barry Jenkins, writer and director of the Academy Award-winning film Moonlight (2016, which also starred Ali), praised the film, calling it "magnificent" and citing it as the best Spider-Man film, one of the best films of 2018, and the best tentpole film since Edge of Tomorrow (2014). Jenkins continued, saying, "I was stupefied. I mean just tremendous, tremendous work, so grounded and full of verve; visceral. Saw it on the biggest screen I could find, just a viscerally enthralling experience. I salute you." Rian Johnson, writer and director of Star Wars: The Last Jedi (2017), described the film as "the Velvet Underground of superhero movies", believing it will be an influential film. James Gunn, writer and director of Guardians of the Galaxy (2014), has named Into the Spider-Verse his favorite superhero film. Marvel Studios president and MCU producer Kevin Feige said that he "loved it." Many other filmmakers including Edgar Wright, Guillermo del Toro, Yance Ford, and RaMell Ross have listed the film as one of their favorites of 2018. The film's success influenced other projects using a mixed 2D and CGI animation style. The animation techniques created for Into the Spider-Verse were notably reused for The Mitchells vs. the Machines (2021), another Sony Pictures Animation film that Lord and Miller co-produced, and similarly influenced the animation style for DreamWorks Animation's The Bad Guys and Puss in Boots: The Last Wish (both 2022). Directors Adil El Arbi and Bilall Fallah said Spider-Verse inspired them to create the hand-drawn style of visual effects for the live-action MCU series Ms. Marvel (2022). Mitchells co-director Jeff Rowe also cited the film as a major influence for his directorial debut Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Mutant Mayhem, claiming that it "showed that a movie can look like the concept artwork and can be critically and financially successful. That opened a lot of doors and I think we tried to take that football and run with it on 'Mitchells,' and then on 'Turtles.'" The film was similarly cited as an inspiration for the animation of the Marvel/Disney series Moon Girl and Devil Dinosaur and Netflix Special Entergalactic. During a special lecture at Takarazuka University, anime director Yoshiyuki Tomino, best known for creating the famed Gundam anime series, expressed that it's necessary that people in the anime industry ought to surpass Into the Spider-Verse and other high-profile American animated features, while also commenting on the film's Best Animated Feature win at the Academy Awards as "At first glance, it looks like a live-action film, and it's very experimental in various places. For American filmgoers, it may be their first time watching an animated film that isn't expressly for kids. I won't appraise the film's quality, but on a technical level, I can see how much hard work the staff put into it." Director Kemp Powers, who would later co-direct the sequel Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (2023), watched an early cut of the movie with the crew of Pixar's Soul (2020) and said that despite Pixar being "a tough crowd" when judging animation, they were quickly impressed and agreed that the movie would revolutionize the medium. Kambole Campbell of the BBC praised called it and Across the Spider-Verse as "the greatest comic book movies ever made", and IndieWire listed it as the 4th greatest animated films of the 21st century. Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse won Best Animated Feature Film at the 76th Golden Globe Awards, and won the same award at the 24th Critics' Choice Awards and the 91st Academy Awards, among several other awards and nominations. It was the first non-Disney or Pixar film to win Best Animated Feature since Rango (2011), becoming the 6th non-Disney/Pixar film to win the award. It was similarly successful at the 76th Golden Globe Awards, the 72nd British Academy Film Awards, and the 46th Annie Awards. Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse appeared on many critics' top ten lists. According to Metacritic it appeared in first place on 5 lists. Critics at New York Magazine listed it at 9 on their list of the best films of the decade. In December 2021, the film's screenplay was listed number seventy-one on the Writers Guild of America's "101 Greatest Screenplays of the 21st Century (So Far)". Following the "incredible buzz" of Into the Spider-Verse, Sony led to the development on a sequel. Its story was split into two films to address the follow-up's excessive length. Into the Spider-Verse was followed by Across the Spider-Verse, released on June 2, 2023, after being delayed twice from an original 2022 date. The film surpassed the box-office take of Into the Spider-Verse, and received a similarly positive critical and audience response. The third film, Beyond the Spider-Verse, is in production. In 2018, Sony announced a spin-off animated film based on the Spider-Women comics, focusing on three generations of female Spider-related characters, including Spider-Gwen, Jessica Drew / Spider-Woman, and Cindy Moon / Silk. Bek Smith is attached as a screenwriter and Lauren Montgomery was in talks to direct. In 2023, producer Amy Pascal confirmed that a Spider-Women movie was in the works. John Mulaney expressed interest in a potential spin-off film starring Spider-Ham, suggesting its plot as a "Watergate-like story" along the lines of The Post or All the President's Men while focusing on his character's career as a reporter. Following the release of Into the Spider-Verse, the studio discussed the possibility of television series featuring the characters. Lord and Miller both expressed interest in seeing a series of shorts starring Spider-Ham, while Sony was announced to be developing animated spin-off TV series focusing on various characters. By April 2019, Lord and Miller signed a five-year deal with Sony Pictures Television to create animated Marvel television series alongside Sony Pictures Animation, including a possible TV series based on Into the Spider-Verse. Discussing these series in August of 2019, Miller could not update where or when the series would be released but said there would be several live-action series and that they would each be "their own unique experience" while still being related to each other. In Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (2023), this scene is established to take place sixteen months later. This scene is a reference to a scene from the 1967–1970 Spider-Man TV series episode "Double Identity", in which the villain Charles Cameo dresses up like Spider-Man to impersonate him; the episode's scene has since become an Internet meme. Debruge, Peter (November 28, 2018). "Film Review: "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse"". Variety. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved November 28, 2018. McNary, Dave (November 21, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Tracking for $30 Million Launch". Variety. Archived from the original on November 21, 2018. Retrieved November 22, 2018. "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2023. Nikolai, Nate (December 2, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Team Talks Diversity: 'Modern Heroes for a Modern World'". Variety. Archived from the original on December 2, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. Perry, Spencer (April 22, 2015), "Sony Announces Animated Spider-Man Film from The LEGO Movie's Phil Lord and Chris Miller!", ComingSoon.net, archived from the original on August 18, 2017, retrieved December 27, 2018 Chapman, Wilson; Desowitz, Bill (November 22, 2023). "The 62 Best Animated Movies of the 21st Century, from 'Marcel the Shell' to 'The Boy and the Heron'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on March 18, 2020. Retrieved March 31, 2024. Robinson, Joanna (December 14, 2018). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse: The End of Credits Scene, Explained". Vanity Fair. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved September 20, 2019. Kit, Borys (April 13, 2017). "Animated Spider-Man Film Finds Its Miles Morales (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 23, 2017. Retrieved April 28, 2017. Bonolomo, Cameron (April 28, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Spins Its Web, Amazes at CinemaCon". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 27, 2018. Retrieved May 26, 2018. Davis, Erik (November 28, 2018). "Interview: 'Into the Spider-Verse' Producers Phil Lord and Chris Miller Talk Spider-Man, Stan Lee and Reinventing the Comic Book Movie". Fandango. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. Schaefer, Sandy (April 24, 2018). "Into the Spider-Verse: Jake Johnson is Voicing Peter Parker". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 25, 2018. Retrieved April 24, 2018. Acuna, Kirsten. "There are 7 versions of Spider-Man in 'Into the Spider-Verse' — here are the actors behind each one". Insider. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. Nyren, Erin (June 6, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider Verse' Casts Hailee Steinfeld, Mahershala Ali and Lily Tomlin". Variety. Archived from the original on June 6, 2018. Retrieved June 7, 2018. Pearson, Ben (June 22, 2017). "Mahershala Ali Joins the Voice Cast of Lord and Miller's Animated 'Spider-Man' Movie". /Film. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2017. "Spider-Ham's Comic Backstory (And What The Spider-Verse Movie Changed)". Screen Rant. December 24, 2018. Archived from the original on December 24, 2018. Retrieved December 24, 2018. Freeman, Molly (July 20, 2018). "Into the Spider-Verse: Spider-Man Noir, Spider-Ham & Peni Parker Confirmed". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 21, 2018. Retrieved July 20, 2018. B. Vary, Adam (December 14, 2018). "The Revolutionary Inclusion Of "Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse"". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved February 22, 2019. Kim, Shiyoon [@shiyoon83] (December 12, 2018). "Penni Parker went through a lot of iterations but I was pretty happy where it finally landed- Phil and Chris wanted to go full anime in terms of her design and so @omarrrrrrrr311 was able to navigate those notes on the sculptural end while I channeled my 1992 Sailor Moon with her facial expressions- SPDR also changed until @yashar.kassai finally hit it with the final design-another great example of the type of collaboration that happened on that show*". Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2019 – via Instagram. Goldberg, Matt (July 5, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse': Nicolas Cage Confirmed to Play Another Spider-Man". Collider. Archived from the original on July 6, 2018. Retrieved July 6, 2018. Collis, Clark (August 15, 2018). "Nicolas Cage based his Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse character on Humphrey Bogart". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 16, 2018. Retrieved August 16, 2018. Vejvoda, Jim (November 29, 2018). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse Official Credits Reveal Surprise Voice Actor Cameos". IGN. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Zachary, Brandon (December 1, 2018). "Black Lightning Star Is a Marvel Crime Boss in Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on December 2, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. Goldman, Eric (December 14, 2018). "Your Guide to the Heroes and Villains of 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse'". Marvel Comics. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved December 18, 2018. Kaufman, Gil (October 2, 2018). "Post Malone Previews 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Track, Talks Justin Bieber Tattoo Rivalry on 'Tonight Show': Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 3, 2018. Retrieved October 3, 2018. Foreman, Alison (October 6, 2018). "Highlights from 35 minutes of 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse'". Mashable. Archived from the original on November 1, 2018. Retrieved November 5, 2018. Evans, Nick (February 12, 2019). "Stan Lee's Second Into The Spider-Verse Cameo Has Been Spotted". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 27, 2019. Retrieved April 30, 2019. Snyder, Chris (February 25, 2019). How Oscar-winning 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' changed comic book movies forever. Business Insider. "if you look closely, you can find multiple Stan Lees inserted in certain frames". "Stan Lee Has More Into the Spider-Verse Cameos". Comic Book Resources. January 7, 2019. Archived from the original on July 27, 2019. Retrieved January 7, 2019. Fugere, Mike (March 2, 2019). "Is Into the Spider-Verse's Daredevil Easter Egg Actually a Sequel Tease?". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 3, 2019. Retrieved January 7, 2019. Kleinman, Jake (November 28, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Post-Credits Has an Oscar Isaac Cameo". Inverse. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. "We Answer Your Burning Questions After Spider-Man: Into the Spider Verse". Gizmodo. December 17, 2018. Archived from the original on December 17, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Yamato, Jen (July 6, 2017). "How Donald Glover wound up in 'Spider-Man: Homecoming,' and what it might mean for an inclusive future". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved January 21, 2022. "A TV comedy assured new Spidey's creator". Retrieved January 21, 2022. "Donald Glover's Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse Cameo Explained". ScreenRant. December 16, 2018. Archived from the original on December 23, 2018. Retrieved December 29, 2018. Lord, Phil; Rotham, Rodney. "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse" (PDF). Sony Pictures Animation Inc. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 26, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2018. Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse The Official Movie Special. Titan Comics. December 18, 2018. ISBN 9781785868108. @philiplord (January 3, 2019). "There was a lot of Ganke in the movie about 18 months ago but when they borrowed so much of Ganke for Ned we worried auds would think we were ripping off Homecoming so we simplified his story and left it for the next movie" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Sciretta, Peter (February 26, 2019). "Pixar Director Pete Sohn Originally Voiced Ganke in 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse'". /Film. Archived from the original on July 26, 2019. Retrieved September 24, 2019. Zahed, Ramin. (2018) Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse – The Art of the Movie (Hardcover). Titan Books. ISBN 1785659464 Fritz, Ben (December 9, 2014). "Sony, Marvel Discussed Spider-Man Movie Crossover". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on December 10, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2014. Davis, Erik (November 29, 2021). "'SPIDER-MAN: NO WAY HOME' PRODUCER AMY PASCAL REVEALS MORE ABOUT THE HISTORIC FILM AND CONFIRMS TOM HOLLAND'S FUTURE AS SPIDER-MAN". Fandango Media. Archived from the original on November 29, 2021. Retrieved November 29, 2021. "'Spider-Man' Animated Movie Coming in 2018". Variety. April 22, 2015. Archived from the original on December 11, 2017. Retrieved June 24, 2015. Gartenberg, Chaim (June 6, 2018). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse's new trailer looks incredible". The Verge. Archived from the original on June 6, 2018. Retrieved June 7, 2018. Perry, Spencer (December 22, 2015). "Emoji Movie, Animated Spider-Man and Peter Rabbit Get Release Dates". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on April 18, 2018. Retrieved December 23, 2015. Kit, Borys (June 20, 2016). "Sony Unveils Plans for Animated 'Spider-Man' and 'Emojimovie: Express Yourself'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 21, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2016. Schwartz, Terri (June 22, 2016). "Spider-Man Animated Movie Writers Phil Lord and Chris Miller Promise a 'Unique Filmgoing Experience'". IGN. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. Retrieved December 10, 2017. Mendelson, Scott (January 18, 2017). "Sony's Animated 'Spider-Man' Movie To Star Miles Morales". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 30, 2017. Retrieved January 24, 2017. Gonzalez, Umberto (February 28, 2017). "Sony's Animated 'Spider-Man' Movie Adds Alex Hirsch as Story Contributor (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 11, 2017. Retrieved April 28, 2017. Sobon, Nicole (April 26, 2017). "Sony's Animated Spider-Man Movie Release Date Pushed Up Verse'". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved March 30, 2018. Haring, Bruce (December 9, 2017). "'Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse' First Look Trailer Unveiled in Brazil". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 9, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2017. Hipes, Patrick (October 2, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse' Trailer: Miles Morales Has Company". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 3, 2018. Retrieved October 3, 2018. Weintraub, Steve (August 2, 2018). 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Directors on Miles Morales, 3D, and the Runtime. Collider. Archived from the original on August 9, 2018. Retrieved August 12, 2018. Lee, Chris (July 17, 2018). "How Will the Spider-Man Cinematic Universe Cast Its Web?". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved July 19, 2018. LaBonte, Rachel (March 22, 2020). "Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse Writer Reveals Complex Rewriting Process". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 23, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2022. Robinson, Joanna (December 14, 2018). "Sony Finally Untangles Its Spider Web". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 14, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Bisset, Jennifer. "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse almost had Tom Holland, Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield cameos". CNet. Archived from the original on June 17, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (June 29, 2019). "Tom Holland Met Miles Morales in Cut Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse Cameo". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved April 1, 2022. At one point, I was supposed to be in it Weintraub, Steve (December 11, 2017). "Here's How Peter Parker Factors into 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse'". Collider. Archived from the original on December 12, 2017. Retrieved December 12, 2017. Singer, Matt (December 4, 2018). "Tobey Maguire Was Considered for 'Spider-Verse's Peter Parker". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved February 22, 2019. Salemme, Danny (April 24, 2018). "Into The Spider-Verse Includes Classic Spider-Man Villains". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 5, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2018. Aames, Ethan (September 18, 2004). "Interview: Nicolas Cage on National Treasure". Cinema Confidential. Archived from the original on August 25, 2020. Retrieved October 10, 2007. Keck, William (September 1, 2000). "'Spider-Man' Casting Nic Cage?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Schmidt, JK (November 29, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Features Chris Pine in a Surprising Cameo". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 1, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. "Daniel Pemberton to Score 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse'". Film Music Reporter. July 24, 2018. Archived from the original on July 26, 2018. Retrieved July 25, 2018. Cowen, Trace (October 19, 2018). "Post Malone and Swae Lee's 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Collab "Sunflower" Is Here". Complex. Archived from the original on October 21, 2018. Retrieved October 19, 2018. "Spider-Man™: Into The Spider-Verse Original Score Music By Daniel Pemberton". PRnewswire. December 13, 2018. Archived from the original on December 13, 2018. Retrieved December 14, 2018. Evangelista, Chris (December 20, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Christmas Songs Being Released This Week; Hear 'Spidey-Bells' Now". /Film. Archived from the original on June 30, 2019. Retrieved December 20, 2018. "Christmas Songs from 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' to Be Released | Film Music Reporter". Film Music Reporter. December 20, 2018. Archived from the original on May 31, 2019. Retrieved December 20, 2018. "Elliphant Premieres New Song "To The End" from Computer Animated Film "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse"". PM Studio. January 29, 2019. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2020. Lussier, Germain (July 30, 2018). "It Took an Entire Year to Figure Out Into the Spider-Verse's Unique Style". io9. Archived from the original on June 23, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2018. Amidi, Amid (January 25, 2019). "Alberto Mielgo's Early Boards For 'Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse' Are Nothing Short Of Amazing". Cartoon Brew. Archived from the original on July 17, 2020. Retrieved July 17, 2020. Mielgo, Alberto. "Spiderman ― +". albertomielgo.com. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2021. Sony – Stories (December 17, 2018). Creating the groundbreaking style of Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse. Retrieved February 18, 2019. McNary, Dave (November 27, 2018). "Sony Developing 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel and Spinoff". Variety. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. "'We ended up making five movies': An exclusive look at Into the SpiderVerse's art style". Polygon. December 11, 2018. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved December 14, 2018. Morrissy, Kim (May 19, 2019). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse Directors Discuss Film's Japanese Anime Influences". Anime News Network. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Snyder, Chris (2019). "How Oscar-winning 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' changed comic book movies forever". Business Insider. Archived from the original on February 22, 2019. Bramesco, Charles (January 18, 2019). "How Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse Changed the Animation Game". Vulture. Retrieved March 9, 2024. ""If We Could Do Anything Our Own Way, What Would We Do?": A Conversation With 'Spider-Man' Co-Director Bob Persichetti". Cartoon Brew. December 18, 2018. Archived from the original on July 27, 2019. Retrieved December 20, 2018. Anderson, Jenna (January 9, 2019). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Designer on Creating the Film's Spider-Gwen". ComicBook.com. Paramount. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved January 17, 2019. Vary, Adam B. (April 19, 2021). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel Snares New Directing Trio (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Jirak, Jamie (January 4, 2019). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' VFX Supervisor Compares Film to 'The Hollow Man'". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Robinson, Joanna (December 14, 2018). "Spider-Man: 16 Into the Spider-Verse Easter Eggs and References You Might Have Missed". HWD. Archived from the original on December 23, 2018. Retrieved December 16, 2018. Yamato, Jen (July 6, 2017). "How Donald Glover wound up in 'Spider-Man: Homecoming,' and what it might mean for an inclusive future". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 29, 2018. Retrieved December 25, 2018. Cabin, Chris (December 9, 2017). "First 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Trailer Reveals Miles Morales' Big-Screen Debut". Collider. Archived from the original on December 9, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2017. Muncy, Julie (December 9, 2017). "Meet The Big-Screen Miles Morales in First Trailer for Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". io9. Archived from the original on December 9, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2017. Amidi, Amid (June 6, 2018). "TRAILER: 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Marks A Radical Shift For U.S. Feature Animation". Cartoon Brew. Archived from the original on June 30, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2018. Placido, Dani Di (June 6, 2018). "'Into The Spider-Verse' Trailer Shows The Amazing Adaptability Of Spider-Man". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 7, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 8, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse' Trailer Snares 44M Views; Ranks With Sony's Most Viral". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 9, 2018. Romano, Nick (October 6, 2018). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse unveils 35 minutes of footage at New York Comic Con". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 7, 2018. Retrieved October 6, 2018. Francisco, Eric (October 3, 2018). "'Venom' Post-Credits Scene Enters Another Marvel Universe". Inverse. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved October 4, 2018. Giardina, Carolyn (November 26, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Web AR Experience Launched". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 27, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 29, 2018). "Nike Air Jordans, Cruise Lines, & 12M Boxes Of Cereal Part Of 'Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse' $115M Promo Campaign". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 11, 2018). "Look Out, Here Comes 'The Spider-Verse': Sony Animation Title Eyes $30M-$35M Opening – Box Office Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 11, 2018. Retrieved December 11, 2018. Chuba, Kristen (December 2, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Stars Honor Stan Lee". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 3, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Bonomolo, Cameron (February 9, 2019). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Blu-ray Release Date and Exclusives Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Coogan, Devan (February 18, 2019). "Exclusive: Watch a clip from Spider-Ham's new 'Spider-Verse' short". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Eisenberg, Eric (February 25, 2019). "Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse Is Getting A Special Alt-Universe Cut". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved February 27, 2019. Carnoy, David (March 15, 2019). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse 4K Blu-ray looks and sounds fantastic". CNET. Archived from the original on January 23, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2021. BFI Statistical Yearbook 2020. United Kingdom: British Film Institute (BFI). 2020. p. 116. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Couch, Aaron (April 21, 2021). "Sony Films Will Move to Disney After Netflix Window Expires". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 25, 2023. Wit, Alex Dudok de (April 28, 2021). "Sony Films Will Head To Disney Platforms After Streaming On Netflix". Cartoon Brew. Retrieved March 25, 2023. "Spider-Man Into The Spider-Verse Added To Disney+ In Some Countries". ComicBook.com. Retrieved March 25, 2023. Mendelson, Scott (January 31, 2019). "A 'Batman Beyond' Movie Needs Michael Keaton Or Kevin Conroy". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 23, 2019. Retrieved January 31, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 16, 2018). "'Spider-Verse' Raises $35M+ As 'The Mule' Kicks Up $17M+ In Pre-Christmas Period, But 'Mortal Engines' Breaks Down With $7M+". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved December 16, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 23, 2018). "'Aquaman' Grabs $67M+ Weekend For $72M+ Cume; 2018 B.O. Poised To Pass $11.4B For New Record – Early Sunday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 23, 2018. Retrieved December 23, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 30, 2018). "'Aquaman' Sailing To $52M+ 2nd Weekend; $189M+ Cume Pacing Ahead Of 'Doctor Strange' & 'Guardians Of The Galaxy'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 31, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (January 6, 2018). "'Aquaman' Still The Big Man At The B.O. With $30M+; 'Escape Room' Packs In $17M+ – Early Sunday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved January 6, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 3, 2019). "'Dragon 3' Keeps The Fire Burning At No. 1 With $30M Second Weekend; 'Madea' Mints $27M". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 6, 2019. Retrieved March 3, 2019. "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on August 1, 2023. Retrieved January 20, 2024. "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Archived from the original on August 7, 2023. Retrieved June 12, 2021. Ehrlich, David (November 28, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Review: The Superhero Movie We Need". IndieWire. Penske Business Media. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved November 28, 2018. Jones, Oliver (November 30, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Is a Thrilling, Mind-Bending Joyride". Observer. Archived from the original on December 1, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2018. Oleksinski, Johnny (November 28, 2018). "'Into the Spider-Verse' is the best Spider-Man movie yet". The New York Post. Archived from the original on December 4, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Lemire, Christy (December 11, 2018). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on July 27, 2019. Retrieved July 6, 2019. McCarthy, Todd (November 28, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Bibbiani, William (December 12, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Film Review: Clever Superhero Saga With Animated Arachnids". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 13, 2018. Retrieved December 13, 2018. Chang, Justin. "Review: The terrific animated film 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' opens a whole new web of intrigue". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Sims, David (December 12, 2018). "If Only Superhero Movies Were More Like Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on December 22, 2018. Retrieved December 23, 2018. Walsh, Katie (December 13, 2018). "Terrific 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' opens new web of intrigue". Tribune News Service. Archived from the original on December 22, 2018. Retrieved December 23, 2018. "Tom Holland Praises Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". Comic Book Resources. December 16, 2018. Archived from the original on December 17, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Shafer, Ellise (June 3, 2023). "Tom Holland Says 'Into the Spider-Verse' Is the Best Spider-Man Movie, Not One of His Own". Variety. Retrieved June 10, 2023. "Chris Pratt Reviews 'Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse'". ComicBook.com. December 5, 2018. Archived from the original on December 6, 2018. Retrieved December 18, 2018. Oswalt, Patton [@pattonoswalt] (December 27, 2018). "I can't say enough about how BRILLIANT #IntoTheSpiderVerse is. This has been a non-stop year for me and I'm glad I'm ending it in such a cinematic high-note. Not only is it the best superhero film ever made, it's flat-out a game-changing MOVIE. Seeing it again tomorrow!" (Tweet). Retrieved September 23, 2019 – via Twitter. "Kevin Smith Says 'Into the Spider-Verse' Made Him Love Spider-Man on a Batman-Type Level". ComicBook.com. December 24, 2018. Archived from the original on December 25, 2018. Retrieved December 27, 2018. "Barry Jenkins Calls 'Into the Spider-Verse' the 'Best Spider-Man Film Ever'". IndieWire. December 23, 2018. Archived from the original on December 24, 2018. Retrieved December 27, 2018. Johnson, Rian [@rianjohnson] (January 7, 2019). "Ok I have seen the light- Into The Spider-Verse is truly next level stuff. I just walked out of the theater & am still buzzing but might be my new favorite super hero movie full stop" (Tweet). Retrieved September 23, 2019 – via Twitter. Johnson, Rian [@rianjohnson] (January 7, 2019). "I also feel like the influence of this movie is going to run deep. It's the Velvet Underground of superhero movies" (Tweet). Retrieved April 15, 2020 – via Twitter. "James Gunn's Favorite Superhero Movie Might Surprise You". CinemaBlend. May 26, 2020. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 9, 2020. "r/marvelstudios – Hi reddit, I'm Kevin Feige. AMAA". Reddit. May 15, 2019. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020. Retrieved September 9, 2020. O'Falt, Chris (December 28, 2018). "52 Directors Pick Their Favorite Movies of 2018". IndieWire. Retrieved December 28, 2018. Ryan, Danielle (December 14, 2021). "We Seem To Have Entered The Post-Into The Spider-Verse Phase Of Animation, And That's Great". /Film. Retrieved November 24, 2022. Hopewell, John (June 12, 2019). "Sony Pictures Animation Links to Tencent, Sets New Boondocks,' Tartakovsky Duo". Variety. Archived from the original on July 23, 2019. Retrieved June 16, 2021. Desowitz, Bill (April 29, 2021). "How The Mitchells vs. The Machines' Went Beyond the Spider-Verse' to Fight the Robot Apocalypse". IndieWire. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved June 16, 2021. "How 'The Bad Guys' shows off an animated Los Angeles in that spectacular car chase". Los Angeles Times. April 25, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. the paradigm-busting "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse." Motamayor, Rafael (June 14, 2022). "Puss In Boots: The Last Wish: The Shrek Spin-Off Gets A Spider-Verse-Inspired Makeover [Annecy]". /Film. Retrieved December 13, 2022. Robinson, Tasha (June 12, 2022). "Ms. Marvel's directors wanted their show to be 'Into the Spider-Verse in live action'". Polygon. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved July 1, 2022. The two men's admiration for Into the Spider-Verse's sheer visual density and energy heavily shaped the show Idelson, Karen (July 16, 2023). "Why 'Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles' Got a Makeover With Brand New CG Animation Style". Variety. Retrieved July 18, 2023. Reif, Alex (October 23, 2022). "LightBox Expo Recap: "Introducing Marvel's Moon Girl and Devil Dinosaur"". LaughingPlace.com. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Matadeen, Renaldo (October 20, 2022). "Entergalactic Homages Into the Spider-Verse's Animation Style – But Fails for One Reason". Comic Book Resources. Retrieved October 20, 2022. "Gundam Creator Yoshiyuki Tomino Expresses Thoughts on Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse Film". Anime News Network. April 25, 2022. Retrieved May 6, 2019. the paradigm-busting "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse." Erao, Math (March 16, 2023). "Into the Spider-Verse Impressed – And Scared – Pixar: 'You've Just Screwed Us'". Comic Book Resources. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Campbell, Kambole (June 7, 2023). "Why the Spider-Verse films are the greatest comic book movies ever made". BBC Online. Retrieved March 13, 2024. "Golden Globes Winners: The Complete List". Variety. January 6, 2019. Archived from the original on January 7, 2019. Retrieved January 7, 2019. "'Roma,' 'The Americans' and 'The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel' Win Top Critics' Choice Honors". Variety. January 13, 2019. Archived from the original on January 14, 2019. Retrieved January 14, 2019. McNary, Dave (February 24, 2019). "Oscars: 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Wins Best Animated Feature". Variety. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved February 25, 2019. Marrow, Brendan (February 24, 2019). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse becomes the first non-Disney film to win the animation Oscar in 7 years". The Week. Archived from the original on February 25, 2019. Retrieved March 5, 2019. "Best of 2018: Film Critic Top Ten Lists". Metacritic. Archived from the original on April 29, 2019. Retrieved April 13, 2020. Edelstein, David; Willmore, Alison; Ebiri, Bilge; and Bastién, Angelica Jade (December 11, 2019). "Every Movie of the 2010s, Ranked". Vulture. New York. Archived from the original on November 25, 2020. Retrieved December 13, 2019. Pedersen, Erik (December 6, 2021). "101 Greatest Screenplays Of The 21st Century: Horror Pic Tops Writers Guild's List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 6, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2023. Coggan, Devan (December 4, 2021). "Get a first look at 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (Part One)'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 20, 2022). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Heads To Summer 2023; Sony Dates 'Equalizer 3' Among Other Release Changes". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved October 9, 2023. McClintock, Pamela; Couch, Aaron (April 24, 2020). "'Spider-Man' Sequel Delays Release to November 2021 Amid Sony Date Shuffle". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 24, 2020. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (June 11, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Surpasses First Film's Entire Box Office Total After Just 12 Days". Variety. Archived from the original on June 11, 2023. Retrieved October 5, 2023. "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved January 30, 2024. Donnelly, Matt (July 28, 2023). "'Beyond the Spider-Verse' Taken Off Sony Release Calendar as Strikes Delay 'Kraven' and 'Ghostbusters' Sequel to 2024". Variety. Archived from the original on July 28, 2023. Retrieved July 31, 2023. Fleming, Mike Jr. (November 27, 2018). "Sony Builds Out Spider-Man Universe With A Spider-Women Film". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 27, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. Malkin, Marc (May 31, 2023). "'Spider-Man' Producers Tease Live-Action Miles Morales Movie and Animated 'Spider-Woman' Film: 'It's All Happening'". Variety. Retrieved March 14, 2024. Donnelly, Matt (December 18, 2018). "John Mulaney's Pitch for 'Spider-Ham' Film: Spotlight… but Family Friendly'". Variety. Archived from the original on January 16, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2020. Barnhardt, Adam (December 1, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Producers Want Spider-Ham Spinoffs". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 2, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. Barnes, Brooks (January 6, 2019). "Sony's Chief Plans to Make Entertainment Assets a Priority". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 9, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Goldberg, Lesley (April 29, 2019). "Phil Lord, Chris Miller Developing Marvel TV Universe With Nine-Figure Sony Overall Deal". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 30, 2019. Retrieved April 30, 2019. Patten, Dominic (August 7, 2019). "Spider-Man' Universe TV Series "Really Special", Chris Miller Says Of Sony Pictures TV Project". Deadline. Archived from the original on August 7, 2019. Retrieved July 20, 2021. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse. Wikiquote has quotations related to Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse. Official website Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse at IMDb Script Archived July 19, 2020, at archive.today. Additional archives: December 26, 2018. Portals:  United States  Film  Cartoon  Animation  Comedy  Food  Comics  2010s