10 Things I Hate About You is a 1999 American teen romantic comedy film directed by Gil Junger in his film directorial debut and starring Julia Stiles, Heath Ledger, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, and Larisa Oleynik. The screenplay by Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith is a modernization of William Shakespeare's comedy The Taming of the Shrew, retold in a late-1990s American high school setting. The film follows new student Cameron James (Gordon-Levitt) who is smitten with Bianca Stratford (Oleynik) and attempts to get bad boy Patrick Verona (Ledger) to date her antisocial sister Kat (Stiles) in order to get around her father's strict rules on dating. Named after a poem Kat writes about her romance with Patrick, the film was mostly shot in the Seattle metropolitan area, with many scenes filmed at Stadium High School in Tacoma, Washington. Released on March 31, 1999, 10 Things I Hate About You grossed over $60 million and received generally positive reviews from critics. It provided breakthrough roles for Stiles, Ledger, and Gordon-Levitt, all of whom were nominated for various teen-oriented awards. The film has since developed a cult following and is considered a classic in the teen film genre. Ten years later, it was adapted into a television reboot, which ran for 20 episodes and featured Larry Miller reprising his role as Walter Stratford. Cameron James, a new student at Padua High School in the Seattle area, immediately becomes smitten with beautiful and popular sophomore Bianca Stratford. Geeky Michael Eckman warns him that she is vapid and conceited, and that her overprotective single father Walter, an obstetrician worried about teenage pregnancy, does not allow her or her shrewish older sister Kat, a senior, to date. Kat is accepted to Sarah Lawrence College in New York, but Walter wants her to stay close to home and attend his alma mater, the University of Washington. Bianca wishes to date affluent senior Joey Donner, but Walter will not allow his daughters to date until they graduate. Frustrated by Bianca's insistence and Kat's rebelliousness, Walter relents and declares that Bianca may date only when Kat does, knowing that Kat's antisocial attitude will greatly complicate it. When Cameron asks Bianca out, she informs him of her father's new rule and suggests he find someone willing to date Kat so that she can freely date Joey. He selects Australian "bad boy" Patrick Verona, who initially frightens him with his attitude. Michael assists by convincing Joey to pay Patrick to take Kat out, believing that it will allow Joey to date Bianca. Patrick agrees to the deal, but Kat initially rebuffs his first few advances. After Michael and Cameron assist him by probing Bianca for information on Kat's preferences, Patrick begins to win Kat's interest. She goes to a party with him, which enables Bianca to tag along, greatly upsetting Walter. At the party, Kat becomes upset upon seeing Bianca with Joey, and responds by getting intoxicated. Patrick attends to her, and she starts to open up to him, expressing her interest in forming a band. When Kat attempts to kiss him, Patrick pulls away, causing her to depart, infuriated. Meanwhile, Bianca upsets Cameron by ignoring him for Joey, but soon realizes that Joey is indeed shallow and self-absorbed. When she asks Cameron to drive her home, he admits his feelings for her are indeed genuine and her treatment towards him has frustrated him, and she reconciliatory kisses him in response. Joey offers to pay Patrick to take Kat to the prom so he can take Bianca. He initially refuses, but relents when Joey offers him more money. Although Kat is still angry with Patrick, he eventually wins her over by serenading her, accompanied by the Padua High School marching band, with a performance of "Can't Take My Eyes Off You" by Frankie Valli, and she returns the favor by assisting him in sneaking out of detention. Their subsequent date turns romantic, but Kat becomes suspicious when Patrick insists that she accompany him to the prom, which she adamantly opposes. Irritated at not being asked to the prom by Cameron, Bianca accepts Joey's invitation, but Walter declines to allow it unless Kat accompanies her. Kat confesses to Bianca that she dated Joey when they were freshmen and, succumbing to peer pressure, had sexual intercourse with him, later regretting it. After Joey dumped her, she vowed against doing anything out of peer pressure. Bianca insists that she can decide her own life, so Kat agrees to attend the prom with Patrick, and Bianca decides to go with Cameron instead of Joey. At the prom, Bianca learns that Joey planned to have sexual intercourse with her that night. Angry that Bianca has spurned him for Cameron, Joey reveals his arrangement with Patrick, which causes Kat to leave, heartbroken. Joey then shoves Michael and punches Cameron, but Bianca then assaults him for having hurt her, Kat, and Cameron. Bianca and Cameron share another kiss. The following day, Bianca reconciles with Kat and begins dating Cameron. Comfortable that Kat can handle herself, Walter permits her to attend Sarah Lawrence College. For an assignment in which the students were tasked to write their own versions of William Shakespeare's Sonnet 141, Kat reads aloud a poem she composed, entitled "10 Things I Hate About You", revealing that she still loves and cares for Patrick. He surprises her with a Fender Stratocaster that he bought with the money Joey paid him, and confesses that he has fallen for her. Kat forgives him, and they reconcile with a kiss. Julia Stiles as Katarina "Kat" Stratford, the antisocial, shrewish elder Stratford sister Heath Ledger as Patrick Verona, the Australian "bad boy" hired to date Kat Joseph Gordon-Levitt (credited as Joseph-Gordon Levitt) as Cameron James, the new student at Padua High School who is smitten with Bianca and goes to great lengths to win her over Larisa Oleynik as Bianca Stratford, the younger Stratford sister, superficial and popular Larry Miller as Walter Stratford, an obstetrician and single parent who is overprotective of his daughters Andrew Keegan as Joey Donner, an affluent, self-absorbed high school senior and aspiring model who intends to have sex with Bianca, and to that end pays Patrick to date Kat David Krumholtz as Michael Eckman, a geek who assists Cameron in his quest to woo Bianca, and in the process tries to woo Kat's friend Mandella Susan May Pratt as Mandella, Kat's only close friend and an aficionado of William Shakespeare who falls for Michael Gabrielle Union as Chastity Church, Bianca's best friend who later becomes her enemy Daryl Mitchell as Mr. Morgan, teacher of Kat, Patrick, and Joey's English class Allison Janney as Ms. Perky, Padua High School's guidance counselor and a writer of erotic literature David Leisure as Mr. Chapin, coach of the girls' soccer team Greg Jackson as "Scurvy", a friend of Patrick Kyle Cease as Bogey Lowenstein, a golf enthusiast and member of a clique of aspiring MBAs The band Letters to Cleo (singer Kay Hanley, guitarists Greg McKenna and Michael Eisenstein, bassist Scott Riebling, and drummer Jason Sutter) appears as the band performing at Club Skunk, playing their songs "Come On" and "Co-Pilot", and a cover of Cheap Trick's "I Want You to Want Me" on the school's rooftop during the closing credits. Hanley and Eisenstein also appear in the prom scene, performing a cover of Nick Lowe's "Cruel to Be Kind" with Save Ferris. The band Save Ferris (singer Monique Powell, guitarist Brian Mashburn, bassist Bill Uechi, trumpeter José Castellaños, trombonist Brian Williams, saxophonist Eric Zamora, and drummer Evan Kilbourne) appears as the band performing at the prom, playing their songs "I Know" and "Can't Stop" as well as covers of The Isley Brothers' "Shout" and Nick Lowe's "Cruel to Be Kind". The script was finalized in November 1997. Many of the scenes were filmed on location at Stadium High School and at a house in the North End of Tacoma, Washington. The prom sequence was shot over three days in Seattle. Costume designer Kim Tillman designed original dresses for Oleynik and Stiles, as well as the period outfits for Pratt and Krumholtz. Union's snakeskin prom dress is a Betsey Johnson design. Ledger's and Gordon-Levitt's vintage tuxes came from Isadora's in Seattle. The scene where Patrick dances on the High School Bleachers, Ledger took inspirations from Showgirls and Fred Astaire. Filming took place from June 8 to August 6, 1998. Josh Hartnett and Ashton Kutcher were in the running to play Patrick. Eliza Dushku auditioned for the role of Kat. Katie Holmes was also considered for the role. Kate Hudson was offered the part but her mother, Goldie Hawn, didn't like the script, so she passed on the role. In its opening weekend, the film grossed $8.3 million in 2,271 theaters domestically (averaging $3,668 per venue), finishing second at the box office, behind The Matrix. It grossed a total of $38.2 million in the U.S. and Canada, and $15.3 million in other territories, for $53.5 million worldwide. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 71% based on 92 reviews, with an average rating of 6.3/10. The website's critics consensus states: "Julia Stiles and Heath Ledger add strong performances to an unexpectedly clever script, elevating 10 Things (slightly) above typical teen fare." Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 70 out of 100, based on 26 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale. Geoff Andrew from Time Out praised the film's leads, writing, "Stiles grows into her character, and Ledger is effortlessly charming." Brad Laidman of Film Threat said the film was "pure of heart and perfectly executed." Ron Wells, also of Film Threat, wrote, "Of all the teen films released this year, this one is, by far, the best." Roger Ebert gave the film two and a half stars out of four, saying that he "liked the movie's spirit, the actors and some of the scenes. The music, much of it by the band Letters to Cleo, is subtle and inventive while still cheerful. The movie almost but not quite achieves liftoff against the gravitational pull of the tired story formula." Entertainment Weekly put the film 49th on its list of Best High School Movies. 10 Things I Hate About You provided breakthrough roles for Stiles, Ledger, and Gordon-Levitt. Gordon-Levitt, Stiles, and Oleynik each received Young Star Award nominations for Best Actor/Actress in a Comedy Film. The movie was nominated for seven Teen Choice Awards: Choice Movie: Breakout Star (Stiles), Choice Movie: Comedy, Choice Movie: Funniest Scene (featuring Krumholtz), Choice Movie: Love Scene (featuring Stiles and Ledger), Choice Movie: Hissy Fit (Gordon-Levitt), Choice Movie: Villain (Andrew Keegan) and Choice Movie: Soundtrack. The film's casting directors Marcia Ross and Donna Morong won "Best Casting for Feature Film, Comedy" at the Casting Society of America in 1999. In 2000, Stiles won the CFCA Award for Most Promising Actress (tied with Émilie Dequenne in Rosetta) and an MTV Movie Award for Breakthrough Female Performance. Ledger was also nominated for an MTV Movie Award for Best Musical Performance for the song "Can't Take My Eyes Off You". The film's soundtrack album, featuring Letters to Cleo performing cover versions of Cheap Trick's "I Want You to Want Me" and Nick Lowe's "Cruel to Be Kind", stayed on the Billboard 200 chart for seven weeks, peaking at no. 52. Reviewer S. Peeples of AllMusic rated it 3 stars out of 5, calling it "one of the best modern rock soundtracks of the spring 1999 season". In June 1999, the Scholastic Corporation published a novelization of the story, adapted by David Levithan. The story is retold as it is in the film, with each chapter written from the point of view of either Bianca, Cameron, Kat, Patrick, or Michael. In October 2008, ABC Family ordered a pilot episode of 10 Things I Hate About You, a half-hour, single-camera comedy series based on the film. Larry Miller is the only actor from the film to reprise his role in the TV series. The director of the film, Gil Junger, directed many of the episodes, including the pilot; the film's composer, Richard Gibbs, also returned to do the show's music. The series was adapted and produced by Carter Covington. The show premiered on July 7, 2009, and ended on May 24, 2010, lasting 20 episodes. "10 Things I Hate About You (1999) – Financial Information". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved March 28, 2021. 10 Things I Hate About You at Box Office Mojo "Internet Movie Script Database". Imsdb.com. November 12, 1997. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2012. "10 Things I Hate About You". CinemaReview.com. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2008. "The Story Behind Heath Ledger's Bleacher Scene In '10 Things I Hate About You'". HuffPost. March 29, 2019. Kaplan, Ilana (March 27, 2019). "'10 Things I Hate About You': When Heath Ledger Was Just Breaking Through". The New York Times. "10 Things I Hate About You (1999)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on June 17, 2020. Retrieved July 18, 2023. "10 Things I Hate About You Reviews". Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved January 30, 2020. "Find CinemaScore" (Type "Ten Things" in the search box). CinemaScore. Archived from the original on January 2, 2018. Retrieved March 28, 2021. Andrew, Geoff. "10 Things I Hate About You Review". Time Out New York. Archived from the original on July 22, 2010. Retrieved September 19, 2009. Laidman, Brad. "10 Things I Hate About You". Film Threat. Archived from the original on January 23, 2013. Retrieved September 19, 2009. Wells, Ron (March 29, 1999). "Current Movie Reviews, Independent Movies". Film Threat. Archived from the original on January 13, 2009. Retrieved September 19, 2009. Ebert, Roger (March 31, 1999). "10 Things I Hate About You". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on June 20, 2008. Retrieved August 10, 2009. "50 Best High School Movies". EW.com. September 22, 2012. Archived from the original on March 7, 2014. Retrieved March 7, 2014. Aames, Ethan (June 5, 2006). "Julia Stiles on "The Omen"". Cinema Confidential News. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved October 28, 2006. Eisenbach, Helen (January 2000). "10 Things We Love About Julia Stiles". Manhattan File Magazine. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved October 28, 2006. Maher, Kevin (October 14, 2006). "Heath Ledger - The Accidental Hero". Times Sunday Magazine. Archived from the original on June 15, 2011. Retrieved October 28, 2006. "MTV Movie Award Nominations". Digital Spy. April 18, 2000. Retrieved September 7, 2022. "The Billboard 200". United States. May 1, 1999. Retrieved February 18, 2018. "The Billboard 200". United States. September 9, 1999. Archived from the original on July 30, 2021. Retrieved February 18, 2018. Peeples, S. "10 Things I Hate About You review". AllMusic. Retrieved February 18, 2018. "ARIA Charts – Accreditations – 2000 Albums" (PDF). Australian Recording Industry Association. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "British album certifications – Original Soundtrack – 10 Things I Hate About You". British Phonographic Industry. Retrieved December 4, 2022. "American album certifications – Soundtrack – 10 Things I Hate About You". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved December 4, 2022. 10 Things I Hate About You. New York: Scholastic. 1999. ISBN 0439087309. Nguyen, Hanh (October 8, 2008). "ABC Family Greenlights '10 Things I Hate,' 'Ruby' Pilots". Zap2it.com. Archived from the original on October 9, 2008. Retrieved October 8, 2008. "10 Things I Hate About You". ABC Family. Archived from the original on May 19, 2009. Retrieved June 17, 2009. Wikiquote has quotations related to 10 Things I Hate About You. 10 Things I Hate About You at IMDb 10 Things I Hate About You at the TCM Movie Database 10 Things I Hate About You at AllMovie