The European Wrestling Championships is the second oldest international wrestling competition of the modern world and the main wrestling championships in Europe. It predates World Wrestling Championships and other regional wrestling championships and is second only to the wrestling events at the Olympics. From its inception in 1898 till 1927 only Greco-Roman wrestling was contested. Since 1929 separate freestyle wrestling events were held as well. Since 1970 the two Olympic wrestling styles were contested together during the same unified events. Since 1973 Sambo wrestling was included into the championships programme along with GR and freestyle wrestling (subsequently discontinued and from 1983 contested separately). Since 2014 associated traditional wrestling styles recognized globally by UWW were incorporated into the annual championships schedule. Until 2005 there was held separate championships for each wrestling style. First women championships was held in 1988. FS : Freestyle / GR : Greco-Roman / LF : Women's Freestyle Until 2018 : 67 GR, 60 FS, 24 LF Updated after the 2024 European Wrestling Championships. At the 2024 European Championships, in accordance with sanctions imposed following by the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, wrestlers from Russia and Belarus were not permitted to use the name, flag, or anthem of Russia or Belarus. They instead participated as "Individual Neutral Athletes (AIN)", their medals were not included in the official medal table. The European U23 Wrestling Championships is main wrestling championships in Europe. As of 2023 European U23 Wrestling Championship The European Espoirs Wrestling Championships is main wrestling championships in Europe. LL : Freestyle / GR : Greco-Roman / LF : Women's Freestyle The European Juniors Wrestling Championships is main wrestling championships in Europe. LL : Freestyle / GR : Greco-Roman / LF : Women's Freestyle The European Cadets Wrestling Championships is main wrestling championships in Europe.