The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas is a 2000 American romantic comedy film directed by Brian Levant, written by Jim Cash, Harry Elfont, Deborah Kaplan, and Jack Epps, Jr., and is the prequel to Levant's The Flintstones (1994), based on the 1960–1966 animated television series of the same name. It is set before the events of both the series and the first film, showing how Fred and Barney meet Wilma and Betty. The title is a play on the Elvis Presley song, Viva Las Vegas, also used as the title of an MGM musical film. None of the original cast from the first film reprise their roles in this film. The film stars Mark Addy as Fred Flintstone, Stephen Baldwin as Barney Rubble, Kristen Johnston as Wilma Slaghoople, and Jane Krakowski as Betty O'Shale, replacing John Goodman, Rick Moranis, Elizabeth Perkins, and Rosie O'Donnell respectively. The supporting cast features Joan Collins, Thomas Gibson, Harvey Korman (in his final film performance), and Alan Cumming as both The Great Gazoo and Mick Jagged, a parody of Mick Jagger. William Hanna and Joseph Barbera, who created the original cartoon series, make cameo appearances at the end of the film. The film was a box office failure, grossing $59.5 million against its $83 million budget. It received mixed-to-negative reviews, though some critics considered it an improvement over the first film. Young bachelors and best friends Fred Flintstone and Barney Rubble have recently qualified as crane operators at Slate & Company. Soon to be employed, they hope to score dates, and a little green alien The Great Gazoo, exiled to Earth by his species, offers to help, although only they can see him. Meanwhile, Wilma Slaghoople wants a normal life, though her controlling mother Pearl wants her to marry suave casino-owner Chip Rockefeller. After Wilma angrily escapes to Bronto King in Bedrock, waitress Betty O'Shale, mistaking her as "caveless", offers to share her apartment and gets her a job. Smitten with the waitresses, the two men invite them to a carnival, with Fred dating Betty and Barney taking Wilma. However, the couples fail to bond until both men switch dates. Fred wins an egg in a carnival game which hatches into a baby dinosaur, which he names "Dino". Wilma invites her new friends home to a birthday party for her father, Colonel Slaghoople, where all are shocked by her wealth. Intending to propose, Fred changes his mind after meeting Chip, who mocks his low-level job at Slate & Company. Pearl despises the three new friends, but the Colonel, glad for Wilma's happiness, accepts them and privately gives Wilma a valuable pearl necklace that his great-grandmother once wore. After the boys humiliate themselves at dinner, Wilma nevertheless proclaims her pride and follows them out. Chip congratulates Fred on attracting Wilma, apologizes for lampooning Fred's job, and invites the group to his Rock Vegas resort as an olive branch. However, unbeknownst to the group, Chip plots to ensure Fred gambles so Wilma dumps him, whereas Fred sees it as a chance to win big so he can impress Wilma with money like Chip's. Gangsters Big Rocko and Little Rocko visit Chip and his girlfriend Roxie to collect a sum of money that Chip owes their boss. Gazoo overhears Chip claiming his upcoming marriage to Wilma will allow him to access the Slaghoople fortune. Considering that plan creditable, the gangsters agree to suspend collections until after the wedding. When Barney tries to keep Fred from high-stakes poker, Chip sends Roxie to seduce and escort Barney to an all-you-can-eat buffet. Chip keeps Fred gambling and he misses his dinner date with the others. Betty sees Barney wipe cream from Roxie's chest, misinterpreting the gesture as a pass. Mick Jagged comforts the weeping girl, and they go on a date. Wilma breaks up with Fred over not spending any time with her. Chip warns her of burglaries and arranges that Fred loses everything before slipping Wilma's pearls in Fred's pocket and asking him to empty them. Hotel security arrest Fred for robbery, but when Barney protests that Fred is incapable of robbery, Chip accuses Barney of being Fred's accomplice and also has him arrested. Hurt that the two stole from her, Wilma goes back to Chip. Gazoo visits the men in prison, revealing that Chip is severely indebted to the mob and hopes to solve both his problems by framing Fred for the robbery and marrying Wilma to get the Slaghooples' money. Barney slips through the bars, steals the keys, and unlocks the cell. Disguised in drag as dancers, they accidentally run into Jagged's dressing room. Barney tells Betty he loves her, and they reconcile after the misunderstanding involving Roxie at the buffet is cleared up. Fred plans to disguise himself as Jagged in an attempt to reconcile with Wilma. Meanwhile, in the audience, Chip proposes to an unimpressed Wilma. Fred then comes on stage disguised as Jagged and briefly sings to Wilma, apologizing for his behavior earlier before proposing to her. Knowing that she still loves Fred, Wilma happily accepts, rejecting Chip, and they marry in the Rock Vegas Chapel of Love. After the pastor proclaims them husband and wife, everyone sings "Meet the Flintstones". When Jagged sings "Viva Rock Vegas" at a party, Betty catches Wilma's tossed bouquet and kisses Barney. The newlyweds drive away with Dino and Gazoo to goodbye waves from their friends, family, and even a handcuffed Chip and Roxie. Mark Addy as Fred Flintstone, a crane operator. He was played by John Goodman in the first film. Stephen Baldwin as Barney Rubble, a crane operator and Fred's best friend. He was played by Rick Moranis in the first film. Kristen Johnston as Wilma Slaghoople, the heir to the Slaghoople fortune and Fred's love interest. She was played by Elizabeth Perkins in the first film. Jane Krakowski as Betty O'Shale, a waitress at Bronto King, Wilma's best friend and Barney's love interest. She was played by Rosie O'Donnell in the first film. Thomas Gibson as Chip Rockefeller, a casino owner who falls for Wilma. Alan Cumming as The Great Gazoo, an alien who befriends Fred and Barney. Cumming also portrays Mick Jagged, the Stones' English lead singer. Harvey Korman as Colonel Slaghoople, Wilma's father. Korman previously voiced the Great Gazoo in the original television series and the Dictabird in the first film. Joan Collins as Pearl Slaghoople, Wilma's mother. She was played by Elizabeth Taylor in the first film. Alex Meneses as Roxie, Chip's girlfriend who assists in his plot. Tony Longo as Big Rocko, a tough gangster who seeks to collect the money that Chip owes his unnamed boss. Danny Woodburn as Little Rocko, a short gangster who seeks to collect the money that Chip owes his unnamed boss. John Taylor as Keith Rockhard. Irwin Keyes as Joe Rockhead, reprising his role from the first film. Taylor Negron as Gazaam and Gazing, aliens from Gazoo's race. Mel Blanc (archive footage, voice) as Puppy Dino; Blanc previously voiced Barney, Dino and numerous characters in the original series. Mark Mangini provides additional vocal effects. William Hanna (special appearance) as himself Joseph Barbera (special appearance) as himself John Stephenson as the voice of the Showroom Announcer; Stephenson previously voiced a number of guest characters in the original series, most notably Mr. Slate and Count Rockula. Stephenson also voices the Minister who marries Fred and Wilma. Rosie O'Donnell as the voice of the Octopus giving Wilma and Betty massages; O'Donnell previously portrayed Betty in the first film. John Cho as Parking valet Kristen Stewart as Ring Toss Girl Steve Schirripa as Croupier Cheryl Holdridge as Genvieve, party guest of Wilma Jim Doughan as Dinosaur Confessor. Doughan previously portrayed a waiter in the first film. David Barclay (lead) Kevin Carlson Tom Fisher Terri Hardin Bruce Lanoil Michelan Sisti Allan Trautman Korman, who played Wilma's father Colonel Slaghoople, voiced The Great Gazoo in the animated series and also voiced the Dictabird in the first film. Stephenson, who voiced both the Showroom announcer and the Minister, voiced Mr. Slate in the animated series. John Goodman, Rick Moranis, Elizabeth Perkins, and Rosie O'Donnell, who played Fred, Barney, Wilma, and Betty, respectively in the first film, did not reprise their roles. Alan Cumming was the first actor cast. He was initially only supposed to play Gazoo, but after performing as Mick Jagged for the table read, it was decided he would play both roles. Ann-Margret, who had a memorable guest appearance on the original animated series as the title character in "Ann-Margrock Presents", sings the theme song, a slightly rewritten version of Viva Las Vegas. The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas opened theatrically on April 28, 2000, and earned $10,518,435 in its first weekend, ranking second to U-571's second weekend. The film ended its run on August 17, 2000, having grossed $35,268,275 domestically and $24,200,000 overseas for a worldwide total of $59,468,275. Based on an $83 million budget, the film was a box office failure. This was a disappointment compared to the first film's $358.5 million worldwide gross. On Rotten Tomatoes, The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas has a 25% score, based on 72 reviews, with an average rating of 4/10. The site's critical consensus states: "The prequel to the first full-length feature set in Bedrock, Viva Rock Vegas is a surprising improvement over The Flintstones. Aimed towards an audience of adults and children alike, critics feel Viva will appeal to a broad range of viewers." Metacritic reports a 27 out of 100 rating, based on 26 reviews, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, the same rating as its predecessor. The film was nominated for four Razzies at the 21st Golden Raspberry Awards: Worst Picture Worst Supporting Actor (Stephen Baldwin) Worst Supporting Actress (Joan Collins) Worst Remake or Sequel At the 2000 Stinkers Bad Movie Awards, it won the award for Worst Resurrection of a TV Show. It also received seven nominations in total; its other nominations were for:[citation needed] Worst Supporting Actor (Stephen Baldwin) Worst Song ("Viva Rock Vegas" by Ann-Margret) Worst On-Screen Hairstyle (Stephen Baldwin) Worst Remake or Sequel The Remake or Sequel Nobody Was Clamoring For Most Unfunny Comic Relief (Alan Cumming as The Great Gazoo and Mick Jagged) List of films set in Las Vegas "THE FLINTSTONES IN VIVA ROCK VEGAS (PG)". British Board of Film Classification. May 18, 2000. Retrieved April 10, 2016. "The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas (2000)". Box Office Mojo. Internet Movie Database. August 18, 2000. Retrieved April 10, 2016. "The Voice of Dino". markmangini.com. Retrieved July 28, 2023. "Flinstones". Cinefantastique, Volumes 31-32. F.S. Clarke. 1999. p. 28. Perlmutter, David, ed. (2018). The Encyclopedia of American Animated Television Shows. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 210–212. ISBN 9781538103746. Smith, Liz. "'Flintstones' Sequel Recast / '3rd Rock's' Johnston taking over as Wilma". Sfgate. "Alan Cumming on The Good Wife, The Great Gazoo, and how Stanley Kubrick reinvigorated his interest in acting". The A.V. Club. May 1, 2018. Retrieved February 3, 2024. Sawyer, Alan (May 1, 2022). "How Ann Margrock Changed The Flinstones History". Rare. "Weekend Box Office Results for April 28-30, 2000". Box Office Mojo. Internet Movie Database. May 1, 2000. Retrieved April 10, 2016. "'U-571' Runs Noisy, Runs Strong". The Los Angeles Times. May 2, 2000. Retrieved November 10, 2010. "The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. April 28, 2000. Retrieved January 29, 2016. "The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved January 29, 2016. "Find CinemaScore" (Type "The Flintstones In Viva Rock Vegas" in the search box). CinemaScore. Retrieved April 7, 2021. "2001 Razzies Awards". bureau42. March 24, 2001. "'Battlefield Earth' sweeps the Stinkers". Deseret News. March 25, 2001. The Universal logo at the beginning of the film reads "Univershell". Wikiquote has quotations related to The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas. Official website The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas at IMDb The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas at Box Office Mojo The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas at Rotten Tomatoes The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas at Metacritic