Wikiquote has quotations related to Grandads-Robbers. Old Robbers (Russian: Старики́–разбо́йники, romanized: Stariki-razboyniki, lit. "elderly bandits") is a 1972 Soviet crime comedy-drama by Eldar Ryazanov, filmed on Mosfilm. The movie title resembles the name of a Russian children's traditional yard game Cossacks-Robbers (Russian: казаки–разбойники, romanized: kazaki-razboyniki). Old detective Nikolay Myachikov is being retired by his boss Fedyaev. The official version is that Myachikov has solved no crimes for the last two months, but the real reason is that Fedyaev's boss wants Myachikov's position to go to another man, Proskudin. Fedyaev gives Myachikov a month to show he should not lose his job. Myachikov's best friend, engineer Valentin Vorobyov, is also due to retire but wants to stay on. He suggests to Myachikov that they set up the biggest crime ever and then solve it together so they will be allowed to continue working. Their first idea is to steal a Rembrandt painting from a museum. The plan fails when no one notices that the canvas is missing, believing the note the thieves left saying it has been removed for restoration. Without great difficulty, Myachikov and Vorobyov sneak the picture back. Their next plan is to enlist the help of Myachikov's neighbour, Anna Pavlovna, a bank employee. Their plan to stage a robbery and pretend to recover the loot goes away when an actual robber intervenes. The trio struggle to understand what has happened, how to make restitution, and return to their honest lives. Yuri Nikulin — Nikolay Sergeevitch Myachikov Yevgeny Yevstigneyev — Valentin Petrovich Vorobyov Olga Aroseva — Anna Pavlovna Suzdaleva Georgi Burkov — Fyodor Fyodorovitch Fedyaev Andrei Mironov — Yury Yevgenyevitch Proskudin Valentina Vladimirova — Masha, Vorobyov's wife Yuri Belov — Petya, militsiaman Roman Filippov — robber Nina Agapova — museum keeper Irina Murzaeva — old museum keeper Lev Durov — driver of the collector car Boris Runge — shoes shop director Gotlib Roninson — doctor Yuri Smirnov — locksmith Georgi Kulikov — Vorobyov's colleague Viktor Bajkov — Vorobyov's colleague Yevgeni Perov — Vorobyov's colleague Natalya Sajko — Vorobyov's colleague Boris Vladimirov [ru] — Vorobyov's colleague Aleksandr Shirvindt — spokesman of the minister Eldar Ryazanov — Myachikov's colleague Yuri Yakovlev — narrator (voice) Grandads-Robbers at IMDb Grandads-Robbers at AllMovie v t e v t e