Turner & Hooch is a 1989 American buddy cop comedy film starring Tom Hanks and Beasley the Dog as the eponymous characters respectively. The film also co-stars Mare Winningham, Craig T. Nelson and Reginald VelJohnson. It was directed by Roger Spottiswoode and co-written by Daniel Petrie Jr., who also served as an executive producer. Touchstone Pictures acquired the screenplay for Turner & Hooch for $1 million, which was the highest amount ever paid by Touchstone for any script at the time. Despite earning mixed reviews, the film was a box office success and opened in the number 1 position. Following the film's success, it spawned a franchise, including a television movie sequel and a legacy sequel television series. Scott Turner is a police investigator in Cypress Beach, California. Bored with his current work, Turner is set to transfer to a better position in Sacramento, leaving fellow investigator David Sutton to replace him. Turner shows David around in the three days left before his transfer, meeting with long time friend Amos Reed for a final time. The two investigators are then called to the discovery of $8,000 found at the local beach. That same evening, Amos is murdered by an affiliate of local seafood magnate Walter Boyett when Amos reveals his suspicions of Boyett's operations. Turner is alerted to the crime the next morning, resulting in Scott taking custody of Hooch, Amos' pet Dogue de Bordeaux and the only witness to his murder. Scott immediately takes Hooch to the new town veterinarian, Emily Carson, and pleads for her to take Hooch as he has no dog-handling experience. However, Emily insists that Hooch will be good for Scott, who lives alone. Immediately returning home, Hooch's noisy, destructive nature clashes intensely with Scott's meticulous routine and lifestyle. Scott leaves Hooch alone one night to buy dog food, only to return to find his home completely ransacked by Hooch unintentionally. Furious, Scott kicks Hooch out, only for him to return later with Emily's female collie, Camille. Scott unsuccessfully attempts to jettison Hooch while returning Camille to the veterinary clinic, but Emily invites Scott inside, and the two proceed to continue painting the house that Emily earlier abandoned for the night. Their mutual attraction begins to flourish. Scott takes Hooch to the police precinct the next day, where a wedding occurs just across the street. Hooch recognizes the wedding photographer as Amos' killer and gives chase. Although he escapes, Scott is able to identify the killer as Zack Gregory, a former Marine with several prior arrests who also fits the profile of Amos' killing (Scott had earlier speculated that Amos' murderer must have had special experience based upon Amos' stab wound). Scott also speculates that Amos was not murdered in a robbery attempt, but in order for Zack to cover up an illegal operation near to where he lived. This theory matches with Amos' regular complaints to Scott about the noises he heard going on at Boyett Seafood, the company that has Zack registered as an employee. Celebrating the approval to search Boyett Seafood, Scott treats Hooch but notices his refusal to eat. Scott considers this a consequence of Amos' death and they start to establish a closer bond. The next day, the police search Boyett Seafood, but find no evidence of any illegal activity. With his transfer pending the following day, Scott is relieved of responsibility for the case, which is given to David by Police Chief Howard Hyde. Frustrated with reaching a dead end in the case, Scott meets with Emily, leading the two to spend the night together. In a eureka moment, Scott finally realizes why the earlier search of Boyett Seafood turned up nothing—instead of searching for imports, Boyett Seafood was actually exporting goods. Armed with this new lead, Scott takes Hooch back to the factory to stake-out. The following morning, David arrives upon Scott's request with the earlier recovered $8,000 from the beach. On a hunch, Scott commands Hooch to trace the scent of the money to anything he can find within the factory, ultimately returning with the exact type of bag the cash was discovered in. Scott travels to the Lazy Acres Motel, the false address at which Zack Gregory was listed as a tenant. Scott interrogates the Motel owner into revealing where Zack is, only to be held up at gunpoint by him moments later. Zack orders Scott into his Cadillac Coupe de Ville to drive away, but Scott crashes the car into a concrete barrier, propelling Zack through the windshield and pinning him down by the neck, while assistance is provided by Hooch. Scott interrogates Zack, who reveals that he killed Amos, and also reveals that Walter Boyett is in on the illegal money trade going on at his factory, but is not in charge of it, to Scott's surprise. Scott returns with Hooch to the factory and is unexpectedly joined by Chief Hyde. Already suspicious of Zack's earlier confession, Scott confronts Hyde, believing him to be in charge of the money laundering operation at the docks, using the gigantic ice cubes to hide the cash being sent out of the country. A gunfight soon occurs pitting Scott against Hyde and Boyett. Hooch is able to ambush Boyett from above, although Boyett shoots Hooch in the process. Confronting Hyde, Scott is seemingly coerced by the corrupt Police Chief to frame Boyett, who is subsequently killed by Hyde. However, Hyde knows that Scott is an entirely honest police officer, and calls his bluff. A mortally wounded Hooch manages to get up, and briefly distract Hyde long enough for Scott to kill him. Scott races to Emily's clinic to tend to Hooch, who has suffered severe blood loss, and eventually dies. Later, Turner is made police chief while Sutton becomes the leading investigator. Turner also marries Emily, with the couple now caring for Camille and her litter of puppies, one of whom looks and acts exactly like Hooch. Tom Hanks as Detective Scott Turner Beasley the Dog as Hooch Mare Winningham as Dr. Emily Carson Craig T. Nelson as Chief Howard Hyde Reginald VelJohnson as Det. David Sutton Scott Paulin as Zack Gregory J. C. Quinn as Walter Boyett John McIntire as Amos Reed David Knell as Ernie Ebbe Roe Smith as Harley McCabe Kevin Scannell as Jeff Foster Joel Bailey as Ferraday Mary McCusker as Katie Ernie Lively as Motel Clerk Clyde Kusatsu as Kevin Williams Elaine Renee Bush as Store Clerk Eda Reiss Merin as Mrs. Remington Hooch's real name was Beasley, and he was a Dogue de Bordeaux (French mastiff). He had a stunt double named Igor, and Animal Makers created an exact replica of Hooch for the death scene.[citation needed] Beasley was born in a dog kennel in Merrimac, Wisconsin, owned by Peter Curley. Beasley was later purchased along with three other dogs for production of the film. The dogs were trained by Clint Rowe, who makes a brief appearance in the film as an ASPCA officer. Beasley died in 1992, aged 14. It was rumored for years — and confirmed by their friend, actor and director Ron Howard in 2020 — that Henry Winkler, the original director, and Hanks had a falling-out on the set which led to Winkler's replacement by Spottiswoode. According to Winkler, he was fired thirteen days into the production by studio executive Jeffrey Katzenberg. Winkler said of his firing: "Let's just say I got along better with Hooch than I did with Turner." Though primarily filmed in San Pedro, on locations scenes were also filmed in Monterey, Pacific Grove, and Moss Landing, California. "Cypress Beach" is fictional, using mostly Pacific Grove for shots such as the police department, the wedding foot chase, and the car chase down Ocean View Ave. Hanks later said that Turner & Hooch was one of the more demanding experiences he had making a film because he had to act around the dog's reactions. In a 2001 interview with Larry King, Hanks recalled: "There's one scene in there, it's a stakeout scene. I'm staking out a scene of a crime with my dog Hooch. And we shot that scene for 16 hours with three different [cameras], they were always rotating. We had a car on the set that was surrounded by bungee-cams, literally cameras that were hanging from bungee-cords. And the whole thing was about, whatever this dog does, I react to. We will not ask the dog to do anything specifically, this dog will just do things". The film was a box office success, opening in first place at $12,211,042. It grossed a domestic total of $71,079,915 on a budget of $13 million. Turner & Hooch gained a mixed response from critics, with a 50% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 28 reviews. The critical consensus reads: "Tom Hanks makes Turner and Hooch more entertaining than it might look on paper, but ultimately, this is still a deeply silly comedy about a cop and a canine". Critics praised Hanks' performance, The Odd Couple-like plot, and the chemistry between the actor and the dog, with Michael Wilmington of the Los Angeles Times writing, "They work together with the seeming near-telepathic sensitivity of longtime vaudeville partners." He added, "One reason 'Big' worked well was the unself-conscious way that Hanks projects boyish qualities of enthusiasm, curiosity, petulance, candor, spontaneity. He really looks and acts like a kid at heart, and, in this movie, he looks like a fussbudget of a kid who needs a good, big, sloppy dog to warm him out." The screenplay, which is attributed to five different writers, was criticized for its dissonant jumble of genres, including a buddy cop film, a man-and-his-dog film, a crime film, and a romance. Wilmington commented, "It’s good that 'Turner and Hooch' has this chemistry at its center, due to the actors and to Beasley's ingenious trainer, Clint Rowe, because it's another movie that seems stranded without a script, somewhere south of the last deal and east of the fifth rewrite." Caryn James of The New York Times gave a mixed review but concluded: "Mr. Hanks is a brilliant understated comedian, who rises to the level of his best material, as he did in Big and who has the intelligence and charm to rise above his weaker roles. He is the best part of this film, first screaming at Hooch and threatening death, then getting so friendly he shares a bite of the dog's biscuit. He even tries a funny human version of Hooch's jowl-shaking. It isn't his fault that the five writers don't come up with five funny lines or one exciting scene." The film was also compared to K-9, another dog and cop buddy film that was released earlier that year. In The Washington Post, Desson Thomson wrote, "We all know Tom's gonna warm up to that pooch Hooch, because in Hollywood a dog is always man's best friend. And Hanks, who can even grace a film such as 'The 'Burbs,' is always a movie's best friend." Variety wrote, "Until its grossly miscalculated bummer of an ending, Turner & Hooch is a routine but amiable cop-and-dog comedy enlivened by the charm of Tom Hanks and his homely-as-sin canine partner." Turner & Hooch has been referred to in various films and television shows, including the NBC/ABC medical sitcom Scrubs, in which main characters J.D. and Turk modify shift schedules so that Doctors Turner and Hooch are teamed up as a surgical team in the episode "My Faith in Humanity". In the episode, Doctor Turner was played by Jim Hanks, Tom Hanks' brother. Another episode had Turk offended at JD's assumption that Turner and Hooch was an interracial buddy movie, an assumption made based on the aforementioned Hooch. In the second season of Castle, Beckett and Castle compare themselves to Turner and Hooch. This comparison returned in the Castle season 7 episode "Kill Switch". During an appearance on Late Night with Conan O'Brien, O'Brien gave Tom Hanks a preserved dog skeleton, claiming it was his old friend Hooch. As one of O'Brien's first guests on The Tonight Show, Hanks improvised a song from an alleged Turner & Hooch stage musical. During the 2006 Academy Awards, Tom Hanks played in a segment about acceptance speeches that ran on too long. In his comedic lengthy speech, he thanked Hooch. The 2014 Tamil film Naaigal Jaakirathai is based on this film. In April 2015, actor Richard Dreyfuss and Christine Turner Wagner, widow of Turner & Hooch producer Raymond Wagner, sued The Walt Disney Company over profits from Turner & Hooch and What About Bob? (1991), a Touchstone release Dreyfuss had starred in. They accused Disney of refusing to allow a firm specializing in profit participation to audit the returns from the movies. Dreyfuss withdrew his claim a day later. Disney eventually allowed the audit to proceed. The auditors determined that Disney had made a profit of $32 million and that Wagner had been denied her share. Disney settled with Wagner in June 2018; the terms of the settlement were not disclosed. NBC made a television pilot based on the film in 1990. Though the show was not ordered to series, the pilot was released as a television film. It aired in the summer with another dog pilot, "Poochinski" under the banner, "Two Dog Night". In February 2020, a new television series remake was announced to be greenlit for the streaming service Disney+. Matt Nix developed the series along with an order of 12 episodes. Josh Peck portrays the ambitious and buttoned-up U.S. Marshal Scott Turner who inherits a big unruly dog coming to realise that the pet he did not want may be the partner he needs. In the same month Lyndsy Fonseca and Carra Patterson joined the cast as Laura, Scott's sister, and Jessica, Scott's partner, respectively. On March 6, Vanessa Lengies joined the cast as Erica, the chief trainer of the K-9 facility. The Disney+ series premiered on July 21, 2021. "Turner & Hooch (1989)". British Board of Film Classification. Retrieved July 29, 2021. Broeske, Pat H. (May 20, 1990). "Shoot-Out at the Box Office : Hollywood's awash in money; the upcoming movie budgets are off the charts; what does it all mean? It's action summer!". Los Angeles Times. "Turner & Hooch (1989)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved November 23, 2009. Barnes, Mike (September 15, 2016). "Dennis Shryack, Screenwriter on Clint Eastwood's 'The Gauntlet' and 'Pale Rider,' Dies at 80". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 5, 2016. "Beasley wins 'Hooch' pooch cattle call". Los Angeles Daily News. July 31, 1989. p. 9C. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Here Are 11 Facts About "Turner & Hooch" For You To Slobber Over". Throwbacks. December 28, 2017. Retrieved December 20, 2020. Cormier, Roger (December 27, 2017). "12 Fun Facts About Turner & Hooch". Mental Floss. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Beasley/Hooch". nationalpurebreddogday.com. March 31, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Andreeva, Nellie (December 10, 2020). "'Turner & Hooch': First Look At Canine Co-Lead Hooch In Disney+ Series Reboot". Deadline. Retrieved December 20, 2020. Freeman, Hadley (September 22, 2020). "Ron Howard: 'I'm introverted and risk-averse. But not when there's a story to be told'". The Guardian. Retrieved December 20, 2020. "Turner & Hooch (1989)". AFI Catalog of Feature Films. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Spellberg, Claire (October 4, 2019). "Henry Winkler Shades Tom Hanks After 'Turner & Hooch' Firing: "Love That Dog"". Decider. Retrieved December 20, 2020. Rosen, Christopher (January 22, 2020). "Henry Winkler Says He Has No Beef With Tom Hanks". Vanity Fair. Retrieved December 20, 2020. Lipton, Michael A. (April 12, 1993). "How Now, Mr. Fonzarelli?". People. Vol. 39, no. 14. Archived from the original on June 3, 2009. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Turner & Hooch (1989)". Film Oblivion. August 12, 2020. Retrieved December 26, 2020. "Turner & Hooch". Monterey County Film Commission. Retrieved December 26, 2020. "Tom Hanks' Career From 'Bonfire of the Vanities' to 'Saving Private Ryan'". Larry King Live. February 17, 2001. CNN. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Turner & Hooch (1989)". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Wilmington, Michael (July 28, 1989). "MOVIE REVIEWS : Hanks and His Dog Charm in 'Turner and Hooch'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 13, 2024. James, Caryn (July 28, 1989). "Review/Film; A Droll Buddy Who Drools And Eats a Stereo Speaker". The New York Times. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Thomson, Desson (July 28, 1989). "'Turner & Hooch' (PG)". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Turner & Hooch review". Variety. 1989. Archived from the original on August 31, 2010. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Rowles, Dustin (September 7, 2016). "Mindhole Blowers: You May Have Missed the Greatest Inside Joke in 'Scrubs' History". Pajiba. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "My Boss' Free Haircut". Scrubs. Season 4. Episode 20. March 29, 2005. "Deep in Death". Castle. Season 2. Episode 1. September 21, 2009. ABC. "Kill Switch". Castle. Season 7. Episode 8. November 24, 2014. ABC. "Conan Helps Tom Hanks Get Into The Christmas Spirit". Late Night with Conan O'Brien. December 22, 2000. NBC. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "Tom Hanks/Green Day". The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien. Season 1. Episode 2. June 2, 2009. NBC. "An Insider's Guide: What Nominees Need to Know". Academy Awards. Retrieved January 13, 2024 – via YouTube. Srinivasan, Sudhir (November 22, 2014). "Naaigal Jaakirathai: An 'inspired' film that loses steam midway". The Hindu. Chennai. Retrieved September 30, 2015. "Bytes galore from Idoh". The Hindu. Chennai. November 12, 2014. Retrieved September 30, 2015. Shoard, Catherine (April 10, 2015). "Richard Dreyfuss sues Disney over What About Bob? 24 years after release". The Guardian. Retrieved April 20, 2015. Gardner, Eriq (April 9, 2015). "Richard Dreyfuss Sues Disney Over 'What About Bob?'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 20, 2015. Patten, Dominic (April 9, 2015). "Disney Slammed By Richard Dreyfuss Over 'What About Bob?' Profits". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 20, 2015. "Disney Settles Suit Over Hanks Film Profits". MyNewsLA.com. June 27, 2018. Retrieved December 26, 2020. Rosenberg, Howard (July 9, 1990). "The Dog Days and Nights of Summer". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 13, 2017. Retrieved April 29, 2019. Andreeva, Nellie (February 10, 2020). "'Turner & Hooch': Josh Peck To Headline TV Series Reboot For Disney+". Deadline. Retrieved February 11, 2020. Andreeva, Nellie (February 26, 2020). "'Turner & Hooch': Lyndsy Fonseca & Carra Patterson To Star In TV Series Reboot For Disney+". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 26, 2020. Andreeva, Nellie (March 6, 2020). "'Turner & Hooch': Vanessa Lengies Joins TV Series Reboot For Disney+". Deadline. Retrieved March 6, 2020. Pedersen, Erik (February 24, 2021). "Disney+ Sets Premiere Dates, First Images For 'Turner & Hooch', 'Mysterious Benedict Society', 'Chip 'N' Dale: Park Life' & 'High School Musical: The Series'". Deadline. Retrieved February 24, 2021. Ausiello, Michael (June 16, 2021). "Disney+ Officially Moves Original Series 'Drop Day' From Friday to Wednesday in Wake of Loki's Record-Setting Launch". TVLine. Retrieved July 20, 2021. Wikiquote has quotations related to Turner & Hooch. Turner & Hooch at IMDb Turner & Hooch at the TCM Movie Database Turner & Hooch at AllMovie Turner & Hooch at the American Film Institute Catalog Turner & Hooch at Rotten Tomatoes