The IHF Men's Handball World Championship has been organized indoor by the International Handball Federation since 1938. In the twenty-eight tournaments held, twelve national teams have won the title. France is the most successful team with six titles, followed by Sweden and Romania with four titles each. The current champion is Denmark, which won its third consecutive title at the 2023 tournament in Poland and Sweden. The first indoor championship took place in Germany in 1938, involving four teams from Europe made up of 7 players who competed in a round robin stage to find a winner. It wouldn't be until sixteen years later where the second World Championship was held in the country of Sweden. Throughout their history, the World Championships have been dominated by European teams, with no medals being won by non-European countries until 2015, by Qatar. Over the years, the organization of the World Championships has changed. Initially, there were group games in both the preliminary and main rounds, but since the 1995 edition a knockout system has been applied after the preliminary round. Legend 1st – Champions 2nd – Runners-up 3rd – Third place 4th – Fourth place 5th – Fifth place 6th – Sixth place 7th – Seventh place 8th – Eighth place 9th – Ninth place 10th – Tenth place 11th – Eleventh place 12th to 24th – Twelfth to twenty-fourth place Q — Qualified for upcoming tournament  ••  — Qualified but withdrew  •  — Did not qualify  ×  — Did not enter / Withdrew from the World Championship / Banned    — Hosts List of hosts by number of championships hosted. Draws include knockout matches decided in a penalty shootout. Boldface denotes active handball players and highest medal count among all players (including these who not included in these tables) per type. * Including one medal won at the 1959 World Outdoor Field Handball Championship The table shows players who have won at least 6 medals in total at the World Championships. The record-holder for scored goals in a single World Championship is Kiril Lazarov. He scored 92 goals for Macedonia in nine matches at the 2009 World Championship. IHF World Women's Handball Championship IHF World Men's Outdoor Handball Championship In 1954, Germany sent a team fully composed of players from the West Germany. In 1958 and 1961, Germany sent a united team composed of players from the West Germany and the East Germany. Russia's total includes one appearance as Russian Handball Federation in 2021. Not including 2021 results (3 victories, 1 draw and 2 loses in 6 matches) because the team participated as the Russian Handball Federation in accordance with a ban by WADA and a decision by CAS. "Danmark vinder VM for tredje gang i streg efter drama" (in Danish). TV 2. 29 January 2023. "IHF official website – Men's World Championships – Statistics (1938–2009)" (PDF). IHF. Official website IHF official website – Competition History IHF official website – Men's World Championships IHF official website – Men's World Championships – Statistics (1938–2009) All time statistics with link to all results and all medal winners All time medal winners