Baltijos Futbolo Akademija, BFA is a Lithuanian football club based in Vilnius, established as an extension of the youth football academy. The football academy was established in 2007. The club has been participating in the Children and Youth Football Championships organized by the Lithuanian Football Federation as well as international football tournaments. The club has been organizing football tournaments in Vilnius. The BFA team took part in the LFF II lyga championship for the first time. The team finished in eighth position, and announced that the team will seek I Lyga license. The BFA did not qualify for promotion to I Lyga, however the club applied for a license anyway and after an appeal was awarded with one, having met the league criteria. The BFA entered into partnership with FK Vilnius club, who offered an addition of several senior players. The venture took on FK Vilnius name, which was approved by the Lithuanian Football Federation. The team was allowed to participate in I Lyga under the BFA license. The league newcomer was expected to fight for higher places in the league and possibly even contest promotion to the top tier A Lyga. However, the team struggled and were in the relegation zone for the first half of the season. The team improved in the second half and managed to finish 11th. The club announced that the partnership with FK Vilnius is coming to an end. FK Vilnius announced that they are withdrawing from the I Lyga, and will seek II Lyga license, whereas BFA announced that the club wants to continue playing in I Lyga and will seek the license. In February the I Lyga license was approved. Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality. Blue and white "Pirmos lygos licencijavime dalyvaus vienas seniausių Lietuvos futbolo klubų". LFF.lt. ""Baltijos Futbolo Akademija" ir futbolo klubo "Vilnius" pasirašė bendradarbiavimo sutartį | LFF I Lyga". www.pirmalyga.lt. 7 June 2021. "2020 m. sezono I lygos licencijų sieks 14 futbolo klubų ir komandų". LFF.lt. "Futbolas.lt – Lietuvos futbolo naujienos". www.sportas.lt. "BFA komanda tęs dalyvavimą I-os lygos čempionate". sportas.lt. "Lithuanian 2018 LFF 2 Lyga Zone West". "Lithuania 2019". RSSSF. "Lithuania 2020". RSSSF. "Lithuania 2021". RSSSF. "Lithuania 2022". RSSSF. Official club website Official Facebook page