Trinidad and Tobago first participated in the Summer Olympic Games in 1948, before they attained their independence from Great Britain. Despite being a small nation in the Caribbean, Trinidad and Tobago has been able to place themselves firmly in international sports. In 1946, Sir Lennox O’Reilly organized the nation’s first Olympic committee. Trinidad and Tobago have participated in sixteen Summer Olympiads and three Winter Olympics (as well as two Summer Paralympics). The Games of the XIV Olympiad were held in 1948 in London, United Kingdom. This was the first time Trinidad & Tobago was represented in the Olympics. The Trinidad & Tobago Olympic Committee sent nine athletes and officials to represent the nation in three disciplines. Errol Knowles was the Chef de Mission Three athletes and one official represented this discipline. George Lewis- 100 m & 200 m Manny Ramjohn- 500 m & 1000 m Wilfred Tull- 800 m & 1500 m A.E. Browne- Manager/Coach Trinidad & Tobago did not win any medals in 1948 for this discipline. One athlete and one official represented this discipline. Compton Gonsalves- Kilometer Time Trial Laurie Rogers- Manager/Coach Trinidad & Tobago did not win any medals in 1948 for this discipline. Compton Gonsalves placed 17th in the kilometer time trial with a time of 1 minute and 32 seconds. One athlete and one official represented this discipline. Rodney Wilkes- Featherweight Lionel Seemungal- Manager/Coach Rodney Wilkes won the first medal for Trinidad and Tobago lifting 317.5 kilograms in three lifts. The Games of the XV Olympiad were held in 1952 in Helsinki, Finland. This was the second time Trinidad & Tobago was represented in the Olympics. The Trinidad & Tobago Olympic Committee sent four athletes and officials to represent the nation in one discipline. Errol Knowles was the Chef de Mission Two athletes and one official represented this discipline. Rodney Wilkes- Featherweight Lennox Kilgour- Middle Heavy Freddy Mendes- Coach Both athletes won medals for Trinidad & Tobago. Rodney Wilkes lift 322.5 kilograms and Lennox Kilgour lift 402.5 kilograms. The Games of the XVI Olympiad were held in 1956 in Melbourne, Australia. This was the third time Trinidad & Tobago was represented in the Olympics. The Trinidad & Tobago Olympic Committee sent eight athletes and officials to represent the nation in one discipline. Dr. Roderick Marcano was the Chef de Mission. Three athletes represented this discipline. Mike Agostini - 100 m & 200 m Joseph Goddard - 100 m & 200 m Edmund Turton Michael Agostini placed 6th in the 100 m and 4th in the 200 m. One athlete represented this discipline. Hilton Mitchell- Match Sprint & Kolo Time Trial Two athletes and one official represented this discipline. Lennox Kilgour- Middle Heavy Rodney Wilkes- Featherweight Alexander Chapman- Coach Lennox Kilgour placed 6th. Rodney Wilkes placed 4th lifting 330 kilograms. The Games of the XVII Olympiad were held in 1960 in Rome, Italy. In 1958 the West Indies joined together to become a Confederation. Because of this, a West Indian Team was entered in the Olympics. Trinidad and Tobago however contributed four athletes to the team. Clifton Bertrand- Athletics Clyde Rimple- Cycling Richard Bennett- Sailing David Farfan- Sailing The British West Indies won two bronze medals, none of which were attributed to Trinidad & Tobago. The Games of the XVIII Olympiad were held in 1964 in Tokyo, Japan. This was the fourth time Trinidad & Tobago was represented in the Olympics. The Trinidad & Tobago Olympic Committee sent twenty athletes and officials to represent the nation in four disciplines. Knolly Henderson was the Chef de Mission. Seven athletes and two official represented this discipline. Kent Bernard- 4 × 400 m relay Clifton Bertrand Wilton Jackson Wendell Mottley- 400 m & 4 × 400 m relay Edwin Roberts- 200 m & 4 × 400 m relay Edwin Skinner- 4 × 400 m relay E. McDonald Bailey- Coach Broderick Lynch- Manager Edwin Roberts won bronze in the 200 m in 20.3 seconds. The men’s relay team also won bronze. Wendell Mottley won silver for the 400 m in 45.2 seconds. Three athletes and two official represented this discipline. Ronald Cassidy- Track Roger Gibbon- Track Fitzroy Hoyte- Track Gordon Carew- Coach Compton Gonsalves- Mechanic Two athletes and one official represented this discipline. Cordell Barrow- Flying Dutchman Rawle Barrow- Flying Dutchman Bob Levorsen- Coach The sailing team placed 20th. Two athletes and one official represented this discipline. Brandon Bailey- Heavyweight Hugo Gittens- Lightweight Alexander Chapman- Coach Hugo Gittens placed 11th in the lightweight class with 367.5 kg (810 lb). Brandon Bailey placed 20th in the heavyweight division. List of flag bearers for Trinidad and Tobago at the Olympics Trinidad and Tobago at the Paralympics Tropical nations at the Winter Olympics "London 2012 4x100m relay men - Olympic Athletics". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 2017-01-08. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Trinidad and Tobago at the Olympic Games. "Trinidad and Tobago". International Olympic Committee. "Trinidad and Tobago". Olympedia.com. "Olympic Analytics/TTO". olympanalyt.com. Trinidad and Tobago National Olympic Committee "Trinidad and Tobago at the Olympics", Trinidad and Tobago government website