Year 762 (DCCLXII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar, the 762nd year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 762nd year of the 1st millennium, the 62nd year of the 8th century, and the 3rd year of the 760s decade. The denomination 762 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. Vinekh, ruler (khagan) of the Bulgarian Empire, dies after a six-year reign. He is succeeded by Telets, ending the rule of the Vokil clan, and beginning the reign of the Ugain clan. Al-Ala ibn Mugith, supporter of the Abbasid cause, is defeated by the Umayyad emir of al-Andalus, Abd al-Rahman I, at Beja (modern-day Portugal). King Æthelbert II of Kent dies, and is succeeded by his nephew Eadberht II. He possibly rules all Kent for a time. Sigered, probably an East Saxon, succeeds in West Kent. Eadberht dies after a short reign, followed by Ealhmund as ruler of Kent. King Æthelwald of Northumbria marries his queen, Æthelthryth, at Catterick (North Yorkshire). July 30 – Caliph al-Mansur moves the seat of the Abbasid Caliphate from Kufa to the new capital of Baghdad. September 25 – The Alid Revolt begins: Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya raises the banner against the Abbasids at Medina, followed by his brother Ibrahim ibn Abdallah at Basra in early 763. Muhammad's rebellion is suppressed, and he is killed by Abbasid troops under Isa ibn Musa. The Chinese official Li Fuguo murders Empress Zhang, wife of Emperor Su Zong. Shortly afterward Su Zong dies of a heart attack; he is succeeded by his son Dai Zong, who kills Li by sending assassins. Schäftlarn Abbey (Bavaria) is founded by Waltrich, a Benedictine monk of noble family, south of modern-day Munich, Germany. Æthelred I, king of Northumbria (d. 796) Sayyida Nafisa, Arab scholar (d. 824) Æthelbert II, king of Kent Ashot III, Armenian prince Eadberht II, king of Kent Eardwulf, king of Kent Gao Lishi, Chinese official and eunuch (b. 684) Li Bai, (also Li Po), Chinese poet (b. 701) Li Fuguo, Chinese official and eunuch (b. 704) Milo, Frankish bishop (or 763) Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya, Arab rebel leader Su Zong, emperor of the Tang dynasty (b. 711) Vinekh, ruler (khagan) of the Bulgarian Empire Xuan Zong, emperor of Tang dynasty (b. 685) Zhang, empress of the Tang dynasty Joel Serrão and A. H. de Oliverira Marques (1993). "O Portugal Islâmico". Hova Historia de Portugal. Portugal das Invasões Germânicas à Reconquista. Lisbon: Editorial Presença. p. 124. Kirby, p. 156. Symeon of Durham, p. 461