EUROfusion is a consortium of national fusion research institutes located in the European Union, the UK, Switzerland and Ukraine. It was established in 2014 to succeed the European Fusion Development Agreement (EFDA) as the umbrella organisation of Europe's fusion research laboratories. The consortium is currently funded by the Euratom Horizon 2020 programme. The EUROfusion consortium agreement has been signed by 30 research organisations and universities from 25 European Union countries plus Switzerland, Ukraine and the United Kingdom. The EUROfusion's Programme Management Unit offices located in Garching, near Munich (Germany), are hosted by the Max Planck Institute of Plasma Physics (IPP). The IPP is also the seat for the co-ordinator of EUROfusion. EUROfusion funds fusion research activities in accordance with the Roadmap to the realisation of fusion energy. The Roadmap outlines the most efficient way to realise fusion electricity by 2050. Research carried out under the EUROfusion umbrella aims to prepare for ITER experiments and develop concepts for the fusion power demonstration plant DEMO. EUROfusion is in charge of the fusion-related research carried out at JET, the Joint European Torus, which is housed in the Culham Centre for Fusion Energy, UK. Other fusion devices in Europe that devote some amount of time towards research under the EUROfusion framework include the following: "Europe launches EUROfusion to make fusion energy a reality". Horizon 2020 Projects. Archived from the original on 2017-08-30. Retrieved 2015-07-10. "European Commission - PRESS RELEASES - Press release - Questions and Answers: Signature of the European Fusion Joint Programme – 'EUROfusion'". europa.eu. "Max-Planck-Institut für Plasmaphysik". mpg.de. "Contract between EC and EUROfusion is signed". fusenet.eu. ITER Joint European Torus (JET) Fusion for Energy DEMO Archived 2012-10-29 at the Wayback Machine Euratom Max Planck Institute of Plasma Physics Culham Centre for Fusion Energy Official website