The IBA official cocktails are cocktails recognised by the International Bartenders Association (IBA) to be the most requested recipes. The list was developed starting in 1960, and the first version was announced in 1961, comprising 50 cocktails. It has since undergone periodic revisions, and as of 2023 comprises 89 cocktails in 3 categories; see § History for more. As of 2021[update], there are 89 IBA official cocktails, divided into three categories: unforgettables, contemporary classics, and new era drinks. 33 drinks: Alexander Made with cognac, cocoa liqueur (crème de cacao), and cream. Americano Made with Campari, sweet vermouth, and for the sparkling version, club soda and garnished with a slice of lemon. Angel face Made with gin, apricot brandy and calvados in equal amounts. Aviation Made with gin, maraschino liqueur, crème de violette, and lemon juice. Some recipes omit the crème de violette.: 25  Between the sheets Made with white rum (or other light rum), cognac, triple sec, and lemon juice. Boulevardier Made with bourbon or rye whiskey, sweet red vermouth, and bitter Campari. Brandy crusta Made with brandy, maraschino liqueur, curaçao, fresh lemon juice, sugar syrup, and Angostura bitters. Casino Made with gin, maraschino liqueur, orange bitters and fresh lemon juice. Clover Club Made with gin, lemon juice, raspberry syrup, and an egg white. Daiquiri Made with rum, citrus juice (typically lime juice), and sugar or other sweetener. Dry martini Made with gin and white vermouth, and garnished with an olive or a lemon twist. Gin fizz Made with gin, lemon juice, and sugar, which are shaken with ice, poured into a tumbler and topped with carbonated water. Hanky panky Made with gin, sweet vermouth, and Fernet-Branca. John Collins Made from Gin, lemon juice, simple syrup and carbonated water. Last word Made with equal amounts of gin, green Chartreuse, maraschino liqueur and freshly pressed lime juice, which are combined in a shaker with ice. After shaking, the mix is poured through a cocktail strainer (sieve) into the glass so that the cocktail contains no ice and is served "straight up". Manhattan Made with whiskey, sweet vermouth, and bitters. Martinez A classic cocktail made from gin, sweet vermouth, maraschino liqueur and orange bitters that is widely regarded as the direct precursor to the Martini. Mary Pickford Made with white rum, fresh pineapple juice, grenadine, and maraschino liqueur. It is served shaken and chilled, often with a maraschino cherry. Monkey gland Made with gin, orange juice, grenadine and absinthe. Created in the 1920s by Harry MacElhone, owner of Harry's New York Bar in Paris, France. Negroni An Italian cocktail made with one part gin, one part vermouth rosso (red, semi-sweet), and one part Campari, garnished with orange peel. Old fashioned Made by muddling sugar with bitters, adding whiskey or, less commonly, brandy, and garnishing with a twist of citrus rind and a cocktail cherry. Paradise Made with gin, apricot brandy (apricot liqueur), and orange juice in a 2:1:1 ratio, with a splash of lemon juice. Planter's punch Made with Jamaican rum, fresh lime juice, and sugar cane juice. Porto flip Made with brandy, ruby port, and one egg yolk. Ramos fizz Made with gin, lemon juice, lime juice, egg white, sugar, cream, orange flower water, and soda water. It is served in a large non-tapered 12 to 14 ounce Collins glass. Rusty nail Made by mixing Drambuie and Scotch whisky. Sazerac A local New Orleans variation of a cognac or whiskey cocktail, named for the Sazerac de Forge et Fils brand of cognac brandy that served as its original main ingredient. The drink is most traditionally a combination of cognac or rye whiskey, absinthe, Peychaud's Bitters, and sugar, although bourbon whiskey is sometimes substituted for the rye and Herbsaint is sometimes substituted for the absinthe. Sidecar Made with cognac, orange liqueur (Cointreau, Grand Marnier, Dry Curaçao, or triple sec), plus lemon juice. Stinger Duo cocktail made by adding crème de menthe to brandy (although recipes vary). Tuxedo Made with gin, dry vermouth, orange bitters, maraschino and absinthe. Vieux Carré Made with rye whiskey, cognac, sweet vermouth liqueur, Bénédictine, and Peychaud's bitters. Whiskey sour Mixed drink containing whiskey (often bourbon), lemon juice, sugar, and optionally, a dash of egg white. White lady Essentially a sidecar made with gin in place of brandy. What makes it different from the simple gin sour is the switching of sugar for triple sec. The cocktail sometimes also includes additional ingredients, for example egg white, sugar, or cream. 31 drinks: Bellini Made with Prosecco and peach purée or nectar. Black Russian Made with vodka and coffee liqueur. Bloody Mary Made with vodka, tomato juice, and other spices and flavorings including Worcestershire sauce, hot sauces, garlic, herbs, horseradish, celery, olives, salt, black pepper, lemon juice, lime juice and celery salt. Caipirinha Brazil's national cocktail, made with cachaça (sugarcane hard liquor), sugar, and lime. Champagne cocktail Made with sugar, Angostura bitters, Champagne, brandy and a maraschino cherry as a garnish. Corpse reviver #2 Consists of equal parts gin, lemon juice, orange liqueur (commonly Cointreau), Kina Lillet (now usually replaced with Cocchi Americano, as a closer match to Kina Lillet than modern Lillet Blanc), and a dash of absinthe. Cosmopolitan Made with vodka, triple sec, cranberry juice, and freshly squeezed or sweetened lime juice. Cuba libre Made with cola, rum, and in many recipes lime juice on ice. French 75 Made from gin, Champagne, lemon juice, and sugar. French Connection Made with equal parts cognac and amaretto liqueur. Golden dream Made with Galliano, triple sec, orange juice and cream. Grasshopper Made with equal parts green crème de menthe, white crème de cacao, and cream shaken with ice and strained into a chilled cocktail glass. Hemingway special Made with rum, lime juice, maraschino liqueur, and grapefruit juice and served in a double cocktail glass. Horse's neck Made with brandy (or sometimes bourbon) and ginger ale, with a long spiral of lemon peel draped over the edge of an 'old-fashioned' or highball glass. Irish coffee Made with hot coffee, Irish whiskey, and sugar, stirred, and topped with cream. The coffee is drunk through the cream. Kir Made with a measure of crème de cassis (blackcurrant liqueur) topped up with white wine. Long Island iced tea Typically made with vodka, tequila, light rum, triple sec, gin, and a splash of cola, which gives the drink the same amber hue as iced tea. Mai Tai Based on rum, Curaçao liqueur, orgeat syrup, and lime juice, associated with Polynesian-style settings. Margarita Made with tequila, orange liqueur, and lime juice often served with salt on the rim of the glass. Mimosa Made with Champagne (or other sparkling wine) and chilled citrus juice, usually orange juice unless otherwise specified. Mint julep Made primarily with bourbon, sugar, water, crushed or shaved ice, and fresh mint. Mojito Made with white rum, sugar (traditionally sugar cane juice), lime juice, soda water, and mint. Moscow mule Made with vodka, spicy ginger beer, and lime juice, garnished with a slice or wedge of lime. Piña colada Made with rum, cream of coconut or coconut milk, and pineapple juice, usually served either blended or shaken with ice. Pisco sour The Peruvian pisco sour uses Peruvian pisco as the base liquor and adds freshly squeezed lemon juice, simple syrup, ice, egg white, and Angostura bitters. The Chilean version is similar, but uses Chilean pisco and pica lime, and excludes the bitters and egg white. Other variants of the cocktail include those created with fruits like pineapple or plants such as coca leaves. Sea breeze Made with vodka, cranberry juice, and grapefruit juice. Sex on the beach Made with vodka, peach schnapps, orange juice and cranberry juice. Singapore sling A gin-based sling cocktail from Singapore. Tequila sunrise Made with tequila, orange juice, and grenadine syrup. Vesper Originally made of gin, vodka, and Kina Lillet. The formulations of its ingredients have changed since its original publication in print, and so some modern bartenders have created new versions which attempt to more closely mimic the original taste. Zombie Made with fruit juices, liqueurs, and various rums. 25 drinks: Barracuda Made with gold rum, Galliano liqueur, pineapple juice, fresh lime juice and top with Prosecco. Bee's knees Made with gin, fresh lemon juice, and honey. It is served shaken and chilled, often with a lemon twist. Bramble Made with dry gin, lemon juice, sugar syrup, crème de mûre (blackberry liqueur), and crushed ice. Canchanchara Made with Cuban aguardiente, honey, and fresh lime juice. Dark 'n' stormy Made with Goslings Black Seal Rum (the "dark") and ginger beer (the "stormy") served over ice and garnished with a slice of lime. Espresso martini Made with vodka, espresso coffee, coffee liqueur, and sugar syrup. It is not a true martini as it contains neither gin nor vermouth, but is one of many drinks that incorporate the term into their names. Fernandito A long drink of Argentine origin consisting of the Italian amaro liqueur fernet and cola, served over ice. French martini The key ingredient that makes a martini "French" is Chambord, a black raspberry liqueur that has been produced in France since 1685. Illegal Made with mezcal, Jamaica overproof white rum, Falernum, maraschino liqueur, lime juice, simple syrup, and optionally a few drops of egg white. Lemon drop A vodka-based cocktail that is prepared with the addition of lemon juice, triple sec and simple syrup. Naked and famous Made with equal parts mezcal, yellow Chartreuse, Aperol, and fresh lime juice. New York sour Made with whiskey (rye or bourbon), simple syrup, lemon juice, egg white, and red wine (Shiraz or Malbec). Old Cuban Created in 2001 by mixologist Audrey Saunders, it is made with aged rum, fresh lime juice, simple syrup, Angostura bitters, mint leaves, and topped with Champagne brut. Paloma Most commonly prepared by mixing tequila, lime juice, and a grapefruit-flavored soda such as Fresca, Squirt, or Jarritos and served on the rocks with a lime wedge. Adding salt to the rim of the glass is also an option. Paper plane Made with equal parts bourbon, Aperol, amaro liqueur and lemon juice. Penicillin Made with whisky, ginger, and fresh lemon juice. Russian spring punch Made with vodka, crème de cassis, sugar syrup, and lemon juice. Spicy Fifty Made with vodka, elderflower cordial, honey syrup, red chili pepper, and fresh lime juice. Spritz Made with Prosecco, bitters and soda water. Suffering bastard Name for two different mixed drinks, one being more of a standard cocktail associated with World War II and the other being more of an exotic drink associated with Tiki bars. Tipperary Made with Irish whiskey, sweet red Vermouth, green Chartreuse, and Angostura bitters. Tommy's margarita Made with tequila, lime juice, and agave nectar or simple syrup and orange bitters served in a cocktail glass. It is distinct from the margarita in its omission of orange liqueur and its preferred substitution of agave nectar to highlight the natural agave notes in tequila. Trinidad sour Made with Angostura bitters, orgeat syrup, lemon juice, and rye whiskey. Ve.n.to Made with white smooth grappa, lemon juice, honey mix (made with chamomile infusion if desired), chamomile cordial, and optionally egg white. Yellow bird Made with white rum, Galliano, triple sec, and lime juice. The following drinks were removed as of the 2020 update of the list: B-52, removed 2020 Bacardi, removed 2020 Derby, removed 2020 Dirty martini, removed 2020: a martini containing a splash of olive brine or olive juice and typically garnished with an olive Godfather, removed 2020 Godmother, removed 2020 Harvey Wallbanger, removed 2020 Kamikaze, removed 2020 Rose, removed 2020 Screwdriver, removed 2020 Southside, added 2020, removed 2021: Made with gin, lemon juice, simple syrup and mint (also known as "South Side"). Vampiro, removed 2020 A minor revision in 2021 removed the Southside, which had only been added in 2020: Southside : Made with gin, lemon juice, simple syrup and mint (also known as "South Side"). After the initial 1961 list, there have been revisions in 1987, 1993, 2004, 2011, 2020, and 2021 (minor). The 1961 list consisted of 50 drinks: Adonis, Affinity, Alaska, Alexander, Angel Face, Bacardi, Bamboo, Bentley, Between The Sheets, Block And Fall, Bloody Mary, Bobby Burns, Bombay, Bronx, Brooklyn, Caruso, Casino, Claridge, Clover Club, Czarina, Daiquiri, Derby, Diki-Diki, Duchess, Est-India, Gibson, Gin And It, Grand Slam, Grasshopper, Manhattan, Martini Dry, Martini Sweet, Mary Pickford, Mikado, Monkey Gland, Negroni, Old Fashioned, Old Pal, Orange Blossom, Oriental, Paradise, Parisian, Planters, Princeton, Rob Roy, Rose, Sidecar, Stinger, White Lady, Za-Za. The 1987 list consisted of 73 drinks: Alexander, Americano, Apotheke, Bacardi, Banana Bliss, Banana Daiquiri, B & B, Bellini, Black Russian, Bloody Mary, Blu Lagoon, Bronx, Buck’s Fizz, Bull Shot, Champagne Cocktail, Champagne Pick Me Up, Collins (Tom Collins), Coffes (Irish Whiskey), Daiquiri, Egg Nogs (Cognac), Fizzes (Gin), Florida, French Connection, Frozen Daiquiri, Garibaldi, Gibson, Gimlet (Gin O Vodka), Gin And French, Gin And It, Golden Cadillac, Golden Dream, God Father, God Mother, Grasshopper, Harvey Wallbanger, Horse’s Neck, King Alfonzo, Kir, Kir Imperial, Kir Royal, Mai Tai, Manhattan, Margarita, Martini, Negroni, Old Fashioned, Paradise, Pimm’s Cup N°1, Piña Colada, Planter’s Punch, Porto Flip, Prairie Oyster, Pussy Foot, Rob Roy, Rose, Rusty Nail, Salty Dog, Screwdriver, Shirley Temple, Sidecar, Singapore Sling, Snowball, Sours (Whiskey), Spritzer, Stinger, Strawberry Daiquiri, Tequila Sunrise, Tequini, Velvet Hammer, Vodkatini, White Lady, White Russian, White Spider 1987 changes: Adonis, Affinity, Alaska, Bamboo, Bentley, Block And Fall, Bobby Burns, Bombay, Brooklyn, Caruso, Claridge, Czarina, Diki-Diki, Duchess, Est-India, Grand Slam, Martini Sweet, Mikado, Old Pal, Orange Blossom, Oriental, Parisian, Princeton, Rob Roy, Za-Za. The 1993 list consisted of 60 drinks: Alexander, Americano, Bacardi, Banana Frozen Daiquiri, Bellini, Black Russian, Bloody Mary, Brandy Egg Nog, Bronx, Buck’s Fizz ( Mimosa ), Bull Shot, Champagne Cocktail, Daiquiri, Florida (non-alcoholic), French Connection, Frozen Daiquiri, Garibaldi, Gibson, Gin And French, Gin And It, Gin Fizz, Golden Cadillac, Golden Dream, God Father, God Mother, Grasshopper, Harvey Wallbanger, Horse’s Neck, Irish Coffe, John Collins, Kir, Kir Royal, Manhattan, Manhattan Dry, Manhattan Perfect, Margarita, Martini Dry, Martini Perfect, Martini Sweet, Martini Vodka, Negroni, Old Fashioned, Paradise, Parson’s Special (non-alcoholic), Piña Colada, Planter’s Punch, Porto Flip, Pussy Foot (non-alcoholic), Rob Roy, Rose, Rusty Nail, Screwdriver, Shirley Temple (non-alcoholic), Sidecar, Singapore Sling, Stinger, Tequila Sunrise, Whisky Sour, White Lady, White Russian The 2004 list consisted of 66 drinks in 5 categories: Pre Dinner (23 drinks): Americano, Bacardi Cocktail, Daiquiri, Banana Daiquiri, Frozen Daiquiri, Bronx, Kir, Kir Royal, Manhattan, Manhattan Dry, Manhattan Medium o Perfect, Margarita*, Martini Dry, Martini Perfect, Martini Sweet, Martini Vodka, Gibson, Negroni, Paradise, Old Fashioned, Rob Roy, Rose, Whiskey Sour After Dinner (11 drinks): Brandy Alexander, Black Russian, White Russian, French Connection, God Father, God Mother, Golden Cadillac, Golden Dream, Grasshopper, Porto Flip, Rusty Nail Long Drink Style (17 drinks): Bellini, Bloody Mary, Brandy Egg Nog, Buck’s Fizz, Mimosa, Bull Shot, Champagne Cocktail, John Collins*, Gin Fizz, Harvey Wallbanger, Horse’s Neck, Irish Coffee, Pina Colada, Planter’s Punch, Screwdriver, Singapore Sling, Tequila Sunrise The Most Popular (14 drinks): Caipirinha*, Cosmopolitan, Japanese Slipper, Kamikaze, Long Island Iced Tea, Mai-Tai, Mojito, Orgasm, B 52, Salty Dog, Sea-Breeze, Cuba Libre, Sex On The Beach, Apple Martini Special Cocktails (1 drink): Ladyboy The 2011 list consisted of 77 drinks in 3 categories: Unforgettables (30 drinks): Alexander, Americano, Angel Face, Aviation, Bacardi, Between The Sheets, Casino, Clover Club, Daiquiri, Derby, Dry Martini, Gin Fizz, John Collins, Manhattan, Mary Pickford, Monkey Gland, Negroni, Old Fashioned, Paradise, Planters Punch, Porto Flip, Ramos Gin Fizz, Rusty Nail, Sazerac, Screwdriver, Sidecar, Stinger, Tuxedo, Whiskey Sour, White Lady Contemporary classics (31 drinks): Bellini, Black Russian, Bloody Mary, Caipirinha, Champagne Cocktail, Cosmopolitan, Cuba Libre, French 75, French Connection, Godfather, Godmother, Golden Dream, Grasshopper, Harvey Wallbanger, Hemingway Special, Horses Neck, Irish Coffee, Kir, Long Island Iced Tea, Mai Tai, Margarita, Mimosa, Mint Julep, Mojito, Moscow Mule, Pina Colada, Rose, Sea Breeze, Sex On The Beach, Singapore Sling, Tequila Sunrise New era drinks (16): B-52, Barracuda, Bramble, Dark N Stormy, Dirty Martini, Espresso Martini, French Martini, Kamikaze, Lemon Drop Martini, Pisco Sour, Russian Spring Punch, Spritz Veneziano, Tommy's Margarita, Vampiro, Vesper Martini, Yellow Bird The IBA list was significantly updated in 2020, with 24 new drinks, 11 removed drinks, 2 movements between sections, and 1 renaming. The following 24 drinks were added in the 2020 update: Added to Unforgettables (6 drinks): Boulevardier, Brandy crusta, Hanky panky, Last word, Martinez, Vieux Carré Added to Contemporary Classics (2 drinks): Corpse Reviver #2, Zombie Added to New Era Drinks (16 drinks): Bee's Knees, Canchanchara, Fernandito, Illegal, Naked and Famous, New York Sour, Old Cuban, Paloma, Paper Plane, Penicillin, Southside, Spicy Fifty, Suffering Bastard, Tipperary, Trinidad Sour, Ve.n.to. Other than additions or removals: Pisco sour and Vesper both moved from "New Era Drinks" to "Contemporary Classics" "Spritz Veneziano" was renamed "Spritz", and remained in "New Era Drinks" The following 11 drinks were removed as of the 2020 update of the list: B-52, Bacardi, Derby, Dirty martini, Godfather, Godmother, Harvey Wallbanger, Kamikaze, Rose, Screwdriver, Vampiro. A minor revision in 2021 removed the Southside, which had only been added in 2020. Drink portal Liquor portal List of cocktails List of cocktails (alphabetical) List of national drinks "IBA official cocktail list". International Bartenders Association. Retrieved 2 January 2023. "Anticipazioni del nuovo libro sui cocktail IBA | AIBM Project". "2-Ingredient Cocktails You'll Want to Memorize". Craddock, Harry (1930). The Savoy Cocktail Book. London: Constable & Co. ISBN 978-1-62654-0644. Ensslin, Hugo (2009) [1917]. Recipes for Mixed Drinks. Mud Puddle Books Inc. ISBN 978-1-60311-190-4. Katz, Allen. "Classics With a Twist: Between the Sheets". Liquor.com. "Between the Sheets". International Bartenders Association. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Simonson, Robert (28 January 2014). "The Boulevardier Is Back on the Menu". The New York Times. Retrieved 19 April 2016. "Brandy Crusta". International Bartenders Association. Retrieved 19 April 2020. "Casino". IBA Official Cocktails. Retrieved 24 May 2016. "International Bartenders Association | International Bartenders Association". "John Collins". IBA Official Cocktails. Retrieved 26 August 2023. Anthony Giglio, Ben Fink: Mr. Boston Official Bartender's Guide. John Wiley and Sons, ISBN 978-0-470-39065-8, p. 80 A. J. Rathbun: Ginger Bliss and the Violet Fizz: A Cocktail Lover's Guide to Mixing Drinks Using New and Classic Liqueurs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt 2011, ISBN 978-1-55832-771-9 , p. 137 Mardee Haidin Regan: The Bartender's Best Friend: A Complete Guide to Cocktails, Martinis, and Mixed Drinks. Wiley 2010, ISBN 978-0-470-44718-5, p.211 Calabrese, Salvatore (1997). Classic Cocktails. New York: Sterling Publishing Co. ISBN 0806905077. "Martinez". punchdrink.com. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "Martinez Cocktail Recipe". seriouseats.com. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Chirico, Rob (2005). Field guide to cocktails : how to identify and prepare virtually every drink at the bar. Philadelphia, Pa.: Quirk. ISBN 1-59474-063-1. OCLC 61177033. Schaap, Rosie (21 May 2014), "Negroni", The New York Times "Planter's Punch". International Bartenders Association. Retrieved 12 July 2020. "Porto Flip". International Bartenders Association. Retrieved 28 June 2017. "Ramos Gin Fizz". New Orleans Online. Retrieved 2 January 2016. "The Cocktail – How the Sazerac came to be". The Sazerac Company. Retrieved 6 July 2012. "Tuxedo". International Bartender Association. Retrieved 28 June 2017. "Vieux Carré". IBA Official Cocktails. Retrieved 29 May 2020. "Lista de Publicações". Senado.gov.br. Archived from the original on 24 February 2012. Retrieved 15 June 2015. "IBA Official Cocktails". Retrieved 15 February 2017. "Flying Grasshopper recipe". Archived from the original on 14 May 2014. Retrieved 7 August 2020. "Hemingway Special". IBA World. Retrieved 8 April 2017. "Long Island iced tea". International Bartenders Association. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 20 February 2016. "Traditional Mojito recipe from Cuba". Tasteofcuba.com. Archived from the original on 4 September 2011. Retrieved 1 September 2011. Colleen Graham; About.com Guide (11 June 2011). "About.com Mojito". Cocktails. about.com. Archived from the original on 8 August 2011. Retrieved 1 September 2011. "Seabreeze – Cocktails – Flavour Essences". Still Spirits. Archived from the original on 28 August 2011. Retrieved 13 June 2011. "Barracuda cocktail". International Bartenders Association. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "Canchanchara". IBA-World.com. 29 April 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2022. "Dark 'N' Stormy". iba-world.com. International Bartenders Association. Retrieved 6 July 2017. "French Martini". iba-world.com. 29 April 2021. Retrieved 15 February 2023. Saria, Lauren (6 September 2013). "How to Make the Perfect Lemon Drop Cocktail". Phoenix New Times. Retrieved 12 December 2015. "Naked and Famous". IBA Official Cocktails. Retrieved 29 May 2020. "How the Old Cuban Became a Modern Classic". PUNCH. Retrieved 12 January 2021. Rothbaum, Noah (7 March 2019). "Love Your Happy Hour Cocktail? Thank Audrey Saunders". The Daily Beast. Retrieved 12 January 2021. "Paloma". Liquor.com. "Penicillin". IBA Official Cocktails. Retrieved 29 May 2020. "Spicy Fifty". IBA Official Cocktails. Retrieved 29 May 2020. "What is spicy rosé, social media's hottest new drinks trend?". The Telegraph. 25 July 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2023. A longer standing cocktail is the spicy fifty – top of the list at The Donovan Bar at Brown's in Mayfair. Created in 2005 by master… "Summer drinks: cocktail trolleys". Financial Times. 15 August 2014. Retrieved 29 April 2023. …there is no denying the deliciousness of its speciality cocktails, such as the Spicy Fifty with chillis, elderflower and honey syrup. "Tipperary". IBA Official Cocktails. Retrieved 29 May 2020. "A Visit With Julio Bermejo, Creator of Tommy's Margarita". Tequila Patrón. Retrieved 9 April 2017. Puchko, Kristy (23 February 2016). "The Origins Of 10 Popular Prohibition Cocktails". Mental Floss. Mental Floss. Retrieved 3 September 2016. "IBA Official Cocktails (2011 – 2019)" (in Italian). "IBA Official Cocktails (1961–1987)". AIBM Project. "IBA Official Cocktails (1987–1993)". AIBM Project. "IBA Official Cocktails (1993-2004)". AIBM Project. "IBA Official Cocktails (2004-2011)". AIBM Project. Jacquelyn (16 April 2020). "The New 2020 IBA Cocktail List. The Quest (modified)". Wild and Wanderful Travel. Luigi Manzo (1 October 2017). International IBA Cocktail Book: A journey through the 77 cocktails that every barman should know. ASIN B0763S859P. IBA Official Cocktail list