Failure to Launch is a 2006 American romantic comedy film directed by Tom Dey, and starring Matthew McConaughey and Sarah Jessica Parker. The film focuses on a 35-year-old man living with his parents who shows no interest in leaving the comfortable life that they, especially his mother, have made for him. It was released on March 10, 2006, and grossed over $128 million. Thirty-five-year-old Tripp still lives with his parents Al and Sue in Baltimore. His best friends Demo and Ace also still live in their parents' homes and seem proud of it. Tripp has many casual girlfriends. When he's tired of them, he invites them to “his place"—and when they realize he still lives at home, they promptly dump him. Al and Sue are fascinated when their friends, whose adult son recently left home, reveal they hired an expert to get him to move out. The expert is Paula, who believes that men continue to live at home because they have low self-esteem. Her approach is to establish a relationship with the man to build his confidence, then transfer his attachment from his parents to her. However, Tripp does not fit her previous profiles, as he has normal social skills, good self-esteem, and a good job he enjoys. After an awkward encounter with his parents, Paula thwarts Tripp's attempt to dump her and has sex with him, while developing real feelings. She and Tripp find themselves in unfamiliar waters and confide in their friends. Paula's vocation exasperates her roommate Kit, who thinks Paula became a con artist because a man who lived with his parents broke her heart. But later Paula is shocked to learn why Tripp lives at home: His life collapsed when his fiancée suddenly died, and his family has been his solace ever since. Ace discovers what is going on and blackmails Paula for a date with Kit. Although Kit is more attracted to Demo, she and Ace wind up falling in love. Ace then "outs" Paula to Demo, who then tells all to Tripp. Tripp angrily confronts his parents over the scam and breaks up with Paula. Wracked with guilt, Paula refunds Al's and Sue's money. After an awkward confrontation, Tripp has moved out and taken up residence in the sailboat he's been saving for. Over time he forgives his parents, but can't forgive Paula. Tripp's parents and friends devise a plan to reconcile the two. They tie up and gag him, locking him and Paula together in a room. Paula pours her heart out, and he finally forgives her. The film ends with Al and Sue in their empty nest, happily singing "Hit the Road, Tripp". This fades into the closing credits over the Ray Charles song "Hit the Road, Jack", and we see Tripp and Paula sail away on his newly purchased boat. Matthew McConaughey as Tripp Sarah Jessica Parker as Paula Zooey Deschanel as Katherine "Kit" Justin Bartha as Philip "Ace" Bradley Cooper as Demo Terry Bradshaw as Al Kathy Bates as Sue Adam Alexi-Malle as Mr. Axelrod Tyrel Jackson Williams as Jeffrey Katheryn Winnick as Melissa Rob Corddry as Gun Salesman Patton Oswalt as Techie Guy Mageina Tovah as Barista Stephen Tobolowsky as Bud Kate McGregor-Stewart as Bev The rock climbing scenes were filmed in Cherokee Rock Village in Leesburg, Alabama. In its opening weekend, the film grossed a total of $24.6 million, ranking first in the United States box office results for that weekend. The film grossed a total of $88.7 million in the United States box office and made $128,406,887 worldwide. The film received negative reviews from critics. As of June 2020[update], the film holds a 23% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 152 reviews with an average rating of 4.6/10. The site's consensus states: "The few comic gags sprinkled throughout the movie fail to spice up this formulaic rom-com." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 47 out of 100 based on 31 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale. Film critic Richard Roeper stated the film was "completely unbelievable". Some otherwise negative reviews singled out Zooey Deschanel's performance as the film's highlight. Stephanie Zacharek of Salon wrote that "Even with a relatively small role, she blows the whole movie to smithereens". Parasite single Boomerang Generation Twixters "Cherokee Rock Village". encyclopediaofalabama.org. Retrieved 31 March 2019. "Failure to Launch". BoxOfficeMojo.com. Retrieved 6 January 2013. "Failure to Launch (2006)". Retrieved 15 June 2020 – via www.rottentomatoes.com. "Failure to Launch Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved February 2, 2023. "Find CinemaScore" (Type "Failure to Launch" in the search box). CinemaScore. Retrieved March 7, 2021. Zacharek, Stephanie (10 March 2006). "Failure to Launch". Salon.com. Retrieved 6 January 2013. Rabin, Nathan. "Failure To Launch | Film | Review". The A.V. Club. Retrieved 2010-08-11. "Current Movie Reviews, Independent Movies". Film Threat. 2006-04-16. Retrieved 2010-08-11. Wikiquote has quotations related to Failure to Launch. Official website Failure to Launch at IMDb Failure to Launch at Rotten Tomatoes Failure to Launch at Box Office Mojo