Ice Princess is a 2005 American teen sports comedy-drama film directed by Tim Fywell, written by Hadley Davis from a story by Princess Diaries creator Meg Cabot and Davis. It stars Joan Cusack, Michelle Trachtenberg, Kim Cattrall and Hayden Panettiere. The film focuses on Casey Carlyle, a normal teenager who gives up a promising future academic life in order to pursue her new-found dream of being a professional figure skater. The film was released on March 18, 2005. It flopped at the box office, grossing $25.7 million during its theatrical run against a production budget of $25 million. In the fictional city of Millbrook, Connecticut, Casey Carlyle, a very smart and talented science student, pursues a scholarship to Harvard University. For the scholarship, she must present a personal summer project about physics. While watching a figure skating competition with her mathematically inclined best friend Ann, Casey realizes that her favorite childhood hobby, ice skating, would make a perfect project. She decides to try to improve her own skating by applying physics and what she has discovered from watching other skaters. Casey becomes proficient and skips two levels to become a junior skater, following a recital. She helps junior skaters Gennifer "Gen" Harwood, Tiffany Lai, and Nikki Fletcher improve their skating by using algorithms generated by her computer. Torn between her Harvard dream and her growing love of skating, Casey has difficulty juggling schoolwork, skating, and a part-time job. Joan Carlyle, Casey's mother, attempts to prevent her daughter from skating due to her declining academic performance. Meanwhile, tension arises between Casey's mother and her coach Tina Harwood, a disgraced former skater who also happens to be Gen's mom. Tina, who manages the rink where Casey trains, has Gen on a strict training program. During a competition where both Casey and Gen compete, Tina sees Casey may outrank Gen and sabotages Casey's performance by buying her new skates. Unaware of the danger of unbroken-in skates, Casey's resulting long program is riddled with poor jumps and several falls. Upon being informed of Tina's intent behind her seemingly kind gesture, Casey lashes out at her and mistakenly assumes her children were equally involved in the plot. She ranks fifth in the competition and can only qualify for sectionals if any of the top four back out. As a result, Casey loses interest in skating and returns to her studies and goal of attending Harvard. Upset at her mother's sabotage and frustrated by all the restrictions of training, Gen quits. While Casey and Gen reconcile, Casey can now qualify for sectionals as Gen quit. She declines the Harvard scholarship competition to devote herself to skating, to her mother's dismay. Casey asks Tina to be her personal coach and train for sectionals. Her mother, upset at this change of direction in her life, refuses to watch her skate. At Sectionals, Casey is not fully focused on the competition, and falls while attempting a triple salchow jump. To her surprise, she sees her mother in the audience. Inspired, she gives a highly rated artistic performance. Sectionals ends with Nikki earning gold and Casey placing silver, both qualifying to go to Nationals and potentially the 2006 Winter Olympics. Gen's brother Teddy Harwood gives Casey flowers to congratulate her, and they kiss. Later, Joan and Tina bicker about how many college courses Casey should take, her and Teddy's budding love, her sponsors, and her future in figure skating. Joan Cusack as Joan Carlyle Kim Cattrall as Tina Harwood Michelle Trachtenberg as Casey Carlyle Hayden Panettiere as Gennifer "Gen" Harwood Trevor Blumas as Teddy Harwood Erik King as Dr. Chip Healey Diego Klattenhoff as Kyle Dayton Kirsten Olson as Nikki Fletcher Signe Ronka as Emma Flanders Juliana Cannarozzo as Zoey Bloch Paul Sun-Hyung Lee as Mr. Lai Martha MacIsaac as Mean Party Girl Connie Ray as Mrs. Fletcher Michelle Kwan as ESPN reporter Brian Boitano as ESPN reporter Jocelyn Lai as Tiffany Lai Shanique Ollivierre-Lake as Chantal DeGroat Amy Stewart as Ann Kristina Whitcomb as Ms. Fisher Lee Blumas said that he was put on hold for two months during the audition process and that there had been "a lot of switch-overs with the directors". Blumas ended up playing Teddy as a sort of father figure to Gen. He began training to drive a Zamboni soon after arriving in Toronto; according to him, he later ended up smoothing the ice on some mornings at the rink where they were shooting. Panettiere did much of her own skating, including a fast spin seen at the end of the regionals short program. Trachtenberg trained for eight months, including the time they were filming (during which time she says she worked twenty-hour days). She had to be on the ice longer than most of the other actors as she was one of the few adults on the film. She had stunt doubles to handle the falls and some of the complex moves, although Trachtenberg did learn a specific move that could not be done by a stunt double as the differences in their build would be apparent. She sustained some injuries while working on the film. According to Trachtenberg, a mistake was made in one of the physics formulas her character recites, which was later fixed; a shot of the back of her head was used and the correct term was looped in. Trachtenberg described the film as "not a Disney kitschy movie" and was somewhat apprehensive of the idea of a sequel for fear of belittling the original. Cusack noted that the relationship between Casey and her mother had already been well-developed in the script, but said that it generated a good deal of discussion during the production, and Cusack ultimately described her role as "meaningful" in terms of the acting and also how it related to her personally. The film was shot from May 3 to July 23, 2004 at several locations in Toronto, including George Bell Arena, Western Technical-Commercial School, Christie Mansion and De La Salle College. In its opening weekend, the film grossed $6,807,471 in 2,501 theaters in the United States and Canada, ranking #4 at the box office, behind The Ring Two, Robots and The Pacifier. By the end of its run, Ice Princess grossed $24,381,334 domestically and $1,351,000 internationally, totaling $25,732,334 worldwide. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a score of 52% based on 109 reviews, with an average rating of 5.60/10. The consensus reads: "This likable Disney film gets points for effort, but can't stick the landing when it comes to originality". Film critic Roger Ebert gave Ice Princess three out of four stars and commended the film for its entertaining nature and ability to overcome cliche and "formula". Todd Gilchrist of IGN questioned the speed at which Casey becomes adept at skating and pointed out some other improbabilities and clichés, but strongly praised Cusack's and Cattrall's performances as emotionally powerful and fully human. United States Conference of Catholic Bishops' Office for Film and Broadcasting rated the film A-I (suitable for general patronage) and provided the film a modest praise as a good family film. Oppenheim Toy Portfolio awarded the film their platinum award. It is rated G by the Motion Picture Association of America. Zahra Lari, a Muslim figure skater from the United Arab Emirates, cited Ice Princess as an inspiration for her career. A documentary about Lari and the film, highlighting Lari's career and Disney's influence on her, and including interviews with many involved in making the film, is currently[when?] in pre-production with Størmerlige Productions as a result of the #DreamBigPrincess campaign. Ice Princess: Original Soundtrack was released on March 15, 2005, in the United States by Walt Disney Records, features tracks by Natasha Bedingfield, Emma Roberts, Hayden Panettiere, Michelle Branch, Aly & AJ, Jesse McCartney, and Raven-Symoné, and various others. It peaked at number 53 on the Billboard 200 and at number 2 on Top Soundtracks. Track listing "Reach" - Caleigh Peters "If I Had It My Way" - Emma Roberts "Get Your Shine On" - Jesse McCartney "You Set Me Free" - Michelle Branch "Reachin' for Heaven" - Diana DeGarmo "No One" - Aly & AJ "It's Oh So Quiet" - Lucy Woodward "Get Up" - Superchick "I Fly" - Hayden Panettiere "Just a Dream" - Jump5 "Bump" - Raven-Symoné "There Is No Alternative" - Tina Sugandh "Unwritten" - Natasha Bedingfield Not included on the soundtrack. "Freak Out" by Avril Lavigne appears in the official trailer but is not included on the soundtrack. "Ray of Light" by Madonna is used as Casey Carlyle's short program music but is not included on the soundtrack. Instrumental versions of "Trouble" by Pink and "Toxic" by Britney Spears were used for Zoey Bloch's short program and free skate, respectively, but not included on the soundtrack. "Galop infernal (Can-can)" by Jacques Offenbach and the theme from The Pink Panther were used for Nikki Fletcher's short program and free skate, respectively, but not included on the soundtrack. "Summer" from Antonio Vivaldi's The Four Seasons was used for Gen's short program, but not included on the soundtrack. "Ice Princess (2005) - Financial Information". The Numbers. Murray, Rebecca. "Trevor Blumas Talks About "Ice Princess": On Playing Michelle Trachtenberg's Love Interest in the Disney Ice Skating Movie". About.com. Retrieved 2009-03-09. Murray, Rebecca. "Hayden Panettiere Discusses "Ice Princess": Hayden Panettiere on Ice Skating versus Riding Zebras". About.com. Retrieved 2009-03-09. "Putting A Brain On Ice". MTV Networks. 2007. Retrieved 2009-03-09. Pryor, Chris. "Film: Interview [Michelle Trachtenberg: Ice Princess]: Michelle Trachtenberg: Trades Stakes for Skates in Ice Princess". Campus Circle, Inc. Retrieved 2009-03-09. Murray, Rebecca. "Michelle Trachtenberg Skates Her Way Through "Ice Princess": Michelle Trachtenberg on Learning to Skate and Starring in "Ice Princess"". About.com. Retrieved 2009-03-09. Murray, Rebecca. "Interview with Michelle Trachtenberg Page 2". About.com. Retrieved 2009-03-09. Gilchrist, Todd (2005-03-18). "Interview: Joan Cusack (Page 2)". IGN. Retrieved 2022-12-23. Ice Princess (2005) - Box office / business "List of Productions Shot in Toronto Representing Other Cities (Page 14)" (PDF). Toronto Film & Television Office. July 2007. Retrieved 2010-11-03. "Ice Princess (2005)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 2011-07-27. Ice Princess. Rotten Tomatoes. Ebert, Roger. Ice Princess. March 18, 2005. Gilchrist, Todd (2005-03-17). "Ice Princess: Review: A surprisingly smart approach to otherwise formulaic material". IGN. Retrieved 2009-03-09. Ice Princess. United States Conference of Catholic Bishops' Office for Film and Broadcasting. "The Oppenheim Toy Portfolio". Archived from the original on 2014-08-27. Middle Eastern women were once discouraged from sport. A new generation now chases Olympic glory.. The Washington Post, 2016/07. "@StormerligeFilm" on Twitter Phares, Heather (2005-03-15). "Ice Princess - Original Soundtrack: Songs, Reviews, Credits, Awards". AllMusic. Retrieved 2012-08-08. Ice Princess - Original Soundtrack Billboard.com "Ice Princess (Original Soundtrack) by Various Artists". iTunes. January 2005. Retrieved December 8, 2018. "Soundtrack Ice Princess Chart History". Billboard. Retrieved 2019-12-17. Official website Ice Princess at IMDb Wikiquote has quotations related to Ice Princess.