The Opposite Of Sex is a 1998 American independent romantic dark comedy written and directed by Don Roos, and starring Christina Ricci, Martin Donovan and Lisa Kudrow. A directorial debut for Roos, it marked the final film produced by Rysher Entertainment. Shortly before the film’s world premiere at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival, it was acquired by Sony Pictures Classics. The tagline: "You’ll laugh, you’ll cry, you’ll be offended." Sixteen-year-old Dedee Truitt runs away from home. She is pregnant by her ex-boyfriend, Randy Cates. Not revealing her pregnancy, Dedee eventually moves in with her much older half-brother Bill, a gay teacher in a conservative, suburban community in Saint Joseph County, Indiana. Although he is living with Matt, Bill still mourns the loss of his previous partner, Tom, who died of AIDS some time ago. Bill maintains a friendship with Tom's younger sister, Lucia, who idolized her brother. Dedee seduces Matt, then tricks him into believing he has impregnated her. They elope, leaving Bill and Lucia to track them down. Bill and Lucia find Dedee and Matt in Los Angeles, only to discover Dedee has stolen Tom's ashes and is holding them for ransom. Randy also finds her; they inform Matt that they are taking the ashes and moving away. They escape but soon get into an argument that leads to Dedee's accidentally shooting Randy. She and Matt escape to Canada. Lucia and Bill have a falling out after she implies that Tom died as a result of having gay sex. Despondent, she has a one-night stand with Sheriff Carl Tippett, who had previously made unsuccessful romantic overtures to her. Lucia later discovers that she is pregnant. Bill eventually tracks down Matt and Dedee. She goes into labor and Bill accompanies her into the delivery room. After giving birth to her son, Dedee returns Tom's ashes to him, apologizing for her actions in the past year. Dedee ends up serving time in prison, leaving her son in Bill's care while she's incarcerated. After a few months, she moves back in with him, while Matt goes traveling, and Lucia gives birth to her own child. Eventually, Dedee decides that her son would be better off with Bill, who is now dating Dedee's parole officer. Dedee sarcastically concludes that sex is precisely the opposite of what people should want, leading as it does to kids, disease or, worst of all, relationships. At the end of the film, the vignettes of the various caring relationships among the characters show the opposite of superficial sexual gratification. Christina Ricci as Dedee Truitt Ivan Sergei as Matt Mateo Martin Donovan as Bill Truitt Lisa Kudrow as Lucia De Lury Lyle Lovett as Carl Tippett William Lee Scott as Randy Cates Johnny Galecki as Jason Bock Colin Ferguson as Tom De Lury Megan Blake as Bobette Dan Bucatinsky as Timothy Chauncey Leopardi as Joe Rodney Eastman as Ty Heather Fairfield as Jennifer Oakes Leslie Grossman as Girl Student The Opposite of Sex was shot from June to July 1997 in Los Angeles, California. It was to be the last theatrical work produced by Rysher Entertainment, who shut down their film unit the same month that shooting wrapped. Sony's arthouse division Sony Pictures Classics distributed the film. The Opposite of Sex was given a limited theatrical release on May 22, 1998. Its opening weekend saw a per screen average of $20,477 for the 5 theaters showing it. Janet Maslin in The New York Times called it a "gleefully acerbic comedy". Christina Ricci's performance was widely praised and she received a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical. Roger Ebert especially enjoyed the voice-over narration supplied in-character by Ricci, calling it "refreshing" and comparing it to Mystery Science Theater 3000: When you've seen enough movies, alas, you can sense the gears laboriously turning, and you know with a sinking heart that there will be no surprises. The Dede character subverts those expectations; she shoots the legs out from under the movie with perfectly timed zingers. I hate people who talk during movies, but if she were sitting behind me in the theater, saying all of this stuff, I'd want her to keep right on talking. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an 81% approval rating based on 42 reviews, with an average rating of 7/10. The site's critics consensus reads: "The Opposite of Sex smartly lightens a bitter story with sharp insights and strong dialogue - as well as a startlingly mature performance from former child actor Christina Ricci." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 70 out of 100, based on reviews from 26 critics, indicating "generally favourable reviews". Director Don Roos has been noted for his depiction of sexual fluidity, which features in The Opposite of Sex as well as other Roos films such as Happy Endings. Judith Kegan Gardiner took a less sanguine view of this feature in the book Masculinity Studies and Feminist Theory. Gardiner described The Opposite of Sex as representative of a "fairly repulsive genre of films" that feature a "heterosexual conversion narrative" that is "set in motion by the desire of a heterosexual person for a seemingly unattainable gay person." The American Film Institute nominated the film for its AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs list. "The Opposite of Sex (18)". British Board of Film Classification. September 14, 1998. Retrieved October 16, 2016. "The Opposite of Sex (1998) - Financial Information". The Numbers. Retrieved March 16, 2019. Maslin, Janet (May 29, 1998). "The Opposite of Sex (1998) FILM REVIEW; Her Mouth Is Poison, and Her Heart Is Fool's Gold". The New York Times. Retrieved October 29, 2022. "Writer Don Roos Makes The Leap From Hollywood To Indies with "The Opposite of Sex"". IndieWire. May 28, 1998. Retrieved October 29, 2022. Laughlin, Stephanie (February 19, 2010). "MAKE 'EM LAUGH: The Opposite of Sex - Friday Film Review". forgetthebox.net. Retrieved October 29, 2022. McCarthy, Todd (February 9, 1998). "The Opposite of Sex". Variety. Hindes, Andrew (July 9, 1997). "Rysher calls 'Cut!'". Variety. "Winners & Nominees 1999 - Best Actress - Motion Picture – Musical/Comedy". Golden Globes. Retrieved October 29, 2022. Ebert, Roger (June 19, 1998). "The Opposite of Sex". RogerEbert.com. Retrieved October 29, 2022. "The Opposite of Sex". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 28, 2022. "The Opposite of Sex". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 26, 2021. Carr, David (May 8, 2005). "The Family Guy Behind the Dark Comedies". The New York Times. Retrieved January 12, 2020. Gardiner, Judith Kegan (2002). Masculinity Studies and Feminist Theory. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 346. ISBN 9780231122795. "AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs Nominees" (PDF). Afi.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 13, 2011. Retrieved March 16, 2019. Wikiquote has quotations related to The Opposite of Sex. The Opposite of Sex at IMDb The Opposite of Sex at the TCM Movie Database The Opposite of Sex at AllMovie The Opposite of Sex at the American Film Institute Catalog The Opposite of Sex at Box Office Mojo The Opposite of Sex at Rotten Tomatoes