The 1962 Ice Hockey World Championships was the 29th edition of the Ice Hockey World Championships. The tournament was held in Colorado Springs and Denver, United States from March 8 to March 18, 1962. This was the first World Championship hosted in North America that was not part of ice hockey at the Olympic Games. It also remains the only IIHF World Championship (not also part of the Olympics) ever held in the United States. The World Championships were in jeopardy of being cancelled to the political situation in Europe and the Berlin Wall. Sweden won their third World, and their ninth European title. Canada, represented by the Galt Terriers, lost only to the Swedes finishing second, followed by the host Americans. In the 'B' pool the Australian team defeated Denmark for their first victory ever. The World Championships were scheduled to be hosted in Colorado Springs, Colorado, but the event was placed in jeopardy due to the political situation in Europe. When the Berlin Wall was constructed in 1961 by East Germany to prevent its citizens from fleeing to the West, NATO responded with travel restrictions which prevented the East Germany national ice hockey team from attending the World Championships. Canadian Amateur Hockey Association president Jack Roxburgh felt that politics should not affect sports, and the decision went against the goodwill and relations established by teams traveling behind the Iron Curtain. He called for the International Ice Hockey Federation to unite in opposition to the NATO decision. Teams from the Soviet Union and other communist countries ultimately chose to withdraw in protest of the NATO decision. With the absences of the USSR, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany, the top two nations from the 1961 'B' pool were elevated (Norway and Great Britain). The third and final spot was filled by a qualifying game between the only remaining 'B' pool nations. Switzerland qualified in Group A Austria qualified in Group B Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goaltender: Lennart Häggroth Best Defenceman: John Mayasich Best Forward: Sven Tumba Media All-Star Team: Goaltender: Lennart Häggroth Defence: Jack Douglas, Harry Smith Forwards: Jackie McLeod, Nisse Nilsson, Ulf Sterner The final standings of the tournament according to IIHF: The final standings of the European championships according to IIHF: Summary and explanations (in french) Dicther, Heather L. (May 28, 2018). "Hockey Research at the 2018 North American Society for Sport History (NASSH) Conference – Canadian Speculation: Back-Up Host for the 1962 IIHF World Championships or NATO Ally?". Hockey in Society. Retrieved June 6, 2019. "Politics, Sports Said Mixed". Medicine Hat News. Medicine Hat, Alberta. February 3, 1962. p. 5. "Championnats du monde 1962". Hockey Archives (in French). Retrieved October 12, 2019. Championnat du monde 1962 Duplacey, James (1998). Total Hockey: The official encyclopedia of the National Hockey League. Total Sports. pp. 498–528. ISBN 0-8362-7114-9. Podnieks, Andrew (2010). IIHF Media Guide & Record Book 2011. Moydart Press. p. 138. Szemberg, Szymon; Podnieks, Andrew, eds. (2007), World of Hockey: Celebrating a Century of the IIHF, Bolton, Ontario: Fenn Publishing, ISBN 978-1-55168-307-2