My Father the Hero is a 1994 French-American comedy-drama directed by Steve Miner and starring Gérard Depardieu and Katherine Heigl. It is an English-language remake of the 1991 French film Mon père, ce héros, which starred Depardieu in a similar role. André Arnel (Gérard Depardieu), a Frenchman divorced from his wife, takes his teenage daughter, Nicole (Katherine Heigl), on vacation with him to The Bahamas. She is desperate to appear as a woman and not a girl, so in order to impress a local boy Ben (Dalton James), she makes up more and more ridiculous stories, starting with André being her lover and leading to some bizarre assumptions by the rest of the community. André is desperate to make Nicole happy (especially as she is increasingly upset by his relationship with girlfriend Isobel) and so plays along with her crazy games, and the stories they make up get increasingly bizarre. Gérard Depardieu as André Arnel, Nicole's father Katherine Heigl as Nicole Arnel, André's daughter Dalton James as Ben Lauren Hutton as Megan Arnel, André's ex-wife and Nicole's mother Faith Prince as Diana Stephen Tobolowsky as Mike Ann Hearn as Stella Robyn Peterson as Doris Frank Renzulli as Fred Manny Jacobs as Raymond Jeffrey Chea as Pablo Stephen Burrows as Hakim Michael Robinson as Tom Robert Miner as Mr. Porter Betty Miner as Mrs. Porter Emma Thompson as Isobel, André's girlfriend (uncredited) Roberto Escobar as Alberto Filming occurred during the summer of 1993. It was filmed on Paradise Island, Bahamas at the One & Only Resort, now known as The Ocean Club by Four Seasons Resort. The film debuted at number 4 at the US box office behind Ace Ventura: Pet Detective, Mrs. Doubtfire and Philadelphia. It went on to gross $25.5 million in the United States and Canada and $19.3 million internationally for a worldwide total of $44.8 million. The film received negative reviews from critics. Janet Maslin wrote, in her review of the film for The New York Times, that "nothing else about the film is moving, but its Bahamian beachfront scenery just might make you cry." Peter Rainer of the Los Angeles Times opened his Los Angeles Times review of the film by writing: The arrival of "My Father, the Hero” begs the question: Why does Hollywood persist in remaking French sex comedies? Most of the originals—including "The Tall Blonde Man With One Black Shoe" and "Les Fugitifs," remade as "Three Fugitives"—weren't all that sexy or funny to begin with. And with the exception of "Three Men and a Little Lady," none of these remakes, which also include "The Toy," "Blame It on Rio," "Partners" and "Buddy Buddy," has been a smash hit. Or sexy. Or funny. “My Father, the Hero,” remade from a French comedy virtually unseen in this country, at least has Gerard Depardieu in the cast, which gives it a pedigree. Depardieu, who has appeared in every French film for the past 20 years, give or take a few, makes his third appearance in a Hollywood movie. (The first two were “Green Card” and “1492: Conquest of Paradise.”) It’s enjoyable watching Depardieu wrap his mouth around the English language; he seems to enjoy it as much as we do. Less enjoyable is watching Depardieu (or, in long shot, his stunt double) water skiing and wallowing through treacherous shoals. (A friend said he reminded her of Shamu.) Depardieu may be fun to watch but he's not enough reason to see the movie. Roger Ebert wrote that "if Depardieu seems right at home in 'My Father the Hero,' perhaps that is because only two years ago he made a French film called 'Mon Pere, Ce Heros,' with exactly the same plot. I saw it, and would say it was more or less exactly as appealing as this English version. Once was a time when Hollywood would buy the rights to French hits ("Three Men and a Cradle") and remake them. Now they buy the recycling rights as soon as the original is released, and hold it out of the American market, which in this case was no great loss." On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a rating of 20%, based on 15 reviews, with an average score of 4.4/10. Top 10 worst (alphabetical order, not ranked) – William Arnold, Seattle Post-Intelligencer Worst (not ranked) – Bob Ross, The Tampa Tribune The film featured music and appearances by the Bahamian junkanoo band Baha Men. The group's songs create the movie's island soundtrack. "Back to the Island" "Mo' Junkanoo" "Gin and Coconut Water (Traditional)" "Land of the Sea and Sun" "Oh, Father" "Island Boy" "Worldwide rentals beat domestic take". Variety. February 13, 1995. p. 28. Fox, David J. (February 8, 1994). "Weekend Box Office : 'Ace Ventura' Detects a Winning Take". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 1, 2012. "My Father, the Hero". Box Office Mojo. IMDB.com, Inc. Retrieved July 13, 2012. Maslin, Janet (February 4, 1994). "Review/Film; Depardieu's Bahamian Vacation". The New York Times. Retrieved June 1, 2012. Rainer, Peter (February 4, 1994). "MOVIE REVIEW : 'My Father' a Sordid Remake of a Sex Comedy". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 1, 2012. Ebert, Roger (February 4, 1994). "My Father the Hero". RogerEbert.com. Ebert Digital LLC. Retrieved July 26, 2017. "My Father, the Hero (1994)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Retrieved August 30, 2021. Arnold, William (December 30, 1994). "'94 Movies: Best and Worst". Seattle Post-Intelligencer (Final ed.). p. 20. Ross, Bob (December 30, 1994). "Versed in the worst". The Tampa Tribune (Final ed.). p. 18. My Father the Hero at IMDb My Father the Hero at the American Film Institute Catalog My Father the Hero at the TCM Movie Database My Father the Hero at AllMovie My Father, the Hero at Box Office Mojo My Father, the Hero at Rotten Tomatoes