17 Again is a 2009 American teen fantasy comedy film directed by Burr Steers. It stars Matthew Perry, Zac Efron, Leslie Mann, Thomas Lennon, and Michelle Trachtenberg, with Melora Hardin and Sterling Knight in supporting roles. The film follows a 37-year-old man named Mike (Perry) who becomes his 17-year-old self (Efron) after a chance accident. The film was distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures and released in the United States on April 17, 2009, to mixed reviews from critics and grossed $139.5 million. In 1989, 17-year-old star athlete Mike O'Donnell finds out that his girlfriend, Scarlet Porter, is pregnant. Scarlet tells Mike about her pregnancy moments before his likely scholarship-clinching high-school championship basketball game. Mike plays the first few seconds of the game before walking off the court to go after Scarlet, abandoning his hopes of going to college and achieving a career. Twenty years later, 37-year-old Mike finds his life stagnant and boring; he abandons any project he starts. Scarlet, now Mike's wife and the mother of their two children, has filed for divorce. Mike moves in with his best friend, Ned Gold, who is wealthy, geeky, and also unhappy. Mike has been passed over for a promotion at work he believed he deserved. He expresses his frustration to his boss, which ends with Mike being fired after he smashes his boss’s bluetooth earpiece against the wall. His high-school-age kids, 18-year-old Maggie and 16-year-old Alex, want nothing to do with him. While driving, Mike has an encounter with a janitor on a bridge that transforms him back into his 17-year-old self. After becoming convinced of Mike's identity, Ned believes that Mike's transformation was caused by a mystical spirit guide who is trying to steer him on a better path. Mike enrolls in high school by posing as Mark Gold, Ned's son. He plans to go to college on a basketball scholarship. As Mike befriends his own son, Alex, he discovers that Alex is being bullied. Mike also learns that his daughter, Maggie, has a boyfriend named Stan who does not respect her and frequently torments Alex. Mike comes to believe that his mission is to help his kids. Through their kids, Mike spends time with Scarlet, who notes his remarkable resemblance to her husband but rationalizes it as an odd coincidence. Attempting to fix his relationship with Scarlet, Mike begins to finish all the garden projects he had abandoned as an adult. He does his best to separate Stan and Maggie while encouraging Alex to be more confident. Mike has difficulty resisting his desire for Scarlet despite the relationship's clear inappropriateness. Mike throws a party to celebrate a basketball game win at Ned's house. He confronts Stan, who has recently dumped Maggie for refusing to have sex with him. Mike gets knocked out and wakes up to Maggie trying to seduce him. Mike tells Maggie that he is in love with someone else, and Maggie leaves, much to Mike's relief. Scarlet arrives at the party, and Mike shows her that Alex has finally managed to get together with his crush. The two have an intimate conversation where Mike, caught up in the moment, tries to kiss Scarlet. Disgusted, she storms off as Mike tries unsuccessfully to explain his true identity. On the day of the court hearing to finalize the divorce, Mike makes one last attempt to win Scarlet back (as Mark) by reading a supposed letter from Mike. After he exits, Scarlet notices that the "letter" is actually directions to the courtroom; she begins to grow curious and postpones the divorce by a month. Frustrated that he could not salvage his marriage, Mike decides to once again pursue a scholarship and move on with a new life. During a high school basketball game, Mike reveals his true identity to Scarlet. As Scarlet runs away, Mike decides to chase her down, just like he did in 1989 before transforming back into his 37-year-old self. He happily reunites with Scarlet, saying that she is the best decision he ever made. As Mike prepares for his first day as the new basketball coach at his kids' school, Ned—who has successfully started a relationship with Jane—gifts him a whistle. Both are happy with the fresh starts in their lives. Matthew Perry / Zac Efron as Mike O'Donnell / Mark Gold: Perry portrays Mike at age 37, while Efron portrays Mike at age 17 in the opening flashback from 1989 and after Mike has undergone his magical transformation into posing as Mark Gold, son of his future friend Ned. Leslie Mann as Scarlet Porter O'Donnell: Mike's soon-to-be former wife and the mother of his children Allison Miller as young Scarlet Thomas Lennon as Ned Gold: Mike's best friend Tyler Steelman as young Ned Michelle Trachtenberg as Margaret Sarah "Maggie" O'Donnell: Mike and Scarlet's 18-year-old daughter. Her conception was the reason Mike chose to abandon his dreams and marry Scarlet. She formerly dated Stan. Sterling Knight as Alex O'Donnell: Mike and Scarlet's 16-year-old son. He is hated by everyone in the school, especially Stan. Melora Hardin as Principal Jane Masterson: principal of the high school that Mike, Scarlet, and Ned used to attend and that Maggie, Alex and "Mark" currently attend. She is also Ned's love interest. Hunter Parrish as Stan: Maggie's former tough boyfriend. He's nice to everyone except Alex, whom he bullies even in his house. Nicole Sullivan as Naomi: Scarlet's best friend Kat Graham, Tiya Sircar and Melissa Ordway as Jamie, Samantha and Lauren: the three girls who are friends with Maggie, and constantly trying to flirt with "Mark". Brian Doyle-Murray as Janitor: the magical spirit guide who makes the transformation possible Josie Loren as Nicole: the head cheerleader and Alex's crush. Jim Gaffigan as Coach Murphy: the high school basketball coach, who has been there for 20 years Margaret Cho as Mrs. Dell: a teacher On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 56% based on 149 reviews, with an average rating of 5.40/10. The site's critics consensus reads, "Though it uses a well-worn formula, 17 Again has just enough Zac Efron charm to result in a harmless, pleasurable teen comedy." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 48 out of 100, based on reviews from 27 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale. Roger Ebert gave the film 3 stars out of 4, writing: "17 Again is pleasant, harmless PG-13 entertainment, with a plot a little more surprising and acting a little better than I expected." Justin Chang of Variety wrote: "Zac Efron's squeaky-clean tweener-bait profile is unlikely to be threatened by 17 Again, an energetic but earthbound comic fantasy that borrows a few moves, if little inspiration, from Big and It's a Wonderful Life." The film was projected to take in around $20 million in its opening weekend. Opening in 3,255 theaters in the United States and Canada, the film grossed $23.7 million, ranking #1 at the box office, with 70% of the audience consisting of young females. By the end of its run, 17 Again grossed $64.2 million in North America and $72.1–75.3 million internationally, totaling $136.3–139.5 million worldwide. 17 Again: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack was released on April 21, 2009, by New Line Records. "On My Own" by Vincent Vincent and the Villains "Can't Say No" by The Helio Sequence "L.E.S. Artistes" by Santigold "Naïve" by The Kooks "This Is Love" by Toby Lightman "You Really Wake Up the Love in Me" by The Duke Spirit "The Greatest" by Cat Power "Rich Girls" by The Virgins "This Is for Real" by Motion City Soundtrack "Drop" by Ying Yang Twins "Cherish" by Kool & the Gang "Bust a Move" by Young MC "Danger Zone" by Kenny Loggins "Kid" by The Pretenders "Nookie" by Limp Bizkit "The Underdog" by Spoon "High School Never Ends" by Bowling for Soup (Used in movie trailer/commercial) "Push It Fergasonic (DJ Axel Mashup)" by Fergie, Salt-n-Pepa, JJ Fad The orchestral score was written by Rolfe Kent and orchestrated by Tony Blondal. It was recorded at Skywalker Sound. A South Korean television series titled 18 Again based on the film aired on JTBC from September 21 to November 10, 2020. Big, 1988 comedy drama film about a boy who becomes a full-grown man Back to the Future, 1985 comedy film about a son who time travels to when his parents were in high school A Distant Neighborhood, a 1990s Japanese manga about an adult re-living his teenage life The Kid, 2000 American fantasy comedy-drama about a grown man who encounters his younger self Seventeen Again, 2000 American fantasy–comedy film about two grandparents who are turned 17 years old 13 Going on 30, 2004 American romantic comedy film about a 13-year-old girl who suddenly turns 30 Mr. Destiny, 1990 American comedy film with similar plot The Poof Point, 2001 American science-fiction comedy film about two scientist parents who accidentally regress their age during an experiment Mrs. Doubtfire, 1993 American comedy film about a father who disguises himself to get closer to his estranged family Little, 2019 American comedy film about an evil boss who becomes a little girl Ben Fritz (2009-04-20). "'17 Again' is No. 1 at weekend box office". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 2014-05-10. Retrieved 2021-01-20. cost just over $40 million "17 Again (2009) - Financial Information". The Numbers. 17 Again at Rotten Tomatoes Fandango Media "17 Again Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved 2021-01-15. Josh Rottenberg (July 30, 2020). "Box Office Report: '17 Again' handily wins the weekend". Entertainment Weekly. audiences were more favorably inclined, giving it a strong A− CinemaScore. Ebert, Roger (April 15, 2009). "17 Again Movie Review & Film Summary". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved June 13, 2014. Chang, Justin (9 April 2009). "17 Again". Variety. Fritz, Ben (2009-04-17). "Zac Efron and '17 Again' expected to rule box office". Los Angeles Times. McClintock, Pamela (April 19, 2009). "'17 Again' tops weekend box office". Variety. Retrieved June 13, 2014. "17 Again (2009)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 2021-01-23. "17 Again: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack". Amazon.com. Archived from the original on 20 April 2009. Retrieved 2009-04-22. Seon, Mi-kyung (February 25, 2020). "Kim Ha Neul, Yoon Sang Hyun, Lee Do Hyun to co-star in new drama 18 Again". Osen. V Live. Archived from the original on August 20, 2020. Retrieved August 9, 2020. Wikiquote has quotations related to 17 Again. 17 Again at IMDb 17 Again at AllMovie 17 Again at the American Film Institute Catalog 17 Again at the TCM Movie Database 17 Again at Box Office Mojo