Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (/oʊˌkɑːsioʊ kɔːrˈtɛz/ oh-KAH-see-oh kor-TEZ, Spanish: [aleɣˈsandɾja oˈkasjo koɾˈtes]; born October 13, 1989), also known by her initials AOC, is an American left-wing politician and activist. She has served as the U.S. representative for New York's 14th congressional district since 2019, as a member of the Democratic Party. On June 26, 2018, Ocasio-Cortez drew national recognition when she won the Democratic Party's primary election for New York's 14th congressional district. She defeated Democratic Caucus Chair Joe Crowley, a 10-term incumbent, in what was widely seen as the biggest upset victory in the 2018 midterm election primaries. She easily won the November general election, defeating Republican Anthony Pappas. She was reelected in the 2020 and 2022 elections. Taking office at age 29, Ocasio-Cortez is the youngest woman ever to serve in the United States Congress. She has been noted for her substantial social media presence relative to her fellow members of Congress. Ocasio-Cortez attended Boston University, where she double-majored in international relations and economics, graduating cum laude. She was previously an activist and worked as a waitress and bartender before running for Congress in 2018. Alongside Rashida Tlaib, Ocasio-Cortez was the first female member of the Democratic Socialists of America elected to serve in Congress. She advocates a progressive platform that includes support for workplace democracy, Medicare for All, tuition-free public college, a federal jobs guarantee, a Green New Deal, and abolishing the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). Ocasio-Cortez was born in the New York City borough of the Bronx on October 13, 1989, the daughter of Sergio Ocasio-Roman and Blanca Ocasio-Cortez (née Cortez). She has a younger brother named Gabriel. Her father was born in the Bronx to a Puerto Rican family and became an architect; her mother was born in Puerto Rico. Ocasio-Cortez lived with her family in an apartment in the Bronx neighborhood of Parkchester until she was five, when the family moved to a house in suburban Yorktown Heights. Ocasio-Cortez attended Yorktown High School, graduating in 2007. In high school and college, Ocasio-Cortez went by the name of "Sandy Ocasio". She came in second in the microbiology category of the Intel International Science and Engineering Fair in 2007 with a research project on the effect of antioxidants on the lifespan of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. In a show of appreciation for her efforts, the MIT Lincoln Laboratory named a small asteroid after her: 23238 Ocasio-Cortez. In high school, she took part in the National Hispanic Institute's Lorenzo de Zavala (LDZ) Youth Legislative Session. She later became the LDZ Secretary of State while she attended Boston University. Ocasio-Cortez had a John F. Lopez Fellowship. After graduating from high school, Ocasio-Cortez enrolled at Boston University. Her father died of lung cancer in 2008 during her second year, and Ocasio-Cortez became involved in a lengthy probate dispute to settle his estate. She has said that the experience helped her learn "first-hand how attorneys appointed by the court to administer an estate can enrich themselves at the expense of the families struggling to make sense of the bureaucracy". During college, Ocasio-Cortez was an intern for U.S. senator Ted Kennedy in his section on foreign affairs and immigration issues. In interviews, she claimed to have been the only Spanish speaker in the office and the sole person responsible for assisting Spanish-speaking constituents. Ocasio-Cortez graduated cum laude from Boston University in 2011 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in both international relations and economics. After college, Ocasio-Cortez moved back to the Bronx and took a job as a bartender and waitress to help her mother—a house cleaner and school bus driver—fight foreclosure of their home. She later launched Brook Avenue Press, a now-defunct publishing firm for books that portrayed the Bronx in a positive light. Ocasio-Cortez also worked for the nonprofit National Hispanic Institute. During the 2016 primary, Ocasio-Cortez worked as an organizer for Bernie Sanders's presidential campaign. After the general election, she traveled across America by car, visiting places such as Flint, Michigan, and Standing Rock Indian Reservation in North Dakota, and speaking to people affected by the Flint water crisis and the Dakota Access Pipeline. In an interview she recalled her December 2016 visit to Standing Rock as a tipping point, saying that before that, she had believed that the only way to run for office effectively was to have access to wealth, social influence, and power. But her visit to North Dakota, where she saw others "putting their whole lives and everything that they had on the line for the protection of their community", inspired her to begin to work for her own community. One day after she visited North Dakota, she got a phone call from Brand New Congress, which was recruiting progressive candidates (her brother had nominated her soon after Election Day 2016). She has credited Jabari Brisport's unsuccessful City Council campaign with restoring her belief in electoral politics, in running as a socialist candidate, and in Democratic Socialists of America as an organization. Ocasio-Cortez began her campaign in April 2017 while waiting tables and tending bar at Flats Fix, a taqueria in New York City's Union Square. "For 80 percent of this campaign, I operated out of a paper grocery bag hidden behind that bar", she told Bon Appétit. She was the first person since 2004 to challenge Joe Crowley, the Democratic Caucus Chair, in the primary. She faced a financial disadvantage, saying, "You can't really beat big money with more money. You have to beat them with a totally different game." Ocasio-Cortez's campaign undertook grassroots mobilization and did not take donations from corporations. Her campaign posters' designs were said to have taken inspiration from "revolutionary posters and visuals from the past". The candidates' only face-to-face encounter during the campaign occurred on a local political talk show, Inside City Hall, on June 15. The format was a joint interview conducted by Errol Louis, which NY1 characterized as a debate. A debate in the Bronx was scheduled for June 18, but Crowley did not participate. He sent former New York City Council member Annabel Palma in his place. Ocasio-Cortez was endorsed by progressive and civil rights organizations such as MoveOn and Democracy for America. Then-Governor Cuomo endorsed Crowley, as did both of New York's U.S. senators, Chuck Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand, multiple U.S. representatives, various local elected officials and trade unions, and groups such as the Sierra Club, Planned Parenthood, the Working Families Party, NARAL Pro-Choice America, and Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, among others. California representative Ro Khanna, a Justice Democrat like Ocasio-Cortez, initially endorsed Crowley but later endorsed Ocasio-Cortez in an unusual dual endorsement. Ocasio-Cortez received 57.13% of the vote (15,897) to Crowley's 42.5% (11,761), defeating the 10-term incumbent by almost 15 percentage points on June 26, 2018. The result shocked many political commentators and analysts and immediately garnered nationwide attention. Many news sources, including Time, CNN, The New York Times, and The Guardian mentioned how the win completely defied their predictions and expectations. She was outspent by a margin of 18 to 1 ($1.5 million to $83,000) but won the endorsement of some influential groups on the party's left. Crowley conceded defeat on election night, but did not telephone Ocasio-Cortez that night to congratulate her, fueling short-lived speculation that he intended to run against her in the general election. Bernie Sanders and Noam Chomsky congratulated her. Several commentators noted the similarities between Ocasio-Cortez's victory over Crowley and Dave Brat's Tea Party movement-supported 2014 victory over House Majority Leader Eric Cantor in the Republican primary for Virginia's 7th congressional district. Like Crowley, Cantor was a high-ranking member in his party's caucus. After her primary win, Ocasio-Cortez endorsed several progressive primary challengers[tone] to Democratic incumbents nationwide, capitalizing on her fame and spending her political capital in a manner unusual even[tone] for unexpected primary winners. Without campaigning for it, Ocasio-Cortez won the Reform Party primary as a write-in candidate in a neighboring congressional district, New York's 15th, with a total vote count of nine, highest among all 22 write-in candidates. She declined the nomination. Ocasio-Cortez faced Republican nominee Anthony Pappas in the November 6 general election. Pappas, an economics professor, did not actively campaign. The 14th district has a Cook Partisan Voting Index of D+29, making it New York City's sixth-most Democratic district, with registered Democrats outnumbering Republicans almost six to one. Ocasio-Cortez was endorsed by various politically progressive organizations and figures, including former president Barack Obama and U.S. senator Bernie Sanders. She spoke at the Netroots Nation conference in August 2018, and was called "the undisputed star of the convention". Crowley remained on the ballot as the nominee of the Working Families Party (WFP) and the Women's Equality Party (WEP). Neither he nor the WFP party actively campaigned, both having endorsed Ocasio-Cortez after the Democratic primary. Ocasio-Cortez called the WEP, which Governor Cuomo created ahead of the 2014 New York gubernatorial election, a cynical, centrist group that endorsed male incumbents over female challengers like her and Cynthia Nixon. Former Connecticut senator Joe Lieberman, who won reelection in 2006 on a third-party line after losing the Democratic Primary in 2006, penned a July 17 column in the Wall Street Journal expressing hope that Crowley would actively campaign on the WFP ballot line. WFP Executive Director Dan Cantor wrote an endorsement of, and apology to, Ocasio-Cortez for the New York Daily News; he asked voters not to vote for Crowley if his name remained on the general election ballot. Ocasio-Cortez won the election with 78% of the vote (110,318) to Pappas's 14% (17,762). Crowley, on the WFP and WEP lines, received 9,348 votes (6.6%). Her election was part of a broader Democratic victory in the 2018 midterm elections, as the party gained control of the House by picking up 41 seats. Saikat Chakrabarti, who had been her campaign co-chair, became chief of staff for her congressional office. His departure in 2019 drew considerable speculation as to whether Ocasio-Cortez was trying to implement a more moderate strategy. The first media network to give Ocasio-Cortez a platform and extensively cover her campaign and policies was The Young Turks, a left-wing online news program. After her primary win, she quickly garnered nationwide media attention, including numerous articles and TV talk-show appearances.[citation needed] She also drew a great amount of media attention when she and Sanders campaigned for James Thompson in Kansas in July 2018. A rally in Wichita had to be moved from a theater with a capacity of 1,500 when far more people said[tone] they would attend. The event drew 4,000 people, with some seated on the floor. In The New Yorker, Benjamin Wallace-Wells wrote that while Sanders remained "the de-facto leader of an increasingly popular left, [he is unable to] do things that do not come naturally to him, like supply hope." Wallace-Wells suggested that Ocasio-Cortez had made Sanders's task easier, as he could point to her success to show that ideas "once considered to be radical are now part of the mainstream". Until she defeated incumbent Joe Crowley in the 2018 Democratic primary, Ocasio-Cortez received little coverage on most traditional news media outlets. Jimmy Dore interviewed her when she first announced her candidacy in June 2017. After her primary win, Brian Stelter wrote that progressive-media outlets, such as The Young Turks and The Intercept, "saw the Ocasio-Cortez upset coming" in advance. Margaret Sullivan wrote in The Washington Post that traditional metrics of measuring a campaign's viability, like total fundraising, were contributing to a "media failure" and that "they need to get closer to what voters are thinking and feeling: their anger and resentment, their disenfranchisement from the centers of power, their pocketbook concerns." Ocasio-Cortez's campaign was featured on the cover of the June 2018 edition of The Indypendent, a free New York City-based monthly newspaper. In a tweet she hailed the cover appearance on "NYC's classic monthly" as an important breakthrough for her campaign. Otherwise Ocasio-Cortez was barely mentioned in print until her primary win. Ocasio-Cortez was one of the subjects of the 2018 Michael Moore documentary Fahrenheit 11/9; it chronicled her primary campaign. In an attempt to embarrass Ocasio-Cortez just before she took office, Twitter user "AnonymousQ" shared a video dating to Ocasio-Cortez's college years: a Boston University student-produced dance video in which she briefly appeared. Many social media users came to her defense, inspiring memes and a Twitter account syncing the footage to songs like "Mambo No. 5" and "Gangnam Style". Ocasio-Cortez responded by posting a video of herself dancing to Edwin Starr's "War" outside her congressional office. Elizabeth Warren wrote the entry on Ocasio-Cortez for 2019's Time 100. The documentary Knock Down the House, directed by Rachel Lears, which focuses on four female Democrats in the 2018 United States elections who were not career politicians—Ocasio-Cortez, Amy Vilela, Cori Bush and Paula Jean Swearengin—premiered at the 2019 Sundance Film Festival. Ocasio-Cortez was the only one of the women featured in the film to win. It was released by Netflix on May 1, 2019. Ocasio-Cortez also appeared in Lears's 2022 film To the End, which focuses on the effects of climate change. The film debuted at the 2022 Sundance Film Festival and was presented at the Tribeca Film Festival in June 2022. Michelle Caruso-Cabrera challenged Ocasio-Cortez in the 2020 Democratic primary. After Ocasio-Cortez won the nomination, Caruso-Cabrera reorganized and ran in the general election as the Serve America Movement nominee. Ocasio-Cortez's Republican challengers in the general election included nominee John Cummings, a former police officer, and Antoine Tucker, a write-in candidate. The American Prospect wrote in October 2020 that Ocasio-Cortez was "spending the 2020 campaign running workshops" for constituents on workplace organizing, fighting eviction, and organizing collective childcare.[further explanation needed] They noted that Ocasio-Cortez was often not featured in the streamed workshops, saying the "strategy decentralizes the candidate from her own campaign." On October 20, 2020, Ocasio-Cortez hosted a Twitch stream of the social deduction game Among Us, with fellow congresswoman Ilhan Omar, and many established streamers such as Pokimane, Hasan Piker, DrLupo, and mxmtoon. The stream peaked with over 400,000 viewers and, according to The Guardian's Joshua Rivera, succeeded in humanizing her. Ocasio-Cortez again streamed Among Us on Twitch on November 27, 2020, with Hasan Piker, xQc, ContraPoints and Canadian MP Jagmeet Singh to raise money for food pantries, eviction defense legal aid, and community support organizations[further explanation needed] to assist those suffering economic hardship during the COVID-19 pandemic. The stream raised $200,000 and Ocasio-Cortez wrote, "This is going to make such a difference for those who need it most right now." Ocasio-Cortez was unopposed in the Democratic primary. She defeated Republican Tina Forte and Conservative Party nominee Desi Cuellar in the general election. Taking office at age 29, Ocasio-Cortez is the youngest woman ever to serve in the United States Congress, and also the youngest member of the 116th Congress. When the 116th Congress convened on January 3, 2019, Ocasio-Cortez entered with no seniority but with a large social media presence. Axios credited her with "as much social media clout as her fellow freshman Democrats combined". Since March 2021[update], she has 12 million Twitter followers, up from 1.4 million in November 2018 and surpassing Nancy Pelosi. She has 8.9 million Instagram followers as of January 2019 and 500,000 followers on Facebook as of February 2019. Her colleagues appointed her to teach them social media lessons upon her arrival in Congress. In early July 2019 two lawsuits were filed against her for blocking Joey Salads and Dov Hikind on Twitter in light of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals ruling that it was a violation of the First Amendment for President Trump to block people on Twitter. On November 4, 2019, it was announced that they settled the lawsuit with Ocasio-Cortez issuing a statement apologizing for the Twitter block. In a 2019 interview, Ocasio-Cortez said she had stopped using her private Facebook account and was minimizing her usage of all social media accounts and platforms, calling them a "public health risk". In November 2018, on the first day of congressional orientation, Ocasio-Cortez participated in a climate change protest outside the office of House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi. Also that month, she backed Pelosi's bid to be Speaker of the House once the Democratic Party reclaimed the majority on the condition that Pelosi "remains the most progressive candidate for speaker". During the orientation for new members hosted by the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Ocasio-Cortez wrote on Twitter in December 2018 about the influence of corporate interests by sponsors such as the American Enterprise Institute and the Center for Strategic and International Studies: "Lobbyists are here. Goldman Sachs is here. Where's labor? Activists? Frontline community leaders?" When Ocasio-Cortez made her first speech on the floor of Congress in January 2019, C-SPAN tweeted the video. Within 12 hours, the video of her four-minute speech set the record as C-SPAN's most-watched Twitter video of a member of the House of Representatives. In February 2019, speaking at a Congressional hearing with a panel of representatives from campaign finance watchdog groups, Ocasio-Cortez questioned the panel about ethics regulations as they apply to both the president and members of Congress. She asserted that no regulations prevent lawmakers "from being bought off by wealthy corporations". With more than 37.5 million views, the clip became the most-watched political video posted on Twitter. When President Donald Trump's former lawyer Michael Cohen appeared before the Oversight Committee in February 2019, Ocasio-Cortez asked him whether Trump had inflated property values for bank or insurance purposes and where to get more information on the subject. Cohen's reply implied that Trump may have committed tax and bank fraud in his personal and business tax returns, financial statements and real-estate filings. The president of the American Constitution Society named Ocasio-Cortez as the committee member best at obtaining specific information from Cohen about Trump's "shady practices, along with a road map for how to find out more". New York Times columnist David Brooks praised her skill in questioning Cohen. The exchange between Ocasio-Cortez and Cohen prompted an investigation by New York Attorney General Letitia James, who referred to it in August 2020 when filing legal action to compel Trump's companies to comply with subpoenas about financial information, and to compel his son Eric Trump to testify. Further developments as a result of the exchange saw James form a civil investigation and lawsuit against The Trump Organization regarding potential financial fraud, which resulted in a fine of $354 million and a ban on Trump doing business in New York for two to three years. According to reports in March 2019, Ocasio-Cortez continued to receive media coverage early in her congressional tenure on par with that of 2020 presidential candidates and was considered "one of the faces of the Democratic party" and one of the most talked-about politicians in the United States. Between July 8 and 14, 2019, she drew more social media attention than the Democratic presidential candidates. Tracking company NewsWhip found that interactions with news articles on Ocasio-Cortez numbered 4.8 million, while no Democratic presidential candidate got more than 1.2 million. David Bauder of the Associated Press wrote that Trump's supporters were thus having "some success" in having "Ocasio-Cortez be top of mind when people think of" the Democratic Party. According to a Media Matters for America study, Ocasio-Cortez has been intensely discussed on sister television channels Fox News and Fox Business, being mentioned every day from February 25 to April 7, 2019, for a total of 3,181 mentions in 42 days (an average of around 75 per day). The Guardian's David Smith wrote that this is evidence that Fox is "obsessed by Ocasio-Cortez, portraying her as a radical socialist who threatens the American way of life". Brian Stelter of CNN Business found that between January and July 2019, she had nearly three times as many mentions on Fox News as on CNN and MSNBC, and seven times the coverage of James Clyburn, a Democratic leader in the House of Representatives. Stelter wrote that the attention Ocasio-Cortez is receiving has caused "the perception, particularly on the right, that her positions and policies are representative of the Democratic Party as a whole". In a CBS News and YouGov poll of almost 2,100 American adults conducted from July 17 to 19, it was found that Republican respondents were more aware of Ocasio-Cortez than Democratic respondents. She had very unfavorable ratings among Republican respondents and favorable ratings among Democratic respondents. In March 2019, PolitiFact reported that Ocasio-Cortez is "one of the most targeted politicians for hoax claims, despite the fact that she just entered Congress as a freshman". Fake quotes attributed to her, fake photos of her, and false rumors about her have spread on social media. Some of these have originated from 4chan and r/The_Donald. By July 2019, the fake material included attributing things Trump said to Ocasio-Cortez, such as "I have a very good brain and I've said lots of things." On July 18, 2019, Charlie Rispoli, a police officer from Gretna, posted on Facebook an apparent threat to shoot Ocasio-Cortez, calling her a "vile idiot" who "needs a round, and I don't mean the kind she used to serve" as a bartender. Rispoli posted the comment in response to a fake news article that falsely quoted Ocasio-Cortez as saying, "We pay soldiers too much". A photo from the article also had the label "satire". Rispoli was fired for his post and his Facebook account was deleted. Ocasio-Cortez is known to wear red lipstick, usually by the American makeup brand Stila Cosmetics in the shade "Beso", as a style trait of Latina women from the Bronx. In a skincare tutorial for Vogue, she explained that beauty and femininity are important to her because these things are often used against women in politics and society, and that self-love is like a "mini protest" against misogynistic critiques. Ocasio-Cortez attended the 2021 Met Gala, which had the theme "In America: a Lexicon of Fashion". The Met Gala is an annual fundraiser for the Metropolitan Museum of Art that is overseen by Vogue editor-in-chief Anna Wintour, who selects every invitee and designer pairing. Ocasio-Cortez wore an organza gown emblazoned with the phrase "Tax the Rich". As an elected official in New York City, she was considered a guest of the museum, and as such did not have to buy a ticket, which costs persons other than elected officials at least $35,000. The dress's designer, Aurora James, also invited her boyfriend Benjamin Bronfman, the son of a billionaire. Critics, both conservative and liberal, rebuked Ocasio-Cortez for attending an event where guests were not required to wear masks, but event staff were and for attending an event known for its opulent display of wealth and social status. She responded that they were using a sexist double standard and that she "punctured the fourth wall of excess and spectacle." James also believed that the extremely wealthy people in attendance needed to see the message in person. In September 2021, the American Accountability Foundation filed an ethics complaint against Ocasio-Cortez for attending the Met Gala. The AAF claimed that her attendance amounted to accepting an illegal gift since her estimated $35,000 ticket was paid for by Condé Nast, a for-profit company, not a charity. Ocasio-Cortez is a member of an informal group of progressive members of Congress called "The Squad", along with Ilhan Omar, Ayanna Pressley, Rashida Tlaib, Cori Bush and Jamaal Bowman. On July 14, 2019, Trump attacked the Squad (which had only four members at the time) in a tweet, saying that they should "go back and help fix" the countries they came from rather than criticize the American government. He continued to make similar comments over the next several days, even though three of the women, including Ocasio-Cortez, were born in the United States. Ocasio-Cortez responded in a tweet that "the President's words [yesterday], telling four American Congresswomen of color 'go back to your own country' is hallmark language of white supremacists." She later added, "We don't leave the things that we love, and when we love this country, what that means is that we propose the solutions to fix it." Days later, Trump falsely asserted that Ocasio-Cortez called "our country and our people 'garbage'"; she had actually said that Americans should not be content with moderate policies that are "10% better from garbage". Trump also falsely claimed that Ocasio-Cortez said "illegal immigrants are more American" than Americans who tried to keep them out; she actually said that "women and children on that border that are trying to seek refuge and opportunity" in America "are acting more American" than those who tried to keep them out. Ocasio-Cortez submitted her first piece of legislation, the Green New Deal, to the House on February 7, 2019. She and Senator Ed Markey released a joint non-binding resolution laying out the main elements of a 10-year "economic mobilization" that "would phase out fossil fuel use and overhaul the nation's infrastructure." Their plan called for implementing the "social cost of carbon" that was part of the Obama administration's plans to address climate change. In the process it aimed to create jobs. According to CNBC, an initial outline the Green New Deal called for "completely ditching fossil fuels, upgrading or replacing 'every building' in the country and 'totally overhaul[ing] transportation' to the point where 'air travel stops becoming necessary'". The outline set a goal of having the U.S. "creating 'net zero' greenhouse gases in 10 years. Why 'net zero'? The lawmakers explained: 'We set a goal to get to net-zero, rather than zero emissions, in 10 years because we aren't sure that we'll be able to fully get rid of farting cows and airplanes that fast.'" Activist groups such as Greenpeace and the Sunrise Movement came out in favor of the plan. No Republican lawmakers voiced support. The plan gained support from some Democratic senators, including Elizabeth Warren, Bernie Sanders and Cory Booker; other Democrats, such as Senator Dianne Feinstein and House speaker Nancy Pelosi, dismissed the proposal (Pelosi has referred to it as "the green dream, or whatever they call it"). On March 26, Senate Republicans called for an early vote on the Green New Deal without allowing discussion or expert testimony. Markey said Republicans were trying to "make a mockery" of the Green New Deal debate and called the vote a "sham". In protest, Senate Democrats voted "present" or against the bill, resulting in a 57–0 defeat on the Senate floor. In March 2019, a group of UK activists proposed that the Labour Party adopt a similar plan, "Labour for a Green New Deal". The group said it was inspired by the Sunrise Movement and the work Ocasio-Cortez has done in the US. In November 2021, Representative Paul Gosar posted a version of the title sequence of the anime series Attack on Titan on social media that he had edited with the faces of Ocasio-Cortez, Joe Biden, and himself superimposed on the show's characters, depicting Gosar attacking them with swords and killing Ocasio-Cortez. Speaker Nancy Pelosi called for law enforcement and the House Ethics Committee to investigate it as a threat. Pelosi opened discussion on the House floor saying that Gosar's actions demanded a response. "We cannot have members joking about murdering each other or threatening the president of the United States. This is both an indictment of our elected officials and an insult to the institution of the House of Representatives. It's not just about us as members of Congress. It is a danger that it represents to everyone in the country." When Republican House members refused to condemn the video, Ocasio-Cortez responded that she believed the video was "part of a pattern that normalizes violence", adding, "I believe this is a part of a concerted strategy and I think it's very important for us to draw a strict line a strong line for material consequence". She gave a six-minute floor speech, saying, "This is not about me. This is not about Representative Gosar. This is about what we're willing to accept." The House voted to censure Gosar, mostly along party lines. The last time the House censured a lawmaker was in 2010. On July 20, 2020, Republican representatives Ted Yoho and Roger Williams accosted Ocasio-Cortez on the steps of the Capitol, where Yoho (as overheard by a journalist) called her "disgusting" and told her, "You are out of your freaking mind" for recently suggesting that poverty and unemployment were driving a spike in crime in New York City during the COVID-19 pandemic amid her ongoing advocacy for cutting police budgets. Ocasio-Cortez told Yoho he was being "rude". As Ocasio-Cortez walked away from Yoho into the Capitol, Yoho called her a "fucking bitch". Yoho addressed the matter on the House floor and, without naming Ocasio-Cortez, apologized for the "abrupt manner of the conversation" with her, claiming that "offensive name calling, words attributed to me by the press, were never spoken to my colleagues", and concluding: "I cannot apologize for my passion". Ocasio-Cortez responded with a speech stating that the incident was emblematic of a "culture ... accepting of violence and violent language against women ... In using that language, in front of the press, he gave permission to use that language against his wife, his daughters, women in his community, and I am here to stand up to say that is not acceptable." In April 2020, Ocasio-Cortez was one of 77 representatives to call for public reports of data regarding COVID-19 cases in nursing homes and long-term care facilities. In March 2021, Ocasio-Cortez and Representative Jamaal Bowman called for New York governor Andrew Cuomo to resign, citing the sexual misconduct allegations against him, as well as the New York COVID-19 nursing home scandal about the Cuomo administration's reported undercounting of COVID-19 nursing home deaths. In a nearly 90-minute Instagram Live video made in February 2021, Ocasio-Cortez said that she had previously experienced sexual assault, and recounted her experience of fear during the 2021 storming of the United States Capitol, when she was in her office (in the Cannon House Office Building). She said she had hidden in her office bathroom before being startled by a Capitol Police officer who entered her office suite and shouted "Where is she?" before ordering her and her staff to evacuate to a different House Office Building. Ocasio-Cortez said the officer did not self-identify, and said she first believed the officer's voice was that of an attacker. She described sheltering in place in Representative Katie Porter's office and preparing for what she believed would be an assault by rioters on their offices. She said, "I had a very close encounter where I thought I was going to die." Ocasio-Cortez reacted to the 2021 Texas power crisis by organizing a fundraiser to provide food, water, and shelter to affected Texans. The fundraiser, which began on February 18, raised $2 million in its first day and $5 million by February 21. The money was given to organizations such as the Houston Food Bank and the North Texas Food Bank. Ocasio-Cortez also traveled to Houston to help volunteers with recovery. On April 15, 2021, Ocasio-Cortez and three other senators called a press conference to announce a bill that they had introduced to implement postal banking pilot programs in rural and low-income urban neighborhoods where millions of households cannot access or afford standard banking services. Ocasio-Cortez described the families she sees in her urban community who need to rely on check cashing companies that charge exorbitant interest rates due to the absence of mainstream banks. "They'll show up to a check cashing place and imagine cashing your stimulus check...and having 10 to 20% of that check taken away from you." On November 5, 2021, Ocasio-Cortez was one of six House Democrats to break with their party and vote against the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, as it was decoupled from the social safety net provisions in the Build Back Better Act. In September 2022, Ocasio-Cortez was asked about running for president. She said, "I hold two contradictory things [in mind] at the same time. One is just the relentless belief that anything is possible. But at the same time, my experience here has given me a front-row seat to how deeply and unconsciously, as well as consciously, so many people in this country hate women. And they hate women of color. People ask me questions about the future. And realistically, I can't even tell you if I'm going to be alive in September [of 2022]. And that weighs very heavily on me. And it's not just the right wing. Misogyny transcends political ideology: left, right, center." In January 2024, the U.S. and other countries cut funding to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) over intelligence reports that certain UNRWA staff members supported Hamas during the 2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel and participated in the attack. On January 29, Ocasio-Cortez acknowledged the reports, but also said that cutting funding to UNRWA was "unacceptable" and that the U.S. "should restore aid immediately". Committee on Oversight and Accountability (Vice Ranking Member, 2023–present) Subcommittee on Health Care and Financial Services Subcommittee on National Security, the Border, and Foreign Affairs Committee on Natural Resources Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources (Ranking Member, 2023–present) Congressional Progressive Caucus House Pro-Choice Caucus Ocasio-Cortez has been described as progressive, left-wing, left-wing populist, and far-left. She is a member of the Democratic Socialists of America and embraces the democratic socialist label as part of her political identity. In an interview on NBC's Meet the Press, she described democratic socialism as "part of what I am. It's not all of what I am. And I think that that's a very important distinction." In response to a question about democratic socialism ultimately calling for an end to capitalism during a Firing Line interview on PBS, she answered: "Ultimately, we are marching towards progress on this issue. I do think that we are going to see an evolution in our economic system of an unprecedented degree, and it's hard to say what direction that that takes." Later at a conference she said "To me, capitalism is irredeemable." Ocasio-Cortez supports progressive ideals such as workplace democracy, single-payer Medicare for All, tuition-free public college and trade school, a federal job guarantee, the cancellation of all $1.6 trillion of outstanding student debt, guaranteed family leave, abolishing U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, ending the privatization of prisons, enacting gun-control policies, and energy policy relying on 100% renewables. She told Anderson Cooper that she favors policies that "most closely resemble what we see in the UK, in Norway, in Finland, in Sweden". Ocasio-Cortez is open to using Modern Monetary Theory (MMT), a heterodox economic theory with little support among mainstream academics, as an economic pathway to fund and enable implementation of her policy goals. Ocasio-Cortez was among the 46 House Democrats who voted against final passage of the Fiscal Responsibility Act of 2023. Ocasio-Cortez has called for reducing defense spending. In December 2022, she was the only House Democrat to vote against an omnibus spending package because of increased funding for defense and federal agencies that oversee immigration. In late 2020, Ocasio-Cortez and Rashida Tlaib proposed a public banking bill to encourage creation of state and local public banks by giving them access to facilities from the Federal Reserve and setting national guidelines on public banking. In April 2021, Ocasio-Cortez announced a bill that she and three senators had introduced to implement postal banking pilot programs in rural and low-income urban neighborhoods where millions of households cannot access or afford standard banking services. Ocasio-Cortez has been a vocal supporter of labor rights, including a $15 per hour federal minimum wage. In May 2019, she returned to bartending at the Queensboro Restaurant in Jackson Heights, Queens, to promote the Raise the Wage Act, which would increase the minimum hourly wage for restaurant servers and other tipped workers from $2.13 to $15. Speaking to restaurant workers, customers and reporters, she criticized an exemption in U.S. minimum wage law for restaurants and the service sector that allows them to be paid less than $7.25 per hour, saying, "Any job that pays $2.13 per hour is not a job, it is indentured servitude." On January 20, 2021, Ocasio-Cortez skipped the inauguration of Joe Biden in order to join the 2021 Hunts Point Produce Market strike in the Bronx. In September 2019, Ocasio-Cortez introduced an anti-poverty policy proposal (packaged in a bundle called "A Just Society") that would take into account the cost of childcare, health care, and "new necessities" like Internet access when measuring poverty. The proposal would cap annual rent increases and ensure access to social welfare programs for people with convictions and undocumented immigrants. According to the U.S. census, about 40 million Americans live in poverty. Ocasio-Cortez has proposed a marginal tax as high as 70% on income above $10 million to pay for the Green New Deal. According to tax experts contacted by The Washington Post, this tax would bring in extra revenue of $720 billion per decade. But an analysis by the think tank Tax Foundation estimated that, after accounting for macroeconomic effects, the proposal would increase tax revenue by $189.1 billion over ten years if it is applied only to ordinary income, or decrease tax revenue by 53.1 billion if it is applied to all forms of income, including capital gains. Ocasio-Cortez has opposed and voted against the pay-as-you-go rule supported by Democratic leaders, which requires deficit-neutral fiscal policy, with all new expenditures balanced by tax increases or spending cuts. She and Representative Ro Khanna have condemned the rule for hamstringing new or expanded progressive policies. She cites Modern Monetary Theory as a justification for higher deficits to finance her agenda. Drawing a parallel with the Great Depression, she has argued that the Green New Deal needs deficit spending like the original New Deal. Ocasio-Cortez opposed a planned deal by New York City to give Amazon.com $3 billion in state and city subsidies and tax breaks to build a secondary headquarters (Amazon HQ2) that was expected to bring in $27 billion in tax revenue for the city and state, in an area near her congressional district, saying that the city should instead itself invest $3 billion in the district. Some commentators criticized her remarks on the grounds that she did not understand tax breaks are discounts on money paid to, not by, the government, that "New York does not have $3 billion in cash" it would "give" to Amazon, and that between 25,000 and 40,000 new jobs, in addition to the high-paying tech jobs Amazon would have created, disappeared when Amazon left. Conservative columnist Marc Thiessen argued that "her economic illiteracy is dangerous" because "by helping to drive Amazon away, she did not save New York $3 billion; she cost New York $27 billion." Ocasio-Cortez has called for "more environmental hardliners in Congress", calling climate change "the single biggest national security threat for the United States and the single biggest threat to worldwide industrialized civilization". Referring to a recent United Nations report indicating that the effects of climate change could become irreversible unless carbon emissions are reined in within the next 12 years, she has argued that global warming must be addressed immediately to avert human extinction. Ocasio-Cortez's environmental plan, the Green New Deal, advocates for the U.S. to transition to an electrical grid running on 100% renewable energy and to end the use of fossil fuels within ten years. The changes, estimated to cost roughly $2.5 trillion per year, would be financed in part by higher taxes on the wealthy. She has said she has an "open mind" about nuclear power's role in the Green New Deal, but has been criticized for ignoring it in her proposals for the deal. Ocasio-Cortez criticized the American companies Activision Blizzard and Apple for censoring pro-democracy protesters in Hong Kong. She co-signed a letter to Activision Blizzard CEO Bobby Kotick that read, "As China amplifies its campaign of intimidation, you and your company must decide whether to look beyond the bottom line and promote American values—like freedom of speech and thought—or to give in to Beijing's demands in order to preserve market access." A bipartisan letter by Ocasio-Cortez and seven other lawmakers fiercely criticized the NBA's handling of a controversy involving a tweet by Houston Rockets general manager Daryl Morey supporting pro-democracy protesters in Hong Kong. The lawmakers wrote that the NBA's response not only "sold out an American citizen" but also "reinforces the Chinese Communist Party view that those who point to Chinese repression in Hong Kong are as best stating opinions, not facts", as well as being "a betrayal of fundamental American values". Ocasio-Cortez voted to withdraw U.S. military aid for Saudi Arabia's war in Yemen. She criticized President Trump's administration for escalating tensions with Iran, saying that it would bring the country into a "military conflict that is completely irresponsible". In May 2018, Ocasio-Cortez criticized the Israel Defense Forces' use of deadly force against Palestinians participating in the 2018 Gaza border protests, calling it a "massacre" in a tweet. In a July 2018 interview, she said she was "a proponent of a two-state solution" and called Israel's presence in the West Bank an "occupation of Palestine". After being asked to elaborate, she responded she was not "the expert on geopolitics on this issue". Her use of the term "occupation" drew backlash from a number of pro-Israel groups and commentators. Others defended her remarks, citing the United Nations' designation of the territory in the West Bank as occupied. In July 2019, Ocasio-Cortez voted against a House resolution introduced by Representative Brad Schneider condemning the Global Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions Movement targeting Israel. The resolution passed 398–17. Ocasio-Cortez warned that Israel's planned annexation of Palestinian territories in the occupied West Bank "would lay the groundwork for Israel becoming an apartheid state". She wrote to U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo that she would work to "pursue legislation that conditions the $3.8 billion in U.S. military funding to Israel to ensure that U.S. taxpayers are not supporting annexation in any way". AIPAC condemned the letter, saying it threatened the U.S.-Israel relationship. In May 2021, Ocasio-Cortez issued a statement condemning Israel's evictions of Palestinian families from their homes in Israeli-occupied East Jerusalem. She criticized President Biden for saying Israel "has a right to defend itself", arguing that "blanket statements like these [with] little context or acknowledgement of what precipitated this cycle of violence—namely, the expulsions of Palestinians and attacks on Al Aqsa—dehumanize Palestinians [and] imply the US will look the other way at human rights violations." On September 23, 2021, Ocasio-Cortez abruptly changed her vote from "no" to "present" on a bill providing $1 billion for Israel's Iron Dome missile defense system, citing the "hateful targeting" she had received surrounding the bill. She apologized for her vote after receiving criticism on social media from some supporters of Israel and of Palestine but maintained her opposition to the bill due to Israel's "persistent human rights abuses against the Palestinian people". On July 18, 2023, Ocasio-Cortez and eight other progressive Democrats (Jamaal Bowman, Cori Bush, Andre Carson, Summer Lee, Ilhan Omar, Ayanna Pressley, Delia Ramirez, and Rashida Tlaib), voted against a congressional non-binding resolution proposed by August Pfluger that "the State of Israel is not a racist or apartheid state", that Congress rejects "all forms of antisemitism and xenophobia", and that "the United States will always be a staunch partner and supporter of Israel". She argued that it was wrong to pair "accusations of antisemitism with real concerns around the human rights crisis in the region" and that combining a "vote on antisemitism and discussion of apartheid and...two-tier legal systems is very cynical". Ocasio-Cortez condemned Hamas's October 2023 attack on Israel. On October 12, 2023, she criticized Israel's plans to block electricity, water and fuel from Gaza, calling it a "collective punishment and a violation of international law." On October 16, she signed a resolution calling for a ceasefire in the 2023 Israel–Hamas war. She criticized the United States' support for Israel's bombing of the Gaza Strip that killed thousands of Palestinian civilians in Gaza. In 2023, Ocasio-Cortez was among 56 Democrats to vote in favor of H.Con.Res. 21, which directed President Joe Biden to remove U.S. troops from Syria within 180 days. After the contentious confirmation of Supreme Court Justice Amy Coney Barrett, Ocasio-Cortez urged Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden to expand the court if he won and their party achieved a Senate majority. In April 2021, she supported a bill to increase the Court's size. She again called for expansion in September 2021 after the Court voted not to grant an emergency stay of the Texas Heartbeat Bill. In March 2022, Ocasio-Cortez called on Justice Clarence Thomas to resign over his wife's texts urging President Trump's chief of staff to overturn the 2020 presidential election, raising a possible impeachment effort if he did not. After the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in June 2022, Ocasio-Cortez called for the impeachment of Justices Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh. She alleged that the two had lied under oath about their views on Roe during their confirmation hearings. In June 2022, after the Supreme Court made several consequential rulings and granted certiorari to Moore v. Harper, which has a potential impact on future elections, Ocasio-Cortez tweeted that the U.S. was "witnessing a judicial coup in progress". The next month, she claimed the Court had "gone rogue" and that impeachment, expansion, introduction of ethics rules and recusal requirements should be considered. She added that Thomas should certainly be impeached. Two days later she led House progressives calling on the Democratic leadership in Congress to strip the Court of its jurisdiction "in the areas of abortion, marriage equality, non-procreative intimacy, and contraception". They pointed to Thomas's concurring opinion in Dobbs, which suggested revisiting cases that established a constitutional right to contraception, same-sex marriage and gay sex. In 2019, Ocasio-Cortez supported pay raises for Congress. She wrote, "It's not a fun or politically popular position to take. But consistency is important. ALL workers should get cost of living increases. That's why minimum wage should be pegged to inflation, too." Members of Congress make $174,000 annually; the Speaker makes $223,500 and House leaders make $193,400. Republican Kevin McCarthy joined her in supporting the pay raise, saying he did not want Congress to be a place where only the wealthy can afford to serve. Colleagues such as Joe Cunningham opposed the measure, saying, "We didn't come up here to give ourselves a raise". On June 28, 2018, Ocasio-Cortez told CNN she would support the impeachment of President Trump, citing Trump's alleged violations of the Emoluments Clause and saying that "we have to hold everyone accountable and that no person is above that law." Ocasio-Cortez has called for "solidarity with Puerto Rico". She has advocated for granting Puerto Ricans further civil rights, regardless of Puerto Rico's legal classification. She advocates for voting rights and disaster relief. Ocasio-Cortez was critical of FEMA's response to Hurricane Maria and the federal government's unwillingness to address Puerto Rico's political status. She believes the federal government should increase investment in Puerto Rico. In August 2020, Ocasio-Cortez and Nydia Velázquez introduced the Puerto Rico Self-Determination Act of 2020, which was referred to the House Committee on Natural Resources. On March 18, 2021, Ocasio-Cortez, Velázquez and Senator Bob Menendez introduced a new version, the Puerto Rico Self-Determination Act of 2021, with over 70 co-sponsors in the House and seven co-sponsors in the Senate, including one Republican. Ocasio-Cortez supports transitioning to a single-payer healthcare system and considers medical care a human right. She says that a single government health insurer should cover every American, reducing overall costs. Her campaign website says, "Almost every other developed nation in the world has universal healthcare. It's time the United States catch up to the rest of the world in ensuring all people have real healthcare coverage that doesn't break the bank." Many 2020 Democratic presidential candidates adopted the Medicare-for-all proposal. In June 2019 and in July 2021, Ocasio-Cortez proposed legislation that would remove restrictions placed on researching the medical use of psilocybin. Ocasio-Cortez supports codifying the right to abortion, and is a member of the House pro-choice caucus. On July 19, 2022, after the Supreme Court overruled Roe v. Wade in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, she and 17 other members of Congress were arrested in an act of civil disobedience for refusing to clear a street during a protest for reproductive rights outside the Supreme Court Building. Ocasio-Cortez campaigned in favor of establishing tuition-free public colleges and trade schools. She has said she is still paying off student loans herself and wants to cancel all student debt. Ocasio-Cortez has expressed support for defunding and abolishing the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agency on multiple occasions. In February 2018 she called it "a product of the Bush-era Patriot Act suite of legislation" and "an enforcement agency that takes on more of a paramilitary tone every single day". That June, she said she would "stop short of fully disbanding the agency", and would rather "create a pathway to citizenship for more immigrants through decriminalization". She later clarified that this does not mean ceasing all deportations. Two days before the primary election, Ocasio-Cortez attended a protest at an ICE child-detention center in Tornillo, Texas. She was the only Democrat to vote against H.R. 648, a bill to fund and reopen the government, because it funded ICE. In January 2021, Ocasio-Cortez expressed support for the Roadmap to Freedom resolution to guide future immigration policy championed by Representative Pramila Jayapal. The resolution aims to safeguard vulnerable migrants while reducing criminal prosecutions of migrants. In June 2019, Ocasio-Cortez compared the detention centers for undocumented immigrants under the Trump administration at the Mexico–United States border to "concentration camps". She cited "expert analysis", linking to an Esquire article quoting Andrea Pitzer, author of One Long Night: A Global History of Concentration Camps, who had made a similar claim. Some academics supported Ocasio-Cortez's use of the term for the forced detention of immigrants; other figures strongly criticized it, saying it showed disrespect for Holocaust victims. In response to criticism from both Republicans and Democrats, Ocasio-Cortez said they had conflated concentration camps ("the mass detention of civilians without trial") with death camps. She refused to apologize for using the term: "If that makes you uncomfortable, fight the camps, not the nomenclature." In July 2019, Ocasio-Cortez visited migrant detention centers and other facilities in Texas as part of a congressional delegation to witness the border crisis firsthand. She described the conditions as "horrifying". She said that women in one cell said they had not had access to showers for two weeks and were told to drink water from the toilet when their sink broke, and that one woman said that her daughters had been taken from her two weeks earlier and she did not know where they were. In February 2021, when the Biden administration reopened a Carrizo Springs, Texas, center to house unaccompanied migrant children, Ocasio-Cortez responded that such actions "never will be okay—no matter the administration or party". For short-term measures to address the situation, she called for mandatory licensing for such centers and urged reconsideration of how the centers are "contracted out". Ocasio-Cortez is a proponent of LGBTQ rights and LGBTQ+ equality. She has said she supports the LGBTQ community and thanked its members for their role in her campaign. She publicized and later appeared on a video game live stream to help raise money for Mermaids, a UK-based charity for trans children. At the January 2019 New York City Women's March in Manhattan, Ocasio-Cortez gave a detailed speech in support of measures needed to ensure LGBTQ equality in the workplace and elsewhere. She has also spoken in support of transgender rights, specifically saying, "Trans rights are civil rights are human rights." At the House Committee on Oversight and Reform on February 27, 2020, Ocasio-Cortez argued for LGBTQ equality in the context of her religious background. Referencing a Catholic hospital that refused a hysterectomy for a transgender man, she argued, "[t]here is nothing holy about rejecting medical care of people, no matter who they are, on the grounds of what their identity is. There is nothing holy about turning someone away from a hospital." Ocasio-Cortez supports the "defund the police" movement. Asked to give her interpretation of the movement, she said, "It looks like a suburb", and "affluent white communities already ... fund youth, health, housing etc more than they fund police. When a teenager or preteen does something harmful in a suburb ... White communities bend over backwards to find alternatives to incarceration.... Why don't we treat Black and Brown people the same way?" Ocasio-Cortez endorsed Bernie Sanders in the 2020 presidential election and appeared with him at speaking engagements. Campaign rallies she attended with him drew the largest crowds of any presidential rally. On January 25, she joined Michael Moore to fill in for Sanders at a rally at the University of Iowa while Sanders was attending the Senate's Trump impeachment trial. In January 2020, Ocasio-Cortez announced the formation of a PAC called Courage to Change, which announced its first endorsements of progressive Democrats on February 21, 2020. Some progressive commentators subsequently criticized Ocasio-Cortez for having only endorsed two Democratic primary challengers by March 3. A notable omission was Cori Bush, who had received an endorsement from Ocasio-Cortez two years prior. In July 2023, Ocasio-Cortez endorsed President Joe Biden in his reelection campaign in the 2024 presidential election. The MIT Lincoln Laboratory named the asteroid 23238 Ocasio-Cortez after her when she was a senior in high school in recognition of her second-place finish in the 2007 Intel International Science and Engineering Fair. Ocasio-Cortez was named the 2017 National Hispanic Institute Person of the Year by Ernesto Nieto. In 2019, Ocasio-Cortez received the Adelle Foley Award. She was named as one of the 2019 BBC 100 Women. After the death of Ocasio-Cortez's father in 2008, her mother and grandmother moved to Florida due to financial hardship. She still has family in Puerto Rico, where her grandfather was living in a nursing home before he died in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria. Ocasio-Cortez said that "to be Puerto Rican is to be the descendant of ... African Moors [and] slaves, Taino Indians, Spanish colonizers, Jewish refugees, and likely others. We are all of these things and something else all at once—we are Boricua." Ocasio-Cortez is a Catholic. She discussed her faith and its impact on her life and her campaign for criminal justice reform in an article she wrote for America, the magazine of the Jesuit order in the United States. She said she has some Sephardic Jewish ancestry. During the 2018 election campaign, Ocasio-Cortez resided in Parkchester, Bronx, with her partner, web developer Riley Roberts. They became engaged in April 2022 in Puerto Rico. OpenSecrets, analyzing financial disclosure forms, ranked Ocasio-Cortez one of the least wealthy members of the 116th Congress, with a maximum net worth of $30,000. In May 2021, Ocasio-Cortez said that she had been in psychotherapy to cope with the "extraordinarily traumatizing" January 6 United States Capitol attack. She said she "did not know if [she] was going to make it to the end of that day alive". List of Hispanic and Latino Americans in the United States Congress List of Democratic Socialists of America who have held office in the United States Nuyorican Puerto Ricans in New York City Puerto Ricans in the United States Women in the United States House of Representatives Elected on both Democratic Party and WFP ballot lines in New York via electoral fusion. Democratic Socialists of America is not a registered political party, instead, it is a political organization for those with democratic socialist ideologies. "New York's 14th Congressional District election, 2022". Ballotpedia. Retrieved October 17, 2023. Stein, Jeff (August 5, 2017). "9 questions about the Democratic Socialists of America you were too embarrassed to ask". Vox. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Murphy, Tim (June 26, 2018). "A progressive insurgent just pulled off the biggest Democratic primary upset in years". Mother Jones. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Krieg, Gregory (June 27, 2018). "A 28-year-old Democratic Socialist just ousted a powerful, 10-term congressman in New York". Atlanta, Georgia: CNN. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. in the most shocking upset of a rollicking political season Merica, Dan; Bradner, Eric (June 27, 2018). "The biggest night so far for progressives and other takeaways from Tuesday night's primaries". CNN. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. It was the most shocking result of 2018's political season so far ... Grigoryan, Nune; Suetzl, Wolfgang (2019). "Hybridized political participation". In Atkinson, Joshua D.; Kenix, Linda (eds.). Alternative Media Meets Mainstream Politics: Activist Nation Rising. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 190. ISBN 9781498584357. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. Watkins, Eli (November 6, 2018). "Ocasio-Cortez to be youngest woman ever elected to Congress". CNN. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved November 6, 2018. McCammond, Alexi (November 28, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has as much social media clout as her fellow freshman Democrats, combined". Axios. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. Neufeld, Jennie (June 27, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is a Democratic Socialists of America member. Here's what that means". Vox. Archived from the original on December 3, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Isserman, Maurice (November 8, 2018). "Socialists in the House: A 100-Year History from Victor Berger to Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez". In These Times. Archived from the original on February 11, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2018. "Unlikely Advocates: Worker Co-ops, Grassroots Organizing, and Public Policy". Non Profit News | Nonprofit Quarterly. August 8, 2023. Retrieved August 16, 2023. "Meet Alexandria". Ocasio 2018. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Igoe, Katherine J. (February 8, 2019). "Who Is Alexandria Ocasio Cortez's Brother Gabriel? He's an Artist and Musician". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on February 12, 2019. Retrieved February 10, 2019. Wang, Vivian (June 27, 2018). "Who Is Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez? A Democratic Giant Slayer". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Newman, Andy; Wang, Vivian; Ferré-Sadurní, Luis (June 27, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Emerges as a Political Star". The New York Times. New York City. Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Goldmacher, Shane (December 10, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: Jewish, Too?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved February 9, 2019. Groves, Stephen (July 3, 2018). "Rising Political Star Ocasio-Cortez Defends Bronx Roots". U.S. News & World Report. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved December 13, 2019. Keane, Isabel (June 28, 2018). "Bronx political star Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez commuted to Yorktown for high school". lohud.com. Archived from the original on December 1, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2018. Yglesias, Matthew (January 4, 2019). "Conservatives' Obsession With Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's High School, Explained". Vox. Vox Media. Archived from the original on November 1, 2019. Retrieved November 15, 2019. There's nothing in any way extraordinary about the yearbook photos, though they do establish that she went by "Sandy Ocasio" at the time. "Intel ISEF Alumna Headed to Capitol Hill". Society for Science & the Public. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2018. King, Georgia Frances (December 1, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez won a science-fair prize for research involving free radicals". Quartz. Archived from the original on October 14, 2020. Retrieved September 30, 2020. Malloy, Daniel (June 23, 2018). "This Berniecrat Aims to Unseat a Queens Power Broker". Ozy. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018. Chamberlin, Alan (August 30, 2007). "JPL Small-Body Database Browser". Archived from the original on August 9, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018. "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez named 2017 NHI Person of the Year". NHI Magazine. December 31, 2017. Archived from the original on July 3, 2018. Retrieved July 3, 2018. Lungariello, Mark; Bandler, Jonathan (July 4, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez takes heat for growing up in Westchester". lohud.com. Archived from the original on January 27, 2019. Retrieved September 4, 2018. Scahill, Jeremy (June 27, 2018). "An Interview With Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the Young Democratic Socialist Who Just Shocked the Establishment". The Intercept. Archived from the original on September 3, 2018. Retrieved September 4, 2018. One of the big decisions though was that I was at Standing Rock in December 2016 ... The day after I got off camp, I was contacted by a progressive organization, Brand New Congress, which was seeking to mount non-corporate candidates in the 2018 midterm. Chavez, Aida; Grim, Ryan (May 22, 2018). "A Primary Against the Machine: a Bronx Activist Looks to Dethrone Joseph Crowley, The King of Queens". The Intercept. New York City: First Look Media. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Joyce, A.P. (February 28, 2018). "Meet the young progressive Latina trying to oust one of the most powerful Democrats in the House". Mic. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Evon, Dan (April 3, 2019). "Did U.S. Rep. Ocasio-Cortez Graduate Cum Laude from Boston University?". Snopes. Retrieved August 10, 2020. Hajela, Deepti (June 26, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, former BU student, shocks Crowley in Democratic primary in NY - The Boston Globe". BostonGlobe.com. Retrieved May 29, 2023. "Boston University Commencement 2011" (PDF). May 22, 2011. p. 21. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 23, 2015. "Distinguished Alumni Award". Boston University Arts & Sciences: Economics. 2019. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved November 11, 2020. Cepeda, Esther J. (January 9, 2019). "Despite Her Haters, Youth Is Not Wasted on Ocasio-Cortez". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020. Retrieved July 20, 2020. There will always be people claiming she's 'unqualified', even though Ocasio-Cortez has an undergraduate degree in international relations with a minor in economics and has worked as an educator, a publisher and a community organizer. Frej, Willa (June 27, 2018). "5 Reasons Why Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Stands Out". HuffPost. New York City: Huffington Post Media Group. Archived from the original on July 17, 2018. Retrieved July 6, 2018. Gambino, Lauren (June 27, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: who is the new progressive star of the Democrats?". The Guardian. London, England. Archived from the original on July 2, 2018. Retrieved August 10, 2018. Beekman, Daniel (July 17, 2012). "Diverse group of start-ups thriving at city-sponsored Sunshine Bronx Business Incubator in Hunts Point". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018. Vincent, Isabel; Klein, Melissa (March 10, 2019). "Company founded by Ocasio-Cortez in 2012 still owes $1,870 in taxes". Fox News. Archived from the original on September 25, 2019. Retrieved September 25, 2019. "Collegiate World Series – The National Hispanic Institute". Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Retrieved January 7, 2019. Weigel, David (June 27, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, 28, takes out 10-term congressman in New York's Democratic primary". National Post. Retrieved December 13, 2019. Goldmacher, Shane; Martin, Jonathan (June 26, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Defeats Joseph Crowley in Major Democratic House Upset". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018. Murphy, Tim (June 27, 2018). "How Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez pulled off the year's biggest political upset". Mother Jones. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Piaella, Gabriella (June 25, 2018). "The 28-Year-Old at the Center of One of This Year's Most Exciting Primaries". The Cut. New York City: New York Media. Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Relman, Eliza (January 6, 2019). "The Truth about Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: The inside story of how, in just one year, Sandy the bartender became a lawmaker who triggers both parties". The Insider. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved March 23, 2019. Soon after Election Day in 2016, Ocasio-Cortez's younger brother, Gabriel, sent her name to Brand New Congress, a Bernie Sanders-inspired group recruiting candidates for the House and Senate. When she got home from her North Dakota trip, a leader of BNC called her out of the blue with an ask: Will you run for US Congress in New York's 14th district? "TALKING SOCIALISM | Catching up with AOC". Budds, Diana (July 2, 2018). "The brilliance of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's bold campaign design". Vox. Archived from the original on January 27, 2019. Retrieved January 27, 2019. Manriquez, Pablo (December 14, 2018). "The Gospel of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez". Roll Call. Archived from the original on January 27, 2019. Retrieved January 27, 2019. Cadigan, Hilary (November 7, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Learned Her Most Important Lessons from Restaurants". Bon Appetit. Archived from the original on January 27, 2019. Retrieved January 27, 2019. Ferguson, John (March 3, 2019). "Talented US Democrat Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez tipped to light up White House". dailyrecord. Archived from the original on March 3, 2019. Retrieved November 25, 2019. Leigh, Anna (2020). Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: Political Headliner. Lerner Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-5415-7747-3. Archived from the original on February 18, 2020. Retrieved November 25, 2019 – via Google Books. Lewis, Errol (June 16, 2018). "Democratic Primary Debate: Crowley vs. Ocasio-Cortez". NY 1 Inside City Hall. Archived from the original on August 20, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Lewis, Rebecca (June 19, 2018). "Crowley sends 'worst NYC lawmaker' to debate in his place". City and State NY. Archived from the original on August 20, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2018. The New York Times Editorial Board (June 19, 2018). "If You Want to Be Speaker, Mr. Crowley, Don't Take Voters for Granted". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 16, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Freedlander, David (June 27, 2018). "Ocasio-Cortez Not Only Beat Crowley – She Beat Old-School New York Politics". New York Intelligencer. Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018. Chamberlain, Samuel (June 26, 2018). "Rep. Joe Crowley defeated in Democratic primary upset by newcomer Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez". Fox News Channel. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Grace Segers (June 28, 2018). "Ocasio-Cortez's victory is already reshaping New York politics". City & States. Archived from the original on December 30, 2020. Retrieved December 30, 2020. Gray, Briahna; Grim, Ryan (June 13, 2018). "Under Pressure From Progressives, Rep. Ro Khanna Endorses Both Democrats in Contentious New York Primary". The Intercept. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved July 1, 2018. Pesantez, Nathaly (June 25, 2018). "Crowley, Ocasio-Cortez, Face Off in New York Congressional Primary Tomorrow". Jackson Heights Post. Archived from the original on December 30, 2020. Retrieved December 30, 2020. Serfaty, Sunlen; Krieg, Gregory; Killough, Ashley (July 25, 2018). "Crowley plans to stay on third party line in November, won't endorse a Democratic leadership replacement". CNN. Archived from the original on December 15, 2020. Retrieved December 30, 2020. Parry, Bill (May 25, 2018). "More than a dozen Queens elected officials endorse Crowley in primary challenge". QNS. Retrieved December 30, 2020. Arney, Michael (June 29, 2018). "People vs. Money: Socialist beats Wall Street Dem in New York". People's World. Archived from the original on December 17, 2020. Retrieved December 30, 2020. Hagen, Lisa (June 26, 2018). "Political stunner! Crowley knocked off by millennial challenger". The Hill. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018. "New York State Primary Election Results". The New York Times. June 28, 2017. Archived from the original on July 22, 2018. Retrieved July 20, 2018. Jacobs, Ben (June 26, 2018). "Democrats see major upset as socialist beats top-ranking US congressman". The Guardian. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018. Elliott, Philip (June 26, 2018). "How Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Pulled Off the Biggest Upset of 2018". Time. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018. Hajela, Deepti (June 27, 2018). "Political novice Ocasio-Cortez scores for progressives in NY". Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018. "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: Millennial beats veteran Democrat". BBC News. June 26, 2018. Archived from the original on July 1, 2018. Retrieved June 30, 2018. Gstalter, Morgan (July 12, 2018). "Ocasio-Cortez accuses defeated Dem of mounting third-party challenge". The Hill. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved March 11, 2019. Crowley stated on live TV that he would absolutely support my candidacy, Ocasio-Cortez tweeted on Thursday. Instead, he's stood me up for all three scheduled concession calls ... Numerous phone calls have been set up but Ocasio-Cortez's aides have failed to follow through with providing a phone number, the aide [to Crowley] said. Seitz-Wald, Alex (June 26, 2018). "High-ranking Democrat ousted in stunning primary loss to newcomer Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez". NBC News. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Chomsky, Noam (July 27, 2018). "Noam Chomsky on Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's "Spectacular" Victory & Growing Split in Democratic Party". Democracy Now (Interview). Interviewed by Amy Goodman. Archived from the original on July 30, 2018. Retrieved July 30, 2018. Kilgore, Ed (June 26, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Ousts Joe Crowley, a Top House Democrat, in Stunning Upset". New York. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. In a shocker that is already being compared to the 2014 primary loss by then–House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, the chairman of the House Democratic Caucus (the fourth-ranking leadership position among House Democrats), ten-term veteran Joe Crowley has been upset by 28-year-old first-time candidate Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez in the Bronx-Queens 14th congressional district. Stelter, Brian (June 27, 2018). "Progressive media saw the Ocasio-Cortez upset coming". CNN. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Lachman, Samantha (June 11, 2014). "With Eric Cantor Defeat, Congressional Republicans Lose Only Non-Christian". HuffPost. Archived from the original on March 6, 2017. Retrieved June 28, 2018. Cantor [was] the second-ranking House Republican and highest-ranking Jewish member. Nichols, John (August 15, 2018). "The Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Effect The Democratic party's new rock star is storming the country on behalf of insurgent populists". The Nation. Archived from the original on August 23, 2018. Retrieved August 22, 2018. Nahmias, Laura (July 5, 2018). "'You can beat the establishment': Ocasio-Cortez crashes Democratic primaries The New York insurgent is stepping on toes as she rallies progressive candidates across the country". Politico. Archived from the original on July 7, 2018. Retrieved July 7, 2018. Verhovek, John (July 11, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Wins Primary in District She Was not Running In". ABC News. Archived from the original on July 11, 2018. Retrieved July 12, 2018. Nilsen, Ella (July 11, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez just won a House primary as a write-in – for a district she wasn't intending to run in". Vox. Archived from the original on July 11, 2018. Retrieved July 12, 2018. Sakellis, Eleni (June 17, 2018). "Prof. Anthony Pappas Running for Congress". The National Herald. Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018. "Anthony Pappas, PhD". St. John's University. Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Matthews, Karen; Hajela, Deepti (June 28, 2018). "Shock, then ambition: Ocasio-Cortez hopes to shake up House". Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018. Mitchell, Andrea (June 27, 2018). "Bernie Sanders weighs in on Ocasio-Cortez's victory". MSNBC. Archived from the original on July 10, 2018. Retrieved August 10, 2018. Wise, Justin (October 1, 2018). "Obama announces endorsement for Ocasio-Cortez". The Hill. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved November 7, 2018. Alter, Charlotte (August 6, 2018). "The Democratic Split isn't Left vs. Center. It's Old vs. New". Time. Archived from the original on August 7, 2018. Retrieved November 17, 2018. Lovett, Kenneth (July 12, 2018). "Ocasio-Cortez rips Crowley for not giving up Working Families Party line". New York Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved July 20, 2018. Julia Conley (July 19, 2018). "Cynthia Nixon and Ocasio-Cortez Blast 'Cynical' Cuomo-Backed Women's Equality Party for Endorsing Male Centrists in New York". Common Dreams. Archived from the original on August 11, 2019. Retrieved August 11, 2019. Lieberman, Joseph (July 17, 2018). "Vote Joe Crowley, for Working Families". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 19, 2018. Retrieved July 20, 2018. Cantor, Dan (July 25, 2018). "Vote against Joe Crowley in November: The Working Families Party chair regrets not endorsing Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on July 26, 2018. Retrieved September 9, 2018. "Certified Results from the November 6, 2018 General Election for U.S. Congress" (PDF). New York Board of Elections. p. 6. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 4, 2019. Retrieved January 4, 2019. Montgotmery, David (July 10, 2019). "AOC's chief of staff isn't just running her office. He's guiding a movement". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 16, 2023. Edmondson, Catie (September 18, 2019). "How Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez learned to play by Washington's rules". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 18, 2020. Retrieved April 12, 2020. Smarsh, Sarah (July 26, 2018). "They thought this was Trump country. Hell no". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on May 23, 2020. Retrieved April 3, 2020. Wallace-Wells, Benjamin (July 23, 2018). "Bernie Sanders and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez in Kansas". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on July 26, 2018. Retrieved July 30, 2018. Calderone, Michael (June 27, 2018). "Times takes heat for missing Crowley's defeat". Politico. Archived from the original on June 30, 2018. Retrieved July 1, 2018. Sullivan, Margaret (June 28, 2018). "Perspective: Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's victory points to a media failure that keeps repeating". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved June 30, 2018. Progressive Alexandria Ocasio Cortez Is Primarying Corporate Democrat in New York. The Jimmy Dore Show. Archived from the original on November 1, 2017. Retrieved January 27, 2019 – via YouTube. Tarleton, John; McMullan-Laird, Lydia (June 1, 2018). "Beat The Machine" (PDF). The Indypendent. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 22, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2019. Tarleton, John; McMullen-Laird, Lydia (May 31, 2018). "Alexandria vs. Goliath". The Indypendent. Archived from the original on April 27, 2020. Retrieved December 13, 2019. Ocasio-Cortez, Alexandria [@aoc] (June 2, 2018). "Holy SMOKES! Our campaign is the FRONT PAGE STORY of NYC's classic monthly, @TheIndypendent! Look for it on a sidewalk corner near you all month long! If you find one, snap a pic and @ me – this one's from @analisacantu pic.twitter.com/LHOFQp7Fuq" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Shannon, Joel (June 27, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez wins an upset and her supporters want the media to say her name". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 30, 2018. Fang, Marina (September 12, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Explains This Year's Progressive Wave in Michael Moore's New Film". HuffPost. Archived from the original on January 16, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2019. mmflint (August 9, 2018). "Michael Moore's Fahrenheit 11/9: Official Trailer – In Theaters 9/21". YouTube. Archived from the original on March 3, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2019. Lyons, Kate; Walters, Joanna (January 4, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez's response to jibes about college dance video? A congressional dance video". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 13, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2019. May, Tiffany (January 4, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Dancing Video Was Meant as a Smear, but It Backfired". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 14, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2019. Warren, Elizabeth (April 17, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Is on the 2019 Time 100 List". Time. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2019. Ryan, Patrick (January 28, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez surprises at Sundance premiere of her emotional new documentary". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 1, 2019. Retrieved January 31, 2019. Palmer, Ewan (January 28, 2019). "Knock Down the House: Watch Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Receive Standing Ovation From Sundance Audience After Documentary Screening". Newsweek. Archived from the original on January 30, 2019. Retrieved January 31, 2019. Wilkinson, Alissa (April 22, 2019). "Watch: Netflix's Knock Down the House trailer is here to make politics feel a little more hopeful". Vox. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 1, 2019. Dennis Harvey (January 23, 2022). "'To the End' Review: A Doc on Pushing For Climate Policy Change". Variety. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Leslie Felperin (January 23, 2022). "'To the End' Review: Rachel Lears' New AOC Doc at Sundance – The Hollywood Reporter". Hollywoodreporter.com. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Jill Goldsmith (April 19, 2022). "Tribeca Festival 2022 Lineup With Jon Hamm, Ray Romano, Bryan Cranston – Deadline". Deadline.com. Retrieved May 20, 2022. "Ocasio-Cortez Faces Two Challengers in NY1 Congressional Primary Debate". www.ny1.com. Archived from the original on October 23, 2020. Retrieved October 18, 2020. "United States House of Representatives elections in New York, 2020". Ballotpedia. Archived from the original on March 25, 2020. Retrieved October 18, 2020. Klar, Rebecca (May 26, 2020). "Ocasio-Cortez challenger drops out of GOP primary". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 18, 2020. Retrieved October 18, 2020. Gibson, Brittany (October 15, 2020). "The Politician as Organizer". The American Prospect. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved October 18, 2020. "Analysis | AOC playing 'Among Us' shouldn't surprise you. Streams are a beloved pastime". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved August 4, 2021. Rivera, Joshua (October 24, 2020). "AOC played Among Us and achieved what most politicians fail at: acting normal". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 25, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Farrell, Jack; Ferrell, Harry (October 24, 2020). "AOC just played 'Among Us' on Twitch. Over 400,000 people came to watch". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 24, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Kastrenakes, Jacob (October 20, 2020). "AOC's debut Twitch stream is one of the biggest ever". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2020. Brown, Abram. "Almost 700,000 People Flock To Twitch To Watch Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Play Hit Video Game 'Among Us'". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2020. Holt, Kris (November 27, 2020). "AOC will return to Twitch tonight for another round of 'Among Us'". Engadget. Archived from the original on November 28, 2020. Retrieved November 28, 2020. Iovine, Anna (November 28, 2020). "AOC raised $200,000 for charity on her 'Among Us' Twitch stream Friday". Mashable. Retrieved January 18, 2021. "AOC cruises to renomination uncontested after other 'Squad' members faced primaries". August 24, 2022. "New York 14th Congressional District Election Results". The New York Times. November 8, 2022. Retrieved November 9, 2022. "Membership of the 116th Congress: A Profile" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. December 17, 2020. Retrieved February 27, 2021. "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (@AOC)". Archived from the original on January 1, 2019. Retrieved January 13, 2019 – via Twitter. Edmondson, Catie; Emily Cochrane; Lisa Friedman (January 6, 2019). "Liberal Freshmen Are Shaking the Capitol Just Days into the New Congress". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2019. Retrieved January 12, 2019. "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (@ocasio2018)". Archived from the original on January 7, 2019. Retrieved January 4, 2019 – via Instagram. Benwell, Max (February 12, 2019). "💃😂✊: How Ocasio-Cortez beat everyone at Twitter in nine tweets". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2019. Paul, Deanna (July 10, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez faces lawsuits for blocking Twitter critics after appeals court ruling on Trump". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. McDonald, Scott (July 9, 2019). "Democrat and Republican sue Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez for blocking them on Twitter". Newsweek. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2019. Bowden, John (November 4, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez apologizes for blocking ex-politician on Twitter, settles lawsuit". The Hill. Archived from the original on November 6, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2019. Gershman, Jacob; Morris, Betsy (November 4, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Apologizes for Blocking Twitter Critic". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on November 6, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2019. acast (April 15, 2019). "AOC unfiltered | Skullduggery on acast". acast. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved May 6, 2019. Shaban, Hamza (April 15, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez quits Facebook, calls social media a 'public health risk'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved May 6, 2019. Gaudiano, Nicole (November 13, 2018). "On her first day of orientation on Capitol Hill, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez protests in Pelosi's office". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 27, 2018. Retrieved November 26, 2018. LeBlanc, Paul (November 22, 2018). "Ocasio-Cortez backs Pelosi for speaker as long as she 'remains the most progressive candidate'". CNN. Archived from the original on November 26, 2018. Retrieved November 26, 2018. Relman, Eliza (December 6, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and House freshmen are protesting orientation". Business Insider. Archived from the original on December 17, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Hignett, Katherine (August 2, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Blasts 'Bipartisan' Congressional Orientation: 'Lobbyists are here ... Where's Labor?'". Newsweek. Archived from the original on December 16, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Gangitano, Alex (December 6, 2018). "Ocasio-Cortez rips presence of lobbyists at orientation event". The Hill. Archived from the original on December 17, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Gajanan, Mahita (January 18, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's First House Speech Broke a C-SPAN Record". Time. Archived from the original on January 18, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Wyatt, Tim (February 8, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez delivers devastating dissection of US financial system and political corruption in congress speech". The Independent. Archived from the original on February 10, 2019. Retrieved February 12, 2019. Wolfson, Sam (February 14, 2019). "Why Ocasio-Cortez's lesson in dark money is the most-watched political video". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2019. Zapotosky, Matt; Demirjian, Karoun; Helderman, Rosalind S.; Bade, Rachael; Harris, Shane (February 27, 2019). "Michael Cohen concludes his testimony: 'I will not sit back'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 15, 2019. Retrieved June 15, 2019. Pindell, James (February 27, 2019). "10 big moments from Cohen's testimony". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on March 2, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2019. Picchi, Aimee (February 28, 2019). "Michael Cohen claims Trump lies about his wealth – here's why it matters". CBS News. Archived from the original on March 2, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2019. Caroline, Fredrickson (February 28, 2019). "How Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Won the Cohen Hearing". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 2, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2019. Woodruff, Judy; Shields, Mark; Brooks, David (March 1, 2019). "Shields and Brooks on Cohen testimony, North Korea summit". PBS NewsHour (Transcript). Archived from the original on March 2, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2019. Kalmbacher, Colin (August 24, 2020). "AOC's Grilling of Michael Cohen Was What Led to NY AG's Fraud Case Against Trump Businesses, Eric Trump". lawandcrime.com. Archived from the original on August 24, 2020. Retrieved August 25, 2020. Bustillo, Ximena (February 16, 2024). "Trump ordered to pay over $355M for fraudulent business practices in New York". NPR. Retrieved February 17, 2024. Snodgrass, Erin (September 23, 2022). "Here's how AOC unwittingly sparked NY Attorney General Letitia James' lawsuit into Donald Trump and the Trump Organization". Business Insider. Retrieved February 27, 2024. Garcia, Eric; Feinberg, Andrew (September 23, 2022). "How Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez inadvertently sparked the New York attorney general's Trump lawsuit". The Independent. Retrieved February 27, 2024. Bump, Phillip (March 21, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is not the 'second most talked-about politician in America'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019. Kludt, Tom (March 21, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, 'second most talked-about politician in America,' graces Time cover". CNN. Archived from the original on March 23, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019. Alter, Charlotte (March 21, 2019). "'Change Is Closer Than We Think.' Inside Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's Unlikely Rise". Time. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019. Wonder Woman of the left, Wicked Witch of the right, Ocasio-Cortez has become the second most talked-about politician in America, after the President of the United States. ... No lawmaker in recent memory has translated so few votes into so much political and social capital so quickly. Bauder, David (July 18, 2019). "Stats show how AOC dominating social media attention". Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019. Smith, David (April 12, 2019). "Fox mentions Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez for 42 days running – 3,181 times". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 15, 2019. Retrieved April 15, 2019. Stelter, Brian (July 22, 2019). "How Fox News fuels Trump's fixation with AOC and Ilhan Omar". CNN Business. Archived from the original on July 22, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2019. Backus, Fred; Salvanto, Anthony (July 21, 2019). "Most Americans disagree with Trump's "go back" tweets – CBS News poll". CBS News. Archived from the original on July 22, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2019. O'Rourke, Ciara (March 27, 2019). "No, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez probably didn't say that". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on July 12, 2019. Retrieved July 12, 2019. Putterman, Samantha (July 11, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez didn't say she speaks with herself because she has 'a very good brain.' That was Trump". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on July 11, 2019. Retrieved July 12, 2019. Calder, Chad (July 20, 2019). "Gretna police officer suggests U.S. Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez 'needs a round' in social media post". nola.com. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019. Smith, Allan (July 22, 2019). "Louisiana police officer fired after suggesting AOC should be shot". NBC News. Archived from the original on July 22, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2019. Ruiz, Michelle (October 28, 2020). "AOC'S Next Four Years". Vanity Fair. Condé Nast. Ruffner, Zoe (August 21, 2020). "Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez on Self-Love, Fighting the Power, and Her Signature Red Lip". Vogue. Condé Nast. Testa, Jessica (September 16, 2021). "A.O.C.'s Met Gala Designer Explains Her 'Tax the Rich' Dress". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 16, 2021. Clark, Dartunorro (September 15, 2021). "Conservative group files ethics complaint against AOC for attending Met Gala". NBC News. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Mishra, Stuti (September 15, 2021). "AOC hit with ethics complaint over Met Gala appearance as she fires back at critics". The Independent. Archived from the original on September 15, 2021. Vakil, Caroline (September 15, 2021). "Conservative Group Files Ethics Complaint over Ocasio-Cortez Appearance at Met Gala". The Hill. Epstein, Kayla (January 16, 2019). "For Ayanna Pressley, the beauty of unexpected wins led to Congress and a historic office". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved July 15, 2019. "Trump to congresswomen of colour: Leave the US". BBC News. July 15, 2019. Archived from the original on October 3, 2019. Retrieved December 13, 2019. Ocasio-Cortez, Alexandria [@AOC] (July 15, 2019). "It's important to note that the President's words yday, telling four American Congresswomen of color "go back to your own country," is hallmark language of white supremacists. Trump feels comfortable leading the GOP into outright racism, and that should concern all Americans" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Naylor, Brian (July 15, 2019). "Lawmakers Respond To Trump's Racist Comments: We Are Here To Stay". NPR. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved July 20, 2019. Dale, Daniel (July 20, 2019). "Fact check: Trump falsely accuses Ocasio-Cortez of calling Americans 'garbage'". CNN. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2019. Greenberg, Jon; Sherman, Amy (July 18, 2019). "Fact-checking Trump's misleading attacks on Omar, Ocasio-Cortez in North Carolina". Archived from the original on July 22, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2019. DePillis, Lydia (February 7, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez's Green New Deal: What's in it". CNN. Archived from the original on February 7, 2019. Retrieved February 7, 2019. Breuninger, Kevin (February 7, 2019). "Does Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez really want to get rid of 'farting cows'? Not yet, at least". CNBC. Archived from the original on November 19, 2020. Retrieved December 3, 2020. Quinn, Liam (February 14, 2019). "Dems divided on Green New Deal after Mitch McConnell ramps up pressure". Fox News. Archived from the original on February 23, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Cillizza, Chris (February 8, 2019). "Nancy Pelosi just threw some serious shade at Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's 'Green New Deal'". CNN. Archived from the original on February 23, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Friedman, Thomas (January 8, 2019). "The Green New Deal Rises Again". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2019. The Green New Deal that Ocasio-Cortez has laid out aspires to power the U.S. economy with 100 percent renewable energy within 12 years and calls for "a job guarantee program to assure a living wage job to every person who wants one", "basic income programs" and "universal health care", financed, at least in part, by higher taxes on the wealthy. Goodkind, Nicole (February 25, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez wonders whether Americans should stop having children in the face of climate change". Newsweek. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved December 3, 2020. Meyer, Robinson (March 26, 2019). "The 3 Democrats Who Voted Against the Green New Deal". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019. The Senate rejected the Green New Deal on Tuesday, in a decisive 57–0 vote that Democrats decried as a political stunt meant to divide their caucus. All the Republican senators opposed the measure. They were joined by four senators who caucus with the Democrats – Senator Joe Manchin, from the coal-heavy state of West Virginia, along with Senators Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, Doug Jones of Alabama, and Angus King of Maine. Battenfield, Joe (March 26, 2019). "Green New Fail as Dems shun GOP-forced vote on climate bill". Boston Herald. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2019. an early vote on the Green New Deal on Tuesday and not a single U.S. Senator, including the measure's sponsor, Massachusetts' Ed Markey – signed on to the overly ambitious environmental overhaul Taylor, Matthew (March 22, 2019). "Labour members launch Green New Deal inspired by US activists". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 10, 2019. Retrieved April 16, 2019. Clark, Dartunorro (November 9, 2021). "Twitter flags GOP lawmaker's anime video depicting him killing Ocasio-Cortez, attacking Biden as 'hateful conduct'". NBC News. Retrieved November 25, 2021. Khan, Mariam; Cathey, Libby; Siegel, Benjamin; Turner, Trish (November 17, 2021). "House votes to censure GOP Rep. Gosar, remove him from committees over violent video". ABC News. Retrieved November 25, 2021. "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez fires back at GOP over Gosar's violent video". CNN. November 17, 2021. Retrieved November 25, 2021. Walsh, Deirdre (November 17, 2021). "Rep. Gosar is censured over an anime video depicts him killing AOC". NPR. Retrieved November 25, 2021. Lillis, Mike (July 21, 2020). "Ocasio-Cortez accosted by GOP lawmaker over remarks: 'That kind of confrontation hasn't ever happened to me'". The Hill. Retrieved July 22, 2020. "Lawmaker reportedly verbally accosts Ocasio-Cortez". CNN. July 21, 2020. Archived from the original on July 22, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2020. Smith, Allan (July 22, 2020). "GOP congressman offers semi-apology to AOC after she says he called her 'disgusting' and 'crazy'". NBC News. Archived from the original on July 22, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2020. Broadwater, Luke (July 22, 2020). "Ocasio-Cortez Upbraids Republican After He Denies Vulgarly Insulting Her". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 17, 2021. "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez denounces 'sexist slur by congressman'". BBC. July 23, 2020. Archived from the original on July 23, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2020. Sprunt, Barbara (July 23, 2020). "'I Could Not Allow That To Stand': Ocasio-Cortez Rebukes Republican For Vulgar Insult". NPR. Archived from the original on July 23, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2020. Cohen, Jason (April 21, 2020). "New York congresswoman wants COVID nursing home fatalities released to the public". Bronx Times. Retrieved March 13, 2021. Katersky, Aaron; Lenthang, Marlene (March 13, 2021). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Chuck Schumer, other NY political leaders call for Cuomo to resign". ABC News. Retrieved March 13, 2021. Givhan, Robin (February 2, 2021). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez shared her personal story and revealed our collective trauma". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 3, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2021. McCarthy, Bill (February 4, 2021). "Ask PolitiFact: Where was Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez during the Capitol riot?". The Poynter Institute. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Peiser, Jaclyn (February 2, 2021). "Ocasio-Cortez reveals she's a sexual assault survivor, recounts 'trauma' of Capitol riot: 'I thought everything was over'". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 4, 2021. "Fact check: Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez did not claim that she was in the Capitol during siege, nor that rioters entered her office". Reuters. February 5, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2021. Sprunt, Barbara (February 2, 2021). "'Many Of Us Narrowly Escaped Death': Rep. Ocasio-Cortez Recounts Capitol Insurrection". NPR. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Homer, Michelle (February 19, 2021). "US Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez raises more than $2 million to help Texans recover from nightmare winter storm". KHOU. Retrieved February 20, 2021. Shalvey, Kevin (February 21, 2021). "AOC doubled her fundraising total for Texas storm victims to $4 million, as she joined fellow lawmakers in Houston to continue relief efforts". Business Insider. Retrieved February 22, 2021. DeBenedetto, Paul; Ernst, Sara (February 22, 2021). "Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Raises $5 Million For Texas Winter Storm Relief". Houston Public Media. Retrieved February 24, 2021. Janowski, Elizabeth (February 19, 2021). "AOC raises over $3M for Texas relief, heads to Houston after blasting Cruz for Mexico trip". ABC News. Retrieved February 21, 2021. "WATCH: Sen. Gillibrand, Rep. Ocasio-Cortez hold news conference on postal banking". PBS NewsHour. April 15, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Annie Grayer (November 6, 2021). "These 6 House Democrats voted against the infrastructure bill. These 13 Republicans voted for it". CNN. Retrieved November 6, 2021. Weisman, Jonathan; Cochrane, Emily; Edmondson, Catie (November 7, 2021). "House Passes $1 Trillion Infrastructure Bill, Putting Social Policy Bill on Hold". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved November 8, 2021. Lowery, Wesley (September 8, 2022). "AOC". GQ. Retrieved September 8, 2022. "Israeli intelligence docs detail alleged UNRWA staff links to Hamas, including 12 accused in Oct. 7 attack" (News article). CBS News. Tel Aviv, Israel: Associated Press (AP) and CBS. January 29, 2024. Archived from the original on January 29, 2024. Retrieved January 29, 2024. Ocasio-Cortez, Alexandria (January 29, 2024). "Cutting off support to @UNRWA - the primary source of humanitarian aid to 2 million+ Gazans - is unacceptable" (Post on 𝕏). 𝕏 (Formerly Twitter). @AOC. Retrieved January 29, 2024. Cutting off support to @UNRWA - the primary source of humanitarian aid to 2 million+ Gazans - is unacceptable. Among an organization of 13,000 UN aid workers, risking the starvation of millions over grave allegations of 12 is indefensible. The US should restore aid immediately. Desiderio, Andrew; Heather Caygle (January 22, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez and liberal freshmen join Oversight Committee". Politico. Archived from the original on January 23, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2019. "Committees and Caucuses". Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. December 13, 2012. Retrieved March 8, 2021. "Caucus Membrs". US House of Representatives. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 3, 2021. "Members". House Pro Choice Caucus. August 19, 2021. Sources describing Ocasio-Cortez as "progressive" include: Luscombe, Richard (February 15, 2022). "Ocasio-Cortez: 'Very real risk' US democracy won't exist in 10 years". The Guardian. Retrieved March 12, 2024. "Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, other progressives to visit left-ruled Latin American nations". Los Angeles Times. August 3, 2023. Retrieved March 12, 2024. Kelly, Caroline (April 15, 2019). "Pelosi calls AOC's progressive wing 'like, five people' | CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved March 12, 2024. Sources describing Ocasio-Cortez as "left-wing" include: "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez takes aim at the 'worship' of 'meh'". NBC News. March 10, 2019. Retrieved March 12, 2024. "Left-wing AOC was with her fiancé at a Brooklyn cinema when pro-Palestine supporters accosted her, demanding she say the word 'genocide'". Yahoo News. March 9, 2024. Retrieved March 12, 2024. "'The US establishment thinks Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is too radical – with an impending climate disaster, the worry is she isn't radical enough'". The Independent. August 11, 2018. Retrieved March 12, 2024. Sources describing Ocasio-Cortez as "left-wing populist" include: Kirchner, Stephen. "Lessons from quantitative easing in the United States: A guide for Australian policymakers". www.ussc.edu.au. Retrieved March 12, 2024. Ross Coleman, Aaron (August 22, 2020). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and the future of the left". Vox. Retrieved March 4, 2021. "What Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's victory says about Democrats' future". Christian Science Monitor. ISSN 0882-7729. Retrieved March 12, 2024. Rhodes-Purdy, Matthew; Navarre, Rachel; Utych, Stephen (March 9, 2023). The Age of Discontent: Populism, Extremism, and Conspiracy Theories in Contemporary Democracies. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-009-27941-3. Sources describing Ocasio-Cortez as "far-left" include: Belvedere, Matthew J. (July 5, 2019). "Biden suggests Ocasio-Cortez's far-left politics won't play in a general election against Trump". CNBC. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Ehrlich, Jamie (July 7, 2019). "AOC hits back at Pelosi for knocking far-left lawmakers who voted against border bill | CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Lillis, Mike (February 14, 2022). "Ocasio-Cortez laments 'sh– show' of Congress". The Hill. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Bauder, David (March 11, 2019). "Hero or villain, Ocasio-Cortez remains a media fixation". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Litvan, Laura (July 13, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez and Her Liberal Blessing Sought by 2020 Democrats - BNN Bloomberg". BNN Bloomberg. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Zoellner, Danielle (February 21, 2020). "AOC launches plan to block non-progressive Democrats with all-female candidates". The Independent. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Kullgren, Ian (July 1, 2018). "Ocasio-Cortez discusses 'Democratic Socialist' label". Politico. Archived from the original on July 16, 2018. Retrieved July 16, 2018. Democratic congressional nominee Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said Sunday she embraces the 'Democratic Socialist' label but doesn't want to force other Democrats to do the same. 'It's part of what I am; it's not all of what I am,' she said on 'Meet the Press' on NBC. 'And I think that's a very important distinction.' Ocasio-Cortez, Alexandria (July 13, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez" (Interview). Interviewed by Margaret Hoover. PBS. Archived from the original on July 17, 2018. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Burke, Michael (March 10, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez: 'Capitalism is irredeemable'". The Hill. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Kaufman, Dan (July 7, 2018). "Progressive Populism Can Save Us From Trump". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2019. The recent primary upset of Joe Crowley, the fourth-ranking Democrat in the House, by Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, showcased the electoral strength of her platform, which included single-payer health insurance and tuition-free college and trade school. Stein, Jeff (June 27, 2018). "Analysis | What Ocasio-Cortez wants for America after beating Joe Crowley". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 30, 2018. Cummings, William (June 24, 2019). "Bernie Sanders unveils plan to forgive $1.6 trillion in student loan debt". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 24, 2019. Retrieved June 25, 2019. Suderman, Peter (August 2, 2018). "How Republican Hypocrisy Lifts Social Democrats". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 21, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2019. Although true-blooded socialists – Democratic Socialists, to be precise – remain a relatively small niche within the Democratic Party, they are having a visible impact on the party's agenda, with nearly every likely 2020 presidential contender embracing Medicare for all. Bernie Sanders's 2016 campaign galvanized progressive support for the idea of Democratic Socialism, and this year, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has embraced not only the label but also a blue-sky vision of American socialism – free public college, a jobs guarantee, guaranteed family leave and more – unbound by moderate liberal worries about government overreach or overspending. Goldmacher, Shane (June 27, 2018). "An Upset in the Making: Why Joe Crowley Never Saw Defeat Coming". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2019. She drew support for her progressive platform that included abolishing the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency, Medicare for all and a federal jobs guarantee. Steiger, Kay (June 27, 2018). "A top House Democrat just lost his primary – to a socialist". Vox. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Krieg, Gregory (January 8, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, activist groups map out next steps in Green New Deal fight". CNN. Archived from the original on January 16, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2019. The idea of a Green New Deal has, in just a few months, become a central piece of Ocasio-Cortez's agenda and attracted the attention of ambitious national Democrats. Cooper, Anderson (January 6, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: The Rookie Congresswoman Challenging the Democratic Establishment". CBS 60 Minutes. Archived from the original on January 12, 2019. Retrieved January 12, 2019. "Modern Monetary Theory". Initiative on Global Markets. University of Chicago. 2019. Relman, Eliza (January 7, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez says the theory that deficit spending is good for the economy should 'absolutely' be part of the conversation". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Gans, Jared (May 31, 2023). "Republicans and Democrats who bucked party leaders by voting no". The Hill. Retrieved June 6, 2023. Stein, Jeff; Gregg, Aaron (April 18, 2019). "U.S. military spending set to increase for fifth consecutive year, nearing levels during height of Iraq war". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 21, 2023. Schnell, Mychael (December 23, 2022). "Ocasio-Cortez only Democrat to vote 'no' on spending package". The Hill. Retrieved August 21, 2023. Stewart, Emily (October 30, 2020). "Exclusive: Rashida Tlaib and AOC have a proposal for a fairer, greener financial system – public banking". Vox. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2020. Henney, Megan (March 3, 2021). "AOC slams debate over $15 minimum wage as 'utterly embarrassing'". Fox Business. Retrieved March 8, 2021. Trotta, Daniel (June 1, 2019). "Rep. Ocasio-Cortez returns to bartending to promote fair wages". Reuters. Retrieved June 6, 2021. Bryant, Miranda (June 1, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez: $2.13 minimum wage for tipped workers is 'indentured servitude'". The Guardian. Queens, New York. Retrieved June 6, 2021. Sisak, Michael R. (January 23, 2021). "Deal ends weeklong strike at largest US produce market". Associated Press. Retrieved January 23, 2021. Inskeep, Steve (September 25, 2019). "Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Wants America To Talk About Poverty". NPR. Archived from the original on September 25, 2019. Retrieved September 26, 2019. Choi, Matthew (April 1, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez floats 70 percent tax on the super wealthy to fund Green New Deal". Politico. Archived from the original on January 6, 2019. Retrieved April 12, 2019. Stein, Jeff (January 5, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez wants higher taxes on very rich Americans. Here's how much money that could raise". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 5, 2019. With the help of tax experts, we produced some back-of-the-envelope estimates. "Right-leaning group: 70 percent tax suggested by Ocasio-Cortez might have little effect on revenue". The Hill. January 14, 2019. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Slattery, Denis (January 2, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez to vote against Pelosi rules package on first day in Congress over 'paygo'". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2019. Retrieved January 14, 2019. McPherson, Lindsey (January 3, 2019). "House adopts rules package with few Democratic defections over PAYGO provision". Roll Call. Archived from the original on January 14, 2019. Retrieved January 14, 2019. Coy, Peter; Dmitrieva, Katia (January 17, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Is the Darling of the Left, Nightmare of the Right". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Aronoff, Kate (June 25, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez on Why She Wants to Abolish ICE and Upend the Democratic Party". In These Times. ISSN 0160-5992. Archived from the original on December 27, 2018. Retrieved January 27, 2019. Fieldstadt, Elisha (February 14, 2019). "NY politicians at odds over Amazon's decision to pull out of Queens". NBC News. Archived from the original on February 16, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2019. "If we're willing to give away $3 billion for this deal, we could invest those $3 billion in our district ourselves if we wanted to. Pramuk, Jacob (November 13, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and New York Democrats criticize Amazon HQ2". CNBC. Archived from the original on February 28, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2019. Davidson, Paul (February 17, 2019). "Politicians squabble over who is to blame for Amazon decision to ditch New York". USA Today. Thiessen, Marc A. (February 21, 2019). "Opinion | Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is an economic illiterate – and that's a danger to America". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 5, 2019. Retrieved July 12, 2019. Ocasio-Cortez, Alexandria (2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's Platform: Mobilizing Against Climate Change". Ocasio2018.com (campaign website). Archived from the original on January 16, 2019. Retrieved January 27, 2019. John, Bowden (January 22, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez: 'World will end in 12 years' if climate change not addressed". The Hill. Archived from the original on March 5, 2019. Retrieved March 5, 2019. Cummings, William (January 22, 2019). "'The world is going to end in 12 years if we don't address climate change,' Ocasio-Cortez says". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 7, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Zhao, Christina (January 22, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Warns, 'World Is Going to End in 12 Years,' Reiterating Claims of Recent U.N. Climate Change Report". Newsweek. Archived from the original on February 24, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Ezrati, Milton (February 19, 2019). "The Green New Deal And The Cost Of Virtue". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 26, 2019. Retrieved March 5, 2019. Cama, Timothy (November 24, 2018). "Five things to know about Ocasio-Cortez's 'Green New Deal'". The Hill. Archived from the original on November 26, 2018. Retrieved November 25, 2018. "Sunrise Movement Green New Deal". Sunrise Movement. Archived from the original on December 28, 2018. Toth, Jacqueline (May 6, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez: Green New Deal 'Leaves the Door Open' on Nuclear". Morning Consult. Archived from the original on May 9, 2020. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Berezov, Alex (May 15, 2019). "Dear Bernie & AOC, Yes, There's A Middle Ground: Nuclear Energy". acsh.org. Retrieved February 28, 2021. Conca, James (March 21, 2019). "Any Green New Deal Is Dead Without Nuclear Power". Forbes. Retrieved February 28, 2021. Lecher, Colin (October 18, 2019). "AOC and Ted Cruz call out Apple for dropping Hong Kong app in joint letter". The Verge. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved September 28, 2020. Axelrod, Tal (October 18, 2020). "Lawmakers condemn Apple, Activision Blizzard over censorship of Hong Kong protester". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 1, 2020. Retrieved September 28, 2020. Lane, Sylvan (October 9, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez, Ted Cruz join colleagues blasting NBA for 'outrageous' response to China". The Hill. Archived from the original on December 30, 2020. Retrieved December 23, 2020. Lutz, Eric (October 10, 2019). "The NBA Isn't the Only Company Tripping Over Itself to Appease China". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on December 30, 2020. Retrieved December 23, 2020. "Gallagher and Sasse Lead Call for NBA to Stand Against CCP Censorship and Bullying". United States House of Representatives. October 9, 2019. Archived from the original on December 30, 2020. Retrieved December 23, 2020. Carden, James (February 14, 2019). "The House Vote to End Support for the War on Yemen Shows How Much Has Changed". The Nation. Archived from the original on June 22, 2019. Retrieved August 2, 2019. DeMarche, Edmund (June 21, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez tells White House to 'put down its saber,' and negotiate with Iran". Fox News. Archived from the original on August 7, 2019. Retrieved August 2, 2019. Ocasio-Cortez, Alexandria [@AOC] (May 14, 2018). "This is a massacre. I hope my peers have the moral courage to call it such. No state or entity is absolved of mass shootings of protesters. There is no justification. Palestinian people deserve basic human dignity, as anyone else. Democrats can't be silent about this anymore" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Kaplan Sommer, Allison (June 27, 2018). "Democrat Who Slammed Israel for Gaza Killings Is Shock Winner of New York Primary". Haaretz. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Dunst, Charles (July 17, 2018). "Ocasio-Cortez criticizes 'occupation of Palestine', but admits she's no expert". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on November 19, 2018. Retrieved December 18, 2018. Da Silva, Chantal (July 18, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez sparked outrage after condemning Israel's "occupation" of Palestinian territory". Newsweek. Archived from the original on January 6, 2019. Retrieved January 6, 2019. Nguyen, Tina (November 26, 2018). ""I Think A Lot of Them Can't Hide Their Misogyny": How Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez De-Fanged The Fox News Haters". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 27, 2019. Retrieved January 6, 2019. Agerholm, Harriet (July 17, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez prompts outrage for accurately referring to Israel's 'occupation' of Palestinian territory". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 18, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2019. Ungar-Sargon, Batya (July 16, 2018). "Opinion | What Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Really Thinks About Israel". The Forward. Archived from the original on January 5, 2019. Retrieved January 6, 2019. Pink, Aiden (July 24, 2019). "Here Are The 17 Members Of Congress Who Voted Against Condemning BDS". The Forward. Archived from the original on July 25, 2019. Retrieved July 25, 2019. Schneider, Bradley Scott (July 23, 2019). "H.Res.246 – 116th Congress (2019-2020): Opposing efforts to delegitimize the State of Israel and the Global Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions Movement targeting Israel". www.congress.gov. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved July 25, 2019. Otterbeing, Holly (June 30, 2020). "Ocasio-Cortez raises AIPAC ire over effort to tie Israel aid to annexation". Politico. Archived from the original on July 25, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2020. Roberts, William (July 1, 2020). "US Democrats, rights groups warn against West Bank annexation". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020. Retrieved July 25, 2020. Magid, Jacob (May 9, 2021). "Sanders, Warren, Ocasio-Cortez slam Israel over pending Sheikh Jarrah evictions". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on May 9, 2021. Woodward, Alex (May 13, 2021). "'It's wrong': AOC hits out at Biden's Israel statement as Democrats demand end to Palestinian displacement". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Broadwater, Luke (September 24, 2021). "Ocasio-Cortez apologizes for her 'present' vote on Iron Dome funding". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved September 25, 2021. Wong, Scott; Kaplan, Rebecca; Stewart, Kyle (July 18, 2023). "House overwhelmingly passes resolution backing Israel after Rep. Jayapal calls it a 'racist state'". NBC News. Archived from the original on July 19, 2023. Retrieved July 18, 2023. "AOC decries 'bigotry and callousness' of pro-Palestinian rally in New York". The Guardian. October 10, 2023. "Ocasio-Cortez Slams Israel For Cutting Gaza's Power And Water Supply". HuffPost. October 12, 2023. "Progressive Democrats bring resolution calling for ceasefire in Israel-Hamas war". The Guardian. October 17, 2023. "Leftist Democrats invoke human rights law in scrutiny of Israel military aid". The Guardian. November 3, 2023. "H.Con.Res. 21: Directing the President, pursuant to section 5(c) of … -- House Vote #136 -- Mar 8, 2023". "House Votes Down Bill Directing Removal of Troops From Syria". U.S. News & World Report. Associated Press. March 8, 2023. Retrieved April 4, 2023. Mathers, Matt (October 27, 2022). "AOC urges Biden to pack supreme court, says GOP doesn't think Democrats have the 'stones to play hardball'". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Schultz, Marisa; Phares, Kelly. "AOC backs court-packing push: 'We should be expanding the court'". Fox News. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Roche, Darragh (September 2, 2021). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Leads Calls To Expand Supreme Court After Texas Abortion Law". Newsweek. Archived from the original on May 11, 2022. Wang, Amy B (March 29, 2022). "Ocasio-Cortez calls on Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas to resign". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Shanahan, Ed (June 27, 2022). "Ocasio-Cortez wants two justices impeached for 'lying under oath.'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Ocasio-Cortez, Alexandria [@AOC] (June 30, 2022). "We are witnessing a judicial coup in process. If the President and Congress do not restrain the Court now, the Court is signaling they will come for the Presidential election next. All our leaders - regardless of party - must recognize this Constitutional crisis for what it is" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Wilkins, Brett (July 1, 2022). "AOC says the U.S. is witnessing a "judicial coup"". Salon. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Vakil, Caroline (July 13, 2022). "Ocasio-Cortez: Supreme Court has 'gone rogue'". The Hill. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Vakil, Caroline (July 15, 2022). "Ocasio-Cortez, progressives call on Schumer, Pelosi to strip SCOTUS of abortion jurisdiction". The Hill. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Marcos, Cristina (June 11, 2019). "GOP leader, Ocasio-Cortez give boost to lawmaker pay hike". The Hill. Archived from the original on May 8, 2021. Retrieved April 8, 2021. "Primaries upend political landscape ahead of midterm elections and could spell trouble for Trump". San Francisco Examiner. Tribune News Service. Tribune News Service. June 27, 2018. Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018. Nelson, Louis (June 27, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez says she supports impeaching Trump". Politico. Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018. "Is Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez for Statehood?". Puerto Rico Report. June 27, 2018. Archived from the original on July 5, 2018. Retrieved July 4, 2018. Acevedo, Nicole (August 26, 2020). "New AOC, Velázquez bill sparks backlash from pro-statehood Puerto Ricans". NBC News. Retrieved January 28, 2021. Velazquez, Nydia M. (August 25, 2020). "Text – H.R.8113 – 116th Congress (2019-2020): Puerto Rico Self-Determination Act of 2020". www.congress.gov. Retrieved March 8, 2021. "Reps. Velazquez, Ocasio-Cortez, Senator Menendez Introduce Puerto Rico Self-Determination Act of 2021". March 18, 2021. "New bill on Puerto Rico status introduced by Reps. AOC, Velázquez, Sen. Menendez". NBC News. March 18, 2021. Clifford, Catherine (June 29, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: In a modern, moral, wealthy society, no person should be too poor to live". CNBC. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Haltiwanger, John (January 4, 2019). "This is the platform that launched Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a 28-year-old Democratic socialist, to the biggest political upset of the year". Business Insider. Archived from the original on June 30, 2018. Retrieved June 30, 2018. Reliford, Alexis (June 9, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Wants It To Be Easier To Study Magic Mushrooms & Other Psychedelics". www.refinery29.com. Retrieved February 8, 2021. Jaeger, Kyle (July 22, 2021). "AOC Promotes Research On Benefits Of Psychedelics Like Psilocybin And MDMA With New Amendment". Marijuana Moment. Retrieved July 23, 2021. "Reproductive Rights". Representative Ocasio-Cortez. September 17, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2022. Aratani, Lauren (July 19, 2022). "Democratic members of Congress arrested during pro-choice protest". The Guardian. Retrieved July 22, 2022. "Reps. Ocasio-Cortez and Omar among Democrats arrested at abortion rights protest". NBC News. July 19, 2022. Retrieved July 22, 2022. Chang, Clio (March 22, 2018). "Talking With Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the Woman Challenging One of New York's Political Kingmakers". Splinter News. Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018. Holmes, Jack (June 28, 2018). "Fox News Reminds Us Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's Platform Is ... Pretty Reasonable". Common Dreams. Archived from the original on July 12, 2018. Retrieved July 12, 2018. Siegelbaum, Max (June 27, 2018). "Early Arrival: Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez wins in upset over Joe Crowley". Documented NY. Archived from the original on July 13, 2018. Retrieved July 12, 2018. @ocasio2018 (August 21, 2018). "#AbolishICE means not having an agency that incarcerates children and sexually assaults women with impunity. It does not mean abolish deportation. Also, I have no problem saying white supremacy has no place in this country. It's the GOP that struggles to say that" (Tweet). Retrieved December 10, 2018 – via Twitter. Neuman, Scott (June 27, 2018). "Who Is Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez?". NPR. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Smith, Allan (January 24, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez is lone Democrat to vote against bill to reopen government". NBC News. Archived from the original on February 5, 2019. Retrieved February 7, 2019. For H.R. 648, see: "H.R. 648 – Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2019". Office of the Clerk. U.S. House of Representatives. January 23, 2019. Archived from the original on February 9, 2019. Retrieved February 7, 2019. Woodward, Alex (January 27, 2021). "Jayapal, AOC and progressive Democrats push 'overhaul' of US immigration system". The Independent. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2021. JTA (June 19, 2019). "The Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez 'concentration camp' debate, explained". Times of Israel. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved June 25, 2019. Gessen, Masha (June 21, 2019). "The Unimaginable Reality of American Concentration Camps". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on June 23, 2019. Retrieved June 23, 2019. Hignett, Katherine (June 24, 2019). "Academics rally behind Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez over concentration camp comments: 'She is completely historically accurate'". Newsweek. Archived from the original on August 23, 2019. Retrieved June 24, 2019. Lind-Guzik, Anna (June 20, 2019). "I'm a Jewish historian. Yes, we should call border detention centers "concentration camps"". Vox. Archived from the original on June 22, 2019. Retrieved June 23, 2019. Chernick, Ilanit (June 20, 2019). "Yad Vashem to Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: Learn about concentration camps". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on June 22, 2019. Retrieved June 22, 2019. Stolberg, Sheryl (June 18, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez Calls Migrant Detention Centers 'Concentration Camps,' Eliciting Backlash". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020. Rodrigo, Chris (June 18, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez dismisses criticism from 'shrieking Republicans'". The Hill. Archived from the original on June 23, 2019. Retrieved June 24, 2019. Gstalter, Morgan (June 19, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez stands by concentration camp remarks: 'I will never apologize'". The Hill. Archived from the original on June 23, 2019. Retrieved June 23, 2019. Mettler, Katie; DeBonis, Mike; Thebault, Reis (July 2, 2019). "Border agents confiscated lawmakers' phones. Joaquin Castro captured photo and video anyway". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2019. Villagran, Lauren (July 2, 2019). "'Broken' and 'horrifying': AOC, Joaquin Castro, lawmakers visit Texas border facilities". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2019. Ordoñez, Franco (February 25, 2021). "Biden Pledges That Border Shelter For Teens 'Won't Stay Open Very Long'". NPR. Retrieved March 3, 2021. Aggarwal, Mayank (February 24, 2021). "AOC joins backlash over Biden child migrant camp: 'This is not okay'". The Independent. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2021. Hartley, Eve (June 27, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez thanks LGBT community after landmark win". PinkNews. Archived from the original on July 6, 2018. Retrieved July 6, 2018. Dessem, Matthew (January 21, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Spent Her Weekend Dunking on Aaron Sorkin and Raising Money for Trans Kids". Slate. Archived from the original on January 21, 2019. Retrieved January 21, 2019. Burkholder, Katie (January 22, 2019). "AOC Gives Powerful Pro-LGBTQ Speech at NYC Women's March". Archived from the original on February 3, 2019. Retrieved February 17, 2019. Arnold, Amanda (January 21, 2019). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Casually Joins Gaming Livestream For a Good Cause". thecut.com. New York. Archived from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved April 12, 2019. Avery, Daniel (February 28, 2020). "Court Rules Transgender Man Can Sue Hospital That Canceled His Hysterectomy". Newsweek. Archived from the original on February 27, 2020. Retrieved February 28, 2020. DeMarche, Edmund (February 28, 2020). "Ocasio-Cortez says Jesus would be maligned in Congress". Fox News. Archived from the original on February 28, 2020. Retrieved February 28, 2020. "Rep AOC's Speech on Personal Faith at Admin's Religious Liberties Assault on LGBTQ Rights". YouTube. Oversight Committee. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved February 28, 2020. Dixon, Emily (June 12, 2020). "AOC Was Asked About Defunding the Police and Her Answer Went Viral". Marie Claire Magazine. Retrieved August 21, 2023. Nicosia, Dominic (December 27, 2019). "Speculation Of AOC's Presidential Run Goes Rampant As She Stumps For Sanders". International Business Times. Archived from the original on January 28, 2020. Retrieved January 27, 2020. Walker, Hunter (January 25, 2020). "AOC and Michael Moore urge Iowa voters not to 'play it safe' as they stand in for Sanders". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on January 25, 2020. Retrieved January 27, 2020. Marans, Daniel (January 12, 2020). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's New PAC Is Already Raising Big Money". HuffPost. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved February 22, 2020. Shabad, Rebecca (February 21, 2020). "AOC announces new PAC, endorses slate of progressive candidates for Congress". NBC News. Archived from the original on March 18, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Thompson, Alex; Otterbein, Holly (March 30, 2020). "The 'new' AOC divides the left". Politico. Archived from the original on April 10, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Price, Michelle (July 7, 2023). "Ocasio-Cortez endorses Biden's reelection campaign, sending a strong signal of Democratic unity". Associated Press. Retrieved August 21, 2023. "New York Primary Election Results: 14th Congressional District". The New York Times. August 17, 2020. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2020. "PEN Oakland Awards & Winners". PEN Oakland. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved March 26, 2020. Folley, Aris (October 16, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez, Thunberg, Rapinoe make BBC's 100 most inspiring women of 2019". The Hill. Archived from the original on April 15, 2020. Retrieved February 23, 2020. "'My Grandfather Died': Ocasio-Cortez Slams Trump's PR Denial". NBC New York. Associated Press. September 14, 2018. Archived from the original on September 29, 2018. Retrieved September 29, 2018. Ocasio-Cortez, Alexandria (June 27, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez on her Catholic faith and the urgency of a criminal justice reform". America. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2018. Innocence, in its mercy, partly excuses us from having to fully reckon with the spiritual gifts of forgiveness, grace and redemption at the heart of the Catechism: I believe in the forgiveness of sins. Citations for Jewish ancestry: Stanley-Becker, Isaac (December 9, 2018). "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez reveals Jewish ancestry at Hanukkah celebration". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 26, 2019. Smith, Allan (December 10, 2018). "Ocasio-Cortez reveals her Jewish heritage: 'I knew it! I sensed it!'". NBC News. Archived from the original on December 16, 2018. Retrieved January 26, 2019. Krupkin, Taly (December 10, 2018). "Ocasio-Cortez Shares Jewish Heritage at NY Event: 'My Family Were Sephardic Jews'". Haaretz. Archived from the original on December 10, 2018. Retrieved December 9, 2018. a very, very long time ago, generations and generations ago, my family consisted of Sephardic Jews. William, Cummings (December 11, 2018). "Incoming congresswoman Ocasio-Cortez reveals Jewish ancestry at New York Hanukkah event". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 18, 2020. Retrieved October 1, 2020. Sales, Ben (August 1, 2019). "Ocasio-Cortez talks about Israel, anti-Semitism, the Holocaust and Bernie Sanders". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved October 1, 2020. Hess, Abigail (November 8, 2018). "Youngest woman elected to Congress Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez can't afford an apartment in D.C." CNBC. Archived from the original on November 17, 2018. Retrieved November 17, 2018. Aleksander, Irina (October 15, 2018). "How Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Other Progressives Are Defining the Midterms". Vogue. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved November 17, 2018. Igoe, Katherine J. (January 15, 2019). "Everything We Know About Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's Boyfriend". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on February 18, 2019. Retrieved February 17, 2019. Relman, Eliza; Lahut, Jake. "Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez confirms she's engaged to longtime partner Riley Roberts: 'Yep! It's true'". Business Insider. Retrieved May 19, 2022. "Freshmen in the 116th Congress". Open Secrets. OpenSecrets. Retrieved March 10, 2021. Garner, Glenn (May 22, 2021). "Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Sought Therapy After 'Extraordinarily Traumatizing' Capitol Riots". People. Retrieved May 25, 2021. Lopez, Lynda (2020). AOC: The Fearless Rise and Powerful Resonance of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. New York: St. Martin's Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-250-25741-3. OCLC 1141032197. The Editors of New York magazine (2022). Take Up Space: The Unprecedented AOC. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-5011-6697-6. OCLC 1263661994. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Official website Campaign website Appearances on C-SPAN Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's file at PolitiFact Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress Profile at Vote Smart Portals:  Biography  Hispanic and Latino Americans  New York City  Politics  Puerto Rico  Socialism  United States