Spider-Man: Far From Home is a 2019 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character Spider-Man, co-produced by Columbia Pictures and Marvel Studios, and distributed by Sony Pictures Releasing. It is the sequel to Spider-Man: Homecoming (2017) and the 23rd film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). The film was directed by Jon Watts, written by Chris McKenna and Erik Sommers, and stars Tom Holland as Peter Parker / Spider-Man, alongside Samuel L. Jackson, Zendaya, Cobie Smulders, Jon Favreau, J. B. Smoove, Jacob Batalon, Martin Starr, Tony Revolori, Marisa Tomei, and Jake Gyllenhaal. In the film, Parker is recruited by Nick Fury (Jackson) and Mysterio (Gyllenhaal) to face the Elementals while he is on a school trip to Europe. Discussions for a sequel to Spider-Man: Homecoming began by October 2016, and the project was confirmed later that year. Holland, Watts, and the writers were all set to return by the end of 2017. In 2018, Jackson and Gyllenhaal joined the cast as Fury and Mysterio, respectively. Holland revealed the sequel's title ahead of filming, which began that July and took place in England, the Czech Republic, Italy, and the New York metropolitan area. Production wrapped in October 2018. The marketing campaign is one of the most expensive for a film ever and attempted to avoid revealing spoilers for Avengers: Endgame prior to its April 2019 release. Spider-Man: Far From Home premiered at the TCL Chinese Theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on June 26, 2019, and was theatrically released in the United States on July 2, as the final film in Phase Three of the MCU. The film received positive reviews with praise for its humor, action sequences, visuals, and the performances of Holland and Gyllenhaal. It grossed over $1.1 billion worldwide, making it the first Spider-Man film to pass the billion-dollar mark, the fourth-highest-grossing film of 2019, and became Sony Pictures' highest-grossing film and the 24th-highest-grossing film of all time. A sequel, Spider-Man: No Way Home, was released in December 2021. In Ixtenco, Mexico, Nick Fury and Maria Hill investigate an unnatural storm and encounter the Earth Elemental. Quentin Beck, a super-powered individual, arrives and defeats the creature. He is subsequently recruited by Fury and Hill. In New York City, the Midtown School of Science and Technology completes its year, which was restarted to accommodate the students who previously disintegrated five years earlier as a result of Thanos's actions; they had reappeared un-aged, thanks to the actions of the Avengers. The school organizes a two-week summer field trip to Europe, where Peter Parker—who is still mourning the death of his mentor Tony Stark—plans to reveal to classmate MJ his attraction to her. Happy Hogan informs Parker that Fury intends to contact him, but Parker ignores Fury's phone call. Parker and his classmates travel to Venice, Italy, where the Water Elemental attacks. While Parker helps protect his classmates, Beck arrives and defeats the creature. Fury meets with Parker and gives him Stark's eyeglasses, which were meant for his successor. The glasses enable him to communicate with and take command of the artificial intelligence E.D.I.T.H., which has access to Stark Industries' databases and commands a large orbital weapons supply. Beck claims to have entered from an alternate reality within the multiverse, where the four Elementals killed his family and destroyed his civilization. With only the Fire Elemental left to destroy, Beck predicts it will attack Prague, Czech Republic. Parker declines Fury's invitation to join the fight and returns to his class trip, but Fury secretly changes the class's itinerary to divert the students to Prague. Parker is forced to help Beck fight the Fire Elemental to again protect his friends. Beck manages to destroy the creature with Parker's help. Fury and Hill invite Parker and Beck to Berlin to discuss the formation of a new superhero team, but Parker decides that Beck should go alone and transfers control of E.D.I.T.H. to him. Once Parker leaves, Beck celebrates alongside ex-Stark Industries employees, with whom he had been working to masquerade as a superhero. Beck, who was fired from his position as Stark's holographic-illusions specialist for his unstable nature, is using advanced projectors to simulate his powers and the Elementals. He plans to use E.D.I.T.H.'s orbital weaponized drones to increase the scale of his illusions and fraudulently establish himself as an Avenger-level hero. After MJ tells Parker she knows he is Spider-Man, they discover that a piece of debris she retrieved during the battle with the Fire Elemental is a projector and the pair realize Beck's deception. Parker travels to Berlin, Germany, to warn Fury, but he is tricked by Beck with an elaborate illusion, revealing the names of his friends who know about Beck's plan before being hit by a train. Beck is unaware that Parker, though injured, has survived. In the Netherlands, Parker contacts Hogan, who flies him to London, England, where his classmates are. Beck uses E.D.I.T.H. to orchestrate a fusion of all the Elementals. He intends to kill Parker's friends during the staged attack, as Beck is concerned that they will expose him with their knowledge. Parker disrupts the illusions and an enraged Beck attacks him with drones. Parker regains control of E.D.I.T.H. and defeats Beck, who is hit by a misfired gunshot from one of the drones. Before he dies, Beck tells one of his associates to retrieve data from the drones. After returning to New York City, Parker begins a relationship with MJ. In a mid-credits scene, J. Jonah Jameson of TheDailyBugle.net broadcasts doctored footage of the London incident in which Beck frames Spider-Man for the drone attack and his death before exposing Spider-Man's secret identity to the world, much to Parker's shock. In a post-credits scene, Fury and Hill are revealed to be the Skrulls Talos and Soren in disguise, under orders from the real Fury while he is away in space commanding a group of Skrulls. Tom Holland as Peter Parker / Spider-Man: A high-school junior and Avenger who received spider-like abilities after being bitten by a radioactive spider. Director Jon Watts said that, in contrast to Spider-Man: Homecoming in which Parker longs for the responsibilities of an adult, in Far From Home he wants to hang onto his youth, saying, "This film is about the world telling him, 'It's time for you to step up and grow up, kid,' and he's saying, 'But I still want to be a kid and go on vacation.'" Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury: The former director of S.H.I.E.L.D., who is now in a situation where he does not have the level of control he is used to having. Watts describes Fury's relationship with Parker as "the mean new stepdad", contrasting his role with Tony Stark as a "supportive cool uncle" in Homecoming, saying, "Fury sees Peter Parker as an asset that he needs who is too preoccupied with a bunch of high school problems." Watts originally pitched Fury as a mentor to Parker in Homecoming. Zendaya as Michelle "MJ" Jones-Watson: Parker's classmate and love interest. Her full name, Michelle Jones-Watson, is revealed in the sequel Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021). Cobie Smulders as Maria Hill: A former high-ranking S.H.I.E.L.D. agent who works closely with Nick Fury. Jon Favreau as Happy Hogan: The head of security for Stark Industries and former driver and bodyguard of Tony Stark who looks after Parker. Watts noted Happy would be used to explore the idea of "trying to find your place in the world if the center of your world is gone" given his close friendship to Stark. J. B. Smoove as Julius Dell: Parker's teacher and a chaperone on his school trip to Europe. The role was written for Smoove after the writers and director enjoyed his performance alongside Holland in an Audi commercial short film produced to promote Homecoming. Jacob Batalon as Ned Leeds: Parker's best friend. His last name is confirmed on-screen in No Way Home. Martin Starr as Roger Harrington: Parker's academic decathlon teacher and a chaperone on his school trip to Europe. Tony Revolori as Eugene "Flash" Thompson: Parker's rival. Marisa Tomei as May Parker: Parker's aunt who is aware of his secret identity and wants him to be Spider-Man more so he can help with charitable causes. Jake Gyllenhaal as Quentin Beck / Mysterio: A former Stark Industries employee and holographic-illusions specialist who masquerades as a superhero from Earth-833 in the multiverse. He is recruited by Nick Fury to help Spider-Man stop the Elementals. Gyllenhaal shared ideas with the writers regarding the character's personality, and was drawn to the idea that Beck is "manipulating everyone's love of superheroes and that need for heroes". Gyllenhaal wanted to play the character's fake backstory as realistically as possible. Regarding Beck's relationship with Parker, Watts says that "If Tony Stark was sort of the mentor in the previous films, we thought it would be interesting to play Mysterio as almost like the cool uncle." Watts was excited to have Beck team with Fury and Parker as it introduced the character to the MCU "in a way that people weren't expecting." Angourie Rice and Jorge Lendeborg Jr. reprise their roles from Homecoming as Parker's classmates Betty Brant, Ned's on-and-off girlfriend, and Jason Ionello. Peter Billingsley reprises his role from Iron Man (2008) as scientist William Ginter Riva, a former employee of Stark Industries who now works with Beck. J. K. Simmons appears as J. Jonah Jameson in the mid-credits scene, marking the first time an actor has reprised a non-MCU role in an MCU film after Simmons portrayed a different incarnation of Jameson in Sam Raimi's Spider-Man film trilogy. Ben Mendelsohn and Sharon Blynn make uncredited cameo appearances in the post-credits scene as the Skrulls Talos and Soren, reprising their roles from Captain Marvel (2019); this scene reveals that they have been posing as Fury and Hill during the film, with deleted footage of Jackson and Smulders, originally intended for the opening scene, used in the reveal. Smulders learned about the twist from producer Kevin Feige shortly before the film's release. Additionally, Numan Acar portrays Fury's associate Dimitri, while Remy Hii plays Brad Davis, a popular student whom Parker sees as competition for MJ's affection, and Claire Rushbrook portrays Janice Lincoln, a woman working for Beck. Zach Barack, the first openly transgender actor in an MCU film, portrays one of Parker's new classmates, Zach, while Zoha Rahman also appears as a classmate of Parker's. Dawn Michelle King, an assistant editor on many MCU films including Far From Home, provides the voice for the artificial intelligence E.D.I.T.H. Jeff Bridges and Robert Downey Jr. appear as Obadiah Stane and Stark through the use of archival footage from Iron Man and Captain America: Civil War (2016), respectively. Images from previous MCU films of Downey Jr., Chris Evans, Scarlett Johansson, and Paul Bettany as Stark, Steve Rogers / Captain America, Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow, and Vision, respectively, are used in the film's opening "in memoriam" segment. In June 2016, Sony Pictures chairman Tom Rothman stated that Sony and Marvel Studios were committed to making future Spider-Man films after Spider-Man: Homecoming (2017). The following month, Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige said if additional films were made, the company had an early idea to follow the model of the Harry Potter film series, and have the plot of each film cover a new school year, with a second film intended to take place during Parker's junior year of high school. By October, discussions had begun for a second film, including which villain would be featured, according to Spider-Man actor Tom Holland, who was signed for two more Spider-Man films after Homecoming. In December, after the successful release of the first Homecoming trailer, Sony slated a sequel to the film for July 5, 2019. Sony's insistence that the sequel be released in 2019 complicated Marvel's preference for secrecy regarding their plans for Spider-Man in this film and their other MCU films, since the character would die at the end of Avengers: Infinity War (2018), and would not be resurrected before Avengers: Endgame in April 2019 by which time marketing for this film would have already begun. After being able to include Iron Man for Homecoming, Sony was revealed in June 2017 to have the use of another Marvel Studios-controlled character for the sequel. Feige stated that Marvel and Sony were "just starting to solidify our plans" for the film, and felt Spider-Man's appearances in Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame would "launch him off into a very new cinematic universe at that point", similar to how Captain America: Civil War (2016) "informed everything in Homecoming". Marvel and Sony both wanted Homecoming director Jon Watts returning for the sequel, with Feige saying "that's the intention for sure", and Watts said he was signed for another Spider-Man film. Feige said the sequel would have a subtitle like Homecoming, and would not feature "2" in the title. He added that filming was expected to begin in April or May 2018. As with Homecoming, Feige said the film's villain would be one that had not yet been seen in film. By July, Watts was in negotiations with the studios regarding his return for the sequel, and Marisa Tomei expressed interest in returning as Aunt May from the previous films. The film is set eight months after the conclusion of Avengers: Endgame. Watts felt dealing with many of the unanswered questions from Endgame posed "a fun creative challenge" for the Far From Home team. They looked to "make a movie that's in that world and deals with those stories but is also still [a] fun Spider-Man movie". For example, Ned, MJ, and Flash all turned to dust during the events of Infinity War along with Parker, while some of his classmates did not and are now five years older due to the events of Endgame. Watts compared this dynamic to the film Flight of the Navigator (1986), calling the situation "really weird ... but ... also something you can have a lot of fun with". At the end of August 2017, as the film was entering pre-production, Chris McKenna and Erik Sommers were in final negotiations to return from Homecoming to write the sequel. In early October, Jacob Batalon confirmed he would reprise his role of Ned in the sequel. Feige confirmed that Watts was returning to direct the sequel in December. By February 2018, Zendaya was slated to return for the film, reprising her role as MJ. Location scouting for the film began at the end of the month, as did the pre-visualisation process for the creative team to begin planning action sequences and visual effects for the film. By late April, Feige stated that filming was scheduled to begin in early July 2018, and would primarily occur in London. This was a change from the first film, which was mostly produced in Atlanta. Feige explained that one of the reasons behind this change in location was because a majority of the sequel would be spent around the world, outside New York City. A month later, Jake Gyllenhaal entered negotiations to play Mysterio, while Tomei and Michael Keaton were confirmed to reprise their respective roles of May and Adrian Toomes / Vulture; Gyllenhaal's casting was confirmed a month later, but Watts later stated that Keaton and Laura Harrier would not be appearing in the sequel. Also in May, McKenna and Sommers were also confirmed as the film's screenwriters. They began working on the film from a set of notes that Marvel had put together based on different influences and story ideas. This included the directive that the film would be releasing shortly after Endgame and would need to deal with the death of Stark due to the relationship between that character and Spider-Man that previous films had established. The film also needed to deal with the aftereffects of "the Blip", the five-year period between Infinity War and Endgame where half of all life disappeared. Mysterio was chosen to be the film's villain because he is one of Spider-Man's iconic villains that had yet to be featured in a film, and because his history of deception in the comics lent itself to a character who could take advantage of a Spider-Man that is mourning the death of Stark. This also allowed the writers to explore relevant modern themes such as fake news. Mysterio's plan went through several iterations, including an early suggestion that he could be an alien Skrull in disguise. The film reuses two of Spider-Man's costumes from the previous films: his main costume from Captain America: Civil War and Spider-Man: Homecoming, and the Iron Spider suit from Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame. It also introduces two new costumes: a black "stealth" costume given to Parker by Nick Fury, and a new, upgraded Spider-Man suit that Parker designs for himself at the end of the film. Marvel Studios' head of visual development Ryan Meinerding explained that Watts had wanted to include a suit inspired by the Spider-Man Noir version of the character, which led to the design of the more tactical stealth suit. He added that the suit represents Parker experimenting with being a new kind of superhero. Other tactical costumes from the comic books were looked at when developing this one, but Meinerding felt they looked less practical than the more straightforward Noir inspiration. The costume includes tactical goggles that can be flipped up. For Parker's new self-designed costume, Meinerding originally designed it with the idea that it would be made from Parker's webbing since that is the strongest material he has access to. Practical versions of the costumes were created by Ironhead Studio, who previously worked on The Amazing Spider-Man films. For Far From Home, Ironhead developed a skull cap for the costumes that has built-in fans to prevent the goggles from steaming up. They also developed a magnetic bellows system for connecting the goggles to the mask, so they could be easily removed but not fall off during action sequences. At the end of June 2018, Holland revealed the film's title to be Spider-Man: Far From Home. Feige explained that they decided to have Holland reveal the title because they thought it was likely that it would leak after filming began anyway. He compared the title to Spider-Man: Homecoming in that it is "full of alternate meaning" while continuing the use of "Home", and revealed the film's premise to be Parker and his friends going to Europe on summer vacation, away from their home of New York. Principal photography began on location in Hertfordshire, England, on July 2, 2018, under the working title Fall of George. Matthew J. Lloyd served as director of photography, after previously working with Watts on Cop Car (2015). Watts had wanted to work with Lloyd on Homecoming, but the cinematographer was working on Power Rangers (2017) at the time. Filming moved to London, with locations including East London, and at London Stansted Airport. Studio work occurred at Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden near Watford, England, where a Venice set was created on one of the studio's backlots. Shortly after filming began, set photos revealed Hemky Madera would return as bodega owner Mr. Delmar, while J.B. Smoove and Numan Acar joined the cast. By early August, Samuel L. Jackson and Cobie Smulders were confirmed to be appearing in the film, reprising their respective roles of Nick Fury and Maria Hill from previous MCU films, and Remy Hii joined the cast later in the month. Filming took place in Prague and Liberec in the Czech Republic in September, and moved to Venice by the end of the month. Filming moved to New York City and Newark, New Jersey in October, where it used the working title Bosco. Locations included areas around Madison Square Garden and Penn Station, and Newark Liberty International Airport. Filming wrapped on October 16, 2018. Lloyd explained that the creative team had approached the film as a road-trip story, and so he wanted to maintain the distinct look and feel of each location visited. This meant giving each stop on the school trip a distinct lighting scheme and color palette. For example, Lloyd visited Venice three times during location scouting to discuss how the scenes there would be filmed, and learned that the city has a "bright, pastel feel, where the light comes through and hits a building. It bathes people in this warm, sandy light". Prague, on other hand, has a "more warm and cool mix, and the beauty of that sort of Baroque, eastern-European architecture." The production took advantage of lighting already on the buildings in Prague, which are often lit for texture in real life. Lloyd felt comfortable working within the aesthetic of the MCU after acting as director of photography on the first season of the MCU television series Daredevil and the miniseries The Defenders, as well as working on additional photography for the films Thor: Ragnarok (2017) and Captain Marvel (2019). Lloyd originally began planning to use the Alexa 65 cameras that Marvel usually films with, but Sony asked that they focus on optimizing the footage for their 2K releases, so the production switched to Alexa Mini cameras. This ended up being a lot easier for the camera department to use on location, and for combining live-action shooting with visual effects elements. In late October 2018, Sony Pictures reached a new multi-film agreement with IMAX Corporation to release their films in IMAX, including Far From Home. At Sony's CCXP Brazil panel in December 2018, it was revealed that the Elementals—a group of characters based on the elements of water, earth, air, and fire—would appear in the film. The four Elementals are modeled after different Spider-Man villains from Marvel comic books: the water Elemental borrows from Hydro-Man, the fire Elemental borrows from Molten Man, the Earth Elemental borrows from Sandman, and the air Elemental borrows from Cyclone. The names of these other villains are not given to the characters in the film. Martin Starr was confirmed to be reprising his role as Mr. Harrington from Homecoming the next month. In April 2019, Sony moved the film's release date up to July 2, 2019. While promoting Endgame at a fan event in Shanghai, Feige said Far From Home would be the final film of the MCU's Phase Three, rather than the start of Phase Four as some had believed. Also in April, Jackson returned to do reshoots for the film. Discussing the film's mid-credits scene, Watts explained that they approached J.K. Simmons "as late as possible" before the film's release to ask him to reprise his role as J. Jonah Jameson from Sam Raimi's Spider-Man film trilogy, hoping to keep the cameo a surprise for fans. Watts acknowledged that there was a chance Simmons would not want to reprise the role, but stated that he never considered another actor, saying, "It's gotta be him. Like, if it wasn't him, it wasn't worth doing." After being pitched the idea for the cameo, Simmons called Raimi and received the director's blessing to return to the role for the new film. The MCU version of the character is brand new, not the Raimi version "from another dimension or multiverse". Simmons' footage was filmed in a Disney conference room in front of a green screen. Watts noted that Simmons' performance was over-the-top in Raimi's films, but now that same performance has real-world comparisons, such as Alex Jones. According to Feige, the changes in the real world also meant that moving the character from a newspaper editor to a "radical right news journalist that kind of scream[s] in front of the camera" made more sense. Simmons said he and Watts did not see "eye to eye" on the film's contemporary portrayal of the character versus his performance in Raimi's films. Watts described Far From Home as a "con man movie" with "so many layers of deception", and for the post-credits scene he felt that ending the film with "one last twist" was on theme. He felt that he owed the fans a more substantial post-credits scene than the jokey one at the end of Homecoming. The Far From Home scene depicts Fury on vacation, in a simulation, both of which are also themes in the film, and reveals that the Fury and Hill seen throughout the film are actually Skrulls in disguise. Watts felt this twist made sense after Fury's interactions with the Skrulls in Captain Marvel. Post-production for Spider-Man: Far From Home was completed in June 2019. The film's visual effects were provided by Framestore, Industrial Light & Magic, Image Engine, Sony Pictures Imageworks, Luma Pictures, Rising Sun Pictures, Scanline VFX, Territory Studio, and Method Studios. Janek Sirrs served as visual effects supervisor on the film, and explained that following the release of the animated film Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse (2018) the effects team looked for ways to use similarly inventive visuals in Far From Home. They ultimately did not use added effects to represent Spider-Man's Spider-sense because these did not fit within the live-action world or were too similar to previous effects, such as Daredevil's sonar vision. They did try to use Spider-Man's actions and the use of his abilities to show his growth since Homecoming, but to also show his "reach as always exceeding his grasp as he refines his superhero skills". The film's main-on-end title sequence was designed by Perception. Method Studios added Spider-Man to a Venice speedboat scene, using their Spider-Man suit asset from Homecoming. Image Engine created the Stark jet, drone, and satellite. The jet work included the creation of a new Spider-Man suit, for which the vendor had to design the interior of the suit based on a scan of a practical costume they were given. They also made a Netherlands tulip field for a scene that was filmed in a grass field in the UK. It required around two million digital tulips. Rising Sun Pictures created the holograms used by Mysterio when he first explains the Elementals to Spider-Man, which include simulations of black-holes and elements researched from real-world history and mythology. The company aimed for the holograms to have a similar quality to the ones that they had created for Captain Marvel. Mysterio was designed by Ryan Meinerding, Marvel Studios' head of visual development, to look like a combination of different Marvel heroes such as Thor and Doctor Strange. His fishbowl helmet is retained from the comics. Sirrs described the character as a "larger-than-life showman at heart" and almost a superhero version of Liberace. The digital model for Mysterio was created by Scanline. The Elementals consisted of animated figures, often driven by slowed-down motion-capture performances, with environmental effects layered on top. Scanline created Earth and Water, Luma created Fire, and Imageworks created the final amalgamation of the four creatures, referred to as the Super Uber Elemental (SUE). For the Fire Elemental, Luma created different looks and actions for the character to show Watts and Sirrs potential designs and movements for the character. This included a progression where the creature goes from being upright and humanoid to bigger and more hunched over as it consumes metal throughout the sequence. Watts responded positively to movements that looked more creature-like. The final battle was created by Imageworks, and consists of over 300 visual effects shots. In addition to creating the SUE—which required extensive effect simulations for the different combined elements such as "water tentacles", rocks, lava, and lightning—the company had to create a digital model of the Tower Bridge for the fight to take place around. The company attempted to fully render only small sections of the bridge where needed, but ultimately required around 80% of the bridge to be fully detailed due to how much of it is seen throughout the fight. They made use of Image Engine's Stark jet model and Scanline's Mysterio asset for the fight, and created the drone models and new Spider-Man suit that were used by the other vendors. They started with a single drone design that featured missiles, cannons, and Gatling guns, but this became repetitive during the battle and so flamethrower and sonic blaster drones were added. Additionally, the sky and environment needed to be digitally replaced in most of the sequence. Framestore handled the "Illusion Battle" sequence in which Mysterio traps Spider-Man within a series of elaborate fear-based illusions. Based on early prototypes of the sequence from Framestore, Marvel decided to extend it to around 150 shots. It was heavily pre-visualized to define which background plates and motion-capture performances would be required; Framestore visual effects supervisor Alexis Wajsbrot compared the motion-capture process for the sequence to automated dialogue replacement, where each short section of the performance was captured individually. The company used existing digital assets from other vendors, including for the different Spider-Man suits, combined with new models such as those for statues of fallen heroes or a "Zombie Iron Man". The effect of green smoke that is throughout the sequence was created using Houdini. Framestore took inspiration from the title sequences of the James Bond films, especially that of Spectre (2015) for the graveyard portion of the battle. For the transition between the real world and the illusions, Framestore had to match a similar transition from the B.A.R.F. scene in Captain America: Civil War which Wajsbrot described as a time-consuming process for each environment in which it was required. Sirrs compared the sequence to an elaborate Broadway production with an unlimited budget, and named several other visual influences including the Looney Tunes short Duck Amuck (1953), Paprika (2006), A Nightmare on Elm Street (1984), and the "Pink Elephants on Parade" scene from Dumbo (1941). Spider-Man: Homecoming composer Michael Giacchino was confirmed to return to score Far From Home in October 2018. Whitney Houston's "I Will Always Love You" plays during the Marvel Studios opening logo as part of the film's opening "in memoriam" scene. The end credits song is "Vacation" by The Go-Go's. The soundtrack album was released by Sony Classical on June 28, 2019. Due to Parker dying at the end of Infinity War and not being resurrected until Endgame, Germain Lussier of io9 noted in May 2018 that Sony would either have to begin marketing this film only two months before its release or spoil the fact that Parker is resurrected for general audiences that may not realize that this would happen in Endgame. Lussier suggested the latter approach be taken, while a representative of Sony said the studio would be working with Marvel to "figure out the Spider-Man strategy". Holland and Gyllenhaal debuted the first trailer for Far From Home at Sony's CCXP Brazil panel on December 8, 2018. The footage does not acknowledge the events of Infinity War or Endgame, with Steven Weintraub of Collider describing it as a continuation of "the Spider-Man universe" only. Holland debuted the trailer publicly on his Instagram account on January 15, 2019. A slightly different "international version" was also released. Several news outlets commented on Parker's appearance in the trailer following the events of Infinity War, with Zack Straf of IndieWire pointing out that while the trailer reveals Parker's return, it does not explain how. Adam Chitwood of Collider described the trailer as "cute and fun" just like Homecoming, and approved of the vacation storyline, the addition of Fury, and Mysterio's short appearance. He did think the film looked "the tiniest bit less special" when compared to the acclaimed animated film Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse. A teaser poster was released with the trailer showing Spider-Man's mask covered in travel stickers. Chitwood said the poster was "really fun, leaning into the whole 'summer vacation' vibe" while potentially hinting at the film's locations with the stickers. Graeme McMillian of The Hollywood Reporter felt the trailer presented the threat of the Elementals so audiences would be "thrown off the scent" of Mysterio being the villain. McMillian's colleague Richard Newby felt the "main takeaway from the trailer is that Spider-Man: Far From Home is deftly blending old and new school elements of the Spider-Man mythos, for a result that feels surprisingly fresh". Newby was also excited about the inclusion of Fury. Forbes's Scott Mendelson felt the trailer showed "the sheer confidence" of Sony in its Spider-Man films, especially after the successes of Homecoming, Venom (2018), and Into the Spider-Verse. The trailer received 130 million views in 24 hours, surpassing Homecoming (116 million views) as the most viewed Sony Pictures trailer in that time period. On May 6, 2019, a second trailer for the film was released. The trailer featured an introduction from Holland warning viewers that it includes spoilers for Avengers: Endgame. Watts, who knew the plots of Infinity War and Endgame and worked with the Russo brothers on Spider-Man's appearances in those films, was relieved that the trailer's release allowed him to speak more openly about Far From Home. The second trailer was viewed 135 million times in 24 hours, surpassing the first Far From Home trailer as the most viewed Sony Pictures trailer in that time period. Beginning the weekend after the trailer's release, screenings of Endgame began with a message from Holland telling audiences to stay till the end of the credits, with the trailer played at the end of the film. Marvel previously added a trailer for The Avengers (2012) to the end of Captain America: The First Avenger (2011). United Airlines served as a promotional partner on the film, with one of their Boeing 777 aircraft and several United employees appearing in the film. As done with previous MCU films, Audi also sponsored the film, promoting several vehicles such as the e-tron SUV, while having some of their other vehicles appear in the film. Partnering with several other companies, including Dr Pepper, Papa John's Pizza, and Burger King, the film had a total promotional marketing value of $288 million, the largest for a film ever. Ahead of the film's home media release, in September 2019, Sony released a "Night Monkey" trailer, featuring footage from the film of Spider-Man in his jokey alter-ego of the same name. Lussier said the trailer was clever, and "in terms of repurposing old footage in fun, funny new ways, you have to give Sony a tip of the cap for this." Later in the month, Sony created a real version of the fictional TheDailyBugle.net website as part of a viral marketing campaign to promote the home media release of the film. Inspired by real-world "conspiracy-pushing" websites such as that of Alex Jones, the website features Simmons reprising his role as Jameson in a video where he speaks out against Spider-Man and in support of Mysterio, before adding "Thanks for watching. Don't forget to like and subscribe!" The website includes testimonials from supposed victims of "the Blip", including one complaining that they disappeared in a dangerous situation and were seriously injured when they reappeared. This contradicts a statement by Feige saying that anyone in such a situation would have reappeared safely. Several days after this was pointed out, the website was updated to say this story was faked for an insurance claim. Spider-Man: Far From Home had its world premiere at the TCL Chinese Theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on June 26, 2019. The film was released on June 28, in China and Japan, and in the United States on July 2, in 3D and IMAX. In the United States, it opened in 4,634 theaters, which was second all-time behind Avengers: Endgame. It was originally scheduled to be released on July 5. The film was re-released on Labor Day weekend, beginning August 29, with four minutes of extra footage. Spider-Man: Far From Home was the last film released in Phase Three of the MCU. In March 2024, Sony announced that all live-action Spider-Man films will be re-released in theaters as part of Columbia Pictures' 100th anniversary celebration. Spider-Man: Far From Home will be re-released on May 27, 2024. Spider-Man: Far From Home was released by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment on digital on September 17, 2019, and on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD on October 1. The home media release features a short film titled Peter's To-Do List, which uses scenes of Parker retrieving various items for his trip that were cut from the theatrical release of the film. The short also includes footage featuring Hemky Madera reprising his Homecoming role as Mr. Delmar, the owner of a local bodega, which was all cut from Far From Home. In April 2021, Sony signed a deal with Disney giving them access to their legacy content, including past Spider-Man films and Marvel content in Sony's Spider-Man Universe, to stream on Disney+ and Hulu and appear on Disney's linear television networks. Disney's access to Sony's titles would come following their availability on Netflix. Far From Home had previously been available on Starz and FX. The film became available on Disney+ in the United States on November 3, 2023. Spider-Man: Far From Home grossed $390.5 million in the United States and Canada, and $741.3 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.131 billion. It was the fourth-highest-grossing film of 2019 and the 24th-highest-grossing film of all time. On August 18, 2019, the film surpassed Skyfall (2012) to become Sony Pictures' highest-grossing film worldwide. Far From Home was the first Spider-Man film to gross over $1 billion. Deadline Hollywood calculated the film's net profit as $339 million, accounting for production budgets, marketing, talent participation, and other costs; box office grosses and home media revenues placed it seventh on their list of 2019's "Most Valuable Blockbusters". Three weeks before its domestic release, official industry tracking had the film grossing around $170 million over its six-day opening frame. Some had the film reaching as high as $200 million, while others were at a conservative $165 million; Sony was predicting a $154 million debut. By the week of release industry estimates lowered to $140 million, with the studio expecting $120 million, due to the recent underperformance of other sequels. Far From Home made a Tuesday-opening record $39.3 million, including an estimated $2.8–3 million from midnight previews at about 1,000 theaters. It then made $27 million on its second day, the best-ever Wednesday gross for an MCU film, and $25.1 million on the 4th of July, the second highest ever total for the holiday behind Transformers ($29 million in 2007). In its opening weekend the film made $92.6 million, and a total of $185.1 million over the six-day frame, topping the $180 million made by Spider-Man 2 over its six-day July 4 opening in 2004; it was the number one film for the weekend. In its second weekend, the film made $45.3 million, again topping the box office with a 51% decrease from the first week; lower than Homecoming's 62% drop in its second box office weekend. Far From Home grossed over $21 million in its third weekend but was dethroned by newcomer The Lion King. It completed its box office run as the seventh highest-grossing film of 2019 in this region. Far From Home was projected to gross around $350 million worldwide by the end of its first week of release, and about $500 million over its first 10 days. In China and Japan, where it was released a week prior to its U.S. debut, the film was expected to gross around a combined $90 million in its opening weekend. In China, where pre-sale tickets were less than Homecoming's, the film made $35.5 million on its first day, including $3.4 million from midnight previews (the fourth-best of all time for a superhero film in the country). It ended up slightly over-performing, debuting at $111 million including $98 million in China, the fourth-best-ever superhero opening in the country. Far From Home ended up grossing $580.1 million worldwide over its first 10 days of release, including $238 million from international territories in its opening weekend. In China, the film had a 10-day total of $167.4 million, and its other biggest debuts were in South Korea ($33.8 million), the United Kingdom ($17.8 million), Mexico ($13.9 million) and Australia ($11.9 million). The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 90%, with an average score of 7.4/10, based on 459 reviews. The website's critics' consensus reads, "A breezily unpredictable blend of teen romance and superhero action, Spider-Man: Far From Home stylishly sets the stage for the next era of the MCU." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 69 out of 100 based on reviews from 55 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while those at PostTrak gave it a 76% "definite recommend". Owen Gleiberman of Variety praised Holland's performance and wrote, "By the end, this Spider-Man really does find his tingle, yet coming after Into the Spider-Verse, with its swirling psychedelic imagery and identity games and trap doors of perception, Spider-Man: Far From Home touches all the bases of a conventional Marvel movie. It doesn't take you out of this world. But it's good enough to summon the kick—or maybe just the illusion—of consequence." Writing for the Chicago Sun-Times, Richard Roeper gave the film 3 out of 4 stars, calling it "zesty, sweet and satisfying" and praised the performances of the cast. Bernard Boo of PopMatters praised the film, commenting, "Spider-Man: Far From Home is technically the final film in Phase [Three] of the MCU, and it's hard to think of a better way to send off the most successful run of one of the highest grossing franchises in history." Alonso Duralde of TheWrap said that the film feels like "a charming teen road-trip comedy that occasionally turns into a superhero movie", which he said was a compliment. He highlighted the cast, including the chemistry between Holland, Zendaya and Batalon, and said that Gyllenhaal "nails his character's earnestness but also clearly enjoys a few moments that let him channel every exasperated-sigh, I-just-want-to-get-this-right male diva director he's ever known." Writing for IndieWire, David Ehrlich gave the film a grade of "C" and, despite complimenting the cast, called the film an "unadventurous bit of superhero housekeeping that only exists to clean up the mess that Avengers: Endgame left behind". He criticized the character development of Spider-Man, feeling that he does not change throughout the film beyond becoming more confident. He described the action as "plastic", and felt that the film did not give enough attention to its teen elements. Ehrlich said it might be enough to satisfy fans but called it a "failure when compared to the remarkable artistry of Into the Spider-Verse or the raw pathos of Sam Raimi's Spider-Man 2." John Anderson of The Wall Street Journal praised Holland and Zendaya's performances, but described the film as "a visually incoherent, effects-heavy superhero movie", and called the dialogue "dire". In September 2019, Marvel Studios and Sony Pictures announced that they were set to produce a third film, after an impasse between the two companies during negotiations. Watts returned to direct, from a script by McKenna and Sommers. Holland, Zendaya, Favreau, Tomei, Batalon, and Revolori reprise their roles, while Benedict Cumberbatch and Benedict Wong reprise their MCU roles as Doctor Strange and Wong. Spider-Man: No Way Home features several actors reprising their roles from past Spider-Man films, including Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield as their versions of Spider-Man from Sam Raimi's Spider-Man trilogy (2002–2007) and Marc Webb's The Amazing Spider-Man films (2012–2014), nicknamed "Peter-Two" and "Peter-Three" respectively, alongside Willem Dafoe as Norman Osborn / Green Goblin, Alfred Molina as Otto Octavius / Doctor Octopus, and Thomas Haden Church as Flint Marko / Sandman from the Raimi trilogy, as well as Rhys Ifans as Curt Connors / Lizard and Jamie Foxx as Max Dillon / Electro from the Webb films. The film was released on December 17, 2021. As depicted in Avengers: Infinity War (2018) and Avengers: Endgame (2019) Also for Avengers: Endgame (2019) Strauss, Bob (January 25, 2022). "How 'Don't Look Up' and 'Spider-Man' mix tone and action through editing". Los Angeles Times. "Spider-Man: Far From Home". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved June 15, 2019. "Spider-Man: Far from Home". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved November 19, 2019. Ford, Rebecca; Kit, Borys (July 19, 2017). "Spider-Man: Homecoming Director in Talks to Return for Sequel (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Retrieved July 19, 2017. Coggan, Devan (April 25, 2019). "Tom Holland teases Spider-Man's adventure abroad in Far From Home". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Buchanan, Kyle (August 7, 2018). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Adds Samuel L. Jackson, Cobie Smulders". Vulture. Archived from the original on August 8, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2018. Coogan, Devan (May 6, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home director Jon Watts breaks down that post-Endgame trailer". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Truitt, Brian (April 19, 2019). "Why Samuel L. Jackson's Nick Fury is the 'mean new stepdad' of Spider-Man: Far From Home". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Newby, Richard (December 17, 2021). "All the Comics, Video-Game, and MCU Easter Eggs You Might Have Missed in Spider-Man: No Way Home". Vulture. Archived from the original on December 18, 2021. Retrieved December 18, 2021. "Zendaya And Tom Holland: Everything We Know About Their Rumoured Relationship". Elle. January 11, 2022. Archived from the original on January 16, 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2022. Warner, Sam (September 7, 2018). "Spider-Man: Far from Home set picture confirms the return of an MCU favourite". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 18, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018. Davis, Erik (May 6, 2019). "Exclusive Interview: Spider-Man: Far From Home Director Jon Watts Breaks Down That Wild New Trailer". Fandango Media. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Goldberg, Matt (May 8, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home: Over 35 Things We Learned on the European-Set Sequel". Collider. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved May 8, 2019. Pearson, Ben (May 8, 2019). "How a Car Commercial Impacted the Marvel Cinematic Universe". /Film. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved May 8, 2019. Alexander, Julia (October 5, 2017). "Peter Parker's best friend, Ned, may show up in an Avengers movie". Polygon. Archived from the original on October 5, 2017. Retrieved October 5, 2017. Jayson, Jay (November 15, 2016). "Spider-Man: Homecoming – Jacob Batalon Reveals Role". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 4, 2019. Retrieved July 4, 2019. Russell, Scott (December 7, 2018). "Everything We Know about Spider-Man: Far From Home So Far". Paste. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved January 15, 2019. Burwick, Kevin (July 20, 2018). "Spider-Man Cast Celebrates Spider-Man: Far From Home Reunion on Instagram". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Kroll, Justin (May 21, 2018). "Jake Gyllenhaal Eyed for Villain Role in Spider-Man: Homecoming Sequel". Variety. Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2018. Bacon, Thomas (January 15, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Trailer Breakdown – 49 Story Reveals & Secrets". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 20, 2019. Retrieved April 20, 2019. Anderton, Ethan (December 9, 2018). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Plot Details Emerge After Trailer Debuts at CCXP". /Film. Archived from the original on December 10, 2018. Retrieved December 9, 2018. Whitbrook, James (May 8, 2019). "A New Spider-Man: Far From Home Clip Has Some Very Intriguing Teases About the Multiverse". io9. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved May 8, 2019. Woerner, Meredith (July 12, 2019). "Spider-Man Writers Break Down What Really Happened During the Marvel Blip". Variety. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved July 16, 2019. Barnhardt, Adam (September 29, 2018). "Tom Holland Battles A Pigeon in New Spider-Man: Far From Home Set Photos". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2018. Retrieved October 18, 2018. Davids, Brian (November 1, 2021). "Jorge Lendeborg Jr. on Night Teeth and the Future of His Spider-Man Character". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved November 1, 2021. Keane, Sean (July 1, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home postcredits scenes, explained". CNET. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2019. Robinson, Joanna (July 2, 2019). "That Spider-Man: Far From Home End of Credits Reveal, Explained". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2019. Owen, Phil (July 3, 2019). "Yes, That Was Who You Thought It Was at the End of Spider-Man: Far From Home". TheWrap. Archived from the original on June 4, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2019. Davids, Brian (July 31, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Star Cobie Smulders Sets the Record Straight on That End-Credit Reveal". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 31, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. N'Duka, Amanda (July 17, 2018). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Adds Numan Acar". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 17, 2018. Retrieved July 17, 2018. "Spider-Man: Far From Home's Chameleon Is Not What You Think". Screen Rant. May 8, 2019. Archived from the original on July 5, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2019. Gonzalez, Umberto (August 14, 2018). "Crazy Rich Asian Star Remy Hii Joins Spider-Man: Far From Home Cast (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 14, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2018. Whitbrook, James (May 8, 2019). "How Spider-Man: Far From Home Brings Peter Parker Back Down to Earth". io9. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved May 8, 2019. Bacon, Thomas (November 11, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Secretly Introduced Another Marvel Villain". Screen Rant. Retrieved August 20, 2022. Kroll, Justin (January 18, 2019). "Transgender Actor Zach Barack Joins Sony's Spider-Man: Far From Home". Variety. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2019. Jackson, Angelique (June 26, 2019). "Spider-Man's Zach Barack Opens Up About Being Marvel Studios' First Openly Transgender Actor". Variety. Archived from the original on July 4, 2019. Retrieved June 29, 2019. Myers, Amanda Lee (July 5, 2019). "Marvel's first openly trans actor Zach Barack calls for more portrayals". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on July 5, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. "British-Pakistani actor Zoha Rahman essays first hijab-wearing character in the Marvel Universe". The Express Tribune. July 2, 2019. Archived from the original on January 28, 2020. Retrieved October 2, 2021. Sherlock, Ben (November 14, 2019). "10 Amazing Behind-The-Scenes Facts About The MCU's Spider-Man Movies". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved April 21, 2021. Pritchard, Tom (July 2, 2019). "All the Easter Eggs and References We Spotted in Spider-Man: Far From Home". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved January 30, 2021. "Spider-Man: Far From Home has an Iron Man and Captain America 'In Memoriam' tribute". PopBuzz. July 2, 2019. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 7, 2019. B. Jile, Meredith (July 3, 2019). "Here's How Spider-Man: Far From Home Explains Life After Endgame". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved July 7, 2019. Galloway, Stephen (June 23, 2016). "Tom Rothman on Spider-Man Plans and Loving Ghostbusters Trolls: 'Can We Please Get Some More Haters to Say Stupid Things?'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved June 23, 2016. Chitwood, Adam (July 27, 2016). "Kevin Feige Says Spider-Man Sequels Could Follow the Harry Potter Format". Collider. Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. Retrieved July 27, 2016. Sciretta, Peter (April 3, 2017). "Spider-Man: Homecoming Set Visit: Everything We Learned – Page 3". /Film. Archived from the original on April 3, 2017. Retrieved April 3, 2017. Nordstrom, Leigh (October 16, 2016). "Robert Pattinson, Sienna Miller Talk The Lost City of Z". Women's Wear Daily. Archived from the original on October 18, 2016. Retrieved October 16, 2016. Siegel, Tatiana (November 9, 2016). "Tom Holland Learned He Got His Spider-Man: Homecoming Role From a Marvel Instagram Post". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 10, 2016. Retrieved November 9, 2016. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 9, 2016). "Spider-Man: Homecoming 2 Shoots Web Around Independence Day 2019 Frame; Bad Boys 4 Moves To Memorial Day". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 11, 2016. Retrieved December 9, 2016. Robinson, Joanna (December 14, 2018). "Sony Finally Untangles Its Spider Web". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on December 16, 2018. Retrieved December 15, 2018. Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (June 21, 2017). "How Sony Learned to Cede Control to Marvel on Spider-Man: Homecoming". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 21, 2017. Retrieved June 21, 2017. Rooney, Matt (June 24, 2017). "Exclusive: Kevin Feige Talks Spidey's Future & Studio Collaborations". JoBlo.com. Archived from the original on June 27, 2017. Retrieved June 25, 2017. Chitwood, Adam (June 26, 2017). "Spider-Man: Homecoming 2: Director Jon Watts Likely to Return". Collider. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved June 26, 2017. Chitwood, Adam (June 26, 2017). "Spider-Man: Homecoming 2 Filming Dates, Title Details Revealed". Collider. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved June 26, 2017. Daniell, Mark (July 2, 2017). "Marvel's Kevin Feige on Spider-Man, the future of the MCU and replacing Robert Downey Jr". Toronto Sun. Archived from the original on July 9, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017. Setoodeh, Ramin (July 21, 2017). "Marisa Tomei on Playing Aunt May in Spider-Man: Homecoming, Sequels and Hollywood Sexism". Variety. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Sandwell, Ian (February 17, 2021). "Did Spider-Man: Far From Home have a hidden WandaVision reference?". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on February 17, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Kit, Borys (August 30, 2017). "Spider-Man: Homecoming Writers Returning for Sequel (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 31, 2017. Retrieved August 30, 2017. Hood, Cooper (December 9, 2017). "Kevin Feige Confirms Jon Watts Will Direct Spider-Man: Homecoming 2". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on December 10, 2017. Retrieved December 9, 2017. Kit, Borys; Galuppo, Mia (February 9, 2018). "Jake Gyllenhaal, Ansel Elgort, Zendaya to Star in Crime Drama Finest Kind". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 10, 2018. Retrieved February 10, 2018. Zendaya is currently in theaters with the awards contender and sleeper hit The Greatest Showman, and is set for the sequel to Spider-Man: Homecoming. Go Creative Show (July 8, 2019). Spider-Man Far From Home Cinematography (with Matthew Lloyd) GCS176. YouTube. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Lussier, Germain (April 22, 2018). "The Sequel to Spider-Man Homecoming Spans the Globe". io9. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Couch, Aaron (June 23, 2018). "Tom Holland Reveals Next Spider-Man Movie Is Called Far From Home". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 24, 2018. Retrieved June 24, 2018. Vlessing, Etan; Kit, Borys (May 21, 2018). "Jake Gyllenhaal in Talks to Star in Spider-Man: Homecoming Sequel". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2018. Chitwood, Adam (July 17, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far from Home Writers on Mysterio, Those Credits Scenes, and Following Endgame". Collider. Archived from the original on July 18, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Reyes, Mikes (June 17, 2019). "New Spider-Man: Far From Home Video Goes Through All Of Peter's Suits". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved October 28, 2019. Dinh, Christine (October 1, 2019). Watch 'Spider-Man: Far From Home' Online and in 4K Ultra HD. Marvel Entertainment. Retrieved October 28, 2019. Vinnie, Cynthia (October 2, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Reveals the Secrets of Spidey's Suits". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on April 27, 2020. Retrieved October 28, 2019. Patches, Matt (June 23, 2018). "Tom Holland just revealed the full title of Spider-man 2". Polygon. Archived from the original on June 25, 2018. Retrieved June 23, 2018. Fischer, Russ (July 8, 2018). "Kevin Feige Still Won't Tell Us All Marvel's Future Plans". Birth.Movies.Death. Archived from the original on July 9, 2018. Retrieved July 10, 2018. Eisenberg, Eric (June 24, 2018). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Has Multiple Meanings, According To Kevin Feige". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on June 25, 2018. Retrieved June 25, 2018. Lussier, Germain (June 26, 2018). "The Avengers 4 Trailers Are Going To Have A Weird Marketing Problem". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on June 26, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018. Stone, Sam (July 2, 2018). "First Spider-Man: Far From Home Set Photos Surface". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 3, 2018. Retrieved July 2, 2018. Marc, Christopher (December 19, 2017). "Spider-Man 2 Working Title Continues Jon Watts' Reference To Seinfeld". Omega Underground. Archived from the original on December 21, 2017. Retrieved December 19, 2017. Huls, Alexander (July 12, 2019). "Shooting Spider-Man: Far From Home as a Road Movie". Pond5. Archived from the original on September 29, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Dumaraog, Ana (July 8, 2018). "New Spider-Man: Far From Home Set Video Sees Tom Holland Get Emotional". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 2, 2018. Retrieved July 9, 2018. Lazare, Lewis (January 16, 2019). "United Airlines getting a Hollywood moment (or two) this summer". Chicago Business Journal. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved January 26, 2019. Grebey, James (July 3, 2018). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Photos Reveal an Unexpected Returning Character". Inverse. Archived from the original on July 10, 2018. Retrieved July 9, 2018. Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 9, 2018). "J.B. Smoove Joins Spider-Man: Far From Home". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 9, 2018. Retrieved July 9, 2018. Vrabec, Luboš (September 6, 2018). "FOTO: Neptuna na náměstí nahradil muž v plášti. Hollywoodská produkce připravuje natáčení". Liberecká Drbna (in Czech). Archived from the original on October 19, 2018. Retrieved September 8, 2018. Carbone, Gina (September 28, 2018). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Is Now Filming in Venice". Moviefone. Archived from the original on October 13, 2018. Retrieved September 29, 2018. Scott, Ryan (October 3, 2018). "Tom Holland Wraps Spider-Man: Far from Home Venice Shoot with New Set Video". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on October 13, 2018. Retrieved October 3, 2018. Bord, Christine (October 12, 2018). "Upcoming filming locations for Spider-Man: Far From Home in NYC". On Location Vacations. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved January 26, 2019. Hood, Cooper (October 16, 2018). "Spider-Man: Tom Holland Announces Far From Home Has Wrapped". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 17, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018. Vlessing, Etan (October 24, 2018). "Imax, Sony Pictures Sign Global Film Slate Deal (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 12, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2019. Aliaga, Victor; Vejvoda, Jim (December 8, 2018). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Trailer Description". IGN. Archived from the original on December 9, 2018. Retrieved December 9, 2018. Small, Gretchen (May 8, 2019). "Who Are the Elementals in Spider-Man: Far From Home?". Nerdist. Archived from the original on May 9, 2019. Retrieved May 8, 2019. Pearson, Ben (May 8, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Set Visit: Everything We Learned About Mysterio, Nick Fury, MJ, and Peter Parker's Globetrotting Adventure". /Film. p. 2. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved June 19, 2019. Hullender, Tatiana (May 8, 2019). "Confirmed: Spider-Man: Far From Home's Elemental Villains Based on B-List Villains". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved May 8, 2019. Holmes, Adam (July 4, 2019). "How Kevin Feige And Jon Watts Feel About Potentially Bringing Green Goblin And Doc Ock Back To The Spider-Man Movies". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 5, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2019. Chitwood, Adam (January 15, 2019). "First Spider-Man: Far From Home Trailer Sends Peter Parker on a European Vacation". Collider. Archived from the original on January 16, 2019. Retrieved January 15, 2019. Schaefer, Sandy (April 17, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Release Date Moves Up 3 Days". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2019. Sharf, Zack (April 22, 2019). "MCU Timeline Shifts as Spider Man: Far From Home Confirmed as Phase Three Finale, Not Endgame". IndieWire. Archived from the original on June 3, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Jirak, Jamie (April 19, 2019). "Samuel L. Jackson Returning as Nick Fury for Spider-Man: Far From Home Reshoots". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 20, 2019. Retrieved April 22, 2019. Goldberg, Matt (July 7, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home: Jon Watts on How They Got That Actor for the Credits Scene". Collider. Archived from the original on July 7, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Erbland, Kate (July 7, 2019). "Spider-Man Director Explains Those Post-Credits Scenes and What They Mean for the MCU". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Kile, Meredith K. (July 12, 2019). "Sam Raimi Says He Gave His Blessing for That Epic Spider-Man: Far From Home Surprise Cameo (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Dumaraog, Ana (July 7, 2019). "Kevin Feige Explains Spider-Man: Far From Home's Iconic Post-Credits Cameo". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 22, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Lawrence, Gregory (September 21, 2020). "J.K. Simmons' Spider-Man: Far from Home Cameo Led to Some Creative Disputes". Collider. Archived from the original on September 22, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2020. Barnhardt, Adam (June 8, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Wraps Post-Production". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 9, 2019. Retrieved June 9, 2019. Frei, Vincent (January 15, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home". Art of VFX. Archived from the original on October 26, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2019. Desowitz, Bill (July 9, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home VFX Were Influenced by Into the Spider-Verse and Looney Tunes". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 10, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. "Spider-Man: Far From Home | Main on End Title Design". Perception. Archived from the original on January 20, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2022. "Spider-Man: Far From Home VFX Breakdown". Animation Boss. July 9, 2019. Archived from the original on September 29, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Hogg, Trevor (July 22, 2019). "Image Engine Swings into Action with Spider-Man: Far From Home VFX". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on July 23, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Hogg, Trevor (July 17, 2019). "Creating a Super Uber Elemental for Spider-Man: Far from Home". Animation Magazine. Archived from the original on July 18, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Failes, Ian (July 15, 2019). "Spider-Man Far From Home: How Do You Animate a Fiery Creature ... That Grows?". Cartoon Brew. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Frei, Vincent (July 16, 2019). "Spider-Man – Far From Home: Alexis Wajsbrot – VFX Supervisor – Framestore". The Art of VFX. Archived from the original on July 23, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. "Michael Giacchino to Return for Spider-Man: Far From Home". Film Music Reporter. October 10, 2018. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved October 10, 2018. Giacchino, Michael [@m_giacchino] (April 27, 2019). "Happy Avengers weekend everyone!! Meanwhile... Saturday morning fun for me at the recording studio..." (Tweet). Retrieved April 28, 2019 – via Twitter. Sandwell, Ian (July 2, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home kills off a major Avenger off-screen". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019. O'Connor, Rory (July 19, 2019). "Belinda Carlisle film: The Go-Go's star reveals biopic plans after Elton John success". Smooth Radio. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved January 24, 2022. "Spider-Man: Far from Home Soundtrack Details". Film Music Reporter. June 20, 2019. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved June 22, 2019. Lussier, Germain (May 7, 2018). "Thanks to Infinity War, Marvel May Need a New Strategy to Promote Its Upcoming Releases". io9. Archived from the original on May 7, 2018. Retrieved May 8, 2018. Truitt, Brian (December 7, 2018). "It's finally here! Watch the first trailer for Marvel's newly titled Avengers: Endgame". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 7, 2018. Retrieved December 7, 2018. Sorrentino, Mike (December 8, 2018). "Spider-Man: Far From Home trailer debuts to fans at CCXP in Brazil". CNET. Archived from the original on December 8, 2018. Retrieved December 9, 2018. Heller, Corrine (January 15, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Trailer Shows New Look for Peter Parker". E! News. Archived from the original on January 16, 2019. Retrieved January 15, 2019. Radulovic, Petrana (January 15, 2019). "First Spider-Man: Far From Home trailer gives Jake Gyllenhaal's Mysterio a grand entrance". Polygon. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved January 15, 2019. Shraf, Zach (January 15, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Trailer: Peter Parker Lives, but Jake Gyllenhaal Is a New Threat". IndieWire. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved January 15, 2019. Abad-Santos, Alex (January 15, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home's first trailer shows Peter Parker alive and slinging in Europe". Vox. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved January 15, 2019. Chitwood, Adam (January 15, 2019). "First Spider-Man: Far from Home Poster Goes Full Tourist". Collider. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved January 15, 2019. McMillian, Graeme (January 15, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Trailer Hints at a Villain Twist". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 16, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2019. Newby, Richard (January 15, 2019). "How Spider-Man: Far From Home Offers a Fresh Perspective on the Marvel Universe". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 16, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2019. Mendelson, Scott (January 15, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Trailer Finally Swings Online". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2019. Boucher, Geoff (January 18, 2019). "Sony's Spider-Man: Far From Home Trailer: 130M Views In 24 Hours Breaks Studio Record". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Boucher, Geoff (May 7, 2019). "Sony's Spider-Man: Far From Home Trailer: 135M Views Breaks Studio Record". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 9, 2019. Retrieved May 8, 2019. Alexander, Julia (May 10, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame gets Spider-Man: Far From Home trailer as a post-credits scene". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 10, 2019. Retrieved May 11, 2019. Jussim, Matthew (June 28, 2019). "Spider-Man Takes on the Science Fair With the Audi E-Tron GT Concept Car in Far From Home". Men's Journal. Archived from the original on January 16, 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 8, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Shatters Industry Records With $288M Promo Campaign". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. Lussier, Germain (September 17, 2019). "Spider-Man's Alter Ego, the Night Monkey, Gets the Official Trailer He Damn Well Deserves". io9. Archived from the original on September 22, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Jaworski, Michelle (September 26, 2019). "The Daily Bugle's website from Spider-Man: Far From Home is now real". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Welk, Brian (September 26, 2019). "JK Simmons' J Jonah Jameson Labels Spider-Man a 'Miscreant' on New Daily Bugle Website (Video)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Chichizola, Corey (September 26, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home's Daily Bugle Website Contradicts Kevin Feige On The Blip". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Lovett, Jamie (September 28, 2019). "Spider-Man Website Updated to No Longer Contradict Kevin Feige After Marvel and Sony Deal". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. "Stars attend the premiere of Spider-Man: Far From Home". New York Daily News. June 27, 2019. Archived from the original on January 16, 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy; D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 31, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Will Swing Into China Ahead Of U.S." Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 31, 2019. Retrieved May 31, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 3, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Posts Record $39M+ Opening Tuesday, Midsommar Sees $1M+ Previews". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019. McClintock, Pamela (August 19, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Scores Labor Day Rerelease With 4 Minutes of New Footage". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 20, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2019. McPherson, Chris (March 10, 2024). "All 8 'Spider-Man' Movies Returning to Theaters This Year for Sony 100". Collider. Archived from the original on March 18, 2024. Retrieved March 19, 2024. Bonomolo, Cameron (August 29, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Blu-ray Special Features and Digital HD Release Date Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 31, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Outlaw, Kofi (June 27, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Blu-Ray to Include Short Film". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2019. Hayes, Dade (April 21, 2021). "Disney And Sony Reach Windows Deal That Can Sling Spider-Man To Disney+ For First Time, Along With Reach Across Hulu, ABC, FX & More". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2021. Couch, Aaron (April 21, 2021). "Sony Films Will Move to Disney After Netflix Window Expires". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2021. Ridgely, Charlie (October 17, 2023). "Disney+: Every Movie & TV Show Arriving in November 2023". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 17, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "2019 Worldwide Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2020. Retrieved August 18, 2023. "All Time Worldwide Box Office". The Numbers. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved January 6, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (August 17, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home To Become Sony's Highest-Grossing Film Ever As WW Box Office Swings Past Skyfall On Sunday". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 17, 2019. Retrieved August 18, 2019. Cooper, Gael (August 18, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home is Sony Pictures' highest-grossing film of all time". CNET. Archived from the original on August 19, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2019. Fuster, Jeremy (July 25, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Becomes First Spidey Film to Gross $1 Billion at Box Office". TheWrap. Archived from the original on January 6, 2022. Retrieved January 6, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 22, 2020). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Reps Sony's Most Profitable Movie Of 2019: No. 8 In Deadline's Most Valuable Blockbuster Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 22, 2020. Retrieved April 22, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 13, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home & The Avengers: Endgame Halo Effect: Web-Slinger Sequel Seeing $170M+ 6-Day Opening". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 14, 2019. Retrieved June 13, 2019. Rubin, Rebecca (June 13, 2019). "Box Office: Spider-Man: Far From Home Eyes $150 Million-Plus Holiday Weekend Debut". Variety. Archived from the original on June 13, 2019. Retrieved June 13, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 29, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Could Weave Near Half Billion Web Around The World In First 10 Days Of B.O. – Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved July 1, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 4, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home $27M Wednesday Is A Record For Marvel Cinematic Universe – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved July 4, 2019. "July 5-7, 2019 Weekend". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 7, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 7, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Hooks $185M 6-Day Opening Records For Sony & Independence Day Stretch – Sunday Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 7, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 14, 2019). "Counterprogramming Crawl & Stuber Collateral Damage In Superhero Summer As Spider-Man Climbs To $45M+ – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 22, 2019. Retrieved July 14, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Nancy (July 21, 2019). "Disney's Busy Weekend: Lion King Rips Up July Record With $192M Following Marvel Slate Announcement, Endgame Notching All-Time $2.8B B.O. Record". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 22, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019. "Domestic Box Office For 2019". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Hughes, Mark (June 27, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Headed For Massive $350 Million-Plus Opening". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 28, 2019. Retrieved June 27, 2019. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 27, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home To Snare $90M+ In Early China/Japan Bows; Middle Kingdom Midnights Strong". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 27, 2019. Retrieved June 27, 2019. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 28, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Swoops Into China With $36M On Way To $100M+ Weekend". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 28, 2019. Retrieved June 28, 2019. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 30, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Takes Off With $111M Overseas; Toy Story 4 Nears $500M WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 30, 2019. Retrieved July 1, 2019. Tartaglione, Nancy (July 7, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Snares $580M Global In First 10 Days, Nears $400M Offshore – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. "Spider-Man: Far From Home". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved July 28, 2023. "Spider-Man: Far From Home". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved July 10, 2019. Maidment, Jay (July 3, 2019). "Box Office: Spider-Man: Far From Home Swings to Record $39M Tuesday". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved July 6, 2019. Gleiberman, Owen (June 27, 2019). "Film Review: Spider-Man: Far From Home". Variety. Archived from the original on June 7, 2020. Retrieved June 27, 2019. Roeper, Richard (June 27, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home is light, bright and wildly entertaining". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved June 27, 2019. Boo, Bernard (July 2, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Is a Perfect Date Movie". PopMatters. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2019. Duralde, Alonso (June 27, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Film Review: Tom Holland Goes Abroad in Globetrotting Marvel Romp". TheWrap. Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved June 27, 2019. Ehrlich, David (June 27, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Review: Cute Vibe and Great Cast Aid Least Essential MCU Movie in a Long Time". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved June 27, 2019. Anderson, John (July 2, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Review: Soporific Marvel Mayhem". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved August 28, 2021. Grater, Tom (October 23, 2019). "The Nightingale, Lambs Of God Lead 2019 Australian Academy Awards Nominations". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 23, 2019. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Bulbeck, Pip (December 4, 2019). "Jennifer Kent's The Nightingale Wins Big At Australia's AACTA Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 25, 2022. Retrieved December 25, 2022. "Klaus Wins Big at Annie Awards for Animation". The Hollywood Reporter. January 25, 2020. Archived from the original on January 26, 2020. Retrieved June 3, 2022. Nordyke, Kimberly; Howard, Annie (January 12, 2020). "Critics' Choice Awards: Once Upon a Time in Hollywood Named Best Picture; Full Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2022. "2019 Dragon Awards Winners". Locus. September 3, 2019. Archived from the original on September 4, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2022. "The 3rd Annual Hollywood Critics Association Awards Nominations". Hollywood Critics Association. November 25, 2019. Archived from the original on April 23, 2020. Retrieved August 30, 2022. "1917 Wins Best Picture at 3rd Annual Hollywood Critics Association Awards". Variety. January 9, 2020. Archived from the original on January 10, 2020. Retrieved August 30, 2022. Harris, LaTesha (November 5, 2019). "Joker, Lion King, Us Lead 2019 Hollywood Music in Media Awards Nominees". Variety. Archived from the original on November 5, 2019. Retrieved June 19, 2022. Grein, Paul (November 21, 2019). "'Stand Up' From Harriet Wins Top Song at Hollywood Music in Media Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved June 19, 2022. Lovett, Jamie (October 8, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame and Game of Thrones Among HPA Award Nominees". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 21, 2023. Retrieved September 21, 2023. "Game of Thrones, The Lion King Are Among Big Winners at HPA Awards". Variety. November 22, 2019. Archived from the original on November 22, 2019. Retrieved September 21, 2023. Howard, Annie (February 25, 2020). "The Lego Movie 2, A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood Take Top Prizes at Movieguide Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 9, 2022. Retrieved June 19, 2022. Wakeling, Naomi (October 21, 2019). "Nominations for the 2nd annual National Film & TV Awards are announced". National Film Academy. Archived from the original on October 22, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2019. "Jennifer Lopez, Sharon Stone, Toy Story 4, Quentin Tarantino and Once Upon A Time in Hollywood win big at the 2nd annual National Film & TV Awards 2019". National Film Academy. December 4, 2019. Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved December 8, 2019. Gennis, Sadie (May 3, 2020). "Kids Choice Awards 2020: Full Winners List". TV Guide. Archived from the original on February 21, 2021. Retrieved March 21, 2022. Nordyke, Kimberly; Howard, Annie (November 10, 2019). "People's Choice Awards: Avengers: Endgame Named Best Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 11, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2019. Anderton, Ethan (September 14, 2019). "2019 Saturn Awards Winners: Avengers: Endgame Dominates with Six Total Awards". /Film. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2022. Milligan, Mercedes (September 15, 2019). "Saturn Awards: Spider-Verse, Star Wars Resistance Win Animation Honors". Animation Magazine. Archived from the original on September 22, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2022. Yang, Rachel (August 11, 2019). "Teen Choice Awards 2019: See the full list of winners and nominees". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 7, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. Hipes, Patrick (January 7, 2020). "VES Awards Nominations: The Lion King, Alita: Battle Angel, The Mandalorian & GoT Top List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 16, 2020. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Huff, Lauren (January 29, 2020). "The Lion King reigns at 2020 Visual Effects Society Awards". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 30, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2022. Lang, Brent (September 27, 2019). "Sony, Marvel Make Up: Companies Will Produce Third Spider-Man Film". Variety. Archived from the original on September 27, 2019. Retrieved September 27, 2019. Kit, Borys (October 1, 2020). "Spider-Man 3 Jolt: Jamie Foxx Returning as Electro (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved October 8, 2020. Fleming, Mike Jr. (August 23, 2019). "Next Post-Spider-Man Skirmish For Sony & Disney: A Tug Of War Over Spider-Man Helmer Jon Watts?". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. Donnelly, Matt (August 23, 2021). "Spider-Man: No Way Home Trailer Officially Drops, Multiverse Villains Descend on Tom Holland". Variety. Archived from the original on August 24, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Borys, Kit (October 8, 2020). "Benedict Cumberbatch Joins Spider-Man 3 as Doctor Strange (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved October 8, 2020. Debruge, Peter (December 13, 2021). "Spider-Man: No Way Home Review: Tom Holland Cleans Out the Cobwebs of Sprawling Franchise With Multiverse Super-Battle". Variety. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2021. Coggan, Devan (November 16, 2021). "New Spider-Man: No Way Home trailer swings headfirst into the multiverse". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved November 16, 2021. Dornbush, Jonathon (February 24, 2021). "Spider-Man 3's Title Is Spider-Man: No Way Home". IGN. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved December 6, 2021. Wikiquote has quotations related to Spider-Man: Far From Home. Official website at Marvel.com Official website at Sony Pictures Spider-Man: Far From Home at IMDb TheDailyBugle.net viral marketing website Portals:  Film  United States  Speculative fiction  Comics