The Christchurch mosque shootings were two consecutive mass shootings on two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand on 15 March 2019. They were committed by Brenton Tarrant who entered both mosques during Friday prayer, firstly at the Al Noor Mosque at 1:40 p.m. and later at the Linwood Islamic Centre at 1:52 p.m. Tarrant was arrested after his vehicle was rammed by a police unit as he was driving to a third mosque in Ashburton. He live-streamed the first shooting on Facebook, marking the first successfully live-streamed far-right terror attack, and had published an online manifesto before the attack. On 26 March 2020, he pled guilty to 51 murders, 40 attempted murders, and engaging in a terrorist act, and in August was sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole – the first such sentence in New Zealand. The attack was linked to an increase in white supremacy and alt-right extremism globally observed since about 2015. Politicians and world leaders condemned it, and then-Prime Minister of New Zealand Jacinda Ardern described it as "one of New Zealand's darkest days". The government established a royal commission into its security agencies in the wake of the shootings, which were the deadliest in modern New Zealand history and the worst ever committed by an Australian national. The commission submitted its report to the government on 26 November 2020, the details of which were made public on 7 December. The shooting has inspired copycat attacks, especially due to its live-streamed nature. In response to this incident, the United Nations designated March 15 as the International Day to Combat Islamophobia. The gunman first attacked the Al Noor Mosque, the first mosque in the South Island, opened in June 1985. It is located on Deans Avenue in the suburb of Riccarton. The Linwood Islamic Centre was attacked shortly after the Al Noor Mosque. It opened in early 2018. It is located on Linwood Avenue in the suburb of Linwood. Brenton Harrison Tarrant (born 27 October 1990), a white Australian man, was 28 years old at the time of the shootings. He grew up in Grafton, New South Wales, where he attended Grafton High School. Tarrant's parents separated when he was young: this, along with other events including the loss of his family home in a fire and the death of his grandfather, led him to be traumatised and to start suffering from social anxiety. Following the separation of his parents, Tarrant and his sister Lauren Tarrant, lived with their mother with her new partner. The relationship became violent, with the partner assaulting his mother, him and his sister. The two children began to live with their father Rodney Tarrant. He began to gain weight from age 12 to 15 which led to bullying at school, where he also had very few friends. He was disengaged at school, while also being unusually knowledgeable in certain topics such as the Second World War. Around 12 he had concerns about immigration, particularly by Muslim migrants into Western countries. He started using 4chan when he was 14. He once told his sister that he thought he was autistic and possibly sociopathic. Around 2007 when Tarrant was either 16 or 17, the father was diagnosed with pleural mesothelioma. Tarrant began to exercise at gyms to cope and lost 52 kilograms. He joined the Big River Gym in Grafton at the end of his final year at Grafton High School and qualified as a personal trainer in mid-2009. In 2010 Tarrant discovered his father dead by suicide after having previously agreed with his father that he would do so. He inherited A$457,000 from his father, which largely came from the settlement of a claim for damages arising out of the exposure to asbestos, which had caused his father's mesothelioma. He stopped working at the Big River Gym in 2012 after suffering an injury and decided to use his inherited money to invest and travel. From 2012 onward, he visited several countries. He always travelled alone, except for a trip to North Korea. In March 2013, he travelled to New Zealand for a holiday, where he stayed with a gaming friend for three days. The gaming friend and his parents were avid firearm users. They took Tarrant to a shooting club where he had his first experience with firearms. In 2015, he took a trip to Ukraine and came into contact with extreme right-wing groups. Police in Bulgaria and Turkey investigated Tarrant's visits to their countries. Security officials suspected that he had come into contact with far-right organisations about two years before the shooting, while visiting European nations. He donated €1,500 to Identitäre Bewegung Österreich (IBÖ), the Austrian branch of Generation Identity (part of the Identitarian movement) in Europe, as well as €2,200 to Génération Identitaire, the French branch of the group, and interacted with IBÖ leader Martin Sellner via email between January 2018 and July 2018, offering to meet in Vienna and a linking to his YouTube channel. During the planning stages of his attack he made a donation of $106.68 to Rebel Media, a site that featured both Sellner and several articles espousing "white genocide" and "Great Replacement" conspiracy theories. Tarrant arrived in New Zealand in August 2017 and lived in Andersons Bay in Dunedin until the shootings. A neighbour described him as a friendly loner. He was a member of a South Otago gun club, where he practised shooting at its range. In 2018, Tarrant was treated for eye and thigh injuries at Dunedin Hospital; he told doctors he had sustained the injuries while trying to dislodge an improperly chambered bullet from a gun. The doctors also treated him for steroid abuse, but never reported Tarrant's visit to the authorities, which would have resulted in police reassessing his fitness to hold a gun licence. Captivated with sites of battles between Christian European nations and the Ottoman Empire, Tarrant went on another series of visits to the Balkans from 2016 to 2018, with Croatia, Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, Turkey, and Bosnia-Herzegovina confirming his presence there in these years. He posted Balkan nationalist material on social media platforms and called for the United States to be weakened to prevent what he perceived as NATO intervention in support of Muslims (Albanians) against Christians (Serbs). He said he was against intervention by NATO because he saw the Serbian military as "Christian Europeans attempting to remove these Islamic occupiers from Europe". By June 2016, relatives noted a change in Tarrant's personality, which he claimed was the result of a mugging incident in Ethiopia, and his mother had expressed concern for his mental health. Tarrant himself identified three key moments that shaped his ideology. The first was the murder of an 11-year-old girl, Ebba Åkerlund, in the 2017 Stockholm truck attack on 7 April 2017. (Her name was among the graffiti scrawled on the gun he used to commit the shooting). He also identified the defeat of Marine Le Pen in the 2017 French presidential election as evidence that the possibility of democratic resolution had "vanished". The third key event was his trip to France where he had a strong emotional response to his perception that the French had become a "minority" in their own country, which he described as "fuming rage" and "suffocating despair". He was moved by visiting a military cemetery: "my despair turned to shame, my shame to guilt, my guilt to anger and my anger to rage". In 2016, three years prior to the attacks, Tarrant praised Blair Cottrell as a leader of the far-right movements in Australia and made more than 30 comments on the now-deleted "United Patriots Front" and "True Blue Crew" webpages. An Australian Broadcasting Corporation team who studied the comments called them "fragments and digital impressions of a well-travelled young man who frequented hate-filled anonymous messaging boards and was deeply engaged in a global alt-right culture." A Melbourne man said that in 2016, he filed a police complaint after Tarrant allegedly told him in an online conversation, "I hope one day you meet the rope". He said that the police told him to block Tarrant and did not take a statement from him. The police said that they were unable to locate a complaint. After his arrest, Tarrant told investigators that he frequented right-wing discussion boards on 4chan and 8chan and also found YouTube to be "a significant source of information and inspiration." Tarrant is thought to have become obsessed with terrorist attacks committed by Islamic extremists in 2016 and 2017, started planning an attack about two years prior to the shootings, and chosen his targets three months in advance. Some survivors at the Al Noor Mosque believed they had seen Tarrant there on several Fridays before the attack, pretending to pray and asking about the mosque's schedules. The Royal Commission report found no evidence of this, and police instead believe that Tarrant had viewed an online tour of Al-Noor as part of his planning. On 8 January 2019, Tarrant used a drone operated from a nearby park to investigate the mosque's grounds. Additionally, he used the Internet to find detailed mosque plans, interior pictures, and prayer schedules to figure out when mosques would be at their busiest levels. On the same day, he had driven past the Linwood Islamic Centre. Police recovered six guns: two AR-15 style rifles (one manufactured by Windham Weaponry and the other by Ruger), two 12-gauge shotguns (a semiautomatic Mossberg 930 and a pump-action Ranger 870), and two other rifles (a .357 Magnum Uberti lever-action rifle, and a .223-caliber Mossberg Predator bolt-action rifle). Tarrant was granted a firearms licence with an "A" endorsement in November 2017, and purchased weapons between December 2017 and March 2019, along with more than 7,000 rounds of ammunition. According to a city gun store, Tarrant bought four firearms and ammunition online. The shop did not detect anything unusual or extraordinary about the customer. He used four 30-round magazines, five 40-round magazines, and one 60-round magazine in the shootings. Additionally, he illegally replaced the semi-automatic rifles' small magazines with the higher capacity magazines purchased online, against the conditions of Tarrant's gun license. He also modified the triggers of some of the firearms to allow for lighter trigger pressure and faster trigger resets. He spent an estimated NZ$30,000 on firearm-related items. The guns and magazines used were covered in white writing naming historical events, people, and motifs related to historical conflicts, wars, and battles between Muslims and European Christians; as well as the names of recent Islamic terrorist attack victims and the names of far-right attackers such as Alexandre Bissonnette, Luca Traini and Darren Osbourne. The markings also included references to "Turkofagos" (Greek: Τουρκοφάγος, lit. 'Turk-eater'; this was the nickname of the revolutionary Nikitas Stamatelopoulos during his battles in the Greek War of Independence), and white supremacist slogans such as the anti-Muslim phrase "Remove Kebab" that originated from Serbia and the Fourteen Words. The Archangel Michael's Cross of the Romanian fascist organisation Iron Guard was among the symbols on the firearm. Apart from the Latin alphabet, writings on the weaponry were in the Cyrillic, Armenian and Georgian alphabets. The writings were names dedicated to historic individuals that fought against Muslim forces. On his armoured vest was a Black Sun patch, a symbol commonly used by the Azov Regiment, and two dog tags: one with a Celtic cross, and one with a Slavic swastika design; all of these symbols are popular in far-right counter-culture. His armoured vest had at least seven loaded .223 magazines in the front pockets. He also wore an airsoft helmet, which held the head-mounted GoPro he used for his live stream. According to Stuff, Tarrant was wrongly granted a firearms licence due to police failures. Sources said that police failed to interview a family member as required for obtaining a firearms licence, instead interviewing two men that Tarrant had met through an online chatroom. In the days after the attacks, the police had quashed concerns that Tarrant had obtained the weapons inappropriately. Police also found four incendiary devices in Tarrant's car; they were defused by the New Zealand Defence Force. He said, on the livestream, that he had planned to set the mosque on fire. Tarrant claims to be the author of a 74-page manifesto titled The Great Replacement, a reference to the "Great Replacement" and "white genocide" conspiracy theories. It said that the attacks were planned two years prior, and the location was selected three months prior. Minutes before the attacks began, the manifesto was emailed to more than 30 recipients, including the prime minister's office and several media outlets, and links were shared on Twitter and 8chan. Seven minutes after Tarrant sent the email containing the manifesto to parliament, it was forwarded to the parliament security team, who instantly called the police communication centre at 1:40 p.m., around the same time the first 111 calls were made from the Al Noor Mosque. In the manifesto, several anti-immigrant sentiments are expressed, including hate speech against migrants, white supremacist rhetoric, and calls for all non-European immigrants in Europe whom he claimed to be "invading his land" to be removed. The manifesto displays neo-Nazi symbols such as the Black Sun and the Odin's cross. The author denies being a Nazi, describing himself instead as an "ethno-nationalist", an "eco-fascist", and a "kebab removalist", in reference to a meme exalting the genocide of Bosnian Muslims that occurred during the Bosnian War. The author cites Norwegian terrorist Anders Behring Breivik, Dylann Roof and others as an inspiration. The author said that he agrees with British Union of Fascists leader Oswald Mosley and that the People's Republic of China was the nation closest to his ideology. He has also been said to have drawn from the counter-jihad movement. Despite claiming to launch this attack in the name of diversity, he called for the expulsion of people he deemed to be "invaders" from Europe including but not limited to Roma, Africans, Indians, Turks and Semitic peoples. The author says he originally targeted the Al Huda Mosque in Dunedin but changed his mind after visiting Christchurch, because the mosques there contained "more adults and a prior history of extremism". In 2014 and 2015, the local press had reported an allegation that a congregation member had been radicalised at the mosque. Additionally, the shooter also called for the killing of German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and London Mayor Sadiq Khan. The manifesto was described by some media outlets as "shitposting"—trolling designed to engender conflict between certain groups and people. Readers of the manifesto described it as containing deliberately provocative and absurd statements, such as sarcastically claiming to have been turned into a killer by playing violent video games. On 23 March 2019, the manifesto was deemed "objectionable" by the Chief Censor of New Zealand, making it unlawful to possess or distribute it in New Zealand. Exemptions to the ban were available for journalists, researchers, and academics. In August 2019, The New Zealand Herald reported that printed copies of the manifesto were being sold online outside New Zealand, something New Zealand law could not prevent. Genocide scholar A. Dirk Moses analysed the manifesto, concluding that "Tarrant's words yield insights into the subjectivity of genocidaires more generally, namely that they commit terrorist acts with genocidal intent as – in their own mind – preventative self-defence; not as acts of aggression but, as he writes, 'a partisan action against an occupying force'". According to Moses, it was hypocritical for Tarrant to complain about supposed "white genocide" from immigration without recognising that he himself comes from a settler colony that resulted from genocide against Indigenous Australians. In the manifesto, Tarrant said he hoped mass shootings would cause conflict over gun control in the United States, and potentially lead to civil war. An arm of the Ukrainian Azov movement subsequently disseminated the manifesto both online and in print. At 1:32 p.m., Tarrant started his live-stream that would last for 17 minutes on Facebook Live, starting with the drive to the Al Noor mosque and ending as he drove away. Just before the shooting, he played several songs, including "Serbia Strong", a Serb nationalist and anti-Muslim song; and "The British Grenadiers", a traditional British military marching song. At 1:39 p.m., Tarrant parked his vehicle in the driveway next to the Al Noor Mosque. He then armed himself with the Mossberg 930 and Windham Weaponry AR-15 rifle before walking towards the mosque. At 1:40 p.m., Tarrant approached the mosque, a worshipper greeted him with "Hello, brother". Tarrant fired his shotgun nine times towards the front entrance, killing four worshippers. He then dropped the shotgun and opened fire on people inside with the AR-15–style rifle, killing two other men down a hallway near the entrance and dozens more inside a prayer hall; a strobe light attached to one of his weapons disoriented victims. Another worshipper charged at Tarrant and knocked him down, dislodging a magazine from his vest in the process, but he was then shot several times and fatally wounded. This worshipper, Naeem Rashid, was posthumously awarded the Nishan-e-Shujaat and the New Zealand Cross, the highest awards of bravery in Pakistan and New Zealand, respectively. Tarrant fired at worshippers in the prayer hall from close range. He then went outside, where he killed a man, discarded his Windham WW-15 and retrieved a Ruger AR-556 AR-15 from his car. He went to the mosque's southern gate and killed two people in the car park sheltering behind vehicles and wounded another. He reentered the mosque and shot already-wounded people, then again went outside, where he killed a woman. Thereupon Tarrant drove over the deceased woman, leaving six minutes after he arrived at the mosque. He shot at fleeing worshipers and cars through the windscreen and closed window of his own car as he was driving towards the Linwood Islamic Centre. At 1:46 p.m., police arrived near the mosque just as Tarrant was leaving, but his car was hidden by a bus, and at the time, no description of the vehicle had been provided, or that he had left. He drove eastwards on Bealey Avenue at up to 130 km/h (81 mph), weaving between lanes against oncoming traffic and driving onto a grass median strip. At 1:51 p.m., just after the livestream had ended due to a connection interruption, he aimed a shotgun at the driver of a vehicle on Avonside Drive and attempted to fire it twice, but it failed to fire on both occasions. The GoPro device attached to Tarrant's helmet continued recording until he was apprehended by police eight minutes later. At 1:52 p.m., Tarrant arrived at the Linwood Islamic Centre, 5 kilometres (3 mi) east of the Al Noor Mosque, where about 100 people were inside. He parked his vehicle on the mosque's driveway, preventing other cars from entering or leaving. According to a witness, Tarrant was initially unable to find the mosque's main door, instead shooting people outside and through a window, killing four and alerting those inside. A worshipper named Abdul Aziz Wahabzada ran outside. As Tarrant was retrieving another gun from his car, Aziz threw a payment terminal at him. Tarrant fired back at Aziz, who picked up an empty shotgun that Tarrant had dropped. He took cover among nearby cars and attempted to draw Tarrant's attention by shouting, "I'm here!" Regardless, Tarrant entered the mosque, where he shot and killed three people. When Tarrant returned to his car, Aziz confronted him again. Tarrant removed a bayonet from his vest but then retreated into his car instead of attacking Aziz. Tarrant drove away at 1:55 p.m., with Aziz throwing the shotgun at his car. Aziz was awarded the New Zealand Cross, New Zealand's highest award for bravery. In May 2023, he represented recipients of the Cross at the coronation of Charles III and Camilla. After a long period of being left vacant, the building was demolished in November 2023. A silver 2005 Subaru Outback matching the description of Tarrant's vehicle was seen by a police unit, and a pursuit was initiated at 1:57 p.m. Two police officers rammed his car off the road with their vehicle, and Tarrant was arrested without resistance on Brougham Street in Sydenham at 1:59 p.m., 18 minutes after the first emergency call. Tarrant later admitted that when he was arrested, he was on his way to attack a mosque in Ashburton, 90 km (56 mi) southwest of Christchurch. He also told the police that there were "nine more shooters", and that there were "like-minded" people in Dunedin, Invercargill, and Ashburton, but when interviewed later, he confirmed that he had acted alone. Tarrant appeared in the Christchurch District Court on 16 March, where he was charged with one count of murder. The judge ordered the courtroom closed to the public except for accredited media and allowed the accused to be filmed and photographed on the condition that Tarrant's face be pixellated. In court, Tarrant smiled at reporters and made an inverted OK gesture below his waist, said to be a "white power" sign. The case was transferred to the High Court, and Tarrant was remanded in custody as his lawyer did not seek bail. He was subsequently transferred to the country's only maximum-security unit at Auckland Prison. He lodged a formal complaint regarding his prison conditions, on the grounds that he has no access to newspapers, television, Internet, visitors, or phone calls.[needs update] On 4 April, police announced they had increased the total number of charges to 89, 50 for murder and 39 for attempted murder, with other charges still under consideration. At the next hearing on 5 April, Tarrant was ordered by the judge to undergo a psychiatric assessment of his mental fitness to stand trial. On 20 May, a new charge of engaging in a terrorist act was laid against Tarrant under the Terrorism Suppression Act 2002. One murder charge and one attempted murder charge were also added, bringing the total to 51 and 40, respectively. On 14 June 2019, Tarrant appeared at the Christchurch High Court via audio-visual link from Auckland Prison. Through his lawyer, he pleaded not guilty to one count of engaging in a terrorist act, 51 counts of murder, and 40 counts of attempted murder. Mental health assessments had indicated no issues regarding his fitness to plead or stand trial. The trial was originally set to begin on 4 May 2020, but it was later pushed back to 2 June 2020 to avoid coinciding with the Islamic holy month of Ramadan. During his time in prison, Tarrant was able to send seven letters, one of which was subsequently posted on the Internet message boards 4chan and 8chan by a recipient. Minister of Corrections Kelvin Davis and the Department of Corrections were criticised for allowing the distribution of these letters. Prime Minister Ardern subsequently announced that the Government would explore amending the Corrections Act 2004 to further restrict what mail can be received and sent by prisoners. On 26 March 2020, Tarrant appeared at the Christchurch High Court via audio-visual link from Auckland Prison. During the appearance, he pleaded guilty to all 92 charges. Due to the nationwide COVID-19 pandemic lockdown, the general public was barred from the hearing. Reporters and representatives for the Al-Noor and Linwood mosques were present in the courtroom. According to media reports, Tarrant's lawyers had informed the courts that their client was considering changing his plea. On 25 March, Tarrant issued his lawyers with formal written instructions confirming that he wanted to change his pleas to guilty. In response, court authorities began making arrangements for the case to be called as soon as possible in the midst of the COVID-19 lockdown. The judge convicted Tarrant on all charges and remanded him in custody to await sentencing.[citation needed] On 10 July, the government announced that overseas-based victims of the shootings would receive border exemptions and financial help to fly to New Zealand for the sentencing. On 13 July, it was reported that Tarrant had dismissed his lawyers and would be representing himself during sentencing proceedings. Wikisource has original text related to this article: The Queen v Brenton Harrison Tarrant: Sentencing remarks Sentencing began on 24 August 2020 before Justice Cameron Mander at the Christchurch High Court, and it was televised. Tarrant did not oppose the sentence proposed and declined to address the court. The Crown prosecutors demonstrated to the court how Tarrant had meticulously planned the two shootings and more attacks, while numerous survivors and their relatives gave victim impact statements, which were covered by national and international media. Tarrant was then sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole for each of the 51 murders, and life imprisonment for engaging in a terrorist act and 40 attempted murders. The sentence is New Zealand's first terrorism conviction. It was also the first time that life imprisonment without parole, the maximum sentence available in New Zealand, had been imposed. Mander said Tarrant's crimes were "so wicked that even if you are detained until you die, it will not exhaust the requirements of punishment and denunciation." Following the sentencing, Deputy Prime Minister Winston Peters called for Tarrant to serve his sentence in Australia to avoid New Zealand having to pay the costs for his life imprisonment. The cost of housing Tarrant in prison was estimated at NZ$4,930 per day, compared to an average cost of $338 per sentenced prisoner per day. Peters's remarks were also motivated[citation needed] by Australia's policy of deporting New Zealand citizens who had committed crimes or breached character requirements. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said there is currently no legal basis for the proposal and that respecting the wishes of his victims and their relatives would be paramount. Justice Minister Andrew Little said Parliament would need to pass a law to deport Tarrant to Australia. University of Otago law professor Andrew Geddis said it was "legally impossible" to deport Tarrant to Australia to serve his sentence. On 28 August, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison and Australian Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton advised that, while no formal request had been made by the New Zealand Government to repatriate Tarrant to Australia and for him to serve his life sentence in an Australian correctional facility, the Australian Government was open to considering a request. On 14 April 2021, Tarrant appealed against his prison conditions and his designation as a "terrorist entity" at the Auckland High Court. According to media reports, he is being imprisoned at a special "prison within a prison" known as a "Prisoners of Extreme Risk Unit" with two other inmates. Eighteen guards have been rostered to guard Tarrant, who is being housed in his own wing. On 24 April, Tarrant abandoned his appeal. In early November 2021, Tarrant's new lawyer Tony Ellis stated that his client intended to appeal against his sentence and conviction, claiming that his guilty plea had been obtained under duress and that his conditions while on remand breached the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990. Mosque attack survivors have criticised Tarrant's appeal as a form of "grandstanding" and an attempt by the terrorist to "re-traumatise" the Muslim community. In early November 2022, Tarrant appealed against his sentence and conviction at the Court of Appeal in Wellington. A Court of Appeal spokeswoman confirmed Tarrant's appeal and that no hearing date had been set. Mosque shooting survivors including Imam Gamal Fouda, Temel Atacocugu, and Rahimi Ahmad described Tarrant's appeal as "re-traumatising," insensitive and attention-seeking. In early February 2024, Tarrant abandoned his judicial review against his prison conditions at the Auckland High Court. His lawyer Todd Simmonds asked Judge Venning to exclude journalists and members of the media from the proceedings, claiming that any publicity on the matter would cause "undue humiliation and embarrassment". Crown lawyer Austin Powell disagreed, arguing that the hearing was a matter of public interest. Judge Venning agreed with Powell and declined Simmonds' submission. After consulting with Tarrant, Simmonds informed the Court that Tarrant had abandoned his judicial review against his prison conditions. Fifty-one people died from the attacks, either at the scene or shortly afterwards: 44 at the Al Noor Mosque and seven at the Linwood Islamic Centre. All but four were male. Their ages ranged from three to 77 years old. Thirty-five others were injured at the Al Noor Mosque and five at Linwood. Police advised mosques to close temporarily, and sent officers to secure and patrol various sites in Christchurch. All Air New Zealand Link services departing from Christchurch Airport were cancelled as a precaution, due to the absence of security screening at the regional terminal. Security was increased at Parliament, and public tours of the buildings were cancelled. In Dunedin, the Police Armed Offenders Squad searched a house, later reported to have been rented by Tarrant, and cordoned off part of the surrounding street in Andersons Bay because Tarrant had indicated on social media that he had originally planned to target the Al Huda Mosque in that city. For the first time in New Zealand history, the terrorism threat level was raised to high. Prime Minister Ardern called the incident an "act of extreme and unprecedented violence" on "one of New Zealand's darkest days". She described it as a "well-planned" terrorist attack and said she would render the person accused of the attacks "nameless" while urging the public to speak the victims' names instead. Ardern directed that flags on public buildings be flown at half-mast. In May 2019, the NZ Transport Agency offered to replace any vehicle number plates with the prefix "GUN" on request. In mid-October 2019, Ardern awarded bravery awards to the two police officers who apprehended Tarrant at the annual Police Association Conference in Wellington. Due to the legal proceedings against Tarrant at the time, the two officers had interim name suppression, but in December 2019, this was lifted. On 1 September 2020, Prime Minister Ardern designated Tarrant as a terrorist entity, thereby freezing his assets and making it a criminal offence for anyone to support him financially. For the three months following the shooting, almost 1,000 reports were published in major news outlets in New Zealand. Less than 10% of news reports published by major media outlets mentioned Tarrant's name. Susanna Every-Palmer, an academic psychiatrist, suggested that the media made a moral choice to deny Tarrant exposure and not sensationalise his views, deviating from how similar events internationally were covered in the media. The court required the media to pixelate Tarrant's face when covering the legal proceedings, thus, within New Zealand, he remained largely faceless and nameless. Instead, media coverage focused largely on the victims and their families. In contrast, the media response in Australia was different, focusing on the extreme violence of the attack, as well as the attacker and his manifesto. For example, The Australian published an audio excerpt containing cries for help, and The Herald Sun wrote dramatic descriptions of victims being shot and used poetic devices to create more vivid imagery. Coverage of the victims was largely focused on physical horrors such as bloodshed, injuries, and graves being dug. Within an hour of the attack, all schools in the city were placed in "lockdown". A ministry report launched after the attacks said schools' handling of the events were varied: some schoolchildren in lockdown still had their mobile phones, and some were able to view the footage of the first attack online, while some schools had children "commando crawl" to the bathroom under teacher supervision. Student climate strikers at the global School strike for the climate rally in Cathedral Square, near the sites of the attacks, were advised by police either to seek refuge in public buildings or go home. The citywide lockdown lasted nearly three hours. In response to security concerns, the University of Otago postponed its sesquicentennial street parade which had been scheduled for 16 March. The third test cricket match between New Zealand and Bangladesh, scheduled to commence at Hagley Oval in Hagley Park on 16 March, was likewise cancelled due to security concerns. The Bangladesh team were planning to attend Friday prayer at the Al Noor Mosque and were moments from entering the building when the incident began. The players then fled on foot to Hagley Oval. Two days later, Canterbury withdrew from their match against Wellington in the Plunket Shield cricket tournament. Likewise, the Super Rugby match between the Crusaders, based in Christchurch, and Highlanders, based in Dunedin, due to be played the next day, was cancelled as "a mark of respect for the events". After the attacks, there were renewed calls to rename the Crusaders team, since its name derives from the medieval Crusades against Muslims. Canadian rock singer-songwriter Bryan Adams and American thrash metal band Slayer both cancelled their concerts that were scheduled to be held in Christchurch on 17 March, two days after the shootings. The Polynesian cultural festival Polyfest was cancelled after the shootings, with security concerns cited as the reason. The music and cultural festival WOMAD went ahead in New Plymouth despite the attacks, with armed police stationed around the festival perimeter, inside the event, and outside artists' hotels. Mosques around the World became the focus of vigils, messages, and floral tributes. The mayor of Christchurch, Lianne Dalziel, encouraged people to lay flowers outside the city's Botanic Gardens. As a mark of sympathy and solidarity, school pupils and other groups performed haka and waiata to honour those killed in the attacks. Street gangs including the Mongrel Mob, Black Power, and the King Cobras sent members to mosques around the country to help protect them during prayer time. One week after the attacks, an open-air Friday prayer service was held in Hagley Park. Broadcast nationally on radio and television, it was attended by 20,000 people, including Ardern, who said, "New Zealand mourns with you. We are one." The imam of the Al Noor Mosque thanked New Zealanders for their support and added, "We are broken-hearted but we are not broken." A national remembrance service was held on 29 March, a fortnight after the attacks. Shortly after the attack, New Zealand Police launched Operation Whakahaumanu. The operation was designed to reassure New Zealanders after the attack and to also investigate possible threats who shared a similar ideology to the gunman. Police increased visibility in streets and visited many schools, businesses, and religious places as part of the operation. In Canterbury alone, there were almost 600 people of interest to police, where hundreds of properties were searched. On 14 July 2020, the Independent Police Conduct Authority deemed three of these searches to be unlawful. An online fundraiser on the fundraising website "Givealittle" started to support victims and their families had, as of August 2020,[ref] raised over NZ$10,903,966. Counting other fundraisers, a combined total of $8.4 million had been raised for the victims and their families (as of 20 March 2019).[update] Prime Minister Ardern reiterated that those injured or killed in the shootings and their immediate families are covered by the country's accident-compensation scheme, ACC, which offers compensation for lost income and a $10,000 funeral grant, among other benefits. In late June, it was reported that the Jewish Federation of Greater Pittsburgh had raised more than NZ$967,500 (US$650,000) through its New Zealand Islamophobia Attack Fund for the victims of the Christchurch mosque shootings. This amount included $60,000 raised by Tree of Life – Or L'Simcha Congregation. These funds will be donated to the Christchurch Foundation, a registered charity which has been receiving money to support victims of the Christchurch shootings. This philanthropy was inspired by local Muslim support for the Pittsburgh Jewish community following the Pittsburgh synagogue shooting in late October 2018. Police arrested four people on 15 March in relation to the attacks, including a woman and a man, after finding a firearm in a vehicle in which they were travelling together.[clarification needed] The woman was released uncharged, but the man was held in custody and was charged with a firearms offence. Additionally, a 30-year-old man said he was arrested when he arrived at Papanui High School to pick up his 13-year-old brother-in-law. He was in camouflage clothing, which he said he habitually wore. He is seeking compensation for a wrongful arrest. The actions were defended by police, who mentioned the threat level after the massacre and that they had to deal with reports possibly related to the attacks.[needs update] On 4 March 2020, a 19-year-old Christchurch man was arrested for allegedly making a terror threat against the Al Noor Mosque on an encrypted social media platform Telegram. Media reports subsequently identified the man as Sam Brittenden, a member of the white supremacist group Action Zealandia. On 4 March 2021, a 27-year-old man was charged with "threatening to kill" after making an online threat against both the Linwood Islamic Centre and the Al Noor Mosque on 4chan. The suspect was granted name suppression and remanded into custody until 19 March. On 18 March 2019, the Australian Federal Police conducted raids on the homes of Tarrant's sister and mother near Coffs Harbour and Maclean in New South Wales. Police said the raids were carried out to assist New Zealand Police with their investigations into the shootings, adding that Tarrant's sister and mother were assisting the investigation. On 19 March 2019, an Australian man who had posted on social media praising the shootings was indicted on one count of aggravated possession of a firearm without a licence and four counts of using or possessing a prohibited weapon. He was released on bail on the condition that he stay offline.[needs update] A 24-year-old man from Oldham, Greater Manchester, United Kingdom, was arrested on 16 March for sending Facebook posts in support of the shootings.[needs update] On 20 March, an employee of Transguard, a company based in the United Arab Emirates, was fired by his company and deported for making comments supporting the shootings. Thomas Bolin, a 22-year-old living in New York, sent Facebook messages praising the shootings and discussing a desire to carry out a similar act in the United States with his cousin. Bolin was later convicted of lying to the FBI for claiming he did not possess any firearms. Nine days after the attack, a mosque in Escondido, California, was set on fire. Police found graffiti on the mosque's driveway that referenced the shootings, leading them to investigate the fire as a terrorist attack. According to Sri Lankan State Defence Minister Ruwan Wijewardene, an early inquiry indicated that the 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings on 21 April were retaliation for the Christchurch attack. Some analysts believe the attacks were planned before the Christchurch attack, and any linkage was questioned by New Zealand's government—with Prime Minister Ardern saying she was not aware of any intelligence linking the two. A mass shooting later took place at a synagogue in Poway, California on 27 April 2019, killing a person and injuring three others. The neo-Nazi perpetrator of the shooting, John T. Earnest, also claimed responsibility for the fire and praised the Christchurch shootings in a manifesto. He and Tarrant were said to have been radicalised on 8chan's /pol/ discussion board. He also unsuccessfully attempted to live stream his shooting on Facebook. On 3 August 2019, Patrick Crusius opened fire and killed 23 people and injured 22 others in a mass shooting at a Walmart in El Paso, Texas, targeting Mexicans. In a manifesto posted to 8chan's /pol/ board, the suspect expressed support for and inspiration from the Christchurch shootings. Additionally, the alleged shooter described himself as an "eco-fascist". On 10 August 2019, Philip Manshaus opened fire at a mosque in Bærum, Norway, and livestreamed it on Facebook. He referred to Tarrant as a saint online and posted an image depicting Tarrant, Crusius, and Earnest as "heroes". The attack resulted in one injury. Manshaus was sentenced to 21 years for the attack and for killing his teenage stepsister, who was found dead shortly after the attack. On 27 January 2021, the Singaporean Internal Security Department reported it had arrested a 16-year-old Protestant Indian youth under the Internal Security Act for plotting to attack the Assyafaah and Yusof Ishak Mosques on the anniversary of the shootings. The youth had produced a manifesto that described Tarrant as a "saint" and praised the shootings as the "justifiable killing of Muslims". Unable to obtain firearms and explosives due to Singapore's strict gun control laws, the youth had instead purchased a machete and vest. On 14 May 2022, white supremacist shooter Payton Gendron killed ten people and injured three others at a Tops Friendly Markets grocery store in Buffalo, New York, targeting African Americans. Eleven of the 13 victims shot were Black and two others were White. He livestreamed the attack on Twitch and published a manifesto stating that he was inspired by Tarrant and others including Crusius and Earnest respectively. In response, Acting Chief Censor Rupert Ablett-Hampson placed an interim ban on the circulation of Gendron's manifesto within New Zealand. In addition, the Department of Internal Affairs considered referring Gendron's livestream of the shooting to the Office of Film and Literature Classification. Queen Elizabeth II, New Zealand's head of state, said she was "deeply saddened" by the attacks. Other politicians and world leaders also condemned the attacks, with some attributing them to rising Islamophobia. The prime minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan, announced that the Pakistani emigrant who charged at Tarrant and died, would be posthumously honoured with a national award for his courage. The president of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, showed footage taken by Tarrant to his supporters at campaign rallies for upcoming[update] local elections. The New Zealand and Australian governments, as well as Turkey's main opposition party, criticised his actions. President Donald Trump condemned the "horrible massacre". When asked after the attacks if he thought white nationalists were a growing threat around the world, Trump replied, "I don't really. I think it's a small group of people that have very, very serious problems. It's certainly a terrible thing." Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad expressed deep regret over the terrorist attack. He said he hoped the New Zealand government would bring the perpetrators to justice. Two New Zealand-based anti-immigration groups, the Dominion Movement and the New Zealand National Front, condemned the attacks, distanced themselves from the perpetrator, and shut their websites down. Some in the broader far-right culture celebrated the attacks and "sanctified" Tarrant as a central figure. Tarrant's manifesto was translated and distributed in more than a dozen different languages with a number of supporters on 8chan making photo and video edits of the shooting. Some extremists were inspired by Tarrant, committing violent incidents and deadly attacks of their own, such as those in Poway, El Paso, and Bærum. The United Kingdom's domestic intelligence service, MI5, launched an inquiry into Tarrant's possible links to the British far-right. Ahmed Bhamji, chair of the largest mosque in New Zealand, spoke at a rally on 23 March in front of one thousand people. He claimed that Mossad, the Israeli foreign intelligence agency, was behind the attack. The claim has been widely described as an unfounded, antisemitic conspiracy theory. The chairman of the Federation of Islamic Associations of New Zealand said that Bhamji's statement did not represent other New Zealand Muslims, but Bhamji defended his statements. The attack was also condemned by the Secretary General of the Muslim Council of Britain, Harun Khan, describing it as "the most deadly Islamophobic terrorist attack" observed recently. The Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) called on Donald Trump, then U.S. president, to condemn the shootings. Speaking to reporters in Washington, D.C. Nihad Award, executive director of CAIR said: "You should condemn this, not only as a hate crime but as a white supremacist terrorist attack." Just before carrying out the attacks, Tarrant asked his audience to subscribe to YouTuber PewDiePie's channel in light of his then-ongoing rivalry with Indian channel T-Series. PewDiePie, real name Felix Kjellberg, has been accused of using far-right content in his videos. Kjellberg tweeted his condolences in reaction, saying he "felt absolutely sickened" to be mentioned by Tarrant. Kjellberg later called for the "subscribe to PewDiePie" movement to be discontinued, citing the attacks; "to have my name associated with something so unspeakably vile has affected me in more ways than I've let show." During the attacks, Tarrant played the song "Fire" by The Crazy World of Arthur Brown. In a Facebook post, singer Arthur Brown expressed "horror and sadness" at the use of his song during the attacks, and cancelled a planned instore appearance at Waterloo Records shortly after the shootings out of respect for the victims. In China, internet users expressed outrage and anger at the shooter praising their country's government. The first shooting, starting from the drive to the Al Noor Mosque and ending on the way to the Linwood Islamic Centre was live-streamed on Facebook Live using Tarrant's head-mounted GoPro camera. The link to the Facebook livestream was first posted on 8chan's /pol/ board, alongside links to the manifesto. The post included the following, Well lads, it's time to stop shitposting and time to make a real life effort post. I will carry out and [sic] attack against the invaders, and will even livestream the attack via Facebook. Fewer than 200 people watched the 17-minute livestream live and none of them made a complaint to Facebook or notified the police. The livestream's perspective mirrored that of a first-person shooter video game, as well as being the first successfully live-streamed far-right terror attack. Copies of the live-streamed video were reposted on many platforms and file-sharing websites, including Facebook, LiveLeak, and YouTube. Police, Muslim advocacy groups, and government agencies urged anyone who found the footage to take it down or report it. The New Zealand Office of Film and Literature Classification quickly classified the video as "objectionable", making it a criminal offence in the country to distribute, copy, or exhibit the video, with potential penalties of up to 14 years' imprisonment for an individual, or up to $100,000 in fines for a corporation. Stuart Bender of Curtin University in Perth noted that the use of live video as an integral part of the attacks "makes [them] a form of 'performance crime' where the act of video recording and/or streaming the violence by the perpetrator is a central component of the violence itself, rather than being incidental." At least eight people in New Zealand have been arrested for possessing or sharing the video or manifesto; most of their names have been suppressed either to prevent threats against them or in support of freedom of expression online. The first was an 18-year-old man who was arrested and charged with inciting racial disharmony under the Human Rights Act on the same day as the shooting. Early news media reports identified him as an accomplice to the shooting, but the police have denied this. On 20 March 2019, Philip Arps was indicted for sharing the video under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act 1993, he subsequently pleaded guilty to the charges. In June 2019, he was sentenced to 21 months' imprisonment and was released in January 2020, under the condition of him wearing a GPS electronic monitor. Arps had also expressed neo-Nazi views and sent letters advocating violence against New Zealand politicians. On 26 February 2020, another Christchurch man was jailed for nearly two years for doctoring footage of the shootings upon Arps' request, two days after the attacks. Several media organisations in Australia and tabloid-news websites in the UK broadcast parts of the video, up to the point Tarrant entered the building, despite pleas from the New Zealand Police not to show it. Sky Television New Zealand temporarily stopped its syndication of Sky News Australia after that network showed the footage, and said it was working with Sky News Australia to prevent further displays of the video. At least three Internet service providers in New Zealand blocked access to 8chan and other sites related to the attacks; and they temporarily blocked other sites hosting the video such as 4chan, LiveLeak, and Mega until they comply with requests to take down copies of the video. The administrator of the online message board Kiwi Farms refused a New Zealand Police request for the data of users who made posts related to Tarrant and the attack. Social media sites including Facebook, YouTube, Reddit, and Twitter said they were working to remove the video from their platforms, and would also remove content posted in support of the attacks. According to Facebook, no complaints were made about the video until 12 minutes after the live-stream ended; the original video from Tarrant himself had been viewed fewer than 200 times before Facebook was notified of its content, and it had been viewed only 4,000 times before it was removed, which happened within minutes of notification. Facebook created a digital hash fingerprint to detect further uploads after the video had been propagated on other sites. The company said it had blocked 1.5 million uploads of the video. Reddit banned "subreddits" named "WatchPeopleDie" and "Gore" for glorifying violence. Microsoft proposed the establishment of industry-wide standards that would flag such content quickly, and a joint project to manage and control the spread of such information via social media. Despite the networks' attempts to self-police, New Zealand officials and other world leaders have asked them to take responsibility for extremist content posted on their services. Australia introduced legislation that would fine content providers and potentially imprison their executives if they do not remove violent imagery of these types of attacks. The French Council of the Muslim Faith filed a lawsuit against Facebook and YouTube, accusing the companies of "broadcasting a message with violent content abetting terrorism, or of a nature likely to seriously violate human dignity and liable to be seen by a minor". Facebook has contested the lawsuit, saying, "Acts of terror and hate speech have no place on Facebook, and our thoughts are with the families of the victims and the entire community affected by this tragedy. We have taken many steps to remove this video from our platform, we are cooperating with the authorities". On 15 May 2019, Ardern and French President Emmanuel Macron co-hosted the Christchurch Call summit in Paris, which called for major technology companies to step up their efforts to combat violent extremism. The initiative had 53 state signatories and eight large tech companies. Gun laws in New Zealand came under scrutiny in the aftermath, specifically the legality of military-style semi-automatic rifles. In 2018, for example, it was reported that of the estimated 1.5 million firearms in New Zealand, 15,000 were registered military style semi-automatic weapons as well as perhaps 50,000 and 170,000 unregistered A-Category semi-automatics. As Philip Alpers of GunPolicy.org noted, "New Zealand is almost alone with the United States in not registering 96 percent of its firearms ... one can assume that the ease of obtaining these firearms may have been a factor in his decision to commit the crime in Christchurch." Cabinet remains undecided on the creation of a register. On the day of the attack, Ardern announced that gun laws would change. Attorney-General David Parker was later quoted as saying that the government would ban semi-automatic guns but subsequently backtracked, saying the government had not yet committed to anything and that regulations around semi-automatic weapons was "one of the issues" the government would consider. On 21 March, Ardern announced a ban on semi-automatic weapons. As an interim measure, the government reclassified some semi-automatic rifles and shotguns, requiring police approval to buy them. The Arms (Prohibited Firearms, Magazines, and Parts) Amendment Act 2019 was introduced in the House of Representatives on 1 April and passed its first reading the following day. The final reading was passed on 10 April, supported by all parties in Parliament except ACT, and it became law by the end of the week. All legally obtained semiautomatic and military-grade firearms and their relevant ammunition were able to be handed over to police in a buy-back scheme. The scheme was initiated in July and lasted six months. Provisional data from police show that as of 21 December 2019 a total of 33,619 hand-ins had been completed, 56,250 firearms had been collected (51,342 as buy-back and 4,908 under amnesty), 2,717 firearms had been modified, and 194,245 parts had been collected (187,995 as buy-back and 6,250 under amnesty).[needs update] Police Minister Stuart Nash hailed the buy-back scheme as a success. In contrast, Nicole McKee, the spokeswoman of the Council of Licensed Firearms Owners, said that the buyback had been a failure and claimed that there are 170,000 prohibited guns in New Zealand, so "50,000 is not a number to boast about". Cabinet agreed to hold an inquiry into the attacks, and announced on 25 March 2019 that it would take the form of a Royal Commission of Inquiry. On 8 April 2019, Prime Minister Ardern announced that Supreme Court justice Sir William Young would chair the inquiry. On 26 November 2020, the Royal Commission formally presented its 792-page report to the government. This report was made public on 8 December. Though it acknowledged there were no signs an attack in New Zealand was imminent at the time, it highlighted failures by the police system to properly vet gun purchases, as well as the country's intelligence services' strong focus on Islamic extremism at the expense of other potential threats such as white supremacy. The report also made 44 recommendations, including the establishment of a new national intelligence agency specialising in counterterrorism strategies. After the report's recommendations were made public, Ardern said the government agreed to implement all of them. The report also found that YouTube had radicalised Tarrant. The inquiry was itself criticised by some Islamic community groups, such as the Islamic Women's Council, for not going far enough in its criticisms of government and police organisations, and the inquiry concluding that no organisation was at fault or had breached government standards. The Christchurch shootings influenced subsequent mass shootings, mainly for the reason of being the first successfully live-streamed far-right terror attack. In line with one of the recommendations of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on 15 March 2019, the New Zealand Government held a hui (social gathering) called "He Whenua Taurikura, a country at peace" on 15–16 June 2021 to discuss countering terrorism and violent extremism. The hui was attended by several community, civil society, media, academic, private sector, and government leaders and representatives including Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, New Zealand Security Intelligence Service (NZSIS) Director-General Rebecca Kitteridge, Police Commissioner Andrew Coster, Anjum Rahman of the Islamic Women's Council and representatives from social media giants Facebook and Twitter, Amnesty International New Zealand, and the New Zealand Jewish Council. The hui's stated aims are "to develop options for the National Centre of Excellence, which will focus on generating research and public discussion to prevent and counter violent extremism, understand diversity and promote social cohesion." On 15 June, several Muslim delegates chanted "Free Palestine" and staged a walk-out at the He Whenua Taurikura after NZ Jewish Council spokesperson Juliet Moses criticised Hezbollah and Hamas as terror organisations while discussing a pro-Hezbollah rally in Auckland in 2018. Muslim attendees including Haris Murtaza of the National Islamic Youth Association, the Federation of the Islamic Associations of New Zealand (FIANZ) chair Abdur Razzaq, and Azad Khan of the Foundation against Islamophobia and Racism criticised Moses for her alleged Islamophobia, perceived insensitivity to Muslim mosque shooting survivors, and for injecting the Israel-Palestine conflict into the conference proceedings. Moses later defended her remarks, denying that she was conflating Islam with terrorism but was seeking to raise the security concerns of the New Zealand Jewish community. During the conference, Anjum Rahman of the Islamic Women's Council testified that her group had tried to warn the Government of a potential attack on Muslims in New Zealand. Some delegates including Aliya Danzeisen, Iman Bsivov, and Radiya Ali also related encounters of racism and discrimination. Danzeisen also criticised the insufficient presence of Muslim delegates among the panel. Victoria University of Wellington criminologist Sara Salman and Auckland University of Technology communications lecturer Khairiah Rahman said that counter-terrorism needed to address economic security, structural injustice, racism, and discrimination. Prime Minister Ardern also addressed the conference via video link. Activist and "Foundation Against Islamophobia and Racism" Valerie Morse also called on Twitter senior director Nick Pickles to take action against a neo-Nazi account. The Christchurch Masjidain Attack Inquiry is a coronial inquiry by the Coronial Services of New Zealand into the Christchurch mosque shootings. The coronial inquiry was preceded by criminal proceedings and a Royal Commission of Inquiry. On 21 October 2021, Chief Coroner Judge Deborah Marshall confirmed that she had opened an inquiry into the Christchurch mosque shootings. In late October, Marshall confirmed that she plans to examine the initial response to the attacks by emergency services and whether any victims could have been saved if things had been done differently. The scope stage of the Inquiry was held between 22 and 24 February 2022, which led Coroner Brigitte Windley to identify 12 issues to be examined. The first phase was held between 24 October and 14 December 2023. The first phase examined nine issues including the events of the 15 March, the Police, emergency services, and Christchurch Hospital's response to the attack, whether shooter Brenton Tarrant received help during the attack, and the final movements and circumstances of each the 51 deceased's deaths, The second phase will examine the Police firearms licensing process, Tarrant's online radicalisation and future responses to violent extremism. In line with the recommendations of the Royal Commission of Inquiry report into the Christchurch mosque shootings, the Government formally created the "Centre of Research Excellence for Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism" in early June 2022. The goal of the research centre was to fund research and academic scholarships into countering terrorism and extremism. Prime Minister Ardern also announced that sociologists Professors Joanna Kidman and Paul Spoonley would serve as the directors of the Centre for Research Excellence. At least two films about the Christchurch mosque shootings have been proposed, Hello Brother and They are Us. Both films have attracted controversy and their future production timetable is uncertain. In May 2019, Variety reported that the Egyptian writer and director Moez Masoud was developing a movie titled Hello Brother, based on the shootings. Masoud's proposed film project was criticised by the Muslim Association of Canterbury, Al Noor Masjid, and New Zealand filmmaker Jason Lei Howken for taking advantage of the tragedy and failing to consult the Christchurch Muslim community. In early August 2021, the New Zealand Herald reported that Masoud's film had been put on hold for unspecified reasons. Glen Basner's FilmNation Entertainment began soliciting funding for They are Us in June 2021. The film was intended to focus on Ardern's response to the shootings, with the Australian actress Rose Byrne being cast as Ardern, while New Zealander Andrew Niccol was named as its writer. The filmmakers' choice to focus on Ardern's response rather than the victims attracted criticism. A spokesperson for the Prime Minister clarified that Ardern and the New Zealand government had no involvement with the film. Some also felt casting an Australian as Ardern was questionable; while this was not an emphasised issue it was seen as emblematic of the foreign, not local, desire to make the film. Several representatives of the New Zealand Muslim community also questioned the timing and appropriateness of the film. Due to this public backlash, producer Philippa Campbell resigned in June 2021. A draft script was then leaked to Newshub in July 2021 and was heavily criticised by the politicians depicted and the families of victims. In response, the producers of They Are Us stated that the script is still in development and subject to change. Later that same month it was confirmed that production had been put on hold until the producers had undertaken a full consultation with the country's Muslim community. On 6 July 2022, Governor-General Cindy Kiro awarded the New Zealand Cross to Linwood Mosque survivor Abdul Aziz and the late Naeem Rashid for confronting Tarrant. In addition, Kiro awarded the New Zealand Bravery Decoration to Senior Constables Scott Carmody and Jim Manning for apprehending the terrorist; and Liam Beale and Wayne Maley for helping survivors of the Al Noor mosque. In addition, Lance Bradford, Mike Robinson and Mark Miller (the latter posthumously) received the New Zealand Bravery Medal for helping victims of the mosque shootings. Cave of the Patriarchs massacre Bayonne mosque shooting Far-right terrorism in Australia Halle synagogue shooting List of massacres in New Zealand List of Islamophobic incidents List of terrorist incidents in March 2019 List of rampage killers (religious, political, or ethnic crimes) 44 at the Al Noor Mosque, and 7 at the Linwood Islamic Centre. At least the Poway synagogue shooting, 2019 El Paso shooting, Bærum mosque shooting, Halle synagogue shooting, 2021 London, Ontario truck attack, Eslöv school stabbing, 2022 Buffalo shooting, Kristianstad school stabbing, 2022 Bratislava shooting and the 2023 Jacksonville shooting. Including 11 with dual citizenship: 4 Egyptian, 3 Jordanian, 1 Bangladeshi, 1 Fijian, 1 Iraqi and 1 Pakistani. Capital punishment in New Zealand was abolished for murder in 1961, and for all crimes in 1989. The option to sentence an offender to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole was introduced in 2010. Australian prime minister Scott Morrison expressed support for New Zealand and condemned the shootings as a "violent, extremist, right-wing terrorist attack". He confirmed that an Australian had been detained as a suspect in connection with the attack. British prime minister Theresa May described the incident as a "horrifying terrorist attack", and said "my thoughts are with all of those affected by this sickening act of violence". Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau expressed "deepest condolences" and said "Canada remembers too well the sorrow we felt when a senseless attack on the Centre culturel islamique de Québec in Ste-Foy claimed the lives of many innocent people gathered in prayer", referencing the Quebec City mosque shooting in 2017. U.S. President Donald Trump extended his "warmest sympathy and best wishes...to the people of New Zealand," and he and the FBI offered them assistance[non-primary source needed] while security at mosques around the United States was increased. Russian President Vladimir Putin sent Prime Minister Ardern a message of condolence, saying, "This attack on civilians who gathered for prayer is shocking in its violence and cynicism." The lighting of the Ostankino Tower in Moscow, the tallest free-standing structure in Europe, was off for one hour as a sign of mourning. King Salman of Saudi Arabia said, "The heinous massacre of the worshipers at mosques in New Zealand is a terrorist act." He also called on the international community to confront hate speech and terrorism. Cardinal Pietro Parolin, the Secretary of State of Vatican City, sent a letter of condolences on behalf of Pope Francis, assuring the Muslim community in New Zealand of the Pope's "heartfelt solidarity in the wake of these attacks" and saying, "His Holiness prays for the healing of the injured, the consolation of those who grieve the loss of their loved ones, and for all affected by this tragedy." Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India expressed "deep shock and sadness" over the deaths and expressed India's solidarity with the people of New Zealand. Condolences were also provided by Azerbaijani, Bangladeshi, Bruneian, Cambodian, Chinese, Fijian, Filipino, Hungarian, Indonesian, Japanese, South Korean, Kosovar, Malaysian, Pakistani, Singaporean, Taiwanese, Thai, Turkish, and Vietnamese leaders. Roy, Eleanor Ainge; Sherwood, Harriet; Parveen, Nazia (15 March 2019). "Christchurch attack: suspect had white-supremacist symbols on weapons". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. A bomb disposal team was called in to dismantle explosive devices found in a stopped car. "'There Will Be Changes' to Gun Laws, New Zealand Prime Minister Says". The New York Times. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. "Mosque attack sentencing: Gunman's plan of terror outlined in court". NZ Herald. 13 February 2024. Retrieved 13 February 2024. Welby, Peter (16 March 2019). "Ranting 'manifesto' exposes the mixed-up mind of a terrorist". Arab News. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Achenbach, Joel (18 August 2019). "Two mass killings a world apart share a common theme: 'ecofascism'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 22 June 2020. Perrigo, Billy. "The New Zealand Attack Exposed How White Supremacy Has Long Flourished Online". Time. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Campbell, Charlie (21 March 2019). "The New Zealand Attacks Show How White Supremacy Went From a Homegrown Issue to a Global Threat". Time. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Gilsinan, Kathy (15 March 2019). "How White-Supremacist Violence Echoes Other Forms of Terrorism". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. R v Tarrant, 2020 NZHC 2192 (Christchurch High Court 27 August 2020). Ensor, Blair; Sherwood, Sam. "Christchurch mosque attacks: Accused pleads guilty to murder, attempted murder and terrorism". Stuff. Archived from the original on 8 July 2020. Retrieved 25 March 2020. Bayer, Kurt (3 July 2020). "Christchurch mosque shooting: Gunman's sentencing confirmed to start on August 24". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 3 July 2020. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Quinlivan, Mark; McCarron, Heather. "Christchurch shooting: Alleged gunman Brenton Tarrant's trial delayed". Newshub. Archived from the original on 13 June 2020. Retrieved 2 January 2020. "Man accused of Christchurch mosque shootings pleads not guilty to 51 murder charges". Stuff. 14 June 2019. Archived from the original on 24 July 2020. Retrieved 13 June 2019. Lourens, Mariné (27 August 2020). "Christchurch mosque gunman jailed 'until his last gasp'". Stuff. Archived from the original on 27 August 2020. Retrieved 27 August 2020. "New Zealand mosque shooter given life in prison for 'wicked' crimes". Reuters. 27 August 2020. Archived from the original on 27 August 2020. Retrieved 27 August 2020. "New Zealand terrorism threat environment following the Christchurch attack" (PDF). Combined Threat Assessment Group. 16 April 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. Clun, Rachel (18 March 2019). "Christchurch shooting live: questions over alt-right hate monitoring following shooting". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. "Alt-right extremists are not being monitored effectively". The Sydney Morning Herald. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. "New Zealand Massacre Highlights Global Reach of White Extremism". The New York Times. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Observer editorial (17 March 2019). "The Observer view on the Christchurch shootings: we've been too slow to see the far right threat". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 April 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "World leaders condemn Christchurch mosque terrorism attack". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 21 April 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "PM on mosque shooting: 'One of New Zealand's darkest days'". Newstalk ZB. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 2 April 2019. "Pakistan to honour Christchurch mosque 'hero' with national award". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. It was the deadliest mass shooting in the country's modern history. "Royal Commission of Inquiry announced following the Christchurch terror attacks". Stuff (company). Retrieved 26 March 2019. Graham-McLay, Charlotte (27 August 2020). "Christchurch shooting: mosque gunman sentenced to life without parole". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 27 August 2020. Retrieved 27 August 2020. Roy, Eleanor Roy (25 November 2020). "Christchurch attacks: royal commission hands in report on New Zealand mosque shootings". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020. Perry, Nick (7 December 2020). "Report shows how New Zealand mosque shooter eluded detection". Associated Press News. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020. Hummel, Kristina (18 July 2019). "The Christchurch Attacks: Livestream Terror in the Viral Video Age". Combating Terrorism Center at West Point. Retrieved 13 December 2023. Lakhani, Dr Suraj (10 June 2022). "The Gamification of Violent Extremism: An Empirical Exploration of the Christchurch Attack". GNET. Retrieved 13 December 2023. Konig, Joseph (7 September 2023). "Leaders, experts warn racist Jacksonville shooting not an isolated incident". NY1. Retrieved 7 January 2024. "'Welcome, brother': A community that stressed peace is undone by violence". Stuff. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 13 June 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020. "Photos". The Press. 22 June 1985. p. 1. Archived from the original on 3 May 2023. Retrieved 3 May 2023. Akerman, Tessa (16 March 2019). "Linwood mosque reflects a growing Muslim community". The Australian. Archived from the original on 6 November 2023. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "'A loner with a lot of money': A look into mosque gunman's past". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 11 April 2023. "How Australian terrorist spent his final months before Christchurch mosque attack". 9news.com.au. 8 December 2020. Archived from the original on 18 February 2023. Retrieved 18 February 2023. Kaye, Byron (16 March 2019). "In New Zealand, a journey around the world and into darkness". Reuters.com. Reuters. Archived from the original on 7 February 2021. Retrieved 26 January 2021. "Executive summary". Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques on 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 18 September 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. Keogan, Sarah; Chung, Laura (15 March 2019). "From local gym trainer to mosque shooting: Alleged Christchurch shooter's upbringing in Grafton". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 24 March 2019. "Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on 15 March 2019" (PDF). Royal Commission. pp. 168–170. Retrieved 11 December 2023. "Christchurch shooting accused Brenton Tarrant was a personal trainer in Grafton". ABC Network. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on 15 March 2019" (PDF). Royal Commission. pp. 168–170. Retrieved 11 December 2023. "Like, Share, Recruit: How a White-Supremacist Militia Uses Facebook to Radicalize and Train New Members". 7 January 2021. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 11 April 2023. The Christchurch mosque attacker, who livestreamed the atrocity on Facebook, had been radicalized by far-right material largely on YouTube and Facebook, according to a New Zealand government report released in December 2020. He had spent time in Ukraine in 2015 and mentioned plans to move to the country permanently. "We know that when he was in that part of the world, he was making contact with far-right groups," says Andrew Little, the Minister responsible for the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service. Little says he does not know if these groups included Azov. But during the attack, the shooter wore a flak jacket bearing a black sun, the symbol commonly used by the Azov Battalion. Beynen, Martin van; Sherwood, Sam (8 December 2020). "New Zealand 'ideal' for mosque shooter to plan his terrorist attack, royal commission finds". Stuff. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 8 December 2020. "Who is Christchurch mosque shooting accused? Brenton Tarrant member of Bruce Rifle Club in Milton". The New Zealand Herald. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Perpetrator of New Zealand terrorist attack visited Turkey 'twice'". TRT World. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Brenton Tarrant: Suspected New Zealand attacker 'met extreme right-wing groups' during Europe visit, according to security sources". The Independent. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. The man arrested over the murder of 49 people at mosques in New Zealand is believed to have met extreme right-wing groups during a visit to Europe two years ago, according to security sources. Multiple sources: "Suspected New Zealand attacker donated to Austrian far-right group, officials say". Reuters/NBC News. 5 April 2019. Archived from the original on 8 March 2020. Retrieved 27 March 2019. "Christchurch mosque shootings: Accused gunman donated $3650 to far-right French group Generation Identity". The New Zealand Herald. 5 April 2019. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 5 April 2019. Wilson, Jason (15 May 2019). "Christchurch shooter's links to Austrian far right 'more extensive than thought'". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 May 2019. Saunders, Doug (15 March 2022). "Opinion: The Christchurch massacre may have had a Canadian connection – but there's a reason you may not know about it". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on 15 March 2019 (PDF). p. 24. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 July 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Dunedin, Candace Sutton in (17 March 2019). "Christchurch massacre: Brenton Tarrant's life in Dunedin, NZ". News.com.au. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 2 April 2019. "Christchurch shooting accused Brenton Tarrant described as a 'recluse' by neighbours". Stuff. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 30 March 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2020. Reid, Melanie; Jennings, Mark (25 March 2019). "Shooter trained at Otago gun club". Newsroom. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 24 August 2021. "Christchurch mosque shootings: Bruce Rifle Club closes in wake of terror". The New Zealand Herald. 17 March 2019. ISSN 1170-0777. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. O'Callaghan, Jody (7 December 2020). "March 15 terrorist accidentally shot himself months before mosque attack". Stuff. Archived from the original on 7 December 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020. "Christchurch shooter was Bulgarian guesthouse's first-ever Australian guest". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 31 March 2019. Archived from the original on 14 June 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2022. Gec, Jovana (16 March 2019). "New Zealand gunman entranced with Ottoman sites in Europe". Associated Press News. Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Schindler, John R. (20 March 2019). "Ghosts of the Balkan wars are returning in unlikely places". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Coalson, Robert. "Christchurch Attacks: Suspect Took Inspiration From Former Yugoslavia's Ethnically Fueled Wars". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Zivanovic, Maja (15 March 2019). "New Zealand Mosque Gunman 'Inspired by Balkan Nationalists'". Balkaninsight.com. Balkaninsight. Archived from the original on 22 September 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Dafinger, Johannes; Florin, Moritz (2022). A Transnational History of Right Wing Terrorism: Political Violence and the Far Right in Eastern and Western Europe since 1900. United Kingdom: Routledge. p. 219. Mann, Alex; Nguyen, Kevin; Gregory, Katharine (23 March 2019). "Christchurch shooting accused Brenton Tarrant supports Australian far-right figure Blair Cottrell". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 23 March 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2019. Nguyen, Kevin (10 April 2019). "'This marks you': Christchurch shooter sent death threat two years ago". ABC News. Archived from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 12 April 2019. "Brenton Tarrant: The 'ordinary white man' turned mass murderer". The Daily Telegraph. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Christchurch shooting: Survivors convinced gunman visited mosque to learn layout". Newshub. Archived from the original on 15 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. "Questions asked by the community". Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques on 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. "Christchurch mosque shootings: Police rule out that gunman entered mosque prior to attack". The New Zealand Herald. 12 April 2020. ISSN 1170-0777. Archived from the original on 27 April 2020. Retrieved 15 May 2020. "The terrorist attack". Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques on 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 23 December 2020. Retrieved 12 December 2020. Bayer, Kurt; Leasl, Anna (24 August 2020). "Christchurch mosque terror attack sentencing: Gunman Brenton Tarrant planned to attack three mosques". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 4 September 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2020. Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on 15 March 2019 (PDF). pp. 49–51. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 July 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern's focus on strengthening current gun laws after Christchurch terror attacks". Radio New Zealand. 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Pannett, Rachel; Taylor, Rob; Hoyle, Rhiannon (18 March 2019). "New Zealand Shootings: Brenton Tarrant Bought Four Guns Legally Online". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 21 March 2019. "New Zealand cabinet backs change to gun laws within 10 days after mosque shooting". The Independent. 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 29 March 2019. Retrieved 29 March 2019. "Table 6: The individual's online purchases of magazines 2017–2018". Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques on 15 March 2019. 17 August 2017. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Christchurch mosque shootings: Briefing to Police Minister Stuart Nash shows gun law loophole also exploited by Northland siege killer Quinn Paterson". The New Zealand Herald. 20 March 2019. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019. Retrieved 28 April 2019. Perry, Nick; Williams, Juliet (21 March 2019). "Thousands descend on site of New Zealand mosque attacks to observe emotional Muslim prayer". The Globe and Mail. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. "Christchurch shootings: NZ cabinet backs tighter gun laws". BBC News. 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on 15 March 2019 (PDF). Royal Commission of Inquiry. p. 201. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 July 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on 15 March 2019 (PDF). p. 70. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 July 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Mosque shooter brandished material glorifying Serb nationalism". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "New Zealand mosque shooter names his 'idols' on weapons he used in massacre". Daily Sabah. Istanbul. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "New Zealand terror suspect wrote Italian shooter's name on his gun". The Local Italy. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Badshah, Nadeem (15 March 2019). "Finsbury Park mosque worshippers shocked by New Zealand terror attack". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 18 June 2022. Dedon, Theodore G. (2021), Mannion, Gerard; Doyle, Dennis M.; Dedon, Theodore G. (eds.), "From Julius Evola to Anders Breivik: The Invented Tradition of Far-Right Christianity", Ecumenical Perspectives Five Hundred Years After Luther's Reformation, Pathways for Ecumenical and Interreligious Dialogue, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 83–105, doi:10.1007/978-3-030-68360-3_6, ISBN 978-3-030-68360-3, S2CID 235865852, archived from the original on 6 November 2023, retrieved 30 April 2023 Hartleb, Florian (2020), "Offenders and Terrorism. Ideology, Motives, Objectives", Lone Wolves, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 63–122, doi:10.1007/978-3-030-36153-2_3, ISBN 978-3-030-36153-2, S2CID 212843876, archived from the original on 6 November 2023, retrieved 30 April 2023 "St. Michael's Cross". Anti-Defamation League. Archived from the original on 14 May 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2022. Macklin, Graham (2019). "The Christchurch Attacks: Livestream Terror in the Viral Video Age" (PDF). CTC Sentinel. 12 (6): 23. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 May 2023. Retrieved 30 April 2023. Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on 15 March 2019 (PDF). Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques on 15 March 2019. p. 46. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 July 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Other equipment for the purposes of the terrorist attack". Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques on 15 March 2019. 17 August 2017. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2023. "Mosque terrorist was wrongly granted firearms licence due to police mistakes, sources say". Stuff. 15 June 2020. Archived from the original on 22 June 2020. Retrieved 20 June 2020. Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on 15 March 2019 (PDF). p. 45. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 July 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Christchurch mosque shooting kills 49, gun laws will change PM says". Stuff (company). 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. Hendrix, Steve (16 March 2019). "'Let's get this party started': New Zealand shooting suspect narrated his chilling rampage". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Darby, Luke (5 August 2019). "How the 'Great Replacement' conspiracy theory has inspired white supremacist killers". The Telegraph. London – via ProQuest. "Terrorism security expert Chris Kumeroa says New Zealanders need to be alert to potential threats". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Jacinda Ardern's office received manifesto from Christchurch shooter minutes before attack". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Wong, Charlene (15 March 2019). "The Manifesto of Brenton Tarrant – a right-wing terrorist on a Crusade". Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Australian man named as NZ mosque gunman". The West Australian. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 19 April 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Operation Deans / Evidential Overview" (PDF). New Zealand Police. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 July 2023. Retrieved 21 August 2023. Gelineau, Kristen; Gambrell, Jon. "New Zealand mosque shooter is a white nationalist who hates immigrants, documents and video reveal". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 2 June 2020. Retrieved 21 March 2019. Dearden, Lizzie (16 March 2019). "New Zealand attack: How nonsensical white genocide conspiracy theory cited by gunman is spreading poison around the world". Independent. Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Invaders from India, Enemies in East: New Zealand Shooter's Post After a Q&A Session With Himself". News18. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Attacker posted 87-page "anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim" manifesto". CNN. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Multiple sources: Achenbach, Joel (18 August 2019). "Two mass killings a world apart share a common theme: 'ecofascism'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 22 June 2020. Retrieved 19 September 2019. "New Zealand suspect Brenton Tarrant 'says he is racist eco-fascist who is mostly introverted'". ITV News. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Weissmann, Jordan (15 March 2019). "What the Christchurch Attacker's Manifesto Tells Us". Slate. Archived from the original on 22 May 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Bolt, Andrew (15 March 2019). "Mosque Shooting in New Zealand. Many Dead". Herald Sun. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Purtill, James (15 March 2019). "Fuelled by a toxic, alt-right echo chamber, Christchurch shooter's views were celebrated online". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. Ravndal, Jacob Aasland (16 March 2019). "The Dark Web Enabled the Christchurch Killer". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. Taylor, Adam (16 March 2019). "Christchurch suspect claimed 'brief contact' with Norwegian mass murderer". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "New Zealand mosque shooter mentioned Dylann Roof in manifesto". Associated Press and The Post and Courier. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. Retrieved 18 June 2022. Kampeas, Ron (15 March 2019). "New Zealand killer says his role model was Nazi-allied British fascist". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. Retrieved 17 June 2022. "New Zealand Shooting Suspect Praised China For 'Lacking Diversity'". Radio Free Asia. 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 4 July 2022. Retrieved 17 June 2022. Hafez, Farid (9 April 2019). "The Great Replacement: Understanding the Origins of the New Zealand Terrorist". Bridge Initiative. Georgetown University. Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Önnerfors, Andreas (March 2019). 'The Great Replacement' – Decoding the Christchurch Terrorist Manifesto (Report). Centre for Analysis of the Radical Right. p. 7. doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.20760.83208. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023. Nilsson, Per-Erik (2022). "Manifestos of White Nationalist Ethno-Soldiers" (PDF). Critical Research on Religion. 10 (2): 228. doi:10.1177/20503032211044426. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Kidd, Rob; Miller, Tim (16 March 2019). "Police confirm Dunedin property linked to terror attack". Otago Daily Times. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 2 August 2019. Sherwood, Sam (21 March 2019). "Ashburton Muslims in gunman's sights 'feeling lucky' Christchurch shooter stopped". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 9 May 2019. Retrieved 2 August 2019. Multiple sources: Wall, Tony; Ensor, Blair; Vance, Andrea (27 July 2014). "A Kiwi Lad's Death by Drone". Sunday Star-Times. Auckland. Archived from the original on 27 July 2014. Retrieved 2 August 2019. "Christchurch Mosque Linked to al-Qaida Suspect". Newshub. Auckland. 4 June 2014. Archived from the original on 14 February 2020. Retrieved 2 August 2019. Matthewson, Nicole (3 December 2015). "Fighting, Killing 'Not the Muslim Way'". The Press. Christchurch, NZ. Archived from the original on 29 January 2020. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Multiple sources: Lorenz, Taylor (18 March 2019). "The Shooter's Manifesto Was Designed to Troll". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. Kupfer, Theodore (15 March 2019). "A Mass Murder for the Age of Sh**posting". National Review. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. Victor, Daniel (15 March 2019). "In Christchurch, Signs Point to a Gunman Steeped in Internet Trolling". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Multiple sources: Groll, Elias (15 March 2019). "How the Christchurch Shooter Played the World's Media". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2020. Kirkpatrick, David (15 March 2019). "Massacre Suspect Traveled the World but Lived on the Internet". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 5 July 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2020. Lerman, Rachel. "'Fortnite trained me to be a killer': Twisted humor of dark internet culture in focus after another attack". KFDA. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 2 July 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2020. "Christchurch mosque shootings: 'Manifesto' deemed objectionable". 23 March 2019. Archived from the original on 31 May 2020. Retrieved 2 July 2019. "Legal experts say censorship on gunman's manifesto went too far". RNZ. 24 March 2019. Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. Retrieved 13 March 2021. Cheng, Derek (21 August 2019). "Christchurch mosque shooting accused's manifesto being sold overseas is 'disgusting': Jacinda Ardern". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 26 August 2019. Moses, A. Dirk (2019). ""White Genocide" and the Ethics of Public Analysis". Journal of Genocide Research. 21 (2): 201–213. doi:10.1080/14623528.2019.1599493. S2CID 132394485. Gelineau, Kristan (16 March 2019). "Mosque shooter a white nationalist seeking revenge". AP NEWS. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Evans, Robert (15 March 2019). "Shitposting, Inspirational Terrorism, and the Christchurch Mosque Massacre". bellingcat. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2022. "Christchurch mosque shootings: Gunman livestreamed 17 minutes of shooting terror". The New Zealand Herald. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. Koziol, Michael (15 March 2019). "Christchurch shooter's manifesto reveals an obsession with white supremacy over Muslims". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Doyle, Gerry. "New Zealand mosque gunman's plan began and ended online". Reuters. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "The Queen v. Brenton Harrison Tarrant: Sentencing Remarks of Mander J" (PDF). High Court of New Zealand. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Multiple sources: "'Hello brother': Muslim worshipper's 'last words' to gunman". Al Jazeera. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "'Hello brother', first Christchurch mosque victim said to shooter". Toronto City News. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 29 May 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Horton, Alex (15 March 2019). "With strobe lights and guns bearing neo-Nazi slogans, New Zealand gunman plotted a massacre". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 7 April 2019. Retrieved 19 April 2019. "Christchurch shootings: Stories of heroism emerge from attacks". BBC. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Mackenzie, James; Russell, Ros. "Pakistan salutes hero of New Zealand mosque shooting". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 21 March 2019. "Special Honours List 16 December 2021 – Citations for New Zealand Bravery Awards". Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. 16 December 2021. Archived from the original on 15 December 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2021. "Mosque attack hero given bravery award in Pakistan". Radio New Zealand. 6 May 2019. Archived from the original on 15 December 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2021. "5.3 Firearms, ammunition and other equipment used in the terrorist attack". Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques on 15 March 2019. 17 August 2017. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2023. "Christchurch terror attack: Police release official timeline". Newshub. Archived from the original on 28 February 2020. Retrieved 28 February 2020. Perry, Nick; Baker, Mark (15 March 2019). "Mosque shootings kill 49; white racist claims responsibility". Star Tribune. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Macdonald, Nikki (18 March 2019). "Alleged shooter approached Linwood mosque from wrong side, giving those inside time to hide, survivor says". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Multiple sources: Perry, Nick. "Man who stood up to mosque gunman probably saved lives". Associated Press News. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Saber, Nasim; Ahmadi, Naser. "New Zealand terror attacks: The hero of Christchurch talks". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 4 April 2019. Retrieved 4 April 2019. "Dodging bullets, a father of 4 confronted the New Zealand shooter and saved lives". CNN. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. "Coronation order of service in full". BBC News. 5 May 2023. Archived from the original on 6 May 2023. Retrieved 6 May 2023. O'Callaghan, Jody (20 November 2023). "Tears and prayers as Linwood mosque gets demolished". Stuff. Retrieved 11 December 2023. "Christchurch's Linwood Mosque demolished after 2019 attacks". 1 News. 20 November 2023. Retrieved 11 December 2023. "Christchurch terror attack: The gunman's next target". Newshub. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 29 March 2020. "Mosque attacks timeline: 18 minutes from first call to arrest". RNZ. 17 April 2019. Archived from the original on 15 February 2020. Retrieved 15 February 2020. Report of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch masjidain on 15 March 2019 (PDF). pp. 72–73. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 July 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Chavez, Nicole; Regan, Helen; Sidhu, Sandi; Sanchez, Ray. "Suspect in New Zealand mosque shootings was prepared 'to continue his attack,' PM says". CNN. Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. NZ Police v Tarrant, 2019 NZDC 4784 (16 March 2019). "Mosque attacks suspect gives 'white power' sign in Christchurch court". Axios. Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "New Zealand mosque attack suspect Brenton Tarrant grins in court". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2019. "Mental health tests for NZ attack suspect". BBC News. 4 April 2019. Archived from the original on 24 June 2020. Retrieved 4 April 2019. "Christchurch shooter: Brenton Tarrant complains about jail". News.com.au. 1 April 2019. Archived from the original on 5 September 2019. Retrieved 4 April 2019. "Accused to face 50 murder charges, police confirm". Radio New Zealand. 4 April 2019. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 4 April 2019. "Mental health tests for NZ attack suspect". BBC News. 4 April 2019. Archived from the original on 24 June 2020. "Accused mosque shooter now facing terrorism charge". Stuff. 21 May 2019. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2019. "Christchurch mosque shooting trial delayed for Ramadan". Stuff. 12 September 2019. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 12 December 2019. Multiple sources: Bateman, Sophie (15 August 2019). "Alleged Christchurch shooter Brenton Tarrant sent seven letters from prison". Newshub. Archived from the original on 14 August 2019. Retrieved 15 August 2019. Perry, Nick (14 August 2019). "Alleged Christchurch gunman sends letter from prison cell". The Washington Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 14 August 2019. Retrieved 15 August 2019. "Officials admit letting accused Christchurch shooter send letter to supporter from prison". Brisbane Times. Associated Press and Stuff. 14 August 2019. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 15 August 2019. "Prison letters: Cabinet pushes ahead with law changes to Corrections Act". Radio New Zealand. 19 August 2019. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2019. Sachdeva, Sam (20 August 2019). "Govt mulls law change after prisoner letter fiasco". Newsroom. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2019. "Christchurch gunman pleads guilty to 51 murders". BBC News. 25 March 2020. Archived from the original on 15 July 2020. Retrieved 25 March 2020. Bayer, Kurt; Leask, Anna (26 March 2020). "Christchurch mosque shootings: Brenton Tarrant's shock guilty plea to murders". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 20 August 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020. Bayer, Kurt (26 March 2020). "Shock guilty plea: Brenton Tarrant admits mosque shootings". Newstalk ZB. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020. Bayer, Kurt (10 July 2020). "Christchurch mosque shooting: Border exceptions for victims based overseas to attend gunman's sentencing". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 10 July 2020. Retrieved 10 July 2020. Andelane, Lana (13 July 2020). "Christchurch mosque shooting: Brenton Tarrant to represent himself at sentencing". Newshub. Archived from the original on 13 July 2020. Retrieved 13 July 2020. Bayer, Kurt (13 July 2020). "Christchurch mosque shooting: Brenton Tarrant sacks lawyers, will represent himself at sentencing". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 13 July 2020. Retrieved 13 July 2020. "Significantly fewer victims to attend Christchurch mosque gunman's sentencing due to Covid restrictions". Stuff. 18 August 2020. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 18 August 2020. Leask, Anna (18 August 2020). "Christchurch mosque attacks: More details released about gunman's sentencing". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 18 August 2020. Retrieved 18 August 2020. Leask, Anna; Bayer, Kurt (27 August 2020). "Christchurch mosque attack sentencing: Brenton Tarrant will never be released from jail". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 27 August 2020. Retrieved 27 August 2020. Graham-Mclay, Charlotte (27 August 2020). "Christchurch shooting: mosque gunman sentenced to life without parole". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 August 2020. Retrieved 27 August 2020. "New Zealand court hears how mosque shooter planned deadly attacks". TRT World. 25 August 2020. Archived from the original on 26 August 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. "Christchurch shooting: Gunman Tarrant wanted to kill 'as many as possible'". BBC News. 24 August 2020. Archived from the original on 25 August 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. Multiple sources: Lourens, Marine (25 August 2020). "Applause as victim tells terrorist: 'You are the loser and we are the winners". Stuff. Archived from the original on 26 August 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. "Christchurch mosque shooter sniggers as victim reads out his impact statement". 1 News. 25 August 2020. Archived from the original on 28 August 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. Leask, Anna; Bayer, Kurt (26 August 2020). "Christchurch mosque attack sentencing: Victim's son describes Brenton Tarrant as trash who should be buried in a landfill". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 26 August 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. Miller, Barbara; Ford, Mazoe (25 August 2020). "Christchurch mosque survivors and families stare down gunman Brenton Tarrant in sentencing hearing". ABC News. Archived from the original on 26 August 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. "Christchurch mosque attack: Brenton Tarrant sentenced to life without parole". No. 27 August 2020. BBC. Archived from the original on 9 August 2021. Retrieved 24 August 2021. Perry, Nick (23 August 2020). "Families confront New Zealand mosque shooter at sentencing". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 13 February 2023. Retrieved 24 August 2021. "The ins and outs of life without parole". Newswroom. 28 March 2019. Archived from the original on 28 August 2020. Retrieved 27 August 2020. Maiden, Samantha (27 August 2020). "Mosque gunman Brenton Tarrant could serve out sentence in Australia, Scott Morrison reveals". The New Zealand Herald. ISSN 1170-0777. Archived from the original on 28 August 2020. Retrieved 28 August 2020. "Annual Report 2018/19" (PDF). corrections.govt.nz. Department of Corrections (New Zealand). 17 October 2019. p. 16. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 February 2021. Retrieved 28 August 2020. Massola, James; Galloway, Anthony (28 August 2020). "Australia open to taking Christchurch gunman from New Zealand". The Sydney Morning Herald. Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 August 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020. "Christchurch mosque shooting: Terrorist launches fresh legal challenge". The New Zealand Herald. 14 April 2021. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 14 April 2021. O'Callaghan, Jody (14 April 2021). "Christchurch mosque killer launches legal appeal over 'terrorist status'". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 14 April 2021. "New Zealand mosque shooter drops legal challenge over police conditions". Reuters. 24 April 2021. Archived from the original on 25 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. Cook, Charlotte (8 November 2021). "Christchurch mosque terrorist claims he pleaded guilty because of inhumane treatment in prison". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2021. O'Callaghan, Jody (8 November 2021). "Victims' family anger over Christchurch shooting killer's plan to appeal". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2021. Bayer, Kurt (8 November 2022). "Christchurch mosque shooter appealing conviction and sentence". The New Zealand Herald. NZME. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 8 November 2022. McCarthy, Jessica (8 November 2022). "Brenton Tarrant, the Christchurch mosque terrorist, appeals conviction and sentence". Nine News. Nine Entertainment. Stuff. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 8 November 2022. Williams, Amy (7 February 2024). "Review of Christchurch mosque attack terrorist's prison conditions dismissed". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 6 February 2024. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "Name Release 1 – Christchurch Terror Attack". police.govt.nz. 20 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 26 January 2024. "Name release 2 – Christchurch terror attacks". police.govt.nz. 21 March 2019. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 26 January 2024. "Name release 3: Christchurch terror attacks". police.govt.nz. 21 March 2019. Archived from the original on 25 March 2019. Retrieved 26 January 2024. "Name Release 4 – Christchurch Terror Attack". police.govt.nz. 22 March 2019. Archived from the original on 25 March 2019. Retrieved 26 January 2024. "Christchurch mosque attack death toll rises". The Sydney Morning Herald. 2 May 2019. Retrieved 26 January 2024. "NZ terror attack victims' age range 3–77". Dhaka Tribune. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2019. "Armed police guard mosques around New Zealand". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 16 April 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Cooke, Henry; Kirk, Stacey (15 March 2019). "New Zealand officially on high terror alert, in wake of Christchurch terror attacks". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Edmunds, Susan (15 March 2019). "Air New Zealand cancels flights, offers 'flexibility'". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Parliament security increased while security threat level high". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. Miller, Tim (16 March 2019). "Neighbours say Tarrant kept to himself, liked to travel". Otago Daily Times. Archived from the original on 8 July 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2019. "Christchurch mosque shootings: Accused gunman Brenton Tarrant was a 'model tenant' in Dunedin". The New Zealand Herald. 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 23 June 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2019. Kidd, Rod; Miller, Tim (15 March 2019). "Part of Dunedin street evacuated after report city was original target". Otago Daily Times. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Mosque shootings: AOS on Dunedin street after report city was original target". The New Zealand Herald. 15 March 2019. ISSN 1170-0777. Archived from the original on 22 May 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "New Zealand officially on high terror alert, in wake of Christchurch terror attacks". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Multiple sources: "Live stream: 1 News at 6 pm". 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 30 January 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "PM on mosque shooting: 'One of New Zealand's darkest days'". Newstalk ZB. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Christchurch mosque shootings: 'This can only be described as a terrorist attack' – PM Jacinda Ardern". Radio New Zealand. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Three in custody after 49 killed in Christchurch mosque shootings". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Wahlquist, Calla (19 March 2019). "Ardern says she will never speak name of Christchurch suspect". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "New Zealand Flag half-masting directive – Friday 15 20 March" (Press release). Ministry For Culture And Heritage. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019 – via Scoop. "NZTA to replace GUN number plates for free". Stuff (company). 1 May 2019. Archived from the original on 16 May 2019. Retrieved 23 August 2019. Multiple sources: "Christchurch mosque shooting: Police officers who apprehended alleged gunman named". RNZ. 10 December 2019. Archived from the original on 13 June 2020. Retrieved 3 April 2020. Leask, Anna (16 October 2019). "Hero cops: Christchurch terror arrest officers' bravery recognised at national ceremony". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 16 October 2019. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Officers who captured Christchurch terrorist attack suspect awarded for their bravery". 1 News. 16 October 2019. Archived from the original on 16 October 2019. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "PM designates Christchurch mosque shooter a 'terrorist entity'". MSN. Archived from the original on 21 October 2020. Retrieved 1 September 2020. Every-Palmer, S.; Cunningham, R.; Jenkins, M.; Bell, E. (23 June 2020). "The Christchurch mosque shooting, the media, and subsequent gun control reform in New Zealand: a descriptive analysis". Psychiatry, Psychology and Law. 28 (2): 274–285. doi:10.1080/13218719.2020.1770635. ISSN 1321-8719. PMC 8547820. PMID 34712096. S2CID 225699765. Ellis, Gavin; Muller, Denis (2 July 2020). "The proximity filter: the effect of distance on media coverage of the Christchurch mosque attacks". Kōtuitui: New Zealand Journal of Social Sciences Online. 15 (2): 332–348. doi:10.1080/1177083X.2019.1705358. "LIVE: Gunman named, four arrested, as Christchurch mosque attacks leave 'significant' number of fatalities". TVNZ. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "As it happened: 49 killed, 48 injured in Christchurch terror attack". Newshub. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. "Variation in schools' lockdowns during Christchurch shootings apparent as ministry launches review". Stuff. 21 March 2019. Archived from the original on 13 June 2020. Retrieved 24 March 2020. "Mosque terror attacks: Christchurch schools faced angry parents during lockdown". Radio New Zealand. 21 March 2019. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2019. "Deadly Christchurch mosque shootings: 49 dead after 'well-planned' attack". Radio New Zealand. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Thousands of students protest against climate change". Radio New Zealand. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Black Caps v Bangladesh test cancelled after gunmen attack Christchurch mosques". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "Bangladesh cricket team flees mosque shooting". City News 1130. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Cricketers escape NZ mosque shooting". Cricket Australia. Archived from the original on 9 June 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Bangladesh tour of New Zealand called off after Christchurch terror attack". ESPNcricinfo. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Canterbury withdraw from final Plunket Shield match, handing CD title". Stuff. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 24 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "Highlanders-Crusaders cancelled after massacre | Sporting News". www.sportingnews.com. Archived from the original on 24 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Crusaders' name change discussions 'a responsible action', says Grant Robertson". TVNZ. Archived from the original on 24 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Crusaders respond to criticism of name in light of attacks". Radio New Zealand. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "'Spill the Blood' band Slayer pulls out of Christchurch concert". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Auckland's Polyfest and St Patrick's celebrations cancelled after Christchurch mosque attack". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Womad festival chooses not to cancel in wake of Christchurch terror attacks". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. Multiple sources: Olito, Frank. "The internet is applauding a man's raw reaction to the New Zealand mass shooting after he laid flowers at a local mosque". INSIDER. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "'We love you': mosques around world showered with flowers after Christchurch massacre". The Guardian. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Hamilton mosque makes sure flowers live on". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Christchurch terror attack: How to support NZ's Muslim communities". The Spinoff. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. Mahony, Maree (16 March 2019). "Christchurch mosque attacks: Mayor Lianne Dalziel says city turning to practical help". RNZ. Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Mass haka and waiata performed outside Christchurch mosque to honour shooting victims". The New Zealand Herald. 21 March 2019. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Hassan, Jennifer; Tamkin, Emily (18 March 2019). "The power of the haka: New Zealanders pay traditional tribute to mosque attack victims". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. Multiple sources: "Mongrel Mob gang members to stand guard at local mosque, in support of Muslim Kiwis". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 21 March 2019. "Black Power perform haka outside Al Noor Mosque cordon in Christchurch". The New Zealand Herald. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "Fear of 'mosque today, marae tomorrow' partly behind gangs reaching out to Muslim community – expert". TVNZ. Archived from the original on 9 April 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2019. Multiple sources: "New Zealand marks one week since mosque attacks". New Straits Times. Reuters. 22 March 2019. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. "New Zealand marks one week since mosque attack with prayers, headscarves". The Straits Times. Reuters. 22 March 2019. Archived from the original on 9 April 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. "NZ falls silent for mosque attack victims". BBC. 22 March 2019. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Perry, Nick (22 March 2019). "New Zealand Observes Muslim Call to Prayer 1 Week After Deadly Mosque Attacks". Time. Archived from the original on 24 March 2019. Retrieved 24 March 2019. "Christchurch attacks: National remembrance service held". BBC. 29 March 2019. Archived from the original on 29 March 2019. Retrieved 29 March 2019. "Inside police investigation that sparked hundreds of raids after March 15 attack". Stuff. 14 July 2020. Archived from the original on 15 July 2020. Retrieved 15 July 2020. "Victim Support Official Page: Christchurch Shooting Victims' Fund". GiveALittle.co.nz. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "New Zealand Givealittle page raises more than $400k for victims of Christchurch terror attack". Stuff (company). 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "New Zealand raises $8.4m for victims of Christchurch mosque shootings". Stuff (company). 17 March 2016. Archived from the original on 14 March 2020. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "Christchurch shooting victims' bodies being returned as volunteers arrive to help with burials". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "PM statement on Christchurch shooting – 4 pm 17 March". The Beehive. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Multiple sources: Tabachnick, Tony (16 July 2019). "Federation sends more than $650,000 to Christchurch, New Zealand". Pittsburgh Jewish Chronicle. Archived from the original on 8 July 2019. Retrieved 16 July 2019. "Pittsburgh Jewish community to donate almost NZ$1 million to victims of Christchurch terror attacks". 1 News. 30 June 2019. Archived from the original on 16 July 2019. Retrieved 16 July 2019. "US Jewish federation donates nearly $1m to victims of Christchurch mosque attacks". Stuff (company). 1 July 2019. Archived from the original on 16 July 2019. Retrieved 16 July 2019. "Watch: Christchurch mosque shooting – Four in custody". Radio New Zealand. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 9 April 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Christchurch mosque shootings: One man faces murder charges, what happened to the other three arrested?". The New Zealand Herald. 16 March 2019. ISSN 1170-0777. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. Westcott, Ben; Marsh, Jenni; Regan, Helen; Wagner, Meg; Ries, Brian; Rocha, Veronica; Lewis, Aimee; Picheta, Rob; Kaur, Harmeet (15 March 2019). "Dozens killed in Christchurch mosque attack". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. "Christchurch mosque shooting: Wrong man arrested for wearing camo". News.com.au. New Zealand Herald. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 2 April 2019. "Christchurch mosque shootings: Camouflage wearer claims wrongful arrest". The New Zealand Herald. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. Multiple sources: "New threat made against Christchurch mosque". Newsroom. 2 March 2020. Archived from the original on 13 June 2020. Retrieved 29 March 2020. Sherwood, Sam (4 March 2020). "Man arrested after Al Noor mosque terror threat raid". Stuff. Archived from the original on 4 March 2020. Retrieved 4 March 2020. "New Zealand police step up patrols after new threat against Christchurch mosque". Reuters. 4 March 2020. Archived from the original on 4 March 2020. Retrieved 4 March 2020. Daalder, Marc (5 March 2020). "Action Zealandia member arrested for threat". Newsroom. Archived from the original on 5 March 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2020. Sherwood, Sam; Manch, Thomas (5 March 2020). "Father of teen arrested in raid after Al Noor mosque threat 'extremely disappointed'". Stuff. Archived from the original on 8 March 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2020. Hunt, Elle (11 March 2021). "New Zealand police charge man over online threat to Christchurch mosques". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 March 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2021. Sherwood, Sam; Ensor, Blair; Allott, Amber (5 March 2021). "Christchurch mosque attack threat granted name suppression during court appearance". Stuff. Archived from the original on 5 March 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2021. Rawsthorne, Sally (18 March 2019). "Police raid homes of the gunman's mother and sister". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 8 July 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2019. McKinnell, Jamie; Miller, Barbara (18 March 2019). "Christchurch shooting investigation reaches NSW, police raid the gunman's sister's house". ABC News. Archived from the original on 11 May 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2019. Multiple sources: "Australian who posted comments about Christchurch shootings cries in court". Stuff. 19 March 2019. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 2 April 2019. Bermingham, Kathryn (18 March 2019). "Chad Vinzelberg appears in court on firearm charges after allegedly supporting Christchurch terror attack online". The Advertiser. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 2 April 2019. "Man in SA court for posting comments in support of mosque shooting". The New Zealand Herald. 19 March 2019. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 2 April 2019. Opie, Rebecca (2 April 2019). "Alleged Christchurch massacre supporter has internet ban upheld, calls media 'animals'". ABC News. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 2 April 2019. Drury, Colin (16 March 2019). "Oldham man arrested for Facebook post 'supporting' New Zealand mosque attack". The Independent. Archived from the original on 6 November 2023. Retrieved 4 April 2019. "Christchurch shootings: Arrest over 'malicious' social media post". BBC News. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 4 April 2019. "Man sacked, deported from UAE for 'celebrating' New Zealand mosque shooting". Reuters. 20 March 2019. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 4 April 2019. Stack, Liam (4 April 2019). "Christchurch Messages on Facebook Lead to Charge of Lying to F.B.I." The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 August 2021. Retrieved 9 August 2021. Johnson, Andrew (24 March 2019). "Suspect of Possible Arson Attack at Escondido Mosque Leaves Note Referencing New Zealand Terrorist Attacks". nbcsandiego.com. NBC San Diego. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 4 May 2019. Winkley, Lyndsay; Schroeder, Lauryn (24 March 2019). "Arsonist strikes mosque in Escondido, refers to New Zealand massacre in note". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 5 April 2019. Multiple sources: Wade, Matt (23 April 2019). "Sri Lankan attacks 'retaliation for Christchurch': minister". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. Retrieved 23 April 2019. "Bombings were response to Christchurch shooting – State Minister". Adaderana.lk. DeranaTV. Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. Retrieved 23 April 2019. "State Defense Minister: Bombings were retaliation for Christchurch killings". 23 April 2019. Archived from the original on 8 May 2019. Retrieved 23 April 2019. "Sri Lanka blasts were in retaliation for New Zealand mosque shootings, official says". 23 April 2019. Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. Retrieved 23 April 2019. "Sri Lanka: Nearly 300 dead, Kiwi security expert says attacks unlikely to be linked to Christchurch". The New Zealand Herald. 23 April 2019. Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2019. "ISIS fanatics celebrate SL attacks". dailymirror.lk. Archived from the original on 1 May 2019. Retrieved 23 April 2019. "New Zealand PM says no intelligence linking Sri Lanka attacks to Christchurch". Reuters. 24 April 2019. Archived from the original on 24 April 2019. Retrieved 29 April 2019. Evans, Robert (28 April 2019). "Ignore The Poway Synagogue Shooter's Manifesto: Pay Attention To 8chan's /pol/ Board". Bellingcat. Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 9 May 2019. Baele, Stephane J.; Brace, Lewys; Coan, Travis G. (2021). "Variations on a Theme? Comparing 4chan, 8kun, and Other chans' Far-Right "/pol" Boards". Perspectives on Terrorism. 15 (1): 65–80. ISSN 2334-3745. JSTOR 26984798. Archived from the original on 10 April 2021. Retrieved 10 April 2021 – via JSTOR. Evans, Robert (4 August 2019). "The El Paso Shooting and the Gamification of Terror". Bellingcat. Archived from the original on 4 August 2019. Retrieved 12 August 2019. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (14 August 2019). "'It brings everything back': Christchurch despairs over white supremacist attacks". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 September 2019. Retrieved 19 September 2019. "Texas Man Pleads Guilty to 90 Federal Hate Crimes and Firearms Violations for August 2019 Mass Shooting at Walmart in El Paso, Texas". justice.gov. 8 February 2023. Archived from the original on 9 February 2023. Retrieved 20 August 2023. Burke, Jason (11 August 2019). "Norway mosque attack suspect 'inspired by Christchurch and El Paso shootings'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 12 August 2019. "Norway court jails mosque gunman Manshaus for 21 years". BBC News. 11 June 2020. Archived from the original on 22 October 2021. Retrieved 9 August 2021. Lim, Min Zhang (27 January 2021). "16-year old Singaporean detained under ISA for planning terror attacks on two mosques". The Straits Times. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2021. Mahmud, Aqil Haziq (27 January 2021). "16-year-old Singaporean detained under ISA after planning to attack Muslims at 2 mosques". Channel NewsAsia. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2021. "US mass shooting: White supremacist manifesto banned in New Zealand". Radio New Zealand. 15 May 2022. Archived from the original on 15 May 2022. Retrieved 15 May 2022. "Christchurch mosque shootings: Queen, Royals, heads of state speak out". The New Zealand Herald. 13 August 2023. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2021. "Erdoğan condemns 'deplorable' terror attacks on New Zealand mosques, rising Islamophobia". Daily Sabah. Archived from the original on 14 March 2020. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Christchurch shooting: 'Beyond awful', Nicola Sturgeon and world react to terror attack". The Scotsman. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Pakistan to honour Christchurch mosque 'hero' with national award". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Turkey's Recep Tayyip Erdogan uses New Zealand attack video at campaign rally". Deutsche Welle. 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "Erdogan again airs attack video at rally despite criticism". Associated Press News. 20 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "NZ foreign minister headed to Turkey to 'confront' Erdogan's mosque..." Reuters. 20 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "Turkey's Erdogan sparks diplomatic row with NZ, Australia". ABC News. 21 March 2019. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. "New Zealand mosque attacks suspect praised Trump in manifesto". Al Jazeera. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 1 May 2019. Retrieved 29 April 2019. Itkowitz, Colby; Wagner, John (15 March 2019). "Trump says white nationalism is not a rising threat after New Zealand attacks: 'It's a small group of people'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "PM: Gov't will ensure safety of Malaysians in New Zealand". New Straits Times. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 6 October 2023. Retrieved 12 September 2023. "Christchurch terror attack: Anti-immigration websites taken down after shootings". Radio New Zealand. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 9 April 2019. Retrieved 21 March 2019. "Revered as a saint by online extremists, how the Christchurch shooter inspired copycat terrorists around the world". The Independent. 24 August 2019. Archived from the original on 24 August 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2019. McMillan, Robert (20 March 2019). "After New Zealand Shooting, Founder of 8chan Expresses Regrets". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 31 August 2019. Retrieved 1 September 2019. Lagan, Bernard; Brown, David; Karim, Fariha; Simpson, John (16 March 2019). "MI5 investigates New Zealand shooter". The Times. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Mossad behind Christchurch attacks, head of New Zealand's biggest mosque claims". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. Archived from the original on 25 June 2019. Retrieved 27 May 2019. I stand here and I say I have a very very strong suspicion that there's some group behind him and I am not afraid to say I feel Mossad is behind this," he said as a person in the audience shouted "It's the truth. Israel is behind this. That's right!" Bhamji continued: "And not only them. There are some business houses, also, who are around ... you know, Zionist business houses that are behind him. Benjamin, Henry. "New Zealand Muslim leader dismisses colleague's claims Mossad ordered killings". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 25 May 2019. Retrieved 27 May 2019. "Dangerous antisemitic conspiracy mainstreamed in New Zealand". Israel Institute of New Zealand. 26 March 2019. Archived from the original on 27 May 2019. Retrieved 27 May 2019. Palmer, Scott (26 March 2019). "Jews outraged after mosque leader blames Mossad for Christchurch attack". NBC News. Archived from the original on 27 May 2019. Retrieved 27 May 2019. "UK Muslims slam New Zealand deadly attack". en.irna.ir. Retrieved 1 January 2023. "U.S. Muslim group urges Trump to condemn New Zealand mosque shootings as 'white supremacist terrorist attacks' – National | Globalnews.ca". Global News. Retrieved 1 January 2023. Chokshi, Niraj (15 March 2019). "PewDiePie Put in Spotlight After New Zealand Shooting". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "49 killed in terrorist attack at mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand". The Washington Post. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Further afield, Felix Kjellberg, a YouTube celebrity from Sweden who goes by "PewDiePie" and flirts openly with Nazi symbolism, distanced himself from the violence after the man who live-streamed his rampage asked viewers to "subscribe to PewDiePie. Dickson, Ed (15 March 2019). "Why Did the Christchurch Shooter Name-Drop YouTube Phenom PewDiePie?". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Paton, Callum (15 March 2019). "PewDiePie 'Sickened' by New Zealand Mosque Shooter Telling Worshippers to Follow Him Before Opening Fire". Newsweek. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Alexander, Julia (19 March 2019). "YouTube creators are trying to move on from 'subscribe to PewDiePie'". The Verge. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. Gambrell, Jon (15 March 2019). "Mosque shooter brandished white supremacist iconography". Associated Press News. Retrieved 16 March 2023. "Arthur Brown issues statement after "Fire" was used in New Zealand mosque shootings, cancels today's Austin show". Brooklyn Vegan. 17 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2023. Su, Alice (16 March 2019). "The Christchurch shooter's manifesto praised China's values. That's sparking debate in China". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 18 June 2022. Fleet, Robert (2022). "Hate the player, not the game: Why did the Christchurch shooter's video look like a game?". Rethinking Social Media and Extremism. ANU Press. pp. 65–86. doi:10.22459/RSME.2022.04. ISBN 9781760465247. JSTOR j.ctv2tsxmq6.10. Coan, Travis G.; Brace, Lewys; Baele, Stephane J. (February 2021). "Variations on a Theme? Comparing 4chan, 8kun, and Other chans' Far-Right "/pol" Boards". Perspectives on Terrorism: 65–80. ISSN 2334-3745. JSTOR 26984798. Retrieved 11 December 2023. Evans, Robert (28 April 2019). "Ignore The Poway Synagogue Shooter's Manifesto: Pay Attention To 8chan's /pol/ Board". Bellingcat. Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2021. Malevich, Simon; Robertson, Tom (24 February 2020). "Violence begetting violence: An examination of extremist content on deep Web social networks". First Monday. 25 (3). doi:10.5210/fm.v25i3.10421. ISSN 1396-0466. Leitch, Shirley (2022). "The making of a 'made for social media' massacre". Rethinking Social Media and Extremism: 13–42. doi:10.22459/RSME.2022.02. ISBN 9781760465247. JSTOR j.ctv2tsxmq6.8. Kupper, Julia; Christensen, Tanya Karoli; Wing, Dakota; Hurt, Marlon; Schumacher, Matthew; Meloy, Reid (2022). "The Contagion and Copycat Effect in Transnational Far-right Terrorism: An Analysis of Language Evidence". Perspectives on Terrorism. 16 (4): 4–26. ISSN 2334-3745. JSTOR 27158149. Retrieved 13 December 2023. Anderson, Charles (24 March 2019). "Censor bans 'manifesto' of Christchurch mosque shooter". The Guardian. Sherwood, Sam; Kenny, Lee. "Christchurch mosque shootings: Man claims responsibility for shootings, records assault on video". Stuff (company). "Facebook battles to stamp out horror footage of Christchurch shooting". Stuff (company). Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Multiple sources: "OFLC Response to Christchurch – What You Can Do : Latest news : OFLC". www.classificationoffice.govt.nz. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Webb-Libell, Alice (19 March 2019). "Chief Censor bans Christchurch shooting video, distributors could face jail". Newshub. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act 1993". New Zealand Legislation Online. Parliamentary Counsel Office. Archived from the original on 24 January 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Stevenson, Rebecca; Anthony, John (16 March 2019). "'Thousands' of Christchurch shootings videos removed from YouTube, Google says". Stuff (company). Multiple sources: Clarkson, David (15 April 2019). "Warning over threats in Christchurch terror attack video prosecutions". Stuff. Bayer, Kurt (9 July 2019). "Teen, 16, charged over Christchurch mosque shootings video returned to custody". The New Zealand Herald. Retrieved 13 July 2019. "Christchurch mosque shooting: Dunedin man charged with possessing livestream footage". The New Zealand Herald. 12 July 2019. Retrieved 13 July 2019. Galuzska, Jono (12 February 2020). "Homeless man jailed for sharing Christchurch mosque shooting video on Facebook". Stuff. Retrieved 4 March 2020. Leask, Anna (17 June 2021). "Christchurch terror attack: Australian man charged after 'accidentally' downloading graphic massacre video". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 17 June 2021. Retrieved 17 June 2021. "Christchurch shootings: Teen charged with sharing live-stream refused bail". The New Zealand Herald. Australian Associated Press. 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. Clarkson, Dave (18 March 2019). "Christchurch teen appears in court over alleged re-posting of mosque shootings live stream". Stuff. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. "Police with the latest information on the mosque shootings". Radio New Zealand. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Stanley-Becker, Isaac; Rosenberg, Eli; Horton, Alex; Brice-Saddler, Michael (15 March 2019). "Primary suspect, one alleged accomplice identified in terrorist attack that killed 49 in New Zealand". Morning Mix. The Washington Post. Multiple sources: "Man who shared mosque shooting livestream sentenced to 21 months in prison". Radio New Zealand. 18 June 2019. Retrieved 18 June 2019. Bayer, Kurt (18 June 2019). "Mosque shooting: White supremacist Philip Neville Arps jailed for 21 months for distributing footage". The New Zealand Herald. Retrieved 18 June 2019. "Christchurch white supremacist Philip Arps released". Radio New Zealand. 29 January 2020. Retrieved 4 March 2020. Molyneux, Vita; Sadler, Rachel; Tukia, Annabelle (29 January 2020). "White supremacist Philip Arps released from prison, banned from contact with Muslims". Newshub. Retrieved 4 March 2020. Morrah, Michael (16 August 2019). "Second letter from Philip Arps calls for traitors' execution, disdain for Jacinda Ardern and Winston Peters". Newshub. Retrieved 28 August 2019. Gower, Patrick (12 May 2019). "Christchurch attack: The dark truth about New Zealand's white supremacists". Newshub. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "Jail for man who gave mosque shooting 'Call of Duty' edit". Newstalk ZB. 26 February 2020. Retrieved 4 March 2020. Meade, Amanda (15 March 2019). "Australian media broadcast footage from Christchurch shootings despite police pleas". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "The Daily Mail Let Readers Download The New Zealand Mosque attacker's Manifesto Directly From Its Website". BuzzFeed. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Hollister, Sean (16 March 2019). "Sky New Zealand yanks Sky Australia after Christchurch footage sparks outrage". The Verge. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Christchurch mosque shootings: Gunman livestreamed 17 minutes of shooting terror". The New Zealand Herald. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "New Zealand Mobile Carriers Block 8chan, 4chan, and LiveLeak". BleepingComputer. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. O'Neill, Marnie (19 March 2019). "Website Kiwi Farms refuses to surrender data linked to accused Christchurch terrorist Brendan Tarrant". news.com.au. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Christchurch mosque shootings: Website Kiwi Farms refuses to surrender data linked to accused". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. Lam, Kristen (15 March 2019). "Social media scrambles to remove videos of New Zealand Christchurch mosque shooting". USA Today. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. D'Anastasio, Cecilia (15 March 2019). "Valve Removes Over 100 Steam Tributes To Suspected New Zealand Shooter". Kotaku. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Christchurch shootings: 'Bad actors' helped attack videos spread online". BBC News. 21 March 2019. Retrieved 21 March 2019. "Facebook: NZ attack video viewed 4,000 times". BBC. 19 March 2019. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. Fingas, Jon (17 March 2019). "Facebook pulled over 1.5 million videos of New Zealand shooting". Engadget. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Multiple sources: Stephan, Bijan (15 March 2019). "Reddit bans r/watchpeopledie in the wake of the New Zealand mosque massacres". The Verge. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Lawler, Richard (15 March 2019). "Reddit bans gore-, death-focused channels following NZ mosque attack". Engadget. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Beelden aanslag blijven opduiken, ondanks inspanningen Facebook, Twitter en YouTube". de Volkskrant (in Dutch). 15 March 2019. Retrieved 14 March 2019. Lecher, Colin (25 March 2019). "Microsoft calls for 'industrywide' moderation plan after New Zealand shooting". The Verge. Retrieved 25 March 2019. Fingas, Jon (30 March 2019). "Australian bill could imprison social network execs over violent content". Engadget. Retrieved 30 March 2019. "Facebook, YouTube sued over shootings video". BBC News. 26 March 2019. Retrieved 27 March 2019. Rt Hon Jacinda Ardern (12 May 2019). "Comment from Jacinda Ardern on Facebook livestreaming announcement". New Zealand Government. Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (New Zealand). "Christchurch Call". "Christchurch call – France and NZ take action to eliminate terrorist and violent extremist content online". Embassy of France in Wellington. 16 May 2019. "Christchurch Call – Supporters". Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (New Zealand). 16 May 2019. Archived from the original on 16 May 2019. Retrieved 16 May 2019. Wright, Stephen; Gelineau, Kristen. "New Zealand welcomes gun control after mosque massacre: 'There will be no opposition'". The Washington Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 21 March 2019. Stieb, Matt (17 March 2019). "In New Zealand, Only One Mass Shooting Is Necessary for Gun Reform to Begin". Intelligencer. Retrieved 25 March 2019. Damien Cave, Matt Stevens (15 March 2019). "New Zealand's Gun Laws Draw Scrutiny After Mosque Shootings". The New York Times. Vsontay, Elias; Ritchie, Emily (16 March 2019). "Weapon exposes gun-law weakness". The Australian. Multiple sources: Manch, T. (2018). "NZ's battle over semi-automatics: Police frustrated by the law, firearm owners frustrated by police". Stuff. Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 5 August 2018. Devlin, C. (21 March 2019). "Military-style semi-automatic weapons and assault rifles to be banned after mass shooting: PM". Stuff. Retrieved 21 March 2019. "Police union calls for firearms register in New Zealand as gun violence grows". Newshub. 2019. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 21 March 2019. Swaine, Jon (15 March 2019). "New Zealand PM vows to toughen gun control laws after Christchurch attack". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Walls, Jason (16 March 2019). "Christchurch mosque shootings: New Zealand to ban semi-automatic weapons". The New Zealand Herald. "Attorney-General David Parker back-tracks on comments about gun control". Radio New Zealand. 16 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "PM Jacinda Ardern says New Zealand will ban all military-style semi-automatic weapons and all assault rifles". Radio New Zealand. 21 March 2019. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 21 March 2019. "Arms (Prohibited Firearms, Magazines, and Parts) Amendment Bill". New Zealand Parliament. Retrieved 3 April 2019. Multiple sources: "Firearms Amendment Bill passes final reading in Parliament". Radio New Zealand. 10 April 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2019. "Bill banning military style semi-automatic weapons passes final reading". Newstalk ZB. 10 April 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2019. "Gun bill to become law". Otago Daily Times. 10 April 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2019. Multiple sources: Patterson, Jane (10 April 2019). "First details about gun buyback scheme released". Radio New Zealand. Retrieved 10 April 2019. Devlin, Collette (10 April 2019). "Gun buyback framework established as first step towards determining compensation". Stuff (company). Retrieved 10 April 2019. Lynch, Jenna (10 April 2019). "Government's firearm buyback scheme gets bigger, more expensive, as new details revealed". Newshub. Retrieved 10 April 2019. "Gun buyback scheme: Firearms collection events announced by police". Newshub. Retrieved 3 March 2020. "Over 50,000 guns collected as buy-back scheme comes to an end". The New Zealand Herald. 19 December 2019. ISSN 1170-0777. Retrieved 3 March 2020. "Amnesty and buy-back statistics". New Zealand Police. Retrieved 3 March 2020. "Gun buyback: Over 56,000 guns collected as police release official figures". The New Zealand Herald. 21 December 2019. ISSN 1170-0777. Retrieved 3 March 2020. "Supreme Court Justice William Young to head Royal Commission of Inquiry into Christchurch terror attacks". Stuff (company). Multiple sources: "Mosque terror inquiry: Failings, apologies but no blame on Govt". Otago Daily Times. 8 December 2020. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Graham-McLay, Charlotte (7 December 2020). "Christchurch Inquiry Says New Zealand Couldn't Have Prevented Mosque Attacks". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Sullivan, Heather (8 December 2020). "Christchurch inquiry report released – as it happened". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Lopatto, Elizabeth (8 December 2020). "Christchurch shooter was radicalized on YouTube, New Zealand report says". The Verge. Retrieved 9 December 2020. Shead, Sam (8 December 2020). "YouTube radicalized the Christchurch shooter, New Zealand report concludes". CNBC. Retrieved 9 December 2020. Pennington, Phil (11 December 2020). "Intelligence agencies' failures highlighted but no accountability sought". Radio New Zealand. Retrieved 20 August 2021. Ardern, Jacinda; Little, Andrew (15 June 2021). "He Whenua Taurikura: New Zealand's first Hui on Countering Terrorism and Violent Extremism". Beehive.govt.nz. New Zealand Government. Archived from the original on 28 June 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2021. Bayer, Kurt (15 June 2021). "Spies, police chiefs, academics: NZ's first counter-terrorism hui opens". Newstalk ZB. Archived from the original on 15 June 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2021. Broughton, Cate; Walton, Steve (15 June 2021). "Walkout at counter-terrorism hui in protest over 'insensitive' speech". Stuff. Archived from the original on 28 June 2021. Retrieved 10 July 2021. Foon, Eleisha (15 June 2021). "Hui on countering terrorism sees mass walkout over Hezbollah comment". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 25 June 2021. Retrieved 10 July 2021. "Jewish spokesperson stands by comments after hui marred by walkout". The Star. 17 June 2021. Archived from the original on 10 July 2021. Retrieved 10 July 2021. Wiliams, David (17 June 2021). "'I shouldn't have to protect myself'". Newsroom. Archived from the original on 16 June 2021. Retrieved 11 July 2021. Williams, David (16 June 2021). "Behind tensions at the terror hui". Newsroom. Retrieved 11 July 2021. O'Callaghan, Joday (16 June 2021). "Anger at internet giants highlighted at Christchurch counter-terrorism hui". Stuff. Archived from the original on 19 June 2021. Retrieved 11 July 2021. "Christchurch Masjidain Attack Inquiry". Coronial Services of New Zealand. Archived from the original on 27 December 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Sherwood, Sam (21 October 2021). "Chief Coroner opens inquiry into Christchurch terror attack". Stuff. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2021. Leask, Anna (28 October 2021). "Christchurch terror attack: Chief Coroner to look into emergency responses to March 15 mosque attacks". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 30 October 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2021. Edwards, Jean (22 February 2022). "Christchurch terror attacks: Coronial inquiry hearing begins today". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 23 February 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2022. Chittock, Niva (24 February 2022). "Christchurch terror attacks: Last day of coronial scope hearing". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 7 March 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2022. "Decision of Coroner B Windley as to Scope of Issues For Inquiry" (PDF). Coronial Services of New Zealand. 28 April 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 October 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Leask, Anna; Harris, Katie (24 October 2023). "Christchurch terror attack: 'Truth-finding' inquest set to begin – why it's going ahead and why it's important". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 24 October 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Brown, Tim (24 October 2023). "Christchurch mosque terror attack inquest set to begin". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 24 October 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Clent, Danielle (15 December 2023). "Christchurch terror attack inquest: Understanding of 15 March transitioning from 'darkness to light'". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023. Retrieved 19 December 2023. "Centre of Excellence for countering violent extremism launched". Radio New Zealand. 3 June 2022. Archived from the original on 14 June 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2022. Ardern, Jacinda; Little, Andrew (3 June 2022). "Centre for Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism officially open". Beehive.govt.nz. New Zealand Government. Archived from the original on 8 June 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2022. Multiple sources: "Third film about Christchurch mosque attacks being developed". Stuff. 13 July 2021. Retrieved 26 July 2021. "Film based on Christchurch mosque shooting in the works". The Guardian. 15 May 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2021. "'They Are Us' filmmakers put development on hold". RNZ. 23 July 2021. Retrieved 26 July 2021. Clarke, Stewart (14 May 2019). "'Hello Brother,' Film Based on New Zealand Mosque Shootings, in the Works (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on 4 May 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2021. "'Hello Brother': Film about Christchurch mosque shootings in works". Newstalk ZB. 15 May 2019. Archived from the original on 15 June 2019. Retrieved 11 June 2021. Molyneux, Vita (15 May 2019). "Egyptian film maker's decision to make a movie about the Christchurch terror attack sparks anger from Muslim community". Newshub. Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 11 June 2021. Bayer, Kurt (3 August 2021). "Christchurch mosque attacks: Second controversial movie project, Hello Brother is on hold". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 3 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. Ritman, Alex (10 June 2021). "Rose Byrne to Play New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern in Andrew Niccol's 'They Are Us'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2021. Multiple sources: Rahman, Abid (11 June 2021). "Jacinda Ardern Film Causes Backlash In New Zealand, Accusations of "White Saviorism"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 11 June 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2021. "Thousands sign petition denouncing mosque attacks film". Radio New Zealand. 12 June 2021. Archived from the original on 12 June 2021. Retrieved 12 June 2021. "They Are Us: Plans for film about Christchurch mosque attacks sparks anger among New Zealanders". Sky News. 12 June 2021. Archived from the original on 12 June 2021. Retrieved 12 June 2021. McKay, Ben (11 June 2021). "Australian Actor Rose Byrne Cast As Jacinda Ardern In New Zealand Terror Movie". Zenger News. Retrieved 21 April 2022. Barton, Monika (11 June 2021). "Christchurch terror attack film They Are Us about Jacinda Ardern dubbed 'sickening', 'too soon'". Newshub. Archived from the original on 11 June 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2021. Brookes, Emily (11 June 2021). "Muslim community was 'blindsided' by news of upcoming film about Christchurch mosque attacks, members say". Stuff. Archived from the original on 11 June 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2021. McConnell, Glenn (14 June 2021). "Kiwi producer of Christchurch terror attack film, They Are Us, resigns". Stuff. Archived from the original on 14 June 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2021. Gower, Patrick (11 July 2021). "Leaked They Are Us draft script graphically depicts Christchurch terror attack, families say it's 'worse than the livestream'". Newshub. Gower, Patrick (13 July 2021). "They Are Us draft script: Winston Peters, David Seymour, Simon Bridges condemn 'offensive' Hollywood portrayals". Newshub. Archived from the original on 13 July 2021. "Christchurch mosque attacks movie: Leaked 'They Are Us' script rewrites NZ history". The New Zealand Herald. 13 July 2021. Archived from the original on 13 July 2021. Retrieved 15 July 2021. Andelane, Lana (14 July 2021). "They Are Us: Winston Peters calls on producers of Christchurch terror attack film to 'quit while they're behind' after viewing draft script". Newshub. Archived from the original on 13 July 2021. Retrieved 15 July 2021. McClure, Tess (23 July 2021). "They Are Us: controversial film about Christchurch attacks put on hold". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 July 2021. Retrieved 24 July 2021. Kronast, Hannah; Henry, Holly (23 July 2021). "Development of Christchurch attack film They Are Us put on hold". Newshub. Retrieved 24 July 2021. Edwards, Jean (6 July 2022). "Christchurch mosque attacks: Acts of great bravery honoured in ceremony". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2022. Multiple sources: Morrison, Scott. "I'm horrified by the reports I'm following of the serious shooting in Christchurch, New Zealand. The situation is still unfolding but our thoughts and prayers are with our Kiwi cousins". Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019 – via Twitter. "'We're not just allies': Scott Morrison says Australia grieves with New Zealand". ABC News. Archived from the original on 30 October 2021. Retrieved 15 March 2019 – via YouTube. Shield, Bevan (15 March 2019). "Scott Morrison confirms Australian taken into custody after 'vicious, murderous' terrorist attack". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Christchurch shootings: Outpouring of UK support to Muslim community". BBC. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Statement by the Prime Minister on terrorist attack on two mosques in New Zealand" (Press release). PMO. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Multiple sources: Westcott, Ben; Marsh, Jenni; Regan, Helen; Wagner, Meg; Ries, Brian; Rocha, Veronica; Lewis, Aimee; Picheta, Rob; Kaur, Harmeet (15 March 2019). "Dozens killed in Christchurch mosque attack". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "Christchurch shootings: 49 dead in New Zealand mosque attacks". BBC. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "Dozens killed as gunman livestreams New Zealand mosque shootings". Reuters. 14 March 2019. Trump, Donald J. (15 March 2019). "My warmest sympathy and best wishes goes out to the people of New Zealand after the horrible massacre in the Mosques. 49 innocent people have so senselessly died, with so many more seriously injured. The U.S. stands by New Zealand for anything we can do. God bless all!". @realDonaldTrump. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Live reaction to NZ mosque attack". BBC. 14 March 2019. "Security Increased at American Mosques After New Zealand Attack". NYT. NYT. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Condolences to Prime Minister of New Zealand Jacinda Ardern". Kremlin. 15 March 2019. "Moscow Ostankino Tower to go dark in honor of New Zealand victims". TASS. 15 March 2019. "World reacts to New Zealand terrorist attacks on mosque". Arab News. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "King Salman in tweet calls for combating hate speech, terrorism". Al Arabiya. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Pope Francis sends message of condolences for the attacks on two mosques in New Zealand, in the city of Christchurch". Rome Reports. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Prime Minister Narendra Modi writes to New Zealand PM, condemns Christchurch attack". India Today. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 8 April 2019. Aliyev, Ilham (15 March 2019). "Yeni Zelandiyanın Baş naziri Zati-aliləri xanım Casinda Ardernə" [To Prime Minister of New Zealand, Her Excellency Mrs. Jacinda Ardern] (Press release) (in Azerbaijani). president.az. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "PM condemns New Zealand terror attack". Dhaka Tribune. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Message of Condolence to the Prime Minister of New Zealand on the attacks of the Linwood Mosque and Masjid Al-Noor in Christchurch" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Brunei. 16 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation on the fatal shooting in New Zealand Mosques on 15 March 2019" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, Cambodia. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lu Kang's Remarks on the Shootings in the New Zealand City of Christchurch" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs, China. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Pratap, Ritika (16 March 2019). "Fiji stands with Pacific family in this difficult time: Bainimarama". FBC. Retrieved 21 March 2019. "Bulletin: On the Mass Shootings in New Zealand" (Press release). Department of Foreign Affairs, Philippines. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 17 November 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Áder sends condolences over terrorist attacks in New Zealand". Hungary Matters. 17 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. "Perkembangan Informasi terkait Serangan Teror di Christchurch, Selandia Baru" [Recent Information related to Terror Attacks in Christchurch, New Zealand] (Press release) (in Indonesian). Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Indonesia. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019.[permanent dead link] "Message of condolences from Foreign Minister Taro Kono following the shooting incident in Christchurch, New Zealand" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Japan. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "MOFA Spokesperson's Statement on Terrorist Attacks in Christchurch, New Zealand" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs, South Korea. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Sulmi terrorist në Zelandën e Re" [Terrorist Attack in New Zealand] (Press release) (in Albanian). Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Kosovo. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Shooting Incident at Mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Malaysia. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Terrorist Attack on Two Mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Pakistan. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "MFA Spokesperson's Comments on the Shooting Incidents in Christchurch, New Zealand, 15 March 2019" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Singapore. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "President Tsai offers condolences to New Zealand attack victims". Focus Taiwan. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Press Release : Messages of Condolence from the Prime Minister of Thailand and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Thailand on the Shooting Incident in Christchurch on 15 March 2019" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Thailand. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "No: 56, 15 March 2019, Press Release Regarding the Terrorist Attacks Against Mosques in New Zealand" (Press release). Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Turkey. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 24 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Vietnam strongly condemns shooting attacks in New Zealand [Vietnamese leaders offer sympathy to New Zealand over shooting incidents]". Vietnam Net. 15 March 2019. Archived from the original on 24 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Ahmed, Farid (2021). Husna's Story: My Wife, the Christchurch Massacre & My Journey to Forgiveness. Allen & Unwin. ISBN 978-1988547480. Salama, Maysoon (2021). Aya and the Butterfly. Lift Education. O'Connor, Tom (2021). Our Darkest Day: The terrorist attack on two mosques, Christchurch, New Zealand, March 15, 2019. Kirsten Wilson Publishing. ISBN 978-0473589295. Quotations related to Christchurch mosque shootings at Wikiquote Media related to Christchurch mosque shootings at Wikimedia Commons The last prayer: surviving Christchurch terror attack, a documentary about the mosque shootings by Turkish news channel TRT World Information on The Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Attack on Christchurch Mosques Christchurch terror attack: The day NZ changed forever, a documentary about the shootings by New Zealand media company RNZ Portals:  Law  Islam  New Zealand