The Orthodox Church of Ukraine (Ukrainian: Православна церква України, romanized: Pravoslavna tserkva Ukrainy; OCU), also called Ukrainian Orthodox Church, is an Eastern Orthodox church in Ukraine. It is one of 16 autocephalous Eastern Orthodox churches, 15th listed in diptych. The Eastern Orthodox Church partially recognizes the Orthodox Church of Ukraine as the only canonical successor of the Metropolitanate of Kyiv, while the Catholic Church recognizes the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church as the only canonical successor. The church was established under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople by a unification council that convened in Kyiv on 15 December 2018. The Ecumenical Patriarch — Bartholomew I — granted a tomos of autocephaly (decree of ecclesial independence) to the Church on 5 January 2019. The unification council united two Ukrainian Orthodox major jurisdictions: the Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kyiv Patriarchate (UOC-KP) and the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church (UAOC). Two bishops formerly of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) also joined. The unification council elected the Metropolitan of Pereiaslav-Khmelnytskyi and Bila Tserkva — Epiphanius Dumenko — as its primate and as Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine. It was also agreed by the council that those "Orthodox Christians of Ukrainian provenance in the Orthodox diaspora" should be subject to the jurisdiction of the diocesan bishops of the Ecumenical Patriarchate (per (Article 4 of the Statute). This provision is also enshrined in the OCU's tomos of autocephaly. In March 2019, Metropolitan Epiphanius said that the transfer of parishes of the dissolved Kyiv Patriarchate to the jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate had already begun. The establishment of the OCU and its recognition by other autocephalic Orthodox Churches has been opposed by the Russian Orthodox Church as well as by the Government of Russia. According to different sources, the Orthodox Church of Ukraine or the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) is the largest church in Ukraine, both of which have claimed full independence and autonomy. The official name of the church is the "Orthodox Church of Ukraine" (the use of the name "Ukrainian Orthodox Church" is also allowed). The style of its primate is "His Beatitude (name), Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine". The Tomos of autocephaly of the OCU refers to the OCU as the "Most Holy Church of Ukraine". On 30 January 2019, the OCU was legally registered under the name "Kyїvan Metropolitanate of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Orthodox Church of Ukraine)" (Ukrainian: Київська Митрополія Української Православної Церкви (Православної Церкви України)). The head of the Ukrainian Department of Religious Affairs of the Ministry of Culture, Andriy Yurash, clarified: "These two terms [the UOC and the OCU] will be used as synonymous and this is expressly agreed with the Phanar. Therefore, the use of the terms, the Ukrainian Orthodox Church and the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, is affixed precisely to the administrative unit that is called the Kyivan Metropolitanate". In his annual report at the hierarchal assembly on 15 December 2020, Metropolitan Epiphanius I clarified that names of the following churches – "Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church", "Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kyiv Patriarchate" and "Kyiv Patriarchate" – are all additional historical names for the same Orthodox Church of Ukraine. In 988, as a result of the Christianization of Kievan Rus' by Vladimir the Great, the first Christian church on the Ukrainian territory was formed under the name of the Metropolitanate of Kyiv of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, with its center in the city of Kyiv. In 1448, the Council of Moscow's Bishops, without the consent of the Ecumenical Patriarch in Constantinople, appointed Jonah, Bishop of Riazan, Metropolitan of Kyiv. This event is considered the beginning of the separation of the Church of Muscovy. After the Union of Brest in 1596, most of the Ukrainian Church led by Metropolitan bishop Michael Rohoza of Kyiv, Galicia and all Ruthenia, joined the Roman Patriarchate, Roman Catholic Church becoming the Ruthenian Uniate Church. However, there were still quite few Eastern Orthodox bishops who decided against the union, primarily in Ruthenian Voivodeship (Palatinatus russiae, what today is Western Ukraine). In 1685, the Moscow Patriarchate began the annexation of the Metropolitanate of Kyiv of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, ordaining Metropolitan Gedeon of Kyiv in Muscovy. In 1686, through simony, Ecumenical Patriarch Dionysius IV (who was later anathema) issued a Synodal letter granting the right to ordinate the Metropolitan of Kyiv to the Moscow Patriarch in the manner of austerity elected by the council of clergy and the faithful of his diocese. It was obligatory that the Metropolitan of Kyiv should mention the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople as his First Hierarch in any service, proclaiming and confirming his canonical dependence on the Mother Church of Constantinople, but none of these conditions were met. The Metropolitanate of Kyiv actually became one of the ordinary dioceses of the Moscow Patriarchate, when Peter the Great in 1722 appointed Barlaam (Voniatovych) to the rank of archbishop, not metropolitan. The Holy Synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate in the process of granting autocephaly to the Church of Ukraine during its meeting on 11 October 2018 canceled the Synodal Letter of 1686 due to simony and its gross violation of the rights of an independent metropolitanate. The Ukrainian Hetman Ivan Mazepa, seeking for the independence of the Cossack Hetmanate, was among the first to return to the omophorion of the Ecumenical Patriarchate. A multitude of churches were built all over Ukraine during his reign in the Ukrainian Baroque style. Despite the anathema, laid on Mazepa by the Russian Church in 1708, it was not recognized by the Ecumenical Patriarchate, which considers it uncanonical and imposed with political motives as a means of political and ideological repression, with no religious, theological or canonical reasons. The Constitution of Pylyp Orlyk, written in 1710, which is also considered to be one of the first examples of constitutional documents in the world, proclaimed the Eastern Orthodox faith to be the faith of Ukraine, with the Metropolitanate of Kyiv acquiring the direct subordination to the Apostolic Church of Constantinople. Due to the Battle of Poltava, when Charles XII of Sweden's and Hetman Mazepa's armies were defeated by Peter I of Russia, the constitution never came into power. In the wake of the breakup of the Russian Empire, the Ukrainian Orthodox Christians again sought autonomy or autocephaly from Moscow. The independent, autocephalous Ukrainian Orthodox Church was proclaimed by the Directorate of Ukraine led by Symon Petliura in 1919. The Law on the Supreme Government of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church stipulated that the Supreme Church Authority in Ukraine would lose all dependence on the Russian Patriarch and move to the All-Ukrainian Church Council. In 1921 an All-Ukrainian Synod was called in Kyiv, and the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church was declared independent from the Moscow Patriarchate. The Sobor delegates chose Metropolitan Vasyl Lypkivsky as head of the church. In this form, the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church existed until 1936 when, due to Soviet pressure, it was liquidated, with some of its members emigrating to the United States. For a short period of time, the UAOC was restored during occupation of Ukraine by Nazi Germany in 1942. This period lasted till the return of the Red Army in 1944, after that the UAOC was again liquidated for a second time and remained structured only in the Ukrainian diaspora. In 1990, the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church was reinstated in Ukraine, and the former Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada metropolitan Mstyslav (Skrypnyk) was enthroned as a patriarch. Since 2000, the church primate has been the Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine. Following months of negotiations and preparations, on 15 December 2018, all the bishops of the UOC-KP and the UAOC as well as two metropolitans of the UOC-MP convened in Kyiv's Saint Sophia Cathedral, presided over by the metropolitan of the ecumenical throne, Emmanuel (Adamakis) [fr], to merge into the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, elect their primate and adopt the statute of the newly independent Church of Ukraine. Metropolitan Epiphanius of the UOC-KP, who had been chosen on 13 December by the UOC-KP as its only candidate, and was believed to have been Filaret Denysenko's right arm and protégé, was elected Metropolitan of Kyiv and all Ukraine by the unification council by the second round of voting. Epiphanius later made clear that no important decision would be taken by his church until he had received the church's formal ecclesiastical decree (or "tomos"). The Ecumenical Patriarch congratulated and blessed the newly elected metropolitan on the day of his election and said the newly elected primate was invited to come to Istanbul to concelebrate the Divine Liturgy with the Ecumenical Patriarch and receive the Orthodox Church of Ukraine's tomos on 6 January 2019. Shortly after the Council, Metropolitan Epiphanius said that the OCU had about 7 thousand parishes. Advertisements to promote a united Ukrainian Orthodox Church had been made months prior to the Unification Council. Petro Poroshenko declared "not a dime" from the Ukrainian State had been paid for them, that he paid those advertisements with his own money. Poroshenko refused to state how much had been spent. Following the Council, Filaret Denysenko, who had been the primate and Patriarch of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kyiv Patriarchate (1995–2018), became the "honorary patriarch" of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, serving in the St Volodymyr's Cathedral. On 5 January 2019, Bartholomew I of Constantinople and Metropolitan Epiphanius celebrated a Divine Liturgy in St. George's Cathedral in Istanbul. The Tomos was signed thereafter, also in St. George's Cathedral. The Tomos "had come into force from the moment of its signing." The signing of the tomos officially established the autocephalous Orthodox Church of Ukraine. After the Tomos was signed, Patriarch Batholomew delivered a speech addressing Metropolitan Epiphanius. President Poroshenko and Metropolitan Epiphanius also delivered speeches, Epiphanius addressing Poroshenko by saying this: "Your name, Mr President, will remain forever in the history of the Ukrainian people and the church next to the names of our princes Volodymyr the Great, Yaroslav the Wise, Kostiantyn Ostrozky and Hetman Ivan Mazepa". On 6 January 2019, after a Divine Liturgy concelebrated by Metropolitan Epiphanius and Patriarch Bartholomew, the latter read out the Tomos of the OCU and then handed it to Metropolitan Epiphanius. President Poroshenko was present during the signing and handing over of the Tomos. On 7 January 2019, Metropolitan Epiphanius celebrated the Divine Liturgy in Saint Sophia's Cathedral, where the Tomos of autocephaly was exposed during the liturgy. The Tomos was then put on display in the refectory church of Saint Sophia's Cathedral in perpetuity, and exposed for the public and tourists to view daily. On 8 January 2019, the Tomos was brought back to Istanbul so that all the members of the Holy Synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate could sign the Tomos. The representative of the press service of the OCU, priest Ivan Sydor, said the Tomos was valid after the signature of the Ecumenical Patriarch, "but according to the procedure, there must also be the signatures of those bishops who take part in the synod of the Constantinople Patriarchate." Former press secretary of the UOC-KP, Eustratius (Zoria) (uk), declared the Ecumenical Patriarch recognised the OCU by signing the tomos of autocephaly and by concelebrating the liturgy with Epiphanius I while considering Epiphanius as primate of the OCU. The Tomos was signed by all members of the synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate on 9 January 2019. The tomos, signed by all members of the synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, was brought back to Ukraine on the morning of 10 January 2019. The Tomos was manufactured on a parchment by the renowned painter and calligrapher of Mount Athos, hieromonk Lucas from the Xenophontos monastery. President Poroshenko, accompanied by Metropolitan Epiphanius, visited several regions of Ukraine to present the Tomos. The Ukrainian Minister of education said that in 2019 the tomos of autocephaly would be included in the history manuals of the 11th grade students. It was planned that Epiphanius would be enthroned on 3 February 2019, which is also the date of his 40th birthday. Thereafter, the first synod of the OCU was to take place. The monasteries of Mount Athos refused to send a delegation for the enthronement ceremony "not because the Fathers do not recognise its legitimacy or canonicity, but because they have chosen to stick with what has become official practice and accept invitations only to the enthronement of their ecclesiastical head, the Ecumenical Patriarch." Two abbots of Mount Athos were planned to come at the enthronement but were to be part of the delegation of the Ecumenical Patriarchate. On 1 February, once in Kyiv, Archimandrite Ephrem, one of the two Athonite abbots, was hospitalised in consequence of a heart attack. On 2 February, Archimandrite Ephrem was visited by Metropolitan Epiphanius. As planned, Epiphanius was enthroned in St. Sophia's Cathedral on 3 February 2019. Filaret was not present due to health conditions, so he sent his written congratulations to the primate Epiphanius, Filaret's congratulations were written by him and read at the end of the liturgy. Archimandrite Ephrem, who had been hospitalised on 1 February 2019, was not present at the ceremony of enthronement, but a hieromonk of Ephrem's monastery was present during the ceremony of enthronement. A monk from a skete of the Koutloumousiou Monastery was also present during the ceremony of enthronement. The first meeting of the Holy Synod of the OCU was held on 5 February 2019. In an interview published on 13 February 2019, Epiphanius said what were the main task the OCU had to fulfill: First, to preserve the unity that was proclaimed in the unifying Council. Secondly, pay special attention to formation, which is our future. The third commitment is with the young, which we must know how to attract them [sic] to the Church. Without spiritual formation, in general without development of formation we will not be able to do anything. On 16 February 2019, the primate of the OCU, Epiphanius, said the OCU would implement reforms "normally and gradually". He gave the example of switching to the Orthodox new calendar.[citation needed] Before that, on 16 December 2018, he had also talked about switching to the Orthodox new calendar. In an interview published on 1 March 2019, Epiphanius told the BBC: We must move away from those Russian imperial traditions that have been imposed on us for a long time. When we visit the churches of the Greek tradition, we see that all those traditions existed in the Ukrainian Church even during the time of Peter Mogila ... But everything will be done gradually, so as not to cause resistance from the conservative part of the faithful who do not perceive reforms as such. We are not talking about changing the foundations of faith, dogmatics. We are talking about good reforms. We must engage in enlightenment, explain to people that we must become better, so that love would prevail among us. In the same interview, when asked if he would allow LGBT people to take communion, Epiphanius declared: We have a clear position ... this is a sin that we have to ... speak openly about .... This is a way of life that is incompatible with Christian views. Therefore, this is the position of the Orthodox Church, the position of the All-Ukrainian Council of Churches, and in this matter we are unshakable. Because we are based on the foundations of the Scriptures, which clearly states that this is a sin. ... people must repent of their sins, correct their mistakes. And if a person repents, if the person recognises it, then of course the person can participate in the sacraments. Following the formation of the OCU, communities (parishes) of the UOC-MP began to switch over to the jurisdiction of the OCU (list [uk]). On 16 December 2018, the cathedral of Metropolitan Symeon joined the OCU. Simeon was one of the bishops of the UOC-MP who had taken part in the unification council. On 17 December 2018, the statement of the Synodal Department of the military clergy of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine was quoted by mass media as saying that the Federal Security Service of Russia, along with members of the Moscow Patriarchate, had created mobile groups to prevent communities in Ukraine from switching from the UOC-MP to the OCU, such groups being present in each diocese of the UOC-MP and composed of a lawyer and several brawny men. On 19 December 2018, the cathedral of Metropolitan Oleksandr (Drabynko) [uk], one of the two UOC-MP bishops who had taken part in the unification council, joined the OCU. On 17 March 2019, TSN reported that more than 500 parishes had switched over to the OCU. Later in March, the primate of the UOC-MP contested the statistics and acknowledged 42 cases of legitimate defections only while attributing scores of others to illicit activity. On 30 March, the UOC-MP acknowledged the transfer of 61 parishes, while the OCU claimed 506 had been transferred. In April 2022, after the Russian invasion of Ukraine, many UOC-MP parishes signaled their intention to switch allegiance. The attitude and stance of Patriarch Kirill of Moscow to the war is one of the oft-quoted reasons. A conflict erupted between Filaret Denysenko and Epiphanius in the spring of 2019 over the model of governance, the management of the diaspora, the name, and the statute of the OCU. Around 20 million Ukrainians live in a foreign country and most of them are Orthodox. The U.S.A. and Canada host the most numerous communities. According to Filaret's statement in May 2019, the agreement reached at the Unification Council was as follows: "The primate is responsible for the external representation of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (UOC), and the patriarch is responsible for the internal church life in Ukraine, but in cooperation with the primate. The primate shall do nothing in the church without the consent of the patriarch. The patriarch chairs the meetings of the Holy Synod and the UOC meetings for the sake of preserving unity, its growth, and affirmation." Filaret said that that agreement had not been fulfilled. On 20 June 2019, a group of clergy which, apart from Filaret himself, comprised only two bishops, both being from Russia, convened in St. Volodomyr Cathedral in Kyiv and adopted a document that purported to cancel the decisions of the 15 December 2018 unification council; the document stated that the UOC-KP continued to exist and had a state registration, while Filaret remained its head. On 14 December 2019, Metropolitan Epiphanius informed the Council of Bishops, which was held in Kyiv on the occasion of the anniversary of the creation of the OCU and was not attended by Filaret, that the legal procedure of liquidation (terminarion) of the UAOC as well as the UOC-KP as legal entities had been completed the day before. Among other things, the Council of Bishops made a decision to "urge the Honorable Patriarch Filaret and his followers to seek reconciliation and end self-isolation". Over 15 per cent of Ukrainians would like to have Patriarch Filaret as the Primate of the national and diaspora churches, despite his age and their historical names. According to the OCU's Statute, the highest governing body of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine is its Local Council, which is an assembly of clergy and laity (Article 2, paragraph 1). The Local Council consists of all hierarch, ruling and others, clergy, monks, and laity from each eparchy (diocese), that were elected by eparchial assemblies. The Local Council is convened regularly by its chairman, that is Metropolitan of Kyiv, and the permanent Holy Synod at least once in five years. Also the Local Council may be convened in extraordinary way, always when its chairman wishes. The Local Council elects the Metropolitan of Kyiv out of three candidates proposed by the Hierarchal Assembly (Council of Bishops). The Local Council may approve the Statute and introduce amendments to it. It also approves amendments to the Statute submitted by the Hierarchal Assembly. The Holy Hierarchal Assembly (Council of Bishops) consists of the Metropolitan of Kyiv and all eparchial hierarchs (Article 3, paragraph 1). The permanent Holy Synod of the OCU is to be composed of twelve rotating members and chaired by the Metropolitan of Kyiv. For the duration of the transitional period, three permanent members of the Synod have been appointed: the former Primates of the UOC-KP (Filaret) and the UAOC (Makariy), and the former UOC-MP Metropolitan Symeon (Shostatsky). List of metropolitans of the "Exarchate of Ukraine": Job (1620–1631) Isaiah (1631–1633) Peter III (1633–1646) who was the first metropolitan to be recognized by the Crown of Poland Sylvester (1647–1657) Dionisius II (1657–1663) who transferred the episcopal seat from Kyiv to Chyhyryn due to Muscovite military incursions Joseph V, 1663–1675 Anton Vinnicky, (anti-Metropolitan) 1663–1679 vacant 1679–1685 Appointed by Romanov civil authorities (residence in Kyiv): Locum Tenens Lazar Baranovych, 1659–1661 Locum Tenens Methodius Filimonovich, 1661–1668 Locum Tenens Lazar Baranovych, 1670–1685 Annexation of the Metropolitanate of Kyiv by the Moscow Patriarchate Epiphanius I of Ukraine, 2019– As of late March 2019, the following statute of diocesan administrations had been registered within the OCU's jurisdiction: Vinnytsia-Tulchyn diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Vinnytsia Vinnytsia-Bar diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-MP, Vinnytsia Vinnytsia-Bratslav diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UAOC, Vinnytsia Volynskyi diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Lutsk Volodymyr-Volynskyi diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Volodymyr-Volynskyi Dnipropetrovsk diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Dnipro Donetsk diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Mariupol Donetsk-Sloviansk diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UAOC, Sloviansk Zhytomyr-Ovruch diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Zhytomyr Zhytomyr-Polissia diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UAOC, Zhytomyr Zakarpattia diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Mukachevo Mukachevo-Carpathian diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UAOC, Uzhhorod Uzhhorod-Khust diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UAOC, Uzhhorod Zaporizhzhia diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Zaporizhzhia Ivano-Frankivsk diocese of the UOC (OUC), previously UAOC, Ivano-Frankivsk Ivano-Frankivsk-Halych diocese of the UOC (OUC), previously UOC-KP, Ivano-Frankivsk Kolomyia diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Kolomyia Kyiv diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Kyiv (central diocese) Pereiaslav-Vyshneve diocese of the UOC (OCU), Kyiv Crimean diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Simferopol (temporarily persecuted by Russian administration) Kropyvnytskyi diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Kropyvnytskyi Luhansk diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Severdonetsk Lviv diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UAOC, Lviv Lviv-Sokal diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Lviv Drohobych-Sambir diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Drohobych Mykolaiv diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Mykolaiv Odesa diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Odesa Poltava diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Poltava Rivne diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Rivne Rivne-Volyn diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UAOC, Rivne Sumy diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Sumy Taurida diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UAOC, Kherson Kherson diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Kherson Ternopil diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Ternopil Ternopil-Buchach diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UAOC, Ternopil Ternopil-Terebovlia diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Kobylovoloky Kharkiv diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Kharkiv Kharkiv-Poltava diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UAOC, Poltava Khmelnytskyi diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Khmelnytskyi Cherkasy diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Cherkasy Chernihiv diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Chernihiv Chernivtsi diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Chernivtsi Chernivtsi-Kitsman diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Chernivtsi Chernivtsi-Khotyn diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UAOC, Chernivtsi Pereiaslav-Bila Tserkva diocese of the UOC (OCU), previously UOC-KP, Kyiv (merged with Kyiv diocese) Theotokos diocese (UOC-KP), not fully regulated Dnipropetrovsk-Zaporizhzhia diocese (UAOC), not registered Khmelnytskyi diocese (UAOC), not registered Cherkasy-Kirovohrad diocese (UAOC), not registered Kyiv diocese (UAOC), not registered Lviv-Sambir diocese (UAOC), not registered West European exarchate (UAOC), undetermined East Moldovan diocese (UOC-KP), turned to the Romanian Orthodox Church European exarchate (UOC-KP), abandoned Paris diocese (UOC-KP), abandoned Russian exarchate (UOC-KP), abandoned Belgorod diocese (UOC-KP), abandoned Odesa-Black Sea diocese (UAOC), not registered before unification According to the information presented by Metropolitan Epiphanius of Kyiv and All Ukraine in December 2019, the total number of the dioceses in the OCU stood at 44. During various official speeches, Poroshenko stressed the importance of Ukraine receiving its tomos of autocephaly which Ukraine "deserved", is the equivalent of "a charter of [Ukraine's] spiritual independence", was comparable to a referendum on Ukraine's independence and would be "another pillar of Ukrainian independence". On the 27th anniversary of the referendum on independence of Ukraine, Poroshenko declared the tomos of autocephaly was the equivalent of Ukraine saying "'Away from Moscow!' – 'Europe now!'" On 15 December 2018, Poroshenko made a speech after Epiphanius' election, in which he said the autocephalous church would be "without Putin, without Kirill", but "with God and with Ukraine". He added autocephaly was "part of our state pro-European and pro-Ukrainian strategy". On 6 January, after the OCU had received its tomos, President Poroshenko declared: "His All-Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew already has a special place in the history of Ukraine. With all that he did, due to his wisdom and leadership, his devotion to Ukraine and Orthodoxy, I would say that His All-Holiness will be considered a co-founder of a new Ukraine. This is a very special and historic mission". On 7 January 2019, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said that Ukraine, with the creation of the autocephalous Orthodox Church of Ukraine, has finally severed ties with Russia. He added: "The creation of the autocephalous Orthodox Church of Ukraine is the pledge of our independence. This is the foundation of our spiritual freedom. We've severed the last ties that connected us with Moscow and its fantasies about Ukraine as the canonical territory of the Russian Orthodox Church. This is not and won't be anymore." He made this declaration at the Christmas liturgy in St. Sophia Cathedral in Kyiv where the tomos of autocephaly of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine was shown to the public. On 12 October 2018, the press service of the president of Russia made it known that the issue of the Russian Orthodox Church (ROC) in Ukraine was the subject of deliberations at the situational meeting Russia's president had with the permanent members of the Security Council of Russia The president's spokesman Dmitry Peskov commented that the Kremlin supported the ROC's position and was ready to defend "the Orthodox faithful in Ukraine". On 17 December 2018, it was reported that the Federal Security Service of Russia, along with members of the Moscow Patriarchate, allegedly had created mobile groups to prevent communities in Ukraine from switching from the UOC-MP to the OCU. Those groups are present in each diocese of the UOC-MP and are composed of a lawyer and several men. On 20 December, Russia's president Vladimir Putin condemned the creation of the OCU. In an interview for Serbia's two major dailies published on 16 January 2019 on the official website of the president of Russia, Putin said the creation of the OCU and its official establishment via the Tomos was an attempt "to legalize the schismatic communities that exist[ed] in Ukraine under the jurisdiction of Istanbul, which is a gross violation of Orthodox canons". On 6 November 2019, following the talks with his Greek counterpart Nikos Dendias, shortly after the Moscow Patriarchate severed communion with the Church of Greece in retaliation to the latter's recognition of the OCU, Russia's foreign minister Sergei Lavrov told a press conference that he believed that the OCU's recognition was predicated on the efforts of the U.S. Government and personally secretary of state Mike Pompeo. On 8 January 2019, Canada's Foreign Minister Chrystia Freeland congratulated the OCU for receiving its tomos of autocephaly. On 15 December, the U.S. embassy in Kyiv congratulated, via Twitter, Ukraine for having elected the primate of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine. On 17 December, the U.S. Department of State officially congratulated Metropolitan Epiphanius on his election. On 10 January 2019, the U.S. State Department headed by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo released a statement: The January 6th announcement of autocephaly for an independent Orthodox Church of Ukraine marks a historic achievement as Ukraine seeks to chart its own future. On this momentous occasion, the United States reiterates its unwavering support for a sovereign, independent Ukraine. The United States maintains its strong support for religious freedom, including the freedom for members of religious groups to govern their religion according to their beliefs, without external interference. We welcome remarks by Metropolitan Epiphaniy that the Orthodox Church of Ukraine is open to all Orthodox believers and encourage government and Church officials to promote tolerance and respect for the freedom of members of all religious affiliations to worship as they choose. Syrian President Bashar al-Assad was quoted by Dmitry Sablin, member of a delegation of the Russian parliament, as saying: "Attempts to divide believers are one of the most serious challenges not only for you, but also for us. Today we see attempts to divide the church on our soil as well, that is, an attempt to divide the Church of Antioch in Syria and Lebanon." Assad noted in particular that granting independence to the Lebanese Metropolitanate was being discussed and said that "the continuation of that process could follow." On 24 December 2018, the Ecumenical Patriarchate sent a letter to the primates of the autocephalous Eastern Orthodox churches to ask them to recognise the OCU. On Sunday 16 December 2018, the next day after the election of Epiphanius as primate of the OCU, the Ecumenical Patriarch commemorated him during a Divine Liturgy, along with the other primates of the other Orthodox churches. On 8 January 2019, the Ecumenical Patriarch sent a letter to all the hierarchs of the Ecumenical Patriarchate to ask them to commemorate Epiphanius in the diptych. On 23 January 2019, the OCU appeared on one of the official websites of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, under the category "autocephalous churches". In June 2019, Patriarch Theodore II of Alexandria told Greece's newspaper Ethnos that the Ecumenical Patriarch had the right to grant autocephaly but talks between the two patriarchates involved were for reconciliation of the faithful in Ukraine. On 12 September 2019, in the village of Ossa near Thessaloniki, a liturgy was concelebrated by the hierarchs of the Patriarchate of Constantinople, the Church of Greece (the Metropolis of Langadas) as well as Bishop Volodymyr Shlapak of the Church of Ukraine and the hierarch of the Bishop of Mozambique Chrysostom Karangunis of the Patriarchate of Alexandria. The concelebration was interpreted by the OCU as de facto recognition of the OCU on the part of the Church of Alexandria. On 8 November 2019, the Patriarchate of Alexandria, ranked second in the diptych of the Eastern Orthodox Churches of the world, officially announced it had recognized the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, and Patriarch Theodore II commemorated the Metropolitan of Kyiv Epiphanius during the liturgy in the Archangels Cathedral in Cairo. Thereafter, the Patriarch of Alexandria sent a reply letter to Epiphanius; this move confirmed the full communion between the two churches. On 8 January 2019, the Permanent Synod of the Church of Greece decided that the issue of recognition of the OCU would be dealt with by the Synod of the Hierarchy of the Church of Greece. In early March 2019, the Permanent Synod discussed the Ukrainian issue and assigned it to two synodical committees for examination and appropriate recommendations. The Archbishop of Athens and All Greece Ieronymos II told the media that the Synod of the Hierarchy would discuss Ukraine at its session to be held on 19–20 March 2019. However, the issue of the OCU was not discussed. On 10 June, Archbishop Ieronymos II of Athens attended Great Vespers with Metropolitan Epiphanius. On 14 July, Metropolitan Ignatius of Demetrias and Volos visited the Ecumenical Patriarch. He declared that Patriarch Bartholomew had the right to grant Autocephaly to Ukraine, and that the Volos Theological Academy accepts students from OCU academies. On 28 July, at the 1,031st-anniversary celebration of the Baptism of Rus-Ukraine, Metropolitan Ioannis of Langada represented the Church of Greece and concelebrated with Metropolitan Epiphany. Earlier, Archbishop Germanos of Chernivtsi concelebrated with Greek and Constantinopolitan hierarchs in Thessaloniki. On 28 August, Greek media sources reported that the Church of Greece supported the autocephaly of the OCU. On 28 August 2019, the Standing Holy Synod of the Church of Greece stated that the Ecumenical Patriarch had the right to grant autocephaly, and that the primate of the Church of Greece had the "privilege ... to further deal with the question of recognition of the Church of Ukraine". While the Holy Synod had not formally recognized the OCU's autocephaly, Epiphanius argued that the OCU had an honorary recognition. On 7 October 2019, "a day before the start of the proceedings of the Synod of the Hierarchy of the Church of Greece, [the Archbishop of Athens] informed in a letter the Body of Hierarchs that he would add another extraordinary meeting this coming Saturday regarding exclusively the Ukrainian issue." This meeting was scheduled for 12 October 2019. On 12 October 2019, the Synod of Hierarchs of the Church of Greece, with 7 bishops stating their objections, acknowledged that "the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople has the right to grant autocephalies" and empowered Archbishop Ieronymos II to act on the issue of the OCU's autocephaly accordingly. During the debate preceding the recognition, more than 35 Metropolitans of the Church of Greece said they had been pressured by the ROC but did not yield to it. Epiphanius thanked the Church of Greece as well as its primate for this decision. According to news media reports, it had been tentatively expected that the formal act of recognition of the OCU would take place on 19 October "in Thessaloniki where Archbishop Ieronymos and Metropolitan Epiphanius w[ould] possibly concelebrate the Divine Liturgy." On 19 October, the Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew and Archbishop Ieronymos II of Athens jointly celebrated a liturgy in the Church of the Acheiropoietos in Thessaloniki, Greece, at which Metropolitan Epiphanius' name was commemorated by the Patriarch. The fact was interpreted by the Greek news outlets as a definitive acknowledgement (recognition) of Epiphanius by the Church of Greece. At the end of his speech after the liturgy, Patriarch Bartholomew thanked Archbishop Ieronymos for having identified with the canonical decisions of the Ecumenical Patriarchate and having inscribed the name of Metropolitan Epiphanius of Kyiv and All Ukraine in the Diptychs. A spokesman of the Moscow Patriarchate contested the interpretation of the concelebration as recognition of the OCU by the Church of Greece pointing up the fact that Epiphanius' name was not said directly by the Archbishop. On 21 October 2019, Archbishop Ieronymos II, the Primate of the Church of Greece, sent a peaceful letter to Metropolitan Epiphanius, the Primate of the OCU. The Archbishop's letter meant that the Church of Greece had officially communicated to the OCU that the Church of Greece had recognized it. On Sunday 10 November 2019, Archbishop Ieronymos II commemorated Epiphanius during a liturgy, thus confirming the recognition of the OCU. On 10 December 2019, the former Minister of Defence in the Alexis Tsipras government, Panos Kammenos, admitted that he had put pressure to bear on Archbishop Ieronymos II by telling him, when in office, that Russia would withdraw what he called "guarantees" to Greece to preclude occupation by Turkey of Greek islands such as Kastellorizo, Lemnos and others in the Eastern Aegean in the event that the Church of Greece recognised the Church of Ukraine before the Patriarchates of Jerusalem and Alexandria did so. The following day, apparently in response to Kammenos' allegations that the recognition of the UOC by the Church of Greece had resulted from pressure on the part of "some American circles", the Standing Holy Synod of the Church of Greece stated in an official communiqué that the decision to recognise the autocephaly of the Church of Ukraine proclaimed by the Ecumenical Patriarchate had been made freely and without coercion and was "entirely within the canonical and ecclesiastical tradition and ha[d] nothing to do with nationalism and other ‘from above’ interventions as ha[d] been propagated by some". In his public statements made in early January 2019, the primate of the Church of Cyprus, Archbishop Chrysostomos II, stressed the importance of avoiding division in the Orthodox Church; he acknowledged that any national state was entitled to have an autocephalous church and that it was up to the Ukrainian people; he also said he would not commemorate the name of the primate of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine in the diptych. Later in January 2019, Archbishop Chrysostomos was reported to have said that he regarded the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople as the Mother church and that he enjoyed good relations with the Phanar, which he was determined to preserve any difficulties notwithstanding; he also welcomed the desire of Metropolitan Epiphanius to have concelebration and said he would one day concelebrate with Metropolitan Epiphanius in Cyprus. On 7 February 2019, the Holy Synod of the Church of Cyprus decided that it would hold an extraordinary session on 18 February 2019 to make the definitive decision concerning the Ukrainian question. On 18 February, the Church of Cyprus announced she did not doubt the goals of granting autocephaly in Ukraine was to heal the schism in Ukraine; the Church of Cyprus also stated that if the schism in Ukraine was not overcome within a certain timeframe, the Church of Cyprus "expect[ed] that the Ecumenical Patriarch, making use of his regulatory role given to him by his position as First in Orthodoxy, w[ould] convene either a Pan-Orthodox Council or a Synaxis of the Primates to act upon the matter." In the same communiqué, the Church of Cyprus said she was offering herself as a mediator on the issue. The Church of Cyprus did not state it had recognised the OCU. In an interview published by the Cypriot newspaper Politis in mid‐December 2019, Archbishop Chrysostomos II criticised the three bishops of his Church, namely Athanasios Nikolaou of Limassol, Nikiphoros Kykkotis of Kykkos, and Isaias Kykkotis of Tamassos, for having derogated from the decision he said had been made by the Synod of the Church of Cyprus that committed her to neutrality on the issue of Ukraine, by making public statements in support of Moscow. The Archbishop also condemned the moves undertaken by Patriarch Kirill of Moscow such as not commemorating the Ecumenical Patriarch, the Archbishop of Athens, and the Patriarch of Alexandria as well as Kirill's aspiration motivated by egoism to illegitimately achieve primacy in Orthodoxy as leading to schism. On 7 January 2020, the Divine Liturgy in St George Patriarchal Cathedral in Istanbul presided over by the Ecumenical Patriarchate Bartholomew was concelebrated, among others, by Metropolitan Makariy Maletych (the OCU) and Metropolitan Chrysostomos Constantinos Kykkotis of Kyrenia (the Church of Cyprus). On 24 October 2020, the primate of the Church of Cyprus, Archbishop Chrysostomos II, commemorated Epiphanius of Ukraine during the Divine Liturgy, thus recognising the OCU. Archbishop Chrysostomos, while acknowledging the fact that some members of his Church's Holy Synod had disagreed with him and had not been told about his decision to commemorate the OCU's primate, explained that he had to take a position and that his move was meant to serve above all Orthodox Christianity and the Church rather than the Church of Cyprus, or individuals. On 25 November 2020, the Holy Synod of the Church of Cyprus decided "not to oppose" the decision of the Archbishop of Cyprus to recognise the OCU. The primate of the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch answered to the 24 December 2018 letter of the Ecumenical Patriarch by asking the Ecumenical Patriarch to postpone the grant of autocephaly to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine. On 15 December, after the election of Epiphanius at the unification council, archpriest Nikolay Balashov, deputy head of the Moscow Patriarchate Department for External Church Relations, told Interfax that this election "means nothing" for the Russian Orthodox Church. Following the Unification Council, the Patriarch of Moscow sent letters to the Primates of all the autocephalous Orthodox Churches (but not to the Ecumenical Patriarchate nor to the OCU), urging them not to recognise the OCU insisting that those who had joined the OCU remained "schismatics". On 30 December 2018, the synod of the ROC declared the unification council of the OCU "uncanonical" and appealed to the primates and synods of the other local Orthodox churches not to recognise the OCU. In February 2019, the Patriarchate of the Georgian Orthodox Church issued a statement that rejected what they saw as pressure and threats on the part of the ROC on the Ukrainian issue. Later in 2019, a number of bishops of the Church of Greece as well as of other autocephalous churches stated that they had been subjected to a campaign of intimidation and blackmail on the part of the Moscow Patriarchate with a view to preventing them from recognizing the Ukrainian autocephaly. This followed a Moscow-orchestrated defamation campaign personally against the Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew. Having unilaterally severed Eucharistic communion with the See of Constantinople on 15 October 2018, weeks before the formal granting of autocephaly to the OCU, the Moscow Patriarchate following the subsequent recognitions of the OCU on the part of the Church of Greece (October 2019) and the Patriarchate of Alexandria (November 2019) severed eucharistic communion with the primate of the Church of Greece and announced it would stop commemorating the Patriarche of Alexandria. Severance of communion with Patriarch Theodore II of Alexandria and the like-minded bishops of his Patriarchate was confirmed by the decision of the Holy Synod of the ROC of 26 December 2019, which also decreed that the representation of the Patriarch of Moscow in Cairo be turned into a parish and the "Russian" parishes in Africa be transferred under direct jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Moscow as stauropegia. On 27 December 2019, the Divine Liturgy was celebrated by the ROC representative in the church of Demetrius of Thessaloniki in the Zeitoun district of Cairo, Egypt, for the last time, as the church was being handed back to the Patriarchate of Alexandria. On 13 March 2019, a document titled "The Position of the Serbian Orthodox Church on the church crisis in Ukraine" was posted on behalf of the office of the Holy Synod of the Serbian Orthodox Church reiterating the previously voiced intention not to recognise the legitimacy of the OCU's hierarchy that had been communicated in November 2018 by Bishop Irinej Bulović of Bačka, the spokesman of the SOC, in the name of the Council ("Assembly") of Bishops of the Serbian Orthodox Church. Among other things, the 13 March 2019 document, which pointedly referred to Kyiv as "the mother of all Russian cities", recommended that the Serbian clergy refrain from any communion with those who were in communion with "Mr Epiphanius Dumenko and his followers". The identical document in Russian had been published by the Moscow Patriarchate's official web site around two weeks prior. In May 2019, the Council of Bishops re-affirmed the Church's stance on Ukraine stating in the publication posted by Irinej Bulović: "[T]he Assembly's present position remains: our Church does not recognize the newly established false-church structure in Ukraine, led by the citizens of Denysenko and Dumenko, and is only and exclusively in liturgical and canonical communion with the canonical Ukrainian Orthodox Church, led by His Beatitude Metropolitan Onufry, and with all the other canonical Orthodox Churches". On 21 February 2019, the Holy Synod of the Romanian Orthodox Church discussed the Ukrainian question and declared in a communiqué: Regarding this tense ecclesiastical situation in Ukraine, the Holy Synod of the Romanian Orthodox Church reiterates its stance expressed during its previous working sessions of 24 May and 25 October 2018. It was then recommended that, through dialogue, the Ecumenical Patriarchate and the Moscow Patriarchate identify a solution to this ecclesiastical dispute by preserving the unity of faith, by respecting the administrative and pastoral freedom of the clergy and faithful in this country (including the right to autocephaly), and by restoring Eucharistic communion. In the event of an unsuccessful bilateral dialogue, it is necessary to convene a Synaxis of all Primates of Orthodox Churches to solve the existing problem. The Romanian Orthodox Church also stated in the same communiqué: that once the schism in Ukraine has been healed, once the Ecumenical Patriarchate and the Moscow Patriarchate have settled their dispute over Ukraine, once the Romanian Orthodox Church has "written assurances from Ukrainian ecclesiastical and state authorities that the ethnic and linguistic identity of [the 127 Romanian Orthodox parishes in Ukraine currently administered by the UOC-MP] will be respected, and that these Romanian Orthodox will have the possibility to organise themselves within a Romanian Orthodox Vicariate and to be able to cultivate spiritual relations with the Romanian Patriarchate", and once the Ecumenical Patriarchate has clarified "the problem of the non-canonical hierarchs and priests in the West, who belonged to the former "Kyiv Patriarchate", then "the Holy Synod will express its official position on the situation of Orthodoxy in Ukraine." In March 2019, Epiphanius declared that he was in favor of creating a Romanian vicariate and that they "will discuss everything". On 2 April 2019, the assembly of bishops of the Polish Orthodox Church released a communiqué. In it, it reiterated its stance taken 9 May and 15 November 2018. The communiqué says the POC is in favor of granting autocephaly to Ukraine, and that autocephaly should be given "according to the dogmatic and canonical norms of the whole Church, and not of a group of schismatics. Those who left the Church and have been deprived of their priestly ordination, cannot represent a healthy ecclesial body. It is an uncanonical act, violating the Eucharistic and inter-Orthodox unity." The decision of the Assembly on the OCU was reaffirmed on 26 October 2021. The head of the Conference of Roman Catholic Bishops of Ukraine congratulated Epiphanius on his election in the name of the Roman Catholic bishops of Ukraine. Major Archbishop Shevchuk of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church (UGCC) congratulated the Orthodox Ukrainians on the formation of the OCU and said it was a "historic moment for Christians in Ukraine". On 18 December 2018, Shevchuck sent a letter of congratulation, in the name of both the UGCC and in his own name, to Metropolitan Epiphanius and said the election of Epiphanius was "God's gift on the way to the complete unity of the churches of Volodymyr's Baptism". However, in an interview published at the end of December 2019 on Radio Liberty, Major Archbishop Shevchuk said there was "no process of unification of the UGCC with the OCU". Concerning the formation of the OCU, the Seventh-day Adventist Church "takes a positive stance towards all the movements and activities that have served the unification of people, the search for ways of peaceful coexistence and understanding". Rabbi Oleksandr, head of the Religious Association of Progressive Judaism Communities of Ukraine, congratulated Orthodox Ukrainians for the receiving of the tomos of autocephaly. Said Ismagilov, Mufti of the Religious Administration of Muslims of Ukraine sent a congratulatory message to Epiphanius after the latter's election. On 6 January 2019, Said congratulated the Eastern Orthodox Christians for the receiving of the tomos by Ukraine. The Orthodox Church of Ukraine plans to introduce a number of new rules in churches. In particular, innovations currently being discussed by bishops include permission for women to enter the church with their heads uncovered, the installation of benches for seating in churches, and permission for the burial of Catholics. Certain innovations are also introduced in church music. For example, during the celebration of Easter 2019 in St. Michael's Golden-Domed Cathedral, a bell rang, written and performed by students of the Kyiv Orthodox Theological Academy. On 20 May 2019, Metropolitan of Cherkasy and Chyhyryn OCU Ioan (Yaremenko) announced that membership in the Orthodox Church of Ukraine is being introduced "on an applicant basis". Each parish will have an open register of its members who are actively involved in the religious, educational, financial, economic and charitable activities of the community. The Gregorian calendar has been adopted as the civil calendar on 15 October 1582 in Western Ukraine and on 14 February 1918 in Eastern Ukraine, causing a gap between the Orthodox Church calendar and the civil one. Commenting on possible changes in the church calendar, Metropolitan Epiphanius during 2019–2020 repeatedly stressed that they should take place gradually, as a result of educational work and corresponding changes in society's views. Reacting to the decision of Metropolitan Mykhailo of Lutsk and Volyn (some other bishops took the same initiative) to celebrate Christmas twice, on 25 December and 7 January, the Holy Synod of the OCU decided on 4 February 2020, that: When some Orthodox in Ukraine are under the influence of the Moscow Patriarchate, and taking into account the experience of 'old calendar schisms' in other Local Churches ... ill-considered and hasty implementation of the current calendar reform in the Orthodox Church of Ukraine may lead to the consolidation of existing divisions and the emergence of new ones. However, the Synod of the OCU allowed to perform on 25 December[neutrality is disputed] with the blessing of the ruling bishop prayers with the akathist at Christmas and carols. In December 2021, the primate of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, Metropolitan Epiphanius, expressed hope in an interview with Radio Svoboda that for the next 10 years, most Ukrainians could switch to celebrating Christmas on 25 December: We are called to carry out, first of all, educational work. Although we celebrate the 25th, just on different calendars. Yes, this error will need to be corrected. But tradition is a tradition – it is so ingrained that if we move on, in most cases, I am convinced, the churches of the 25th will be empty and the 7th full. And that is why it is necessary for the people to mature to this, to come consciously, and when we are all together. But this process is gradually, as we see, continuing, increasing the number of supporters of change. I think that over the next 10 years we will see that these figures change. This is mostly due to the traditions inside. We have already spoken and analyzed. Although this year I see that there is no such active wave of discussions about celebrating Christmas. In the last two years, or it was artificially created, I remember that the year before last my quotes were launched saying that I was not against it, and I was not really against the transition. But for it to happen correctly. We must act wisely. — Epiphanius I of Ukraine On October 18, 2022, the Orthodox Church of Ukraine allowed dioceses to hold Christmas services according to the Revised Julian calendar, i.e., December 25[neutrality is disputed]. Where there are pastoral circumstances for this and the desire of the faithful is evidenced, as an exception, by decision of the abbot and the congregation, on December 25, 2022, it may be allowed to hold a divine service with subsequent submission through the diocesan administration to the Kyiv Metropolitanate of written information about the number of participants in divine services. In the case of a divine service, its participants are released from the restrictions of fasting on this day. On December 24, 2022, during an audience, Major archbishop Sviatoslav handed over to Metropolitan Epiphanius for review a letter outlining the considerations of the UGCC hierarchs regarding the calendar reform. The primates decided to create a joint working group on specific proposals for calendar reform. The joint group is initiated on the occasion of the celebration of the 1700th anniversary of the First Ecumenical Council, held in Nicaea in 325. In this Council, in particular, the calendar principles of church life were determined. On December 25, 2022, Metropolitan Epiphanius announced that at the next meeting of the Synod of the OCU, he would study the experience gained in celebrating Christmas Liturgies on December 25, 2022 in the new style, both positive and negative. And in the future, further steps in the calendar reform of the OCU will be determined exclusively by the council. On January 6, 2023, Metropolitan Epiphanius announced that the parishes of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, which want to completely switch to the Revised Julian calendar, will soon be able to do so after the decision of the nearest meeting of the Synod, noting that the OCU has already started on the path of reforming the church calendar and will do everything in order to implement it during 2023. On February 2, 2023, the Holy Synod of the OCU allowed and approved the procedure for blessing parishes and monasteries for the full use of the Revised Julian calendar, and on May 24, 2023, to hold a meeting of the Council of Bishops, where the issue of calendar reform will be raised. On May 24, 2023 the Council of Bishops decides to completely switch to the Revised Julian calendar and that this transition will take place on September 1, 2023. It was also decided to convene the Local Council of the OCU on July 27, 2023, which will finally approve the transition to the Revised Julian calendar. The clergy of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church are involved in the work of the Ukrainian Liturgical Society, which is working to improve Ukrainian-language translations of liturgical texts, and to develop prayer, liturgical, and theological terminology. According to V. Khromets, one of the currently unresolved problems is the inconsistency of the current translations with the original sources (in particular, Greek). The Orthodox liturgical tradition and liturgical literature in Ukraine were also influenced by the long stay under the jurisdiction of the Moscow Patriarchate. One of the steps towards the return of ancient liturgical traditions was the decision of the Synod of the OCU, according to which it is necessary to pronounce the litany for those announced in the parishes where they are announced – those who are preparing to receive Baptism and undergo catechesis. missing. The traditional following of the epiclesis, ie "the invocation of the grace of the Holy Spirit on the offered Gifts", was restored, according to the practice that existed in the Orthodox Church of Ukraine until the 16th century. On the eve of the enthronement of Metropolitan Epiphanius, an initiative group of priests and laity of the OCU published a document with ten proposals for the agenda for the newly established autocephalous Church, which would help it better carry out its vocation in today's circumstances. Among them are calls for true catholicity, renewal of parish life, greater involvement of believers in the Church, quality translation of liturgical texts, "new evangelization", abandonment of the old paradigm of church-state relations, strengthening transparency and accountability, Church social service, church reform education, dialogue and openness. From 15 December 2018 to 7 November 2022, 1153 religious communities and monasteries have announced their transition from the UOC of the Moscow Patriarchate to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine. As of January 2023, the church had over 8,000 parishes in total. Autocephaly to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine Unification council of the Orthodox churches of Ukraine Conflict between Filaret and Epiphanius The hierarchy which was consecrated in 1620 was legalized by the government in a 1632 agreement that permitted both the disuniate Greek Orthodox and uniate Greek Catholic jurisdictions within the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. "Доповідь Предстоятеля на Архієрейському Соборі 14 грудня 2019 р." pomisna.info (in Ukrainian). 14 December 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2019. "Report on the network of religious organizations as of January 1, 2022". dess.gov.ua. Retrieved 14 December 2023. "Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra to host services in Ukrainian as Epiphanius vows monastery will remain open". nv.ua. 18 March 2023. Retrieved 10 April 2023. "OCU establishes Romanian vicariate". risu.ua. 8 July 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2023. "OCU Synod approves appointments and appoints a bishop for Greek-speaking faithful in Ukraine". risu.ua. 24 May 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2023. UATV English. "Tomos Ceremony" – via YouTube. "Факти ICTV – Михайлівський Золотоверхий стане кафедральним собором єдиної УПЦ". 16 December 2018. Archived from the original on 18 December 2018. Retrieved 17 December 2018. "Михайлівський Золотоверхий собор буде головним храмом ПЦУ". risu.org.ua. Retrieved 17 December 2018. "Ukraine Orthodox Church granted independence from Russian Church". British Broadcasting Corporation. 5 January 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019. Butler, Daren; Usta, Bulent (6 January 2019). "Ukraine's Orthodox Church now independent". The Australian. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Feldschreiber, Jared (6 January 2019). "Ecumenical Patriarch officially grants independence to Ukrainian Orthodox Church". Kyiv Post. Retrieved 5 January 2019. "73% of parishioners of the UOC-Moscow Patriarchate no longer identify with this church" (PDF). sapiens.com.ua. Retrieved 30 April 2022. "Православна Церква України запустила власний сайт". risu.org.ua. Σύνταξης, Αίθουσα (15 December 2018). Ανακηρύχθηκε η αυτοκέφαλη Ορθόδοξη Εκκλησία της Ουκρανίας. Tribune.gr (in Greek). Retrieved 16 December 2018. "Αυτοκέφαλη η Εκκλησία της Ουκρανίας, επικεφαλής ο μητροπολίτης Επιφάνιος |thetoc.gr". The TOC. 15 December 2018. Retrieved 16 December 2018. "Ukrainian Orthodox Church condemns manifestations of "language of hate"". pomisna.info. 5 April 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2023. Diptych (Greek) Diptych) (English) на офіційному сайті Вселенського Патріархату (архівна версія) "Патріарший і Синодальний Томос надання автокефального церковного устрою Православній Церкві в Україні". PCU. Retrieved 22 June 2019. "Тепер в Україні немає УПЦ МП, – Вселенський патріарх". novynarnia.com. 1 November 2020. Retrieved 14 December 2023. "Варфоломій: єдина канонічна православна церква в Україні – це ПЦУ". texty.org.ua. 14 December 2020. Retrieved 14 December 2023. "Варфоломій привітав ПЦУ з річницею хрещення Русі-України". Гордон | Gordon. Retrieved 14 December 2023. Православна церква України буде автокефальною – статут (повний текст документу) [The Orthodox Church of Ukraine will be autocephalous – the charter (full text of the document)]. РБК-Украина (in Ukrainian). 15 December 2018. Retrieved 30 December 2018. Piter234903 (15 December 2018). "Statut". www.slideshare.net. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 31 December 2018.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Томос для Української Церкви: що ховається в деталях". risu.org.ua. 5 January 2019. Retrieved 13 January 2019. Rakocevic, Jelena (3 January 2019). "Overcoming of schisms goes further or the Ecumenical Patriarchate strikes back". DELFI. Retrieved 14 January 2019. "PATRIARCHAL AND SYNODAL TOMOS FOR THE BESTOWAL OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL STATUS OF AUTOCEPHALY TO THE ORTHODOX CHURCH IN UKRAINE – Announcements – The Ecumenical Patriarchate". www.patriarchate.org. Retrieved 15 January 2019. "Epifaniy announces start of transfer of foreign parishes of OCU to Constantinople". risu.org.ua. 4 March 2019. Retrieved 9 April 2019. Younger, Katherine (8 November 2019). "The changing dilemmas of Ukrainian Orthodoxy". www.eurozine.com. Retrieved 27 December 2019. Релігія, Церква, суспільство і держава: два роки після Майдану [Religion, Church, Society and State: Two Years after Maidan] (PDF) (in Ukrainian), Kyiv: Razumkov Center in collaboration with the All-Ukrainian Council of Churches, 26 May 2016, pp. 22, 27, 29, 31, archived (PDF) from the original on 22 April 2017 Sample of 2,018 respondents aged 18 years and over, interviewed 25–30 March 2016 in all regions of Ukraine except Crimea and the occupied territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. Ksenia Luchenko (30 May 2022). "Независимость или раскол. Какими станут отношения Украинской и Русской православной церкви" [Independence or split. What will be the relationship between the Ukrainian and Russian Orthodox Churches?]. Carnegie Endowment. Retrieved 5 October 2023. "Kyiv Patriarchate announces official name of new Ukrainian Orthodox Church". unian.info. 15 December 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2018. "Official name of new Orthodox Church and title of its Primate, both according to Charter, announced". risu.org.ua. 15 December 2018. Retrieved 18 December 2018. "Щодо поминання за богослужінням Предстоятеля помісної Православної Церкви України". www.cerkva.info. 15 December 2018. Retrieved 28 December 2018. "Kyiv-based Metropolia of Ukrainian Orthodox Church registered in Ukraine". www.unian.info. 31 January 2019. Retrieved 31 January 2019. "Зареєстровано Київську митрополію УПЦ (ПЦУ)". risu.org.ua. 31 January 2019. Retrieved 31 January 2019. Доповідь Предстоятеля на Архієрейському Соборі 15 грудня 2020 року. Pomisna.info. 15 December 2020 "Новини України: Львів відвідав Архієпископ Всеволод Майданський". galinfo.com.ua (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 25 December 2022. "DECISION OF THE SYNOD: THE UKRAINIAN CHURCH WILL RECEIVE A THOMOS. Full text". Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 31 August 2019. ""Ukraine has always been the canonical territory of the Ecumenical Patriarchate"". ECUMENICAL PATRIARCHATE PERMANENT DELEGATION TO THE WORLD COUNCIL OF CHURCHES. 20 September 2018. Retrieved 2 May 2022. "1919 - The Directory of the Ukrainian People's Republic proclaims the autocephaly of the Orthodox Church in the Ukrainian People's Republic". Ukrainian Institute of National Memory (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 2 May 2022. Cazabonne, Emma (15 December 2018). "Bishop Epiphaniy (Dumenko) elected Primate of the Orthodox Church in Ukraine". Orthodoxie.com. Retrieved 15 December 2018. Alya, Shandra (16 December 2018). "History in the making: future Ukrainian Orthodox Church elects its Primate |". Euromaidan Press. Retrieved 17 December 2018. "Metropolitan Epifaniy (Dumenko) becomes Primate of One Local Orthodox Church of Ukraine". risu.org.ua. 15 December 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2018. "Metropolitan Epiphany of "Kiev Patriarchate" elected as leader of "local Orthodox church" in Ukraine". interfax-religion.com. 15 December 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2018. Предстоятель единой УПЦ Епифаний рассказал о статусе Филарета и главном соборе новой церкви. unian.net (in Russian). 16 December 2018. Retrieved 16 December 2018. "Epifaniy's rep: After receipt of Tomos, OCU Synod to set up governing bodies". risu.org.ua. 28 December 2018. Retrieved 1 January 2019. "Варфоломій благословив Епіфанія та запросив за томосом у Стамбул". BBC News Україна. 15 December 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2018. "Ecumenical Patriarchate". facebook.com. Retrieved 16 December 2018. "Communiqué (15/12/2018). – Announcements – The Ecumenical Patriarchate". www.patriarchate.org. Retrieved 25 January 2019. (in Ukrainian) In the CPC, the number of parishes and commented on the seizure of temples, Ukrainska Pravda (21 December 2018) В украинском фейсбуке появилась реклама Томоса. religions.unian.net (in Russian). Retrieved 23 December 2018. Порошенко власним коштом запустив рекламу на підтримку автокефалії – АП. ukrinform.ua (in Ukrainian). 14 August 2018. Retrieved 23 December 2018. Порошенко не декларує витрат на телерекламу. www.chesno.org (in Ukrainian). 1 October 2018. Retrieved 23 December 2018. Филарет стал почетным патриархом Православной церкви Украины. РБК-Украина (in Russian). 15 December 2018. Retrieved 16 December 2018. "Ексклюзивне інтерв'ю митрополита Епіфанія на телеканалі "Прямий"". Прямий Онлайн. 29 December 2018. Retrieved 30 December 2018. Телеканал Прямий, Ексклюзивне інтерв'ю з митрополитом Київським і всієї України Епіфанієм, retrieved 30 December 2018 "Про процедуру надання Томосу, Софію Київську та переходи до Православної церкви України – Епіфаній у ексклюзивному інтерв'ю "Прямому"". Прямий Онлайн. 30 December 2018. Retrieved 1 January 2019. "Patriarch Bartholomew signs Tomos of autocephaly of Orthodox Church of Ukraine". risu.org.ua. 5 January 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019. "Ukraine receives Tomos officially and forever". risu.org.ua. 6 January 2019. Retrieved 6 January 2019. La-Croix.com (5 January 2019). "L'Église d'Ukraine officiellement créée par le patriarche Bartholomée" [The church of Ukraine officially created by Patriarch Bartholomew]. La Croix (in French). Retrieved 5 January 2019. "Patriarch Bartholomew: "Prince Vladimir and Saint Olga are present in spirit and prayer, sharing our joy and pleasure"". risu.org.ua. 5 January 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019. "Серед 15 зірок автокефальних православних Церков з'явилася українська зірочка!, – Петро Порошенко" [Among the 15 stars of the Autocephalous Orthodox Churches there was a Ukrainian star ! – Petro Poroshenko]. risu.org.ua. 5 January 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019. "Metropolitan Epifaniy thanked Patriarch Bartholomew for signing the Tomos". risu.org.ua. 5 January 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019. "Ecumenical Patriarch hands tomos of autocephaly over to leader of Orthodox Church of Ukraine (Video, photos)". www.unian.info. 6 January 2019. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Президент України прибув у Стамбул [President of Ukraine arrived in Istanbul]. www.ukrinform.ua (in Ukrainian). 5 January 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019. "President took part in the solemn handing over of the Tomos of autocephaly of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church in Istanbul". Official website of the President of Ukraine. 6 January 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "Petro Poroshenko at the ceremony of signing the Tomos: At last, God has bestowed the Orthodox Church of Ukraine upon us". Official website of the President of Ukraine. 5 January 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "Tomos of autocephaly being exhibited in St Sophia Cathedral on Orthodox Christmas (Video)". www.unian.info. 7 January 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "Christmas with Tomos: Epifaniy presides over Liturgy at St Sophia in Kyiv". risu.org.ua. 7 January 2019. Retrieved 8 January 2019. "Томос на кілька днів відбуде на Фанар, щоб навіки повернутися в Україну". risu.org.ua. 7 January 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "Що з підписами під томосом і чому його повертають до Стамбула". BBC News Україна. 8 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019. "Archbishop: Members of Ecumenical Patriarchate's Synod sign public copy of tomos for Ukraine". Kyiv Post. 9 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019. В ПЦУ пояснили, чому томос ще раз повертався у Стамбул. zik.ua (in Ukrainian). 9 January 2019. Archived from the original on 9 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019. "Ukrainian Tomos signed by all members of Holy Synod of Ecumenical Patriarchate". risu.org.ua. 9 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019. "Tomos for Ukraine Church signed by all members of Constantinople Synod". unian.info. 9 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019. Panagiotisandriopoulos (9 January 2019). "Φως Φαναρίου : Η ΥΠΟΓΡΑΦΗ ΤΟΥ ΤΟΜΟΥ ΤΗΣ ΑΥΤΟΚΕΦΑΛΙΑΣ ΤΗΣ ΟΥΚΡΑΝΙΑΣ ΑΠΟ ΤΑ ΜΕΛΗ ΤΗΣ ΑΓΙΑΣ ΚΑΙ ΙΕΡΑΣ ΣΥΝΟΔΟΥ". Φως Φαναρίου. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "Tomos returns to Ukraine, brought to Rivne – Poroshenko". Interfax-Ukraine. 10 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "Tomos returns from Istanbul to Ukraine". interfax-religion.com. 10 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. Томос повернувся в Україну. Інформаційне агентство Українські Національні Новини (УНН). Всі онлайн новини дня в Україні за сьогодні – найсвіжіші, останні, головні. (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 11 January 2019. "Подписанный представителями Вселенского патриархата томос вернули в Украину". Ukrainska Pravda. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "Hieromonk Lucas athonite gave the Patriarch the calligraphed parchment with the Tomos for Ukraine". † Бигорски манастир. 4 January 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019. Порошенко начал в Ровно "Томос-тур" с Епифанием и получил орден от Филарета. Фото, видео. newsone.ua (in Ukrainian). 10 January 2019. Retrieved 12 January 2019. 112 Украина, Порошенко на Благодарственном молебене в Ровно, 10.01.2018, retrieved 12 January 2019{{citation}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "The Tomos of Autocephaly for the Church of Ukraine will be included in the new books of History". Romfea News. 11 February 2019. Retrieved 16 February 2019. "Enthronement of Yepifaniy to be held on Feb 3". www.interfax-religion.com. 18 January 2019. Retrieved 18 January 2019. Інтронізація предстоятеля ПЦУ відбудеться 3 лютого. www.ukrinform.ua (in Ukrainian). 17 January 2019. Retrieved 18 January 2019. Оголошення про інтронізацію Митрополита Київського і всієї України Епіфанія. Єдина помісна Українська Православна Церква (in Ukrainian). 17 January 2019. Retrieved 18 January 2019. Священный Синод ПЦУ после интронизации митрополита Епифания проведет кадровое заседание. Интерфакс-Украина (in Russian). 19 January 2019. Retrieved 19 January 2019. "First synod of new Ukrainian church to be held after enthronement of its head – Epifaniy". www.unian.info. 19 January 2019. Retrieved 20 January 2019. "When fake news becomes… an Athonite craft". Orthodoxia.info. 30 January 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Cazabonne, Emma (1 February 2019). "Two Athonite abbots will go to Kyiv on February 3 for Metropolitan Epifaniy's enthronement". Orthodoxie.com. Retrieved 2 February 2019. Cazabonne, Emma (2 February 2019). "The abbot of the Athonite Vatopedi Monastery was hospitalized in Kyiv ⋆ Orthodoxie.com". Orthodoxie.com. Retrieved 8 February 2019. Cazabonne, Emma (6 February 2019). "Metropolitan Epifaniy (Dumenko) visited Archimandrite Ephrem in Kyiv". Orthodoxie.com. Retrieved 8 February 2019. Panagiotisandriopoulos (2 February 2019). "Φως Φαναρίου : Ο ΚΙΕΒΟΥ ΕΠΙΦΑΝΙΟΣ ΕΠΙΣΚΕΦΘΗΚΕ ΣΤΗΝ ΚΛΙΝΙΚΗ ΤΟΝ ΒΑΤΟΠΑΙΔΙΝΟ ΗΓΟΥΜΕΝΟ ΕΦΡΑΙΜ (ΦΩΤΟ)". Φως Φαναρίου. Retrieved 8 February 2019. "Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine Epifaniy inaugurated as Primate of Orthodox Church of Ukraine". www.unian.info. 3 February 2019. Retrieved 3 February 2019. У Філарета погіршилось здоров’я і він не відвідав інтронізацію Епіфанія. 24 Канал (in Ukrainian). 3 February 2019. Retrieved 3 February 2019. "Митрополит Епіфаній сьогодні офіційно очолив ПЦУ (оновлено)". risu.org.ua. 3 February 2019. Retrieved 3 February 2019. Cazabonne, Emma (7 February 2019). "Metropolitan Epifaniy's enthronement". Orthodoxie.com. Retrieved 8 February 2019. "Ενθρονίστηκε ο Ουκρανίας Επιφάνιος (BINTEO)". romfea.grlanguage=el-gr. 3 February 2019. Retrieved 9 February 2019. "Despite abbot's absence, hieromonk of Vatopedi attended schismatic enthronement with abbot of Xenophontos and monk of Koutloumousiou". OrthoChristian.Com. 5 February 2019. Retrieved 16 February 2019. "Filaret to head Kyiv Diocese, Metropolitan Symeon elected Chief Secretary of the OCU, the Synod decides". risu.org.ua. 5 February 2019. Retrieved 9 February 2019. Відповідно до Статуту Предстоятель, Блаженніший Митрополит Київський і всієї України Епіфаній визначив склад Священного Синоду та скликав його перше засідання [In accordance with the Statute, the Primate, His Beatitude Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine Epiphanius defined the composition of the Holy Synod and convened its first meeting]. Єдина помісна Українська Православна Церква (in Ukrainian). 5 February 2019. Retrieved 5 February 2019. Священний Синод Православної Церкви України провів своє засідання та ухвалив низку рішень [The Holy Synod of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine held its meeting and approved a series of decisions]. Єдина помісна Українська Православна Церква (in Ukrainian). 5 February 2019. Retrieved 5 February 2019. Rozanskij, Vladimir (15 February 2019). "Epiphanius of Kiev: Let's build the future of Ukraine together". www.asianews.it. Retrieved 20 February 2019. Кушнір, Мар'ян (16 December 2018). Нам потрібно довершити повноцінне єднання – Епіфаній про єдину Православну церкву України. Радіо Свобода (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 17 February 2019. "OCU Primate: We will implement good reforms and shift away from Russian imperial traditions". risu.org.ua. 1 March 2019. Retrieved 2 March 2019. Червоненко, Святослав Хоменко, Віталій (1 March 2019). "Митрополит Епіфаній: "Ми не маємо права розпалювати в Україні релігійний фронт"". Retrieved 5 March 2019.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "У Вінниці владика Симеон оголосив про перехід від УПЦ МП до Православної Церкви України". risu.org.ua. 17 December 2018. Retrieved 20 December 2018. "У Вінниці митрополит УПЦ МП Симеон оголосив про перехід до Помісної церкви України | Всі Новини Вінниці". Vinbazar.com (in Russian). 17 December 2018. Retrieved 20 December 2018. "UOC MP set up mobile groups to block transfer of communities to Orthodox Church of Ukraine". risu.org.ua. 19 December 2018. Retrieved 19 December 2018. "РПЦ задіює в Україні "силові групи" для контролю майна церков — військове духовенство". www.ukrinform.ua. 17 December 2018. Retrieved 19 December 2018. "Metropolitan Oleksandr (Drabynko)'s parish moves to OCU". risu.org.ua. 20 December 2018. Retrieved 20 December 2018. Велика столична парафія Московського патріархату перейшла до Православної церкви України. glavcom.ua (in Ukrainian). 19 December 2018. Retrieved 20 December 2018. Перші півтисячі: до ПЦУ приєднались вже понад 500 парафій УПЦ МП. ТСН.ua (in Ukrainian). 17 March 2019. Retrieved 25 March 2019. "Глава синодального Отдела РПЦ МП сравнил встречу митрополита Онуфрия и президента Украины с обличением Ивана Грозного св. Филиппом". credo.press. 26 March 2019. Archived from the original on 6 April 2019. Retrieved 6 April 2019. A. Goble, Paul (31 March 2019). "Kyiv says 506 parishes have shifted from Moscow Church; Moscow claims only 61 have". Euromaidan Press. Retrieved 6 April 2019. Переходы храмов из УПЦ в ПЦУ: 61 или 506?. ahilla.ru (in Russian). 30 March 2019. Retrieved 6 April 2019. Maqbool, Aleem (15 April 2022). "'I'm shocked by my church leaders in Moscow' - priest in Ukraine". BBC News. Retrieved 23 April 2022. "Opinion: Only Patriarch Filaret will Protect Ukrainian Faithful in Diaspora". Novinite. 21 June 2019. "Patriarch Filaret talks of split, schools Metropolitan Epifaniy". www.unian.info. 15 May 2019. Retrieved 15 May 2019. "Відмова від статусу Патріархату була чисто ситуативною, – почесний Патріарх Філарет виступив із заявою". risu.org.ua. 15 May 2019. Retrieved 15 May 2019. "Filaret's 'Council' restores UOC-KP with all its structure, property and criticizes Tomos". risu.org.ua. 20 June 2019. Retrieved 20 June 2019. ""Kyiv Patriarchate" cancels its dissolution". www.interfax-religion.com. 20 June 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2019. "Відбувся перший Архієрейський Собор об'єднаної Православної Церкви України". pomisna.info (in Ukrainian). 14 December 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2019. "Митрополит Епіфаній оголосив про юридичне припинення існування УПЦ КП та УАПЦ". risu.org.ua. 14 December 2019. Retrieved 14 December 2019. "Постанови Архієрейського Собору від 14 грудня 2019 р." pomisna.info (in Ukrainian). 14 December 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2019. Subtelny 2009, p. ? (ebook). sfn error: no target: CITEREFSubtelny2009 (help) Senyk 1996, pp. 354–357. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSenyk1996 (help) Blazejovskyj 1990, p. 223. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBlazejovskyj1990 (help) Blazejovskyj 1990, p. 225. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBlazejovskyj1990 (help) Blazejovskyj 1990, p. 226. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBlazejovskyj1990 (help) Blazejovskyj 1990, p. 224. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBlazejovskyj1990 (help) "Зареєстровані статути перших єпархій ПЦУ". risu.org.ua. 26 March 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2019. "volynskyi diocese". www.pravoslaviavolyni.org.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Житомирсько-Поліська Єпархія - Українська Православна Церква (ПЦУ)". uapc.zt.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Мукачівсько-Карпатська єпархія Православної Церкви України". www.keuapc.org. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Головна". pcu.if.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "ПРАВОСЛАВ'Я НА ПРИКАРПАТТІ". pravoslavie.if.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Коломийська Єпархія". kolomija.com. 9 February 2021. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Переяславсько-Вишневська єпархія ПЦУ". pereyaslav-eparchia.kiev.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Архів матеріалів - Кримська єпархія УПЦ КП". cerkva-krim.at.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Кропивницька Єпархія Православної Церкви України – офіційний сайт Кропивницької Єпархії ПЦУ". cerkva-kr.info. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Головна: Львівська єпархія ПЦУ". uaoc.lviv.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Львівсько-Сокальська єпархія". gradleva.com. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Дрогобицько-Самбірська єпархія". drogobych-orthodox.info. "Полтавська єпархія (головна)". www.cerkva.pl.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Веб-портал Сумської єпархії Православної Церкви України". www.pravoslavya.sumy.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. Kherson diocese "Архієрей помолився в каплиці-пантеонів загиблих Героїв у Лішні". cerkva.te.ua. 22 December 2022. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Тернопільсько-Бучацька єпархія | Православна Церква України". uapc.net.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Тернопільсько-Теребовлянська Єпархія ПЦУ – Офіційний сайт Тернопільсько-Теребовлянської єпархії Української Православної Церкви (Православної Церкви України)". eparchy.te.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Головна". Харківсько-Полтавська єпархія ПЦУ • Офіційний сайт [uaoch.com]. Retrieved 25 December 2022. Khmelnytskyi diocese "Home - Orthodox-Cv". 20 February 2023. Retrieved 14 December 2023. "Чернівецько-Буковинська єпархія ПЦУ". orthodox.cv.ua. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Our great nation deserved the right to have its own church – President on the autocephaly of the Ukrainian church". Official website of the President of Ukraine. 28 November 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2019. Retrieved 2 December 2018. "President's address as regards the decision of the Synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate on the approval of the Tomos for the Ukrainian church". Official website of the President of Ukraine. 29 November 2018. Archived from the original on 2 December 2018. Retrieved 1 December 2018. "We are going our way – President congratulated Ukrainians on the 27th anniversary of the referendum on Independence of Ukraine". Official website of the President of Ukraine. 1 December 2018. Archived from the original on 3 December 2018. Retrieved 2 December 2018. "We are creating another pillar of Ukrainian independence – President on the founding of the Autocephalous Ukrainian Orthodox Church". risu.org.ua. 8 December 2018. Retrieved 12 December 2018. "Speech by the President on the results of the All-Ukrainian Orthodox Unity Council". Official website of the President of Ukraine. 15 December 2018. Archived from the original on 14 March 2019. Retrieved 23 December 2018. MacFarquhar, Neil (15 December 2018). "Amid Russia Tensions, Ukraine Moves Toward Separate Church". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "His All-Holiness will be considered a co-founder of a new Ukraine – President on the role of Patriarch Bartholomew in the establishment of the independent UOC". risu.org.ua. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "Poroshenko: Ukraine finally severs ties with Russia". www.unian.info. 7 January 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "Совещание с постоянными членами Совета Безопасности". President of Russia (in Russian). 12 October 2019. Retrieved 9 November 2019. "В Кремле разделяют обеспокоенность РПЦ последствиями решения Константинопольского патриархата — Песков". Interfax (in Russian). 12 October 2019. Retrieved 9 November 2019. "В Кремле обещают защищать интересы православных на Украине политико-дипломатическими методами". Interfax (in Russian). 12 October 2019. Retrieved 9 November 2019. "Putin Condemns Creation of Independent Ukraine Church". VOA. 20 December 2018. Retrieved 22 December 2018. "Poutine condamne la création d'une église indépendante en Ukraine". www.romandie.com. 20 December 2018. Retrieved 22 December 2018. "Интервью сербским изданиям "Политика" и "Вечерние новости": В преддверии визита в Республику Сербия Владимир Путин ответил на вопросы сербских СМИ – газет "Политика" и "Вечерние новости"". President of Russia. 16 January 2019. Retrieved 17 January 2019. "Interviews to Serbian periodicals Politika and Večernje novosti". President of Russia. 16 January 2019. Retrieved 17 January 2019. "Лавров обвинил США в попытках продвигать раскол во всем православном мире: По словам главы МИД РФ, налицо внешнее влияние в вопросах, касающихся Элладской православной церкви и автокефальной церкви Украины". TASS (in Russian). 6 November 2019. Retrieved 9 November 2019. "Выступление и ответы на вопросы СМИ Министра иностранных дел Российской Федерации С.В.Лаврова в ходе совместной пресс-конференции по итогам переговоров с Министром иностранных дел Греческой Республики Н.Дендиасом Москва, 6 ноября 2019 года". The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia (in Russian). 6 November 2019. Retrieved 9 November 2019. "Canada hails receiving of tomos by OCU and becoming Autocephalous Church — Canada's FM". Interfax-Ukraine. 8 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. "U.S. congratulates Ukraine on establishing local Ukrainian Orthodox Church". www.unian.info. Retrieved 15 December 2018. "U.S. congratulates Ukraine's Metropolitan Epifaniy on election as head of local Orthodox Church". www.unian.info. 18 December 2018. Retrieved 18 December 2018. "US State Department officially reacted to Tomos". risu.org.ua. 11 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "Assad points to attempts to divide Church of Antioch in Syria, Lebanon". TASS. 17 January 2019. Retrieved 26 May 2019. "Attempts are being made to divide Antioch Church – al-Assad". www.interfax-religion.com. 17 January 2019. Retrieved 26 May 2019. "H ΕΚΚΛΗΣΙΑ ΤΗΣ ΕΛΛΑΔΟΣ : Ιερά Σύνοδος Εκκλησίας Ελλάδος – Δελτία Τύπου της Ιεράς Συνόδου". ecclesia.gr. 8 January 2019. Retrieved 8 January 2019. "Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America". antiochian.org. 9 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. "Bartholomew calls on leaders of autocephalous churches to recognize Orthodox Church of Ukraine". www.unian.info. 4 January 2019. Retrieved 4 January 2019. Antoniadou, Maria (4 January 2019). "I call upon You to recognize UOC autocephaly: Bartholomew". Orthodoxia.info. Retrieved 4 January 2019. Loudaros, Andreas (16 December 2018). "New Ukrainian primate's name commemorated in Constantinople". Orthodoxia.info. Retrieved 5 January 2019. Cazabonne, Emma (14 January 2019). "Patriarch Bartholomew's letter to the hierarchs of the Ecumenical Throne on Ukraine". Orthodoxie.com. Retrieved 15 January 2019. Panagiotisandriopoulos (10 January 2019). "Φως Φαναρίου : ΠΑΤΡΙΑΡΧΙΚΟ ΓΡΑΜΜΑ ΠΡΟΣ ΤΟΥΣ ΙΕΡΑΡΧΕΣ ΤΟΥ ΘΡΟΝΟΥ ΠΕΡΙ ΤΗΣ ΑΥΤΟΚΕΦΑΛΙΑΣ ΤΗΣ ΟΥΚΡΑΝΙΑΣ". Φως Φαναρίου. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "Українська Церква – в диптиху Вселенського патріархату!". cerkvarium.org. 23 January 2019. Archived from the original on 23 January 2019. Retrieved 23 January 2019. "Ecumenical Patriarchate's official website lists Orthodox Church of Ukraine". risu.org.ua. 23 January 2019. Retrieved 27 January 2019. "O Πατριάρχης Αλεξανδρείας στο ethnos.gr: Δεν έχουµε την πολυτέλεια να είµαστε διχασµένοι: Ο ιεράρχης που έχει αναπτύξει σηµαντική ιεραποστολική δράση στη Μαύρη Ηπειρο µιλά για το ζήτηµα του Αυτοκέφαλου της Ουκρανικής Εκκλησίας και την πρόταση που προωθείται για συνάντηση του Προκαθήµενου της Ορθοδοξίας µε τον Πατριάρχη Μόσχας". Ethnos (in Greek). 15 June 2019. Retrieved 25 October 2019. "(Δελτίο Τύπου) Ιερά Αγρυπνία επί τη ευκαιρία της ενθυμήσεως του γεγονότος, της κατά θαυμαστό τρόπο ανευρέσεως και ανακομιδής των Χαριτοβρύτων και Σεπτών Ιερών Λειψάνων της Αγίας Νεοπαρθενομάρτυρος Κυράννης". imlagada.gr. The official web site of the Metropolis of Langada. 12 September 2019. Retrieved 25 October 2019. "OCU сlaims to be recognized by Alexandrian Church". risu.org.ua. religious Information Service of Ukraine. 18 September 2019. Retrieved 25 October 2019. "Ще одна Помісна Церква фактично визнала ПЦУ". religionpravda.com.ua. Релігійна правда. 17 September 2019. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 17 September 2019. "Митрополит Нігерійський Олександр митрополиту Волоколамському Іларіону: "Олександрійський Патріархат не є під протекторатом Російської Церкви і ми ніколи не дозволимо йому бути під ним"". www.pomisna.info. Православна церква України. 24 September 2019. Retrieved 23 September 2019. "Олександрійський патріархат визнав автокефалію ПЦУ". www.ukrinform.com. Ukrinform. 8 November 2019. Retrieved 8 November 2019. "Олександрійський патріархат визнав ПЦУ. Чому це важливо". www.bbc.com. BBC. 8 November 2019. Retrieved 8 November 2019. "The Patriarchate of Alexandria recognizes the Autocephalous Church of Ukraine (upd)". Orthodox Times. 8 November 2019. Retrieved 8 November 2019. "Letter sent by Patriarch Theodore to hierarchs on recognition of Ukrainian autocephaly". Orthodox Times. 8 November 2019. Retrieved 8 November 2019. "Александрийский патриарх признал ПЦУ". www.interfax-religion.ru. 8 November 2019. Retrieved 8 November 2019. "Reply letter by Patriarch of Alexandria to Metropolitan of Kyiv". Orthodox Times. 27 November 2019. Retrieved 29 November 2019. Cazabonne, Emma (9 January 2019). "The Holy Synod of the Orthodox Church of Greece refers the Ukrainian issue to their assembly of bishops". Orthodoxie.com. Retrieved 15 January 2019. Греція почала процедуру визнання автокефалії Православної церкви України. www.ukrinform.ua (in Ukrainian). 8 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019. "H ΕΚΚΛΗΣΙΑ ΤΗΣ ΕΛΛΑΔΟΣ : Ιερά Σύνοδος Εκκλησίας Ελλάδος - Δελτία Τύπου της Ιεράς Συνόδου". www.ecclesia.gr. Retrieved 25 December 2022. Ιερώνυμος στο Έθνος: Συζητήσαμε το θέμα της μισθοδοσίας κληρικών: Για το ζήτημα της Ουκρανίας είναι πολύ πιθανό οι Επιτροπές να μην προλάβουν να ολοκληρώσουν τις γνωμοδοτήσεις τους και το θέμα να παραπεμφθεί σε έκτακτη Ιεραρχία. Ethnos, 7 March 2019. "Елладська Церква розгляне визнання ПЦУ 19 березня – архієпископ Афінський Ієронім". cerkvarium.org. Archived from the original on 7 March 2019. Retrieved 7 March 2019. "Ukrainian issue not discussed at all at latest Greek Holy Synod meeting". OrthoChristian.Com. 22 March 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2019. "Митрополит Епіфаній перебуває з візитом у Вселенського Патріарха Варфоломія". PCU (in Ukrainian). 10 June 2019. Retrieved 11 October 2019. Anastasiadis, Fr Romanos (15 July 2019). "Ρωμαλέω Φρονήματι...: Metropolitan Ignatius of Volos (Church of Greece) about the Ukrainian Autocephaly / Ο Μητροπολίτης Δημητριάδος και Αλμυρού κ. Ιγνάτιος για την Αυτοκεφαλία της Ορθοδόξου Εκκλησίας της Ουκρανίας (video)". Ρωμαλέω Φρονήματι... Retrieved 11 October 2019. "Metropolitan Epiphanius: The Church of Greece recognized de facto our Church (upd)". Orthodox Times. 29 July 2019. Retrieved 20 October 2019. "Metropolitan of Langadas concelebrated with Metropolitan from Autocephalous Orthodox Church of Ukraine". Orthodox Times. 13 September 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019. "Український хресний хід з нагоди 1031-ї річниці хрещення Руси-України". PCU (in Ukrainian). 28 July 2019. Retrieved 20 October 2019. "Greek Orthodox Church backs independence of Ukrainian Church | Kathimerini". www.ekathimerini.com. Retrieved 29 August 2019. "The Synod of the Church of Greece recognizes the Ecumenical Patriarch's right to issue the status of Autocephaly (upd)". Romfea News. 28 August 2019. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "Greek Orthodox Church backs independence of Ukrainian Church | Kathimerini". www.ekathimerini.com. 28 August 2019. Retrieved 30 August 2019. "Metropolitan Epiphanius: The Church of Greece recognized de facto our Church (upd)". Orthodox Times. 29 July 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019. "Έκτακτη Ιεραρχία το Σάββατο για το Ουκρανικό Ζήτημα- Η εισήγηση του Αρχιεπισκόπου Αθηνών". Ορθοδοξία News Agency (in Greek). 7 October 2019. Retrieved 11 October 2019. "ΑΠΟΚΛΕΙΣΤΙΚΟ: Έκτακτη Ιεραρχία το Σάββατο 12 Οκτωβρίου για την Ουκρανία". ROMFEA (in Greek). 7 October 2019. Retrieved 11 October 2019. "Extraordinary meeting of the Hierarchy of the Church of Greece to discuss the Ukrainian autocephaly issue". Orthodox Times. 7 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019. "What does Ieronymos' move to call the Hierarchy on the Ukrainian issue indicate". Orthodox Times. 7 October 2019. Retrieved 11 October 2019. "Η Εκκλησία της Ελλάδος αναγνώρισε την Αυτοκέφαλη Εκκλησία της Ουκρανίας" [The Church of Greece recognized the Autocephalous Church of Ukraine]. eleftherostypos.gr. Eleutheros Typos. 12 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019. "The Church of Greece has recognized the Autocephalous Church of Ukraine (upd)". Orthodox Times. 12 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019. "Urgent: Greek Orthodox Church recognizes autocephaly of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine". risu.org.ua. 12 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019. Θεοχάρης, Γιώργος (1 November 2019). "Ραγδαίες εξελίξεις – Πειραιώς Σεραφείμ στο ΒΗΜΑ ΟΡΘΟΔΟΞΙΑΣ για ουκρανικό : Σε Πανορθόδοξη ακόμα και χωρίς τον Βαρθολομαίο – Κοινή επιστολή με Κυθήρων". ΒΗΜΑ ΟΡΘΟΔΟΞΙΑΣ (in Greek). Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Heated debate between Hierarchs of Church of Greece on Ukrainian autocephaly issue". Orthodox Times. 12 October 2019. Retrieved 14 October 2019. "EXCLUSIVE: It is time for Orthodox primates and hierarchs to stand up to Moscow and ensure Church unity". theorthodoxworld.com. 11 December 2019. Archived from the original on 24 February 2020. Retrieved 24 February 2020. "Metropolitan Epifaniy thanks head and hierarchs of the Greek Orthodox Church for recognizing the OCU". risu.org.ua. 12 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019. "Metropolitan Epiphanius of Kiev and All Ukraine thanked the Church of Greece". Orthodox Times. 12 October 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2019. "Grèce : la reconnaissance officielle de l'Église orthodoxe d'Ukraine aura lieu le 19 octobre prochain". Orthodoxie.com (in French). 12 October 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2019. Newsroom (19 October 2019). "Ιστορικές στιγμές στη Θεσσαλονίκη: Ο Πατριάρχης Βαρθολομαίος μνημόνευσε τον Επιφάνιο στο συλλείτουργο με τον Ιερώνυμο". ΒΗΜΑ ΟΡΘΟΔΟΞΙΑΣ (in Greek). Retrieved 20 October 2019. "Έγινε η μνημόνευση του Ουκρανίας από Βαρθολομαίο – Ιερώνυμο". ΟΡΘΟΔΟΞΙΑ INFO (in Greek). 19 October 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2019. "Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew and Archbishop Ieronymos acknowledged Metropolitan Epiphanius of Kiev". Orthodox Times. 19 October 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2019. "Ιστορικό συλλείτουργο και ευχαριστίες Βαρθολομαίου στον Ιερώνυμο για το Ουκρανικό: Σε κλίμα συγκίνησης ολοκληρώθηκε το συλλείτουργο του Οικουμενικού Πατριάρχη με τον Αρχιεπίσκοπο". ethnos.gr (in Greek). 19 October 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2019. Πατριαρχική Θεία Λειτουργία στον ιερό ναό Παναγίας Αχειροποιήτου, retrieved 20 October 2019 "Πατριάρχης και Αρχιεπίσκοπος στον ι. ν. Παναγίας Αχειροποιήτου". ecclesia.gr (in Greek). 19 October 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2019. "Le métropolite Épiphane commémoré pendant la divine liturgie célébrée à Thessalonique". Orthodoxie.com (in French). 19 October 2019. Retrieved 20 October 2019. "Ecumenical Patriarch: The autocephaly of the Church of Ukraine was a rightful demand". Orthodox Times. 19 October 2019. Retrieved 20 October 2019. "В РПЦ прокомментировали совместную литургию Варфоломея и Иеронима". RIA Novosti (in Russian). 19 October 2019. Retrieved 20 October 2019. "The document of the recognition of the Church of Greece has arrived in Kyiv (upd)". Orthodox Times. 29 October 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2019. "З Синоду Елладської Православної Церкви надійшов лист на ім'я Митрополита Епіфанія". pomisna.info. 29 October 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2019. "Синод Элладской церкви поздравил Епифания с решением о признании автокефалии ПЦУ". TASS (in Russian). 29 October 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2019. "Archbishop Ieronymos commemorated Metropolitan Epiphaniy of Kyiv". Orthodox Times. 10 November 2019. Retrieved 10 November 2019. "Ο Αρχιεπίσκοπος Ιερώνυμος μνημόνευσε τον Κιέβου Επιφάνιο". ΟΡΘΟΔΟΞΙΑ INFO (in Greek). 10 November 2019. Retrieved 11 November 2019. "Admission of pressure on Archbishop Ieronymos not to recognize Church of Ukraine". Orthodox Times. 11 December 2019. Retrieved 13 December 2019. "ΔΙΣ: "Ελεύθερα και αβίαστα" η αναγνώριση της Εκκλησίας της Ουκρανίας". CNN Greece (in Greek). 11 December 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "The Church of Greece has decided freely and without haste for the Autocephaly of the Church of Ukraine". Orthodox Times. 11 December 2019. Retrieved 13 December 2019. "Ολοκλήρωσε τις εργασίες της η Ιερά Σύνοδος (11/12/2019)". ecclesia.gr (in Greek). 11 December 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2019. "Church hits back overUkraine [sic] blackmail claim". Kathimerini. 11 December 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2019. Cazabonne, Emma (9 January 2019). "What's most important right now is not autocephaly, but that Orthodoxy may not be divided". Orthodoxie.com. Retrieved 15 January 2019. Αρχιεπίσκοπος Κύπρου: Αυτή την στιγμή δεν προέχει η Αυτοκεφαλία, αλλά να μην διχαστεί η Ορθοδοξία. ROMFEA (in Greek). 9 January 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2019. Παπαγεωργίου, Σπύρος (25 January 2019). "Κύπρου Χρυσόστομος: "Το Οικουμενικό Πατριαρχείο είναι η Μητέρα Εκκλησία"". Orthodoxia.info. Retrieved 18 December 2019. "Orthodox Church of Cyprus to recognize OCU head Epifaniy". www.unian.info. 25 January 2019. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "Church of Cyprus plans to recognize OCU". risu.org.ua. 25 January 2019. Retrieved 27 January 2019. "Кіпрська Православна Церква визначилася з датою розгляду питання про визнання ПЦУ". risu.org.ua. 8 February 2019. Retrieved 8 February 2019. "Church of Cyprus: We are not questioning Ecumenical Patriarchate's goal for the Church of Ukraine". Romfea News. 18 February 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2019. "Cyprus Church condemns Russia's aggressive policy toward Orthodox Church of Ukraine". www.unian.info. 19 February 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2019. Οι αποφάσεις της Εκκλησίας της Κύπρου για την Ουκρανία. ROMFEA (in Greek). 18 February 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2019. Andreas Koshiaris (18 February 2019). Ανακοινωθέν Έκτακτης Συνεδρίας της Ιεράς Συνόδου (18 Φεβρουαρίου 2019). Εκκλησία της Κύπρου (in Greek). Retrieved 19 February 2019. "Позачерговий Синод Кіпрської Православної Церкви обговорив українське питання". risu.org.ua. 19 February 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2019. "Archbishop of Cyprus: I told Patriarch of Moscow he would never be first among Orthodox primates (upd)". orthodoxtimes.com. 16 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Λυσάνδρου, Μιράντα (16 December 2019). "Β' μέρος συνέντευξης Αρχιεπισκόπου: Οι 300 χιλ. του Λόου και τα "πυρά" κατά τριών Μητροπολιτών". politis.com.cy (in Greek). Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Β΄ μέρος συνέντευξης του Μακαριωτάτου Αρχιεπισκόπου Κύπρου στον "Πολίτη"". churchofcyprus.org.cy (in Greek). 16 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "The Holy Epiphany was celebrated with greatness and splendor at the Ecumenical Patriarchate on Monday, January 6". orthodoxtimes.com. 7 January 2020. Retrieved 8 January 2020. "Archbishop of Cyprus commemorates Metropolitan Epifaniy of Kyiv for first time (upd)". Orthodox Times. 24 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Αρχιεπίσκοπος Κύπρου: Η απόφασή μου αυτή υπηρετεί την Ορθοδοξία". ΕΚΚΛΗΣΙΑ ONLINE (in Greek). 24 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Кіпрська Церква визнала Православну Церкву України". Релігійно-інформаційна служба України (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Archbishop of Cyprus: My decision to commemorate Metropolitan Epifaniy first serves Orthodoxy". Orthodox Times. 24 October 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Décision du Saint-Synode de l'Église orthodoxe de Chypre au sujet du problème ukrainien". Orthodoxie.com (in French). 25 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020. Andreas Koshiaris (25 November 2020). "Ανακοινωθέν Έκτακτης Συνεδρίας της Ιεράς Συνόδου (της 23ης και 25ης Νοεμβρίου 2020)". Εκκλησία της Κύπρου (in Greek). Retrieved 26 November 2020. "Election of leader of "single local church" in Ukraine means nothing – Russian Orthodox Church". interfax-religion.com. 15 December 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2018. "His Holiness Patriarch Kirill sends letters to Primates of Local Orthodox Churches concerning "unification" pseudo-council held in Kiev | The Russian Orthodox Church". Retrieved 20 December 2018. "Holy Synod discussed consequence of Patriarchate of Constantinople's invasion in canonical territory of Ukrainian Orthodox Church | The Russian Orthodox Church". mospat.ru. 28 December 2018. Retrieved 5 January 2019. "საქართველოს საპატრიარქოს განცხადება (01.02.2019)". patriarchate.ge (in Georgian). 1 February 2019. Retrieved 22 October 2019. "ΟΥΚΡΑΝΙΚΟ: Μετά την ελλαδική, ποια Εκκλησία;" (in Greek). 15 October 2019. Retrieved 18 October 2019. "Александрийский патриархат поссорился с Москвой из-за Украины: Епископ из Африки заявил, что не хочет быть "вассалом" Русской церкви". Nezavisimaya Gazeta (in Russian). 1 October 2019. Retrieved 18 October 2019. "Νιγηρίας προς Βολοκολάμσκ: "Το Πατριαρχείο Αλεξανδρείας δεν είναι και δεν θα επιτρέψουμε ποτέ να γίνει προτεκτοράτο της Εκκλησίας της Ρωσίας"". Nyxthimeron.com (in Greek). 23 September 2018. Retrieved 22 October 2019. "Кто стоит за травлей Патриарха Варфоломея?". lb.ua (in Russian). 19 September 2018. Retrieved 18 October 2019. "Russian Orthodox Church to stop communion with head of Greek Church". www.interfax-religion.com. 2 November 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Moscow continues to 'strike' Orthodox Primates off its diptychs". Orthodox Times. 9 November 2019. Retrieved 9 November 2019. "Священный Синод принял меры в связи с признанием Предстоятелем Александрийского Патриархата раскольнической структуры на Украине". patriarchia.ru (in Russian). 26 December 2019. Retrieved 26 December 2019. "ROC breaks off the communion with Patriarch of Alexandria because of their recognition of OCU, – the decision of the Synod". risu.org.ua. 26 December 2019. Retrieved 28 December 2019. "Богослужение в Каире". rusmissionafrica.com (in Russian). 27 December 2019. Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 28 December 2019. "Став Српске Православне Цркве о црквеној кризи у Украјини". www.spc.rs. 13 March 2019. Archived from the original on 13 March 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019. "Position of the Serbian Orthodox Church on the Church Crisis in Ukraine After the Newest Decisions by the Patriarchate of Constantinople". spc.rs. 20 November 2018. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019. Retrieved 3 April 2019. The Assembly states that the Patriarchate of Constantinople made a canonically unfounded decision to rehabilitate and recognize as bishops two leaders of schismatic groups in Ukraine, Filaret Denysenko and Makary Maletich, together with their episcopacy and clergy, among whom the former was once canonically defrocked, and then excommunicated from the Church community and subjected to anathema, while the latter was deprived of the Apostolic succession as a spiritual offshoot of the so-called sect the self-consecrated, for which reason the Holy Assembly of Bishops considers this decision of the Synod of Constantinople non-binding for the Serbian Orthodox Church. The Assembly does not recognize the mentioned individuals nor their followers as Orthodox bishops or clergy and, consequently, does not accept liturgical and canonical union with them or their supporters. "Заявление Сербской Православной Церкви по церковной ситуации на Украине". patriarchia.ru (in Russian). 28 February 2019. Retrieved 3 April 2019. "Serbian Orthodox Church formulates its official position on ecclesiastical situation in Ukraine | The Russian Orthodox Church". mospat.ru. 28 February 2019. Retrieved 14 March 2019. "The Communique of the Holy Assembly of Bishops of the Serbian Orthodox Church from their regular meeting held at Zica Monastery and in Belgrade, May 9–18, 2019". spc.rs. 22 May 2019. Archived from the original on 31 May 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019. Iftimiu, Aurelian (21 February 2019). "First 2019 Holy Synod working session kicks off with Ukraine situation on the agenda". Basilica.ro. Retrieved 22 February 2019. Iftimiu, Aurelian (21 February 2019). "Holy Synod examines Ukrainian ecclesiastical issue at first 2019 working session". Basilica.ro. Retrieved 22 February 2019. "Epifaniy: OCU can make agreement on recognition with Romanian Church". risu.org.ua. 4 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Communiqué of the Polish Orthodox Church Assembly of Bishops on Ukrainian autocephaly". Orthodoxie.com. 9 April 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "ORTHODOX | Komunikat Kancelarii Św. Soboru Biskupów". www.orthodox.pl. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Komunikat Kancelarii Św. Soboru Biskupów". www.orthodox.pl. 27 October 2021. Retrieved 14 November 2021. "Roman Catholic bishops of Ukraine greet Metropolitan Epifaniy". risu.org.ua. 18 December 2018. Retrieved 19 December 2018. "Патріарх УГКЦ привітав православних українців: Відтепер ми разом йдемо в історію". risu.org.ua. 16 December 2018. Retrieved 16 December 2018. "From now on we go together in history to unity to the truth the Head of the UGCC on the newly elected Primate of the UOC". news.ugcc.ua. 17 December 2018. Retrieved 19 December 2018. Ioannis, Lotsios (20 December 2018). "Panorthodox Synod : HIS BEATITUDE SVIATOSLAV CONGRATULATED HIS BEATITUDE EPIPHANIJ". Panorthodox Synod. Archived from the original on 21 December 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2018. "Блаженніший Святослав привітав Блаженнішого Епіфанія". news.ugcc.ua. 18 December 2018. Retrieved 19 December 2018. "His Beatitude Sviatoslav congratulated His Beatitude Epiphanij". news.ugcc.ua. 20 December 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2018. Кузнецова, Інна (25 December 2018). "Нам треба ментально звільнитися від "руки Москви" – глава УГКЦ Святослав". Радіо Свобода (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 28 December 2019. "Adventists of Ukraine positively assess establishment of OCU and call for strict observance of religious freedom". risu.org.ua. 20 December 2018. Retrieved 28 December 2018. "Roma Victims Remembered at Babyn Yar". Human Rights in Ukraine. 25 September 2016. Retrieved 14 January 2019. "Об'єднання Громад Прогресивного Юдаїзму привітало православних українців з Томосом". risu.org.ua. 7 January 2019. Retrieved 14 January 2019. "Muslims of Ukraine expressed their respect and readiness to cooperate with the Orthodox Church of Ukraine". risu.org.ua. 17 December 2018. Retrieved 14 January 2019. "Муфтій Саїд Ісмагілов привітав православних християн з Томосом". risu.org.ua. 6 January 2019. Retrieved 14 January 2019. "Не покривати голову хусткою та лавки в церквах: ПЦУ змінить правила для вірян". 5 канал (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 19 December 2021. "Святковий передзвін до Великодня написали і виконали студенти-дзвонарі". День. 28 April 2019. "У Православній церкві України запроваджують відкритий реєстр членів парафій, – митрополит Іоан". procherk.info. 20 May 2019. Retrieved 21 May 2019. "Епіфаній розповів про можливі реформи календаря та "дрес-коду" в ПЦУ". ТСН.ua. 16 February 2019. Retrieved 25 June 2019. "ПЦУ може перенести святкування Різдва на 25 грудня за згоди вірян – Епіфаній". www.radiosvoboda.org. Retrieved 16 December 2019. "Відбулося чергове засідання Священного Синоду". PCU. 4 February 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2020. Свобода, Радіо (8 January 2022). "Епіфаній спрогнозував, коли більшість українців святкуватимуть Різдво 25 грудня". Радіо Свобода. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "OCU allowed Christmas services on December 25". Ukrainian Pravda (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 18 October 2022. "Heads of OCU, UGCC agree to set up working group to reform church calendar". www.ukrinform.net. 24 December 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. "During the meeting of His Beatitude Sviatoslav with His Beatitude Epiphanius, they talked about the reform of the church calendar". Українська Греко-Католицька Церква (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 24 December 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. "There was a meeting of the Primate of the OCU with the Father and the Primate of the UGCC". OCU (in Ukrainian). 24 December 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. "Word of the Head on the celebration of Christmas and the topic of calendar changes". OCU (in Ukrainian). 25 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. ""The date is not important, it is not a dogma": Epiphanius told when Ukraine will celebrate Christmas and Intercession". ТСН.ua (in Ukrainian). 7 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. Censor.NET (6 January 2023). "OCU Synod to allow full transition to New Julian calendar for those parishes that decide to do so - Epifaniy". Censor.NET. Retrieved 7 January 2023. "The OCU will allow parishes to switch to the New Julian calendar at the next Synod — Metropolitan Epiphanius". nv.ua (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 7 January 2023. "Decree of the Holy Synod on the procedure for blessing parishes and monasteries for the use of the Revised Julian calendar". OCU (in Ukrainian). 2 February 2023. Retrieved 3 February 2023. "Official notice of the meeting of the Holy Synod on February 2, 2023". OCU (in Ukrainian). 2 February 2023. Retrieved 3 February 2023. "Orthodox Church of Ukraine to switch to Revised Julian calendar, celebrate Christmas on Dec. 25". Kyiv Independent. 24 May 2023. Retrieved 24 May 2023. RFE/RL. "Orthodox Church Of Ukraine Approves Calendar Switch In Widening Diversion From Russia". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. Retrieved 25 May 2023. "OCU switches to a new calendar". Istorychna Pravda (in Ukrainian). 24 May 2023. Retrieved 24 May 2023. "Orthodox Church of Ukraine finally adopts new calendar". english.nv.ua. Retrieved 31 July 2023. Свобода, Радіо (24 May 2023). "ПЦУ схвалила перехід на новий календар: Різдво – 25 грудня". Радіо Свобода. Retrieved 24 May 2023. "Отець Андрій Дудченко про важливість якісних літургійних текстів українською: Перше, з чим зустрічається вірянин в процесі богослужіння – це його мова". risu.org.ua. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Віталій Хромець про переклад літургії на сучасну українську мову: Ми ставимо завдання – дати науково-вивірений матеріал, який став би відправною точкою для формування і використання необхідних текстів у богослужбовій практиці". risu.org.ua. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Журнали засідання Священного Синоду від 19 листопада та 5 грудня 2019 р." PCU. 10 December 2019. Retrieved 14 December 2019. "10 тез для ПЦУ: віряни опублікували пропозиції до плану дій нової помісної Церкви". risu.org.ua. Релігійно-інформаційна служба України. 31 January 2019. Retrieved 9 June 2019. "Митрополит Епіфаній: «Ми просто терпимо присутність МП - вони не мають права перебувати на нашій території»". lb.ua (in Ukrainian). 6 January 2023. Retrieved 10 April 2023. Denysenko, Nicholas, The Orthodox Church in Ukraine: A Century of Separation, Northern Illinois University Press, 2018 (ISBN 978-0875807898) History of the Ukrainian church at the Encyclopedia of Ukraine Mykhaleyko, Andriy (1 December 2019). "The New Independent Orthodox Church in Ukraine". Comparative Southeast European Studies. 67 (4): 476–499. doi:10.1515/soeu-2019-0037. ISSN 2364-933X. S2CID 211229487. "Orthodox Church of Ukraine undergoing a catharsis – Cyril Hovorun". euromaidanpress.com. Euromaidan Press. 6 July 2019. Retrieved 29 July 2019. Media related to Orthodox Church of Ukraine at Wikimedia Commons Official website Orthodox Church of Ukraine on Facebook Text of the tomos of autocephaly of the Orthodox church of Ukraine in Ukrainian, Greek and English (in Ukrainian on RISU.org) (in Greek in the archives of the Ecumenical Patriarchate)