Volodymyr Oleksandrovych Zelenskyy (born 25 January 1978) is a Ukrainian politician and former actor who has been serving as the sixth president of Ukraine since 2019. Born to a Ukrainian Jewish family, Zelenskyy grew up as a native Russian speaker in Kryvyi Rih, a major city of Dnipropetrovsk Oblast in central Ukraine. Prior to his acting career, he obtained a degree in law from the Kyiv National Economic University. He then pursued a career in comedy and created the production company Kvartal 95, which produced films, cartoons, and TV shows including the TV series Servant of the People, in which Zelenskyy played a fictional Ukrainian president. The series aired from 2015 to 2019 and was immensely popular. A political party with the same name as the TV show was created in March 2018 by employees of Kvartal 95. Zelenskyy announced his candidacy in the 2019 presidential election on the evening of 31 December 2018, alongside the New Year's Eve address of then-president Petro Poroshenko on the TV channel 1+1. A political outsider, he had already become one of the frontrunners in opinion polls for the election. He won the election with 73.23 percent of the vote in the second round, defeating Poroshenko. He has positioned himself as an anti-establishment and anti-corruption figure. As president, Zelenskyy has been a proponent of e-government and of unity between the Ukrainian- and Russian-speaking parts of the country's population.: 11–13  His communication style makes extensive use of social media, particularly Instagram.: 7–10  His party won a landslide victory in the snap legislative election held shortly after his inauguration as president. During the first two years of his administration, Zelenskyy oversaw the lifting of legal immunity for members of parliament (the Verkhovna Rada), the country's response to the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent economic recession, and some limited progress in tackling corruption in Ukraine. During his presidential campaign, Zelenskyy promised to end Ukraine's protracted conflict with Russia, and he has attempted to engage in dialogue with Russian president Vladimir Putin. His administration faced an escalation of tensions with Russia in 2021, culminating in the launch of an ongoing full-scale Russian invasion in February 2022. Zelenskyy's strategy during the Russian military buildup was to calm the Ukrainian populace and assure the international community that Ukraine was not seeking to retaliate. He initially distanced himself from warnings of an imminent war, while also calling for security guarantees and military support from NATO to "withstand" the threat. After the start of the invasion, Zelenskyy declared martial law across Ukraine and a general mobilisation of the armed forces. Zelenskyy was named the Time Person of the Year for 2022. Volodymyr Oleksandrovych Zelenskyy was born to Jewish parents on 25 January 1978 in Kryvyi Rih, then in the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. His father, Oleksandr Zelenskyy, is a professor and computer scientist and the head of the Department of Cybernetics and Computing Hardware at the Kryvyi Rih State University of Economics and Technology; his mother, Rymma Zelenska, used to work as an engineer. His grandfather, Semen Zelenskyy [uk], served as an infantryman, reaching the rank of colonel in the Red Army (in the 57th Guards Motor Rifle Division) during World War II; Semyon's father and three brothers were killed in the Holocaust. In March 2022, Zelenskyy said that his great-grandparents had been killed after German troops burned their home to the ground during a massacre. Before starting elementary school, Zelenskyy lived for four years in the Mongolian city of Erdenet, where his father worked. Zelenskyy grew up speaking Russian. At the age of 16 he passed the Test of English as a Foreign Language and received an education grant to study in Israel, but his father did not allow him to go. He later earned a law degree from the Kryvyi Rih Institute of Economics, then a department of Kyiv National Economic University and now part of Kryvyi Rih National University, but never worked in the legal field. At age 17, he joined his local team competing in the KVN comedy competition. He was soon invited to join the united Ukrainian team "Zaporizhzhia-Kryvyi Rih-Transit," which performed in the KVN's Major League, and eventually won in 1997. That same year, he created and headed the Kvartal 95 team, which later transformed into the comedy outfit Kvartal 95. From 1998 to 2003, Kvartal 95 performed in the Major League and the highest open Ukrainian league of KVN, and the team members spent a lot of time in Moscow and constantly toured around post-Soviet countries. In 2003, Kvartal 95 started producing TV shows for the Ukrainian TV channel 1+1, and in 2005, the team moved to fellow Ukrainian TV channel Inter. In 2008, he starred in the feature film Love in the Big City, and its sequel, Love in the Big City 2. Zelenskyy continued his movie career with the film Office Romance. Our Time in 2011 and with Rzhevsky Versus Napoleon in 2012. Love in the Big City 3 was released in January 2014. Zelenskyy also played the leading role in the 2012 film 8 First Dates and in sequels which were produced in 2015 and 2016. He recorded the voice of Paddington Bear in the Ukrainian dubbing of Paddington (2014) and Paddington 2 (2017). Zelenskyy was a member of the board and the general producer of the TV channel Inter from 2010 to 2012. In August 2014, Zelenskyy spoke out against the intention of the Ukrainian Ministry of Culture to ban Russian artists from Ukraine. Since 2015, Ukraine has banned Russian artists and Russian media and art from entering Ukraine. In 2018, the romantic comedy Love in the Big City 2 starring Zelenskyy was banned in Ukraine due to the film not following the Law of Ukraine on cinematography. After the Ukrainian media had reported that during the Russo-Ukrainian War Zelenskyy's Kvartal 95 had donated ₴1 million to the Ukrainian army, some Russian politicians and artists petitioned for a ban on his works in Russia. Once again, Zelenskyy spoke out against the intention of the Ukrainian Ministry of Culture to ban Russian artists from Ukraine. In 2015, Zelenskyy became the star of the television series Servant of the People, where he played the role of the president of Ukraine. In the series, Zelenskyy's character was a high-school history teacher in his 30s who won the presidential election after a viral video showed him ranting against government corruption in Ukraine. The comedy series Svaty ("In-laws"), in which Zelenskyy appeared, was banned in Ukraine in 2017, but unbanned in March 2019. Zelenskyy worked mostly in Russian-language productions. His first role in the Ukrainian language was the romantic comedy I, You, He, She, which appeared on the screens of Ukraine in December 2018. The first version of the script was written in Ukrainian but was translated into Russian for the Lithuanian actress Agnė Grudytė. Later, the movie was dubbed into Ukrainian. In October 2021, the Pandora Papers revealed that Zelenskyy, his chief aide, and the head of the Security Service of Ukraine Ivan Bakanov operated a network of offshore companies in the British Virgin Islands, Cyprus, and Belize. These companies included some that owned expensive London property. Around the time of his 2019 election, Zelenskyy handed his shares in a key offshore company over to Serhiy Shefir, but the two men appear to have made an arrangement for Zelenskyy's family to continue receiving the money from these companies. Zelenskyy's election campaign had centred on pledges to clean up the government of Ukraine. In March 2018, members of Zelenskyy's production company Kvartal 95 registered a new political party called Servant of the People – the same name as the television program that Zelenskyy had starred in over the previous three years. Although Zelenskyy denied any immediate plans to enter politics and said he had registered the party name only to prevent it being appropriated by others, there was widespread speculation that he was planning to run. As early as October 2018, three months before his campaign announcement and six months before the presidential election, he was already a frontrunner in opinion polls. After months of ambiguous statements, on 31 December, less than four months from the election, Zelenskyy announced his candidacy for president of Ukraine on the New Year's Eve evening show on the TV channel 1+1. His announcement up-staged the New Year's Eve address of incumbent president Petro Poroshenko on the same channel, which Zelenskyy said was unintentional and attributed to a technical glitch. Zelenskyy's presidential campaign against Poroshenko was almost entirely virtual. He did not release a detailed policy platform and his engagement with mainstream media was minimal; he instead reached out to the electorate via social media channels and YouTube clips. In place of traditional campaign rallies, he conducted stand-up comedy routines across Ukraine with his production company Kvartal 95. He styled himself as an anti-establishment, anti-corruption figure, although he was not generally described as a populist. He said he wished to restore trust in politicians, "to bring professional, decent people to power" and to "change the mood and timbre of the political establishment." On 16 April 2019, a few days before the election, 20 Ukrainian news outlets called on Zelenskyy to "stop avoiding journalists." Zelenskyy stated that he was not hiding from journalists but that he did not want to go to talk shows where "people of the old power" were "just doing PR" and that he did not have time to satisfy all interview requests. Prior to the elections, Zelenskyy presented a team that included former finance minister Oleksandr Danylyuk and others. During the campaign, concerns were raised over his links to the oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskyi, a billionaire businessman who had gained control of the 1+1 Media Group in 2010. The group operates eight Ukrainian TV channels and broadcast the Servant of the People TV series from 2015 until 2019, featuring Zelenskyy in a comedian role as a national president. President Poroshenko and his supporters claimed that Zelenskyy's victory would benefit Russia. On 19 April 2019 at Olimpiyskiy National Sports Complex presidential debates were held in the form of a show. In his introductory speech, Zelenskyy acknowledged that in 2014 he voted for Poroshenko, but "I was mistaken. We were mistaken. We voted for one Poroshenko, but received another. The first appears when there are video cameras, the other Petro sends Medvedchuk privietiki (greetings) to Moscow." Although Zelenskyy initially said he would serve only a single term, he walked back this promise in May 2021, saying he had not yet made up his mind. Zelenskyy stated that as president he would develop the economy and attract investment to Ukraine through "a restart of the judicial system" and restoring confidence in the state. He also proposed a tax amnesty and a 5-per-cent flat tax for big business which could be increased "in dialogue with them and if everyone agrees." According to Zelenskyy, if people would notice that his new government "works honestly from the first day," they would start paying their taxes. Zelenskyy achieved a plurality of the electorate (30%) in the first round of elections on 31 March 2019. In the second round, on 21 April 2019, he received 73 per cent of the vote to Poroshenko's 25 per cent, and was elected President of Ukraine. Polish president Andrzej Duda was one of the first European leaders to congratulate Zelenskyy. French president Emmanuel Macron received Zelenskyy at the Élysée Palace in Paris on 12 April 2019. On 22 April, U.S. president Donald Trump congratulated Zelenskyy on his victory over the telephone. European Commission president Jean Claude Juncker and European Council president Donald Tusk also issued a joint letter of congratulations and stated that the European Union (EU) will work to speed up the implementation of the remainder of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement, including the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area. Zelenskyy was inaugurated on 20 May 2019. Various foreign officials attended the ceremony in Ukraine's parliament (Verkhovna Rada), including Salome Zourabichvili (Georgia), Kersti Kaljulaid (Estonia), Raimonds Vējonis (Latvia), Dalia Grybauskaitė (Lithuania), János Áder (Hungary), Maroš Šefčovič (European Union), and Rick Perry (United States). Zelenskyy is the first Jewish president; with Volodymyr Groysman as prime minister, Ukraine became the first country other than Israel to simultaneously have a Jewish head of state and head of government. In his inaugural address, Zelenskyy dissolved the then Ukrainian parliament and called for early parliamentary elections (which had originally been due to be held in October of that year). One of Zelenskyy's coalition partners, the People's Front, opposed the move and withdrew from the ruling coalition. On 28 May, Zelenskyy restored the Ukrainian citizenship of Mikheil Saakashvili. Zelenskyy's first major proposal to change the electoral system from a plurality voting system to proportional representation with closed party lists was strongly rejected by the Ukrainian parliament, due to the belief that closed lists would lead to more corruption in government. In addition, on 6 June, lawmakers refused to include Zelenskyy's key initiative on reintroducing criminal liability for illegal enrichment in the parliament's agenda, and instead included a similar bill proposed by a group of deputies. In June 2019 it was announced that the president's third major initiative, which seeks to remove immunity from lawmakers, diplomats and judges, would be submitted after the July 2019 Ukrainian parliamentary election. This initiative was completed on 3 September, when the new parliament passed a bill stripping lawmakers of legal immunity, delivering Zelenskyy a legislative victory by fulfilling one of his key campaign promises. On 8 July, Zelenskyy ordered the cancellation of the annual Kyiv Independence Day Parade on Maidan Nezalezhnosti, citing costs. Despite this, Zelenskyy highlighted that the day would "honor heroes" on Independence Day, however the "format will be new." He also proposed to spend the money that would have been used to finance the parade on veterans. In 2020, Zelenskyy's party proposed reforms to Ukraine's media laws with the intent to increase competition and loosen the dominance of Ukrainian oligarchs on television and radio broadcasters. Critics said it risked increasing media censorship in Ukraine because its clause of criminal responsibility for the distribution of disinformation could be abused. In January 2020, Zelenskyy took a trip to Oman that was not published on his official schedule, appearing to combine a personal holiday with government business. His office said Zelenskyy paid for the entire trip himself. Nevertheless, he was criticised for a lack of transparency and critics pointed out he had once criticized his predecessor Poroshenko for taking an undisclosed vacation in the Maldives. In January 2021, parliament passed a bill updating and reforming Ukraine's referendum laws, which Ukraine's Constitutional Court had declared unconstitutional in 2018. Fixing the referendum law had been one of Zelenskyy's campaign promises. In June 2021, Zelenskyy submitted to the Verkhovna Rada a bill creating a public registry of Ukraine's oligarchs, banning them from participating in privatizations of state-owned companies, and forbidding them from contributing financially to politicians. Opposition party leaders supported Zelenskyy's goal of reducing oligarchs' influence on politics in Ukraine but were critical of his approach, saying the public register would be both dangerous, as it concentrated power in the president; and ineffective, since oligarchs were merely a "symbol" of more deeply-rooted corruption. The bill was passed into law in September 2021. Critics of Zelenskyy's administration have claimed that, in taking power away from the Ukrainian oligarchs, he has sought to centralize authority and strengthen his personal position. Zelenskyy appointed Andriy Bohdan as head of the Presidential Administration of Ukraine. Prior to this, Bohdan had been the lawyer of Ukrainian oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskyi. Under the rules of Lustration in Ukraine, introduced in 2014 following Euromaidan, Bohdan is not entitled to hold any state office until 2024 (because of his government post during the Second Azarov Government). Bohdan, however, contended that because heading the presidential administration is not considered civil service work, lustration did not apply to him. A number of the members of the Presidential Administration Zelenskyy appointed were former colleagues from his former production company, Kvartal 95, including Ivan Bakanov, who became deputy head of the Ukrainian Secret Service. Former deputy foreign minister Olena Zerkal declined an appointment as deputy head of the presidential administration, but did agree to serve as the Ukrainian representative of the international courts concerning Russia. Zelenskyy's requests to replace the foreign minister, defence minister, chief prosecutor and head of Ukraine's security service were rejected by parliament. Zelenskyy also dismissed and replaced 20 of the governors of Ukraine's 24 oblasts. In the 21 July 2019 parliamentary election, Zelenskyy's political party, Servant of the People, won the first single-party majority in modern Ukrainian history in parliament, with 43 per cent of the party-list vote. His party gained 254 of the 424 seats. Following the elections, Zelenskyy nominated Oleksiy Honcharuk as prime minister, who was quickly confirmed by parliament. Parliament also confirmed Andrii Zahorodniuk as defence minister, Vadym Prystaiko as foreign minister and Ivan Bakanov as head of the SBU. Arsen Avakov, a controversial figure due to longstanding corruption allegations, was kept on as interior minister, with Honcharuk arguing that the relatively inexperienced government needed experienced administrators and that Avakov had been "'drawn red lines' that cannot be crossed." Zelenskyy dismissed Bohdan as head of his presidential administration on 11 February 2020 and appointed Andriy Yermak as his successor the same day. In March 2020, Honchurak resigned as prime minister following the leak of an audio recording in which he appeared to belittle Zelenskyy's economic management. Honchurak was replaced as prime minister Denys Shmyhal. Honchurak's hasty departure caused disquiet both in Ukraine and abroad, with many economists and political observers warning it would bring instability. In his 4 March address to the Rada, Zelenskyy recommitted to reforms domestic and financial, and remarked that he "cannot always become a psychologist for people, a crisis manager for someone, a collector who requires honestly earned money, and a nanny of the ministry in charge."[citation needed] By September 2020, Zelenskyy's approval ratings had fallen to less than 32 per cent. On 24 March 2021, Zelenskyy signed the Decree 117/2021 approving the "strategy for de-occupation and reintegration of the temporarily occupied territory of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol." One of Zelenskyy's central campaign promises had been to end the Russo-Ukrainian War and resolve the Russia-sponsored separatist movement there. On 3 June, Zelenskyy appointed former president Leonid Kuchma as Ukraine's representative in the Tripartite Contact Group for a settlement in the conflict. On 11 July 2019, Zelenskyy held his first telephone conversation with Russian president Vladimir Putin, during which he urged Putin to enter into talks mediated by European countries. The two leaders also discussed the exchange of prisoners held by both sides. In October 2019, Zelenskyy announced a preliminary deal struck with the separatists, under which the Ukrainian government would respect elections held in the region in exchange for Russia withdrawing its unmarked troops. The deal was met with heavy criticism and protests by both politicians and the Ukrainian public. Detractors noted that elections held in Donbas were unlikely to be free and fair, that the separatists had long driven most pro-Ukrainian residents out of the region to ensure a pro-Russia majority, and that it would be impossible to ensure Russia kept its end of the agreement. Zelenskyy defended his negotiations, saying the elections would not be held before a Russian withdrawal. The agreement failed to ease the conflict, as the separatists continued their attacks and Russia continued providing them with weapons and ammunition. Several Ukrainian nationalist militias and former militias also refused to accept the agreement, including the far-right Azov fighters in the Luhansk region of Donbas. Zelenskyy met personally with some of these groups and tried to convince them to surrender their unregistered weapons and accept the peace accord. Andriy Biletsky, the leader of the far-right National Corps and first commander of Azov, accused Zelenskyy of being disrespectful to army veterans and of acting on behalf of the Kremlin by leaving Ukrainians vulnerable to Russian aggression. Ultimately, the peace deal failed to reduce the violence, much less end the war. In December 2019, Russia and Ukraine agreed to resume talks mediated by France and Germany under the so-called Normandy Format, which had been abandoned in 2016; it was Zelenskyy's first face-to-face meeting with Vladimir Putin. In July 2020, Zelenskyy announced a formal ceasefire with the separatists — the more than twentieth such attempt since the war began in 2014. Although the ceasefire was frequently violated over the next few years and overall violence remained high, ceasefire violations in 2020 did decrease by over 50 per cent compared to the previous year. On 8 January 2020, the Presidential Office announced that Volodymyr Zelenskyy was cutting short his trip to Oman owing to the Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752 plane crash in nearby Iran the same day. Also on the same day, internet news site Obozrevatel.com released information that on 7 January 2020, Ukrainian politician of the Opposition Platform — For Life Viktor Medvedchuk – who has exclusive relations with the current president of Russia – may have arrived in Oman. Soon, rumors began that Zelenskyy may have had some additional meetings beside the ones that were announced. On 14 January 2020, Andriy Yermak dismissed the rumors as speculations and baseless conspiracy theories, while Medvedchuk stated that the plane was used by his older daughter's family to fly from Oman to Moscow. Later, Yermak contacted the on-line newspaper Ukrainian Truth and gave more details about the visit to Oman and the plane crash in Iran. On 17 January 2020, the presidential appointee Minister of Foreign Affairs, Vadym Prystaiko, was unable to give answers during the "times of questions to the government" in parliament when the people's deputies of Ukraine asked him about the visit's official agenda, the invitation from Oman, officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who were preparing the visit, as well as how the president actually crossed the border while visiting Oman. On 20 January 2020, Prystaiko followed up by giving a briefing to the press in the Office of the president of Ukraine and saying that he would explain everything about the visit when the time came. Zelenskyy's first official trip abroad as president was to Brussels in June 2019, where he met with European Union and NATO officials. In August 2019, Zelenskyy promised to lift the moratorium on exhuming Polish mass graves in Ukraine after the previous Ukrainian government banned the Polish side from carrying out any exhumations of Polish victims of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army-perpetrated Volhynian massacres, following the removal of a memorial to the Ukrainian Insurgent Army in Hruszowice, southeastern Poland. In September 2019, it was reported that U.S. president Donald Trump had allegedly blocked payment of a congressionally mandated $400-million military aid package to Ukraine to pressure Zelenskyy during a July phone call between the two presidents to investigate alleged wrongdoing by Joe Biden and his son Hunter Biden, who took a board seat on Ukrainian natural gas company Burisma Holdings. This report was the catalyst for the Trump–Ukraine scandal and the impeachment inquiry against Donald Trump. Zelenskyy has denied that he was pressured by Trump and declared that "he does not want to interfere in a foreign election." On a trip to the United States in September 2021, Zelenskyy engaged in talks and commitments with U.S. president Joe Biden, Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin, Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm, and Secretary of State Antony Blinken. President Zelenskyy and First Lady Olena Zelenska also took part in the opening of the Ukrainian House in Washington, D.C. On the same trip, he met with Apple CEO Tim Cook and with Ukrainians in senior positions at Silicon Valley tech companies, and spoke at Stanford University. While Zelenskyy was still in the U.S., just after delivering a speech at the United Nations, an assassination attempt was made in Ukraine on Serhiy Shefir, his closest aide. Shefir was unhurt in the attack, although his driver was hospitalized with three bullet wounds. In April 2021, in response to Russian military build-up at the Ukrainian borders, Zelenskyy spoke to American president Joe Biden and urged NATO members to speed up Ukraine's request for membership. On 26 November 2021, Zelenskyy accused Russia and Ukrainian oligarch Rinat Akhmetov of backing a plan to overthrow his government. Russia denied any involvement in a coup plot and Akhmetov said in a statement that "the information made public by Volodymyr Zelenskiy about attempts to draw me into some kind of coup is an absolute lie. I am outraged by the spread of this lie, no matter what the president's motives are." In December 2021, Zelenskyy called for preemptive action against Russia. On 19 January 2022, Zelenskyy said in a video message that the country's citizens should not panic and appealed to the media to be "methods of mass information and not mass hysteria." On 28 January, Zelenskyy called on the West not to create a "panic" in his country over a potential Russian invasion, adding that constant warnings of an "imminent" threat of invasion are putting the economy of Ukraine at risk. Zelenskyy said that "we do not see a bigger escalation" than in early 2021 when Russia's military build-up started. Zelenskyy and U.S. president Joe Biden disagreed on how imminent the threat was. On 19 February, as worries of a Russian invasion of Ukraine grew, Zelenskyy warned the Munich Security Conference that Western nations should abandon their "appeasement" attitude toward Moscow. "Ukraine has been granted security assurances in exchange for giving up the world's third-largest nuclear arsenal. We don't have any firearms. And there's no security... But we have a right to urge a transformation from an appeasement policy to one that ensures security and peace," he stated. In the early hours of 24 February, shortly before the start of the Russian invasion, Zelenskyy recorded an address to the citizens of both Ukraine and Russia. He disputed claims of the Russian government about the presence of neo-Nazis in the Ukrainian government and stated that he had no intention of attacking the Donbas region, while highlighting his personal connections to the area. In part of the address, he spoke in Russian to the people of Russia, appealing to them to pressure their leadership to prevent war: Who will suffer the most from this? People. Who does not want this more than anyone? People. Who can prevent this? People. Are these people present among you? I am sure there are. Public figures, journalists, musicians, actors, athletes, scientists, doctors, bloggers, stand-up comedians, Tik-Tokers and many more. Regular people. Regular, normal people. Men, women, the elderly, children, fathers, and most importantly, mothers. Just like people in Ukraine. Just like the authorities in Ukraine, no matter how much they try to convince you otherwise. I know that they will not show this appeal of mine on Russian television. But the citizens of Russia must see it. They must know the truth. And the truth is that this needs to stop, before it is too late. And if the Russian leadership does not want to sit down at the table with us for the sake of peace, then perhaps, they will sit down at the table with you. Do Russians want war? I would very much like to answer this question. But the answer depends only on you, the citizens of the Russian Federation. The speech was widely described as "emotional" and "astonishing." On the morning of 24 February, Putin announced that Russia was initiating a "special military operation" in the Donbas. Russian missiles struck a number of military targets in Ukraine, and Zelenskyy declared martial law. Zelenskyy also announced that diplomatic relations with Russia were being severed, effective immediately. Later in the day, he announced general mobilisation. On 25 February, Zelenskyy said that despite Russia's claim that it was targeting only military sites, civilian sites were also being hit. In an early morning address that day, Zelenskyy said that his intelligence services had identified him as Russia's top target, but that he is staying in Kyiv and his family will remain in the country. "They want to destroy Ukraine politically by destroying the head of state," he said. In the early hours of 26 February, during the most significant assault by Russian troops on the capital of Kyiv, the United States government and Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan urged Zelenskyy to evacuate to a safer location, and both offered assistance for such an effort. Zelenskyy turned down both offers and opted to remain in Kyiv with its defense forces, saying that "the fight is here [in Kyiv]; I need ammunition, not a ride." More than 90% of Ukrainians supported the actions of Zelenskyy, including more than 90% in western and central Ukraine and more than 80% in Russian-speaking regions in eastern and southern Ukraine. A Pew Research Center poll found that 72% of Americans had confidence in Zelenskyy's handling of international affairs. Zelenskyy has gained worldwide recognition as the wartime leader of Ukraine during the Russian invasion; historian Andrew Roberts compared him to Winston Churchill. Harvard Political Review said that Zelenskyy "has harnessed the power of social media to become history's first truly online wartime leader, bypassing traditional gatekeepers as he uses the internet to reach out to the people." He has been described as a national hero or a "global hero" by many commentators, including publications such as The Hill, Deutsche Welle, Der Spiegel and USA Today. BBC News and The Guardian have reported that his response to the invasion has received praise even from previous critics. During the invasion, Zelenskyy has been reportedly the target of more than a dozen assassination attempts; three were prevented due to tips from Russian FSB employees who opposed the invasion. Two of those attempts were carried out by the Wagner Group, a Russian paramilitary force, and the third by the Kadyrovites, the personal guard of Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov. While speaking about Ukrainian civilians who were killed by Russian forces, Zelenskyy said: We will not forgive. We will not forget. We will punish everyone who committed atrocities in this war... We will find every scum who was shelling our cities, our people, who was shooting the missiles, who was giving orders. You will not have a quiet place on this earth – except for a grave. On 7 March 2022, Czech president Miloš Zeman decided to award Zelenskyy with the highest state award of the Czech Republic, the Order of the White Lion, for "his bravery and courage in the face of Russia's invasion." Zelenskyy has repeatedly called for direct talks with Russian president Vladimir Putin, saying: "Good Lord, what do you want? Leave our land. If you don't want to leave now, sit down with me at the negotiating table. But not from 30 meters away, like with Macron and Scholz. I don't bite." Zelenskyy said he was "99.9 percent sure" that Putin thought the Ukrainians would welcome the invading forces with "flowers and smiles." On 7 March 2022, as a condition for ending the invasion, the Kremlin demanded Ukraine's neutrality; recognition of Crimea, which had been annexed by Russia, as Russian territory; and recognition of the self-proclaimed separatist republics of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states. On 8 March, Zelenskyy expressed willingness to discuss Putin's demands. Zelenskyy said he is ready for dialogue, but "not for capitulation." He proposed a new collective security agreement for Ukraine with the United States, Turkey, France, Germany as an alternative to the country joining NATO. Zelenskyy's Servant of the People party said that Ukraine would not give up its claims on Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk. However, Zelenskyy said that Ukraine was considering giving the Russian language protected minority status. On 15 March 2022, Polish Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki, together with Czech Prime Minister Petr Fiala and Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Janša, visited Kyiv to meet with Zelenskyy in a display of support for Ukraine. On 16 March 2022, a deepfake appeared online of Zelenskyy calling on Ukrainian citizens to surrender to Russia. The attack was largely deemed to have failed at its intended goal. The video is considered to be the first use of deepfake technology in a global-scale disinformation attack. Zelenskyy has made an effort to rally the governments of Western nations in an effort to isolate Russia. He has made numerous addresses to the legislatures of the EU, UK, Poland, Australia, Canada, US, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Romania, and the Nordic countries. On 23 March, Zelenskyy was calling on Russians to emigrate from Russia so as not to finance the war in Ukraine with their taxes. In March 2022, Zelenskyy supported the suspension of 11 Ukrainian political parties with ties to Russia: the Socialist Party of Ukraine, Derzhava, Left Opposition, Nashi, Opposition Bloc, Opposition Platform — For Life, Party of Shariy, Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine, Union of Leftists, and the Volodymyr Saldo Bloc. The Communist Party of Ukraine, another pro-Russia party, had already been banned in 2015 because of its support to the Donbas separatists. Zelenskyy has also supported consolidating all TV news stations into a single 24-hour news broadcast run by the state of Ukraine. In April 2022, Zelenskyy criticized Germany's ties with Russia. In May 2022, Zelenskyy said that Ukrainian men of conscription age had a duty to remain in Ukraine and that up to 100 Ukrainian soldiers were killed every day in the fighting in eastern Ukraine. He made the comment after he was asked about an online petition calling to lift a prohibition on Ukrainian men leaving Ukraine. As Zelenskyy ordered a general military mobilization in February 2022, he also banned men aged 18 to 60 from leaving Ukraine. In early June 2022, Zelenskyy's adviser Mykhailo Podolyak said that up to 200 Ukrainian soldiers were killed in combat every day. Zelenskyy denounced suggestions by former US diplomat Henry Kissinger that Ukraine should cede control of Crimea and Donbas to Russia in exchange for peace. On 25 May 2022, he said that Ukraine would not agree to peace until Russia agreed to return Crimea and the Donbas region to Ukraine. However, he later said he did not believe that all the land seized by Russia since 2014, which includes Crimea, could be recaptured by force, saying that "If we decide to go that way, we will lose hundreds of thousands of people." On 3 May 2022, Zelenskyy accused Turkey of having "double standards" by welcoming Russian tourists while attempting to act as an intermediary between Russia and Ukraine in order to end the war. On 25 May 2022, Zelenskyy said that he was satisfied with China's policy of staying away from the conflict. In August 2022, he said China had the economic leverage to pressure Putin to end the war, adding "I'm sure that without the Chinese market for the Russian Federation, Russia would be feeling complete economic isolation. That's something that China can do – to limit the trade [with Russia] until the war is over." According to Zelenskyy, since the beginning of the invasion, Chinese President Xi Jinping had refused to speak with him." On 30 May 2022, Zelenskyy criticized EU leaders for being too soft on Russia and asked, "Why can Russia still earn almost a billion euros a day by selling energy?" The study published by the Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air (CREA) calculates that the EU paid Russia about €56 billion for fossil fuel deliveries in the three months following the start of Russia's invasion. On 20 June 2022, Zelenskyy addressed African Union (AU) representatives via videoconference. He invited African leaders to a virtual meeting, but only four of them attended. On 20 July 2022, South America's Mercosur trade bloc refused Zelenskyy's request to speak at the trade bloc's summit in Paraguay. Speaking about the 2022 Russian mobilization, Zelenskyy called on Russians to not submit to "criminal mobilization," saying: "Russian commanders do not care about the lives of Russians — they just need to replenish the empty spaces left" by killed and wounded Russian soldiers. Following Putin's announcement of Russia annexing four regions of Ukrainian territory it had seized during its invasion, Zelenskyy announced that Ukraine would not hold peace talks with Russia while Putin was president. On 25 September 2022, Zelenskyy said that Putin's threats to use nuclear weapons "could be a reality." He added that Putin "wants to scare the whole world" with nuclear blackmail. He also said that Putin is aware that the "world will never forgive" a Russian nuclear strike. When asked what kind of relationship Ukrainians and Ukraine will have with Russia after the war, Zelenskyy replied that "They took too many people, too many lives. The society will not forgive them," adding that "It will be the choice of our society whether to talk to them, or not to talk at all, and for how many years, tens of years or more." On 21 December 2022, Zelenskyy visited the United States on his first foreign trip since the war began. He met with President Joe Biden and addressed Congress delivering his full speech in English. The United States announced they would supply Patriot missiles to Ukraine as had been requested. In May 2023, he visited the International Criminal Court in The Hague and said he would like to see Russian President Vladimir Putin stand trial for war crimes committed during the war in Ukraine, including the crime of aggression. On 19 September 2023, in a speech to the UN General Assembly, Zelenskyy called on neutral countries in Latin America, Africa and Asia to abandon their neutrality and support Ukraine. In October 2023, after the Hroza missile attack, he criticized countries supporting Russia, saying "all those who help Russia circumvent sanctions are criminals." In a mid-June interview with BIHUS info [uk] a representative of the president of Ukraine at the Cabinet of Ministers, Andriy Herus stated that Zelenskyy had never promised to lower communal tariffs, but that a campaign video in which Zelenskyy stated that the price of natural gas in Ukraine could fall by 20–30 per cent or maybe more was a not a direct promise but actually "half-hinting" and "joking." Zelenskyy's election manifesto mentioned tariffs only once—that money raised from a capital amnesty would go towards "lowering the tariff burden on low-income citizens." During his presidential campaign, Zelenskyy said that he supported Ukraine's becoming a member of the European Union and NATO, but he said Ukrainian voters should decide on the country's membership of these two organisations in referendums. At the same time, he believed that the Ukrainian people had already chosen "eurointegration." Zelenskyy's close advisor Ivan Bakanov also said that Zelenskyy's policy is supportive of membership of both the EU and NATO, and proposes holding referendums on membership. Zelenskyy's electoral programme claimed that Ukrainian NATO membership is "the choice of the Maidan and the course that is enshrined in the Constitution, in addition, it is an instrument for strengthening our defense capability." The program states that Ukraine should set the goal to apply for a NATO Membership Action Plan in 2024. The programme also states that Zelenskyy "will do everything to ensure" that Ukraine can apply for European Union membership in 2024. Two days before the second round, Zelenskyy stated that he wanted to build "a strong, powerful, free Ukraine, which is not the younger sister of Russia, which is not a corrupt partner of Europe, but our independent Ukraine." In October 2020, he spoke in support of Azerbaijan in regards to the Nagorno-Karabakh war between Azerbaijan and ethnic Armenians over the disputed region of Nagorno-Karabakh. Zelenskyy said: "We support Azerbaijan's territorial integrity and sovereignty just as Azerbaijan always supports our territorial integrity and sovereignty." Zelenskyy has tried to position Ukraine as a neutral party in the political and trade tensions between the United States and China. In January 2021, Zelenskyy said in an interview with Axios that he does not perceive China as a geopolitical threat and that he does not agree with the United States assertions that it represents one. In February 2022, he applied for Ukraine to join the European Union. Zelenskyy condemned Hamas' actions during the 2023 Israel–Hamas war and expressed his support to Israel and its right to self-defense. Zelenskyy supported the late 2013 and early 2014 Euromaidan movement. During the war in Donbas, he actively supported the Ukrainian army. Zelenskyy helped fund a volunteer battalion fighting on Donbas. In a 2014 interview with Komsomolskaya Pravda v Ukraine, Zelenskyy said that he would have liked to pay a visit to Crimea, but would avoid it because "armed people are there." In August 2014, Zelenskyy performed for Ukrainian troops in Mariupol and later his studio donated ₴1 million to the Ukrainian army. Regarding the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea, Zelenskyy said that, speaking realistically, it would be possible to return Crimea to Ukrainian control only after a regime change in Russia. In an interview in December 2018 with Ukrainska Pravda, Zelenskyy stated that as president he would try to end the ongoing war in Donbas by negotiating with Russia. As he considered the leaders of the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic (DPR and LPR) to be Russia's "puppets," it would "make no sense to speak with them." He did not rule out holding a referendum on the issue. In an interview published three days before the 2019 presidential election (on 21 April), Zelenskyy stated that he was against granting the Donbas region "special status." In the interview he also said that if he were elected president he would not sign a law on amnesty for the militants of the DPR and LPR. In response to suggestions to the contrary, he stated in April 2019 that he regarded Russian president Vladimir Putin "as an enemy." On 2 May 2019, Zelenskyy wrote on Facebook that "the border is the only thing Russia and Ukraine have in common." Zelenskyy opposes the Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline between Russia and Germany, calling it "a dangerous weapon, not only for Ukraine but for the whole of Europe." On 25 May 2022, Zelenskyy said that "Ukraine will fight until it regains all its territories." Zelenskyy has described the extensive environmental damage from the war as “an environmental bomb of mass destruction” and "an ecocide" (a crime in Ukraine) and has met with prominent European politicians and others to discuss the environmental damage. During the presidential campaign, Zelenskyy promised bills to fight corruption, including removal of immunity from the president of the country, members of the Verkhovna Rada (the Ukrainian parliament) and judges, a law about impeachment, reform of election laws, and providing efficient trial by jury. He promised to bring the salary for military personnel "to the level of NATO standards." Although Zelenskyy prefers elections with open list election ballots, after he called the snap 2019 Ukrainian parliamentary election his draft law "On amendments to some laws of Ukraine in connection with the change of the electoral system for the election of people's deputies" proposed to hold the election with closed list because the 60-day term to the snap election did not "leave any chances for the introduction of this system." Zelenskyy opposed targeting the Russian language in Ukraine and banning artists for their political opinions (such as those viewed by the Government as anti-Ukrainian). In April 2019, he stated that he was not against a Ukrainian language quota (on radio and TV), although he noted they could be tweaked. He also said that Russian artists "who have turned into (anti-Ukrainian) politicians" should remain banned from entering Ukraine. In response to a petition demanding equal rights for same-sex couples, Zelenskyy echoed the view that family does not depend on sex and asked the Prime Minister of Ukraine to review civil partnerships for same-sex couples. With regards to same-sex marriage, Zelenskyy cited a provision in the Constitution of Ukraine barring same-sex marriage, as well as a ban on wartime changes to the Constitution, ruling out an introduction of same-sex marriages during the ongoing war. Civil rights organizations praised the statement, though criticizing its vagueness, as Zelenskyy had avoided giving any details about legal proposals for civil partnerships. On 2 December 2022, Zelenskyy entered a bill to the Verkhovna Rada that would officially ban all activities of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) UOC in Ukraine. In September 2003, Zelenskyy married Olena Kiyashko, with whom he had attended school and university. Kiyashko worked as a scriptwriter at Kvartal 95. The couple's first daughter, Oleksandra, was born in July 2004. Their son, Kyrylo, was born in January 2013. In Zelenskyy's 2014 movie 8 New Dates, their daughter played Sasha, the daughter of the protagonist. In 2016, she participated in the show The Comedy Comet Company Comedy's Kids and won ₴50,000. The family lives in Kyiv. Zelenskyy's first language is Russian, and he is also fluent in Ukrainian and English. His assets were worth about ₴37 million (about US$1.5 million) in 2018. Since becoming president, he has heavily improved his knowledge of Ukrainian, and hired a tutor to help him improve his command of the language. In 2022, British newspaper Financial Times and US magazine Time both selected Zelenskyy as Person of the Year.  Ukraine: Honorary Diploma of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (2003)  Czech Republic: Member 1st Class of the Order of the White Lion (2022)  Estonia: Order of the Tallinn Coat of Arms [et] (2022)  France: Grand Cross of the Order of the Legion of Honour (2023)  Germany: Charlemagne Prize (2023)  Latvia: Member 1st Class of the Order of Viesturs (2022)  Lithuania: Order of Vytautas the Great with the Golden Chain (2022)  Poland: Jan Karski Eagle Award (2022) Knight of the Order of the White Eagle (2022)  Portugal: Grand Collar of the Order of Liberty (2023)  Slovakia: State Award of Alexander Dubček (2022)  United Kingdom: Sir Winston Churchill Leadership Award (2022)  United States: Ronald Reagan Freedom Award (2022) John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Award (2022) Philadelphia Liberty Medal (2022) Ripple of Hope Award (2022) Ausichicrinites zelenskyyi, an extinct species of feather star described on 20 July 2022 by a group of Polish paleontologists, is named after Zelenskyy "for his courage and bravery in defending free Ukraine." Zelensky, Volodymyr (2022). A Message From Ukraine: Speeches, 2019–2022. London: Hutchinson Heinemann. ISBN 978-1-52-915354-5. OCLC 1374537388. A collection of sixteen of Zelenskyy's speeches. In this name that follows Eastern Slavic naming customs, the patronymic is Oleksandrovych and the family name is Zelenskyy. Ukrainian: Володимир Олександрович Зеленський, pronounced [woloˈdɪmɪr olekˈsɑndrowɪdʒ zeˈlɛnʲsʲkɪj] also romanized as Zelensky or Zelenskiy Zelenskyy's name lacks an established Latin-alphabet spelling, and it has been romanized in various ways: for example Volodymyr Zelensky or Zelenskyi from Ukrainian, or Vladimir Zelenskiy from Russian. Zelenskyy is the transliteration on his passport, and his administration has used it since he assumed the presidency in 2019. Since 2015, Ukraine has banned Russian artists and other Russian works of culture from entering Ukraine. From 21 January until 18 April 2019 Zelenskyy did not give interviews. Зеленський Володимир Олександрович [Elections of the President of Ukraine 2019]. Central Election Commission (Ukraine) (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 14 February 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2022. Dickinson, Peter (9 June 2019). "Zelensky, Zelenskiy, Zelenskyy: Spelling Confusion Doesn't Help Ukraine". Atlantic Council. Archived from the original on 11 June 2019. Retrieved 10 June 2019. Mendel, Iuliia [@IuliiaMendel] (10 June 2019). "Dear colleagues, this is the official form of the last name that the President has in his passport. This was decided by the passport service of Ukraine. The President won't be offended if BBC standards assume different transliteration" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 10 June 2019 – via Twitter. Hosa, Joanna; Wilson, Andrew (25 September 2019). Zelensky Unchained: What Ukraine's New Political Order Means For Its Future (Report). European Council on Foreign Relations. JSTOR resrep21659. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 10 February 2022. "Ukraine Lifts Prosecutorial Immunity For Members Of Parliament". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 19 December 2019. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. Peleschuk, Dan (15 April 2021). "Ukraine's anti-corruption effort struggles, but soldiers on". Eurasianet. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. Wilson, Andrew (6 July 2021). Faltering fightback: Zelensky's piecemeal campaign against Ukraine's oligarchs (Report). European Council on Foreign Relations. JSTOR resrep33811. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022. Retrieved 10 February 2022. Khalaf, Roula; Miller, Christopher; Hall, Ben (5 December 2022). "FT Person of the Year: Volodymyr Zelenskyy. 'I am more responsible than brave'". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 5 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. Lutsevych, Orysia (16 November 2021). "Ukraine still backs Zelenskyy despite slow progress". Chatham House. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "Conflict in Ukraine". Global Conflict Tracker. Archived from the original on 23 February 2022. Retrieved 23 February 2022. Seibt, Sébastian (18 February 2022). "Military tactics: Zelensky plays both sides in Ukrainian crisis". France 24. Archived from the original on 18 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 1 February 2024. Retrieved 16 March 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "Ukrainian parliament approves extending martial law in Ukraine | Ukrainska Pravda". Archived from the original on 16 March 2024. Retrieved 16 March 2024. "Українці визначилися з "найкращим президентом" в історії країни - Рейтинг" (in Russian). LIGA. 18 May 2020. Archived from the original on 28 May 2020. Retrieved 10 August 2020. Як змінювався рівень довіри та підтримки Зеленського та його попередників (оновлено). Слово і Діло (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022. Оцінка президентів: найбільше довіряють Зеленському, найкращим вважають Кучму. Українська правда (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 27 May 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022. Історія президентів України в семи актах - Центр спільних дій. Сentreua (in Ukrainian). 1 December 2021. Archived from the original on 29 June 2022. Retrieved 13 May 2022. "ethnic Ukrainian father's farer's medal certificate" (in Russian). Archived from the original on 11 June 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2019. Зеленский Владимир | Руководитель проекта "Квартал-95" [Zelensky Vladimir | Project manager "Kvartal-95"]. Ligamedia (in Russian). 5 June 2018 [28 October 2011]. Archived from the original on 2 January 2019. Retrieved 10 March 2022. Liphshiz, Cnaan (19 March 2019). "Jewish comic who plays Ukraine president on TV leads Ukraine's presidential race". The Times of Israel. OCLC 969749342. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Higgins, Andrew (24 April 2019). "Ukraine's Newly Elected President Is Jewish. So Is Its Prime Minister. Not All Jews There Are Pleased". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 25 April 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2019. ВОЛОДИМИР ЗЕЛЕНСЬКИЙ РОЗКАЗАВ ПРО СТОСУНКИ З БАТЬКАМИ [Volodymyr Zelenskyi Spoke about His Relationship with His Parents]. один плюс один [1+1 (TV channel)] (in Ukrainian). 28 September 2017. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 11 March 2022. Зеленський Олександр Семенович [Zelensky Oleksandr Semenovich] (in Ukrainian). Kryvyi Rih State University of Economics and Technology. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Zelenskyy, Volodymyr (26 December 2018). "Зеленский: Если меня выберут президентом, сначала будут обливать грязью, затем – уважать, а потом – плакать, когда уйду" [Zelensky: If I am elected president, first they will throw dirt on me, then they will respect me, and then they will cry when I am gone]. gordonua.com (Interview) (in Russian). Interviewed by Dmitry Gordon. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. "Volodymyr Zelensky Was a Jewish Comedian. Now the World's Eyes Are on Him". The Detroit Jewish News. 28 February 2022. LCCN sn94088996. OCLC 32399051. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2022. "Отбил 4 атаки и уничтожил врага: чем прославился дедушка Зеленского во Второй мировой войне". 9 May 2019. Archived from the original on 4 July 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2020. "Zelenskiy: contribution of Ukrainians in victory over Nazism huge". Kyiv Post. Interfax-Ukraine. 9 May 2019. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2019. Cramer, Philissa (2 March 2022). "18 things to know about Jewish defender of Ukrainian democracy Volodymyr Zelensky". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2022. "Volodymyr Zelenskyy told the story of his family during a joint speech with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu". president.gov.ua. 24 January 2020. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 17 March 2022. Brockell, Gillian (25 February 2022). "Putin says he'll 'denazify' Ukraine. Its Jewish president lost family in the Holocaust". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022. Retrieved 17 March 2022. Cramer, Philissa (23 March 2022). "Zelensky offers insight into family history, igniting debate over Ukrainian Holocaust memory". Ynetnews. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Talmazan, Yuliya (27 February 2022). "3 years ago Zelenskyy was a TV comedian. Now he's standing up to Putin's army". CNBC. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022. "Зеленський: Якщо мене оберуть президентом, спочатку будуть поливати брудом, потім – поважати, а потім – плакати, коли піду". gordonua.com. 26 December 2018. Archived from the original on 6 February 2019. Retrieved 13 February 2020. Зеленський заявив про рішення йти у президенти (відео) [Zelensky announced his decision to go to the presidency (video)] (in Ukrainian). UNIAN. 1 January 2019. Archived from the original on 27 March 2020. КВН 95 квартал – Человек рожденный в танце on YouTube "Vladimir Zelenskiy". Kvartal 95. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. "Запорожье - Кривой Рог - Транзит" [Zaporizhzhia-Kryvyi Rih-Transit] (in Russian). KVN. Archived from the original on 7 April 2019. Groskop, Viv (2 April 2019). "How funny is the comedian who may be Ukraine's next president?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2022. Сурикова, Ольга (9 August 2014). "Зеленский намерен требовать отставки Минкультуры Украины" [Zelensky intended to demand the resignation of the Ministry of Culture]. sevas.com (in Russian). Archived from the original on 21 February 2019. Retrieved 21 February 2019. "Ukraine bans 38 Russian 'hate' books amid culture war". BBC News. 11 August 2015. Archived from the original on 2 March 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2022. 'Нічна варта', 'Кохання у великому місті 2': у Держкіно назвали нові заборонені фільми ['Night watch', 'Love in a big city 2': in the State Committee called new prohibited films]. Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). 17 January 2019. Archived from the original on 17 January 2019. "Актер Зеленский раскритиковал СБУ из-за запрета сериала "Сваты"" [Actor Zelensky criticized the SBU because of the ban on the series "Matchmakers"]. RIA Novosti (in Russian). 24 November 2017. Archived from the original on 2 January 2019. "СК проверит, финансировал ли Зеленский украинскую армию" [SC will check whether Zelensky financed the Ukrainian army]. Komsomolskaya Pravda (in Russian). 5 February 2015. Archived from the original on 6 February 2016. Retrieved 18 March 2022. "Volodymyr Zelensky in major lead in Ukraine presidential election runoff: Biography, quotes". Ukrainian Independent Information Agency (UNIAN). 22 April 2019. Archived from the original on 30 September 2019. Retrieved 30 September 2019. "Суд скасував заборону на серіал "Свати"" [The court lifted the ban on the TV series "Svaty"]. Українська правда. Archived from the original on 29 April 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2019. "'Kvartal 95' will take off its first Ukrainian-language comedy with Nastya Kamensky in the lead role". Zaxid.net [uk; de] (in Ukrainian). 20 June 2017. Archived from the original on 19 December 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2019. "Я, Ти, Вiн, Вона (2018) – Release Info" [I, You, He, She (2018) – Release Info]. IMDb. Archived from the original on 15 July 2020. Retrieved 4 April 2019.[unreliable source?] Tetjana Turlik'yan (18 December 2018). Мовний факап і чіткі актори: як пройшла презентація комедії "Я, ти, він, вона" від "Квартал 95" [Language fakap and clear actors: how was the presentation of the comedy "I, You, He, She" from "Kvartal 95"] (in Ukrainian). РБК-Україна. Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 4 April 2019. Pandora Papers Reveal Offshore Holdings of Ukrainian President and his Inner Circle Archived 9 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (3 October 2021) "Revealed: 'anti-oligarch' Ukrainian president's offshore connections". The Guardian. 3 October 2021. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021. Retrieved 3 October 2021. "Lawyer Zelenskyy has registered a new political party "Servant of the people"" (in Ukrainian). UNIAN. 3 December 2017. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 1 January 2019. "The boundary of a joke. How Zelensky prepares for the election". Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). 25 October 2018. Archived from the original on 8 February 2019. Connolly, Nick (24 August 2018). "Could a rock star become Ukraine's next president?". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 2 January 2019. "How Ukraine's Presidential Race Is Shaping Up". Atlantic Council. 29 October 2018. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 6 March 2022. "Comedian faces scrutiny over oligarch ties in Ukraine presidential race". Reuters. 1 April 2019. Archived from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 23 April 2019. "Volodymyr Zelensky: April 1 – an awesome day for a clown to win". Українська правда (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 26 April 2019. Varshalomidze, Tamila (16 April 2019). "Ukraine media demands access to runoff frontrunner Zelensky". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Karatnycky, Adrian (24 April 2019). "The World Just Witnessed the First Entirely Virtual Presidential Campaign". Politico Magazine. Archived from the original on 25 April 2019. Retrieved 26 April 2019. "Ukraine election: Why comic Zelenskiy is real threat to Poroshenko". BBC News. 27 March 2019. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. "Zelensky's team. Who are these people". Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). 19 April 2019. Archived from the original on 18 April 2019. Miller, Christopher (8 February 2019). "Crowdsourcer In Chief: Ukrainian Funnyman Takes Unorthodox Path To Top Of Presidential Pack". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. Archived from the original on 6 March 2022. Retrieved 6 March 2022. Melkozerova, Veronika (4 March 2019). "'Servant of the People' leads Ukraine's presidential race". Coda Story. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 6 March 2022. "Zelensky: Party "Servant of the people" goes into politics". Interfax-Ukraine (in Ukrainian). 26 December 2018. Archived from the original on 3 January 2019. Зеленський відповів на "кота в мішку" і розповів про стратегію [Zelensky responded to the "cat in the bag" and told about the strategy]. Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). 18 April 2019. Archived from the original on 18 April 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2022. Bociurkiw, Michael (30 March 2019). "Why Ukraine might elect a comedian". CNN. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Maheshwari, Vijai (17 April 2019). "The comedian and the oligarch". Politico Europe. Archived from the original on 22 April 2019. Retrieved 22 April 2019. "Ukraine elections: actor and comedian poised to win crushing victory". The Guardian. 18 April 2019. Archived from the original on 24 July 2019. Retrieved 30 September 2019. "Ukraine election: Poroshenko attacks Zelensky before runoff". Al Jazeera. 1 April 2019. Archived from the original on 30 September 2019. Retrieved 30 September 2019. "Rivals in Ukraine's presidential runoff hold bitter debate at sports stadium". The Times of Israel. 20 April 2019. Archived from the original on 26 May 2019. Retrieved 30 September 2019. "How the Ukraine Scandal Looks in Ukraine". Slate. 27 September 2019. Archived from the original on 30 September 2019. Retrieved 30 September 2019. "Зеленський vs Порошенко: дебати на стадіоні та в студії Суспільного" [Zelensky vs Proshenko: debates at the stadium and the Suspilne TV studio]. Hromadske.ua (in Ukrainian). 19 April 2019. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. "Дебати Порошенка і Зеленського: всі подробиці, фото і відео" [Debates of Poroshenko and Zelensky: all details, photos and video]. Apostrophe. 19 April 2019. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Yermakov, Oleksandr (19 April 2019). "Дебати Зеленського і Порошенка: хронологія подій від телемосту до двох сцен на "Олімпійському"" [Zelensky and Poroshenko debates: chronology of events from telebridge to both stages at "Olimpiyskiy"]. Radio Liberty. Archived from the original on 29 June 2019. Зеленський відповів, чи буде йти на другий термін [Zelensky answered whether he would go for a second term]. Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). 20 May 2021. Archived from the original on 20 May 2021. Зеленський планує залучати інвестиції в Україну через перезапуск судової системи [Zelensky plans to attract investment in Ukraine through a restart of the judicial system]. Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). 23 March 2019. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. (in Ukrainian) "Central Election Commission of Ukraine – Ukrainian Presidential Election 2019 (first round)". cvk.gov.ua. Central Election Commission of Ukraine. Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. "Ukraine election: Comedian Zelensky wins presidency by landslide". BBC News. 22 April 2019. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. "Election of President of Ukraine 2019 Repeat voting". UKR.VOTE. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. "Перший європейський лідер привітав Зеленського". Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 21 April 2019. "Zelensky meets with Macron". Ukrinform. 12 April 2019. Archived from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 13 April 2019. "Зеленський вже поговорив телефоном із Трампом". Українська правда. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 21 April 2019. "Ukraine vaults into unknown after comic elected president". Agence France-Presse. 16 January 2012. Archived from the original on 22 April 2019. Retrieved 22 April 2019. "Joint letter of President Tusk and President Juncker to Volodymyr Zelensky, President-elect of Ukraine – Consilium". consilium.europa.eu. Archived from the original on 22 April 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Ukraine's New President Vows To Dissolve Parliament As PM, Other Key Officials Resign". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 20 May 2019. Archived from the original on 20 May 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Volodymyr Zelenskyy promised international partners that the world would be proud of Ukraine". President of Ukraine. Archived from the original on 26 May 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "New Ukraine President Zelensky calls snap election". BBC News. 20 May 2019. Archived from the original on 20 May 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Zelensky may dissolve parliament despite People's Front withdrawal from coalition – expert". UNIAN. Archived from the original on 20 May 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Georgia's Saakashvili has Ukrainian citizenship restored". BBC News. 28 May 2019. Archived from the original on 30 June 2019. Retrieved 29 May 2019. "UAWire – Ukrainian parliament rejects Zelensky's proposal to change election system". uawire.org. Archived from the original on 9 June 2019. Retrieved 9 June 2019. Рада відмовилась розглядати законопроект Зеленського про відповідальність за незаконне збагачення [Rada refused to consider Zelensky's bill on liability for illegal enrichment] (in Ukrainian). UNIAN. Archived from the original on 9 June 2019. Retrieved 9 June 2019. Рада включила в повестку дня депутатский законопроект об ответственности за незаконное обогащение, инициативу Зеленского рассматривать отказались. gordonua.com. 6 June 2019. Archived from the original on 9 June 2019. Retrieved 9 June 2019.[better source needed] Президент внесе у нову Раду законопроект про зняття недоторканності з депутатів, дипломатів та суддів – Стефанчук [President introduces bill on removing torture from deputies, diplomats and judges to new Rada - Stefanchuk] (in Ukrainian). UNIAN. Archived from the original on 9 June 2019. Retrieved 9 June 2019. Zinets, Natalia; Williams, Matthias (3 September 2019). "Quick win for Zelenskiy as Ukraine parliament strips lawmakers' immunity". Reuters. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2022. "Zelensky cancels Independence Day military parade, gives money to soldiers | KyivPost – Ukraine's Global Voice". KyivPost. 9 July 2019. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 11 July 2019. "No Independence Day parade to be held this year, Zelensky says". UNIAN. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 28 July 2019. "Bonuses instead of parade: Ukraine's leader takes surprising decision". belsat.eu. Archived from the original on 11 July 2019. Retrieved 11 July 2019. "Voice of America: Journalists see censorship in Ukraine's proposed media laws". Kyiv Post. 6 February 2020. Archived from the original on 17 March 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2020. Leonova, Nataliya; Lihostova, Oksana; Deynychenko, Ruslan (5 February 2020). "Journalists See Specter of Censorship in Ukraine's Proposed Media Law". VoA News. Archived from the original on 5 December 2020. Retrieved 28 December 2020. "Зеленський без зайвих анонсів гайнув в Оман "на зустрічі на найвищому рівні"" [Zelensky without extra announcement jetted off in Oman "for a meeting at the highest level]. Ukrainska Pravda. 5 January 2020. Archived from the original on 21 February 2020. Solonyna, Yevhen (6 January 2020). "Зеленський в Омані. Експерти говорять про кризу комунікації президента" [Zelensky in Oman. Experts tell about crisis in communications of the President]. Radio Liberty. Archived from the original on 21 February 2020. Shushkovska, Alisa (18 February 2021). "Ukraine adopts new and improved referendum law". Atlantic Council. Archived from the original on 6 July 2021. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "Ukraine's referendum law passed during Yanukovych's presidency designated as unconstitutional". UNIAN. 27 April 2018. Archived from the original on 2 March 2021. Retrieved 2 March 2022. Filtenborg, Emil; Weichert, Stefan (22 June 2021). "Zelenskyy speeds up corruption crackdown, one oligarch at a time". Euronews. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 6 March 2022. Polityuk, Pavel; Zinets, Natalia (23 September 2021). "Ukrainian lawmakers pass law on oligarchs after assassination attempt". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 March 2022. Retrieved 6 March 2022. Hall, Ben; Olearchyk, Roman; Seddon, Max (21 October 2019). "Ukraine: why Volodymyr Zelensky is pursuing a disruptive agenda". Financial Times. ISSN 0307-1766. OCLC 801838674. Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 20 February 2022. "Нові кадри в Адміністрації. Кого Зеленський привів на Банкову". Українська правда. Archived from the original on 21 May 2019. Retrieved 21 May 2019. Нові кадри в Адміністрації. Кого Зеленський привів на Банкову [New Personnel in the Administration. Who did Zelenskyy bring to Bankova]. Українська правда (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 21 May 2019. Retrieved 23 May 2019. Карцев, Дмитрий (22 May 2019). "Владимир Зеленский руководит Украиной три дня. Вот что он сделал (и не сделал)". meduza.io. Archived from the original on 24 May 2019. Retrieved 5 June 2019. "Zelensky's childhood friend appointed SBU's first deputy chief (Document)". UNIAN. Archived from the original on 31 October 2019. Retrieved 9 December 2019. "Зеркаль відмовилась від посади заступника глави АП – джерела". Українська правда. Archived from the original on 22 May 2019. Retrieved 21 May 2019. "Рада отказала Зеленскому в увольнении двух министров и главы СБУ. Ни один из его законопроектов не рассмотрен". meduza.io (in Russian). Archived from the original on 9 June 2019. Retrieved 9 June 2019. Даша, Зубкова (2 July 2019). "Zelenskyy Again Asking Rada To Dismiss Lutsenko And Klimkin, Appoint Prystaiko As Foreign Affairs Minister". Ukranews.com. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. Sorokin, Oleksiy (6 July 2019). "Zelensky appoints his first governors — in Lviv, Donetsk, Zakarpattia oblasts". KyivPost. Archived from the original on 2 February 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "Volodymyr Zelensky clears the old elite out of parliament". The Economist. 25 July 2019. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 6 August 2019. Retrieved 1 August 2019. Talant, Bermet; Sorokin, Oleksiy (29 August 2019). "Oleksiy Honcharuk named prime minister, Cabinet approved". KyivPost. Archived from the original on 4 March 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. "Ukrainian Parliament Accepts Resignation Of Influential Interior Minister". RadioFreeEurope. 15 July 2021. Archived from the original on 27 August 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2022. "Новий прем'єр пояснив, як лишили Авакова: "червоні лінії"" [The new prime minister explained how Avakov was left – the "red lines"]. Ukrainska Pravda. 30 August 2019. Archived from the original on 31 March 2020. "Zelensky dismisses head of president's office Bohdan, appoints Yermak instead". Interfax-Ukraine. 11 February 2020. Archived from the original on 12 February 2020. Roth, Andrew (4 March 2020). "Ukrainian president removes PM in government reshuffle". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 23 February 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2023. Talant, Bermet (6 March 2020). "Hasty government reshuffle sows disquiet at home, abroad". Kyiv Post. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 16 March 2020. ZELENSKYY, VOLODYMYR (4 March 2020). "Speech by President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelenskyy at an extraordinary session of the Verkhovna Rada". President of Ukraine. Archived from the original on 5 July 2020. Retrieved 16 March 2020. "Zelensky's approval rating slides to 31% – poll". Ukrainian Independent Information Agency. 21 September 2020. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 15 April 2021. "Zelensky enacts strategy for de-occupation and reintegration of Crimea". Ukrinform. 24 March 2021. Archived from the original on 12 December 2021. Retrieved 15 April 2021. "Ukraine conflict: Anger as Zelensky agrees vote deal in east". BBC News. 2 October 2019. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 28 December 2020. "Леонид Кучма возглавил украинскую делегацию в Трехсторонней контактной группе" [Leonid Kuchma heads the Ukrainian delegation in the Trilateral Contact Group]. Официальное интернет-представительство Президента Украины. Archived from the original on 4 June 2019. Retrieved 8 June 2019. "Telephone conversation with President of Ukraine Vladimir Zelensky". President of Russia. 11 July 2019. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2019. Foy, Henry (11 July 2019). "Putin and Zelensky hold first discussion with talks on conflict, prisoner swap". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2019. "Thousands protest Ukraine leader's peace plan". France 24. 6 October 2019. Archived from the original on 15 January 2021. Retrieved 8 March 2021. Midttun, Hans Petter (25 December 2019). "The basis for a peaceful resolution of the war in eastern Ukraine – trends at the end of 2019". Euromaidan Press. Archived from the original on 2 March 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. Krivosheev, Kirill (27 October 2019). "Владимир Зеленский ушел без оружия" [Volodymyr Zelenskyy walks away unarmed]. Kommersant (in Russian). Archived from the original on 23 February 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. "Far-right groups protest Ukrainian president's peace plan". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. 14 October 2019. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. Wintour, Patrick (26 January 2022). "Ukraine tensions: what is the Normandy format and has it achieved anything?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. Cookman, Liz. "Ukraine-Russia crisis: Ceasefire violations rise at contact line". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 2 March 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. Ponomarenko, Illia (15 February 2021). "OSCE in Donbas reports 55% less ceasefire violations in 2020". KyivPost. Archived from the original on 28 February 2021. Retrieved 9 March 2022. Через катастрофу в Ірані Зеленський перервав поїздку до Оману [Due to the catastrophe in Iran, Zelensky interrupted his trip to Oman]. Українська правда [Ukrainska Pravda] (in Ukrainian). 8 January 2020. Archived from the original on 21 February 2020. Retrieved 10 March 2022. Grigorenko, Timur (8 January 2020). "Вылетаю!" Зеленский срочно покинул Оман из-за крушения самолета ['I'm flying out!' Zelensky urgently left Oman due to plane crash]. Obozrevatel (in Russian). Archived from the original on 21 February 2020. Retrieved 10 March 2022. Зеленський прилетів з Оману майже через добу після авіакатастрофи – "Схеми" [Zelensky arrived from Oman almost a day after the plane crash - "Skhemy"]. Українська правда [Ukrainska Pravda] (in Ukrainian). 9 January 2020. Archived from the original on 22 February 2020. Retrieved 10 March 2022. "В Омані Зеленський міг зустрічатися із Сурковим, – ЗМІ" [In Oman Zelensky may have met with Surkov, mass media]. Glavcom.ua. 12 January 2020. Archived from the original on 22 February 2020. Зеленський і літак Медведчука в Омані: у президента прокоментували збіг [Zelensky and Medvedchuk's plane in Oman: the president commented on the coincidence]. Українська правда [Ukrainska Pravda] (in Ukrainian). 14 January 2020. Archived from the original on 22 February 2020. Retrieved 10 March 2022. "Медведчук розповів, хто летів у його літаку з Оману, поки там був Зеленський" [Medvedchuk told who flew in his plane from Oman, while there was Zelensky]. Ukrainska Pravda. 14 January 2020. Archived from the original on 22 February 2020. Romaniuk, Roman (14 January 2020). Андрій Єрмак: Зеленський повернувся з Оману настільки швидко, наскільки це було можливо [Andriy Yermak: Zelensky returned from Oman as soon as possible]. Українська правда [Ukrainska Pravda] (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 13 February 2020. Retrieved 10 March 2022. Shilin, Mikhail (17 January 2020). "Пристайко не ответил по "официальному визиту" Зеленского в Оман" [Prystaiko did not answer about the "official visit" of Zelensky to Oman]. Liga.net. Archived from the original on 22 February 2020. Rebrina, Vadim (24 January 2020). "В ОП не знают, с кем летал и что подписывал Зеленский в Омане" [In the Presidential Office do not know with whom flew Zelensky and what he signed in Oman]. Liga.net. Archived from the original on 22 February 2020. Shilin, Mikhail (20 January 2020). "Prystaiko on Zelensky's visit to Oman: We'll clarify in due time". Liga.net (in Russian). Archived from the original on 22 February 2020. "Zelensky to meet EU officials on first foreign visit". euronews.com. 4 June 2019. Archived from the original on 4 June 2019. Retrieved 8 June 2019. "Ukrainian president to resume exhumation of Poles in Ukraine: report". Telewizja Polska. 29 August 2019. Archived from the original on 30 September 2019. Retrieved 30 September 2019. Vogel, Kenneth P.; Mendel, Iuliia (1 May 2019). "Biden Faces Conflict of Interest Questions That Are Being Promoted by Trump and Allies". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 5 September 2019. Retrieved 30 September 2019. Schreckinger, Ben (3 August 2019). "The Biden family's strange business history". Politico. Archived from the original on 13 November 2019. Retrieved 30 September 2019. Law, Tara (25 September 2019). "Ukrainian President Denies President Trump Pressured Him". Time. Archived from the original on 17 November 2019. Retrieved 4 November 2019. "Biden, Zelensky Discuss Energy, Russia, Ukraine's Future With the West". The Wall Street Journal. 1 September 2021. Archived from the original on 8 September 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021. "President Zelensky, First Lady open Ukrainian House in Washington". Ukrinform. 2 September 2021. Archived from the original on 4 September 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021. "Zelensky arrives to Washington to meet Blinken, Granholm, Biden". Kyiv Post. 31 August 2021. Archived from the original on 31 August 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021. "Zelensky to meet with Apple CEO in California on Sept 2, visit Silicon Valley, speak at Stanford University". Interfax-Ukraine – Ukraine News Agency. 2 September 2021. Archived from the original on 6 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "In California, Zelensky meets with Ukrainians working at Silicon Valley companies". Ukrinform. 4 September 2021. Archived from the original on 6 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Zelensky at Stanford: 'Russia's policy is to take, not give'". Kyiv Post. 3 September 2021. Archived from the original on 3 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. Nechepurenko, Ivan; Schwirtz, Michael (22 September 2021). "Top Adviser to Ukrainian President Is Targeted in an Assassination Attempt". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 September 2021. Retrieved 23 September 2021. Shylenko, Olga (8 April 2021). "Ukraine's Zelensky on frontline as Merkel urges Putin to pull back troops". CTVNews. Archived from the original on 26 April 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Zelensky warns Ukraine 'entirely prepared' if Russia attacks". France 24. 26 November 2021. Archived from the original on 16 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Zelenskiy says Ukraine uncovers coup plot involving Russians; Kremlin denies role". Reuters. 26 November 2021. Archived from the original on 16 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Ukraine's Zelenskiy Says Ready for Russian Escalation, Claims Coup Plot Uncovered". The Moscow Times. 27 November 2021. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "EU threatens Russia sanctions as NATO backs Ukraine". France 24. 16 December 2021. Archived from the original on 17 December 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "'Big hype': Zelenskyy urges restraint amid risk of Russian invasion". Daily Sabah. 20 January 2022. Archived from the original on 27 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. "Some Ukrainians Are Angry About Washington Ordering Diplomats' Families To Leave The US Embassy". BuzzFeed News. 24 January 2022. Archived from the original on 30 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. "Volodymyr Zelensky accuses the West of causing 'panic' with warnings of a Russian invasion that hurts the Ukrainian economy". Business Insider. 28 January 2022. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Ukraine to the world: keep calm and stop spreading panic". Financial Times. 28 January 2022. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Ukraine crisis: US president Joe Biden tells Zelensky to 'prepare' for Russian invasion". The New Zealand Herald. 28 January 2022. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. "Ukraine's president told Biden to 'calm down' Russian invasion warnings, saying he was creating unwanted panic: report". Yahoo News. 28 January 2022. Archived from the original on 30 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. "Ukraine is 'longing for peace' says Zelensky at Munich Security Conference". France 24. 19 February 2022. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. Cruz Bustillos, Dominic (24 February 2022). "Full Translation: Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy's Feb. 23 Speech". Lawfare. Archived from the original on 13 January 2024. Retrieved 25 February 2022. Ivanova, Polina (24 February 2022). "Volodymyr Zelensky's appeal to Russians: 'The people of Ukraine want peace'". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 19 March 2022. Retrieved 19 March 2022. "London Playbook: BREAKING: Putin declares war — Bombs Kyiv — Blasts rock major cities". Politico. 24 February 2022. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 19 March 2022. "Ukraine conflict: Russian forces attack from three sides". BBC News. 24 February 2022. Archived from the original on 24 February 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2022. "Украина разорвала дипломатические отношения с Россией". Interfax. 24 February 2022. Archived from the original on 24 February 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2022. "Ukrainian president signs decree on general mobilisation of population -Interfax". Reuters. 24 February 2022. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2022. "Ukraine president orders full military mobilisation". The National. PA. 24 February 2022. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2022. Krasnolutska, Daryna; Crawford, Alan (25 February 2022). "Putin Unbowed as Russia Presses Ahead With Invasion Toward Kyiv". BNN Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2022. Harris, Shane; Francis, Ellen; Dixon, Robyn (25 February 2022). "U.S. stands ready to evacuate Zelensky, Russia's 'No. 1 target'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 26 February 2022. Karmanau, Yuras; Heintz, Jim; Isachenkov, Vladimir; Litvinova, Dasha (25 February 2022). "Ukraine's capital under threat as Russia presses invasion". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 26 February 2022. "Volodymyr Zelenskiy stands defiant in face of Russian attack". The Guardian. 26 February 2022. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "93 Percent of Ukrainians Believe Russia Will Be Defeated: Poll". Newsweek. 20 March 2022. Archived from the original on 2 April 2022. Retrieved 3 April 2022. "Majority of Ukrainians believe they will win against Russia - poll". The Jerusalem Post. 28 February 2022. Archived from the original on 3 April 2022. Retrieved 3 April 2022. "Americans have more confidence in Zelenskyy than Biden when it comes to world affairs". NPR. 31 March 2022. Archived from the original on 4 April 2022. Retrieved 3 April 2022. "Ukraine's Volodymyr Zelenskyy: From comedian to national hero". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. Other sources: "3 years ago Zelenskyy was a TV comedian. Now he's standing up to Putin's army". NBC News. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Actor-turned-president Zelensky grows on stage as Ukraine's war-time leader". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. he is now the face of national defiance, winning rave reviews as a war-time leader "Zelenskyy's unlikely journey, from comedy to wartime leader". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "For many Jews, Volodymyr Zelensky is a 'modern Maccabee' as he fights Ukraine's war". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. "Ukraine leader Zelenskyy's wild ride: Jewish comedian to national hero". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. "Ukraine president suddenly thrust into hero role, mirrors one of the darkest chapters of the Cold War". Fortune. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. O'Cearuil, Eamon (3 March 2022). "Glory to You, President Zelenskyy". Harvard Political Review. Archived from the original on 5 March 2022. Retrieved 5 March 2022. "Zelensky emerges as global hero in Ukraine battle against Russia". The Hill. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. "Ukrainian President Zelenskyy Standing Tall in the Face of Danger". Der Spiegel. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. "'I need ammunition, not a ride': Zelenskyy is the hero his country needs as Russia invades". USA Today. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. "Ukraine's Volodymyr Zelensky: The comedian president who is rising to the moment". BBC News. 26 February 2022. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. Rana, Manveen (3 March 2022). "Volodymyr Zelensky survives three assassination attempts in days". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 6 March 2022. Retrieved 5 March 2022. "Zelensky says 'we will not forgive' after Russians kill fleeing civilians". The Times of Israel. 7 March 2022. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2022. "Czech president to award state honour to Ukraine's president". Reuters. 7 March 2022. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2022. "Ukraine's Zelenskiy Says Open to 'Compromise' with Russia on Crimea, Separatist Territories". The Moscow Times. 8 March 2022. Archived from the original on 12 March 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2022. Wermus, Katie (3 March 2022). "Zelensky Calls on Putin for Face-to-Face Talks, Says 'I Don't Bite'". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 12 March 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2022. "Volodymyr Zelensky says Ukraine ready to discuss neutrality in peace talks with Russia". Financial Times. 28 March 2022. Archived from the original on 1 April 2022. Retrieved 3 April 2022. "Russia will stop 'in a moment' if Ukraine meets terms – Kremlin". Reuters. 7 March 2022. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2022. "Israel's Bennett plays peacemaker in Ukraine-Russia war". BBC News. 10 March 2022. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022. "Analysis: Two weeks into Ukraine war, analysts detect faint glimmers of compromise emerge". Reuters. 11 March 2022. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022. "Alternative to NATO proposed by Zelensky's party". The Jerusalem Post. 8 March 2022. Archived from the original on 26 March 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022. Kirby, Paul (30 March 2022). "Why has Russia invaded Ukraine and what does Putin want?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "Leaders of Poland, Czech Republic, Slovenia to visit Kyiv on Tuesday". Politico. 15 March 2022. Archived from the original on 2 April 2022. Retrieved 2 April 2022. Simonite, Tom. "A Zelensky Deepfake Was Quickly Defeated. The Next One Might Not Be". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 13 May 2022. Holroyd, Matthew (16 March 2022). "Deepfake video shows Zelenskyy's false call for Ukraine to surrender". euronews. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 17 March 2022. Basu, Zachary (1 March 2022). "Zelensky tells European Parliament "nobody is going to break us" in emotional appeal". Axios. Archived from the original on 22 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. "Ukraine's Zelenskyy tells EU: 'Prove you are with us'". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 22 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Basu, Zachary (8 March 2022). "Zelensky echoes Churchill in historic address to U.K. Parliament". Axios. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Aiello, Rachel (10 March 2022). "Ukrainian President Zelensky to address Canadian Parliament on Tuesday". CTVNews. Archived from the original on 17 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Hitch, Georgia (31 March 2022). "Volodymyr Zelenskyy asks for Australian Bushmaster armoured vehicles in address to federal parliament". ABC News. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 31 March 2022. Aiello, Rachel (14 March 2022). "'Please, close the sky': says Ukraine President Zelensky in address to Canada's Parliament". CTVNews. Archived from the original on 21 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Clare Foran (16 March 2022). "Zelensky to US lawmakers: 'We need you right now' as he invokes Pearl Harbor and 9/11". CNN. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. "'Tear down this Wall': Zelenskyy urges Germany for more support". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Oshin, Olafimihan (20 March 2022). "Zelensky criticizes Israel's response to Russian war in speech to lawmakers". The Hill. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Epstein, Jake. "Zelenskyy calls on Italy to stop Russian oligarchs from using the country as a 'resort for murderers'". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. "Ukrainian President Zelenskyy to address Japanese parliament". NPR. The Associated Press. 22 March 2022. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. "Ukrainian President Zelenskyy to address Dutch parliament". NL Times. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. "Volodimir Zelenski va vorbi în Parlamentul României" [Volodymyr Zelenskyy to address Romanian parliament]. Digi24 (in Romanian). 30 March 2022. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 30 March 2022. "Zelensky to address Swedish, Danish parliaments". Newvision. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2022. "Ukraine's ambassador to Norway says that Zelenskyy is ready to speak to the Storting". Norway Today. 24 March 2022. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2022. "President Niinistö spoke with the President of Ukraine Zelensky". Office of the President of the Republic of Finland. 25 February 2022. Archived from the original on 20 March 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2022. "Zelenskyy told Russian people to leave Russia if they could to deprive Putin of tax money for the war". Business Insider. 24 March 2022. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Sauer, Pjotr (20 March 2022). "Ukraine suspends 11 political parties with links to Russia". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 2 May 2022. The activities of those politicians aimed at division or collusion will not succeed, but will receive a harsh response. Therefore, the national security and defence council decided, given the full-scale war unleashed by Russia, and the political ties that a number of political structures have with this state, to suspend any activity of a number of political parties for the period of martial law. "Zelensky says Ukrainian political parties linked to Russia to be banned". The Hill. 20 March 2022. Archived from the original on 4 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2022. "Ukraine Suspends Political Parties With Russian Links". Radiofreeeurope/Radioliberty. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2022. "Ukraine bans Communist party for 'promoting separatism'". The Guardian. 17 December 2015. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. "Zelenskyy has consolidated Ukraine's TV outlets and dissolved rival political parties". NPR. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "German President Is Told He Isn't Welcome in Ukraine". The Wall Street Journal. 12 April 2022. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. Retrieved 4 June 2022. "Zelenskyy: up to Ukrainian 100 soldiers killed each day in eastern Ukraine". Ukrainska Pravda. 22 May 2022. Archived from the original on 27 May 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2022. "Nearly 100 Ukraine Servicemen Could Die Every Day in East Region: Zelensky". Newsweek. 22 May 2022. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2022. "Ukrainian Males Aged 18 to 60 Are Now Banned from Leaving the Country". Vice. 25 February 2022. Archived from the original on 30 March 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2022. "Ukrainian casualties: Kyiv losing up to 200 troops a day - Zelensky aide". BBC News. 10 June 2022. Archived from the original on 12 June 2022. Retrieved 11 June 2022. Bostock, Bill (26 May 2022). "Zelenskyy slams Henry Kissinger for emerging 'from the deep past' to suggest Ukraine cede territory to Russia". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2022. Ortiz, Jorge L.; Bacon, John (25 May 2022). "Zelenskyy rejects Kissinger plan to concede territory to Russia; Ukraine hero alive, in Russian custody: Live updates". USA Today. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2022. "Ukraine rejects winning back all territory by force". Deutsche Welle. 29 May 2022. Archived from the original on 23 February 2023. Lewis, Jacob (3 May 2022). "Volodymyr Zelenksy criticises Turkey for move to defy Nato sanctions with Russian tourism boost". inews.co.uk. Archived from the original on 26 October 2023. "Zelensky: Ukraine is fine with China's position on war with Russia". Ukinform. 25 May 2022. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 1 June 2022. "Zelenskyy urges China's Xi to help end Russia's war in Ukraine". Al Jazeera. 4 August 2022. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "EU leaders agree to Russian oil ban after compromise with Hungary". Al Jazeera. 31 May 2022. Archived from the original on 1 June 2022. Retrieved 31 May 2022. "EU agrees on partial oil ban after Zelensky's call for unity". EUobserver. 31 May 2022. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 31 May 2022. "Volodymyr Zelensky seeks African Union support". Le Monde. 22 June 2022. Archived from the original on 28 June 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2022. "Mercosur trade bloc denies Zelensky request to address summit". France 24. 20 July 2022. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "Zelenskyy to Russians: Defy 'criminal mobilization'". Deutsche Welle. 25 September 2022. Archived from the original on 28 March 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "Ukraine applies for Nato membership after Russia annexes territory". The Guardian. 30 September 2022. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "Zelenskyy on Putin's threat of nuclear weapons: 'I don't think he's bluffing'". CNBC. 25 September 2022. Archived from the original on 16 March 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "Zelensky says Putin wouldn't survive nuclear strike on Ukraine". The Times of Israel. 6 October 2022. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "'I want to remain human': Volodymyr Zelenskyy on the price of war and the future of Ukraine". CBC News. 20 October 2022. Archived from the original on 18 November 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "Zelensky in Washington: Ukraine's leader heads to US for first foreign trip". BBC News. 20 December 2022. Archived from the original on 18 January 2023. Retrieved 21 December 2022. Gangitano, Alex (21 December 2022). "Biden greets Zelensky at White House". The Hill. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. Mitchell, Ellen (21 December 2022). "US to send Patriot system to Ukraine in new $1.85 billion package". The Hill. Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 21 December 2022. "Zelensky says in The Hague that Putin deserves to be sentenced for crimes in Ukraine". The Hill. 4 May 2023. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Putin will face an international war crimes court, Zelenskyy says". NBC News. 4 May 2023. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "'Evil cannot be trusted': Zelenskyy urges reticent countries to side with Ukraine". Politico. 19 September 2023. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Russia kills 50 in bomb attack on café, shop in northeast Ukraine". Politico. 5 October 2023. Archived from the original on 19 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Zelensky has stated that he does not promise to lower tariffs". Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). 12 June 2019. Archived from the original on 12 June 2019. Зеленский опубликовал свою предвыборную программу [Zelensky published his election program]. ТСН.ua (in Russian). 25 January 2019. Archived from the original on 9 August 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2019. "Передвиборча програма кандидата в президенти України Володимира Зеленського". Передвиборча програма кандидата на пост Президента України Володимира Зеленського. July 2020. Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 11 May 2021. Troianovski, Anton (9 March 2019). "'Parallel universe': The front-runner seeking to be Ukraine's president plays one on TV". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 11 April 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2019. "Zelensky about eurointegration: referendum is needed". Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). 22 March 2019. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. "What a Volodymyr Zelensky Ukrainian Presidency Would Look Like". The National Interest. 18 April 2019. Archived from the original on 19 April 2019. Retrieved 22 April 2019. "Zelensky, Poroshenko, Tymoshenko and Hrytsenko told how to move towards NATO". Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). 25 March 2019. Archived from the original on 25 March 2019. Sydorenko, Serhii (25 March 2019). "From the EU to nuclear weapons: the foreign policy of Zelensky, Poroshenko, Tymoshenko and Hrytsenko". European Pravda (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Зеленський представив свою команду. Українська правда (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 19 April 2019. Retrieved 21 April 2019. "Ukraine supports Azerbaijan's territorial integrity". Anadolu Agency. 2 October 2020. Archived from the original on 5 October 2020. Retrieved 15 April 2021. "Exclusive: Ukraine's Zelensky says he doesn't feel China threat". Axios. 31 January 2021. Archived from the original on 13 May 2021. Retrieved 15 April 2021. Treisman, Rachel (28 February 2022). "Ukraine wants to join the EU. Here's how that would work". NPR. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. "8 EU countries support Ukraine's call to fast-track membership talks". Yahoo News. 28 February 2022. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. "Zelensky wanted to make solidarity visit but was told 'time not right' — reports". The Times of Israel. 16 October 2023. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Ukraine election rivals trade taunts and media tricks". BBC News. 17 April 2019. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 1 October 2019. Владимир Зеленский: Отдыхать в Крым – вряд ли. На гастроли – возможно [Vladimir Zelensky: "I don't think I can go on vacation to the Crimea. On tour - maybe".]. kp.ua (in Russian). Archived from the original on 3 May 2019. Retrieved 3 May 2019. Зеленский и его Студия Квартал-95 выступили в зоне АТО [Zelensky and his Studio Kvartal-95 performed in the ATO zone]. kp.ua (in Russian). Archived from the original on 3 May 2019. Retrieved 3 May 2019. "Front-runner in Ukraine's election race names condition for returning Crimea". uawire.org. Archived from the original on 24 March 2019. Retrieved 24 March 2019. Krasinskyi, Vladyslav; Shcherbina, Sergey (26 December 2018). "Zelensky on the war in the Donbas: Though we are ready to negotiate with the devil". Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. "Vladimir Zelensky: It is beneficial for us to dissolve the Rada, but we will think and act according to the law". rbc.ua (in Russian). RBK Group. 18 April 2019. Archived from the original on 18 April 2019. Parfitt, Tom (19 April 2019). "Ukraine poll leader Volodymyr Zelensky sees Putin as an enemy". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 22 April 2019. "Zelensky: Border only "common" thing between Ukraine, Russia". UNIAN. Archived from the original on 4 May 2019. Retrieved 4 May 2019. "Ukraine insists Nord Stream 2 is 'dangerous' despite German reassurances". Politico. 22 August 2021. Archived from the original on 7 November 2021. Retrieved 7 November 2021. "Zelensky says Ukraine will fight until it regains all its territories after Kissinger remark". The Hill. 25 May 2022. Archived from the original on 27 May 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2022. Gigova, Radina (2 July 2023). "Russia is accused of 'ecocide' in Ukraine. But what does that mean?". CNN. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 3 July 2023. "Zelenskyy meets Greta Thunberg, Mary Robinson to address war's effect on Ukraine's ecology". TheJournal.ie. Press Association. 29 June 2023. Archived from the original on 3 July 2023. Retrieved 3 July 2023. "'Environmental Destruction Is a Form of Warfare': Thunberg Joins Ecocide Investigation in Ukraine". www.commondreams.org. Archived from the original on 3 July 2023. Retrieved 3 July 2023. "Ukraine Recap: Zelenskiy Decries 'Ecocide' Brought on by War - BNN Bloomberg". BNN. 30 June 2023. Archived from the original on 3 July 2023. Retrieved 3 July 2023. "Zelensky accuses Russia of 'ecocide' over damage to wildlife". thepeninsulaqatar.com. 7 December 2022. Archived from the original on 3 July 2023. Retrieved 3 July 2023. Chabarai, Hanna (6 March 2019). "Convenient topics for candidates: how they understand the reforms". The Ukrainian Week (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. "Опублікували виборчий закон Зеленського, у нардепів є альтернатива". Українська правда. Archived from the original on 22 May 2019. Retrieved 22 May 2019. Surikova, Olga (9 August 2014). "Zelenskyy intends to demand the resignation of the Ministry of Culture of Ukraine". news.sevas.com (in Russian). Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 31 March 2019. "Ukraine blacklists Russian artists for rebel support". BBC News. 8 August 2015. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 31 March 2019. Roschenko, Olena (18 April 2019). "Zelensky admitted that he would not be able to shake Poroshenko's hand". Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 18 April 2019. Levenson, Michael (2 August 2022). "Zelensky says Ukraine's government may allow civil partnerships for same-sex couples". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 31 August 2022. Pietsch, Bryan (4 August 2022). "Zelensky floats civil unions amid gay marriage push in Ukraine". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 24 August 2022. Retrieved 31 August 2022. Lavers, Michael K. (2 August 2022). "Ukraine president backs civil partnerships for same-sex couples". Washington Blade. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Santora, Marc (3 December 2022). "Zelensky Proposes Barring Orthodox Church That Answers to Moscow". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Rose, Hilary (15 March 2022). "Olena Zelenska, Ukraine's shy first lady, steps up". The Times. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Carroll, Oliver (19 June 2022). "'Our son wants to be a soldier': an interview with Ukraine's first lady". 1843. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2022 – via The Economist. Walker, Shaun (18 June 2022). "Ukraine's first lady Olena Zelenska on being Russia's target No 2: 'When you see their crimes, maybe they really are capable of anything'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 June 2022. Retrieved 23 June 2022. War in Ukraine: Sky's Alex Crawford's interview with Volodymyr Zelenskyy in full. Sky News. 10 March 2022. Archived from the original on 3 August 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2022 – via YouTube. Exclusive interview with Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelensky. 60 Minutes Australia. 1 May 2022. Archived from the original on 7 November 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2022 – via YouTube. Savchuk, Tetiana (28 March 2019). Західна преса: про Тимошенко, Порошенка і Зеленського. Радіо Свобода (in Ukrainian). Radio Svoboda/Radio Liberty. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2022. російськомовний Зеленський President Trump and Ukrainian President speak after bilateral meeting – 09/25/2019. CNBC Television. 25 September 2019. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2022 – via YouTube. "Рух Чесно: У 2018 році Зеленський збільшив свої статки на 6 млн грн". Українська правда. Archived from the original on 21 May 2019. Retrieved 22 May 2019. Interfax-Ukraine (7 November 2019). "Zelensky wants to know and speak Ukrainian better". Kyiv Post. Archived from the original on 15 March 2024. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "FT Person of the Year: Volodymyr Zelenskyy. 'I am more responsible than brave'". Financial Times. 6 December 2022. Archived from the original on 5 December 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2022. Felsenthal, Edward; Dondyuk, Maxim (7 December 2022). "Why TIME Chose Volodymyr Zelensky and the Spirit of Ukraine as the 2022 Person of the Year". Time. Archived from the original on 8 May 2023. "Кабінет Міністрів України - Про нагородження Почесною грамотою Кабінету Міністрів України". kmu.gov.u. 23 June 2003. Archived from the original on 23 April 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2022. "Ukraine's President Zelensky to receive highest Czech state honour". Radio Prague International (Czech Radio). 3 August 2022. Archived from the original on 18 July 2023. Retrieved 19 July 2023. "France's Macron awards Legion of Honour to Ukraine's Zelenskiy". Reuters. 9 February 2023. Retrieved 9 February 2023. "Volodymyr Zelenskyy will receive 2023 Charlemagne Prize". DW News. 16 December 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2022. "Латвия наградила Зеленского Орденом Виестура — за мужество в защите Украины". gorod.lv. 2 March 2022. Archived from the original on 2 March 2022. Retrieved 11 March 2022. "Zełenski z najwyższym litewskim odznaczeniem. Nausėda wyróżnił ukraińskiego odpowiednika". kurierwilenski.lt. 8 March 2022. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 11 March 2022. "Prezydent Ukrainy W. Zełeński odznaczony Nagrodą Orła Jana Karskiego". gosc.pl. 27 February 2022. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 11 March 2022. Prezydent Ukrainy Wołodymyr Zełenski odznaczony Orderem Orła Białego - website of Polish legal and business daily newspaper Dziennik Gazeta Prawna "'You stood with us shoulder to shoulder': Zelensky visits key ally Poland". CNN. "Postanowienie Prezydenta Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej z dnia 11 kwietnia 2022 r. nr rej. 105/2022 o nadaniu orderu" (PDF). monitorpolski.gov.pl. 11 April 2022. Retrieved 17 April 2023. "Marcelo condecora Zelensky com Grande-Colar da Ordem da Liberdade" [Marcelo awards Zelensky the Grand Collar of the Order of Liberty] (in Portuguese). SIC Noticias. 24 August 2023. Retrieved 25 August 2023. "Slovakia Awards Zelenskiy Dubcek Prize For 'Freedom and Hope'". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. 28 March 2022. Archived from the original on 28 March 2022. "UK's Johnson gives Churchill award to Ukraine's Zelenskyy". Associated Press. 26 July 2022. Archived from the original on 27 July 2022. Retrieved 27 July 2022. "Zelenskyy wins Ronald Reagan Freedom Award". Fox News. 7 March 2022. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 11 March 2022. "Zelenskyy gets John F. Kennedy award for defending democracy". Associated Press. 21 April 2022. Archived from the original on 29 April 2022. Retrieved 27 April 2022. "Constitution Center". Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2022. Sky News Salamon, Mariusz A.; Jain, Sreepat; Brachaniec, Tomasz; Duda, Piotr; Płachno, Bartosz J.; Gorzelak, Przemysław (2022). "Ausichicrinites zelenskyyi gen. et sp. nov., a first nearly complete feather star (Crinoidea) from the Upper Jurassic of Africa". Royal Society Open Science. 9 (7): 220345. Bibcode:2022RSOS....920345S. doi:10.1098/rsos.220345. PMC 9297031. PMID 35875469. Bressan, David. "Fossil Named After Ukraine's President Zelenskyy". Forbes. Retrieved 28 July 2022. Ritman, Alex (28 February 2022). "Yes, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky Did Voice Paddington, StudioCanal Confirms". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 3 June 2023. "NFL Honors Highlights Defenders of Ukraine". Ukraine World Congress. 13 February 2023. Retrieved 14 February 2023. Shuster, Simon (23 January 2024). The Showman: Inside the Invasion That Shook the World and Made a Leader of Volodymyr Zelensky. New York: William Morrow. ISBN 978-0-06-330742-1. OCLC 1410393061. Volodymyr Zelenskyy at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Official website Kvartal 95 Archived 31 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine Volodymyr Zelenskyy at IMDb Appearances on C-SPAN Volodymyr Zelenskyy on Instagram Volodymyr Zelenskyy on Facebook Volodymyr Zelenskyy on Telegram Who is Volodymyr Zelenskyy? 1:31h Biograph Fox Videos James Hookway (31 March 2022). "Who Is Volodymyr Zelensky? What to Know About Ukraine's President". The Wall Street Journal. Portals:  Ukraine  Politics  Biography  Film  TV  Comedy