Bad Boys is a 1995 American buddy cop action comedy film directed by Michael Bay in his feature directorial debut, produced by Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer, and starring Martin Lawrence and Will Smith as two Miami narcotics detectives Marcus Burnett and Mike Lowrey. The film received mixed reviews from critics, but was commercially successful and spawned two sequels: Bad Boys II (2003), Bad Boys for Life (2020). A fourth film titled Bad Boys: Ride or Die is set for release in 2024. Lifelong friends Mike Lowrey and Marcus Burnett are devoted Miami Police narcotics detectives investigating $100 million of seized Mafia heroin, their biggest career bust which was stolen from a secure police vault. Internal Affairs suspects that it was an inside job and threatens to shut down the entire department unless they recover the drugs within 72 hours. Mike asks one of his informants and ex-girlfriend Maxine "Max" Logan to look for people who are newly rich and therefore suspects. She gets herself and her best friend Julie Mott hired as escorts by Eddie Dominguez, a crooked former cop. The party is soon interrupted by Dominguez's French drug kingpin boss Fouchet and his henchmen Casper, Ferguson, and Noah. To further cover his tracks because of this slip up, Fouchet kills Dominguez and Max, while Julie manages to escape. The madam who hired Julie and Max is disposed of by Noah, who then knocks out Mike as he investigates Max's death. Frantically calling the police station, Julie insists on talking only to Mike, who is following up on a lead with the Madam. Knowing she never met Mike, captain Conrad Howard forces Marcus to impersonate him to talk to her. At her apartment, Marcus and Julie are attacked by some of Fouchet's henchmen, one of whom Marcus kills. When they rendezvous with Mike, Marcus and Mike have to impersonate each other, with Mike living at the Burnett residence while Marcus stays with Julie at Mike's. The two struggle to keep up the charade in Julie's presence, but she soon begins to suspect the truth. Looking through mugshots, Julie identifies Noah as one of the henchmen. The trio go to Club Hell, one of Noah's known hangouts. After being spotted, Marcus knocks Casper unconscious during a bathroom fight. Julie tries to kill Fouchet but Marcus stops her. In the ensuing car chase, Mike kills Noah. The three manage to get away, but are caught on camera by a news helicopter. The ensuing report is later seen by Marcus's family, who were told that he was temporarily reassigned to Cleveland. Mike and Marcus meet their old informant Jojo and learn about the location of the chemist who is cutting the stolen drugs. The three return to Mike's apartment, where Marcus' wife Theresa confronts them and confirms Julie's suspicion they have been impersonating each other. Fouchet and his gang show up and kidnap Julie. Mike and Marcus' department is shut down by Internal Affairs. Despite being reassigned, Howard delays the order, giving Mike and Marcus more time to solve the case. They access Dominguez's private police database profile and learn that the police secretary Francine is his former girlfriend. She was being blackmailed by Fouchet and Dominguez after they took nude photos of her, threatening to post them at her kids' school. Mike, Marcus, and detectives Sanchez and Ruiz, head to the Miami-Opa Locka Executive Airport. During a fierce shootout, they kill Fouchet's remaining henchmen, including Casper and Ferguson, and rescue Julie. They chase a fleeing Fouchet and force his car into a concrete barrier. As he tries to flee, Mike shoots him in the leg and arrests him at gunpoint. After a tense conversation with Marcus, Fouchet surreptitiously draws a gun but is shot to death by Mike before he can kill Marcus, avenging Max's death. An exhausted Marcus leaves Julie with Mike and heads home, eager to be reunited with his wife and family. Martin Lawrence as Detective Sergeant Marcus Miles Burnett Will Smith as Detective Sergeant Michael Eugene "Mike" Lowrey Téa Leoni as Julie Mott Tchéky Karyo as Fouchet Theresa Randle as Theresa Burnett Marg Helgenberger as Captain Alison Sinclair Nestor Serrano as Detective Sanchez Julio Oscar Mechoso as Detective Ruiz Saverio Guerra as Chet Anna Thompson as Francine Kevin Corrigan as Elliot Michael Imperioli as Joe "Jo-Jo" Joe Pantoliano as Captain Conrad Howard Vic Manni as Ferguson Frank John Hughes as Casper Ralph Gonzales as Kuni Marc Macaulay as Noah Trafficante Emmanuel Xuereb as Eddie Dominguez John Salley as Fletcher (credited as Hacker "Fletcher") Karen Alexander as Max Logan Shaun Toub as Store Clerk Kim Coates as White Carjacker Michael 'Bear' Taliferro as Black Carjacker Ed Amatrudo as Van Boss Lisa Boyle as Girl Decoy Principal photography began on June 27, 1994, at the Dade Tire company near downtown Miami, the city chosen to replace the original New York locale. Filming continued throughout the area, including South Beach's Tides Hotel, the Mediterranean Biltmore Hotel, the Dade County Courthouse and a multimillion-dollar estate on a private island. The second floor of downtown Miami's Alfred DuPont building was converted into a police station; a freighter on the Miami River into a drug lab. Bad Boys' climactic scenes were filmed at the Opa-Locka Airport. Filming was quick due to the TV schedules of the stars with production wrapping on August 31. The opening sequence was written and shot during post-production. In the film's early stages of development, Simpson and Bruckheimer initially envisioned Dana Carvey and Jon Lovitz in the roles. When the film was written for Carvey and Lovitz, the original title for Bad Boys was Bulletproof Hearts. Arsenio Hall turned down the role of Lowrey and cites[citation needed] that choice as the worst mistake he has ever made. The role eventually went to Smith. Both Lawrence and Smith were starring in their own hit TV shows, Martin and The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, when filming Bad Boys. The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air even references the film in an episode. In the season 6, episode 20, called "I Stank Horse", Nicholas "Nicky" Banks tells Will that his parents will not let him watch Bad Boys, to which Will replies, "Bad Boys, huh? What'cha gonna do?" Director Bay did not like the script and often engaged Smith and Lawrence in discussions about how the dialogue and scenes could improve. He often allowed them to improvise while the cameras were rolling. He secretly told Smith to call Lawrence a bitch before the car scene. The whole "two bitches in the sea" was improvised, as was Lawrence's comment when Leoni called him gay. The scene in the convenience store, when the clerk puts a gun to Burnett and Lowrey's heads and yells, telling them to "Freeze, mother bitches!", is also improvised. They came up with: "No, you freeze, bitch! Now back up, put the gun down and get me a pack of Tropical Fruit Bubbalicious". "And some Skittles." According to Bay in the DVD commentary, at the end of the film when Mike and Marcus are recuperating, Mike says "I love you, man." Bay claims that Smith refused to say the line, causing the director and actor to argue back and forth over the line. Bay wanted Smith to say the line as he felt it summed up the friendship between the cops. After their argument had lasted for half of the day's shoot and much of the crew was ready to pack up, a fed up Bay told Smith to do whatever he wanted, after which Smith changed his mind and agreed to say the line. Bad Boys generated a total of $15.5 million during its opening weekend, beating out A Goofy Movie and Tommy Boy to reach the number one spot. For its second weekend, it remained at the top spot with $11 million. Despite being dethroned by While You Were Sleeping, the film still made $7 million in its third weekend, while also outgrossing Kiss of Death. Bad Boys was commercially successful, grossing $141,407,024 worldwide — $65,807,024 in North America and $75,600,000 internationally. On Rotten Tomatoes, Bad Boys has an approval rating of 43% based on reviews from 67 critics, with an average rating of 5.30/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "Bad Boys stars Will Smith and Martin Lawrence have enjoyable chemistry; unfortunately, director Michael Bay too often drowns it out with set pieces and explosions in place of an actual story." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 41 out of 100, based on 24 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale. Most of the criticisms focused on the fact that despite the production of the film and the ability of the stars, the script did not diverge from the generic plot of a buddy-cop genre film, instead opting for repeated use of formulaic scenes. Roger Ebert in his video review of the film on At the Movies noted that despite the highly energetic approach of the two lead actors and the visual style of the film, their acting talents were mostly "new wine in old bottles". He illustrated that many of the elements featured in the film including both the plot and characters had been recycled from other films, particularly those from the Lethal Weapon and Beverly Hills Cop series—recurrent stock-characters, police detective clichés and over-long action scenes. In describing the archetypal cop-buddy genre action scene adhered to by the film, Ebert noted "Whenever a movie like this starts to drag, there's always one infallible solution; have a car-chase and then blow something up real good." Ebert gave the film 2 out of 4 stars. Gene Siskel in his appraisal of the film said that he had lost interest in the film after its introduction due to the very formulaic approach, and repeated Roger Ebert's criticism that the talents of the lead actors were wasted; suggesting that the production company did not spend significant time producing a script which would be suitable for their talents. Siskel gave the film 2 out of 4. Bad Boys was released on DVD on June 27, 2000. A UMD was released on December 20, 2005. A Blu-ray release followed on June 1, 2010. Bad Boys was released in a two movie pack that includes its successor Bad Boys II on Ultra HD Blu-ray on September 4, 2018. Bad Boys (franchise) Bade Miyan Chote Miyan (1998), an Indian film inspired from Bad boys. "BAD BOYS (18)". British Board of Film Classification. May 3, 1995. Archived from the original on June 5, 2019. Retrieved May 20, 2015. "Bad Boys (1995)". Box Office Mojo. 1995. Archived from the original on July 30, 2010. Retrieved February 19, 2020. "Bad Boys (1995) - Financial Information". The Numbers. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Bad Boys: the cult places of the saga in Miami and elsewhere". Young, Paul F. (July 10, 1995). "The rationale of re-shoots". Variety. p. 5. Wolff, Craig (December 31, 1992). "IN THE DRESSING ROOM WITH DANA CARVEY; Every Night Live?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 25, 2020. Retrieved April 26, 2010. Sommer, Constance (April 12, 1995). "'Bad Boys' strikes it rich". Associated Press. The Berkshire Eagle. p. 22. Archived from the original on October 16, 2023. Retrieved October 16, 2023 – via Newspapers.com. "'Bad Boys' first at box office for second week in a row". Press of Atlantic City. April 19, 1995. p. 13. Archived from the original on November 4, 2023. Retrieved November 4, 2023. "A real sleeper movie tops the competition". Daily Record. April 25, 1995. p. 11. Archived from the original on November 4, 2023. Retrieved November 4, 2023. "Bad Boys (1995)". Box Office Mojo. Internet Movie Database. Archived from the original on July 30, 2010. Retrieved August 12, 2010. "Bad Boys (1995)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on July 31, 2010. Retrieved January 10, 2023. "Bad Boys". Metacritic. CBS. Archived from the original on August 4, 2018. Retrieved February 24, 2020. "Find Cinemascore". Cinemascore. Archived from the original on July 22, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2010. McCarthy, Todd (April 3, 1995). "Bad Boys review". Variety. Reed Business Information. Archived from the original on May 13, 2008. Retrieved August 12, 2010. Ebert, Roger., Siskel, Gene., 1995 Bad Boys Review [Internet Video] Available at http://bventertainment.go.com/tv/buenavista/atm/reviews.html?sec=1&subsec=1313 Buena-Vista Television Berardinelli, James. "Bad Boys (1995)". ReelViews. Archived from the original on December 25, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2010. Ebert, Roger (April 7, 1995). "Bad Boys". Chicago Sun-Times. RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on August 14, 2016. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Siskel, Gene (April 7, 1995). "RIVETING 'ROB ROY' TRIUMPHS WHERE 'ROBIN HOOD' COLLAPSED". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on April 10, 2019. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Bad Boys DVD Release Date". DVDs Release Dates. Archived from the original on March 29, 2020. Retrieved June 12, 2018. "High Def Digest | Blu-ray and Games News and Reviews in High Definition". ultrahd.highdefdigest.com. Archived from the original on June 7, 2019. Retrieved June 12, 2018. Wikiquote has quotations related to Bad Boys (1995 film). Bad Boys at IMDb Bad Boys at the TCM Movie Database Bad Boys at the American Film Institute Catalog