Kulich is the Russian name for Easter bread. For the eastern Slavs, festive bread was round and tall, and dough decorations were made on top of it. The cylindrical shape of the cake is associated with the church practice of baking artos. The Paska bread tradition spread in cultures which were connected to the Byzantine Empire and is a traditional cultural part of countries with an Orthodox Christian population. It is eaten in countries like Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, Romania, Armenia, Georgia, Moldova, North Macedonia and Serbia. Kulich is a variant of paska Easter breads and represents not only Easter but also the spring. Easter is a very important celebration in Eastern European countries, even more important than Christmas. Traditionally after the Easter service, the kulich, which has been put into a basket and decorated with colorful flowers, is blessed by the priest. Blessed kulich is eaten before breakfast each day. Any leftover kulich that is not blessed is eaten with paskha for dessert. Kulich is baked in tall, cylindrical tins (like coffee or fruit juice tins). When cooled, kulich is decorated with white icing (which slightly drizzles down the sides) and colorful flowers. Historically, it was often served with cheese paska bearing the symbol ХВ (from the traditional Easter greeting of Христос воскрес (Khristos voskres, "Christ is risen"). Kulich is only eaten between Easter and Pentecost. The recipe for kulich is similar to that of Italian panettone, but is denser and thus weighs considerably more. Russian paska bread Kulich without frosting and crumbles A painting of people with Easter fare Orthodox Church of Rome priest (second from right) blesses paschal (Easter) foods including kulichs, eggs, and wine Kulich shares the same name as a place in Iran Kulich Cozonac List of sweet breads Panettone Paska (bread) Pinca Red Easter eggs Stollen Russian: кули́ч, romanized: kulích, Belarusian: куліч, romanized: kulich, Armenian: կուլիչ, romanized: kulich (from Ancient Greek κόλλῑξ, romanized: kóllīx, "roll of coarse bread"); Georgian: პასკა, Ukrainian: пáска, romanized: páska Karen Evans-Romaine; Helena Goscilo; Tatiana Smorodinskaya, eds. (2013). Encyclopedia of Contemporary Russian Culture. Taylor & Francis. p. 160. ISBN 978-1-136-78785-0. Retrieved November 5, 2016. Vasmer's Etymological Dictionary, s.v. "кулич" κόλλιξ, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus "Orthodox Easter in Ukraine". Archived from the original on 2018-06-15. Retrieved 2017-05-21. "Kiev Kulich (Ukraine) - sweet Kiev - dessert Kiev - desserts Kiev - sweets Kiev". "Why No Slavic Easter Is Complete Without Kulich". Kitchn. Retrieved 2018-09-24. Kharzeeva, Anna; RBTH, special to (2015-04-10). "Kulich: A cake that means spring, not just Easter". www.rbth.com. Retrieved 2019-03-08. "What to Know if You're Visiting Russia on Easter". TripSavvy. Archived from the original on 2018-01-29. Retrieved 2019-03-08. Dee, Aliza. "Kulich – Russia's Classic Easter Cake", The Moscow Times, Moscow, 10 April 2015. Retrieved on 29 February, 2016. Kulich recipe (in Russian, with photos) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kulich.