Goon: Last of the Enforcers is a 2017 Canadian sports comedy film directed by Jay Baruchel in his directorial debut and written by Baruchel and Jesse Chabot. A sequel to Goon (2011), the film stars Seann William Scott, Baruchel, Liev Schreiber, Alison Pill, Elisha Cuthbert, Wyatt Russell, Marc-André Grondin and Kim Coates. Principal photography began in Toronto on June 22, 2015. The film was released in Canada on March 17, 2017, and on September 1, 2017, in the United States. During an NHL lockout, Doug "The Thug" Glatt's minor-league team, the Halifax Highlanders, receive increased media coverage. Their owner, Hyrum Cain, seeks to capitalize on the attention. For the opening game, Doug is promoted to captain, but loses a fight with the rival team's enforcer, Anders Cain, the son of the Highlanders' owner. Badly injured, Doug retires to a more stable job as an insurance salesman, while he and his pregnant wife Eva make preparations for their child. Without Doug, the Highlanders embark on a long losing streak which prompts the owner to push for changes. He signs several overseas players and his son. Meanwhile, Doug finds no joy in his new job, and tries to find a way back into hockey. His old rival, Ross "The Boss" Rhea, convinces him to join him in a hockey fighting league, where he could find a way back into the game. He wins a ten-man battle royale, watched by Hyrum. Meanwhile, Anders does not perform well for the Highlanders, and eventually gets suspended for violence. Hyrum adds Doug back to the roster, as competition for his son. Before Doug's first game back, Eva makes him promise not to fight, for the sake of their future child. Doug reluctantly agrees, and the team goes on a winning streak, but when Anders returns from suspension, he goads Doug into being more aggressive. Doug and Anders interrupt a game during a dispute, and they are both suspended for the next one. During the game's afterparty, Anders provokes Doug into a fight, and when Eva sees that he has been fighting again, she kicks him out of the house. Meanwhile, the Highlanders must win the last two games of the season to get into the playoffs. Hyrum signs Ross, at the expense of firing Anders. While Ross helps the Highlanders to win the first of their last two games, Eva goes into labor, and Doug reconciles with her as they head to the hospital. After having her baby, Eva realizes that the same drive that led Doug to be with her during the birth, is what pushes him to want to defend his teammates on the ice, and she gives Doug her blessing to continue fighting. Having been kicked off the team, Anders rejoins his old team, who will play the Highlanders in the last game of the season with a playoff spot on the line. Anders gravely injures Ross, so Doug enters the rink in retaliation. Doug beats Anders, but when showing mercy at the end of the fight, Anders vengefully threatens him, declaring he will never stop coming for him until they end up like Ross, being carried out on stretchers. Realizing that his new family is more important to him than hockey, Doug uses his weakened right arm to level Anders in the face just as he was about to strike again, throwing his arm out and being helped off the ice. Hyrum rushes to his son's aid, Anders tells him that he hates hockey, and they seem to make amends. Knowing that further injury to his right arm would be career-ending, Doug realizes that his hockey days are behind him. He watches as the Highlanders win the game in the final seconds, and during the celebration, he sets his stick down and goes home. In a post-credits scene, a female reporter talks about the Hockey Story. Doug doesn't know if he's a Gretzky and steals her microphone. Seann William Scott as Doug "The Thug" Glatt Alison Pill as Eva Glatt, Glatt's love interest, now married to Glatt Wyatt Russell as Anders Cain, a volatile young captain of the Halifax Highlanders Liev Schreiber as Ross "The Boss" Rhea Marc-André Grondin as Xavier LaFlamme Kim Coates as Ronnie Hortense, Highlanders coach Jay Baruchel as "Pat" Patrick Hooolihan Elisha Cuthbert as Mary, Eva's outlandish sister Callum Keith Rennie, as Hyrum Cain, Highlanders owner and father of Anders Jonathan Cherry as Goalie Marco "Belchie" Belchior Trent Pardy as Stevenson Karl Graboshas as Oleg Yakovlena George Tchortov as Evgeni Yakovlena Richard Clarkin as Gord Ogilvey Jason Jones as Bob Forbes T.J. Miller as Chad Bailey David Paetkau as Ira Glatt Ellen David as Mrs. Glatt Larry C. Woo as Park Kim Boomer Phillips as Jared Walters Nathan Dales as Petr James Duthie as himself Tessa Bonhomme as Female Reporter Current and former hockey players Tyler Seguin, Michael Del Zotto, Brandon Prust, George Parros, Colton Orr and Georges Laraque make appearances in the film. Doug "The Hammer" Smith, whom Doug Glatt is based on, has a cameo in the "Bruised and Battered" sequence. He is head-butted by Seann William Scott in the square-off between the two Dougs. On September 24, 2012, it was announced that Jay Baruchel would be returning to write the sequel to Goon along with Jesse Chabot, while Michael Dowse was set to return to direct the film, and Evan Goldberg to produce. On May 15, 2015, it was announced that Baruchel would make his directorial debut on the film, titled Goon: Last of the Enforcers, and would also return in the role of Pat, while Seann William Scott would also return to play the role of the hockey enforcer, Doug "The Thug" Glatt. Goldberg would be executive producer, while David Gross, Jesse Shapira, Jeff Arkuss and Andre Rouleau would be producers on the film. On June 8, 2015 Elisha Cuthbert joined the cast of the film along with the returning cast of Liev Schreiber and Alison Pill from the first film. On June 10, 2015, the complete cast of the film was announced by Entertainment One, Wyatt Russell was set to play Anders Cain, a volatile young captain of the Halifax Highlanders, Marc-André Grondin to play a superstar Xavier LaFlamme, Kim Coates as Highlanders coach Ronnie Hortense, Pill would star as Glatt's love interest Eva and Schreiber as Ross "The Boss" Rhea, while Cuthbert would play Mary, the outlandish sister of Pill's character Eva, who is now married to Doug the Thug. In a tweet on July 7, 2015 from the set of the film, TSN's Sportscaster James Duthie revealed that he and T.J. Miller were cast to play the sportscasters in the film. On July 23, 2015, real NHL players Tyler Seguin and Michael Del Zotto were spotted on the set during filming along with Scott. On August 7, 2015, a tweet by Georges Laraque stated that he was headed to the set with Colton Orr and George Parros. Principal photography on the film began on June 22, 2015, in Toronto, Ontario. Baruchel also tweeted the photo of the cast from the set. Late-June, filming was taking place in Hamilton, Ontario's Corktown area, the Barrie Molson Centre in Barrie in July until August 13, 2015 and near Bayfront Park in Hamilton. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 42% based on 62 reviews, with an average rating of 5/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Seann William Scott remains as watchable as ever in the title role, but Goon: Last of the Enforcers repeats its predecessor's violent and profane formula to diminishing effect." On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 48 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Barry Hertz from The Globe and Mail gave the film 3 out of 4 and wrote "Baruchel's sequel is everything Dowse's original film was, amped up a degree or three: The fights involving dim-bulb hero Doug (Seann William Scott) and his various rivals are bloodier, the locker-room talk is dirtier and the on-ice action is slicker. The unlikely project – how many made-in-Canada films spark a franchise? – doesn't quite reach the heights of the original film, which found surprising pathos in Doug's tale of sweet good guy to brutal goon. But it delivers on nearly every other scale, including standout performances from returning players Scott, Alison Pill and Liev Schreiber, as well as some bits of comic gold courtesy of series rookies Wyatt Russell, T.J. Miller and Jason Jones." Toronto Sun gave the film 3.5 out of 5, and stated "Violent, crude and really funny, Goon: Last of The Enforcers, works for the same reason the original Goon worked — you will love the characters." National Post gave the film a 1 out of 4. List of films about ice hockey "Mr. Will Wong, Toronto Entertainment Blogger". "Goon: Last of the Enforcers (2017)". AllMovie. Retrieved April 22, 2017. "Goon - Last of the Enforcers". British Board of Film Classification. Archived July 22, 2017 "Hot Sheet: Top 5 Canadian films April 21 to 27, 2017". Playback. Brunico Communications. May 2, 2017. Retrieved May 9, 2017. "Goon: Last of the Enforcers". ComingSoon.net. CraveOnline. Retrieved 25 February 2018. Fleming, Mike Jr. (June 10, 2015). "Hockey Brawler Pic 'Goon' Sequel Has Wyatt Russell Squaring Off With Liev Schreiber, Seann William Scott". deadline.com. Retrieved June 12, 2015. "James Duthie stars alongside T.J. Miller in the Goon sequel!". tsn.ca. July 8, 2015. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 23, 2015. Peters, Chris (July 23, 2015). "LOOK: Tyler Seguin, Michael Del Zotto on set for 'Goon 2' cameos". cbssports.com. Retrieved July 24, 2015. Q&A: Jay Baruchel talks Goon, Subban, Therrien, Elisha Cuthbert TRUMBORE, DAVE (September 24, 2012). "Jay Baruchel Tweets GOON 2 Update; Will Co-Write with Jesse Chabot and Michael Dowse Will Return to Direct; Evan Goldberg Will Produce". collider.com. Retrieved June 12, 2015. Kit, Borys (May 15, 2015). "Jay Baruchel to Direct 'Goon' Sequel (Exclusive)". hollywoodreporter.com. Retrieved June 12, 2015. Kit, Borys (June 8, 2015). "Elisha Cuthbert Joins Seann William Scott for 'Goon' Sequel (Exclusive)". hollywoodreporter.com. Retrieved June 12, 2015. Georges Laraque [@GeorgesLaraque] (August 7, 2015). "With Colton Orr and @GeorgeParros on our way to the set to film "Goon 2" yeah!" (Tweet). Retrieved May 11, 2017 – via Twitter. "On the Set for 6/22/15: Spielberg's 'The Bfg' Wraps Along with 'Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles' Sequel, Woody Harrelson Starts 'Wilson'". ssninsider.com. June 22, 2015. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved June 23, 2015. Jay Baruchel [@BaruchelNDG] (June 19, 2015). "The boys are back in town. #GOON #LASTOFTHEENFORCERS" (Tweet). Retrieved May 11, 2017 – via Twitter. "Browse by Corktown in Area at Historical Hamilton". historicalhamilton.com. Retrieved 2015-08-29. "Extras wanted for 'Goons 2' filming in Barrie". barrie.ctvnews.ca. July 8, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015. "Filming in Hamilton this week". thespec.com. June 30, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2015. "Goon: Last of the Enforcers (2017)". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved May 9, 2020. "Goon: Last of the Enforcers reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved September 1, 2017. Hertz, Barry (March 17, 2017). "Goon: Last of the Enforcers is a welcome addition to a Canadian hockey franchise". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved August 12, 2017. Braun, Liz (March 16, 2017). "'Goon: Last of the Enforcers' review: Violent, crude and funny". Toronto Sun. Retrieved August 12, 2017. Marsh, Calum (March 19, 2017). "Gross misconduct: The unfunny Goon sequel is everything its predecessor managed not to be". National Post. Retrieved May 11, 2017. Goon: Last of the Enforcers at IMDb Goon: Last of the Enforcers at Rotten Tomatoes