Social philosophy examines questions about the foundations of social institutions, social behavior, and interpretations of society in terms of ethical values rather than empirical relations. Social philosophers emphasize understanding the social contexts for political, legal, moral and cultural questions, and the development of novel theoretical frameworks, from social ontology to care ethics to cosmopolitan theories of democracy, natural law, human rights, gender equity and global justice. There is often a considerable overlap between the questions addressed by social philosophy and ethics or value theory. Other forms of social philosophy include political philosophy and jurisprudence, which are largely concerned with the societies of state and government and their functioning. Social philosophy, ethics, and political philosophy all share intimate connections with other disciplines in the social sciences and the humanities. In turn, the social sciences themselves are of focal interest to the philosophy of social science. The philosophy of language and social epistemology are subfields which overlap in significant ways with social philosophy. Some topics dealt with by social philosophy are: Agency and free will The will to power Accountability Speech acts Situational ethics Modernism and postmodernism Individualism Identity Property Rights Authority Ideologies Cultural criticism A list of philosophers that have concerned themselves, although most of them not exclusively, with social philosophy: Theodor Adorno Giorgio Agamben Hannah Arendt Alain Badiou Mikhail Bakunin Jean Baudrillard Walter Benjamin Jeremy Bentham Edmund Burke Judith Butler Thomas Carlyle Chanakya Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky Confucius Simone de Beauvoir Guy Debord Émile Durkheim Terry Eagleton Friedrich Engels Julius Evola Michel Foucault Sigmund Freud Erich Fromm Giovanni Gentile Henry George Erving Goffman Jürgen Habermas G. W. F. Hegel Martin Heidegger Thomas Hobbes Max Horkheimer Ivan Illich Carl Jung Ibn Khaldun Peter Kropotkin Jacques Lacan R. D. Laing Henri Lefebvre Emmanuel Levinas John Locke Georg Lukács Herbert Marcuse Karl Marx Marshall McLuhan John Stuart Mill Huey P. Newton Friedrich Nietzsche Michael Oakeshott Antonie Pannekoek Plato Karl Popper Pierre-Joseph Proudhon John Rawls Wilhelm Röpke Jean-Jacques Rousseau John Ruskin Bertrand Russell Jean-Paul Sartre Alfred Schmidt Arthur Schopenhauer Roger Scruton Socrates Pitirim A. Sorokin Thomas Sowell Herbert Spencer Oswald Spengler Charles Taylor Alexis de Tocqueville Max Weber John Zerzan Slavoj Žižek Outline of sociology Social simulation Social theory Sociological theory Sociology "Definition of SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY". "Overview - Journal of Social Philosophy - Wiley Online Library". onlinelibrary.wiley.com. "Social Philosophy". Cavite State University Main Campus.