Where the Heart Is is a 2000 American romantic drama film directed by Matt Williams and starring Natalie Portman, Stockard Channing, Ashley Judd, and Joan Cusack with supporting roles by James Frain, Dylan Bruno, Keith David, and Sally Field. The screenplay, written by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel, is based on the best-selling 1995 novel of the same name by Billie Letts. The film follows five years in the life of Novalee Nation, a pregnant 17-year-old who is abandoned by her boyfriend at a Walmart in a small Oklahoma town. She secretly moves into the store, where she eventually gives birth to her baby, which attracts media attention. With the help of friends, she makes a new life for herself in the town. Novalee Nation (Natalie Portman)—a 17-year-old with a seven-month pregancy and an aversion to the number 5—is abandoned by her boyfriend Willy Jack Pickens (Dylan Bruno) in a Walmart store when they stop at Sequoyah, Oklahoma to buy shoes. Whilst stranded, she meets Thelma "Sister" Husband (Stockard Channing) who presents her with a buckeye tree, and local photographer Moses Whitecotton (Keith David) who advises her to give her baby a strong name. Novalee also becomes acquainted with surly librarian Forney Hull (James Frain) who cares for his mentally and physically unwell sister Mary Elizabeth (Margaret Hoard). During a thunderstorm Novalee, who has been living undetected inside the Walmart, goes into labour. Forney, now in awe of Novalee, smashes through the window to help deliver the child her mother names Americus. Novalee instantly becomes a media darling and is befriended by local nurse Lexie Coop (Ashley Judd). Her estranged mother Mama Lil (Sally Field) visits after seeing her daughter on television, but disappears with the money donated by well-wishers, and Sister Husband offers to take in both Novalee and Americus. Novalee trains as a photographer under Moses' mentorship whilst working at Walmart. A tornado blows through Sequoyah and Sister Husband is killed, but Novalee discovers she is the beneficiary of Sister's estate, and builds a new home for herself and Americus. Meanwhile, after a spell in prison and travelling to Nashville, Willy Jack teams with cranky music agent Ruth Meyers (Joan Cusack) who gives him a makeover and the stage name "Billy Shadow." Novalee arrives in Las Vegas to accept a photo contest award after submitting an image of Americus—who had previously survived an abduction attempt—and the still-standing buckeye tree amidst the damage from the storm. Simultaneously, Willy Jack—who happens to be in the same hotel—is informed that his old cellmate is suing him for plagiarism, and Ruth drops Willy Jack as a client for disloyalty. Upon her return to Sequoyah, Novalee discovers Lexie has been attacked by a new love interest who molested her two eldest children. Lexie's injuries hinder her nursing job, and she and her children move in with Novalee and Americus. Mary Elizabeth later passes away and when Forney does not appear at the funeral, Novalee finds him in a hotel and comforts him. They act on the feelings they have long denied and spend the night together. Forney confesses his love, but Novalee confides in Lexie she has never considered herself good enough for Forney and is confused about her feelings for him. Believing his life would be a dead end with her, Novalee lies to Forney, claiming she does not love him, leaving Forney heartbroken. Novalee learns that Lexie is seeing Ernie (Bob Coonrod), an exterminator who lacks the physical attributes she prefers but fell in love with him after learning he gave his ex-wife his restored 1967 Chevy Camaro in exchange for custody of his stepdaughter whom he adopted as his own. The couple marry, and Lexie tells Novalee that she is pregnant. Severely depressed at his ruined career following the lawsuit, Willy Jack becomes a depressed alcoholic. He wanders off drunk and collapses on a railroad track where he is unable to move as a train approaches. On Americus's 5th birthday, Novalee picks up a newspaper and sees an article about Willy Jack's accident. Novalee visits Willy Jack in hospital and realises he is a changed man, but warns him never to contact Americus. After driving Willy Jack home to Tennessee, she visits Forney at Bowdoin College where she confesses her love for him, and they return to Sequoyah where they marry in a ceremony held in the Walmart, surrounded by their close friends. Natalie Portman as Novalee Nation, a pregnant teen who gets stranded in Sequoyah. Ashley Judd as Lexie Coop, a nurse who lives in Sequoyah and becomes Novalee's best friend. Stockard Channing as Thelma "Sister" Husband, a promiscuous religious woman in Sequoyah. She is the first to befriend Novalee when Thelma mistakes her for somebody she used to know years earlier. Joan Cusack as Ruth Meyers, a cranky music agent. James Frain as Forney Hull, a librarian in Sequoyah who becomes Novalee's love interest. Dylan Bruno as Willy Jack Pickens, Novalee's ex-boyfriend and presumably Americus' biological father. Keith David as Moses Whitecotton, a Walmart portrait photographer who later trains Novalee in photography. Richard Andrew Jones as Mr. Sprock, Thelma's partner. Sally Field as Mama Lil, the estranged mother of Novalee. Laura House as Nicki, one of Novalee's friends from Tennessee. Karey Green as Rhonda, one of Novalee's friends from Tennessee. Mark Vogues as a religious man from Midnight, Mississippi, who abducts baby Americus. Angee Hughes as a religious woman from Midnight, Mississippi, who abducts baby Americus. Margaret Hoard as Mary Elizabeth Hull, the sick sister of Forney. Mackenzie Fitzgerald as Americus Nation, the daughter of Novalee. Alicia Godwin as Jolene, a 14-year-old girl who ropes Willy Jack into assisting in her recent heist. Dennis Letts (the book author's husband) as an unnamed sheriff who arrests Willy Jack for being involved in Jolene's heist. Rodger Boyce as Officer Harry David Alvarado as Tommy Reynolds, a cellmate of Willy Jack during his time in prison. Willy Jack stole his song that he wrote about. Richard Nance as Johnny DeSotto, a known music agent who meets Willy Jack. Bob Coonrod as Ernie, an exterminator that becomes Lexie's love interest. Cody Linley as Brownie Coop, one of Lexie's children. Adrian and Michael Garza as Young Brownie Coop (uncredited) Camryn Callaway as Baby Ruth Coop, one of Lexie's children. Jessica Hinderliter as Young Baby Ruth Coop Shelby Callaway as Cherry Coop, one of Lexie's children. Sarah Hinderliter as Young Cherry Coop Kaylie Harmony as Praline Coop Heather Kafka as Delphia Jim Beaver had a part in the film as Clawhammer, but his scene was deleted. In the novel, Novalee's aversion is to the number 7, however this is replaced throughout in the movie to the number 5 where appropriate Sister Husband has brown hair in the movie and blue hair in the novel. In the novel, Benny Goodluck gives Novalee a buckeye tree for good luck. In the film, Benny is omitted, and the buckeye tree was given to Novalee by Sister Husband. In the novel, Jolene is the daughter of a dive bar owner and shifted the blame of her convenience store robbery on him to the police that pull them over. In the film, Jolene's parents aren't mentioned. In the novel, Lexie is obese. She is constantly trying new fad diets and weight loss schemes. This aspect of her character is removed from the film version. In the novel, Walmart's owner Sam Walton gives Novalee a check while offering her a job at Walmart. Sam Walton's appearance was omitted from the film. In the novel, Willy Jack has a heart attack after being struck in the chest. In the film, he gets into a fight with his cellmate. In the novel, Willy Jack gets his guitar from the prison librarian Claire Hudson which used to belong to her late son Finny. In the film, it was mentioned that Willy Jack's later cellmate Tommy Reynolds gave him his guitar. In the novel, Sister Husband died from her injuries after being trapped in a trailer while visiting a neighbor. Her death is not shown in the film. In the novel, Moses has a wife named Certain, to whom Novalee becomes close when she and Americus move in with her after Sister Husband's death. She is entirely omitted from the film. In the novel, Ruth Meyers ends Willy Jack's career for going behind her back. In the film, she also ends his career when she gets a call from Tommy Reynolds' lawyer, who is suing Jack for taking the song "Beat of a Heart" from him. In the novel, Mary Elizabeth Hull dies in the fire at her library. In the film, she succumbs to the complications of her alcoholism. In the novel, Lexie marries her co-worker Leon Yoder. In the film, Lexie marries Ernie the exterminator. In the novel, Forney instead travels for some time before settling in Chicago. In the film, Forney returns to school. In the novel, Willy Jack makes it to California, where he fails to get money from his cousin in Bakersfield, tries to pawn his guitar for money which falls through, and ditches his current girlfriend, which leads to his train accident. In the film, his girlfriend goes into a restaurant to eat, leading to Willy Jack's train accident. Novalee's marriage to Forney only occurs in the film. Original music for the film was produced by Mason Daring. A soundtrack of the original music was released by RCA Records, as well as a music compilation soundtrack featuring songs used in the film by artists such as Emmylou Harris, Lyle Lovett, Martina McBride, and John Hiatt. The song "That's the Beat of a Heart" was performed by The Warren Brothers and Sara Evans. A music video was made for the song, which is included as a bonus extra on the DVD release and features a number of scenes from the film. The film received mostly negative reviews. Metacritic gives it a score of 30% based on reviews from 28 critics. Rotten Tomatoes gives it a 35% approval rating, based on reviews from 97 critics, with the site's consensus stating that the film's "poor script and messy plot undermines the decent cast." The film opened in theaters in the United States on April 28, 2000. Where the Heart Is accumulated (USD)$8,292,939 in its opening weekend, opening at number 4. The film went on to make $33,772,838 at the North American box office, and an additional $7,090,880 internationally for a worldwide total of $40,863,718. Metacritic (Where The Heart Is) Rotten Tomatoes (Where The Heart Is) "Where the Heart Is". boxofficemojo.com. Retrieved April 15, 2006. Where the Heart Is at IMDb Where the Heart Is at Box Office Mojo Where the Heart Is full movie on Youtube