Tucker Swanson McNear Carlson (born May 16, 1969) is an American conservative political commentator and writer who hosted the nightly political talk show Tucker Carlson Tonight on Fox News from 2016 to 2023. Since his contract with Fox News was terminated, he has hosted Tucker on X. An advocate of former U.S. President Donald Trump, Carlson has been described as "perhaps the highest-profile proponent of 'Trumpism'", and as "the most influential voice in right-wing media, without a close second." Carlson began his media career in the 1990s, writing for The Weekly Standard and other publications. He was a CNN commentator from 2000 to 2005 and a co-host of Crossfire, the network's prime-time news debate program, from 2001 to 2005. From 2005 to 2008, he hosted the nightly program Tucker on MSNBC. In 2009, he became a political analyst for Fox News, appearing on various programs before launching his own show. In 2010, Carlson co-founded and served as the initial editor-in-chief of the right-wing news and opinion website The Daily Caller, until selling his ownership stake and leaving in 2020. He has written three books: Politicians, Partisans, and Parasites (2003), Ship of Fools (2018), and The Long Slide (2021). Described as a leading voice of White grievance politics, Carlson is known for circulating far-right ideas into mainstream politics and discourse. He has promoted conspiracy theories on topics such as demographic replacement, COVID-19, the January 6 United States Capitol attack, and Ukrainian bioweapons; and has been noted for false and misleading statements about these and other topics. Carlson's remarks on race, immigration, and women – including slurs he said on air between 2006 and 2011 – have been described by some as racist and sexist, and provoked advertiser boycotts of Tucker Carlson Tonight. In April 2023, Fox News dismissed Carlson and canceled his show without any explanation. Tucker Carlson Tonight had at that point been one of the most-watched cable news shows in the country. Carlson was among the hosts named in the Dominion Voting Systems v. Fox News Network defamation lawsuit for broadcasting false statements about the plaintiff company's voting machines that Fox News settled for $787.5 million and required Fox News to acknowledge that the broadcast statements were false. Carlson is a critic of immigration. Formerly an economic libertarian, he now supports protectionism. In 2004, he renounced his initial support for the Iraq War, and has since been skeptical of U.S. foreign interventions. He was said to have influenced some of Trump's decisions as president, including the cancellation of a military strike against Iran in 2019, the dismissal of John Bolton as National Security Advisor the same year, and the commutation of Roger Stone's prison sentence in 2020, and would criticize Trump when he believed he was straying from "Trumpism". Carlson has often defended Russian President Vladimir Putin. In February 2024, he became the first Western journalist to interview Putin since the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. Carlson was born Tucker McNear Carlson at the Children's Hospital in San Francisco, California, on May 16, 1969. He is the elder son of Lisa McNear (née Lombardi; 1945–2011), an artist from San Francisco, and Dick Carlson (1941–), a former "gonzo reporter" who became the director of Voice of America, president of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and the U.S. ambassador to the Seychelles, and more recently a director at the lobbying firm Policy Impact Strategic Communications. Carlson's brother, Buckley Peck Carlson, later Buckley Swanson Peck Carlson, is nearly two years younger and has worked as a communications manager and a Republican Party political operative. Carlson's paternal grandparents were Richard Boynton and Dorothy Anderson, who were teenagers when they placed his father at The Home for Little Wanderers orphanage, where he was fostered by Carl Moberger of Malden, near Boston, a tannery worker of Swedish descent, and his wife Florence Moberger. Carlson's father was adopted at the age of two by upper-middle-class New Englanders, the Carlsons, an executive at the Winslow Brothers & Smith Tannery of Norwood (the oldest tannery in America) and his wife. Carlson's maternal great-great-great-grandfather was Henry Miller, the "Cattle King". Carlson's maternal great-great-grandfather Cesar Lombardi immigrated to New York from Switzerland in 1860. Carlson is also a distant relative of Massachusetts politicians Ebenezer R. Hoar and George M. Brooks. Carlson himself was named after his great-great-great-grandfather Dr. J. C. Tucker and his great-great-grandfather George W. McNear. Carlson is of one thirty-second Italian-Swiss ancestry. In 1976, Carlson's parents divorced after the nine-year marriage reportedly "turned sour". Carlson's father was granted custody of Tucker and his brother. Carlson's mother left the family when he was six and moved to France. The boys never saw her again. When Carlson was in first grade, his father moved Tucker and his brother to the La Jolla neighborhood of San Diego, California, and raised them there. Carlson attended La Jolla Country Day School and grew up in a home overlooking the La Jolla Beach and Tennis Club. His father owned property in Nevada, Vermont, and islands in Maine and Nova Scotia. In 1984, his father unsuccessfully challenged the incumbent Republican Party Mayor Roger Hedgecock in the San Diego mayoral race. In 1979, Carlson's father married Patricia Caroline Swanson, an heiress to Swanson Enterprises, daughter of Gilbert Carl Swanson and niece of Senator J. William Fulbright. Though Patricia remained a beneficiary of the family fortune, the Swansons had sold the brand to the Campbell Soup Company in 1955 and did not own it by the time of Carlson's father's marriage. This was the third marriage for Swanson, who legally adopted Tucker Carlson and his brother. Carlson was briefly enrolled at Collège du Léman, a boarding school in the canton of Geneva in French-speaking Switzerland, but said he was "kicked out". He attained his secondary education at St. George's School, a boarding school in Middletown, Rhode Island, where he started dating his future wife, Susan Andrews, the headmaster's daughter. He then spent four years attending Trinity College in Hartford, Connecticut and graduated in 1991 with a B.A. in history. Carlson's Trinity yearbook describes him as a member of the "Dan White Society", an apparent reference to the American political assassin who murdered San Francisco Mayor George Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk. After college, Carlson tried to join the Central Intelligence Agency, but his application was denied, after which he decided to pursue a career in journalism with the encouragement of his father, who advised him that "they'll take anybody". Carlson began his career in journalism as a fact-checker for Policy Review, a national conservative journal then published by The Heritage Foundation and later acquired by the Hoover Institution. He then worked as an opinion writer at the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette newspaper in Little Rock, Arkansas, before joining The Weekly Standard news magazine in 1995. Writer Andrew Ferguson, who served as senior editor of The Weekly Standard said that Carlson "had as much talent as anybody who ever came through the door." Carlson sought a role with the publication after hearing of its founding, fearing he would be "written off as a wing nut" if he instead joined The American Spectator. In 1999, Carlson interviewed then-Governor George W. Bush for Talk magazine. He quoted Bush mocking Karla Faye Tucker, who was executed in Bush's state of Texas, and frequently using the word "fuck". The piece led to bad publicity for Bush's 2000 presidential campaign. Bush claimed that "Mr. Carlson misread, mischaracterized me. He's a good reporter, he just misunderstood about how serious that was. I take the death penalty very seriously." Among liberals, Carlson's piece received praise, with Democratic consultant Bob Shrum calling it "vivid". Carlson said of the interview, "I thought I'd be ragged for writing a puffy piece. My wife said people are going to think you're hunting for a job in the Bush campaign." Further into his career in print, Carlson worked as a columnist for New York magazine and Reader's Digest; writing for Esquire, Slate, The Weekly Standard, The New Republic, The New York Times Magazine, The Daily Beast, and The Wall Street Journal. John F. Harris of Politico would later remark on how Carlson was "viewed ... as an important voice of the intelligentsia" during this period. While working on a story for New York covering the Taliban, Carlson, alongside his father, was involved in a plane crash as it made its landing on a runway in Dubai on October 17, 2001. Carlson's 2003 Esquire profile on his journey to Liberia alongside Reverend Al Sharpton and other civil and political rights activists would garner a nomination at the National Magazine Awards. In his early television career Carlson wore bow ties, a habit from boarding school he continued on air until 2006. On June 21, 2021, New York Times reporter Ben Smith reported that Carlson was a media source for several journalists and authors, including Michael Isikoff, Michael Wolff, Brian Stelter, and others who wrote critically of Donald Trump. In 2000, Carlson co-hosted the short-lived show The Spin Room on CNN. In 2001, he was appointed co-host of Crossfire, in which Carlson and Robert Novak represented the political right (alternating on different nights), while James Carville and Paul Begala, also alternating as hosts, represented the left. Carlson's 2003 interview with Britney Spears, wherein he asked if she opposed the ongoing Iraq War and she responded, "[W]e should just trust our president in every decision he makes", was featured in the 2004 film Fahrenheit 9/11, for which she won a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actress at the 25th Golden Raspberry Awards. In October 2004, comedian and The Daily Show host Jon Stewart appeared on Crossfire, ostensibly to promote America (The Book), but he instead launched into a critique of Crossfire, saying the show was harmful to political discourse in the U.S. Carlson was singled out by Stewart for criticism, with Carlson in turn criticizing Stewart for being biased toward the left. Carlson and Begala later recalled that Stewart and one of the book's co-authors, Ben Karlin, stayed at CNN for more than an hour after the show to discuss the issues he had raised on the air, with Carlson saying, "It was heartfelt. [Stewart] needed to do this." In 2017, The New York Times referred to Stewart's "on-air dressing-down" of Carlson as an "ignominious career [moment]" for Carlson, leading to the show's cancellation. The Atlantic suggested that Stewart's appearance was a turning point leading to how Carlson remade himself. On January 5, 2005, CNN chief Jonathan Klein told Carlson the network had decided not to renew his contract. CNN announced that it was ending its relationship with Carlson and would soon cancel Crossfire. Carlson later said: "I resigned from Crossfire in April [2004], many months before Jon Stewart came on our show, because I didn't like the partisanship, and I thought in some ways it was kind of a pointless conversation." Carlson was hired to helm a new program for PBS in November 2003, Tucker Carlson: Unfiltered, which ran concurrently with Carlson's Crossfire gig on CNN. The show launched on June 18, 2004, and was, according to The New Yorker, "part of a broader effort to push PBS further to the right ideologically". Carlson announced he was leaving the show roughly a year after it started on June 12, 2005, despite the Corporation for Public Broadcasting allocating money for another show season. Carlson wanted to focus on his new MSNBC show Tucker and said that although PBS was one of the "least bad" instances of government spending he disagreed with, it was still "problematic". Carlson's early evening show Tucker, originally titled The Situation With Tucker Carlson, premiered on June 13, 2005, on MSNBC. Rachel Maddow and Jay Severin featured as guests on a rotating panel. He also hosted a late-afternoon weekday wrap-up for the network during the 2006 Winter Olympics. He reported the aftermath of the Virginia Tech shooting and Johnson Space Center shooting in 2007. Tucker was canceled by the network on March 10, 2008, owing to low ratings; the final episode aired on March 14, 2008. He remained with the network as a senior campaign correspondent for the 2008 election. Brian Stelter, writing for The New York Times, reported that, "during Mr. Carlson's tenure, MSNBC's evening programming moved gradually to the left. His former time slots, 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., were subsequently occupied by two liberals, Ed Schultz and Rachel Maddow." Carlson said the network had changed a lot and "they didn't have a role for me". Carlson described being fired by MSNBC as leading to a professional "meltdown". In discussing the termination, he described himself as "hav[ing] a lot of problems with authority and being told what to do. I don't react well to it. I become really aggressive[.]" Carlson was a contestant on season 3 of the reality show Dancing with the Stars, which aired in 2006; he was paired with professional dancer Elena Grinenko. Carlson took four-hour-a-day ballroom dance classes to prepare. In an interview a month before the show began, he lamented that he would miss classes during a two-week-long MSNBC assignment in Lebanon, saying, "It's hard for me to remember the moves." Carlson said he accepted ABC's invitation to perform because "I don't do things that I'm not good at very often. I'm psyched to get to do that." Carlson was the first contestant eliminated, on September 13, 2006. Carlson had cameo appearances as himself in the Season 1 episode "Hard Ball" of 30 Rock and in a Season 9 episode of The King of Queens. He had a cameo appearance in the 2008 film Swing Vote, again playing himself. On January 11, 2010, Carlson and Neil Patel (a former aide to Dick Cheney, and former college roommate of Carlson) launched a political news website titled The Daily Caller. Carlson served as editor-in-chief, and occasionally wrote opinion pieces with Patel. The website was funded by the conservative activist Foster Friess. By February 2010, The Daily Caller was part of the White House rotating press pool. Carlson reportedly offered his employees free junk food, an unmonitored keg, provided them with a ping pong table, and allowed them to sleep under their desks. In interviews, Carlson said The Daily Caller would not be tied to ideology but rather "breaking stories of importance", and "We're not enforcing any kind of ideological orthodoxy on anyone." Columnist Mickey Kaus quit after Carlson refused to run a column critical of Fox News's coverage of the immigration policy debate due to his contractual obligations to Fox News. In June 2010, The Daily Caller published excerpts from e-mails sent between members of JournoList, an invitation-only liberal forum, consisting of "several hundred journalists, academics and policy experts" launched in 2007 by Ezra Klein. The forum barred media reporters and conservatives. Carlson had earlier attempted to join the forum on May 25, 2010, but was denied by Klein. Klein offered to form a bipartisan forum with Carlson, but Carlson declined. Daily Caller employees later impersonated an editor of the Arkansas Times to gain entry into JournoList. The e-mails leaked by The Daily Caller, which detailed efforts to, according to Carlson, "formulate the most effective talking points in order to defeat Palin and McCain and help elect Barack Obama president", also contained statements by The Washington Post's Dave Weigel "wishing for the death of Rush Limbaugh" among other controversial remarks that The Washington Post considered "untenable", leading to his resignation. In February 2012, The Daily Caller published an "investigative series" of articles co-authored by Carlson, purporting to be an insiders' exposé of Media Matters for America, the liberal watchdog group that monitors and scrutinizes conservative media outlets, and its founder David Brock. Reuters media critic and libertarian Jack Shafer, while commenting "I've never thought much of Media Matters' style of watchdogging or Brock's journalism", nevertheless sharply criticized The Daily Caller piece for relying on conjecture, absence of evidence, and inclusion of "anonymously sourced crap", adding that "Daily Caller is attacking Media Matters with bad journalism and lame propaganda." In June 2017, the Center for Media and Democracy, a liberal watchdog organization, said The Daily Caller was paid $150,000 by Donald Trump's 2016 presidential campaign for its list of subscribers, whom the Trump campaign then emailed at least 25 times. The watchdog said Carlson had a conflict of interest and had violated journalistic standards. In June 2020, Carlson sold his one-third stake in The Daily Caller to Patel for an undisclosed amount and said "Neil [Patel] runs it. I wasn't adding anything. So we made it official". In May 2009, Fox News announced that Carlson was being hired as a Fox News contributor. He was a frequent guest panelist on Fox's late-night satire show Red Eye w/Greg Gutfeld, made frequent appearances on the All-Star Panel segment of Special Report with Bret Baier, was a substitute host of Hannity in Sean Hannity's absence, and produced and hosted a special entitled Fighting for Our Children's Minds in September 2010. On the eve of then-President Barack Obama's first debate with Mitt Romney in October 2012, Carlson publicized a 2007 video recording of then-Senator Obama criticizing the federal government's response to Hurricane Katrina and complimenting his pastor at the time, Reverend Jeremiah Wright. Wright's sermons had been a controversy in Obama's 2008 presidential campaign. Portions of the video had been available online since 2007. An anonymous user going by the name "Sore Throwt" (a pun on famous Watergate informant Deep Throat) had been looking for a buyer of the tape for a week before Carlson distributed it. In April 2013, Carlson replaced Dave Briggs as a co-host of Fox & Friends Weekend, joining Alisyn Camerota and Clayton Morris on Saturday and Sunday mornings. On November 14, 2016, Carlson began hosting Tucker Carlson Tonight on Fox News. The premiere episode of the show, which replaced On the Record, was the network's most watched telecast of the year in the time slot, with 3.7 million viewers. Tucker Carlson Tonight aired at 7:00 p.m. each weeknight until January 9, 2017, when Carlson's show replaced Megyn Kelly at the 9:00 p.m. time slot after she left Fox News. In January 2017, Forbes reported that the show had "scored consistently high ratings, averaging 2.8 million viewers per night and ranking as the number two cable news program behind The O'Reilly Factor in December". In March 2017, Tucker Carlson Tonight was the most watched cable program in the 9:00 p.m. time slot. On April 19, 2017, Fox News announced that Tucker Carlson Tonight would air at 8:00 p.m. following the cancellation of The O'Reilly Factor. Tucker Carlson Tonight was the third-highest-rated cable news show as of March 2018. In October 2018, Tucker Carlson Tonight was the second-highest rated cable news show in prime time, after The Sean Hannity Show with Sean Hannity, with 3.2 million nightly viewers. By the end of 2018, the show had begun to be boycotted by at least 20 advertisers after Carlson said immigration makes the country "poorer, dirtier and more divided". According to Fox News, the advertisers only moved their ad buys to other programs. In November 2018, a "Smash Racism D.C." activist group associated with antifa protested outside Carlson's home in Washington, D.C. Carlson's driveway was vandalized with a spray-painted anarchist symbol. Carlson alleged "someone started throwing himself against the front door and actually cracked the front door," though police observed no damage to the door, nor did Washington Post columnist Erik Wemple when he visited the Carlson home the next day. Carlson was not home at the time of the incident. By January 2019, Carlson's show dropped to third with 2.8 million nightly viewers, down six percent from the previous year. The show also lost at least 26 advertisers. In March 2019, there were calls to fire Carlson from Fox News after Media Matters resurfaced remarks he had made over several years to the radio show Bubba the Love Sponge concerning women, calling them "like dogs" and "extremely primitive", and statutory rape, Iraqis, and immigrants. His ratings rose eight percent that week despite the boycotts. By August 2019, Media Matters calculated that some companies had fulfilled their media buy contracts and advertising inventory for the time slot and had now begun their purchases for other time slots on Fox News. At the close of 2019, Carlson's Nielsen ratings among all viewers 25–54 placed him second only to Fox's The Sean Hannity Show among cable news shows. In December 2019, Playboy model Karen McDougal sued Fox News after Carlson, in a 2018 episode of his show, accused her of extorting Donald Trump. In September 2020, federal judge Mary Kay Vyskocil dismissed the lawsuit, citing Fox News' defense that Carlson's extortion claims were opinion based and not "statements of fact". The judge also agreed with Fox News' defense that reasonable viewers would have "skepticism" over statements Carlson makes on its show, as he often engages in "exaggeration" and "non-literal commentary", and that Carlson is not "stating actual facts" on its show. Beginning the week of June 8–14, 2020, Tucker Carlson Tonight became the highest-rated cable news show in the U.S., with an average of four million viewers, beating out the shows hosted by fellow Fox News pundits Hannity and Laura Ingraham. This came in the wake of Carlson's remarks criticizing the Black Lives Matter movement, which had caused some companies to pull their advertising from the show, including The Walt Disney Company, T-Mobile, and Papa John's. In July 2020, Carlson's head writer Blake Neff resigned after CNN Business reported that he had been using a pseudonym to post remarks that were widely described as racist, sexist, and homophobic on AutoAdmit, a message board known for its lack of moderation of offensive and defamatory content. The incident drew renewed scrutiny to Carlson's program, already under pressure from sponsors because of Carlson's remarks about Black Lives Matter. Neff had also previously been a writer on The Daily Caller. Carlson condemned Neff's posts on the second episode of Tucker Carlson Tonight that aired after the posts were initially reported. By October 2020, Tucker Carlson Tonight averaged 5.3 million viewers, with the show's monthly average becoming the highest of any cable news program in history at that point. In the 25–54 demographic, the show maintained an average viewership of just over a million, with 670,000 being between 18 and 49. Carlson's program saw a dip in viewership following the aftermath of the 2020 election, losing out to Anderson Cooper 360° in the 25–54 demographic, which Carlson had maintained a hold of the prior month. In 2020, Tucker Carlson Tonight and The Sean Hannity Show became the first cable news programs to finish a full year with viewership in excess of four million. In the week following the inauguration of Joe Biden as president, Tucker Carlson Tonight remained the only cable news program not to see a drop in viewership, slightly increasing from where it stood one week prior and reclaiming its lead among the 25–54 demographic. It remained the most-watched news-related cable show as of mid-2021. Through May 2022 it was a close second to The Five, while leading in the 25–54 demographic. In February 2021, Carlson announced a multiyear deal with Fox News to host a new weekly podcast and series of monthly specials dubbed Tucker Carlson Originals on sister streaming service Fox Nation, which released on March 29. In spring of 2021, he began hosting a show on Fox Nation called Tucker Carlson Today. On the morning of Monday, April 24, 2023, Fox News dismissed Carlson and the executive producer of his evening show. It does not appear that Carlson received advance notice of his dismissal, given that on Friday, April 21, in what became his final show's sign-off, he told his viewers that he would "be back on Monday". As of October 2023, a rotation of guest hosts fill Carlson's old slot until a permanent replacement is found. On April 26, Carlson responded to his departure by tweeting a video that was watched millions of times. Fox did not provide a reason for Carlson's termination. The Los Angeles Times wrote that Chairman of Fox Corporation Rupert Murdoch was responsible for the firing, and that a pending lawsuit from former Fox producer Abby Grossberg and Carlson's coverage of the January 6 U.S. Capitol insurrection both influenced the decision. The Wall Street Journal wrote that Carlson was dismissed due to private messages in which he criticized Fox's management, using vulgar and offensive language. In May, The New York Times reported that in one such message Carlson expressed racist views by criticizing three Trump supporters who were beating one antifa activist: "It's not how white men fight." Less than a week before his ouster Fox retained law firm Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz to investigate Tucker over this and potentially other messages due to liability concerns. The Washington Post wrote that the decision to oust Carlson was made by Murdoch's son, Lachlan, and Fox CEO Suzanne Scott. Fox was reported to have a "stockpile" of damaging information that they would be ready to release in case of any retaliation made by Carlson; the network denied this, however. In a video on his Twitter feed on May 9, 2023, Carlson said he would relaunch his show on Twitter. Just before making the announcement, Carlson's attorneys sent a letter to Fox executives, alleging that Rupert Murdoch and other senior executives "intentionally" broke their promises to him, an alleged breach of contract that he says ought to free him from his non-compete clause. Fox News reportedly sent him a cease and desist after the first episode aired. The first episode of the show, called Tucker on Twitter, was released on June 6, 2023 and lasted just over 10 minutes. During the episode, Carlson claimed that the US had recovered an extraterrestrial starship and its pilot; that Volodymyr Zelensky is "sweaty and rat-like", and was persecuting Christians; that the destruction of the Kakhovka Dam was done by Ukrainian forces; that the Black Lives Matter riots were organized by an unknown entity; and that the truth behind the September 11 attacks was still classified. In June 2023, he was reportedly seeking funds to start a new media company with Neil Patel. On August 23, 2023, Carlson hosted Donald Trump on Tucker on X, the re-branded name of Twitter, deliberately to conflict with the first 2024 Republican debate. On September 6, 2023, Carlson interviewed Larry Sinclair, who had a criminal record, largely for crimes of deceit and who claimed that he had "had a night of crack cocaine-fueled sex with Barack Obama" 24 years before. The interview was criticized by many, including Elon Musk, owner of X. He launched the streaming service Tucker Carlson Network in December, with both ad-supported and subscription-based content. Initially planned for Twitter/X, Musk's company was unable to deliver the needed technology. Justin Wells, a former executive producer at Fox for Carlson, will oversee programming. Carlson traveled to Russia in February 2024 to interview President Vladimir Putin, whom he "has been an outspoken defender of". It was Putin's first one-on-one interview with a Western journalist since he launched the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. Carlson said that while Ukraine's president Volodymyr Zelenskyy had been given a platform, "not a single Western journalist has bothered to interview the president of the other country involved in this conflict, Vladimir Putin". This sparked backlash from American and European journalists, who pointed out that they had repeatedly been denied interviews with Putin, and that some had been expelled. The Kremlin Press Secretary, Dmitry Peskov, said Carlson had been allowed an interview because "his position is different", saying, "It's not pro-Russian, not pro-Ukrainian, it's pro-American. It starkly contrasts with the stance of traditional Anglo-Saxon media". Some independent Russian journalists were angered by Carlson's words, noting that at least 1,000 independent journalists had fled Russia due to new censorship laws that ban criticism of the war. They also highlighted that two American journalists were currently imprisoned by Russia: Evan Gershkovich of The Wall Street Journal and Alsu Kurmasheva of Radio Free Europe. After the death of prominent Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny in a Russian prison days after the interview, Carlson faced fresh criticism for holding the interview with Putin and saying that "leadership requires killing people". Carlson called Navalny's death "barbaric and awful" in a statement to The New York Times. Carlson authored the memoir Politicians, Partisans, and Parasites: My Adventures in Cable News, published by Warner Books in September 2003, about his television news experiences. It received favorable reviews from Publishers Weekly and the Washingtonian, who both complimented the book for its humor. In May 2017, Carlson, represented by the literary and creative agency Javelin, signed an eight-figure, two-book deal with Simon & Schuster's conservative imprint, Threshold Editions. His first book in the series, Ship of Fools: How a Selfish Ruling Class is Bringing America to the Brink of Revolution, was released in October 2018, and debuted at No. 1 on The New York Times Best Seller list. His second book, The Long Slide: Thirty Years in American Journalism, was released in August 2021. In 2023, a biography of Carlson titled Tucker was released. The book was written by Chadwick Moore with the help of Carlson, who had given the author more than 100 hours of interviews. Moore had stated that the book was intended to tell the story of Carlson's exit from Fox News from the former host's perspective. The book performed poorly, with just over 3,000 copies sold during the first week after its release. Carlson has been described in the media as a conservative, paleoconservative, right-wing extremist, and far right. In 2021, Time magazine said Carlson "may be the most powerful conservative in America". Writing for New York magazine's Intelligencer in 2019, Park MacDougald called Carlson a "Middle American radical", which he described as someone who holds populist economic beliefs; hostility to corporatocracy; fervent positions on nationalism, race, and immigration; and a preference for a strong U.S. president. MacDougald identified this form of radicalism as the ideological core of Trumpism. Carlson is noted for circulating white nationalist views and terminology into mainstream political discourse, in particular, repackaging the fringe racist "replacement" conspiracy theory into a version that accuses Democrats and "elites" of forcing demographic change. More virulent versions of the conspiracy theory have been cited by gunmen in several mass shootings targeting minorities; Carlson has denounced the attacks. Carlson is a Republican. He was previously registered as a Democrat in Washington, D.C., from 2006 to 2020. In 2017, Carlson said his registration as a Democrat was to gain the right to vote in the primaries for mayoral elections in the district, and that he nevertheless "sincerely despise[s]" the Democratic Party and "always vote[d] for the more corrupt candidate over the idealist" in order to favor the status quo and stem progressivism. Carlson campaigned for Republicans and Republican-affiliated causes during his time as a Democrat. In public correspondence in Slate with Texas Monthly's Evan Smith on November 29, 1999, Carlson agreed with Smith's low opinion of Donald Trump, who was then running for president with the Reform Party. Carlson wrote that Trump was "the single most repulsive person on the planet" and that the Reform Party consisted of "a bunch of wackos". Separately, he criticized the party's eventual nominee, Pat Buchanan. In his 2018 book, Ship of Fools, Carlson wrote that he had adopted some of Buchanan's views. Carlson voted for George W. Bush in the 2000 election. Carlson told Salon in 2003 that some Washington conservatives suspected he was "secretly liberal" because he liked John McCain. Carlson said in an interview, "by my criteria, Bush isn't much of a conservative". Carlson did not vote in the 2004 election, citing his souring on the Iraq War, his disillusionment with the once small-government Republican Party, and his disappointment with Bush and like-minded conservatives. Carlson was reportedly floated as a potential candidate for the Libertarian nomination in the 2008 presidential election. He was included in polling at the 2008 Libertarian National Convention, with unconfirmed speculation arising that he was personally funding the effort. Carlson spoke at Ron Paul's independent Rally for the Republic convention, opposite the official 2008 Republican National Convention, in Minneapolis, Minnesota, which served as a "message of revolt to the Republican Party" and a general celebration of Paul's policy proposals. He expressed his disappointment with the Republican nominee for the 2012 election, Mitt Romney, and the health care reform he signed in 2006 as governor of Massachusetts, which contained an individual mandate, saying, "out of 315 million Americans, the Republican Party managed to find the one guy who couldn't run on Obamacare". Writing for Politico in January 2016, Carlson expressed his support for Donald Trump's candidacy and his positions, such as his proposed "Muslim ban", and criticized the other Republican candidates for not similarly making immigration a core issue. During the Trump presidency, Carlson was described in Politico as "perhaps the highest-profile proponent of 'Trumpism' – a blend of anti-immigrant nationalism, economic populism and America First isolationism". Carlson's commentaries did not uniformly praise Trump, but he had frequent scorn for Trump's critics; some commentators called Carlson an exemplar of "anti-anti-Trump" arguments. In March 2023, Carlson defended Trump after he was indicted in New York, calling the indictment "election interference". Despite his praise for Trump, he has at times been critical. Carlson criticized the assassination of Qasem Soleimani, ordered by Trump in January 2020 and said in June 2020 that Trump had let Black Lives Matter protests go too far. In private correspondence, he referred to Trump as a "demonic force" and wrote, "I hate him passionately". Following the 2020 election, Carlson reportedly told people he had voted for independent candidate Kanye West, though Politico points out that it was unclear whether Carlson "was serious or merely joking". In July 2021, Carlson told Time magazine that the Republican Party is "inept and bad at governing" and "much more effective as an oppositional force than it is as a governing party". Carlson supported J. D. Vance in the 2022 Republican U.S. Senate primary in Ohio and privately persuaded Trump to endorse him despite Vance's past anti-Trump comments. Former Hawaii congresswoman and Democratic presidential primary contender Tulsi Gabbard was a substitute host on Tucker Carlson Tonight in 2022; she appeared on the show the night she left the Democratic Party in October 2022, to Carlson's praise. Carlson opposes abortion and has said it is the only political issue he considers non-negotiable. Carlson has described Roe v. Wade as "the most embarrassing court decision handed down in the last century". Carlson wrote in 2000 that capital punishment "deserves more vigorous debate", and in 2003 told Salon, "I'm opposed to the death penalty as I am adamantly opposed to abortion". After saying on Fox News in 2010 that Michael Vick "should have been executed" for dog fighting, Carlson stated that he is "not comfortable with the death penalty under any circumstances". Carlson supports the right to keep and bear arms. He has opposed gun control and the assault weapons ban. He has debated several Democrats on gun control. In 2015, he said Australian gun laws were "insane" and "childish". In March 2018, he criticized Donald Trump for comments supporting gun control after the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting. In a 2019 interview, Carlson said he owns an AR-15 style rifle and said "all my guns are working-class guns". He has a concealed carry permit in the District of Columbia. Carlson aired segments defending Kyle Rittenhouse, a 17-year-old who shot three protesters, killing two, in August 2020 in confrontations during unrest after a police shooting in Kenosha, Wisconsin. At trial Rittenhouse was found not guilty on all charges. Early in his career, Carlson supported libertarian economics. He supported Ron Paul's 1988 presidential candidacy, when Paul ran as the candidate for the Libertarian Party, along with his 2008 presidential candidacy, when Paul ran as a Republican. Carlson said in 2004, "I hate all nanny-state regulations, such as seat belt laws and smoking bans." From 2009 through 2015, Carlson was a senior fellow at the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank. Since 2018, he has promoted more populist economics, attacking libertarianism, saying "market capitalism is not a religion" and portraying some Republicans as "controlled by the banks". In an interview, he said that economic and technological change that occurs too quickly can cause widespread social and political upheaval, and praised President Theodore Roosevelt, saying his intervention in the economy in the early 1900s may have prevented a communist revolution in the United States. In 2019 on Tucker Carlson Tonight, Carlson said America's "ruling class" are, in effect, the "mercenaries" behind the decline of the American middle class, and "any economic system that weakens and destroys families is not worth having. A system like that is the enemy of a healthy society." He cited parallels between the problems of inner cities and rural areas as evidence that the "culture of poverty" cited by conservatives as the cause of urban decline "wasn't the whole story", and that "Certain economic systems allow families to thrive. Thriving families make market economies possible." In January 2019, Carlson used a Washington Post op-ed by Romney to criticize what he described as the "mainstream Republican" worldview, consisting of "unwavering support for a finance-based economy. Carlson has criticized hedge funds (singling out the Republican donor Paul Singer in 2019) and private equity (in criticizing Mitt Romney, former CEO of Bain Capital). He described the business model of firms like Bain as: "Take over an existing company for a short period of time, cut costs by firing employees, run up the debt, extract the wealth and move on, sometimes leaving retirees without their earned pensions. ... Meanwhile, a remarkable number of the companies are now bankrupt or extinct." He attacked payday lenders, saying they "loan people money they can't possibly repay" and "charge them interest that impoverishes them" He praised Democratic presidential candidate Elizabeth Warren's economic plan and called her book The Two Income Trap "one of the best books I've ever read on economics". On his show, Carlson frequently hosts guests who downplay the scientific consensus on climate change, and disagreed with Bill Nye on the subject. Carlson has also said that he does not consider climate change a threat. Carlson believes that global warming will have many positive effects on Earth, namely "more arable land in places like Canada and northern Europe". In 2023, Carlson, Clean Ocean Action, and multiple Republicans criticized New Jersey and New York's use of wind power, falsely claiming that it has been contributing to the deaths of whales. Carlson is skeptical of foreign intervention, has expressed regret for his public support of the U.S. invading Iraq in 2003, and has said "the U.S. ought to hesitate before intervening abroad". Carlson is known for some defenses of authoritarian foreign leaders, including Vladimir Putin of Russia, Nayib Bukele of El Salvador, and Viktor Orbán of Hungary. Carlson was noted for defending Putin in the lead-up to Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine. Carlson's praise for Orbán included a visit and his online film Hungary vs. Soros. and Carlson is sympathetic to Russian president Vladimir Putin, has defended Putin's Russia, and has promoted pro-Kremlin disinformation and propaganda. Carlson said he does not consider Russia a serious threat to the United States, and called for the United States to work with Russia in the Syrian Civil War against a common enemy like the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIS). He asserts that Putin does not hate the United States as much as American liberals do, and suggested there is no reason to dislike Putin, asking his viewers to consider whether Putin has ever called them racist or threatened to get them fired for disagreeing with him. Carlson said it is "not treason, it is not un-American" to support Putin. In 2019, while discussing U.S. military aid to Ukraine during the Donbas War, Carlson said on his show: "Why shouldn't I root for Russia? Which I am". At the end of the show he claimed to have been joking. Afterwards, he explained: "I think we should probably take the side of Russia if we have to choose between Russia and Ukraine". In early 2022, Carlson downplayed Russia's military buildup on Ukraine's borders as a "border dispute". Although Carlson called the Russian invasion of Ukraine "awful" and acknowledged Putin's responsibility, he has promoted pro-Russian disinformation since then, such as a Russian conspiracy theory that the U.S. and Kyiv were developing biological weapons in Ukraine. Many of Carlson's broadcasts have been used by Russian state media to support their messaging, and Mother Jones reported that the Kremlin sent a memo to state media outlets saying it was "essential" to use video clips of Carlson "as much as possible". Mother Jones further observed Carlson was the only Western media pundit that the Kremlin adopted in this way. Carlson's views of Putin's Russia have changed markedly since the 2000s. Back then, he agreed that Russia was becoming a "police state" where "freedom of the press is disappearing", and said that Putin was "in league with our enemies". Peter Beinart of The Atlantic said Carlson has been an "apologist for Donald Trump on the Russia scandal". Carlson described the controversy over revelations that Donald Trump Jr. was willing to accept opposition research about Hillary Clinton from a Russian government official as a "new level of hysteria" and said that Trump Jr. had only been "gossiping with foreigners". Carlson initially supported the Iraq War. A year after the invasion of Iraq, he began criticizing the war, telling The New York Observer: "I think it's a total nightmare and disaster, and I'm ashamed that I went against my own instincts in supporting it." In 2004, Carlson wrote a commentary in Esquire accusing Bush of weakness after the September 11 attacks and in the invasion of Iraq. Carlson said "Iraq is a crappy place filled with a bunch of, you know, semi-literate primitive monkeys, that’s why it wasn’t worth invading.". In July 2017, Carlson said that "we actually don't face any domestic threat from Iran". He asked Max Boot to "tell me how many Americans in the United States have been murdered by terrorists backed by Iran since 9/11?" According to The New York Times, Carlson played an influential role in dissuading Trump from launching military strikes against Iran in response to the shooting down of an American drone in June 2019. Carlson reportedly told Trump that if he listened to his hawkish advisors and went ahead with the strikes, he would not win re-election. In 2019, Carlson lobbied Donald Trump to fire his national security advisor, John Bolton. Carlson said Bolton was "demented" for seeking a military strike against Iran and accused him of undermining Trump by disagreeing publicly with Trump's decisions. Trump fired Bolton on September 10, 2019. Carlson called the 2020 assassination of Qasem Soleimani a "quagmire". He criticized the "chest-beaters" who promote foreign interventions, particularly Senator Ben Sasse (R-NE), and asked, "By the way, if we're still in Afghanistan, 19 years, sad years, later, what makes us think there's a quick way out of Iran?" Carlson opposes overthrowing Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and has downplayed some of the Assad regime's human rights violations in the Syrian Civil War. In April 2018, Carlson questioned whether Assad was responsible for the Douma chemical attack that had occurred a few days earlier and killed dozens. In November 2019, Carlson repeated this claim and queried whether the attack had happened at all. Carlson suggested that a similar attack that occurred the year before (the Khan Shaykhun chemical attack), which was attributed to Assad's forces and which the OPCW JIM indicated was carried out with sarin that bore the regime's signature, was a false flag attack perpetrated to falsely implicate the Assad government. Carlson compared Assad's war crimes during the Syrian Civil War to Saudi Arabia's war crimes in Yemen. In 2006, Carlson appeared live from Israel during the 2006 Lebanon War between Israel and Hezbollah in southern Lebanon. Early on in the conflict, Carlson proposed that Lebanon fight and push out Hezbollah instead of going to war with Israel. During the conflict, he criticized Syria's involvement in the conflict in supporting Hezbollah and later expressed some support for the Israel Defense Forces. However, he also criticized the tactics used by the Israel Defense Forces in fighting Hezbollah. During the 2023 Israel-Hamas War, Carlson criticized both President Joe Biden and Republican House Speaker Mike Johnson support for military aid to Israel and called for American neutrality during the conflict. He declared Israel guilty of war crimes. Commentators have described him as part of a growing faction within the Republican Party that is indifferent to or directly opposed to Zionism. In August 2021, Carlson traveled to Hungary, broadcasting from Budapest. He praised the country and its prime minister, Viktor Orbán, for rejecting asylum seekers on its border, and ridiculed the idea that Orbán was authoritarian. He spoke at a conference sponsored by the Mathias Corvinus Collegium. In January 2022, Carlson released the film Hungary vs. Soros on Fox Nation. According to Vox, it promoted conspiracy theories about Soros and suggested that criticism of the Hungarian government was a function of jealousy from the political left. The Open Society Foundations, a group founded by Soros, called the film "anti-American propaganda", and its Vice President Laura Silber stated that "Carlson appears to prefer authoritarian rule, state capture of media and the courts, crony corruption and rigged elections." Carlson supported Trump's expansion of the Mexico–United States barrier, saying a wall was needed to "restore sovereignty" to the border. In a July 2018 interview about Russian involvement in U.S. elections, Carlson claimed that Mexico had interfered in U.S. elections "more successfully" than Russia by "packing our electorate" through mass immigration. This assertion was disputed by journalist Philip Bump, who wrote that the number of Mexicans in the U.S. had decreased since 2009 and asked rhetorically: "What good has it done Mexico to have a number of its citizens move to the United States and gain the right to vote?" In May 2019, Carlson defended Trump's decision to place tariffs on Mexico unless Mexico stopped illegal immigration to the United States. Carlson said, "When the United States is attacked by a hostile foreign power it must strike back, and make no mistake Mexico is a hostile foreign power." Carlson has visited El Salvador on three occasions, twice under Bukele's rule, and routinely defended his strongman policies to reduce crime and combat the MS-13 gangs. When President Trump met the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un at the country's border with the South in June 2019, Carlson, who was touring with Trump, defended Trump's friendship with Kim. Carlson told Fox & Friends that the North Korean regime was "monstrous" and North Korea was a "disgusting place" but "On the other hand, you've got to be honest about what it means to lead a country. It means killing people". Carlson went on to argue that "a lot of countries commit atrocities including a number that we're closely allied with". Carlson has said normalization of relations with China following President Richard Nixon's 1972 visit led to unforeseen consequences, and that America became progressively worse off for it.[third-party source needed] He criticized LeBron James for speaking out against Daryl Morey, the latter having tweeted in support of the 2019–2020 Hong Kong protests, and referred to the former CEO of The Walt Disney Company, Bob Iger, as a "propagandist" for the Chinese Communist Party.[third-party source needed] On November 20, 2020, The New York Times reported that Steve Bannon and Chinese businessman Guo Wengui had brought Li-Meng Yan to America to promote the COVID-19 lab leak theory, a theory that states COVID-19 was made in a Chinese laboratory and then escaped from the lab. Bannon and Guo set up appearances for Yan on Carlson's show to promote the theory. Carlson would later say that he did not endorse her theories. Nonetheless, Carlson still hosted her on his show for a second appearance. In March 2021, Carlson stated that issues like the Latin American immigration crisis should be blamed on "other colonial powers centuries ago" instead of the United States, and suggested that the Spanish government, having a "legacy responsibility for what is happening in Latin America", should start by "sending back the gold now sitting in its central bank." Carlson's statements on Spain were criticized by Hermann Tertsch and Mamela Fiallo for supporting the Spanish Black Legend, though Fiallo's rebuttal article in La Gaceta was retracted in November 2023 after Carlson appeared with Santiago Abascal in support of the 2023 Spanish protests. After the death of Queen Elizabeth II in September 2022, Carlson opined that the British Empire, although "not perfect", had brought civilization to regions it occupied with "decency unmatched by any empire in human history". He was criticized in India by figures including the politician and historian Shashi Tharoor, who had written a book detailing atrocities by the British Raj. Carlson is a frequent critic of immigration, and has been described by multiple writers as demonizing both documented and undocumented immigrants. White grievance politics is a persistent theme in Carlson's commentary. Sources such as CNN and The Washington Post have said Carlson promotes racism, a charge he denies, saying in 2018, "I'm not a racist. I hate racism." Carlson has repeatedly promoted a conspiracy theory that Democrats are seeking "demographic replacement" to increase their voter base, and in 2021 he described this as "the Great Replacement", using white nationalist terminology. Carlson has described white supremacy as "not a real problem in America". Heidi Beirich of the Southern Poverty Law Center has said that "Carlson probably has been the No. 1 commentator mainstreaming bedrock principles of white nationalism in [the U.S.]." Terry Smith, a law professor at St. Thomas University, has called Carlson's rhetoric an example of white identity politics. University of Michigan professor Alexandra Stern has written that Carlson propagates demographic fear. Neoconservative pundit Bill Kristol described Carlson's commentaries in 2018 as "close now to racism" and "ethno-nationalism of some kind, let's call it". Carlson has compared the Obama administration's stance on anti-police protests to Nazism for "[categorizing] people by race", and he has alleged that the George Floyd protests were about "ideological domination" rather than police brutality. The latter comment prompted several advertisers to boycott his program. Carlson has falsely claimed that Floyd was not killed by officer Derek Chauvin and that Chauvin was only found guilty because the jurors felt threatened by rioters. When Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican nominee for president, denounced Trump in March 2016, saying Trump made a "disqualifying and disgusting response" by evading questions about former Ku Klux Klan Grand Wizard David Duke's support, Carlson criticized Romney and dismissed his speech by suggesting "Obama could have written this." After Neff, his head writer, was fired for hateful blog posts in 2020, Carlson said of the posts, "They have no connection to the show. It is wrong to attack people for qualities they cannot control." Separately, Carlson said in 2017 that he does not approve of white supremacy. In 2018, he criticized China's treatment of Muslims. In 2022, in response to The New York Times publishing a report criticizing Carlson and his show, Carlson said that his show did not have a controversial opinion on race, saying "Our view of race is really simple. We believe Martin Luther King Jr. We don't think your skin color is the most important thing about you. We think all people were created by God and should therefore be judged by what they do, not by how they look." Carlson has also offered praise for Malcolm X, saying that unlike other civil rights leaders, Malcolm X "didn't talk like a sharecropper. He spoke dignified standard English. He wasn't running a shakedown racket to fleece guilty white liberals." Carlson is critical of Islam and has hosted guests on his program that criticize Islam. He has described the existence of an "Islamic cult" and an "Islamic problem", describing it as a threat to the United States. He was critical of the Obama administration's terrorism policy, arguing that it should have considered Islam as a cause of terrorism. In 2019, advocacy group Media Matters for America released recordings of racist comments that Carlson made in 2006 including that Iraq was not worth invading because he believed it to be a country made up of "semi-literate primitive monkeys" and "lunatic Muslims who are behaving like animals". In 2018, Carlson described the effects of mass immigration on the United States using the terms dirtier, poorer, and more divided and said it "has badly hurt this country's natural landscape". On another 2018 episode, Carlson criticized multiculturalism in the United States, skeptically asking "how, precisely, is diversity our strength?" and whether any other institutions benefitted from a lack of commonalities. Talking about Hazleton, Pennsylvania, where Hispanics had quickly become a majority of the population, Carlson said it was "more change than human beings are designed to digest". In May 2019 he said, "The flood of illegal workers into the United States has damaged our communities, ruined our schools, burdened our healthcare system and fractured our national unity." In December 2019, he falsely claimed that immigrants were responsible for making the Potomac River "dirtier and dirtier". Carlson has accused Democrats of supporting increased immigration to change the racial demographics of the United States to increase the Democratic voter base. Commentators and organizations such as the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) have described these views as endorsement of the Great Replacement conspiracy theory. Carlson has also accused President Joe Biden of engaging in eugenics and "Great Replacement" through a policy of increased immigration. Despite this, Carlson has challenged accusations that he believes the Great Replacement conspiracy theory, describing it as a "voting rights question". He has also questioned the popularity of the conspiracy theory after it was invoked by multiple white supremacist mass shooters, including the 2019 El Paso shooting and the 2022 Buffalo shooting, contradicting his previous endorsement of the conspiracy theory and calling its existence a "hoax". In August 2018, Carlson alleged that the South African government was targeting white farmers because "they are the wrong skin color" and falsely said the country's president had changed the constitution to allow land thefts from whites during ongoing land reform efforts. CBS News, Associated Press, The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal described Carlson's segment (with guest Marian Tupy of the Cato Institute) as false or misleading, because violence against farmers had reached an all-time low and the reforms had yet to pass and were primarily aimed at land that had fallen into disuse. Following the Carlson segment, President Trump tweeted that he had instructed Secretary of State Mike Pompeo to "closely study the South Africa land and farm seizure and large scale killing of farmers". The South African government responded that Trump's tweet was "misinformed" and said it would address the matter through diplomatic channels. AfriForum, a South African non-governmental organization focused mainly on the interests of Afrikaners, took credit for Carlson's and Trump's statements, saying it believed that its campaign to influence American politics had succeeded. The evening after the segment, Carlson acknowledged that the proposed amendment was still being debated and added that no farms had yet been expropriated, though he did not admit to having made errors. Carlson later said in an interview that his South Africa segment made "an argument against tribalism". Carlson concluded Tucker Carlson Tonight on July 9, 2019, with a three-minute monologue about Representative Ilhan Omar (D-MN), who was born in Somalia and immigrated to the United States as a refugee as an adolescent. Carlson accused Omar of being ungrateful to the United States, and called her "living proof that the way we practice immigration has become dangerous to this country". His monologue was described by The Guardian as "racially loaded" and "full of anti-immigrant rhetoric". Omar responded on Twitter, saying that "advertisers should not be underwriting this kind of dangerous, hateful rhetoric". The Daily Beast commented that Carlson had devoted numerous segments to criticizing Omar, and that largely due to "right-wing attacks that have then been amplified by members of Congress and the president", Omar had been receiving death threats since her election to Congress. On the October 6 and 7, 2022 episodes of Tucker Carlson Tonight, Carlson aired an edited version of an interview with rapper and fashion designer Ye, also known by his birth name Kanye West. West and conservative commentator Candace Owens had recently been photographed at Paris Fashion Week wearing matching shirts that read "White Lives Matter", a phrase often associated with white supremacist groups. In his interview with Carlson, West said he had worn the shirt because he found it "funny" and agreed with the message. When Carlson asked West about a badge West was wearing on a lanyard around his neck, West stated that it was an image from an obstetric ultrasound, and added, "It just represents life. I'm pro-life"; he claimed without evidence "that there are more Black babies being aborted than born in New York City at this point." On October 11, 2022, the Vice website Motherboard published leaked unaired footage from the interview. In the unaired footage, West expressed Black Hebrew Israelite views, stated he had received a COVID-19 vaccine, and claimed that paid child actors had been "placed into [his] house to sexualize [his] kids"; in one instance, referring to a Kwanzaa celebration at his children's school, West said, "I prefer my kids knew Hanukkah than Kwanzaa [sic]. At least it will come with some financial engineering." The leaked footage was heavily scrutinized in light of other antisemitic statements West had made on social media in the days after the Tucker Carlson Tonight interview aired, including an October 8 tweet in which he threatened to go "death con 3 [sic]" on Jewish people. Philip Bump of The Washington Post wrote that Carlson had presented "a very specific version" of West's remarks that "mirrored Carlson's rhetoric on race and politics". Ben Samuels of Haaretz wrote that the episode "brings Carlson's history of providing a platform for antisemitism further into focus". Carlson is an opponent of feminism. In a December 2021 segment despairing the falling labor participation rate of U.S. men, Carlson said, "Men and women are very different, extremely different. Society is built on their differences." He has alleged that feminists want girls to make gains at the expense of boys. He was rebuked by the U.S. military in March 2021 after he ridiculed maternity flight suits for U.S. women soldiers and described a decision by the Chinese military to build ships as "more masculine". He used the words pig and cunt to describe several individual women in remarks from 2006 to 2011 on the radio show Bubba the Love Sponge. In 2022, Carlson released The End of Men, a Tucker Carlson Original alleging a decline in American masculinity. The episode featured Raw Egg Nationalist, a pseudonymous author affiliated with Neo-Nazi publishing house Antelope Hill. Carlson is critical of the use of SSRIs because of their impact on sexual drive. Carlson has highlighted what he considers excesses of LGBT people on the political left. Some of his comments on air have been described as homophobic, including a 2006 radio conversation in which he and Bubba the Love Sponge used the word faggot to describe their affection for each other, and his 2007 description of an incident during high school of beating up a gay man who had made an advance on him in a public bathroom. In the same year, he called Democratic primary contenders cowards for not pledging to legalize same sex marriage and stated that he would support that. In 2021, Carlson belittled the paternity leave taken by U.S. Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg, a gay man, joking that Buttigieg could be "trying to figure out how to breastfeed". Carlson's promotion of inflammatory rhetoric about LGBTQ controversies was scrutinized after the Colorado Springs nightclub mass shooting in November 2022. Carlson has strongly criticized the transgender rights movement, including saying hospitals that provide gender-affirming healthcare to minors are criminals who harm children, and that they should not be surprised to receive threatening phone calls. In September 2023 Tucker Carlson interviewed a man who claimed to have had gay sex with Barack Obama. Carlson differed with Trump and some of his colleagues at Fox News in early 2020 by saying COVID-19 should be taken more seriously in the U.S, and he reportedly influenced then-President Trump to take the virus more seriously. Carlson blamed China for causing the pandemic. By May 2020, Carlson began to publicly question the severity of the virus. Carlson criticized stay-at-home orders brought on by the pandemic and defended protests against lockdowns in rural areas. In February 2022, he supported the Canada convoy protest against COVID-19 restrictions and called it "the single most successful human rights protest in a generation". He also claimed that some U.S. officials were overstating the deadliness of the virus – a claim that PolitiFact called mostly false. Carlson mentioned the anti-parasite medication ivermectin as a possible COVID-19 treatment, though the FDA warned against its use. Carlson has repeatedly misrepresented the safety of COVID-19 vaccines and asserted that U.S. officials were "lying" about them. He has falsely suggested that COVID-19 vaccines suppress the immune system, and he has misrepresented federal data to claim that 30 Americans died after receiving the vaccine each day, misleading his audience by citing the unverified VAERS database that included deaths from unrelated causes. He has likened vaccine passports to segregationist Jim Crow laws, and he claimed that a vaccine mandate in the U.S. Armed Forces was designed to oust "the sincere Christians in the ranks, the free thinkers, the men with high testosterone levels, and anyone else who doesn't love Joe Biden". He has also falsely claimed that the government was attempting to "force people to take medicine they don't want or need" through door-to-door vaccines. Carlson says he has not been vaccinated against COVID-19. Carlson routinely criticized National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases director Anthony Fauci during Fauci's tenure. This criticism included repeated false allegations that Fauci was responsible for the creation of COVID-19, with Carlson also falsely claiming that Fauci lied about the origin of COVID-19 to sell vaccines. According to Jon Cohen in Science, "Carlson took facts out of context and cited long-debunked studies or reports to attack Fauci". Fauci responded to Carlson's remarks by calling them a "crazy conspiracy theory". Carlson was a vocal critic of the use of face masks during the COVID-19 pandemic, calling people wearing masks outdoors "zealots and neurotics". He received significant public backlash for his claim that having children wear face masks was tantamount to child abuse and that it warranted a response "no different from your response to seeing someone beat a kid in Walmart". Carlson has pointed to the use of masks as evidence that vaccines do not work, falsely claiming that there would be no benefits to mask use with an effective vaccine. Ahead of the 2020 election, in September, Carlson told viewers that Democrats were promoting mail-in voting to create "uncertainty over the outcome of the election, so they can manipulate the results". After Joe Biden won the election in November, Carlson raised false allegations of fraud in the election. On his show, he mentioned the names of purportedly dead individuals who voted in Georgia; investigative reporting subsequently found that some of the individuals whom he claimed to be dead were in fact alive. Carlson apologized on his show for the error. Carlson distanced himself from Trump's post-election legal fights, in which Carlson said the election was "not fair" but acknowledged that it still would not produce a Trump victory. Later that month, Carlson cast doubt on unfounded conspiratorial claims made by former federal prosecutor Sidney Powell, who alleged that Venezuela, Cuba and unidentified communist interests had used a secret algorithm to hack into voting machines and commit widespread electoral fraud. Carlson said "what Powell was describing would amount to the single greatest crime in American history", but that Powell became "angry and told us to stop contacting her" when he asked for evidence of widespread voter fraud. Prominent defenders of Trump criticized Carlson for his skepticism, though Powell was dropped from Trump's legal team shortly afterward. Carlson later brought on Mike Lindell on January 26, 2021, whose company My Pillow was the largest advertiser on Tucker Carlson Tonight, to criticize Dominion Voting Systems and claim it had "hired hit groups and bots and trolls" to target him following his Twitter account's permanent suspension for promoting unfounded fraud claims. In July 2021, Carlson suggested that "there actually was meaningful voter fraud in Fulton County, Georgia, last November" despite the state's election results being validated via both hand and machine recounts. PolitiFact found that none of the evidence provided by Carlson substantiated his conclusion. For example, because Trump and Biden ballots were sorted into separate piles during the hand recount, tally sheets with votes exclusively for either candidate are not indicative of fraud. In August 2022, Carlson was deposed as part of a lawsuit by Dominion Voting Systems against Fox News over false claims of voter fraud made about the company. The following February, Dominion's legal team released texts and other products of discovery against Fox, revealing that Carlson privately doubted the false claims that the 2020 election was stolen and mocked Trump advisors, including Rudy Giuliani and Sidney Powell. Carlson texted to Laura Ingraham, "Sidney Powell is lying by the way. I caught her. It's insane" and "Our viewers are good people and they believe it." Carlson also texted Sean Hannity, saying Fox News White House correspondent Jacqui Heinrich should be fired for tweeting a fact-check of false claims Carlson and Trump circulated about Dominion. He wrote "Please get her fired. Seriously ... What the fuck? I'm actually shocked ... It needs to stop immediately, like tonight. It's measurably hurting the company. The stock price is down. Not a joke.", and said he "just went crazy on" a Fox executive over Heinrich's reporting. Heinrich's tweet was deleted by the next morning. Also published were texts of Carlson regarding Donald Trump, with Carlson stating: "I hate him passionately". About Trump's presidency, he texted: "We're all pretending we've got a lot to show for it, because admitting what a disaster it's been is too tough to digest. But come on. There really isn't an upside to Trump." In March 2023, Carlson said in an interview that he was "enraged that my private texts were pulled" for the court case, and asserted: "I love Trump … I think Trump is funny and insightful." In February 2021, after attorney general nominee Merrick Garland pledged at his confirmation hearing to supervise the prosecution of "white supremacists and others" involved in the January 6 United States Capitol attack, Carlson alleged, "There's no evidence that white supremacists were responsible for what happened on January 6. That's a lie." PolitiFact rated Carlson's claim false, because several rioters had known ties to white supremacist groups, according to court records and congressional testimony by law enforcement leaders, and video and photos from the incident showed white supremacist symbols prominently displayed. Philip Bump of The Washington Post wrote in an analysis that Carlson was blurring the lines between "being involved" and "being responsible for" to create a strawman in an effort to "undercut the public understanding of what happened and, by extension, to soften the implications for Trump and his supporters". Carlson has also inaccurately stated that "[n]ot a single person in the crowd on January 6 was found to be carrying a firearm." In June 2021, Carlson promoted a conspiracy theory alleging that the Capitol storming was a "false flag" FBI operation intended to "suppress political dissent". He alleged that unindicted co-conspirators in rioters' indictments were government agents, saying, "FBI operatives were organizing the attack on the Capitol on January 6, according to government documents". Legal experts said Carlson's claim was unfounded because prosecutors cannot describe an undercover agent as an unindicted co-conspirator. One of the unindicted co-conspirators was readily identifiable as Stewart Rhodes, founder and leader of Oath Keepers, a far-right anti-government militia; another unindicted co-conspirator was likely the wife of an indicted alleged conspirator. Carlson's guest, Darren Beattie of Revolver News, whose writing the segment was primarily based on, had been fired as a Trump speechwriter in 2018 after CNN asked the White House about his attendance at a gathering of white nationalists. Carlson also said Russian president Vladimir Putin raised "fair questions" when Putin mentioned the fatal police shooting of a rioter inside the Capitol while denying involvement in the poisoning of a Russian politician. Republican House members Matt Gaetz and Marjorie Taylor Greene quickly embraced Carlson's story about FBI involvement in the Capitol attack, and Republican congressman Paul Gosar entered the Revolver News story into the Congressional Record during a House Oversight Committee hearing. In response to Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Mark Milley's defense of studying critical race theory "to understand white rage" as it concerns the storming, Carlson said, "Hard to believe that man wears a uniform. ... He's not just a pig, he's stupid!" After Carlson criticized Senator Ted Cruz for calling the Capitol storming a "terrorist attack", Cruz appeared on Carlson's show on January 6, 2022, the anniversary of the event, and apologized for his words. House Speaker Kevin McCarthy in early 2023 gave Carlson exclusive access to 44,000 hours of security surveillance video from the day of the Capitol attack. Carlson subsequently aired portions of it on his show to illustrate his own narrative concerning the event, painting it as "peaceful chaos" and condemning other media outlets as untruthful when portraying the attack as violent. The family of Brian Sicknick, a United States Capitol Police officer who died the day following the Capitol attack, and Capitol Police Chief Tom Manger condemned the segment, which also received reproach from Democratic and Republican politicians, including from the Republican leader of the Senate, Mitch McConnell. Carlson's presentation included video of Jacob Chansley — the "QAnon Shaman" — walking the halls of Congress, depicting him as a peaceful demonstrator being escorted by police who was unjustly prosecuted and incarcerated. Days after the presentation, Justice Department prosecutors stated in a court filing that the four minutes of video showed only a brief part of Chansley's activity and omitted his earlier incriminating behavior, concluding, "Chansley was not some passive, chaperoned observer of events for the roughly hour that he was unlawfully inside the Capitol." Carlson repeatedly promoted a conspiracy theory that pro-Trump protestor Ray Epps was actually a federal agent engaged in a false flag operation to instigate the January 6 attack. Epps said he and his wife were subjected to threats and harassment, leading them to sell their home and business to go into hiding in another state. An attorney for Epps wrote Carlson in March 2023 demanding a public retraction of "false and defamatory statements." In late October 2021, Patriot Purge, a three-part series produced by Carlson, was released on the Fox Nation streaming service. Carlson broadcast a trailer that suggested the January 6 attack was a government false flag operation to implicate the right wing, with one speaker asserting that "the left is hunting the right". Carlson stated on-air that the government had "launched a new war" on American citizens and characterized his series as "rock-solid factually". Fact-checkers found the series contained numerous falsehoods and conspiracy theories. Michael Jensen, a senior researcher at the National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, called it "political propaganda that is meant to rally a support base that has shown a willingness to mobilize on the basis of disinformation and lies. That's how we got Jan. 6 in the first place." Conservative writers Jonah Goldberg and Steve Hayes responded to the series by severing their ties to Fox News, declaring that the series was "a collection of incoherent conspiracy-mongering, riddled with factual inaccuracies, half-truths, deceptive imagery, and damning omissions". Bret Baier and Chris Wallace, prominent anchors in the network's news division, raised objections to the series to top executives of the Fox organization. In October 2020, Carlson alleged on his show that someone was reading his text messages, after documents he claimed had compromising information on Joe Biden's son, Hunter, were lost by the United Parcel Service and then quickly located. Carlson did not say what these documents contained. In November 2021, the Daily Mail published emails from a laptop owned by Hunter Biden, which appear to demonstrate a friendship between himself and Carlson. On June 28, 2021, Carlson said on his program that "a whistleblower within the U.S. government" informed him that the National Security Agency (NSA) was "monitoring our electronic communications and is planning to leak them in an attempt to take this show off the air", adding, "The Biden administration is spying on us. We have confirmed that." That same day, a producer for Carlson filed an unusually broad Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request with the NSA, seeking records, including "any communication between NSA officials regarding journalist Tucker Carlson", dating back to January 2019, before Biden became president. On June 29, the NSA tweeted a rare statement of denial, stating that Carlson has never been a target of its surveillance and it never had any intent to have his program taken off the air. Carlson responded on-air that the NSA did not deny reading his emails. House Republican leader Kevin McCarthy asked House Intelligence Committee ranking member Devin Nunes to investigate. Axios reported on July 7 that, shortly before Carlson made his allegation, he had been in contact with U.S.-based Kremlin intermediaries to arrange an interview with Vladimir Putin. The reporter of the Axios exclusive story, Jonathan Swan, later confirmed he had contacted Carlson seeking pre-publication comment, but said he had not told Carlson that anyone had shared the email contents with him. On that night's program, Carlson said that he had contacted people about interviewing Putin, but did not mention it to anyone because he did not want to "rattle the Russians, and make the interview less likely to happen". He said that the NSA had unmasked his identity and that "the contents of my emails left that building at the NSA and wound up with a news organization". On July 23, cybersecurity news website The Record wrote that Carlson had not been targeted by the NSA but had been unmasked after he was mentioned by third parties who were under surveillance, citing two anonymous sources. Fox News called the reported act "unacceptable". The New York Times observed there was a distinction between Carlson's communications being intercepted by the NSA and intercepts of foreigners who were discussing Carlson. The NSA inspector general's office announced in August 2021 that it was examining Carlson's allegation. Carlson's rhetorical style and debating tactics have drawn close attention from writers and other public figures. In arguments, Carlson can quickly shift between personas as a devil's advocate and a moralizing truth teller, and simultaneously appear outraged and blasé – a use of contradiction that Lili Loofbourow, writing for Slate, referred to as a "joking/not-joking loophole" historically used by radio shock jocks. James Carville, a Democratic strategist and friend of Carlson who has appeared on his shows, called Carlson "one of the world's great contrarians". Touching upon this, Kelefa Sanneh, writing for The New Yorker said that one of Carlson's gifts is to make any position he takes on an issue "seem like a brave rebellion against someone else's way of thinking." Carlson has said he especially targets the "moral preening" of people he sees as having a sensibility of "I'm a really good person, and you're not." According to Philip Bump of The Washington Post, Carlson presents his perceived opponents "as endlessly cynical and duplicitous", and agitates his audience against them by cherry-picking and misinterpreting information. Charlotte Alter of Time wrote that Carlson "sanitizes and legitimizes right-wing conspiratorial thinking, dodges when you try to nail him down on the specifics, then wraps it all in an argument about censorship and free speech". Elaina Plott in The Atlantic summed up Carlson's style as "a gleeful fuck you" to his opponents. During remote interviews, Carlson's producers will keep his face close-up onscreen so viewers can watch him react, often in disbelief. His trademark scowl lets viewers "share his disdain" toward opposing views, foreshadowing a "scathing rebuttal". Carlson is known to interrupt guests repeatedly with direct demands to answer questions he poses, sometimes focusing on an embarrassing episode or statement from a guest's past. Jack Shafer wrote in Politico that "When the host barks questions in your earpiece, you can't help but jolt to life like a puppet on a string", suggesting that successful guests on Carlson's show must match his quick-wittedness and unflappability. Lyz Lenz of the Columbia Journalism Review wrote that this debate maneuver mirrors Jon Stewart's confrontation of Carlson on Crossfire in 2004, describing Stewart then and Carlson now as both "com[ing] out of the gate with an impossible line of questioning and a disingenuous defense". Charlotte Alter of Time wrote in July 2021 that Carlson sometimes tells "outright falsehoods", but generally "avoids assertions that are factually disprovable, instead sticking to innuendo". As an example, Alter wrote that Carlson did not endorse Sidney Powell's specific claims of voter fraud in the 2020 election, but he did say, "The people now telling us to stop asking questions about voting machines are the same ones who claim that our phones weren't listening to us". In September 2020, on The Rubin Report, Carlson said that, unlike TV newscasters who he said "systematically lie", he will only lie "if I'm really cornered or something", saying, "I lie. I really try not to. I try never to lie on TV. ... I don't like lying. I certainly do it, you know, out of weakness or whatever." Bump argued in 2022 that compared with other television anchors, Carlson is loath to acknowledge factual errors in his commentary. Carlson's use of hyperbole as a rhetorical device was cited by Fox News in its successful defense in 2020 of a slander lawsuit by Karen McDougal, after Carlson incorrectly argued in 2018 that Donald Trump had been a victim of extortion by McDougal. Carlson describes George Orwell as his favorite writer and cites Strunk and White's The Elements of Style as having an influence on his writing. According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, Carlson has been "recognized for his success in helping to bring far-right viewpoints and vocabulary into the mainstream of American politics" through his promotion of "extreme positions on a range of political and social issues, for his embrace of white nationalism, for his support of authoritarian leaders of other countries, and for his regular reliance on arguably false or misleading claims, including baseless conspiracy theories" and for "exert[ing] an unusual influence on Republican Pres. Donald Trump, who was a regular viewer of Carlson's show." In 2021, Time said that Carlson could be the most powerful conservative in America, with Republican strategist Jeff Roe adding, "He doesn't react to the agenda, he drives the agenda." Mediaite named Carlson the most influential person in news media in 2021. Tina Brown, the former editor of Vanity Fair and a former colleague of Carlson, said: "Tucker is a tremendously good writer and I always thought it was a real shame that he kind of got sucked into this TV mania thing." On February 23, 2017, The Atlantic wrote that "Carlson's true talent is not for political philosophizing, it's for televised partisan combat. His go-to weapons—the smirky sarcasm, the barbed comebacks, the vicious politeness—seem uniquely designed to drive his sparring partners nuts, frequently making for terrific television". On September 19, 2017, journalist Stephen Rodrick wrote in a GQ profile of Carlson: "On his show, Carlson mocks and verbally body-slams those who disagree with him, a passel of easy marks such as Democratic politicians, well-meaning liberal activists, and young reporters. He shares with Donald Trump a deep reluctance to apologize for his mistakes, and he lobs insults that seem suspiciously like subconscious self-assessments: He loves to accuse his guests of 'preening', and he derides 'pomposity, smugness, and groupthink'." In an interview for a 2021 Time profile of Carlson, a former NewsCorp executive, Alex Azam, described Carlson as having some impunity within Fox News, "because of the signal that touching him would send to the viewers that Fox never wants to lose". In 2021, he was included in the Time 100, Time's annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world. In April 2022, The New York Times published a three-part 20,000-word investigative series on Carlson called "American Nationalist". The investigative series documents Carlson's rise to prominence and his rhetoric on immigration, race relations and the COVID-19 pandemic, describing Tucker Carlson Tonight as "what may be the most racist show in the history of cable news — and also, by some measures, the most successful." Carlson responded by saying that he has not read "American Nationalist" and does not plan to. He also denied allegations from the Times about obsessing over ratings, saying that "I've never read the ratings a single day in my life. I don't even know how. Ask anyone at Fox." He also claimed to have taken positions unpopular with his audience, saying, "Most of the big positions I've taken in the past five years — against the neocons, the vax and the war [in Ukraine] — have been very unpopular with our audience at first." Carlson is married to Susan Thomson Carlson (née Andrews). They met at St. George's School, where she was the daughter of the school's headmaster and priest. They were married on August 10, 1991, in the school chapel. They have four children. Carlson is left-handed and dyslexic. Carlson was baptized as an Episcopalian but has said he grew up with secular beliefs; he credits his wife for his religious faith. In 2013, Carlson said, "We still go to the Episcopal Church for all kinds of complicated reasons, but I truly despise the Episcopal Church in a lot of ways," citing his opposition to the church's support for same-sex marriage and abortion rights. He has said he stays in the church because he "loves the liturgy" and "likes the people". Carlson quit drinking alcohol in 2002. A few years earlier, he quit smoking cigarettes (a habit begun in eighth grade) and took up nicotine gum, which he "chews constantly", and nicotine pouches. Carlson is a Deadhead (a fan of the rock band Grateful Dead); he has attended more than fifty Dead concerts, and the title of his 2018 book Ship of Fools was inspired by the Grateful Dead song of the same name. In 2011, a group of protesters gathered outside his house in Kent, Washington, D.C., to protest Carlson. In 2017, Carlson sold his home and purchased another nearby. In late 2018, protestors gathered in front of their home. In 2020, Carlson sold his home in Kent and bought a house on Gasparilla Island, on Florida's Gulf Coast, and in the summer of 2022, a second home next door. They now also live part of the year in Maine near his "favorite place in the world", Bryant Pond, Woodstock, Maine. In September 2022, Carlson spoke at the funeral of Hells Angels president Sonny Barger. Carlson said that he had been a fan of Barger since his college years, quoted Barger as saying "stay loyal, remain free, and always value honor", and added "I want to pay tribute to the man who spoke those words". Carlson, Tucker (2003). Politicians, Partisans, and Parasites: My Adventures in Cable News. New York: Warner Books. ISBN 978-0759508002. Carlson, Tucker (2018). Ship of Fools: How a Selfish Ruling Class Is Bringing America to the Brink of Revolution. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1501183669. Carlson, Tucker (2021). The Long Slide: Thirty Years in American Journalism. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1501183690. Carlson has stated that he was a registered Democratic voter only to be able to vote in Democratic primaries in Washington, D.C. Paleoconservative writer Paul Gottfried has objected to Carlson being described as a paleoconservative. Carlson has said he did not vote for Trump in either 2016 or 2020, not voting at all in the former election, and voting for Kanye West in the latter. Revolver has been promoted by Trump and his administration. Details of the FOIA were obtained via a separate FOIA filed by The Intercept's Ken Klippenstein; Carlson derided both the website and journalist in a segment on July 8. By law, the NSA is prohibited from monitoring communications of Americans without a special court order based on concerns an American is a terrorist or an agent of a foreign power, though communications of Americans can be incidentally intercepted if they are communicating with a foreign person who is being monitored. Sanneh, Kelefa (April 10, 2017). "Tucker Carlson's Fighting Words". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on March 3, 2018. Retrieved April 12, 2018. Lange, Jeva (April 3, 2017). "Tucker Carlson tried to join the CIA". The Week. Retrieved May 5, 2022. Thompson, Alex (July 2, 2020). "Tucker Carlson 2024? The GOP is buzzing". Politico. Archived from the original on July 3, 2020. Retrieved July 3, 2020. Marantz, Andrew (April 25, 2023). "The World According to Tucker Carlson". The New Yorker. ISSN 0028-792X. Retrieved November 17, 2023. Hagey, Keach (June 10, 2020). "Fox News Host Tucker Carlson Leaves the Daily Caller". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on June 10, 2020. Retrieved July 11, 2020. Kranish, Michael (July 14, 2021). "How Tucker Carlson became the voice of White grievance". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved July 14, 2021. Kludt, Tom; Stelter, Brian (August 9, 2018). "White anxiety finds a home at Fox News". CNN Business. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Retrieved September 29, 2018. Confessore, Nicholas (April 30, 2022). "How Tucker Carlson Stoked White Fear to Conquer Cable". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Tucker Carlson". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved April 25, 2023. Carless, Will; Sankin, Aaron (December 7, 2018). "The Hate Report: What white nationalists think about Tucker Carlson". Reveal. Retrieved December 5, 2022. Pink, Aiden (March 17, 2019). "Why Do White Supremacists Love Tucker Carlson So Much?". The Forward. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2021. Place, Nathan (April 9, 2021). "Tucker Carlson faces calls to resign after promoting white supremacist 'replacement' theory". The Independent. Retrieved April 10, 2021. Alter, Charlotte (July 15, 2021). "Talking With Tucker Carlson, the Most Powerful Conservative in America". Time. Retrieved August 2, 2021. Bella, Timothy (July 29, 2021). "Tucker Carlson falsely claims Anthony S. Fauci 'created' covid". The Washington Post. DiResta, Renée (April 24, 2021). "The Anti-Vaccine Influencers Who Are Merely Asking Questions". The Atlantic. Retrieved August 2, 2021. Blake, Aaron (June 16, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's wild, baseless theory blaming the FBI for organizing the Jan 6 Capitol riot". The Washington Post. McCarthy, Bill (November 5, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's 'Patriot Purge' film on Jan. 6 is full of falsehoods, conspiracy theories". PolitiFact. "Why Did Tucker Carlson Echo Russian Bioweapons Propaganda On His Top-Rated Show?". NPR. March 29, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2023. Ling, Justin (March 18, 2022). "How 'Ukrainian bioweapons labs' myth went from QAnon fringe to Fox News". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved September 18, 2023. Bump, Philip (January 14, 2022). "The accountability-free world of Tucker Carlson". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 27, 2022. Cohen, Jon (August 25, 2022). "Almost everything Tucker Carlson said about Anthony Fauci this week was misleading or false". Science. Retrieved October 16, 2022. Chiu, Allyson (March 11, 2019). "Tucker Carlson unapologetic over 'misogynistic' comments on statutory rape, insults against women". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 25, 2023. Brice-Saddler, Michael; Rosenberg, Eli (March 11, 2019). "Fox News host Tucker Carlson uses racist, homophobic language in second set of recordings". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved March 19, 2019. Stelter, Brian (April 9, 2021). "ADL calls on Fox News to fire Tucker Carlson over racist comments about 'replacement' theory". CNN. Retrieved April 13, 2021. Maglio, Tony (March 19, 2019). "Tucker Carlson's Weekly TV Ratings Rise Despite Boycotts". TheWrap. Retrieved February 8, 2020. Stelter, Brian (June 12, 2020). "Tucker Carlson ad boycott causes headaches for Fox News". CNN. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved August 31, 2020. Johnson, Ted (June 1, 2022). "Fox News Tops May Cable News Ratings As 'The Five' Ranks No. 1 In Total Viewers". Deadline. Retrieved June 29, 2022. Peters, Jeremy W.; Robertson, Katie; Grynbaum, Michael M. (April 24, 2023). "Live Updates: Fox News Parts Ways With Tucker Carlson Days After Dominion Settlement". The New York Times. Simonetti, Isabella (April 24, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Is Leaving Fox News". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved April 24, 2023. Levine, Sam (April 25, 2023). "Tucker Carlson leaves Fox News – reportedly fired by Rupert Murdoch". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved May 16, 2023. Graham, David A. (April 24, 2023). "Tucker's Successor Will Be Worse". The Atlantic. Retrieved April 24, 2023. Barr, Jeremy; Ellison, Sarah (April 24, 2023). "Tucker Carlson is out at Fox News after Dominion lawsuit disclosures". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Robertson, Katie (April 24, 2023). "In a Lawsuit, Tucker Carlson Is Accused of Promoting a Hostile Work Environment". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 24, 2023. Folkenflik, David; Yang, Mary (April 18, 2023). "Fox News settles blockbuster defamation lawsuit with Dominion Voting Systems". NPR. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Davis, Eric (March 31, 2023). "Summary Judgment" (PDF). Superior Court of the State of Delaware. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 31, 2023. Retrieved April 20, 2023. Horton, Alex (December 15, 2018). "Tucker Carlson suggested immigrants make the U.S. 'dirtier' – and it cost Fox News an advertiser". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 28, 2018. Plott, Elaina (December 15, 2019). "What Does Tucker Carlson Believe?". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2020. Hunter, Jack (June 7, 2019). "Tucker Carlson thinks libertarians run the economy. That's news to Ron Paul". The Washington Examiner. Carlson, Tucker (August 30, 2004). "Republican Convention: Tucker Carlson". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved August 5, 2009. Coppins, McKay (February 23, 2017). "Tucker Carlson: The Bow-Tied Bard of Populism". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Mills, Curt (July 14, 2017). "Tucker Carlson Goes to War Against the Neocons". The National Interest. Archived from the original on July 23, 2018. Retrieved January 29, 2019. Baker, Peter; Haberman, Maggie; Gibbons-Neff, Thomas (June 21, 2019). "Urged to Launch an Attack, Trump Listened to the Skeptics Who Said It Would Be a Costly Mistake". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 22, 2019. Retrieved June 22, 2019. Baker, Peter; Haberman, Maggie; LaFraniere, Sharon (July 10, 2020). "Trump Commutes Sentence of Roger Stone in Case He Long Denounced". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 24, 2021. Bella, Timothy (February 20, 2020). "Trump, tweeting a Tucker Carlson segment, hints of possible pardon for Roger Stone". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Porter, Tom (September 11, 2019). "Tucker Carlson took a victory lap over John Bolton's ousting, after reports he lobbied Trump to fire him". Business Insider. Retrieved January 8, 2022. Johnson, Eliana (September 10, 2019). "Inside Trump and Bolton's spectacular split". Politico. Retrieved January 8, 2022. "Bickel v. Carlson (In re Estate of Vaughan), F077628". California 5th District Court of Appeal. June 4, 2019. Archived from the original on September 6, 2019 – via Casetext. Hartlaub, Peter (April 25, 2023). "Before Tucker Carlson was ousted from Fox, his father triggered an S.F. libel scandal". San Francisco Chronicle. Tucker McNear Carlson was born in San Francisco on May 16, 1969, at Children's Hospital... Ross, Martha (April 28, 2023). "Tucker Carlson: How early rejection by hippie San Francisco mom made him shameless". The Mercury News. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Harris, Scott (May 6, 1984). "Carlson Takes on Embattled Mayor". Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles, California. Perry, Anthony (November 11, 1988). "It's a Different Story Now for Ex-Newsman". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Lenz, Liz (September 5, 2018). "The mystery of Tucker Carlson". Columbia Journalism Review. Archived from the original on September 8, 2018. Retrieved September 8, 2018. Novak, Benjamin; Grynbaum, Michael M. (August 7, 2021). "Conservative Fellow Travelers: Tucker Carlson Drops In On Viktor Orban". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved August 7, 2021. Morch, Albert (February 15, 1971). "Albert Morch [Column]". San Francisco Examiner. p. 15 – via Newspapers.com. "Weddings: Melissa Price, Buckley Carlson". The New York Times. June 8, 1997. Retrieved April 12, 2021. Wemple, Eric (March 26, 2015). "Buckley Carlson's former employer asks LinkedIn to 'get our name off the page'". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 12, 2021. Knight, Tony (May 27, 1984). "Hoping for a runoff". Times-Advocate. Escondido, California. Kerrigan, Michael J. (2010). "Ambassador Richard Carlson (Ret).". Politics with Principle: Ten Characters with Character. Tucson: Wheatmark. pp. 46–57. ISBN 978-1604944471. Archived from the original on September 30, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2018. Carlson, Richard W. (August 8, 1993). "My 40-Year Goodbye". The Washington Post. "How Tucker Carlson's SF Mother Became a Stand-In for Everything He Despises". The San Francisco Standard. April 25, 2023. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Mendelsohn, Jennifer (January 18, 2018). "How Would Trump's Immigration Crackdown Have Affected His Own Team?". Politico. Archived from the original on January 19, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2020. Bump, Philip (April 9, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's espousal of 'replacement' theory is both toxic and ahistoric". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 11, 2021. "VIPs in San Francisco: George McNear". Maritime Heritage Project, San Francisco. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Morch, Albert (May 26, 1969). "Albert Morch [Column]". San Francisco Examiner. p. 21 – via Newspapers.com. Lombardi, Cesar (1913–1916). Autobiographical Letters of Cesar Lombardi to his Grandchildren (PDF). Rice University. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 26, 2020. Retrieved February 4, 2021. "California Divorce Index, 1966-1984". Sacramento, California: Center for Health Statistics, California Department of Health Services. Lapointe, Joe (January 24, 2018). "Tucker Carlson's Xenophobia Is Horribly Effective". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on August 6, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2019. Dougherty, Steve (November 6, 2000). "Meet Mister Right". People. Vol. 54, no. 19. Archived from the original on January 6, 2017. Retrieved January 5, 2017. Braun, Gerry (October 21, 1984). "Rites of Passage: Dick Carlson says he has proven himself". Times-Advocate. Escondido, California. Dickey, Fred (February 4, 2017). "Column: Long before Fox News, Carlson was a La Jollan". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Harris, David (September 9, 1979). "Swanson Saga: End Of A Dream". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 28, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2017. Palma, Bethania (April 1, 2021). "Does Tucker Carlson's Family Own Swanson?". Snopes. "IN RE ESTATE OF VAUGHN". Leagle. June 4, 2019. Gehriger, Urs (2018). "Tucker Carlson: Trump is not capable". Die Weltwoche. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. Kurtz, Howard (August 17, 1999). "The Opinionated Journalist". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 29, 2020. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Victor, Daniel (April 24, 2023). "A brief timeline of Tucker Carlson's rise: From CNN and PBS to Fox". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Bravo, Tony (April 21, 2021). "Did Fox News host Tucker Carlson name-drop Harvey Milk's killer in his yearbook?". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved April 22, 2021. Weber, Peter (April 22, 2021). "Tucker Carlson appears to endorse Harvey Milk's murderer in college yearbook". The Week. Retrieved April 22, 2021. Ellefson, Lindsey; Chan, J. Clara (April 21, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's College Yearbook Says He Belonged to Club for Harvey Milk's Murderer". Yahoo!. Retrieved April 22, 2021. Lange, Jeva (April 3, 2017). "Tucker Carlson tried to join the CIA". The Week. Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. Retrieved April 8, 2020. Shephard, Alex (September 16, 2021). "How Tucker Carlson Lost It". The New Republic. ISSN 0028-6583. Retrieved October 2, 2021. Brantley, Max (January 5, 2017). "Former Dem-Gaz editorial writer Tucker Carlson to succeed Megyn Kelly in Fox prime time". Arkansas Times. Retrieved October 2, 2021. "Interview with Andrew Ferguson". Max Raskin (Interview). August 15, 2023. Will, George F. (August 12, 1999). "Bush's revealing interview". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved September 26, 2020. Carlson, Margaret (February 13, 2000). "Death, Be Not Proud". Time. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved September 26, 2020. Noah, Timothy (December 2, 2005). "Bush's Tookie". Slate. Archived from the original on December 17, 2020. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Harris, John F. (May 14, 2020). "Why Are Writers and Editors So Obsessed With Tucker Carlson?". Politico. Archived from the original on May 16, 2020. Retrieved February 3, 2020. Grove, Lloyd (October 18, 2001). "The Reliable Source". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 19, 2021. Retrieved March 19, 2021. Rodrick, Stephen (September 19, 2017). "Tucker Carlson Is Sorry for Being Mean". GQ. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved March 19, 2021. Spitznagel, Eric (October 25, 2018). "The Playboy Interview With Tucker Carlson". Playboy. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved March 19, 2021. Carlson, Tucker (November 2003). "The League Of Extraordinary Gentlemen". Esquire. Pareene, Alex (April 26, 2012). "Tucker Carlson's downward spiral". Slate. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Bartlett, Tom (November 26, 2012). "The Bearable Lightness of Being Tucker Carlson". Washingtonian. Battaglio, Stephen (January 9, 2017). "Bow tie-free Tucker Carlson steps into prime time on Fox News Channel". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 31, 2020. Smith, Ben (June 21, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Calls Journalists 'Animals.' He's Also Their Best Source". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 18, 2024. Spears, Britney (September 3, 2003). "Britney Spears: 'Trust our president in every decision'" (Interview). Interviewed by Tucker Carlson. CNN. Retrieved September 30, 2021. "'Catwoman,' 'Fahrenheit 9/11' split Razzies". CBC News. February 27, 2005. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Billey, Catherine (February 28, 2005). "Arts, Briefly; Accepting the Worst, in Person". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 29, 2015. "Watch Jon Stewart Call Tucker Carlson a "Dick" in Epic 2004 Crossfire Takedown". The Hollywood Reporter. January 5, 2017. Archived from the original on July 19, 2018. Retrieved July 19, 2018. Cave, Damien (October 24, 2004). "A Week in Review: If You Interview Kissinger, Are You Still a Comedian?" (PDF). The New York Times. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 5, 2013. Retrieved July 19, 2018 – via Msl1.mit.edu. Full Article: Archived from the original on 12 February 2022. Begala, Paul (February 12, 2015). "Begala: The day Jon Stewart blew up my show". CNN. Grynbaum, Michael M. (January 5, 2017). "Megyn Kelly Being Replaced by Tucker Carlson at Fox". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 9, 2018. Retrieved December 8, 2018. Gordon, Devin (April 21, 2022). "What Happened to Jon Stewart?". The Atlantic. Retrieved April 26, 2022. "Tucker Carlson Leaving CNN; Crossfire's Demise Likely". TV Week. January 5, 2005. Archived from the original on January 26, 2020. Retrieved August 17, 2006. Kurtzman, Daniel (January 7, 2005). "Jon Stewart's Wish Fulfilled; Crossfire to Stop 'Hurting America'". Political Humor. Archived from the original on May 1, 2009. Retrieved August 5, 2009. Carter, Bill (January 6, 2005). "CNN Will Cancel Crossfire and Cut Ties to Commentator". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 22, 2012. Retrieved March 16, 2009. Ankel, Sophia (August 27, 2020). "How Tucker Carlson went from a CIA reject to the most-watched person on cable news, accused of peddling prejudice to millions". Business Insider. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2021. "PBS hires conservative commentator Tucker Carlson for weekly talk show". Sun Journal. Lewiston, Maine. Associated Press. November 11, 2003. Auletta, Ken (May 30, 2004). "Big Bird Flies Right". The New Yorker. Black, Duncan (June 17, 2004). "PBS's new weekly standard: Tucker Carlson; An unfiltered Media Matters for America analysis of the new PBS host". Media Matters for America. Rosenthal, Phil (June 12, 2005). "Carlson 'sorry' to be walking away from PBS". Chicago Tribune. Gold, Matea (June 13, 2005). "Tucker Carlson, Take 2". Los Angeles Times. "Let the games begin in Torino, Italy!". Today. February 3, 2006. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Schmoldt, Eric (February 22, 2006). "USA in Winter Blunderland". The Badger Herald. University of Wisconsin–Madison. Jurkowitz, Mark (April 26, 2007). "Talk Shows Consumed by Virginia Tech Tragedy". Project for Excellence in Journalism. "'Tucker' for April 17, 6 p.m. ET". Tucker. NBC News. April 18, 2007. Goodman, Tim (April 18, 2007). "Virginia Tech killer: Using media for his message". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on May 25, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2021. "David Gregory Replaces Tucker Carlson on MSNBC Evening Shift". Fox News. Associated Press. March 10, 2008. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved December 27, 2018. Gough, Paul J. (March 11, 2008). "Carlson replaced at MSNBC". Reuters. Stelter, Brian (May 15, 2009). "Tucker Carlson turns 40, moves to Fox News". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 4, 2013. Retrieved March 4, 2013. "Interview with Tucker Carlson". Interviews with Max Raskin. March 1, 2021. Retrieved August 8, 2021. "Names & Faces". The Washington Post. August 15, 2006. Archived from the original on November 7, 2012. Retrieved August 5, 2009. Tobin, Taylor (July 31, 2018). "47 celebrities you forgot guest-starred on '30 Rock'". Insider Inc. Archived from the original on March 29, 2020. Retrieved December 30, 2020. "The King of Queens – what time is it on TV? Episode 10 Series 9". Radio Times. London. Archived from the original on May 30, 2016. Retrieved December 30, 2020. Orr, Christopher (July 31, 2008). "The Movie Review: 'Swing Vote'". The New Republic. "Tucker Carlson and Neil Patel Author Page". The Daily Caller. Archived from the original on January 7, 2013. Retrieved March 4, 2013. Calderone, Michael (February 1, 2010). "Daily Caller joins W.H. pool". Politico. Archived from the original on June 20, 2010. Retrieved July 8, 2010. Calderone, Michael (January 11, 2010). "Tucker: 'Conventional journalism is no safer than a start-up'". Politico. Retrieved April 10, 2021. Wemple, Erik (March 18, 2015). "Daily Caller's Tucker Carlson takes a stand for censorship". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 12, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. Byers, Dylan (March 17, 2015). "Mickey Kaus quits Daily Caller after Tucker Carlson pulls critical Fox News column". Politico. Archived from the original on April 1, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2015. Folkenflik, David (August 9, 2010). "Bloggers And Cable Pundits: The New Newsmakers". NPR. Wemple, Erik (December 7, 2016). "Opinion: Fox News's Tucker Carlson has no business lecturing about journalism ethics". The Washington Post. Hagey, Keach (June 25, 2010). "Weigel quits – and a debate begins". Politico. Socca, Tom (July 23, 2010). "How Will Tucker Carlson Explain the Journolist Scandal to His Fellow Conservative Journalists?". Slate. Retrieved March 15, 2022. Shafer, Jack (February 15, 2012). "Media Madders". Archived from the original on July 27, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2019. "Trump Campaign Secretly Paid Tucker Carlson's Daily Caller $150k for Email Blasts". The New York Observer. June 2, 2017. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Borchers, Callum (June 2, 2017). "Analysis | Charity doubles as a profit stream at the Daily Caller News Foundation". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Sternlicht, Alexandra (June 11, 2020). "Fox News Host Tucker Carlson Cuts Ties With Conservative Media Site The Daily Caller". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved July 11, 2020. Hananoki, Eric (July 13, 2010). "Special Report's "all-star" panel is overwhelmingly conservative: 67% over past 3 months". Media Matters for America. "Tucker Carlson addresses Vick role". ESPN. Associated Press. December 29, 2010. "Fox News Reporting: Fighting for Our Children's Minds". Fox News. September 17, 2010. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Peters, Jeremy W.; Rutenberg, Jim (October 4, 2012). "Resurfaced '07 Talk by Obama Renews Questions on Race". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 4, 2012. Retrieved July 3, 2021. Wolff, Michael (October 3, 2012). "Tucker Carlson's Obama video: the Fox News 'bombshell' that fizzled". The Guardian. Epstein, Jennifer (October 2, 2012). "Obama '07 video: Shock or schlock?". Politico. Coscarelli, Joe (October 4, 2012). "Tucker Carlson Probably Paid for Obama Video Everyone Had Already Seen". New York. Byers, Dylan (March 27, 2013). "Tucker Carlson to Fox & Friends Weekends". Politico. Archived from the original on March 30, 2013. Retrieved March 27, 2013. "Greta Van Susteren Abruptly Leaves Fox News". Crooks and Liars. September 7, 2016. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2016. Darcy, Oliver (November 15, 2016). "Tucker Carlson's Fox News show debuts to phenomenal ratings, beats both CNN and MSNBC combined". Business Insider. Archived from the original on December 23, 2016. Retrieved December 22, 2016. Berg, Madeline (January 5, 2017). "'Right' Move For Fox News As Tucker Carlson To Replace Megyn Kelly in Prime Time". Archived from the original on October 14, 2018. Retrieved October 14, 2018. Edkins, Brett (March 28, 2017). "Fox News Ratings Hit Record High In Trump's First Few Months As President". Forbes. Steinberg, Brian (April 19, 2017). "Fox News Will Replace Bill O'Reilly With Tucker Carlson". Variety. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Concha, Joe (April 30, 2018). "Carlson's ratings on Fox closing in on O'Reilly's". The Hill. Archived from the original on September 13, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Concha, Joe (October 31, 2018). "Fox News tops CNN and MSNBC combined in October cable news ratings". The Hill. Archived from the original on November 22, 2018. Retrieved November 22, 2018. Katz, A.J. (December 20, 2018). "20-Plus Brands Have Stopped Advertising on Tucker Carlson Tonight After Immigration Comments". Adweek. Archived from the original on March 24, 2019. Retrieved March 24, 2019. Chiu, Allyson (November 8, 2018). "'They were threatening me and my family': Tucker Carlson's home targeted by protesters". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 29, 2018. Retrieved January 29, 2019. Fieldstadt, Elisha (November 8, 2018). "Antifa group chants outside, vandalizes Fox commentator Tucker Carlson's home". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 26, 2018. Retrieved January 29, 2019. Stelter, Brian (November 16, 2018). "Tucker Carlson claimed his door was 'cracked' by Antifa protesters. The police saw no sign of that". CNN. Palma, Bethania (November 15, 2018). "Tucker Carlson's Claim About Protesters Damaging His Door Challenged". Snopes. Retrieved March 13, 2023. Katz, A.J. (March 24, 2019). "RATINGS The Top Cable News Programs of January 2019 Were ..." Adweek. Archived from the original on March 24, 2019. Retrieved March 24, 2019. Brunley, Gabrielle (March 22, 2019). "If Tucker Carlson Keeps Hemorrhaging Advertisers He Might Soon Be Down to Just 'My Pillow'". Esquire. Archived from the original on March 24, 2019. Retrieved March 24, 2019. Barr, Jeremy (March 22, 2019). "Without Major Sponsors, Tucker Carlson's Show Leans on Ads for Fox Programming". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 24, 2019. Retrieved March 24, 2019. "Tucker Carlson refuses to apologize over 'extremely primitive' women comments". Chicago Sun-Times. March 11, 2019. Retrieved May 8, 2021. Peltz, Madeline (March 10, 2019). "In unearthed audio, Tucker Carlson makes numerous misogynistic and perverted comments". Media Matters for America. Retrieved May 12, 2021. Uhl, Jordan (August 19, 2019). "Tucker Carlson returns to Fox News – but advertisers are staying away". Media Matters for America. Archived from the original on August 20, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2019. Uhl, Jordan (August 19, 2019). "Tucker Carlson Tonight loses advertisers after remarks about 'hoax' of white supremacy". Media Matters for America. Joyellaq, Mark (January 7, 2020). "Fox News Ends 2019 with Highest Rated Prime Time Ratings Ever". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 7, 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2020. Folkenflik, David (September 29, 2020). "You Literally Can't Believe The Facts Tucker Carlson Tells You. So Say Fox's Lawyers". NPR. Retrieved October 31, 2020. Voytko, Lisette (September 24, 2020). "Judge Tosses Playboy Model Karen McDougal's Defamation Lawsuit Against Fox News". Forbes. Retrieved October 31, 2020. Joyella, Mark (June 16, 2020). "Tucker Carlson Is Most-Watched Host In Cable News For Last Week". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 17, 2020. Retrieved June 18, 2020. Blake, Meredith (July 11, 2020). "Fox News condemns former Tucker Carlson Tonight writer for 'horrific' racist, sexist comments". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 3, 2021. Retrieved July 11, 2020. Ellison, Sarah (July 11, 2020). "Tucker Carlson's writer resigns over racist and sexist posts, the latest trouble for Fox's most controversial star". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved July 11, 2020. Darcy, Oliver (July 10, 2020). "Tucker Carlson's top writer resigns after secretly posting racist and sexist remarks in online forum". CNN. Archived from the original on July 10, 2020. Retrieved July 11, 2020. Grynbaum, Michael (July 13, 2020). "Tucker Carlson to Take 'Long-Planned' Vacation After Writer's Resignation". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved July 19, 2020. Johnson, Ted (October 27, 2020). "Fox News' 'Tucker Carlson Tonight' Reaches Ratings Milestone". Deadline. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved October 27, 2020. Concha, Joe (October 27, 2020). "Cable news October ratings explode as Fox News hits historic highs". The Hill. Archived from the original on March 3, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2020. Palmer, Ewan (November 24, 2020). "Fox News, Tucker Carlson Ratings Slipping in Key TV Audience Demographic". Newsweek. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved November 24, 2020. Joyella, Mark (December 16, 2020). "Sean Hannity, Tucker Carlson Set Records As Fox News Makes History In 2020 Cable News Ratings". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 14, 2021. Retrieved December 30, 2020. Bridge, Gavin (February 1, 2021). "CNN Primetime Ratings Fall Back to Earth in First Post-Trump Week". Variety. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Johnson, Ted (February 2, 2021). "CNN Tops January Ratings With Big Gains In Primetime Vs. A Year Ago". Deadline. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Joyella, Mark (April 27, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Leads Fox News To Big Win In April Prime Time Ratings". Forbes. Retrieved April 30, 2021. Joyella, Mark (June 2, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Leads Fox News To May Cable News Ratings Victory". Forbes. Joyella, Mark (July 27, 2021). "Fox News Dominates July Cable News Ratings As All Networks See Declines". Forbes. Retrieved July 30, 2021. Patten, Dominic (February 17, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Inks New Deal With Fox; Expands Presence With Fox Nation Video Podcast & Specials". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 17, 2021. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Steinberg, Brian (February 17, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Expands Streaming-Video Duties for Fox News Media". Variety. Archived from the original on February 17, 2021. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Moore, Thomas (March 29, 2021). "Tucker Carlson debuts his first major streaming show on Fox Nation". The Hill. Garber, Megan (July 12, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's Manufactured America". The Atlantic. Retrieved September 20, 2021. Weprin, Alex (April 24, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Out at Fox News". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 24, 2023. Carlson, Tucker [@TuckerCarlson] (April 27, 2023). "Good evening" (Tweet). Retrieved April 27, 2023 – via Twitter. Shephard, Alex (April 27, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Has Already Lost His War With Fox News". The New Republic. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Suciu, Peter (May 28, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Racked Up Views With Twitter Video – Does He Really Need TV?". Forbes. Battaglio, Stephen (April 24, 2023). "Tucker Carlson departs Fox News, pushed out by Rupert Murdoch". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Hagey, Keach; Flint, Joe; Simonetti, Isabella (April 26, 2023). "Tucker Carlson's Vulgar, Offensive Messages About Colleagues Helped Seal His Fate at Fox News". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved April 26, 2023. Peters, Jeremy W.; Schmidt, Michael S.; Rutenberg, Jim (May 3, 2023). "Carlson's Text That Alarmed Fox Leaders: 'It's Not How White Men Fight'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 3, 2023. A couple of weeks ago, I was watching video of people fighting on the street in Washington. A group of Trump guys surrounded an Antifa kid and started pounding the living shit out of him. It was three against one, at least. Jumping a guy like that is dishonorable obviously. It's not how white men fight. Yet suddenly I found myself rooting for the mob against the man, hoping they'd hit him harder, kill him. I really wanted them to hurt the kid. I could taste it. Then somewhere deep in my brain, an alarm went off: this isn't good for me. I'm becoming something I don't want to be. The Antifa creep is a human being. Much as I despise what he says and does, much as I'm sure I'd hate him personally if I knew him, I shouldn't gloat over his suffering. I should be bothered by it. I should remember that somewhere somebody probably loves this kid, and would be crushed if he was killed. If I don't care about those things, if I reduce people to their politics, how am I better than he is? Holmes, Kristen; Passantino, Jon (May 3, 2023). "Tucker Carlson sent a racist text to a producer: 'It's not how white men fight'". CNN. Retrieved May 3, 2023. Stelter, Brian (October 31, 2023). ""It Was Always Going to End Badly": The Untold Story of Tucker Carlson's Ugly Exit From Fox News". Vanity Fair. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Ellison, Sarah; Barr, Jeremy (April 26, 2023). "For the Murdochs, Tucker Carlson became more trouble than he was worth". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 26, 2023. Jankowicz, Mia (April 26, 2023). "Fox News has a secret file of damaging info on Tucker Carlson in case he starts trashing the network: report". Yahoo! News. Retrieved April 16, 2023. Ray, Siladitya (April 26, 2023). "Secret Tucker Carlson Files Reportedly Held By Fox News—As Ex-Producer Claims She Has 90 Recordings Of Her Time On Network". Forbes. Retrieved April 26, 2023. Yang, Mary; Folkenflik, David (May 9, 2023). "Tucker Carlson says he'll take his show to Twitter". NPR. Rizzo, Lillian; Whitten, Sarah (May 9, 2023). "Tucker Carlson to host show on Twitter after being fired from Fox News". CNBC. Visser, Nick (May 10, 2023). "Tucker Carlson's Lawyers Say Fox Violated Contract, Freeing Him From Non-Compete: Report". Huffington Post. Retrieved May 10, 2023. Pengelly, Martin (June 12, 2023). "Tucker Carlson 'will not be silenced' as Fox News seeks to ban Twitter show". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved June 26, 2023. Nahs, Charlie (June 6, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Drops First Episode of 'Tucker on Twitter'". Mediaite. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Bump, Philip (June 7, 2023). "Analysis | Tucker Carlson becomes just another social-media conspiracy theorist". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved June 8, 2023. Bowman, Verity (June 7, 2023). "Watch: Tucker Carlson spouts conspiracy theories about 9/11, Ukraine and UFOs in new show". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved June 8, 2023. Dickey, Josh (June 6, 2023). "Tucker Carlson's New Show 'Tucker on Twitter' Launches With Report About Blown Dam in Ukraine". The Wrap. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Hagey, Keach; Corse, Alexa (July 14, 2023). "WSJ News Exclusive | Tucker Carlson Is Creating a New Media Company". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved July 14, 2023. "Report: Tucker Carlson Raising Money to Launch New Media Company". AdWeek. June 29, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Ortiz, Candice (September 7, 2023). "Elon Musk Shades Tucker Carlson For Lack of 'Objective Evidence' Over 'Dubious' Interview With Man Claiming He Slept With Obama". Mediaite. Walker, Jackson (September 7, 2023). "Elon Musk questions Tucker Carlson's interview with Larry Sinclair: 'Not super convincing'". Fox11 Online. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Simonetti, Isabella; Hagey, Keach (December 10, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Is Launching His Own Streaming Service". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Haring, Bruce; Tapp, Tom (December 10, 2023). "Tucker Carlson's Subscription Website Launches With Interviews, 'Ask Tucker' And Topic-Specific Shorts". Deadline. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Wertheimer, Tiffany (February 6, 2024). "Tucker Carlson interviews Russia's Putin". BBC Home. Retrieved March 6, 2024. Chiappa, Claudia (February 7, 2024). "Tucker Carlson faces media fury over Putin interview". Politico Europe. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Suliman, Adela; Paúl, María Luisa (February 17, 2024). "Tucker Carlson faces new backlash over Putin interview after Navalny death". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 17, 2024. Rutenberg, Jim; Grynbaum, Michael M. (February 16, 2024). "Tucker Carlson's Lesson in the Perils of Giving Airtime to an Autocrat". The New York Times. Retrieved February 17, 2024. Blair, Rob (October 6, 2006). "Politicians, Partisans, and Parasites: My Adventures in Cable News". Washingtonian. Archived from the original on November 20, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2014. Urban, Amanda (July 14, 2003). "Nonfiction Book Review: Politicians, Partisans, and Parasites: My Adventures in Cable News". Publishers Weekly. Retrieved December 31, 2020. Italie, Hillel (May 2, 2017). "Tucker Carlson Gets Two-Book, Eight-Figure Deal". Associated Press News. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved August 16, 2017. Osborn, Dave (October 2, 2018). "Fox News star Tucker Carlson exposes 'elites' in new book". Naples Daily News. Archived from the original on January 21, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2019. Concha, Joe (October 11, 2018). "Tucker Carlson's new book topples Woodward from No. 1 on New York Times best-seller list". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 16, 2018. Retrieved October 15, 2018. Barkoukis, Leah (June 4, 2021). "Tucker Announces New Book That Includes Section Grilling His Own Publisher". Townhall. Trachtenberg, Jeffrey A. (June 27, 2023). "Tucker Carlson's Life, Fox News Ouster Coming to Bookshelves". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 17, 2023. Pengelly, Martin (August 15, 2023). "Much-hyped biography of Tucker Carlson struggles to sell". The Guardian. Retrieved August 17, 2023. Frevale, Jamie (August 14, 2023). "New Tucker Carlson Biography Bombs With Just 3,000 Copies Sold". Mediaite. Retrieved August 17, 2023. Grynbaum, Michael M.; Koblin, John (April 19, 2017). "For Fox News, Life After Bill O'Reilly Will Feature Tucker Carlson". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 4, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Raimondo, Justin (January 24, 2019). "Tucker Carlson: A Buckley for Our Time?". Intercollegiate Studies Institute. Archived from the original on August 9, 2020. Retrieved April 8, 2020. Chapman, Matthew (June 19, 2019). "President Trump got talked out of war with Iran by Fox News host Tucker Carlson: report". Salon. Archived from the original on February 13, 2020. Retrieved April 8, 2020. Gottfried, Paul (February 8, 2018). "An Old Paleocon Sets the Record Straight". The American Conservative. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Darcy, Oliver; Cohen, Marshall (April 25, 2023). "Tucker Carlson out at Fox News". CNN. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Gabbatt, Adam (April 30, 2023). "It's out $787.5m and top host Tucker Carlson. What's next for Fox News?". The Guardian. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Darcy, Oliver (May 10, 2023). "Tucker Carlson announces plans to relaunch his show on Twitter". CNN Business. Retrieved June 17, 2023. "FOX News parts ways with notorious Trump supporter Tucker Carlson". PM News. April 24, 2023. Archived from the original on April 24, 2023. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Hurley, Bevan (April 7, 2023). "A rival channel, a podcast or a foray into politics? Tucker Carlson teases his next move after Fox exit". The Independent. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Tharoor, Ishaan (August 4, 2021). "U.S. conservatives yearn for Orban's Hungary". Washington Post. Retrieved February 9, 2024. "Who is Tucker Carlson, the fired Fox News host who interviewed Vladimir Putin?". Sky News. May 10, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Woodward, Alex (November 30, 2023). "Tucker Carlson says he plans to vote for Trump". The Independent. Retrieved February 9, 2024. MacDougald, Park (September 17, 2019). "Is Tucker Carlson the Most Important Pundit in America?". New York Magazine. Archived from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved September 17, 2019. McCarthy, Bill (May 19, 2022). "Tucker Carlson feigned ignorance over 'great replacement theory,' despite talking about it often". PolitiFact. Retrieved May 22, 2022. The New York Times reported that Carlson has "amplified the idea that Democratic politicians and others want to force demographic change through immigration" in more than 400 episodes of his show Tucker Carlson Today, totaling over 50 hours devoted to that theme. Confessore, Nicholas (April 30, 2022). "How Tucker Carlson Reshaped Fox News - and Became Trump's Heir". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Lippman, Daniel (July 1, 2021). "Tucker Carlson told associates he voted for Kanye, not Trump". Politico. Thompson, Alex; Meyer, Theodoric (May 4, 2021). "Biden team prepares a Mike Lindell, yes, Mike Lindell oppo file". Politico. Allen, Mike (June 21, 2021). "Tucker Carlson shuns 2024". Axios. Wemple, Eric (April 10, 2015). "Tucker Carlson, registered Democrat". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 21, 2019. Retrieved December 6, 2018. Lee, Nathaniel (December 1, 2017). "Fox News' Tucker Carlson – a registered Democrat – explains why he always votes for the most corrupt mayoral candidate". Business Insider. Archived from the original on June 30, 2018. Retrieved December 6, 2018. Hananoki, Eric (November 1, 2012). "REPORT: 30+ Fox News Hosts And Contributors Who Are Campaigning For Republicans". Media Matters for America. Wemple, Erik (January 29, 2016). "Article by registered Democrat Tucker Carlson appeals to 'my dear fellow Republicans'". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 25, 2021. Smith, Evan (November 29, 1999). "Tucker Carlson and Evan Smith". Slate. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Carlson, Tucker (November 29, 1999). "Reckless Gossip Merchants vs. Media Hand-Wringers". Slate. Retrieved July 18, 2021. "News Review". C-SPAN. September 24, 1999. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Martin, Garrett (March 15, 2021). "John Oliver Reminds Us that Tucker Carlson Is a Big Fan of White Supremacy". Paste. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Carlson, Tucker (September 1, 2004). "A Conservative's Dilemma". Esquire. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Lauerman, Kerry (September 14, 2003). "'You burn out fast when you demagogue'". Salon. Retrieved April 29, 2021. Suellentrop, Chris (May 22, 2008). "And Paul Begala for Vice President?". The New York Times. Bateman, Christopher (September 8, 2008). "Inside Ron Paul's Counter-Convention". Vanity Fair. Martin, Jonathan (April 20, 2012). "Romney's challenge: Convincing GOP he can win". Politico. Carlson, Tucker (January 28, 2016). "Donald Trump Is Shocking, Vulgar and Right". Politico. Wemple, Erik (November 29, 2017). "Opinion | 'Look, I'm not defending Trump': An anatomy of Tucker Carlson's deflective agenda". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 15, 2022. Multiple sources: Poniewozik, James (May 3, 2017). "In Conservative Prime Time, It's Now Fox and Enemies (Published 2017)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on May 3, 2017. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Friedersdorf, Conor (May 19, 2017). "The 'Trump Derangement Syndrome' Dodge". The Atlantic. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Miller, Tim (June 3, 2020). "Thank You Mister Trump!". The Bulwark. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Ramirez, Nikki McCann (April 1, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Regurgitates Trump's Claims That Indictment Is 'Election Interference'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Tucker Carlson Regurgitates Trump's Claims That Indictment Is 'Election Interference'". Yahoo! Finance. March 31, 2023. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Stelter, Brian (January 4, 2020). "Fox's Tucker Carlson breaks with colleagues and criticizes Trump's strike on Iranian general". CNN. Retrieved October 10, 2022. Choi, Matthew (June 1, 2020). "Fox News' Tucker Carlson goes after Trump and Kushner over protests". Politico. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Fung, Katherine (February 17, 2023). "Five bombshells in Tucker Carlson's texts about election". Newsweek. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Stahl, Jeremy (February 17, 2023). "Tucker Carlson's Dominion Text Messages Are a Thing of Beauty". Slate. Retrieved February 18, 2023. Shoaib, Alia (February 18, 2023). "Tucker Carlson called Trump a 'demonic force' in a text on January 6, filing reveals". Business Insider. Madarang, Charisma (February 17, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Calls Trump 'Demonic Force' in New Legal Filing". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 5, 2023. Darcy, Oliver (March 8, 2023). "Tucker Carlson 'passionately' hates Trump, and eight more key revelations about Fox News from new Dominion filings". CNN. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Mastrangelo, Dominick (July 15, 2021). "Tucker Carlson dismisses GOP as 'inept and bad at governing'". The Hill. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Suebsaeng, Asawin; Rawnsley, Adam (April 28, 2022). "Tucker Carlson Pushed Trump to Endorse J.D. Vance With 'Disgusting' Sexual Innuendo". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 20, 2022. Vaillancourt, William (October 12, 2022). "Tucker Fawns: Every Republican Should Sound Like Tulsi". The Daily Beast. Retrieved October 13, 2022. Creitz, Charles (August 7, 2020). "Tucker Carlson praises Kanye West as 'most compelling voice against Planned Parenthood'". Fox News. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020. Dicker, Ron (April 18, 2019). "Tucker Carlson: Abortion Ensures 'Women Can Be Obedient Workers'". HuffPost. Retrieved April 22, 2021. Zeitchik, Steven (June 28, 2022). "Tucker Carlson just inadvertently helped raise $14,000 for abortion rights". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Carlson, Tucker (June 22, 2000). "Tucker Carlson: Death penalty deserves more vigorous debate". CNN. Archived from the original on November 28, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020. Hudson, John (December 29, 2010). "Tucker Carlson Wants Michael Vick 'Executed' for Dogfighting". The Atlantic. Retrieved April 22, 2021. Swartz, Bryn (January 4, 2011). "Fox Commentator Tucker Carlson Retracts Comments About Vick's Execution". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved August 15, 2020. Vaillancourt, William (March 24, 2023). "Pro-Gun Tucker Carlson Pumps Brakes on Armed Trans People". The Daily Beast. Retrieved April 14, 2023. "Tucker: Biden claim assault weapon ban will make America safer 'an appalling lie' contradicted by evidence". Fox News. March 26, 2021. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Carlson, Tucker (April 8, 2021). "Tucker Carlson: Biden wants to take your guns, but leave criminals with theirs". Fox News. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Bonk, Lawrence (February 16, 2018). "Tucker Carlson Calls Fight For Gun Control 'Class War' and Says the 'Left Hates Rural America'". Mediaite. Retrieved April 4, 2022. Baragona, Justin (September 4, 2019). "Tucker Carlson: Gun Buybacks Would Lead to 'Civil War'". The Daily Beast. Retrieved September 19, 2022. Meyer, Ken (March 27, 2018). "Tucker Cuts Off Georgia State Rep. After Heated Clash on Guns: 'Don't Demagogue it With Me'". Mediaite. Retrieved April 2, 2022. "Tucker: Gun debate isn't a simple fix". Yahoo! News. February 21, 2018. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Paul Begala-Tucker Carlson Debate (Video, 28'). C-SPAN. March 14, 2013. Wahlquist, Calla (October 6, 2015). "'Australia has no freedom,' Fox News host claims in discussion on gun laws". The Guardian. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Laukkonen, Jeremy (October 6, 2015). "Fox News Host Tucker Carlson Claims Australia Has 'No Freedom' During Gun Control Discussion [Video]". Inquisitr. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Gstalter, Morgan (March 2, 2018). "Tucker Carlson hits Trump due process comments: Obama would've been called a dictator for that". The Hill. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Levine, Jon (March 2, 2018). "Tucker Carlson Shreds Trump Over Gun Control: If 'Obama Had Said That,' We'd Be 'Talking Impeachment'". TheWrap. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Davidson Sorkin, Amy (June 18, 2022). "Will the G.O.P. Finally Make a Deal on Guns?". The New Yorker. Retrieved September 19, 2022. Miniter, Frank. "Shooting Straight with Tucker Carlson". An Official Journal Of The NRA. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Elfrink, Tim (August 27, 2020). "Tucker Carlson suggests teen charged in Kenosha protester killings had to 'maintain order when no one else would'". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved September 27, 2021. Litke, Eric (September 23, 2020). "Here's what Tucker Carlson got wrong about the Kenosha shootings". PolitiFact. Retrieved September 27, 2021. Williams, Paige (June 26, 2021). "Kyle Rittenhouse, American Vigilante". The New Yorker. Retrieved September 27, 2021. Vogt, Adrienne; Sangal, Aditi; Wagner, Meg; Macaya, Melissa; Mahtani, Melissa (November 19, 2021). "Rittenhouse jury reaches verdict". CNN. Archived from the original on November 19, 2021. Retrieved November 19, 2021. "Ron Paul Endorsed by Nevada Brothel Owner". NBC News. Associated Press. November 26, 2007. Archived from the original on September 2, 2020. Retrieved September 7, 2019. "Tucker Carlson Joins the Cato Institute". Cato Institute. February 23, 2009. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved September 7, 2019. "Tucker Carlson- Former Senior Fellow". Cato Institute. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Coaston, Jane (January 10, 2019). "Tucker Carlson has sparked the most interesting debate in conservative politics". Vox. Archived from the original on January 10, 2019. Retrieved January 11, 2019. "Sunday Special Ep 26: Tucker Carlson". The Ben Shapiro Show. The Daily Wire. November 4, 2018. Archived from the original on January 29, 2019. Retrieved November 9, 2018 – via YouTube. Wilcox, W. Bradford; Hammond, Samuel (January 9, 2019). "What Tucker Carlson Gets Right". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on January 13, 2019. Retrieved January 13, 2019. Carlson, Tucker (January 3, 2019). "Tucker Carlson: Mitt Romney supports the status quo. But for everyone else, it's infuriating". Fox News. Archived from the original on January 27, 2019. Retrieved January 27, 2019. Emba, Christine (January 12, 2019). "What happens when Tucker Carlson makes sense?". The Washington Post. Edsall, Thomas B. (February 6, 2019). "Opinion | What Does Tucker Carlson Know That the Republican Party Doesn't?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 26, 2021. Coaston, Jane (December 10, 2019). "Tucker Carlson on why conservatives should crack down on "vulture capitalism"". Vox. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Hasson, Peter (May 31, 2020). "Romney To Biden? Bain Capital Founders Throw Money At Biden 2020 Campaign". The National Interest. Archived from the original on July 23, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Gstalter, Morgan (May 11, 2019). "Tucker Carlson says Sanders, Ocasio-Cortez are 'indisputably right' on Loan Shark Prevention Act". The Hill. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Choi, Matthew (June 5, 2019). "Fox News host says Warren 'sounds like Donald Trump at his best'". Politico. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved June 6, 2019. "Tucker Carlson at National Conservatism Conference: Big Business Hates Your Family". National Conservatism Conference. July 17, 2019. Archived from the original on September 5, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2020 – via YouTube. Shamsian, Jacob (March 22, 2019). "Only 12% of Republican Fox News viewers believe climate change is man-made". Business Insider. Archived from the original on June 7, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2019. Becca, Stanek (February 28, 2017). "Fox News' Tucker Carlson and Bill Nye got into a heated debate about humans' contribution to climate change". The Week. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved April 2, 2019. Matyszczyk, Chris (February 28, 2017). "Bill Nye appears on Fox News and it doesn't go well". CNet. Archived from the original on January 26, 2020. Retrieved January 26, 2020. "Tucker vs. Bill Nye the Science Guy | Video". RealClearEnergy. February 28, 2017. Archived from the original on June 7, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2019. Atkin, Emily (April 27, 2017). "Bill Nye Is Not the Right Guy to Lead the Climate Fight". The New Republic. ISSN 0028-6583. Archived from the original on July 13, 2017. Retrieved April 2, 2019. "Tucker Carlson Says Global Warming Is Not A Threat But Winter Is". HuffPost. August 30, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2023. Valliancourt, William (March 17, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Says We're Ignoring the Good Parts of Climate Change". The Daily Beast. Retrieved November 13, 2023. Pahwa, Nitish (February 3, 2023). "Tucker Carlson's Whale Blubber". Slate. ISSN 1091-2339. Retrieved March 11, 2023. Rivard, Ry (January 29, 2023). "Why whale deaths are dividing environmentalists — and firing up Tucker Carlson". Politico. Bump, Philip (September 12, 2022). "Analysis | What if Tucker Carlson's wrong about more than just Russia?". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved December 4, 2022. Naughtie, Andrew (January 25, 2022). "Tucker Carlson defends Russia again as Ukraine crisis mounts". The Independent. Retrieved December 5, 2022. Swan, Jonathan; Solender, Andrew (January 27, 2022). "Tucker Carlson-fueled Republicans drop tough-on-Russia stance". Axios. Retrieved January 29, 2022. Bella, Timothy (February 23, 2022). "Tucker Carlson, downplaying Russia-Ukraine conflict, urges Americans to ask, 'Why do I hate Putin?'". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved November 13, 2023. Thorpe, Nick (August 5, 2021). "Tucker Carlson: What the Fox News host is doing in Hungary". BBC News. Retrieved August 7, 2021. Folmar, Chloe (January 28, 2022). "Soros group pushes back on Tucker Carlson documentary". The Hill. Retrieved January 29, 2022. McGreal, Chris (October 2, 2022). "Who is Tucker Carlson really 'rooting for' in Ukraine?". The Guardian. Wemple, Erik (February 25, 2022). "How did Tucker Carlson turn into a Putin apologist?". The Washington Post. Thomas, Elise (October 10, 2023). "Why Russia Embraces Tucker Carlson". The Moscow Times. "Everything Tucker Carlson has said about Vladimir Putin". Telegraph.co.uk. February 6, 2024. Beinart, Peter (July 13, 2017). "Tucker Carlson Is Doing Something Extraordinary". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on July 15, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Choi, David (July 12, 2017). "Tucker Carlson interview goes sideways when guest accuses him of defending Putin". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 25, 2019. Retrieved June 25, 2019. Heilbrunn, Jacob (July 12, 2017). "Why two talking heads on Fox News just rehashed the debates of 1938". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 17, 2017. Pengelly, Martin (December 3, 2019). "Fox News host Tucker Carlson: Putin does not hate America like liberals do". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 28, 2020. Retrieved January 23, 2020. Edwards, Jonathan (February 25, 2022). "After downplaying Russia-Ukraine conflict, Tucker Carlson shifts his tone on Putin: 'He is to blame'". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 15, 2022. Qiu, Linda (March 11, 2022). "Theory About U.S.-Funded Bioweapons Labs in Ukraine Is Unfounded". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 11, 2022. Retrieved March 12, 2022. Ling, Justin (March 18, 2022). "How 'Ukrainian bioweapons labs' myth went from QAnon fringe to Fox News". The Guardian. Retrieved March 19, 2022. Chappell, Bill; Yousef, Odette (March 25, 2022). "How the false Russian biolab story came to circulate among the U.S. far right". NPR. Retrieved March 26, 2022. Davis, Julia (December 30, 2021). "How Tucker Carlson Is Boosting Russia's New Propaganda War". The Daily Beast. Retrieved March 15, 2022. Harris, Shane; Sonne, Paul (December 3, 2021). "Russia planning massive military offensive against Ukraine involving 175,000 troops, U.S. intelligence warns". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 15, 2022. Saul, Derek (March 13, 2022). "Tulsi Gabbard Latest To Push Russian-Backed Conspiracy About U.S.-Backed Biological Labs In Ukraine". Forbes. Retrieved March 17, 2022. Corn, David (March 13, 2022). "Leaked Kremlin Memo to Russian Media: It Is 'Essential' to Feature Tucker Carlson". Mother Jones. Retrieved March 13, 2022. Pengelly, Martin (March 14, 2022). "Kremlin memos urged Russian media to use Tucker Carlson clips – report". The Guardian. Retrieved March 14, 2022. Hagan, Joe (May 17, 2004). "Newly Dovish, Tucker Carlson Goes Public ... Kimmel Writer Ribs Times". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved January 23, 2020. Sharman, Jon (March 12, 2019). "Tucker Carlson: New audio reveals Fox News host calling Iraqis 'semi-literate monkeys' and using homophobic slur". The Independent. MacDougald, Park (September 17, 2019). "Is Tucker Carlson the Most Important Pundit in America?". New York Intelligencer. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Hayden, Michael Edison (April 10, 2018). "Syrian gas attack conspiracy theories fueled by Tucker Carlson and far-right fringe". Newsweek. Retrieved March 17, 2021. "Fox News Host: We Tolerate Saudi Atrocities in Yemen, So Why Not Assad's in Syria?". Haaretz. April 11, 2018. Archived from the original on April 12, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2018. Wilson, Jason (April 13, 2018). "Why is the far right so against US intervention in Syria?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 4, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2020. Malaea, Marika (November 27, 2019). "Tucker Carlson Claims There's 'No Evidence' Assad Was Behind Deadly Chemical Attack in Syria or That it Even Happened". Newsweek. Archived from the original on January 6, 2020. Retrieved January 23, 2020. "'Tucker' for July 25". Tucker. NBC News. July 26, 2006. Battah, Habib (September 23, 2006). "When assumption trumps objectivity". Al Jazeera English. "'Tucker' for July 21". NBC News. July 24, 2006. Retrieved December 4, 2023. Battah, Habib. "When assumption trumps objectivity". Al Jazeera. Retrieved December 4, 2023. "'Tucker' for July 25". NBC News. July 26, 2006. Retrieved December 4, 2023. Samuels, Ben (October 11, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Questions U.S. Support for Israel War – Could the GOP Follow?". Haaretz. Retrieved November 16, 2023. Higham, Aliss (November 4, 2023). "Tucker Carlson tears into Mike Johnson". Newsweek. Retrieved December 2, 2023. Schorr, Issac (October 24, 2023). "Tucker Carlson and Douglas Macgregor state Israel Is Committing 'War Crimes' and Mock 'Moral Victories'". Mediaite. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Postel, Danny (November 7, 2023). "The Conservative Fault Lines Revealed by Debates Over Israel". New Lines Magazine. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Bump, Philip (August 3, 2021). "Hungary turned to authoritarian nationalism. So Tucker Carlson went to Hungary". The Washington Post. Chait, Jonathan (August 4, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Has Seen the Future, and It Is Fascist". New York Intelligencer. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Linker, Damon (August 3, 2021). "Tucker Carlson joins the right-wing pilgrimage to Budapest". The Week. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Beauchamp, Zack (January 29, 2022). "Why Tucker Carlson's special on Hungary and Soros matters". Vox. Retrieved January 29, 2022. Barr, Jeremy (January 28, 2022). "George Soros-founded group challenges Tucker Carlson documentary as 'anti-American propaganda'". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved January 29, 2022. "Fox's Tucker Carlson: Why Is Congress Paying for Walls in Israel, but Not the U.S." Haaretz. December 18, 2018. Archived from the original on March 17, 2019. Retrieved June 25, 2019. Greenwood, Max (July 16, 2018). "Tucker Carlson: Mexico has interfered in US elections 'more successfully' than Russia". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved October 8, 2018. Bump, Philip (July 17, 2018). "Analysis: Tucker Carlson identifies the actual threat to American democracy: Hispanic voters". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved October 8, 2018. Messer, Olivia (June 1, 2019). "Tucker Carlson: America 'Must Strike Back' Against Mexico". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on June 2, 2019. Retrieved June 5, 2019. Wheatley, Jack (March 7, 2023). "Activists are raising the alarm about a new mega prison in El Salvador. American right-wing media personalities are celebrating it". Media Matters for America. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Creitz, Charles (March 16, 2021). "Salvadoran President Tells Tucker: Mass Immigration 'Not Profitable,' 'Feeding on Dependency'". Fox News. Retrieved September 8, 2021. Freeman, Will (February 16, 2023). "Nayib Bukele's Growing List of Latin American Admirers". Americas Quarterly. Retrieved March 10, 2023. "Fox News' Tucker Carlson is right: Governments kill people". The Week. July 2, 2019. Archived from the original on August 9, 2020. Retrieved March 30, 2020. Zhao, Christina (June 30, 2019). "Tucker Carlson defends Trump for liking Kim Jong-un: North Korea is 'monstrous' but 'to lead a country' means 'killing people'". Newsweek. Archived from the original on July 1, 2019. Retrieved July 1, 2019. Rahim, Zamira (June 30, 2019). "Fox host Tucker Carlson defends North Korean regime: 'Leading a country means killing people'". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 1, 2019. Retrieved July 1, 2019. Cummings, William (June 30, 2019). "Leading a country 'means killing people': Tucker Carlson defends Trump friendship with Kim Jong Un". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 1, 2019. Retrieved July 1, 2019. O'Donnell, Tim (June 30, 2019). "Fox's Tucker Carlson on Trump's meeting with Kim: 'In the end, what matters is what's good for the United States'". The Week. Archived from the original on June 30, 2019. Retrieved June 30, 2019. Carlson, Tucker (December 16, 2020). "Tucker Carlson: Biden set to pick China propagandist Bob Iger as ambassador to Beijing". Fox News. Archived from the original on January 1, 2021. Retrieved January 1, 2021. "Tucker Carlson and Laura Ingraham blast LeBron James over support of China". Yahoo! News. October 16, 2019. Archived from the original on March 25, 2020. Retrieved March 30, 2020. "Dennis Rodman defends LeBron James and confuses Tucker Carlson". Yahoo! News. October 18, 2019. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved March 30, 2020. Qin, Amy; Wang, Vivian; Hakim, Danny (November 20, 2020). "How Steve Bannon and a Chinese Billionaire Created a Right-Wing Coronavirus Media Sensation". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Carlson, Tucker (March 16, 2021). "Tucker Carlson: Biden's border crisis has shown he doesn't value American citizenship". Fox News. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Fiallo, Mamela (March 21, 2021). "Tucker Carlson miente: España no empobreció a América, todo lo contrario" [Tucker Carlson lies: Spain did not impoverish America, quite the contrary]. La Gaceta (in Spanish). Quito. Archived from the original on March 22, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Capdevila, Guillermo Infantes (November 15, 2023). "Tucker Carlson, de amplificar la 'leyenda negra' contra España a defender la unidad nacional con Vox" [Tucker Carlson, from amplifying the 'black legend' against Spain to defending national unity alongside Vox]. Newtral (in Spanish). Retrieved November 16, 2023. "Tucker Carlson: Anger after Fox News host says British civilised India". BBC News. September 14, 2022. Retrieved September 18, 2022. Sharma, Shweta (September 13, 2022). "Tucker Carlson angers Indians by suggesting country peaked under British rule". The Independent. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Bort, Ryan (September 9, 2022). "The America First Crowd Sure Seems to Love British Colonialism Now That the Queen is Dead". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Multiple sources: Maza, Carlos (July 21, 2017). "Why white supremacists love Tucker Carlson". Vox. Archived from the original on August 31, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Wemple, Erik (July 20, 2017). "In his quest to demonize immigrants, Fox News's Tucker Carlson misses a good story". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 20, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Wemple, Erik (May 8, 2017). "Fox News's Tucker Carlson demagogued a rape case involving immigrants. Then they were cleared". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Holmes, Jack (January 19, 2018). "Here's a Window into the Pro-Trump Propaganda Machine". Esquire. Retrieved April 15, 2021. Peters, Jeremy W.; Grynbaum, Michael M.; Collins, Keith; Harris, Rich; Taylor, Rumsey (August 11, 2019). "How the El Paso Killer Echoed the Incendiary Words of Conservative Media Stars". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 15, 2021. Coaston, Jane (March 21, 2018). "Watch: Tucker Carlson rails against America's demographic changes". Vox. Archived from the original on March 21, 2018. Retrieved March 21, 2018. Filipovic, Jill (July 16, 2020). "What's behind Tucker Carlson's mask". CNN. Retrieved April 13, 2021. Bump, Philip (September 23, 2021). "Don't ignore the normalization of Tucker Carlson's poisonous rhetoric on race". The Washington Post. Miller-Idriss, Cynthia (2020). Hate in the Homeland: The New Global Far Right. Princeton University Press. pp. 53, 58. doi:10.2307/j.ctv10tq6km. ISBN 978-0691222943. JSTOR j.ctv10tq6km. S2CID 242934392. Haltiwanger, John (September 23, 2021). "Tucker Carlson peddled a white supremacist conspiracy theory while attacking Biden over the Haitian migrant crisis". Business Insider. Retrieved September 25, 2021. Walsh, Joan (October 7, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's Nightly Toxicity Is Poisoning His Brain". The Nation. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Herbert, Geoff (August 7, 2019). "Tucker Carlson: White supremacists are a hoax, 'not a real problem'". The Post-Standard. Syracuse, N.Y. Archived from the original on August 7, 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2019. Smith, Terry (2020). Whitelash: Unmasking White Grievance at the Ballot Box. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 85. ISBN 978-1108698412. OCLC 1141200629. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2020. Stern, Alexandra Minna (2019). Proud boys and the White Ethnostate: How the Alt-Right is Warping the American Imagination. Beacon Press. p. 99. ISBN 978-0807028377. OCLC 1108290715. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2020. Harwood, John (January 25, 2018). "Bill Kristol hits Fox News, Tucker Carlson for 'dumbing down' coverage, pushing 'ethno-nationalism'". CNBC. Archived from the original on March 19, 2018. Retrieved March 20, 2018. Hananoki, Eric (May 20, 2015). "Tucker Carlson To Alex Jones: Obama Pushing "Nazi" Racial Politics". Media Matters for America. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. "Tucking Into Some German Cooking". Esquire. May 22, 2015. Retrieved September 18, 2022. Hsu, Tiffany (June 12, 2020). "Fox News Host Tucker Carlson Loses More Advertisers". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Gibson, Kate (June 12, 2020). ""Bye-bye Tucker Carlson!" T-Mobile CEO says as advertisers drop Fox News show". CBS News. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Chiu, Allyson (June 9, 2020). "Tucker Carlson says protests are 'definitely not about black lives,' prompting backlash". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Murphy, Coral (June 11, 2020). "Tucker Carlson Tonight loses Disney, T-Mobile ads after host's Black Lives Matter comments". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Gowdy, ShaCamree (February 11, 2021). "Tucker Carlson smears George Floyd in death, drawing backlash". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Elfrink, Tim (April 21, 2021). "Tucker Carlson says protests intimidated Derek Chauvin jury into guilty verdict: 'Please don't hurt us'". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved April 21, 2021. "Huckabee, Rep. King talk Trump's KKK controversy; Carson vows he's not dropping out of race". Fox News. January 23, 2017. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved June 26, 2019. Sides, John; Tesler, Michael; Vavreck, Lynn (October 30, 2018). Identity Crisis. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. p. 88. ISBN 978-0691174198. Archived from the original on October 12, 2018. Retrieved October 16, 2018. Roussi, Antoaneta (March 1, 2016). "Tucker Carlson's amazingly stupid tweet: Says Mitt's criticism about Trump's KKK stance was something "Obama could have written"". Salon. Retrieved April 10, 2021. Barr, Jeremy (July 13, 2020). "Tucker Carlson says there's 'no connection' between writer's hateful blog posts and his Fox News show". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved May 14, 2022. "Fox's Carlson stunned by reaction to stories on South Africa". AP NEWS. April 30, 2021. Retrieved April 14, 2023. "Fox's Tucker Carlson stunned by reaction to stories on South Africa". Chicago Tribune. August 24, 2018. Retrieved April 14, 2023. McLaughlin, Aidan (April 30, 2022). "WATCH: Tucker Carlson Lashed Out at New York Times Report and 'Brownnoser' Reporter Before It Was Published". Mediaite. Retrieved May 14, 2022. Vaillancourt, William (April 13, 2023). "Tucker Goes on Insanely Bigoted Rant Targeting Black Tennessee Lawmaker". The Daily Beast. "Factsheet: Tucker Carlson". Bridge Initiative. October 28, 2019. Retrieved October 14, 2022. Baragona, Justin (April 25, 2019). "Tucker Carlson Guest: Islam Is the 'Most Hateful, Intolerant Religion on Earth'". The Daily Beast. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Daugherty, Owen (December 14, 2018). "Pacific Life pulls ads from Tucker Carlson's show after 'poorer and dirtier' immigration comment". The Hill. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved December 15, 2018. Barr, Jeremy (December 14, 2018). "Pacific Life Insurance Will Pause Ads on Tucker Carlson's Fox News Show, "Reevaluate" Relationship". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 14, 2018. Retrieved December 15, 2018. "Tucker Carlson's show loses advertisers over immigration comments". CBS News. December 18, 2018. Archived from the original on December 19, 2018. Retrieved December 19, 2018. Boot, Max (September 12, 2018). "Opinion | Sorry, Tucker Carlson, but there are plenty of reasons diversity really is America's strength". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved May 15, 2023. Walsh, Joan (May 16, 2022). "The Ideas Behind the Buffalo Massacre Are Now Mainstream on the Right". The Nation. ISSN 0027-8378. Retrieved May 15, 2023. McCarthy, Bill (December 18, 2019). "Tucker Carlson wrong about Potomac River litter". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on December 20, 2019. Retrieved December 20, 2019. Pilkington, Ed (December 17, 2019). "Clean water group denounces Tucker Carlson's 'racist' litter comments". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on December 20, 2019. Retrieved December 20, 2019. Cameron, Chris (April 9, 2021). "The Anti-Defamation League calls for Tucker Carlson to be fired over 'replacement theory' remarks". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 9, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2021. Bowker, Brittany (April 10, 2021). "'We believe it's time for Carlson to go': Anti-Defamation League calls on Fox News to fire Tucker Carlson". The Boston Globe. Retrieved April 11, 2021. Kessler, Glenn (September 25, 2021). "Analysis | How Tucker Carlson twisted a 2015 clip of Biden into a conspiracy theory". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved September 25, 2021. Helmore, Edward (August 7, 2019). "Fox News host Tucker Carlson dismisses white supremacy as 'a hoax'". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on August 7, 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2019. Vaillancourt, William (May 17, 2022). "Tucker Carlson Claims the Great Replacement Theory 'Is Coming From the Left'". The Daily Beast. Ellyatt, Holly (August 23, 2018). "Trump hypes fringe talking point about South African government 'seizing land from white farmers'". CNBC. Archived from the original on August 28, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2018. de Greef, Kimon; Karasz, Palko (August 23, 2018). "Trump Cites False Claims of Widespread Attacks on White Farmers in South Africa". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 27, 2018. Retrieved July 11, 2020. "SA rejects Trump tweet on farmer killings". BBC News. August 23, 2018. Archived from the original on August 26, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2018. du Toit, Pieter (August 23, 2018). "Expropriation without compensation: Fact-checking Tucker Carlson and Donald Trump". News24. Archived from the original on October 20, 2018. Retrieved June 25, 2019. Bauder, David (August 25, 2018). "Fox's Carlson stunned by reaction to stories on South Africa". Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 28, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2018. Steinhauser, Gabriele (August 23, 2018). "Trump Tweet on South African Land Overhaul Draws Government's Ire". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on August 27, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2018. "South Africa hits back at Trump over land seizure tweet". CBS News. August 23, 2018. Archived from the original on August 27, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2018. Akin, Katie (August 24, 2018). "Trump tweets incorrect on S.A. land seizures, farmers". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on August 28, 2018. Meldrum, Andrew (August 23, 2018). "AP Fact Check: Trump's claim on South African farms off mark". The Washington Post. AP. Archived from the original on August 28, 2018. Bryant, Miranda (July 10, 2019). "Ilhan Omar calls Tucker Carlson a 'racist fool' after his scathing attack on air". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on July 10, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2019. Amatulli, Jenna (July 10, 2019). "Ilhan Omar Calls Tucker Carlson 'Racist Fool' After He Claimed She Hated America". HuffPost Canada. Archived from the original on July 10, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2019. Baragona, Justin (July 10, 2019). "Tucker Carlson: Ilhan Omar Is 'Living Proof' Our Immigration Laws Are 'Dangerous'". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on July 11, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2019. Vaillancourt, William (October 6, 2022). "Kanye Justifies 'White Lives Matter' Shirt to Tucker: 'It Was Funny'". The Daily Beast. Retrieved May 9, 2023. Merlan, Anna (October 11, 2022). "Watch the Disturbing Kanye Interview Clips That Tucker Carlson Didn't Put on Air". Vice. Samuels, Ben (October 14, 2022). "Kanye Antisemitic Comments Put Spotlight on Tucker Carlson". Haaretz. Retrieved December 1, 2022. Shapero, Julia (October 11, 2022). "In unaired portions of Tucker Carlson interview, Ye made antisemitic remarks, spoke of 'fake children' infiltrating his home". The Hill. Retrieved December 1, 2022. Bump, Philip (October 11, 2022). "The Kanye West Tucker Carlson didn't want his audience to see". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 16, 2022. "Tucker Carlson mocked for incorrect claim women outnumber men in US workforce". The Independent. December 17, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2021. Ismay, John (March 11, 2021). "The Pentagon condemns Tucker Carlson's sexist remarks about women in the military". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 11, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2021. Nationalist, Raw Egg (March 1, 2022). "The Decline is Real". The American Mind. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Field, Laura (April 22, 2022). "The Decay at the Claremont Institute Continues". The Bulwark. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Gais, Hannah; Squire, Megan; Wilson, Jason; Hayden, Michael Edison (June 13, 2022). "White Nationalist Book Publishers Revealed". Southern Poverty Law Center. McCann Ramirez, Nikki (October 5, 2022). "Man Boobs and Raw Eggs: The Most Absurd Moments From Tucker Carlson's Ball-Tanning Special". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 5, 2022. Sheehan, Daniel (June 15, 2022). "National hate group monitor unmasks a Lehigh Valley-area publishing company peddling Nazi and fascist literature". The Morning Call. Allentown, Pa. Retrieved October 5, 2022. Denizet-Lewis, Benoit (January 11, 2019). "For Gay Conservatives, the Trump Era is the Best and Worst of Times". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 11, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2021. "'Tucker' for July 24". NBC News. July 26, 2007. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Glenza, Jessica (October 16, 2021). "Pete Buttigieg hits back at Fox News host's criticism of his paternity leave". The Guardian. Retrieved December 19, 2021. Grant, Melissa Gira (September 28, 2022). "Doxxed Doctors, Library Bomb Threats, and Attacks on Pride Centers: A Week in Escalating Anti-LGBTQ Violence". The New Republic. ISSN 0028-6583. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Goggin, Ben; Tenbarge, Kat (November 23, 2022). "Right-wing influencers and media double down on anti-LGBTQ rhetoric in the wake of the Colorado shooting". NBC News. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Baker-Jordan, Skylar (September 20, 2022). "Tucker Carlson's latest LGBT rant proves he's been radicalized". The Independent. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Wiggins, Christopher (September 23, 2022). "Tucker Carlson Says Hospitals Should Expect Threats Over Trans Care". The Advocate. Mahdhawi, Arwa (September 23, 2022). "Even for Tucker Carlson, his supposed Obama sex expose was ridiculous". The Guardian. "Tucker Carlson says he felt an obligation to meet with Trump on seriousness of coronavirus". U.S. News & World Report. The Associated Press. March 18, 2020. Archived from the original on March 19, 2020. Retrieved March 30, 2020. Chiu, Allyson (March 19, 2020). "'China has blood on its hands': Fox News hosts join Trump in blame-shifting". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 8, 2020. Retrieved March 31, 2020. Hagan, Joe (March 17, 2020). ""Dishonesty ... Is Always an Indicator of Weakness": Tucker Carlson on How He Brought His Coronavirus Message to Mar-a-Lago". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on March 21, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2020. Costa, Robert (March 17, 2020). "As much of America takes drastic action, some Republicans remain skeptical of the severity of the coronavirus pandemic". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 29, 2020. Retrieved March 30, 2020. McCarthy, Bill (May 4, 2020). "Tucker Carlson says coronavirus isn't as deadly as we thought. Experts disagree". PolitiFact. Retrieved March 15, 2021. Chait, Jonathan (April 28, 2020). "Tucker Carlson Thinks Lockdowns Have Nothing to Do With Flattening the Curve". New York. Archived from the original on May 24, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2020. Earlier this month, Dr. Anthony Fauci, who we are apparently required by law to respect no matter what he says, suggested that in fact we may never be allowed to resume a normal life ... That is the same Dr. Fauci – keep this to yourself because, as noted, you're not allowed to show any skepticism – that's the same Dr. Fauci who also announced that shaking hands, the ancient custom of shaking hands should be done away with forever, and then a week later, told Snapchat that actually it's fine to have sex with strangers you meet on Tinder. Walker, James (April 24, 2020). "Fox News Host Tucker Carlson Says Coronavirus Lockdown is 'Punishing' Rural America, Calls it 'Mindless and Cruel'". Newsweek. Archived from the original on May 11, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2020. Bump, Philip (February 11, 2022). "Analysis | Once again, Fox News stokes a protest against a Democratic president". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved April 3, 2022. Darcy, Oliver (August 23, 2021). "Right-wing media pushed a deworming drug to treat Covid-19 that the FDA says is unsafe for humans". CNN. Blake, Aaron (August 24, 2021). "How the right's ivermectin conspiracy theories led to people buying horse dewormer". The Washington Post. Sommerlad, Joe (February 10, 2021). "Tucker Carlson says US authorities 'lying' about Covid vaccines as conservative media sows doubts over safety". The Independent. Archived from the original on March 19, 2021. Retrieved March 15, 2021. Porter, Tom (February 23, 2021). "How Fox News hosts started attacking COVID-19 vaccines after Biden took over the rollout from Trump". Business Insider. Retrieved March 15, 2021. Dunlop, W. G. (May 7, 2021). "Tucker Carlson misrepresents government data on Covid-19 vaccines". AFP Fact Check. Retrieved May 11, 2021. Walsh, Joe (May 5, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Says Vaccine-Related Deaths May Be Abnormally High — But Vaccines Haven't Been Linked To Deaths". Forbes. Retrieved May 11, 2021. Shanker, Pradheep J. (May 7, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's Faulty Complaint about Coronavirus Vaccines". National Review. Retrieved May 8, 2021. Bremner, Jade (July 20, 2021). "Fox News's Tucker Carlson tells viewers to 'ignore' TV medical advice". The Independent. McDonald, Jessica (July 29, 2022). "COVID-19 Vaccination Increases Immunity, Contrary to Immune Suppression Claims". FactCheck.org. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Blake, Aaron (May 6, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's sloppiest, most dangerous vaccine segment yet". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2021. Guzman, Joseph (May 6, 2021). "Sanjay Gupta blasts Tucker Carlson as 'reckless' on vaccines". The Hill. Retrieved May 7, 2021. Carlson, Tucker (May 6, 2021). "Tucker Carlson: How many Americans have died after taking the COVID vaccine?". Fox News. Retrieved May 7, 2021. McCarthy, Bill (May 6, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's misleading claim about deaths after COVID-19 vaccine". PolitiFact. Retrieved May 7, 2021. Qiu, Linda (May 7, 2021). "Tracking Viral Misinformation". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 8, 2021. Stelter, Brian (May 6, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's Fox News colleagues call out his dangerous anti-vaccination rhetoric". CNN Business. Retrieved May 7, 2021. Hall, Louise (June 2, 2021). "Tucker Carlson under fire for calling workplace vaccine requirement 'medical Jim Crow'". The Independent. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Graham, David A. (July 20, 2021). "Suddenly, Conservatives Care About Vaccines". The Atlantic. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Baragona, Justin (September 21, 2021). "Tucker Bizarrely Claims Military Vax Mandate Is Plot to Root Out 'Men With High Testosterone'". The Daily Beast. Retrieved October 19, 2021. Hsu, Tiffany (July 11, 2021). "Despite Outbreaks Among Unvaccinated, Fox News Hosts Smear Shots". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on July 11, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2021. Blake, Aaron (July 9, 2021). "GOP and Fox News rush to turn vaccine door-knockers into terrifying straw men". The Washington Post. Hodgman, Lucy (July 14, 2023). "Asa Hutchinson clashes with Tucker Carlson on vaccination status". Politico. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Jain, Akshita (July 29, 2021). "Tucker Carlson escalates feud against Anthony Fauci by claiming he 'created' Covid". The Independent. Retrieved July 30, 2021. McCarthy, Bill (April 13, 2021). "Tucker Carlson falsely claims COVID-19 vaccines might not work". PolitiFact. Retrieved April 17, 2021. Ibrahim, Nur (April 27, 2021). "Did Tucker Carlson Say Forcing Kids To Wear Masks Outside Is 'Child Abuse'?". Snopes. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Pengelly, Martin (April 27, 2021). "Fox News host Tucker Carlson claims making children wear masks is 'abuse'". The Guardian. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Brewster, Jack (April 27, 2021). "Criticism Mounts As Tucker Carlson Urges Viewers To Call Child Protective Services On Children Wearing Masks Outdoors". Forbes. Kiely, Eugene; Spencer, Saranac Hale (April 17, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Misleads on COVID-19 Vaccines, Masks". FactCheck.org. Retrieved April 18, 2021. Gertz, Matt (September 18, 2020). "Warning of a left-wing coup, Trumpist media prep their audience for election unrest". Media Matters for America. Stelter, Brian; Darcy, Oliver (November 9, 2020). "Trump election dead-enders have a home on Fox News and right-wing radio". CNN Business. Archived from the original on November 14, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Silverstein, Jason (November 13, 2020). "Trump posts flurry of anti-Fox News tweets: "They forgot what made them successful"". CBS News. Archived from the original on November 14, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Owen, Phil (November 9, 2020). "Tucker Carlson Still Backing Trump's Fake Voter Fraud Claims (Video)". The Wrap. Archived from the original on November 14, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Kafka, Peter (November 13, 2020). "Fox News's election fraud pandering may be its most dangerous lie yet". Vox. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020. "Two accused 'dead' Georgia voters very much alive despite claims – and they voted legally". WXIA-TV. Atlanta. November 13, 2020. Archived from the original on November 14, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Pengelly, Martin (November 24, 2020). "Fox News' Laura Ingraham and Tucker Carlson distance themselves from Trump". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 3, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2020. Bump, Philip (November 24, 2020). "Tucker Carlson outlines the post-Trump playbook". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved November 24, 2020. Peters, Jeremy W. (November 20, 2020). "Tucker Carlson Dared Question a Trump Lawyer. The Backlash Was Quick". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 21, 2020. Retrieved November 23, 2020. Lahut, Jake (November 23, 2020). "Tucker Carlson was attacked by Trump supporters for questioning the outlandish claims of the president's lawyer Sidney Powell before she was fired". Business Insider. Retrieved March 16, 2021. "Sidney Powell: Trump team cuts ties with lawyer who made voter fraud claims". BBC News. November 23, 2020. Baragona, Justin (January 27, 2021). "MyPillow Guy Peddles Crazy Twitter Conspiracies in Tucker Carlson Interview". The Daily Beast. Retrieved July 30, 2021. McCann Ramirez, Nikki (January 27, 2021). "Tucker Carlson suddenly gives a welcome ear to election conspiracy theories when they come from his major sponsor". Media Matters for America. McCarthy, Bill (July 20, 2021). "Tucker Carlson spins web of misleading claims as he alleges 'meaningful voter fraud' in Georgia". PolitiFact. Retrieved March 14, 2022. Weiner, Rachel; Barr, Jeremy (August 30, 2022). "Fox News stars questioned by election tech company in defamation case". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Folkenflik, David (September 6, 2022). "Fox producer's warning against Jeanine Pirro surfaces in Dominion defamation suit". NPR. Wilkinson, Joseph (August 31, 2022). "Tucker Carlson, Sean Hannity among Fox News stars deposed in voting machine lawsuit". New York Daily News. Retrieved November 5, 2023. Peters, Jeremy W.; Robertson, Katie (February 16, 2023). "Fox Stars Privately Expressed Disbelief About Election Fraud Claims. 'Crazy Stuff.'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 21, 2023. Darcy, Oilver (February 17, 2023). "Fox News stars and executives privately trashed Trump's election fraud claims, court document reveals". CNN. Bauder, David; Riccari, Nicholas (March 8, 2023). "'I hate him passionately,' Tucker Carlson said in a text about Donald Trump, court papers show". The Associated Press. Mastrangelo, Dominick (March 21, 2023). "Tucker Carlson 'enraged' private texts revealed; 'I love Trump'". The Hill. Retrieved March 22, 2023. Colby, Hall (February 23, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Rips Merrick Garland on White Supremacists". Mediaite. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2021. Wagner, Meg (February 23, 2021). "White supremacists were involved in Capitol attack, officials testify". CNN. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2021. McCarthy, Bill (February 23, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's false claim downplaying role of white supremacists at Capitol riot". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Bump, Philip (February 23, 2021). "Analysis | How the effort to deny the reality of the Jan 6 attack is evolving". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 23, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2021. Putterman, Samantha (June 13, 2022). "Tucker Carlson is wrong. Firearms, other weapons were found at the Capitol on Jan. 6". PolitiFact. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Cohen, Marshall (June 17, 2021). "Fact-check: Fox News and Republican lawmakers push new false flag conspiracy that FBI orchestrated US Capitol attack". CNN. Retrieved August 7, 2021. Hill, Clara (June 18, 2021). "Tucker Carlson doubles down on Capitol riot conspiracy theory". The Independent. Retrieved August 7, 2021. Baragona, Justin (June 16, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Bizarrely Suggests Capitol Insurrection Was Orchestrated by FBI". The Daily Beast. Retrieved June 16, 2021. Keller, Aaron (June 16, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Ignored Laws and Common Practices While Suggesting Undercover FBI Agents, Not Pro-Trump Criminals, Are to Blame for Jan. 6". Law & Crime. Gore, D'Angelo (June 18, 2021). "Conservative Outlets Advance Unfounded Theory About Capitol Attack". FactCheck.org. Retrieved June 20, 2021. Multiple sources: Kaczynski, Andrew (August 19, 2018). "Speechwriter who attended conference with white nationalists in 2016 leaves White House". CNN. Bump, Philip (June 17, 2021). "Analysis | How the right is trying to reshape the history of the Jan 6 riot". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved June 18, 2021. Palma, Bethania (June 16, 2021). "No, the Jan 6 Attack on the Capitol Wasn't an FBI False Flag". Snopes. Retrieved June 20, 2021. Palmer, Ewan (June 16, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Approves Putin Criticizing Ashli Babbitt January 6 Shooting". Newsweek. Carlson, Tucker (June 16, 2021). "Tucker Carlson: Government agents may have helped organize the Jan 6 Capitol riot". Fox News. Hill, Clara (June 25, 2021). "Tucker Carlson lashes out at top US military leader Mark Milley: 'He's not just a pig, he's stupid'". The Independent. Retrieved July 1, 2021. Colvin, Jill (January 7, 2022). "Cruz apologizes for describing Jan. 6 attack as terrorism". Associated Press. Retrieved January 8, 2022. Sahil, Kapur (March 8, 2023). "Tucker Carlson, with video provided by Speaker McCarthy, falsely depicts Jan. 6 riot as a peaceful gathering". NBC News. Retrieved March 8, 2023. Sullum, Jacob (March 8, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Describes the Capitol Riot As 'Mostly Peaceful Chaos.' Is He Wrong?". Reason. Retrieved March 9, 2023. Pengelly, Martin (March 8, 2023). "'Sleaze-slinging' Fox News denounced by family of January 6 officer who died". The Guardian. Retrieved March 8, 2023. Jackman, Tom (March 7, 2023). "Capitol Police chief blasts Tucker Carlson over 'misleading' Jan. 6 footage". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 8, 2023. Wendling, Mike (March 8, 2023). "Republicans slam Fox News' Tucker Carlson over Capitol riot clips". BBC News. Retrieved March 8, 2023. Cheney, Kyle (March 12, 2023). "Prosecutors say newly aired Chansley footage paints misleading portrait of his Jan. 6 conduct". Politico. Feuer, Alan (July 13, 2022). "A Trump Backer's Downfall as the Target of a Jan. 6 Conspiracy Theory". The New York Times. Feuer, Alan (October 13, 2022). "New Evidence Undercuts Jan. 6 Instigator Conspiracy Theory". The New York Times. Feuer, Alan (March 23, 2023). "Man at Center of Jan. 6 Conspiracy Theory Demands Retraction From Fox". The New York Times. Multiple sources: Darcy, Oliver. "Rupert Murdoch is letting his media empire spread January 6 and election conspiracy theories". CNN. Barr, Jeremy (October 28, 2021). "Tucker Carlson draws bipartisan backlash for 'false flag' claim about Jan. 6 in new documentary". The Washington Post. "Tucker Carlson condemned over 'false flag' claim about deadly Capitol attack". The Guardian. October 30, 2021. Evon, Dan (November 4, 2021). "The Multiple Falsehoods of 'Patriot Purge'". Snopes. Hayes, Steve; Goldberg, Jonah (November 21, 2021). "Why we are leaving Fox News". The Dispatch. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Folkenflik, David (November 21, 2021). "Two Fox News commentators resign over Tucker Carlson series on the Jan. 6 siege". NPR. Belam, Martin (October 29, 2020). "Fox News's Tucker Carlson mocked for 'lost in mail' Biden documents claim". The Guardian. Sollenberger, Roger (October 30, 2020). "'Someone's reading our texts': Tucker Carlson, UPS and the non-stolen Biden documents". Salon. Retrieved July 8, 2021. "Why Tucker Carlson Is Feuding with the NSA". People. July 1, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2021. Shoaib, Alia (December 5, 2021). "Email leak reveals the surprising friendship between Hunter Biden and his 'buddy' Tucker Carlson, says report". Business Insider. Retrieved December 5, 2021. Beech, Eric (June 30, 2021). "U.S. intelligence agency says it isn't spying on Fox's Tucker Carlson". Reuters. Leopold, Jason; Mack, David (July 7, 2021). "Here's The Extremely Broad FOIA Request Tucker Carlson's Producer Filed With The NSA". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved July 11, 2021. Baragona, Justin (July 8, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's Extremely Mad That Journalists FOIA'd His FOIA Request to NSA". The Daily Beast. Retrieved July 11, 2021. National Security Agency/Central Security Service [@nsagov] (June 30, 2021). "A statement from NSA regarding recent allegations" (Tweet). Retrieved August 7, 2021 – via Twitter. Knowles, Hannah (June 29, 2021). "NSA says it never targeted Tucker Carlson and focuses on foreign threats". The Washington Post. Wong, Wilson (June 30, 2021). "Tucker Carlson claims the NSA is spying on him. The agency denies it". NBC News. Retrieved August 7, 2021. Tavlian, Alex (June 30, 2021). "McCarthy taps Nunes to investigate NSA over claims of spying on Tucker Carlson". San Joaquin Valley Sun. Swan, Jonathan (July 7, 2021). "Tucker Carlson sought interview with Putin at time of NSA spying claim". Axios. Savage, Charlie (August 10, 2021). "Watchdog to Scrutinize Fox News Host's Claim the N.S.A. Spied on Him". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Schnell, Mychael (July 7, 2021). "Tucker Carlson says he was pursuing Putin interview around time of spying claims". The Hill. Johnson, Dominic Patten, Ted; Patten, Dominic; Johnson, Ted (June 30, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Lashes Out At NSA "Lies" As Intel Agency Denies Spying On Fox News Host". Deadline. Retrieved July 27, 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Castronuovo, Celine (July 23, 2021). "Fox News: 'Entirely unacceptable' for 'NSA to unmask Tucker Carlson'". The Hill. Volz, Dustin (August 10, 2021). "Tucker Carlson's Spying Allegations Being Investigated by National Security Agency Watchdog". The Wall Street Journal. Loofbourow, Lili (March 22, 2019). "How Tucker Carlson Conned America Into Thinking His Heinous Opinions Don't Matter". Slate. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2021. Shafer, Jack (February 1, 2017). "How to Beat Tucker Carlson". Politico. Archived from the original on March 14, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2021. Bump, Philip (July 20, 2021). "Analysis: Sean Hannity's limited vaccine endorsement is a small drop in Fox News's ocean of doubt". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Bump, Philip (May 7, 2021). "Perhaps Tucker Carlson's data cherry-picking isn't limited to vaccines". The Washington Post. In a sense, it's been useful to have Carlson misinterpret bad data because it reveals how he approaches his job. It's a direct example of how he cherry-picks information to make a point centered on tearing down his perceived opponents and agitating his audience. Chait, Jonathan (March 12, 2021). "Conservatives Are Furious Biden Delivered a Non-Insane Presidential Speech". New York. Archived from the original on March 13, 2021. Retrieved March 14, 2021. Baragona, Justin (September 13, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Admits: 'I Lie if I'm Really Cornered or Something'". The Daily Beast. Retrieved September 14, 2021 – via Yahoo! News. Hays, Tom (September 24, 2020). "Judge dismisses suit against Fox over Trump affair story". Associated Press. Retrieved May 3, 2021. Daniels, Eugene; Ross, Garrett; Okun, Eli (December 21, 2021). "Politico Playbook PM: What Trump is planning for the Jan. 6 anniversary". Politico. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Mediaite's Most Influential in News Media 2021". Mediaite. December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Parsley, Aaron (September 15, 2021). "Bernie Sanders and Cindy McCain Write Tributes for Biden and Other Leaders on TIME 100 List". People. Retrieved November 14, 2021. Allen, Mike (May 1, 2022). "Tucker Carlson vows he won't read N.Y. Times series about him". Axios. Retrieved May 3, 2022. Mastrangelo, Dominick (May 2, 2022). "Tucker Carlson brushes off 20,000-word NY Times story dubbing him 'American Nationalist'". The Hill. Retrieved July 20, 2022. Confessore, Nicholas (April 30, 2022). "How 'Tucker Carlson Tonight' Fuels Extremism and Fear". The New York Times. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Weddings/East: Andrews-Carlson". Detroit Free Press. August 28, 1991. p. 58 – via Newspapers.com. Olasky, Marvin (April 12, 2013). "Tucker Carlson takes it to the Episcopalians". World. Retrieved October 14, 2022. Carlson, Tucker (May 15, 2005). "Off the Hook". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 14, 2021. Retrieved February 20, 2017. Avlon, John P. (August 9, 2005). "Jerry Garcia's Conservative Children". The New York Sun. Archived from the original on December 6, 2018. Retrieved December 6, 2018. "Luxury Homes: Tucker Carlson Trades His $4 Million House for a $2 Million One". Washingtonian. August 5, 2011. Retrieved May 16, 2023. Gilgore, Sara (November 30, 2017). "Tucker Carlson sells D.C. home — and buys another nearby". Washington Business Journal. Archived from the original on July 12, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2023. David, Mark (July 16, 2020). "Tucker Carlson Sells D.C. Digs, Snags Florida Hideaway". DIRT. Marr, Madeleine (April 27, 2023). "After his abrupt firing from Fox News, Tucker Carlson is seen near his Florida home". Miami Herald. David, Mark (April 18, 2023). "Tucker Carlson Beefs Up South Florida Holdings, Picks Up the House Next Door". DIRT. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Collins, Steve (July 21, 2020). "Tucker Carlson plans to spend more time in Maine". Lewiston Sun Journal. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Dowd, Katie (September 27, 2022). "Tucker Carlson gives speech at Sonny Barger's funeral in Northern California". SFGate. Retrieved September 27, 2022. Pengelly, Martin (September 26, 2022). "Fox News's Tucker Carlson speaks at Hells Angels president's funeral". The Guardian. Retrieved October 1, 2022. Tucker Carlson at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website A conversation with Tucker Carlson (1 Dec. 2023). Carlson discusses his thoughts on the state of US society, rediscovering national alignment, the benefits and perils of prosperity, climate change, immigration, the current US political landscape, media control, the importance of free speech platforms, Carlson's future, and more. A conversation with David O. Sacks, Chamath Palihapitiya, David Friedberg and Jason Calacanis. Tucker Carlson at Public Accountability Initiative Tucker Carlson on Fox News Channel Appearances on C-SPAN Tucker Carlson on the Muck Rack journalist listing site Tucker Carlson at IMDb Portals:  Biography  California  Conservatism  Florida  Journalism  Television  United States