Serbia competed at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. This was the nation's third appearance at the Summer Olympics. The Olympic Committee of Serbia sent a total of 116 athletes to the Games, 80 men and 46 women, to compete in 15 sports. Volleyball, men's handball, men's water polo were the only team-based sports in which Serbia had its representation in these Olympic games. Among the sports played by the athletes, Serbia marked its Olympic debut in taekwondo. Notable Serbian athletes featured butterfly swimmer and Olympic silver medalist Milorad Čavić, and world number-one male tennis player and Olympic bronze medalist Novak Djokovic, who was the nation's flag bearer at the opening ceremony. Pistol shooter and Olympic gold medalist Jasna Šekarić, the oldest of the team at age 47, became the first Serbian athlete to compete in seven Olympic games, and played as an individual competitor under five different banners. Two athletes, on the other hand, made their sixth Olympic appearance: rifle shooter Nemanja Mirosavljev, and high jumper Dragutin Topić. Water polo player Dušan Mandić, at age 18, was the youngest athlete of the team. Serbia left London with a total of four Olympic medals (one gold, one silver, and two bronze). Taekwondo jin Milica Mandić won Serbia's first ever Olympic gold medal as an independent nation. Meanwhile, the men's national water polo team managed to repeat its bronze medal from Beijing. Two other medals were awarded to the athletes in shooting. Serbian athletes qualified in this athletics events (up to a maximum of 3 athletes in each event at the 'A' Standard, and 1 at the 'B' Standard): Key Note–Ranks given for track events are within the athlete's heat only Q = Qualified for the next round q = Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or, in field events, by position without achieving the qualifying target NR = National record N/A = Round not applicable for the event Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round Men Track & road events Field events Combined events – Decathlon Women Track & road events Field events Men Men Women Qualification Legend: FA = Qualify to final (medal); FB = Qualify to final B (non-medal) Serbia qualified a team in the men's tournament. Team roster The following is the Serbia roster in the men's handball tournament of the 2012 Summer Olympics. Head coaches: Veselin Vuković Reserve player: Žarko Šešum Group play Source:[citation needed] Men Qualification Legend: FA=Final A (medal); FB=Final B (non-medal); FC=Final C (non-medal); FD=Final D (non-medal); FE=Final E (non-medal); FF=Final F (non-medal); SA/B=Semifinals A/B; SC/D=Semifinals C/D; SE/F=Semifinals E/F; QF=Quarterfinals; R=Repechage Men Women Qualifiers for the latter rounds (Q) of all events were decided on a time only basis, therefore positions shown are overall results versus competitors in all heats. Men Women Men Women Mixed Summary Team roster The following is the Serbian roster in the men's volleyball tournament of the 2012 Summer Olympics. Head coach: Igor Kolaković Group play Source:[citation needed] Team roster The following is the Serbian roster in the women's volleyball tournament of the 2012 Summer Olympics. Head coach: Zoran Terzić Group play Source:[citation needed] Serbia will participate in the men's tournament. Roster The following is the Serbian roster in the men's water polo tournament of the 2012 Summer Olympics. Head coach: Dejan Udovičić Group play Source:[citation needed] Quarterfinal Semifinal Bronze medal match Key: VT - Victory by Fall. PP - Decision by Points - the loser with technical points. PO - Decision by Points - the loser without technical points. Men's Greco-Roman Serbia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics Serbia – Official site of the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games Archived 2012-11-07 at the Wayback Machine Novak: Čast mi je da nosim zastavu (in Serbian), B92, retrieved 6 June 2012 "iaaf.org – Top Lists". IAAF. Retrieved 4 June 2011. IAAF Games of the XXX Olympiad – London 2012 ENTRY STANDARDS (PDF), IAAF, retrieved 4 June 2011 "Serbia team roster". london2012.com. 19 July 2012. "Spain – Serbia" (PDF). IHF. 29 July 2012. "Serbia – Croatia" (PDF). IHF. 31 July 2012. "Serbia – Denmark" (PDF). IHF. 2 August 2012. "South Korea – Serbia" (PDF). IHF. 3 August 2012. "Hungary – Serbia" (PDF). IHF. 6 August 2012. "Serbia men's volleyball team roster". London 2012. FIVB. Retrieved 5 November 2017. "TEAM COMPOSITION – SRB / Serbia (women)". FIVB. Retrieved 18 July 2012. "Serbia team roster". london2012.com. 20 July 2012. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Serbia at the 2012 Summer Olympics. The list of qualified athletes