Bakhchysarai Raion (Russian: Бахчисарайский район; Ukrainian: Бахчисарайський район; Crimean Tatar: Bağçasaray rayonı) is one of the 25 regions of Crimea, currently subject to a territorial dispute between the Russian Federation and Ukraine. Population: 90,911 (2014 Census). The Bakhchysarai Raion is situated in the southwestern part of the peninsula. Two thirds of the raion's area is mountainous, while the northwestern part of the region is occupied by the coastal plain. The raion contains a great number of historical landmarks of the ancient history and the Middle Ages history of Crimea, among which are so called cave cities Chufut-Kale, Mangup, and others. The administrative centre of the raion, Bakhchysarai, in the past was a capital of the Crimean Khanate. In addition, the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory is located in the town of Nauchnyi. A few other important attractions located within the raion: Bakhchysarai Palace The "cave city" of Çufut Qale The "cave city" of Eski Kermen Mangup The "cave city" of Tepe-Kermen Uspenskyi Cave Monastery In July 2020, Ukraine conducted an administrative reform throughout its de jure territory. This included Crimea, which was at the time occupied by Russia, and is still ongoing as of October 2023. Crimea was reorganized from 14 raions and 11 municipalities into 10 raions, with municipalities abolished altogether. The territory of Bakhchysarai Raion was expanded to include parts of Sevastopol, which has been de jure implemented since 2023. Russian Federal State Statistics Service (2014). "Таблица 1.3. Численность населения Крымского федерального округа, городских округов, муниципальных районов, городских и сельских поселений" [Table 1.3. Population of Crimean Federal District, Its Urban Okrugs, Municipal Districts, Urban and Rural Settlements]. Федеральное статистическое наблюдение «Перепись населения в Крымском федеральном округе». ("Population Census in Crimean Federal District" Federal Statistical Examination) (in Russian). Federal State Statistics Service. Retrieved January 4, 2016. "Bakhchisaray historical and cultural preserve". Archived from the original on 2013-03-29. Retrieved 2012-11-26. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів". Офіційний вебпортал парламенту України (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 2023-10-16. "Про внесення змін до деяких законодавчих актів України щодо вирішення окремих питань адміністративно-територіального устрою Автономної Республіки Крим". Офіційний вебпортал парламенту України (in Ukrainian). 2023-08-23. Retrieved 2024-03-28. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bakhchysarai Raion. Local government body