Gukovo (Russian: Гу́ково) is a mining town in Rostov Oblast, Russia, located close to the border with Ukraine. Population: 66,648 (2002 Census); 67,336 (1989 Census). The city is located in the northwestern part of Rostov Oblast, occupies an area of 34.4 km², and consists of six separate neighborhoods (former mining settlements) that are several kilometers apart.  The city is located at a short distance from the federal highway M4. The territory of the city adjoins directly to the state border of the Russian Federation and Ukraine, there are railway and automobile international checkpoints. Within the framework of administrative divisions, it is incorporated as Gukovo Urban Okrug—an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, this administrative unit also has urban okrug status. The city of Gukovo was founded in the Provallia Steppe in 1878 as a railway station. It was further developed due to the presence of high quality anthracite coal reserves. Coal was mined here before the revolution of 1917. In the early 19th century, in 1802, the land on which the city is located today, belonged to the Cossack centurion Gukov, who founded the khutor. However, the town was born in 1878, when a new railroad went through this territory, connecting Likhaya station with the center of Donetsk coal basin - Debaltsevo. The railway station, built on the future territory of the city, was originally called Kovalyovo, but in 1904 it was renamed Gukovo. The settlement at the station grew at the expense of the population of nearby farms, who moved here to get work at the mines and mines that appeared here. The largest mine was owned by the Azov Coal Company. However, during the civil war, the economic development of the area was only stopped, and was only resumed at the end of the 1920s. In 1927, coal mining was started in the Uglerod mine, and in 1929, the mine of the former Azov company was restored and named "Anthracite". In the thirties built several more mines, united in February 1939 in the trust "Gukovugol" combine "Rostovugol". In the villages started to appear relatively comfortable houses, schools, clubs, the first mechanized bakery was built. Nazi occupation of Gukovo lasted six months: from July 19, 1942 to February 14, 1943. A tragic page in the history of Gukovo was the mass execution of hundreds of disobedient residents in Kovalevsky stone quarry. In mining villages for the entire period of occupation there were underground resistance groups. After the victory in the Battle of Stalingrad on February 2, 1943 the Soviet troops moved westward, overcoming the resistance of the Nazis. The 5th Tank Army, which included the 47th Guards Division and the 321st Infantry Division, entered Gukovo, Zverevo, Likhaya and Krasny Sulin in the offensive zone. On February 14 regiments of the 321st division liberated settlements of Svetly, Uglerod, Zamchalovo and Zapovedny. The next day Gukovo was completely liberated from Nazi invaders. After liberation from the Nazi invaders a rapid reconstruction of mines and settlements at them began. In 1948 the trust "Gukovugol" was awarded the Order of the Red Banner of Labor for its success. Gradually the settlements began to grow and merged into the city with a new center, built on an empty place. On June 30, 1955 Gukovo township (since 1939) was transformed into a city of regional subordination. At that time "Gukovshakhtostroy" trust was founded, active construction of both industrial objects, and housing and cultural institutions was started. In a young town a large palace of culture was built, a construction college and a vocational school were opened. There was a growth of new mines, including the largest in the region mine "Obukhovskaya-Zapadnaya. In 1970 on the basis of the trust "Gukovugol" was formed an independent plant, which also absorbed the mining enterprises of the neighboring city of Donetsk. Today in Gukovo there are several food and light industry enterprises, as well as a brick factory and an engineering plant. The appearance of the city has changed considerably, several modern neighborhoods have been built here. There are two palaces of culture, a regional museum of local lore (museum of miners' work, the first in Russia and the only in the European part of Russia). There are modern hospitals, dispensaries, two stadiums, the Sports Palace with a swimming pool and several gymnasiums. Highways connect Gukovo with neighboring cities such as Novoshakhtinsk, Shakhty, Zverev, Krasnoe Sulin, as well as cities in neighboring Ukraine. There is also an international road border crossing to Ukraine. After the collapse of the Soviet Union and the ensuing economic crisis that led to the closure of many enterprises of extractive industries, the city's population declined slightly. Throughout the 1990s, it remained stable, but starting in the 2010s, it gradually began to decline as city residents moved to the regional center of Rostov-on-Don. The main branch of the city's economy for more than 80 years was the coal mining industry; in Soviet times, the city operated six mines. At the present time only the mine "Rostovskaya" is working. A sharp decline in industry had a negative impact on the economic situation in the city.  In 2010, Gukovo was included in the list of monotowns, which were given priority assistance from the federal budget; as a result of efforts to reorient the local economy by 2019, 800 new jobs were created in a number of newly created agricultural, processing and recycling industries. However, the problem of the shortage of jobs has not been completely solved, forcing some of the able-bodied local population to migrate to other regions of Russia, as well as to the regional center, the city of Rostov-on-Don. Branches of a number of commercial banks have been operating in Gukovo since the early 1990s. In the period from 1999 to 2010 in the city operated "Donskoy Narodny Bank" - the only commercial bank, which had a legal address and head office in Gukovo. The history of this bank dates back to 1994, when on the insolvency of the Moscow branch "Geolbank", from the Gukovo branch Geolbank was immediately transferred to the newly opened Gukovo branch of "Rostovsotsbank", where depositors' savings and account balances of city organizations were transferred. At the beginning of 1998 due to the insolvency of the Head office Rostovsotsbank the heads of Gukovsky branch Leonid Shafirov (later - an honorary citizen of Gukovo) and Ludmila Klochko with the help of Gukovo management and JSC "Gukovugol" invited depositors and other customers to get their savings, and also sold assets and asked the borrowers to repay their loans. This made it possible to save the funds of all customers of the Gukovo branch of Rostovsotsbank. In 1999 former employees of the Gukov branch of "Rostovsotsbank" became founders, managers and other employees of the "Donskoy Narodny Bank" which in 2002 became a branch of the Moscow subsidiary of the Hungarian OTP-Bank. On the territory of the municipality is a railway station Gukovo Rostov region of the North Caucasus Railway. Freight trains pass through the station. Shunting operations are performed at the station. Passenger trains have not passed through the town since May 25, 2013. There is a bus station in the city of Gukovo. Intercity bus routes link Gukovo with cities in the Rostov Oblast, Krasnodar Krai and Moscow. In the city of Gukovo is one institution of higher education - Gukovo Institute of Economics and Law (regional branch of the Rostov State Economic University). Two colleges prepare specialists in the field of construction and energy. More than ten secondary schools, three art schools. More than twenty kindergartens and nurseries. In the city there is the only in the European part of Russia Gukovsky Museum of Miners' Labor. The museum was founded in 1964 as a local history museum, at the beginning of the 21 century it began to develop intensively as a mining museum. After moving to a new building on Kovalev Street, 49, in the museum appeared a complex of rooms "Mine", which presents mining workings in full size, panoramas of pre-revolutionary mines, mining machinery and equipment. Currently, the museum's collection consists of more than 23,000 items. The oldest church in the city is St. Nicholas' Church, built in 1887. The temple, unlike many others that were destroyed by Soviet orders or during combat operations, survived both the Revolution and the Civil War and World War II. In 1978-1986 the church was reconstructed and greatly expanded. A new foundation was dug and the walls were bricked up. In 1992, a new painting of the interior walls of the temple was completed. The city of Gukovo is famous for the fact that in its vicinity for a long time a stage of the Russian Rally Championship with the same name was held. The competition was held on a cross-country track called "Berezki", which was the only one in the city. In October 2016 there was a grand opening of the new cross-country track "Gukovskaya", which is located in the vicinity of khutor Kalinov. This track is presented for the stages of the Russian Rally Championship and local regional competitions. Vasily Alekseyev Leonid Shafirov Law #340-ZS Russian Federal State Statistics Service (2011). Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года. Том 1 [2010 All-Russian Population Census, vol. 1]. Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года [2010 All-Russia Population Census] (in Russian). Federal State Statistics Service. "26. Численность постоянного населения Российской Федерации по муниципальным образованиям на 1 января 2018 года". Federal State Statistics Service. Retrieved January 23, 2019. Law #229-ZS "Об исчислении времени". Официальный интернет-портал правовой информации (in Russian). June 3, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2019. Почта России. Информационно-вычислительный центр ОАСУ РПО. (Russian Post). Поиск объектов почтовой связи (Postal Objects Search) (in Russian) Russian Federal State Statistics Service (May 21, 2004). Численность населения России, субъектов Российской Федерации в составе федеральных округов, районов, городских поселений, сельских населённых пунктов – районных центров и сельских населённых пунктов с населением 3 тысячи и более человек [Population of Russia, Its Federal Districts, Federal Subjects, Districts, Urban Localities, Rural Localities—Administrative Centers, and Rural Localities with Population of Over 3,000] (XLS). Всероссийская перепись населения 2002 года [All-Russia Population Census of 2002] (in Russian). Всесоюзная перепись населения 1989 г. Численность наличного населения союзных и автономных республик, автономных областей и округов, краёв, областей, районов, городских поселений и сёл-райцентров [All Union Population Census of 1989: Present Population of Union and Autonomous Republics, Autonomous Oblasts and Okrugs, Krais, Oblasts, Districts, Urban Settlements, and Villages Serving as District Administrative Centers]. Всесоюзная перепись населения 1989 года [All-Union Population Census of 1989] (in Russian). Институт демографии Национального исследовательского университета: Высшая школа экономики [Institute of Demography at the National Research University: Higher School of Economics]. 1989 – via Demoscope Weekly. "Official portal - Government of the Rostov region". "Подборка документов о периоде оккупации районов Ростовской области". gosarhro.ru. Retrieved March 10, 2023. "Жители Ростовской области бегут из Гуково и переезжают в Аксай — Последние новости Ростова-на-Дону и области | RostovGazeta". rostovgazeta.ru (in Russian). Retrieved March 10, 2023. "Распоряжение Правительства РФ от 29.07.2014 N 1398-р «Об утверждении перечня моногородов»" (PDF). "ИСТОРИЯ УСПЕХА: ТЫСЯЧИ СПАСЕННЫХ БАНКОВСКИХ ВКЛАДОВ ЖИТЕЛЕЙ ДОНСКОГО КРАЯ". finance-times.ru. Retrieved March 10, 2023. "АО "ОТП Банк" | Новости | Донской народный банк стал филиалом ОТП Банка". www.otpbank.ru. Retrieved March 10, 2023. "История". October 24, 2017. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2023. "Гуково, Церковь Николая Чудотворца". sobory.ru (in Russian). Retrieved March 10, 2023. Законодательное Собрание Ростовской области. Закон №340-ЗС от 25 июля 2005 г. «Об административно-территориальном устройстве Ростовской области», в ред. Закона №270-ЗС от 27 ноября 2014 г. «О внесении изменений в областной Закон "Об административно-территориальном устройстве Ростовской области"». Вступил в силу со дня официального опубликования. Опубликован: "Наше время", №187–190, 28 июля 2005 г. (Legislative Assembly of Rostov Oblast. Law #340-ZS of July 28, 2005 On the Administrative-Territorial Structure of Rostov Oblast, as amended by the Law #270-ZS of November 27, 2014 On Amending the Oblast Law "On the Administrative-Territorial Structure of Rostov Oblast". Effective as of the official publication date.). Законодательное Собрание Ростовской области. Закон №229-ЗС от 27 декабря 2004 г. «Об установлении границы и наделении статусом городского округа муниципального образования "Город Гуково"», в ред. Закона №656-ЗС от 8 августа 2011 г «О внесении изменений в областные Законы "Об установлении границы и наделении статусом городского округа муниципального образования "Город Гуково" и "Об установлении границ и наделении соответствующим статусом муниципального образования "Красносулинский район" и муниципальных образований в его составе"». Вступил в силу со дня официального опубликования. Опубликован: "Наше время", №325–338, 28 декабря 2004 г. (Legislative Assembly of Rostov Oblast. Law #229-ZS of December 27, 2004 On Establishing the Border and Granting Urban Okrug Status to the Municipal Formation of the "Town of Gukovo", as amended by the Law #656-ZS of August 8, 2011 On Amending the Oblast Laws "On Establishing the Border and Granting Urban Okrug Status to the Municipal Formation of the "Town of Gukovo" and "On Establishing the Borders and Granting an Appropriate Status to the Municipal Formation of "Krasnosulinsky District" and to the Municipal Formations It Comprises". Effective as of the official publication date.). Media related to Gukovo at Wikimedia Commons Official website of Gukovo Archived November 15, 2019, at the Wayback Machine (in Russian) Gukovo Business Directory (in Russian)