North Macedonia competed at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece, from 13 to 29 August 2004. This was the nation's third consecutive appearance at the Summer Olympics in the post-Yugoslav era. The Olympic Committee of North Macedonia selected a team of ten athletes, seven men and three women, to compete in five different sports at these Olympic Games. Seven of them had previously competed in Sydney, including slalom kayaker Lazar Popovski, who became the first Macedonian athlete to compete in four editions of the Olympic Games (although he first appeared in 1992 as part of the Independent Olympic Participants), and freestyle wrestler Mogamed Ibragimov, who won the bronze in the men's 84 kg class. Former basketball player, 1976 Olympic silver medalist, and assistant coach Blagoja Georgievski was appointed by the committee to carry the Macedonian flag in the opening ceremony. North Macedonia left Athens without receiving a single Olympic medal for the first time since the nation made its Olympic debut at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta. Athletes of North Macedonia have so far achieved qualifying standards in the following athletics events (up to a maximum of 3 athletes in each event at the 'A' Standard, and 1 at the 'B' Standard). Key Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete's heat only Q = Qualified for the next round q = Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or, in field events, by position without achieving the qualifying target NR = National record N/A = Round not applicable for the event Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round Men Women One Macedonian shooter qualified to compete in the following events: Women Macedonian swimmers earned qualifying standards in the following events (up to a maximum of 2 swimmers in each event at the A-standard time, and 1 at the B-standard time): Men Women Key VT – Victory by Fall. PP - Decision by Points - the loser with technical points. PO - Decision by Points - the loser without technical points. Men's freestyle Macedonia at the 2004 Summer Paralympics "Буштур на отворањето ќе го виори македонското знаме" [Bushtur native will carry the Macedonian flag in the opening] (in Macedonian). Dnevnik. 18 March 2006. Archived from the original on 18 August 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2014. officially under the provisional appellation "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia", abbreviated "FYR Macedonia" "2004 Athens: Flag Bearers for the Opening Ceremony". Olympics. 13 August 2004. Retrieved 11 September 2013. "iaaf.org – Top Lists". IAAF. Retrieved June 4, 2011. "IAAF Games of the XXX Olympiad – Athens 2004 Entry Standards". IAAF. Retrieved 4 June 2011. Official Report of the XXVIII Olympiad Macedonian Olympic Committee (in Macedonian)