Oksana Kalashnikova (Georgian: ოქსანა კალაშნიკოვა, romanized: oksana k'alashnik'ova, pronounced [okʰsana kʼalaʃnikʼova]; born 5 September 1990) is a Georgian professional tennis player. Kalashnikova has won six WTA Tour doubles titles with three doubles titles on the WTA Challenger Tour, as well as five singles and 25 doubles titles on the ITF Circuit. On 5 July 2010, she reached a career-high singles ranking of No. 156. On 11 September 2023, she peaked at No. 42 in the WTA doubles rankings. Playing for Georgia Fed Cup team since 2007, Kalashnikova has a win–loss record of 24–17 (as of February 2024). Kalashnikova entered the ITF tournament in Astana, where she won the doubles event with Marta Sirotkina against twin sisters Lyudmyla and Nadiia Kichenok. In November, she and Nina Bratchikova won the doubles title at the Royal Indian Open. She reached the third round of the French Open on her debut at this major, partnering Alicja Rosolska. Kalashnikova won her first WTA doubles title at the 2013 Baku Cup, partnering Irina Buryachok against Eleni Daniilidou and Aleksandra Krunić. After that, she and Alicja Rosolska reached the quarterfinals of the Canadian Open, a prestigious tournament serving as a warm-up for the US Open. In September, she reached the final of the Ningbo International Tennis Open, a WTA 125 tournament, again partnering Buryachok. In July, at İstanbul Cup partnering Paula Kania, they reached the final and lost to Misaki Doi and Elina Svitolina. In July, Kalashnikova entered the Contrexéville Open and won the doubles competition against Constance Sibille & Irina Ramialison, partnering Danka Kovinić. She then won her second title on WTA Tour at the Bucharest Open, partnering Demi Schuurs. They beat Andreea Mitu & Patricia Maria Țig in the final. In November, she lost two WTA 125 doubles finals, the Open de Limoges, partnering Margarita Gasparyan, and the Southern California Open, partnering with Tatjana Maria. She made the third round at the Australian Open for the first time at this major. She reached her first semifinal at a WTA Premier tournaments level in Indian Wells partnering Sara Errani. On 13 June 2016, she reached a career-high doubles ranking of No. 43. At the Australian Open, she reached the third round for the second time at this major, partnering Alycia Parks but lost in straight sets to top seeds and eventual champions Czech duo Kateřina Siniaková and Barbora Krejčíková. She reached her first Grand Slam quarterfinal at Wimbledon, partnering Belarusian Iryna Shymanovich, where they lost to 16th seeds Zhang Shuai and Caroline Dolehide in straight sets, in one hour. She also partnered with Shymanovich at the US Open and with Miriam Kolodziejová at a WTA 1000 level in Guadalajara and the 2023 China Open (tennis). She was selected to play in the 2023 WTA Elite Trophy with Yana Sizikova with whom she had also partnered earlier for the WTA 1000 tournaments during the clay-court season. (W) winner; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (P#) preliminary round; (DNQ) did not qualify; (A) absent; (Z#) Davis/Fed Cup Zonal Group (with number indication) or (PO) play-off; (G) gold, (S) silver or (B) bronze Olympic/Paralympic medal; (NMS) not a Masters tournament; (NTI) not a Tier I tournament; (P) postponed; (NH) not held; (SR) strike rate (events won / competed); (W–L) win–loss record. To avoid confusion and double counting, these charts are updated at the conclusion of a tournament or when the player's participation has ended. Only main-draw results in WTA Tour, Grand Slam tournaments, Fed Cup/Billie Jean King Cup and Olympic Games are included in win–loss records. Current after the season of 2022. Current through the 2023 Australian Open. WTA Tournament of Champions was held from 2009 to 2014, when WTA Elite Trophy replaced it. The first Premier 5 event of the year has switched back and forth between the Dubai Tennis Championships and the Qatar Ladies Open since 2009. Dubai was classified as a Premier 5 event from 2009 to 2011 before being succeeded by Doha for the 2012–2014 period. In 2015, Dubai regained its Premier 5 status while Doha was demoted to Premier status. The Premier 5 tournaments were reclassified as WTA 1000 tournaments in 2021. Withdrawal before second-round match, not counted as a loss In 2014, the Pan Pacific Open was downgraded to a Premier event and replaced by the Wuhan Open. The Premier 5 tournaments were reclassified as WTA 1000 tournaments in 2021. The WTA International tournaments were reclassified as WTA 250 tournaments in 2021. https://ausopen.com/articles/news/partners-opposition-ao-2023-mixed-doubles https://londonnewsonline.co.uk/number-16-seeds-safely-through-to-ladies-doubles-semi-finals/ "Oksana Kalashnikova [GEO] | Australian Open". ausopen.com. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Oksana Kalashnikova. Oksana Kalashnikova at the Women's Tennis Association Oksana Kalashnikova at the International Tennis Federation Oksana Kalashnikova at the Billie Jean King Cup