Tooth Fairy is a 2010 American fantasy comedy family film directed by Michael Lembeck and produced by Jim Piddock, Jason Blum, Mark Ciardi and Gordon Gray. It was written by Lowell Ganz, Babaloo Mandel, Randi Mayem Singer, Joshua Sternin and Jennifer Ventimilia with music by George S. Clinton, and stars Dwayne Johnson in the title role, Ashley Judd, and Julie Andrews. Filmed in Vancouver, British Columbia, it was co-produced by Walden Media and distributed and theatrically released by 20th Century Fox on January 22, 2010. The movie was given a negative reception from critics but it earned $112.5 million on a $48 million budget, making it a success at the box office. Tooth Fairy was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc/DVD/digital copy combination pack on May 4, 2010. A direct-to-video sequel, Tooth Fairy 2, starred Larry the Cable Guy as the title character and was released on March 6, 2012. Derek Thompson is a minor league ice hockey player, nicknamed "Tooth Fairy" for his habit of shoving opposing players so hard, their teeth come out. One night, Derek steals a dollar from his girlfriend Carly Harris's six-year-old daughter Tess that had been left for her lost tooth, telling her that the tooth fairy doesn't exist in the process. He receives a magical Summons under his pillow, which causes him to grow wings and transports him to the realm of tooth fairies. He meets his caseworker, Tracy, and the head fairy, Lily, both of whom he develops an adversarial relationship with. Lily tells Derek that he is a "dream crusher," due to his unsympathetic dealings with children like Tess, and sentences him to serve two weeks as a tooth fairy. Later, he meets Jerry, who gives him his tooth fairy supplies, which include "Shrinking Paste," "Invisible Spray," "dog peppermints", "Amnesia Dust", "cat away" and a magic wand that will only work if he believes. Carly's 14-year-old son, Randy, dislikes Derek. Randy wants to grow up to be a heavy metal star. When Derek defends Randy against a bully, he begins to win Randy over, and Derek begins teaching Randy to play his electric guitar better so he can win a talent show. Derek visits several children and tries to collect teeth and give out dollars, but a mixture of obstacles, his own incompetence, and sheer bad luck cause him to fail at his job. Lily says that he is the worst tooth fairy ever and denies Derek any more supplies from Jerry for the remainder of his sentence, criticizing his lack of faith in children. Afterward, he is approached by a fairy named Ziggy who provides him black market supplies. Later that night, the items malfunction and Derek is seen by a child's mother and arrested. While behind bars, Tracy tells Derek that Lily extended his duty to three weeks, and offers to give Derek proper supplies if he will start acting like a tooth fairy; Carly soon comes to bail Derek out. Derek works on improving his tooth fairy skills and bonding with Tracy and Randy, but when Derek can't score a goal at a hockey game, he takes his frustration out on Randy, telling him that he will never become a rock star. With his dreams crushed, Randy tearfully smashes his guitar and a disappointed Carly breaks up with Derek, telling him his biggest flaws are his inability to be optimistic and that he can't say "what if". Later, Tracy comes to Derek's house to announce that he is a tooth fairy-in-training, much to Derek's annoyance, and when he mocks him and tells him to get out of his house, Tracy tells him that Derek's dream-crushing reputation hurts himself more than others. At the next hockey game, Derek gets back on the ice and sees Tracy, who silently encourages Derek to score a goal, and after some brief difficulty, Derek successfully scores a goal, finally learning the importance of dreams. Tracy then reveals to Derek that his next tooth fairy assignment is at Tess' house, and with a more confident and optimistic spirit, Derek accepts the job, gets into his tooth fairy costume, and flies away, while Tracy spreads Amnesia Dust on the audience to cover up the event. At Carly's, Tess sees Derek taking her tooth, and Derek reveals that he is a tooth fairy to her, and she promises to keep it a secret. Derek apologizes to Randy and encourages him to keep pursuing his dreams, using his magic wand to grant Randy a new guitar. Downstairs, Carly sees Derek as a tooth fairy, but assumes that he rented a costume for Tess' sake, causing her to forgive him. Derek flies Randy to the talent show, throwing Amnesia Dust on him when they arrive. Derek heads back to the fairy realm to give Lily the tooth, and is told that because of this job, as well as for reaffirming Tess' belief, he has been relieved of his fairy duties. Lily explains that he will never see the tooth fairies again and will have Amnesia Dust thrown on him. Before departing, Derek says a friendly goodbye to Tracy. Lily throws Amnesia Dust on Derek and transports him back to the talent show. There, Randy outperforms everyone and ends up forming a band. Derek's newfound optimism remains intact, and he proposes to Carly, who accepts. Later, Derek is seen playing left wing for the Los Angeles Kings, and when he sees Lily and Jerry in the crowd, he doesn't recognize them. Jerry secretly helps him score a goal. Dwayne Johnson as Derek Thompson, a hockey player forced to become a Tooth Fairy as punishment for being a "dream crusher" Ashley Judd as Carly Harris, Derek's girlfriend Julie Andrews as Lily, the head of the Tooth Fairies Stephen Merchant as Tracy, a wingless tooth fairy assigned to be Derek's case manager Chase Ellison as Randy Harris, Carly's fourteen-year-old son and Tess' older brother who loves electric guitar Destiny Grace Whitlock as Tess Harris, Carly's six-year-old daughter Ryan Sheckler as Mick "the Stick" Donnelly, Derek's new teammate, a highly talented, but disrespectful young hockey player Brendan Meyer as Ben, Randy's classmate who verbally attacks him. Billy Crystal as Jerry, a fairy working for Lily who provides Derek his tooth fairy supplies Seth MacFarlane as Ziggy, a fairy that sells black market tooth fairy items Brandon T. Jackson as Duke Josh Emerson as Kyle Padgett Dan Joffre as the Tooth Fairy #1 Dana Jaime as the Permit Woman Desiree Crosthwaith as The Hockey Team Coach Michael Daingerfield as The Hockey Game Broadcast Announcer Chad Brownlee as unnamed hockey player The hockey scenes were filmed at the Great Western Forum using players from the Los Angeles Kings. The score for Tooth Fairy was composed by George S. Clinton and recorded in the spring of 2009 with an 80-piece ensemble of the Hollywood Studio Symphony at the Newman Scoring Stage at 20th Century Fox studios. The film was released on January 22, 2010, and opened in 3,344 theaters and took in $3,544,512 its opening day, with an average of $1,060 per theater. On its opening weekend, it grossed $14,010,409 with an average of $4,190 per theater. It ranked #4, behind Avatar, Legion, and The Book of Eli; however, the film rose to #3 on that weekend in Canada with $16,000,000 and remained #4 in the U.S. on its second weekend, behind Avatar, Edge of Darkness, and When in Rome. Despite negative reviews, the film has come to be a box office hit grossing $60,022,256 in the United States and Canada, and $51,854,764 in other markets, grossing a worldwide total of $111,877,020. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 17% based on 116 reviews with an average rating of 4/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Dwayne Johnson brings the full force of his charm (and his appropriately pale chompers) to the title role, but flat direction and a committee-written script render The Tooth Fairy unacceptably dull." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 36 out of 100 based on 24 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale. Tooth Fairy was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc/DVD/Digital copy combination pack on May 4, 2010. Tooth Fairy was followed by a sequel, starring Larry the Cable Guy as the title character. Directed by Alex Zamm, Tooth Fairy 2 had a direct-to-video release on March 6, 2012. List of films about ice hockey List of films featuring miniature people "Movie projector: 'Legion,' 'Tooth Fairy,' 'Extraordinary Measures' won't touch 'Avatar'". Los Angeles Times. January 21, 2010. Retrieved January 22, 2010. The kids' comedy, which cost $48 million to produce, should open to about $15 million, a so-so start given its budget. "Tooth Fairy (2010)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 2013-12-29. "About Metro Orlando". Metro Orlando Economic Development Commission. January 21, 2011. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved December 23, 2011. Henrickson, Eric. "'Transformers' goes back to basics; an unlikely 'Tooth Fairy'". The Detroit News. Retrieved 30 March 2012.[dead link] "Exclusive Interview: Pop-Culturalist Chats with Range Roads' Chad Brownlee". Pop-Culturalist. March 31, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021. "Behind-the-Scenes of the Tooth Fairy". Kings Vision. January 14, 2010. Dan Goldwasser (September 18, 2009). "George S. Clinton score Tooth Fairy". ScoringSessions.com. Retrieved September 18, 2009. "Daily Box Office for Friday, January 22, 2010". Box Office Mojo. Internet Movie Database. January 22, 2010. Retrieved January 24, 2010. "Weekend Box Office Results for January 22–24, 2010". Box Office Mojo. Internet Movie Database. January 24, 2010. Retrieved January 24, 2010. "Tooth Fairy (2010)". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved July 25, 2010. "The Tooth Fairy (2010)". Rotten Tomatoes. "Tooth Fairy Reviews". Metacritic. "CinemaScore". cinemascore.com. "About Metro Orlando". Metro Orlando Economic Development Commission. January 21, 2011. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved December 23, 2011. "Renee Yohe Project and 'Tooth Fairy 2' — about to film in Orlando and environs – Frankly My Dear". Orlando Sentinel. January 21, 2011. Archived from the original on January 15, 2012. Retrieved December 23, 2011. Henrickson, Eric. "'Transformers' goes back to basics; an unlikely 'Tooth Fairy'". The Detroit News. Retrieved 30 March 2012.[dead link] Wikiquote has quotations related to Tooth Fairy (2010 film). Official website Tooth Fairy at IMDb Tooth Fairy at Rotten Tomatoes Tooth Fairy at Metacritic Tooth Fairy at Box Office Mojo