During the parade of nations portion of the 1980 Summer Olympics opening ceremony, athletes from each country participating in the Olympics paraded in the arena, preceded by their flag. The flag was borne by a sportsperson from that country chosen either by the National Olympic Committee or by the athletes themselves to represent their country. As the nation of the first modern Olympic Games, Greece entered the stadium first; whereas, the host nation Soviet Union marched last, in accordance with the tradition and IOC guidelines. As each delegation entered accompanied by the Soviet march music, the national name was announced in Russian. Eighty nations entered the stadium with a combined total of 5,179 athletes, the smallest since 1956. Seven of them made their Olympic debut, namely Angola, Botswana, Cyprus, Jordan, Laos, Mozambique and Seychelles. In partial support of the United States-led boycott, sixteen countries marched into the Olympic stadium under the Olympic flag. Seven of them, however, did not attend the opening ceremonies, their flags were instead carried by Moscow Olympic Committee volunteers. Two other countries (Great Britain and Ireland) paraded into the Stadium only with their officials, while four of them participated under the Olympic flag with their athletes. New Zealand, Portugal, and Spain, on the other hand, participated in the Games under their NOC flags. The following is a list of each country's announced flag bearer. The list is sorted by the order in which each nation appears in the parade of nations. The names are given in their official designations by the IOC. This table is sortable by country name (in Russian), the flag bearer's name, and the flag bearer's sport. Notes GDR – Germanskaya Demokraticheskaya Respublika NR Kongo – Narodnaya Respublika Kongo KNDR – Koreiskaya Narodnaya Demokraticheskaya Respublika Liberia withdrew after marching in the opening ceremony and joined the United States-led boycott. SSSR – Soyuz Sovetskih Sotsialisticheskih Respublik Торжественное открытие XXII Олимпийских игр в Москве. Олимпиада-80 (1980) [Opening ceremony of the XXII Olympic Games in Moscow] (YouTube) (in Russian). Soviet Central Television. 15 July 2020. Opening Ceremony – Moscow 1980 (International Olympic Committee). Retrieved 2 November 2022. "Technical Manual on Ceremonies" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. November 2005. p. 40. Retrieved 6 October 2019. Murphy, Brian. "Sting remains from boycotted 1980 Games". Idaho Statesman. Retrieved 22 August 2010. Fimrite, Ron (July 28, 1980). "Only The Bears Were Bullish". SI Vault – CNN. Retrieved August 14, 2013. "Olympics chief feared protests". Belfasttelegraph.co.uk. December 30, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2013. Barker, Philip (May 28, 2020). "Philip Barker: Moscow – the best and most political Olympic Opening Ceremony". Inside the Games. Retrieved November 2, 2022. Flagbearers for 1980 Summer Olympics