Layer Cake is a 2004 British crime film directed by Matthew Vaughn, in his directorial debut. The screenplay was adapted by J. J. Connolly from his 2000 novel of the same name. The film was produced by Adam Bohling, David Reid and Vaughn, with Stephen Marks as executive producer. The title refers to the social strata, especially in the British criminal underworld. The film's plot revolves around a London-based criminal, played by Daniel Craig, who works in the cocaine trade and wishes to leave the drug business. The film also features Tom Hardy, Michael Gambon, Colm Meaney, and Sienna Miller. Craig's character is unnamed in the film and is listed in the credits as "XXXX". Layer Cake grossed $11.9 million at the box office and received generally positive reviews from critics. Craig's performance in the film has often been cited as a major factor in his casting as James Bond in 2005. The protagonist XXXX (otherwise unnamed) is a London cocaine distributor who abhors violence and operates with the care and professionalism of a legitimate businessman. His chief associates are his enforcer and partner Morty, and Gene, an Irish gangster who serves as his liaison to mob boss Jimmy Price. Just as XXXX is ready to retire from criminal life, he is summoned to a lunch meeting with Jimmy, who gives him two tasks. The first is to track down Charlie, the drug-addicted runaway daughter of one of Price's associates. XXXX enlists the con men Cody and Tiptoes to find her; they learn that Charlie has apparently been kidnapped, but are unable to discover who abducted her. The second task is for XXXX to oversee the purchase of one million ecstasy tablets from the "Duke", a low-level criminal who recently returned to London from Amsterdam with his girlfriend Slasher and crew of thugs led by his right-hand man Gazza. Unbeknownst to XXXX, the Duke and his crew have stolen the pills from a gang of Serbian war criminals. He meets the Duke's feckless nephew, Sidney, and finds himself attracted to his girlfriend Tammy. XXXX tries to broker the sale of the pills to Liverpool gangsters Trevor and Shanks but they refuse, informing him of their origin and that the vengeful Serbians have sent the assassin Dragan to recover the pills and kill the thieves. As the Duke had mentioned his name to the Serbians, XXXX is also a target. XXXX arranges a tryst with Tammy but is kidnapped and brought to Eddie Temple, a wealthy crime lord. Eddie explains that Charlie is his daughter, whom he has recovered; Jimmy, having recently lost a fortune due to bad investments he blames on Eddie, wanted her as a hostage until Eddie recouped his losses. Eddie gives XXXX a recording, revealing that Jimmy has been working as an informant for Scotland Yard, planning to betray XXXX to the police once the pills were sold in exchange for immunity for his own crimes and XXXX's money. Eddie demands that XXXX sell him the pills instead. XXXX assassinates Jimmy at his home, but later finds that his accountant, an associate of Jimmy's, has vanished along with XXXX's money. Confronted by Gene and Morty, he shares the evidence of Jimmy's betrayal, and the pair acknowledge him as the new acting boss. Gene shows them the corpse of the Duke, who was killed by one of his men when Slasher threatened to go to the police if Jimmy did not help them out of their situation. XXXX hires a hitman to ambush and kill Dragan, but Dragan kills the hitman first and makes XXXX promise to recover the pills. Sidney brings XXXX to Duke's old hideout, and, as he tries to bargain with Gazza for the pills, the police arrive. XXXX and the Duke's gang barely escape the raid, while Dragan watches from afar as the pills are confiscated. However, it turns out that XXXX arranged for the raid, with Cody and Tiptoes posing as officers to secure the pills. XXXX delivers the Duke's severed head to Dragan as a peace offering; satisfied, Dragan reports to the Serbians that the police have seized the drugs. The Serbians accept the loss, which is revealed to be a small amount in comparison to their overall manufacturing capacity. When XXXX and his crew arrive at Eddie's warehouse to sell the pills as arranged, Eddie's henchmen relieve them of the drugs at gunpoint, and Eddie welcomes him to the "layer cake" of criminal hierarchy. Having anticipated this double-cross, XXXX arranges Trevor and Shanks to gun down Eddie's men in an armed robbery, take the drugs, and sell them via Dizzy so he can settle his accounts. The gang assembles for lunch at the Stoke Park Country Club, honouring their new boss, but XXXX declines their offer of leadership and follows up on his initial plan to retire. With Tammy on his arm, he leaves the club, but is shot by a jilted yet apologetic Sidney, who was furious due to XXXX having avoided his sexual attentions. He collapses, bleeding on the steps. Daniel Craig as XXXX Colm Meaney as Gene George Harris as Morty Sienna Miller as Tammy Tamer Hassan as Terry Jamie Foreman as the Duke Kenneth Cranham as Jimmy Price Michael Gambon as Eddie Temple Ben Whishaw as Sidney Tom Hardy as Clarkie Dexter Fletcher as Cody Steve John Shepherd as Tiptoes Burn Gorman as Gazza Sally Hawkins as Slasher Marcel Iureș as Slavo Louis Emerick as Trevor Stephen Walters as Shanks Francis Magee as Paul the boatman Dragan Mićanović as Dragan Nathalie Lunghi as Charlie Jason Flemyng as Crazy Larry Matt Ryan as Junkie 2 Ivan Kaye as Freddie Hurst Daniel Moorehead as Dizzy Paul Orchard as Lucky Filming began in June 2003. Queen's Gate Mews in South Kensington, London, was used as the filming location for the home of Daniel Craig's main character. The soundtrack from Layer Cake comprises 14 tracks. "Hayling" – FC Kahuna "Opening" – Ilan Eshkeri and Steve McLaughlin "She Sells Sanctuary" – The Cult "Can't Get You Out of My Head" (Original Radio Edit) – Kylie Minogue "You Got the Love" (Original bootleg radio mix) – The Source feat. Candi Staton "Drive to the Boatyard" – Ilan Eshkeri "Junky Fight" – Lisa Gerrard "Making Plans for Nigel" – XTC "Ordinary World" – Duran Duran "Ruthless Gravity" – Craig Armstrong "Four to the Floor" (Soulsavers Mix) – Starsailor "Drive to the Warehouse" – Ilan Eshkeri and Lisa Gerrard "Aria" (Layer Cake Speech) – Lisa Gerrard with Michael Gambon "Don't Let Me Be Misunderstood" – Joe Cocker The Rolling Stones song "Gimme Shelter" also features in the film but does not appear on the soundtrack album. Layer Cake was released on DVD and VHS on 23 August 2005 and on Blu-ray in 2007. It was also re-released in 2014. Layer Cake received positive reviews, with an 81% rating on Rotten Tomatoes and an average of 7.1/10 based on 142 reviews. The critical consensus states that it is "A stylized, electric British crime thriller". On Metacritic it has a weighted average score of 73% based on 30 reviews. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times remarked, "The movie was directed by Matthew Vaughn, who produced Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels and Snatch, and this one works better than those films because it doesn't try so hard to be clever and tries harder to be menacing". Of Craig's performance, he said, "Craig is fascinating here as a criminal who is very smart, and finds that it is not an advantage because while you might be able to figure out what another smart person is about to do, dumbos like the men he works for are likely to do anything". He gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars. Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle remarked on the "efficient, gripping story" and wrote that Craig's performance as an improvising, "intelligent amateur" contained the "cool-yet-humble vibe of Steve McQueen". Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave it a grade A, calling it a "Fast, convulsive, and densely exciting new British gangster thriller". Leslie Felperin of Variety wrote: "There's a proper lived-in believability about Layer Cake's depiction of how the worlds of the rich, the criminal and the criminally rich intersect." Craig's starring role in the film has been cited as the performance that led to his high-profile casting as James Bond. Jason Statham's production company is said to have the rights to produce a sequel, entitled Viva La Madness with Statham taking the lead role from Craig. On 17 September 2015, it was reported that Viva La Madness will be a TV show for Gaumont International Television. "Layer Cake (2004)". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on 10 March 2017. "Layer Cake (2005)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 18 August 2011. "Columbia Pictures". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on 6 May 2017. "Columbia Pictures Industries Inc". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on 21 March 2017. "Layer Cake (15)". British Board of Film Classification. 10 August 2004. Retrieved 4 September 2014. "Layer Cake (2005)". The Numbers. Retrieved 18 August 2011. Vineyard, Jennifer (30 June 2008). "Daniel Craig's Role As James Bond Allowed Him To Become A 'Fool' – Movie News Story | MTV Movie News". MTV.com. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 27 October 2012. Mews News. Lurot Brand. Published Spring 2010. Retrieved 20 September 2013. "Layer Cake soundtrack". AllMusic. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "Layer Cake". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved 19 February 2024. "Layer Cake". Metacritic. CBS. 13 May 2005. Retrieved 2 October 2020. Ebert, Roger (2005). "Layer Cake movie review & film summary (2005)". Chicago Sun-Times. Mick LaSalle (23 August 2005). "Nothing sweet about 'Layer Cake' thugs". SFGate. Owen Gleiberman (17 March 2020). "Layer Cake". Entertainment Weekly. Felperin, Leslie (29 September 2004). "Layer Cake". Variety. Vineyard, Jennifer (30 June 2008). "Daniel Craig's Role As James Bond Allowed Him To Become A 'Fool' – Movie News Story | MTV Movie News". MTV.com. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 27 October 2012. "Film in 2005 | BAFTA Awards". awards.bafta.org. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "Winners Nominations · BIFA · British Independent Film Awards". BIFA · British Independent Film Awards. 24 October 2004. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "The 10th Annual Sony Ericsson Empire Awards". Empire Online. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "European Film Academy : 2005". members.europeanfilmacademy.org. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "2005 Archives". National Board of Review. Retrieved 20 October 2022. Prudom, Laura (17 September 2015). "Jason Statham to Star in TV Drama 'Viva La Madness' from Gaumont". Variety.com. Retrieved 17 September 2015. Wikiquote has quotations related to Layer Cake. Layer Cake at IMDb Layer Cake at Box Office Mojo Layer Cake at Rotten Tomatoes Layer Cake at Metacritic BBC interview with Matthew Vaughn