Georgia competed at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece, from 13 to 29 August 2004. Georgian National Olympic Committee (GNOC) sent the nation's smallest delegation to the Games since the post-Soviet era. A total of 32 athletes, 26 men and 6 women, competed in 10 different sports. The Georgian team featured four bronze medalists from the previous games: weightlifter Giorgi Asanidze, and wrestlers Akaki Chachua, Eldar Kurtanidze, and Mukhran Vakhtangadze. Among these medalists, Asanidze managed to beat his opponents and overhaul the host nation's defending champion Pyrros Dimas for the gold in the men's 85 kg class. Other notable athletes included pistol shooter and 1988 Olympic champion Nino Salukvadze, who participated in her fifth games under three different banners (the other two were Soviet Union and the Unified Team) as the oldest and most experienced member of the contingent, and judoka and world champion Zurab Zviadauri, who was appointed by GNOC to be the nation's flag bearer in the opening ceremony. Georgia left Athens with a total of four medals (two golds and two silver). These medals were officially awarded to Asanidze, Zviadauri, lightweight judoka Nestor Khergiani, and Greco-Roman wrestler Ramaz Nozadze. Georgia has qualified two spots in the women's individual archery. Georgian athletes have so far achieved qualifying standards in the following athletics events (up to a maximum of 3 athletes in each event at the 'A' Standard, and 1 at the 'B' Standard). Key Note–Ranks given for track events are within the athlete's heat only Q = Qualified for the next round q = Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or, in field events, by position without achieving the qualifying target NR = National record N/A = Round not applicable for the event Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round Men Track & road events Women Field events Georgia sent two boxers to Athens. They both were defeated in the round of 16, after one victory and one bye in the round of 32. Their combined record was 1-2. Men Men Women Men Key VT - Victory by Fall. PP - Decision by Points - the loser with technical points. PO - Decision by Points - the loser without technical points. Men's freestyle Men's Greco-Roman "2004 Athens: Flag Bearers for the Opening Ceremony". Olympics. 13 August 2004. Retrieved 11 September 2013. Sheridan, Phil (22 August 2004). "Greeks lift a battered weightlifter Dimas' bronze was golden to his nation". Philadelphia Inquirer. Retrieved 3 April 2014. "iaaf.org – Top Lists". IAAF. Retrieved June 4, 2011. "IAAF Games of the XXX Olympiad – Athens 2004 Entry Standards". IAAF. Retrieved 4 June 2011. Official Report of the XXVIII Olympiad Georgian National Olympic Committee (in Georgian and English)