Austria competed at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, from 27 July to 12 August 2012. The nation has competed at every edition of Summer Olympic Games, except the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp. The Österreichisches Olympisches Comité sent a total of 70 athletes to the Games, 39 men and 31 women, to compete in 17 sports. This was approximately the same size as the previous Games, with the difference of one male athlete, the addition of one female athlete and three sporting events participated in. There was only a single competitor in eventing, fencing, rhythmic gymnastics, modern pentathlon, and Greco-Roman wrestling. The Austrian team included past Olympic medalists: judoka Ludwig Paischer, who won silver in Beijing, and swimmer Markus Rogan, who was the nation's flag bearer at the opening ceremony. Rifle shooter and multiple time world champion Thomas Farnik, at age 45, competed at his sixth Olympics and was the oldest and most experienced team member. Meanwhile, two Austrian athletes made their fifth Olympic appearance: table tennis player and former world champion Werner Schlager, and slalom kayaker Helmut Oblinger, the husband of former Olympic bronze medalist Violetta Oblinger-Peters. Austria, however, failed to win a single medal for the first time in since 1964, after achieving poor performance at these games. Hurdler Beate Schrott, butterfly swimmer Dinko Jukic, open skiff sailors Nico Delle Karth and Nikolaus Resch, sprint kayak pair Yvonne Schuring and Viktoria Schwarz, and modern pentathlete Thomas Daniel qualified successfully for the final rounds of their respective sports, but missed out of the medal standings. Austrian athletes have further achieved qualifying standards in their respective events (up to a maximum of 3 athletes in each event at the 'A' Standard, and 1 at the 'B' Standard). Key Note–Ranks given for track events are within the athlete's heat only Q = Qualified for the next round q = Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or, in field events, by position without achieving the qualifying target NR = National record N/A = Round not applicable for the event Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round Men Track & road events Field events Women Track & road events Field events Combined events – Heptathlon Austria has qualified boats for the following events Austria has so far qualified boats for the following events Qualification Legend: FA = Qualify to final (medal); FB = Qualify to final B (non-medal) Austria has qualified two riders. Alexander Gehbauer in the men's cross-country race Karl Markt in the men's cross-country race Austria has qualified 1 fencer. Men Men Women Austria has qualified 1 athlete. Austria has qualified 1 boat for each of the following events Men Women Open M = Medal race; EL = Eliminated – did not advance into the medal race Austria has ensured four quota places in the shooting events at the Games. Men Women Austria selected 11 swimmers to the team after achieving qualifying standards in their respective events (up to a maximum of 2 swimmers in each event at the Olympic Qualifying Time (OQT), and 1 at the Olympic Selection Time (OST)): Three of their swimmers had competed at their first Games, including medley swimmer Lisa Zaiser, who was also the nation's youngest athlete. The Austrian swimmers also included the former backstroker and Olympic silver medalist Markus Rogan, competing in the men's 200 m individual medley event, and Dinko Jukic, brother of former Olympic swimmer Mirna Jukic, in the butterfly events. By results, Jukic qualified successfully for the finals in the men's 200 m butterfly event, but missed out of the medal standings. Rogan, another Olympic hopeful, was disqualified in the semi-finals due to a technical mistake during a turn. Men Women Austria has qualified 2 quota places in synchronized swimming. Austria has qualified three athletes for singles table tennis events. Based on their world rankings as of 16 May 2011 Werner Schlager and Weixing Chen have qualified for the men's event; Jia Liu has qualified for the women's. Men Women Austria has qualified the following athletes. Austria has qualified in the following events. Key: VT – Victory by fall. PP – Decision by points – the loser with technical points. PO – Decision by points – the loser without technical points. Men's Greco-Roman Staff (6 July 2012). "Rogan bei Eröffnung Österreichs Fahnenträger" [Rogan, Austria's Flag Bearer at the Opening Ceremonies]. Die Presse (in German). Austria Presse Agentur. Retrieved 12 July 2012. "Olympics 2012: Austria laments worst Games in 50 years". Daily News & Analysis India. 10 August 2012. Retrieved 26 August 2012. "iaaf.org – Top Lists". IAAF. Retrieved 6 September 2011. IAAF Games of the XXX Olympiad – London 2012 ENTRY STANDARDS (PDF), IAAF, retrieved 6 September 2011 "Quota places by nation and name". International Shooting Sport Federation. Retrieved 20 April 2011. "Swimming World Rankings". FINA. Archived from the original on 6 January 2011. Retrieved 6 September 2011. FÉDÉRATION INTERNATIONALE DE NATATION – Swimming (PDF), FINA, archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2011, retrieved 6 September 2011 "Austrian swim hopeful Rogan disqualified". The Austrian Times. 2 August 2012. Archived from the original on 19 June 2013. Retrieved 31 August 2012. "Direct Qualifiers for 2012 London Olympic Games – Provisional list" (PDF). International Table Tennis Federation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 August 2011. Retrieved 27 May 2011. Media related to Austria at the 2012 Summer Olympics at Wikimedia Commons First 24 nominated (German language)