Beverly Hills Cop III is a 1994 American action comedy film starring Eddie Murphy and directed by John Landis, who had previously worked with Murphy on Trading Places and Coming to America. It is the third film in the Beverly Hills Cop franchise. Murphy again plays Detroit detective Axel Foley, who once again returns to Beverly Hills and teams up with detective Billy Rosewood (Judge Reinhold) to stop a gang of counterfeiters at a local amusement park called Wonder World. The film features a number of cameo appearances by well-known film personalities, including Robert B. Sherman, Arthur Hiller, John Singleton, Joe Dante, Barbet Schroeder, Peter Medak, special effects legend Ray Harryhausen, and George Lucas as a ride patron. It is also the first film in the series not to involve producers Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer, who opted out of the film's production due to budgetary disagreements. Beverly Hills Cop III was released on May 25, 1994, and grossed $42.6 million in the United States, and $76.5 million at the foreign box office for a worldwide total of $119.2 million. The film received negative reviews from critics, and was considered by them and Murphy himself as the weakest film in the trilogy. Detroit Police Department detective Axel Foley plans to arrest a car theft ring at a chop shop. Unbeknownst to his superior, Inspector G. Douglas Todd, Axel cancels his SWAT backup, planning to use only his team for the raid. Meanwhile, a group of four men arrive at the chop shop to pick up a stolen box truck; the leader of the group confirms the truck still has its cargo—crates apparently belonging to the U.S. government—then has his men execute the car thieves. The group prepares to leave when Axel and his team launch their raid, but are outgunned. Todd, arriving moments later, is killed by the group's leader. When the group flees in the box truck, Axel gives chase in one of the partially disassembled cars from the shop, but is intercepted by Secret Service Agent Steve Fulbright, who informs Axel that the killer must remain on the loose because the federal government is pursuing a larger scheme in which he is involved. After Todd's funeral, Axel learns that several clues left behind by the killers point to Wonder World, a theme park in Beverly Hills, California, owned by "Uncle Dave" Thornton. Axel arrives in Beverly Hills and reunites with his friend Billy Rosewood, now promoted to "Deputy Director of Operations for Joint Systems Interdepartmental Operational Command" (DDO-JSIOC), and meets Jon Flint, Billy's new partner after John Taggart's retirement. Flint calls his friend Ellis DeWald, head of Wonder World's park security, to let him know that Axel is coming to the park for his investigation. Axel befriends Janice Perkins, a park employee, whilst touring the park's underground behind-the-scenes facilities. He is observed by security, then shot at and attacked hand-to-hand. Axel retreats to the surface, where he cuts in line to enter the Spider Ferris wheel ride. Axel rescues two children from the Spider after the guards accidentally jam the ride and is brought to park manager Orrin Sanderson. When DeWald is called in to contest the claim that Axel was attacked by the security guards without prior challenge, Axel recognizes DeWald as Todd's killer, but Rosewood and Flint refuse to believe that claim because of DeWald's impeccable public reputation. Later, Axel is visited in his motel room by Uncle Dave and Janice, who inform him that the Wonder World park's designer and Dave's close friend, Roger Frye, has mysteriously disappeared while inspecting the grounds two weeks earlier, leaving only a letter with a cryptic message. Axel and Rosewood attend a banquet to honor DeWald as private law enforcement officer of the year and meet Axel's old friend Serge; meanwhile, the box truck is located at the Santa Monica Pier, having been repaired and spray painted. Axel tries to heckle DeWald into revealing his criminal activities, despite continued admonishments by Fulbright, but DeWald resists Axel's attempts. Later, Axel digs deeper into a closed-off section of the park and learns DeWald and Sanderson are using Wonder World as a front for a counterfeiting ring; DeWald was at the chop shop in Detroit to collect mint paper stored in the truck. That evening, Axel meets with Uncle Dave to ask him about further details to find a piece of viable evidence, and discovers that Frye's warning letter is actually written on a sheet of the stolen mint paper. Before he can make use of that evidence, Uncle Dave is shot and wounded by DeWald, and Axel is framed for his shooting. After getting away from DeWald and bringing Uncle Dave to Willshire Memorial Hospital, Axel sets out to prove his innocence by storming the park, calling Rosewood and Flint to assist him. The ensuing shootout kills DeWald's henchmen, and after a hand-to-hand fight Axel shoots and kills DeWald, avenging Inspector Todd. During the fight, Sanderson is killed in the print shop by Agent Fulbright, who appears before Axel to explain that he was right. Axel realizes Agent Fulbright is involved with the counterfeiters and fatally shoots him after a brief struggle. Uncle Dave makes a full recovery, and he thanks Axel for his assistance by creating a new character for Wonder World with his name, "Axel Fox", while Axel begins a relationship with Janice. Eddie Murphy as Detective Axel Foley Judge Reinhold as Sergeant Billy Rosewood Hector Elizondo as Detective Jon Flint Timothy Carhart as Ellis DeWald John Saxon as Orrin Sanderson Theresa Randle as Janice Perkins Alan Young as Uncle Dave Thornton Stephen McHattie as Secret Service Agent Steve Fulbright Bronson Pinchot as Serge Gil Hill as Inspector Douglas Todd Jon Tenney as Detective Levine Lindsey Ginter as Holloway Dan Martin as Cooper Al Green as Minister Joey Travolta as Giolito Hattie Winston as Mrs. Todd Helen Martin as Grandma Tracy Melchior as Ticket Booth Lady Eugene Collier as Leppert Forry Smith as Rondy Gregory McKinney as Kimbrough David Parry as Taddeo Michael Bowen as Fletch Symba Smith as Annihilator Girl #1 Julie Strain as Annihilator Girl #2 Heather Elizabeth Parkhurst as Annihilator Girl #3 John Singleton as Fireman George Lucas as Disappointed Man Arthur Hiller as Bar Patron #1 Ray Harryhausen as Bar Patron #2 Robert B. Sherman as Bar Patron #3 Richard M. Sherman as Wonderworld Bandleader (deleted scenes) Asked in 1989 about a third installment, Murphy stated: "There's no reason to do it. I don't need the money and it's not gonna break any new ground. How often can you have Axel Foley talk fast and get into a place he doesn't belong? But these motherfuckers are developing scripts for it. They're in pre-production. The only reason to do a Cop III is to beat the bank, and Paramount ain't gonna write me no check as big as I want to do something like that. In fact, if I do a Cop III, you can safely say, 'Ooh, he must have got a lot of money!'" During the script's early drafts, the plot concerned Foley, Rosewood, and Taggart going to London to rescue Captain Bogomil (Ronny Cox), who was being held hostage by terrorists during an International Police Convention. However, problems such as scripting issues and budgeting caused pre-production to slow to the point where both John Ashton and Ronny Cox had to drop out due to obligations to other film projects. Ashton's part was re-written as John Flint (Héctor Elizondo) and dialogue was inserted to explain that Taggart had retired and moved to Phoenix. Cox's character's absence is never addressed in this film, nor is he mentioned. However, Ashton and Cox make subtle cameos in the form of a picture on Rosewood's desk of Foley, Taggart, Rosewood, and Bogomil on a fishing trip. This is the same picture that appeared in Cop II on Bogomil's and Foley's desks.[citation needed] In an interview in 2012, Ronny Cox said, "They wanted me to be in Beverly Hills Cop III, but...I read the script." Rejected ideas for Cop III included a Robert Towne screenplay (in which Foley has to deal with his celebrity status), a scenario teaming Murphy with Sean Connery as a Scotland Yard detective, and another Axel-in-London idea where his Scotland Yard counterpart would have been played by John Cleese. The last would have involved British gangsters, loosely based on the real-life Kray brothers, who were captured in Detroit and transported to London by Jeffrey (Axel's friend from Beverly Hills Cop and Beverly Hills Cop II, played by Paul Reiser), and Axel would have gone overseas after the gangsters's henchmen broke them out of custody and murdered Jeffrey. This was scrapped because producers Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer decided it was too close to the story of Michael Douglas's 1989 film Black Rain.[citation needed] When writer Steven E. de Souza was brought in, he originally wrote the story as more "Die Hard in a theme park". He was told that each of the rides he had designed would cost about $10 million to build and the whole film would cost about $70 million. When box office results for Murphy's 1992 comedy The Distinguished Gentleman came in, Paramount ordered the budget to be cut to $55 million. Paramount had earlier told Simpson and Bruckheimer that they would only outlay $25 million for a proposed version to be set in New York City, one of the main reasons that the producing team parted ways with the studio. Joel Silver was set to take over producing duties from Simpson and Bruckheimer; however, negotiations on a large budget resulted in production delays leading to Silver quitting production. It was at this time that producers Mace Neufeld and Robert Rehme took on the project. Consequently, the film became more about the investigation and less about the action. Production was temporarily shut down to allow the Paramount top brass the chance to get to grips with the film's spiraling budget. Originally estimated at $55 million, it was soon in excess of $70 million. Of that budget, $15 million was Murphy's paycheck. Principal photography began on September 8, 1993. The final chase scene through the "Land of the Dinosaurs", featuring eleven animatronic dinosaurs, was filmed at Universal Studios Stage 37. Exterior scenes set in the theme park were filmed at Paramount's Great America (now known as California’s Great America) in Santa Clara, California, after Knott's Berry Farm declined permission. The three-armed Ferris wheel rescue scene used Great America's Sky Whirl. One shootout sequence was filmed inside the Earthquake! ride at the Universal Studios theme park. The Sherman Brothers wrote the WonderWorld theme song. Filming wrapped on January 25, 1994. A soundtrack containing mostly R&B music was released on May 10, 1994, by MCA Records. It peaked at 158 on the Billboard 200 and 66 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums. While Harold Faltermeyer did not return to score this film, his co-producer from the previous franchise entries, Keith Forsey, did produce and co-write a new song entitled "Keep the Peace", performed by INXS. However, Nile Rodgers covered Faltermeyer's "Axel F" in a breakbeat hardcore version. This is the only film in the series not to feature a song performed by The Pointer Sisters, although "Neutron Dance" was used in the film's trailer. Beverly Hills Cop featured their song "Neutron Dance", while Beverly Hills Cop II had their song "Be There". Beverly Hills Cop III was criticized harshly and currently holds an 11% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 56 reviews. The critical consensus reads; "Despite being set at an amusement park, Beverly Hills Cop III forgets to have any fun as it churns out uninspired violence and witless gags, with an uncharacteristically lethargic Eddie Murphy not helping matters." Metacritic, which assigns a normalized score, rated it 16/100 based on 15 reviews, indicating "overwhelming dislike". Richard Natale of Variety called it "a return to form by Eddie Murphy" that "runs out of steam before the end". Caryn James of The New York Times wrote that the film is designed to be a foolproof and safe money-maker, but Murphy plays Foley too straight. Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly rated it D− and called Murphy's performance "joyless" and "depressing". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale. Beverly Hills Cop III was nominated for two Golden Raspberry Awards, for Landis as Worst Director and the film as Worst Remake or Sequel. 4th worst – Robert Denerstein, Rocky Mountain News Top 10 worst (not ranked) – Dan Webster, The Spokesman-Review Top 12 worst (Alphabetically ordered, not ranked) – David Elliott, The San Diego Union-Tribune Worst (not ranked) – Bob Ross, The Tampa Tribune Dishonorable mention – Glenn Lovell, San Jose Mercury News Dishonorable mention – Dan Craft, The Pantagraph In an interview in 1994, Eddie Murphy said that Beverly Hills Cop III is "different from the trilogy's first installment because Axel is more mature and no longer the wisecracking rookie cop." During that same year, Murphy said he thought Beverly Hills Cop III was "infinitely better than Beverly Hills Cop II." About the experience on making the movie, John Landis said: "Cop 3 was a very strange experience. The script wasn't any good, but I figured, “So what? I'll make it funny with Eddie". But then I discovered on the first day when I started giving Eddie some shtick, he said, "You know, John… Axel Foley is an adult now. He's not a wiseass anymore". So, with Beverly Hills Cop 3, I had this strange experience where he was very professional, but he just wasn't funny. I would try to put him in funny situations, and he would find a way to step around them. It's an odd movie. There are things in it I like, but it's an odd movie." In an interview with The A.V. Club in 2009, Bronson Pinchot claimed that Eddie Murphy "was really depressed" at the time Beverly Hills Cop III was being filmed, claiming that Murphy was low-spirited and had a low energy level. A fourth entry in the series was initially announced for release in the mid-1990s, under the production of Eddie Murphy's own production company "Eddie Murphy Productions", though production later fizzled out. It was re-announced in 2006, when producer Jerry Bruckheimer announced his intention to resurrect the film series, though he eventually gave up his option to produce the film, instead passing production duties to Lorenzo di Bonaventura. In September 2006 a script, an amalgamation of several earlier drafts, was presented to Murphy who was reported to be "very happy" with the outline which was described as an attempt to recapture the "feel of the original". Murphy admitted one of his motivations for making a fourth Beverly Hills Cop film was to make up for the fact that the third film was "horrible" and that "he didn't want to leave (the series) like that". In May 2008, Rush Hour director Brett Ratner was officially named director, who promised the film would return under the series' standard "R" rating, rather than as a rumored watered down PG-13. Michael Brandt and Derek Haas were hired as screenwriters to improve on the existing script in July 2008 and completed a new script, under the working title Beverly Hills Cop 2009, which would see Foley return to Beverly Hills to investigate the murder of his friend Billy Rosewood. The script was eventually rejected, leaving Ratner to work on a new idea. In an interview with Empire magazine, Ratner stated "I'm working very hard on the fourth. It's very difficult, especially since there were three before. We're trying to figure out some important things, like where do we start? Is Axel retired? Is he in Beverly Hills? Is he on vacation? Does Judge Reinhold return as the loveable Billy Rosewood? Many questions to figure out, but I'm hoping to have a script before film disappears from our existence." Although Murphy himself committed to the project, it was unconfirmed whether the series' other principal actors, Judge Reinhold, John Ashton, Ronny Cox or Bronson Pinchot would also return, though Ratner stated in late 2009 that he was trying to convince Reinhold and Ashton to reprise their roles. Harold Faltermeyer's "Axel F", however, would definitely be returning for the proposed fourth installment, with Ratner quoted as saying "It'll be back but it'll be a whole new interpretation." On November 15, 2010, Ratner stated in an interview with MTV that there was still a possibility that they will make a fourth film, but that it wouldn't be "anytime soon." In October 2011, Murphy discussed a possible fourth film, stating, "They're not doing it. What I'm trying to do now is produce a TV show starring Axel Foley's son, and Axel is the chief of police now in Detroit. I'd do the pilot, show up here and there. None of the movie scripts were right; it was trying to force the premise. If you have to force something, you shouldn't be doing it. It was always a rehash of the old thing. It was always wrong." During late Summer 2013, after CBS decided to pass on the TV series, Paramount decided to move forward with the fourth film. On September 13, 2013, Jerry Bruckheimer stated he was in talks to produce. On December 6, 2013, it was announced that Eddie Murphy would again reprise the role of Axel Foley and Brett Ratner would direct. On May 2, 2014, Deadline announced that screenwriters Josh Appelbaum and Andre Nemec would be penning the screenplay. On June 27, 2014, in an interview with Rolling Stone, Murphy discussed returning to the edgier type character of Axel Foley after years of making family-friendly films. "I haven't done a street guy, working class, blue-collar character in ages so maybe it's like, 'Oh, wow, I didn't remember he was able to do that'", Murphy said.[citation needed] According to studio reports on the film's plot, Foley returns to Detroit after leaving his job in Beverly Hills and he's faced with the coldest winter on record to navigate the new rules and old enemies of one of America's most tenacious cities.[citation needed] The state of Michigan approved $13.5 million in film incentives, based on an estimated $56.6 million of filmmaker spending in the state.[citation needed] The film was supposed to be shot in and around Detroit and was estimated to provide jobs for 352 workers. The film was originally scheduled for a March 25, 2016 release, but on May 6, 2015, Paramount Pictures pulled Beverly Hills Cop IV from its release schedule, due to script concerns. On October 1, 2019, in an interview with Collider, Murphy confirmed that production on Beverly Hills Cop IV will commence once the filming of Coming 2 America has wrapped. On November 14, 2019, Deadline Hollywood announced that Paramount Pictures made a one-time license deal with an option for a sequel to Netflix to create the fourth film. By May 2020, after delays in the filmmaking business caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, Arbi and Fallah confirmed they are still attached as co-directors and that a new screenwriter was working on a new script for the film. In April 2022, Arbi and Fallah left the film to focus on Batgirl (2022), with Mark Molloy hired to replace them. In the same article, Will Beall was announced to have penned the script. The film was retitled Beverly Hills Cop: Axel F, with filming commencing on August 29, 2022. "BEVERLY HILLS COP III (15)". British Board of Film Classification. May 13, 1994. Retrieved November 28, 2015. Cook, John Evan (January 5, 1993). "Par puts 'Cop III' off 8 wks". Variety. Retrieved April 15, 2020. "'BEVERLY HILLS COP III' COULD FINALLY GET ROLLING THIS SUMMER". Orlando Sentinel. April 2, 1993. Retrieved February 15, 2020. "Beverly Hills Cop III (1994)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved September 22, 2009. "Eddie Murphy: 'Beverly Hills Cop 3' Was 'Garbage'". The Hollywood Reporter, February 12, 2015. February 12, 2015. Retrieved February 12, 2015. Zehme, Bill (August 24, 1989). "The Rolling Stone interview: Eddie Murphy". Rolling Stone. p. 130. ""Random Roles: Deliverance's Ronny Cox on RoboCop, Total Recall, and the glory of Cop Rock." The A.V. Club, July 5, 2012". www.avclub.com. July 5, 2012. Retrieved July 6, 2012. Galbraith, Jane (January 6, 1993). "'Costs Force Paramount to Delay Filming 'Beverly Hills Cop III'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 29, 2010. Dutka, Elaine (September 30, 1991). "Movies: Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer just say no to Paramount's offer to make a third 'Beverly Hills Cop.'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 29, 2010. Beck, Marilyn (March 16, 1988). "Judge Reinhold Still Unsigned For 'Beverly Hills Cop III'". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved September 29, 2010. "Filming Postponed Again For 'Beverly Hills Cop 3'". Orlando Sentinel. Retrieved September 29, 2010. "Delays for 'Beverly Hills Cop 3'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved April 15, 2020. Archerd, Army (December 13, 1993). "'Cop III' displays spectacle for Wasserman". Variety. Retrieved October 23, 2019. Boyar, Jay (May 25, 1994). "'Cop III': Eddie rides again". Orlando Sentinel. Retrieved October 23, 2019. Mannes, George (June 10, 1994). "Eddie Murphy's dangerous ride". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 23, 2019. Potter, Derek (November 16, 2013). "Theme Park History: 10 top movies or TV shows filmed in theme parks". Theme Park Insider. Retrieved October 23, 2019. Sciretta, Peter (March 6, 2012). "Legendary Disney Songwriter Robert Sherman Has Died". SlashFilm. Retrieved October 23, 2019. "Beverly Hills Cop III (1994)". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved November 29, 2022. "Beverly Hills Cop III". Metacritic. Retrieved January 25, 2014. Natale, Richard (May 25, 1994). "Review: 'Beverly Hills Cop III'". Variety. Retrieved January 25, 2014. James, Caryn (May 25, 1994). "Beverly Hills Cop III (1994)". The New York Times. Retrieved January 25, 2014. Gleiberman, Owen (June 3, 1994). "Beverly Hills Cop III (1994)". Entertainment Weekly. No. 225. Archived from the original on July 6, 2014. Retrieved January 25, 2014. Denerstein, Robert (January 1, 1995). "Perhaps It Was Best to Simply Fade to Black". Rocky Mountain News (Final ed.). p. 61A. Webster, Dan (January 1, 1995). "In Year of Disappointments, Some Movies Still Delivered". The Spokesman-Review (Spokane ed.). p. 2. Elliott, David (December 25, 1994). "On the big screen, color it a satisfying time". The San Diego Union-Tribune (1, 2 ed.). p. E=8. Ross, Bob (December 30, 1994). "Versed in the worst". The Tampa Tribune (Final ed.). p. 18. Lovell, Glenn (December 25, 1994). "The Past Picture Show the Good, the Bad and the Ugly -- a Year Worth's of Movie Memories". San Jose Mercury News (Morning Final ed.). p. 3. Craft, Dan (December 30, 1994). "Success, Failure and a Lot of In-between; Movies '94". The Pantagraph. p. B1. Leavy, Walter (June 1994). "Eddie Murphy: Hollywood's $2 billion man talks about his marriage, 'Beverly Hills Cop III' and the joys of fatherhood". Ebony. p. 102. Landis, John (September 1, 2005). "The Collider Interview: John Landis, Part II". Collider (Interview). Interviewed by Weintraub, Steve. Pinchot, Bronson (October 20, 2009). "Bronson Pinchot". The A.V. Club (Interview). Retrieved September 29, 2010. "Brett Ratner offers Beverly Hills Cop 4 Update". Archived from the original on July 3, 2010. Retrieved July 12, 2010. "Murphy Back for Beverly Hills Cop IV". Coming Soon. November 30, 2006. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved October 17, 2009. McNary, Dave; McClintock, Pamela (November 29, 2006). "Murphy back for more 'Beverly Hills Cop'". Variety. Retrieved October 17, 2009. Davis, Erik (November 30, 2006). "Beverly Hills Cop IV!". Cinematical. Retrieved October 17, 2009. Morris, Clint (May 2, 2006). "Beverly Hills Cop 4 finally underway?". Moviehole. Archived from the original on September 19, 2006. Retrieved October 24, 2007. Adler, Shawn (July 1, 2008). "Eddie Murphy Quashes Retirement Rumours". MTV Movies. MTV. Retrieved July 2, 2008. "'The Third 'Beverly Hills Cop' Was So Horrible'". MTV. July 1, 2008. Retrieved July 2, 2008. Morris, Clint (July 1, 2008). "Axel to keep it real!". Moviehole. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved July 2, 2008. Adler, Shawn (June 3, 2008). "'Beverly Hills Cop 4' May Be Geared Towards Kids, Says Brett Ratner". MTV Movies. Retrieved October 17, 2009. Williams, Jamie (July 31, 2008). "Writers Attached To Beverly Hills Cop 4". Screenrant. Retrieved September 10, 2008. Morris, Clint (May 29, 2008). "Axel Foley smells a rat". Moviehole. Archived from the original on May 31, 2008. Retrieved October 17, 2009. Morris, Clint (October 15, 2009). "Exclusive : Ashton in Cop 4!?". Moviehole. Archived from the original on October 19, 2009. Retrieved October 19, 2009. "Axel F Tune Will Be Back For Beverly Hills Cop IV". Internet Movie Database. September 10, 2008. Retrieved September 12, 2008. Ditzian, Eric (November 15, 2010). "Eddie Murphy, Brett Ratner Still Hoping For Fourth 'Beverly Hills Cop'". MTV. Retrieved December 4, 2010. Grossberg, Josh (October 26, 2011). "Shrek's Donkey Done For? The Klumps Killed Off? Eddie Murphy Ready to Get Raw Again". E! Online. Retrieved October 26, 2011. Busch, Anita (December 6, 2013). "UPDATE: Jerry Bruckheimer And Paramount Ink First-Look Deal; Brett Ratner Attached To Direct 'Beverly Hills Cop'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 6, 2013. Ditzian, THE DEADLINE TEAM (May 2, 2014). "Paramount Sets 'Beverly Hills Cop' Starring Eddie Murphy For Spring 2016". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved May 2, 2014. Masters, Kim; Goldberg, Lesley (June 27, 2014). "Eddie Murphy Will Be Back in Detroit for 'Beverly Hills Cop 4'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 27, 2014. "Paramount postpones 'Beverly Hills Cop 4'". Detroit Free-Press. Gannett Company. May 7, 2015. Retrieved May 10, 2015. Foutch, Haleigh (May 7, 2015). "BEVERLY HILLS COP 4 Pulled From Paramount's Release Schedule". Collider. Retrieved May 10, 2015. Weintraub, Steve (October 1, 2019). "Eddie Murphy on 'Beverly Hills Cop 4' and Returning to 'Saturday Night Live' in December". Collider. Retrieved October 4, 2019. Fleming, Mike Jr. (November 14, 2019). "Netflix Licenses From Paramount Rights To Make 'Beverly Hills Cop' Sequel With Eddie Murphy & Jerry Bruckheimer". deadline.com. Retrieved November 14, 2019. Sandwell, Ian (May 17, 2020). "'Beverly Hills Cop 4' directors offer update on Netflix sequel". Digital Spy. Retrieved June 5, 2020. Burwick, Kevin (May 18, 2020). "'Beverly Hills Cop 4' Script Starts Fresh, Directors Can't Wait to Work with Eddie Murphy". MovieWeb. Retrieved June 5, 2020. Kroll, Justin (April 8, 2022). "'Beverly Hills Cop 4': Mark Molloy To Direct Next Installment For Netflix". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 8, 2022. Retrieved April 8, 2022. Kroll, Justin (August 29, 2022). "Beverly Hills Cop Sequel Adds Joseph Gordon-Levitt & Taylour Paige; Netflix Pic Starring Eddie Murphy Gets New Title". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 29, 2022. Wikiquote has quotations related to Beverly Hills Cop III. Beverly Hills Cop III at IMDb Beverly Hills Cop III at Box Office Mojo Beverly Hills Cop III at Rotten Tomatoes Beverly Hills Cop III at Metacritic