Slovenia competed at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, United Kingdom. This was the nation's sixth consecutive appearance at the Summer Olympics. The Slovenian Olympic Committee (Slovene: Olimpijski komite Slovenije) sent the nation's third-largest delegation ever to the Games. A total of 65 athletes, 28 men and 37 women, competed in 15 sports. For the first time in its Olympic history, Slovenia was represented by more female than male athletes. Slalom kayaker and multiple-time world champion Peter Kauzer was the nation's flagbearer at the opening ceremony. The London Games also featured Slovenia's Olympic debut in triathlon. The Slovenian team contained two Olympic medalists from the Beijing Olympics: hammer thrower and defending champion Primož Kozmus, and Finn sailor Vasilij Žbogar, who both competed at their fourth Olympics. Rifle shooter and former gold medalist Rajmond Debevec, the oldest athlete on the team at 49, became the first Slovenian to compete in eight Olympic Games (including two appearances for Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia). Rower and four-time medalist Iztok Čop competed at his sixth Olympics, while Čop's rowing partner Luka Špik and butterfly swimmer Peter Mankoč both made their fifth Olympic appearances. Slovenian athletes earned four medals in London: one gold, one silver, and two bronze. All of Slovenia's medal winners had already won medals at one or more previous Olympics. Slovenia qualified one archer. Slovenian athletes achieved qualifying standards in the following athletics events (up to a maximum of 3 athletes in each event at the 'A' Standard, and 1 at the 'B' Standard): Key Note–Ranks given for track events are within the athlete's heat only Q = Qualified for the next round q = Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or, in field events, by position without achieving the qualifying target NR = National record N/A = Round not applicable for the event Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round Men Track & road events Field events Women Track & road events Field events Slovenia qualified boats for all slalom events. Qualification Legend: FA = Qualify to final (medal); FB = Qualify to final B (non-medal) Slovenia qualified athletes in the following events: Women Men Women Slovenia qualified the following boats: Men Qualification Legend: FA=Final A (medal); FB=Final B (non-medal); FC=Final C (non-medal); FD=Final D (non-medal); FE=Final E (non-medal); FF=Final F (non-medal); SA/B=Semifinals A/B; SC/D=Semifinals C/D; SE/F=Semifinals E/F; QF=Quarterfinals; R=Repechage Slovenia qualified one boat for each of the following events: Men Women M = Medal race; EL = Eliminated – did not advance into the medal race Slovenia ensured berths in the following events: Men Women Slovenian swimmers achieved qualifying standards in the following events (up to a maximum of two swimmers in each event at the Olympic Qualifying Time (OQT), and 1 at the Olympic Selection Time (OST)): Men Women Slovenia qualified one athlete for singles table tennis. Slovenia qualified 3 athletes. Slovenia qualified 4 players. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Slovenia at the 2012 Summer Olympics. Staff (3 July 2012). "Peter Kauzer zastavnoša na igrah v Londonu" [Peter Kauzer Will Be the Flag Bearer at the London Games]. Slovenian Press Agency (in Slovenian). Retrieved 4 July 2012. "iaaf.org – Top Lists". IAAF. Retrieved 4 June 2011. IAAF Games of the XXX Olympiad – London 2012 ENTRY STANDARDS (PDF), IAAF, retrieved 4 June 2011 OI: Za nastop v Londonu 91 slovenskih kandidatov, RTVSLO, retrieved 24 April 2012 "Quota places by nation and name". International Shooting Sport Federation. Retrieved 2 June 2011. "Swimming World Rankings". FINA. Retrieved 8 June 2011. FÉDÉRATION INTERNATIONALE DE NATATION – Swimming (PDF), FINA, retrieved 8 June 2011 "Direct Qualifiers for 2012 London Olympic Games – Provisional list" (PDF). International Table Tennis Federation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 August 2011. Retrieved 17 May 2011.