A virtual assistant (typically abbreviated to VA, also called a virtual office assistant) is generally self-employed and provides professional administrative, technical, or creative (social) assistance to clients remotely from a home office. Because virtual assistants are independent contractors rather than employees, clients are not responsible for any employee-related taxes, insurance, or benefits, except in the context that those indirect expenses are included in the VA's fees. Clients also avoid the logistical problem of providing extra office space, equipment, or supplies. Clients pay for 100% productive work and can work with virtual assistants, individually, or in multi-VA firms to meet their exact needs. Virtual assistants usually work for other small businesses but can also support busy executives. It is estimated that there are as few as 5,000 to 10,000 or as many as 25,000 virtual assistants worldwide. The profession is growing in centralized economies with "fly-in fly-out" staffing practices. In terms of pay, according to Glassdoor, the annual salary for virtual assistants in the US is $35,922. However, worldwide, many virtual assistants work as freelancers on an hourly wage. One recent survey involving 400 virtual assistants on the popular freelancer site Upwork shows a huge discrepancy in hourly pay commanded by virtual assistants in different countries. Common modes of communication and data delivery include the internet, e-mail and phone-call conferences, online work spaces, and fax machine. Increasingly, virtual assistants are utilizing technology such as Skype and Zoom, Slack, as well as Google Voice. Professionals in this business work on a contractual basis, and a long-lasting cooperation is standard. Typically, administrative experience in an office is expected at such positions as executive assistant, office manager/supervisor, secretary, legal assistant, paralegal, legal secretary, real estate assistant, and information technology. In recent years, virtual assistants have also worked their way into many mainstream businesses, and with the advent of VOIP services such as Skype and Zoom, it has been possible to have a virtual assistant who can answer phone calls remotely, without the end user's knowledge. This allows businesses to add a personal touch in the form of a receptionist, without the additional cost of hiring someone.[citation needed] Virtual assistants consist of individuals as well as companies who work remotely as an independent professional, providing a wide range of products and services, both to businesses and consumers. Virtual assistants perform many different roles, including typical secretarial work, website editing, social media marketing, customer service, data entry, accounts (MYOB, Quick books), and many other remote tasks. Virtual assistants come from a variety of business backgrounds, but most have several years' experience earned in the "real" (non-virtual) business world, or several years' experience working online or remotely. A dedicated virtual assistant is someone working in the office under the management of a company. The facility and internet connection as well as training are provided by the company, though not in all cases. The home-based virtual assistant works either in an office sharing environment or from home. General VAs are sometimes called an online administrative assistant, online personal assistant, or online sales assistant. A virtual webmaster assistant, virtual marketing assistant, and virtual content writing assistant are specific professionals that are usually experienced employees from corporate environments who have set up their own virtual offices. Virtual assistants were an integral part of the 2007 bestselling book The 4-Hour Workweek by Tim Ferriss. Ferriss claimed to have hired virtual assistants to check his email, pay his bills, and run parts of his company. Crowdsourcing Virtual volunteering Virtual office Virtual team Unattributed (2002). "Real work in virtual offices". International Journal of Productivity and Performance Management. 51 (4/5): 266–268. ISSN 1741-0401. Starks, Misty (July–August 2006). "Helping Entrepreneurs, Virtually" (PDF). D-MARS. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 27 July 2008. Finkelstein, Brad (February–March 2005). "Virtual Assistants a Reality". Broker Magazine. 7 (1): 44–46. ISSN 1540-0824. "Outsourcing Comes of Age: The Rise of Collaborative Partnering" (PDF). PricewaterhouseCoopers. Retrieved 27 July 2008. Rose, Barbara (21 December 2005). "Personal Assistants Get a High-tech Makeover". The Standard-Times. Retrieved 29 July 2008. "Technology links virtual businesses. Advances spur rise in collaborative work". matr.net. 22 May 2006. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Salary: Virtual Assistant". Glassdoor. Retrieved 12 July 2021. "Virtual Assistant Hourly Rates Compared – Guide for Entrepreneurs". Best of Budgets. 16 May 2021. Retrieved 12 July 2021. Johnson, Tory (23 July 2007). "Work-From-Home Tips: Job Opportunities for Everyone". ABC News. Retrieved 28 July 2008. Ferriss, Timothy The 4-Hour Workweek: Escape 9-5, Live Anywhere, and Join the New Rich" Crown (2007) Maney, Kevin (7 October 2007). "Tim Ferriss Wants You to Get a Life". Portfolio. Retrieved 21 March 2008.