The national flag of Latvia (Latvian: Latvijas karogs) was used by independent Latvia from 1918 until the country was occupied by the Soviet Union in 1940. Its use was suppressed during Soviet rule. On 27 February 1990, shortly before the country regained its independence, the Latvian government re-adopted the traditional red-white-red flag. Though officially adopted in 1921, the Latvian flag was used in as early as the 13th century. The red colour is sometimes described as symbolizing the readiness of the Latvians to give the blood from their hearts for freedom and their willingness to defend their sovereignty. An alternative interpretation, according to the Rhymed Chronicle of Livonia, is that a Latgalian leader was wounded in battle, and sheet on which he was laid on were stained by his blood with only the centre stripe of the sheet being left unstained. This story is similar to the legend of the origins of the flag of Austria. The red-white-red Latvian flag is first mentioned in the medieval Rhymed Chronicle of Livonia (Livländische Reimchronik), which covers the period from 1180 to 1343, and is thus among the oldest flags in the world. The chronicle tells of a battle that took place around 1279, in which ancient Latgalian tribes from Cēsis, a city in the northern part of modern-day Latvia, went to war, bearing a red flag with a white stripe. Legend recounts the story of the mortally wounded chief of Latgalians who was wrapped in a white sheet. The part of the sheet on which he was lying remained white, but the two edges were stained in his blood. During the next battle, the bloodstained sheet was used as a flag. According to the legend, this time the Latgalian warriors were successful and drove the enemy away. Since then, Latgalian tribes have used these colours. Based on the aforementioned historical record, some nationalist individuals and organisations started to use such flags in the 19th century. In 1917, a red-white-red flag was used in several events aimed at uniting Latvian regions, the debate about the visual appearance of the Latvian flag was raised. In May, during a meeting of the Latvian Art Promotion Association (Latviešu mākslas veicināšanas biedrība), several proposals were reviewed, finally, a design by artist Ansis Cīrulis [lv; ru] was accepted. The Latvian national flag, together with the national coat of arms was affirmed in this format by a decree of the Constitutional Assembly of Latvia passed on 15 June 1921. During the Soviet period by the Soviet Union (and briefly during occupation by Nazi Germany), the red-white-red Latvian flag was rendered unusable from 1940 to 1941 and 1944 to 1991. Any production and public display of the nationalist Latvian flag was considered anti-state crime and punishable by law. The first flag of Soviet Latvia was a red flag with the gold hammer and sickle in the top-left corner, with the Latin characters LPSR (Latvijas Padomju Sociālistiskā Republika) above them in gold in a serif font. In 1953, the final version of the flag was adopted. It depicts the Soviet flag with six 1/3 blue wavy bands representing the sea on the bottom.[citation needed] Under the influence of Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost and perestroika initiatives, the flag of independent Latvia was restored on 15 February 1990, one and a half years before the formal recognition of Latvian independence. Per Latvian law, The Latvian national flag is carmine red with a white horizontal stripe. (Latvian: tumši sarkana (karmin)) The colour on the flag is sometimes referred to as Latvian red. The red colour of the Latvian flag is a particularly dark shade, which is composed of brown and purple. The flag's colour proportions are 2:1:2 (the upper and lower red bands each being twice as wide as the central white band), and the ratio of the height of the flag to its width is fixed at 1:2. The shade of red on the flag is different based on where its used; on 27 November 2018, an amendment to the Procedures on the application of the law on the national flag was made, which came into force 1 January 2019, stating that non-fabric flags, as well as representations produced using other techniques (including digital representations), would use Pantone 201 C, whilst physical flags would continue using 19-1629 TPX. Latvian law states that the flag and national colours can be displayed and used as an ornament if proper respect to the flag is guaranteed. Destruction, disrespectful treatment or incorrect display of the flag is punishable by law.[citation needed] The flag shall be placed at least 2.5 metres (8 ft 2 in) above the ground and properly secured to the flagstaff. The flagstaff shall be longer than the longest side of the flag, straight, painted white, and preferably made of wood. The finial at the tip of the flagstaff shall be wider than the flagstaff. When the flag is not displayed continuously, it shall be raised at sunrise and lowered at sunset. If flown for a festival or funeral, it shall be raised before and lowered after the end of the occasion.[citation needed] If the flag is flown from a flagpole in mourning, it shall be raised to half-staff. If fixed to a flagstaff, a black ribbon whose width is 1⁄20 the width of the flag shall be secured to the flagstaff above the flag; the ribbon shall be of sufficient length to span the width of the flag.[citation needed] 25 March (in mourning) — In memory of victims of communist genocide 1 May — Constitution Day, Labour Day 4 May — Restoration of Independence (1990) 14 June (in mourning) — In memory of victims of communist genocide 17 June (in mourning) — Beginning of the Soviet occupation in Latvia 4 July (in mourning) — In memory of victims of the Holocaust (See: The Holocaust in Latvia) 11 November — Lāčplēsis Day 18 November — Independence Day (1918) First Sunday in December (in mourning) — In memory of victims of communist genocide Presidential standard of Latvia Standard of the prime minister of Latvia Standard of the speaker of the Saeima of Latvia Standard of the minister of defence of Latvia The standard of the president is white with the rectangular cross in the colour proportions of the national flag. The centre of the cross covered a white rectangular panel bearing the coat of arms of Latvia. The height of the coat of arms is 1⁄3 of the width of the Standard, the centre of the sun depicted on the shield of the coat of arms is in the centre of the Standard. The proportion between the width of the national colours and that of the Standard is 1:5. The proportion between the length and width of the Standard is 3:2. The standard of the prime minister is white with the symmetric cross in the colour proportions of the national flag. In top left canton of the flag, the coat of arms is placed. The height of coat of arms is 5⁄6 of the height of canton, and the sun of coat of arms is in the centre of the canton. The proportion between the width of the national colours and that of the Banner is 1:5. The proportion between the length and width of the Banner is 3:2. The standard of the speaker of the Saeima is white with the symmetric cross in the colour proportions of the national flag. In top right canton of the flag the coat of arms is placed. The height of the coat of arms is 5⁄6 of the height of the canton; the sun of coat of arms is in the centre of the canton. The proportion between the width of the national colours and that of the Banner is 1:5. The proportion between the length and width of the Banner is 3:2. The flag of the defence minister is white with the symmetric cross in the colour proportions of the national flag. In top left canton of the flag the soldier insignia is placed. The height of insignia is 3⁄5 of the height of canton. The proportion between the width of the national colours and that of the Banner is 1:5. The proportion between the length and width of the Banner is 3:2. Heraldry portal Latvia portal List of flags of Latvia Coat of arms of Latvia National Anthem of Latvia "Procedures for the Application of the Law on the National Flag of Latvia". Government of Latvia. 2018-11-28. Retrieved 2024-03-28. Livlädische Reimchronik (Archived 2014-12-15 at the Wayback Machine): Von Wenden was zû Rîge komen / zûr lantwer, als ich hân vernomen,/ ein brûder und wol hundert man:/ den wart daß mêre kunt getân./ die quâmen hovelîchen dar / mit einer banier rôtgevar,/ daß was mit wîße durch gesniten / hûte nâch wendischen siten./ Wenden ist ein burc genant,/ von den die banier wart bekant,/ und ist in Letten lant gelegen,/ dâ die vrowen rîtens pflegen / nâch den siten, als die man./ vor wâr ich ûch daß sagen kan,/ die banier der Letten ist. (9219–9233) Volker Preuß. "National Flagge des Lettland" (in German). Retrieved 2003-04-27. "Sarkanbaltsarkanās – Latvijas karoga krāsas (II)". LV portāls (in Latvian). 2009-11-17. Retrieved 2024-01-15. "National symbols". President of the Republic of Latvia. Retrieved 2024-01-15. "Latvia - History of Flag". Flags of the World. Retrieved 2023-01-06. Dzintra Stelpe (2009). Lielā Latvijas Enciklopēdija (in Latvian). Riga: Zvaigzne ABC. p. 263. ISBN 9789984408095. OCLC 644036298. "Latvijas valsts karoga likums (The Latvian flag law)" (in Latvian). The Saeima (legislature) of Latvia. 17 November 2009. Archived from the original on 27 November 2010. Latvijas valsts karogs ir karmīnsarkans ar baltu horizontālu svītru. [The Latvian national flag is carmine red with a white horizontal stripe.] "Latvijas valsts karoga likuma piemērošanas noteikumi". "Statute of 1994 regarding the National Flag of Latvia" (in Latvian). Archived from the original on 2 March 2009. "Statute of 2009 regarding the National Flag of Latvia" (in Latvian). Archived from the original on 27 November 2010. The Rhyme Chronicle of Livonia (Ditleb’s von Alnpeke Livländische Reimchronik) (in Latvian, German, and Russian) Law regarding Official standards (in Latvian) Wikimedia Commons has media related to National flag of Latvia. The Latvian Flag fact sheet at the Latvian Institute Web site Flags and pendants of Latvian Naval Forces Latvia at Flags of the World VEXILLOGRAPHIA - Флаги Латвии