The Fifth Estate is a 2013 biographical thriller film directed by Bill Condon about the news-leaking website WikiLeaks. The film stars Benedict Cumberbatch as its editor-in-chief and founder Julian Assange and Daniel Brühl as its former spokesperson Daniel Domscheit-Berg. Anthony Mackie, David Thewlis, Alicia Vikander, Stanley Tucci, and Laura Linney are featured in supporting roles. The film's screenplay was written by Josh Singer based in-part on Domscheit-Berg's book Inside WikiLeaks: My Time with Julian Assange at the World's Most Dangerous Website (2011), as well as WikiLeaks: Inside Julian Assange's War on Secrecy (2011) by British journalists David Leigh and Luke Harding. The film's name is a reference to people who operate in the manner of journalists outside the normal constraints imposed on the mainstream media. Co-produced by DreamWorks Pictures and Participant Media, The Fifth Estate premiered at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival and was distributed theatrically by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures through the Touchstone Pictures label in the United States on October 18, 2013, with international distribution divided among Disney, Reliance Entertainment, and independent arrangements by Mister Smith Entertainment. The film performed poorly at the box office and garnered mixed critical reaction, receiving criticism for its screenplay and direction, although the acting was praised, particularly Cumberbatch's performance. The story opens in 2010, with the release of the Afghan War Logs. It then flashes back to 2007, where journalist Daniel Domscheit-Berg meets Australian journalist Julian Assange for the first time, at the Chaos Communication Congress in Berlin. Daniel's interest in online activism has led him to Assange, with whom he has corresponded by email. They begin working together on WikiLeaks, a website devoted to releasing information being withheld from the public while retaining anonymity for its sources. Their first major target is a private Swiss bank, Julius Baer, whose Cayman Islands branch has been engaged in illegal activities. Despite Baer's filing of a lawsuit and obtaining an injunction, the judge dissolves the injunction, allowing Julian and Daniel to reclaim the domain name. As their confidence increases, the two push forward in publishing information over the next three years, including secrets on Scientology, revealing Sarah Palin's email account, and the membership list of the British National Party. At first Daniel enjoys changing the world, viewing WikiLeaks as a noble enterprise and Assange as a mentor. However, the relationship between the two becomes strained over time. Daniel loses his job and problems arise in his relationship, particularly concerning the BNP membership leak, which also revealed the addresses of the people involved, and caused several to lose their jobs. Assange openly mocks Daniel's concerns about these issues, implying his own life has been more troubling. Assange's abrasive manner and actions, such as abandoning Daniel at his parents' house after having accepted their dinner invitation, only deepen the strain further. Interspersed throughout the film are flashbacks hinting at Assange's troubled childhood and involvement in a suspicious cult, and that Assange's obsession with WikiLeaks has more to do with childhood trauma than wanting to improve the world. Daniel begins to fear that Assange may be closer to a con man than a mentor. He also notices that Assange constantly gives different stories about why his hair is white. Assange at first tells Daniel that WikiLeaks has hundreds of workers, but Daniel later finds out that Daniel and Assange are the only members. Most importantly to Daniel, Assange frequently claims that protecting sources is the website's number one goal. However, Daniel begins to suspect that Assange only cares about protecting sources so people will come forward and that Assange does not actually care who gets hurt by the website, though Assange claims that the harm the website may cause is outweighed by good the leaks create. Daniel's girlfriend tells him that she believes in his cause, but that it's his job to prevent Assange from going too far. The tensions come to a head when Bradley Manning (later known as Chelsea Manning) leaks hundreds of thousands of documents to WikiLeaks, including the "Collateral Murder" video of an airstrike in Baghdad, the Afghan and Iraq War Logs, and 250,000 US Diplomatic Cables. Assange wants to leak the documents immediately, but Daniel insists that they review the documents first. Later, several major newspapers agree to cooperate with WikiLeaks in releasing the documents while spinning WikiLeaks positively. However, both Daniel and the newspapers require the names in the documents be redacted both to protect sources and to assist in the media spin, to which Assange reluctantly agrees. Daniel realizes that Assange has no intention of following through on this promise and is grooming a right-hand man to replace Daniel. The newspapers release the redacted documents. The resulting media and public uproar forces informants to flee from their countries of residence and many U.S. diplomats to resign. Before Assange can go further, however, Daniel and the other members of the original WikiLeaks team delete the site and block Assange's access to the server. Daniel later talks with a reporter from The Guardian, and the two fear that giving Assange such a large platform was a mistake. The reporter tells Daniel that while Assange may be untrustworthy, he had done a good thing by uncovering secret dealing in the government and business world and attempting to protect sources. Daniel also reveals the real reason for Assange's hair colour—that it had been a custom of the cult he had been part of in Australia—and reports that he once accidentally discovered Assange dyeing it that colour. It is revealed that WikiLeaks is continuing to leak information (with Assange implied to have either regained the site or rebuilt it), and the Manning documents were released with no redactions. Daniel has written a book on his involvement with the organization on which this film was based, and Assange has threatened to sue in retaliation. Assange is shown to be living in the Ecuadorian embassy in London to avoid arrest on an outstanding warrant for alleged sex crimes. In an interview, he denounces the two upcoming WikiLeaks films, stating that they will be factually inaccurate (having been partly based on Daniel's book). He claims that all institutions are fallible but that hiring Daniel was the one mistake he made. Benedict Cumberbatch as Julian Assange Daniel Brühl as Daniel Domscheit-Berg Anthony Mackie as Sam Coulson David Thewlis as Nick Davies Moritz Bleibtreu as Tryggvi Alicia Vikander as Anke Domscheit-Berg Stanley Tucci as James Boswell Laura Linney as Sarah Shaw Carice van Houten as Birgitta Jónsdóttir Peter Capaldi as Alan Rusbridger Dan Stevens as Ian Katz Alexander Beyer as Marcel Rosenbach Alexander Siddig as Dr. Tarek Haliseh Philip Bretherton as Bill Keller Lydia Leonard as Alex Lang Hera Hilmar as WikiLeaks staffer Nigel Whitmey as General Thomason Peter Nzioki as Oscar Kamau Kingara Joseph Muriuki as John Paul Oulu It was reported in March 2011 that Steven Spielberg's DreamWorks Studios had acquired the rights of Domscheit-Berg's book Inside WikiLeaks: My Time with Julian Assange and the World's Most Dangerous Website, as well as WikiLeaks: Inside Julian Assange's War on Secrecy by British journalists David Leigh and Luke Harding. Spielberg was quick to clarify that he is not involved in any way in the adaptation even though his DreamWorks company would produce the film. In July 2012, reports surfaced that Jeremy Renner was in talks of playing Julian Assange, and Bill Condon was in negotiations to direct. It was also announced that Josh Singer penned the screenplay. Later that year, Deadline Hollywood broke the news that Renner was out of the running and the studio was seeking Benedict Cumberbatch instead. Joel Kinnaman was also attached at some point, but reports were proven to be premature. The confirmation of Cumberbatch as the lead and Condon as the director also brought the news that James McAvoy was in talks to play Daniel Domscheit-Berg. McAvoy later dropped out because of scheduling conflicts and Daniel Brühl was eventually cast. In December 2012, the film's title was reported as The Man Who Sold the World but with the official press release, it was confirmed that the film's title was actually The Fifth Estate. Principal photography began on January 23, 2013, with Michael Sugar and Steve Golin of Anonymous Content serving as producers. During filming, Cumberbatch had to wear three different wigs, false teeth and blue contact lenses, in order to reflect Julian Assange's physical characteristics. The film was partially shot in Belgium, as can be seen in the movie poster, which contains the Liège-Guillemins railway station. The film's title sequence, which depicts the history of news communication, took over a year to create. The film's score was composed by Carter Burwell and its soundtrack was released by Lakeshore Records on October 8, 2013. All music is composed by Carter Burwell, except as noted It may be decades before we understand the full impact of WikiLeaks and how it's revolutionized the spread of information. So this film won't claim any long view authority on its subject, or attempt any final judgment. We want to explore the complexities and challenges of transparency in the information age and, we hope, enliven and enrich the conversations WikiLeaks has already provoked. —Director Bill Condon, on the film On January 24, 2013, Assange claimed during a presentation of the Sam Adams Award for Integrity in Intelligence—held at Oxford University—that he had read a version of the screenplay of the film, describing it as a "serious propaganda attack on WikiLeaks and the integrity of its staff", as a "lie built upon a lie", and as "fanning the flames for war on Iran". The opening scene was inside a putative military complex in Iran and nuclear symbols could be seen. Birgitta Jónsdóttir told the WikiLeaks official Twitter account, "the Iran scene has been written out, plus the name has been changed. Come with constructive ideas how to improve it". Birgitta also tweeted that Assange does not possess the latest version of the script. Julian Assange pre-emptively described the film as a "massive propaganda attack". WikiLeaks criticised both books on which the film was based as "inaccurate and libellous". WikiLeaks said that the film was "careful to avoid most criticism of US foreign policy actually revealed by WikiLeaks" and covered "almost none of the evidence WikiLeaks published ... of serious abuses within the US military and the State Department". It said the film contained fabrications which had the effect of obscuring the benefits of WikiLeaks' releases and demonising Assange. Assange contacted Cumberatch via email during filming to ask him to withdraw from the film, and refused to meet with Cumberbatch. Our view is that a $US40 million advertising budget promoting WikiLeaks around the world, and actors like Cumberbatch speaking about it, is a good thing for the popularisation of WikiLeaks. —WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, on the film On September 21, 2013, a version of the script, allegedly the film's screenplay, was released by WikiLeaks, along with commentary labeling the film as "fiction masquerading as fact". Both Assange and WikiLeaks have stated that neither DreamWorks nor Disney approached them for any consultation on the film. Assange elaborated on the matter, "I don't think we are in a situation anymore where an organization like DreamWorks or Disney can succinctly decide that it is going to produce a movie about living people, and living political refugees, and people who are embroiled in a grand jury proceeding in the United States, and just smear, without the cost." He (Assange) called me one day during the making of the DreamWorks movie, when I was in a supermarket in Camberwell. 'I've got an idea,' he said. 'They'll want you as a consultant on this film. Why don't you say yes to that, and split the fee with me?' 'Because I'm not interested in that,' I said, 'and if you want to oppose the film, why would you also want to make a profit from it?' 'Why not?' he said. —Writer Andrew O'Hagan, recalling Assange's reaction on the film In October 2013, WikiLeaks published a personal letter that Assange wrote to Cumberbatch in January of that year, in which he commended the actor's talent and good intentions, but requested him to reconsider his involvement with the film, which Assange negatively labeled as "a project that vilifies and marginalises a living political refugee to the benefit of an entrenched, corrupt and dangerous state." WikiLeaks described Cumberbatch's reply to Assange as "courteous and considered". Cumberbatch also admitted his reservations with the early drafts of the film's script, believing that it portrayed Assange as an antagonistic person. In regard to his continued involvement with the film, Cumberbatch stated "I wanted to create a three dimensional portrait of a man far more maligned in the tabloid press than he is in our film to remind people that he is not just the weird, white haired Australian dude wanted in Sweden, hiding in an embassy behind Harrods. But a true force to be reckoned with, achieved the realization of the great ideal." In an interview with George Stephanopoulos' show This Week, Assange stated that "Cumberbatch tried to ameliorate the script but unfortunately with limited success... though I'm pleased he tried." In February 2014, Andrew O'Hagan, the ghostwriter of Assange's autobiography by Canongate, recalled the activist's reaction to the film in a lecture for the London Review of Books. He stated that Assange wanted him to be a consultant on the film and even suggested that OHagan split his fee with Assange. Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures distributed The Fifth Estate globally through its Touchstone Pictures label, except for territories in Europe, Africa and the Middle East, where the film's rights were sold by Mister Smith Entertainment to independent distributors, including Entertainment One Films in the United Kingdom. DreamWorks' financial partner, Reliance Entertainment, released the film in India. The film opened the Toronto International Film Festival on September 5, 2013. Touchstone Home Entertainment released the film on Blu-ray and DVD on January 7, 2014. The Fifth Estate grossed $3.3 million in North America and $5.3 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $8.6 million, against a budget of $28 million. In its opening weekend, the film came in eighth place with $1.7 million, one of the lowest openings for a DreamWorks release and the worst 2013 debut for a wide release in the United States. The film was a box office bomb in the United States, though according to Disney distribution chief Dave Hollis, the film performed best in major North American cities. The Fifth Estate received mixed reviews from film critics, although Cumberbatch's performance as Assange received praise. On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 35%, based on 181 reviews, with an average score of 5.4/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Heavy on detail and melodrama but missing the spark from its remarkable real-life inspiration, The Fifth Estate mostly serves as a middling showcase for Benedict Cumberbatch's remarkable talent." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 49 out of 100, based on 42 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". It received an average grade of "B" from market-research firm CinemaScore. Variety wrote "that it primarily hobbles itself by trying to cram in more context-needy material than any single drama should have to bear." The Hollywood Reporter compared the film unfavorably to The Social Network, adding that "Though it will attract attention at the box office, it is unlikely to appeal broadly to moviegoers who, one suspects, have never been as worked up about WikiLeaks as journalists and governments are." Tim Robey of The Daily Telegraph reciprocated the comparison, elaborating that, "At times, this debt is so obvious that the movie's style feels second-hand: an overeager, slightly shop-worn bombardment of finger-on-the-pulse pop-out graphics, representing the giddy proliferation of voices in the misinformation age by simply filling the screen with text." Alan Scherstuhl of The Village Voice criticized the film for hewing "so closely to template that it's easy to imagine that paperclip from Microsoft Word popping up on Condon's desktop one day to say, 'It looks like you're directing a techno-thriller. Would you like help?'" Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly praised the film, describing it as "a vintage journalism thriller, a nihilistic newspaper drama for the dark digital age." Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave a positive review, noting that the film "sticks to the ancient movie tradition of depicting journalists as untamed, quasi-bohemian wild men, showing up late, gruff and unshaven in the office." Mark Kermode's reaction was mixed, praising the film's cast and cinematography, but disliking the direction, writing that "The Fifth Estate feels strangely unfocused, uncertain of how to deal with its slippery enigma." Rolling Stone's Peter Travers enjoyed the dynamic between Cumberbatch and Brühl, but disliked the focus of the film's subplot. Alan Rusbridger, who worked closely with Assange and is portrayed by Peter Capaldi in the film, describes Cumberbatch as "stunning as Assange. The voice and the slightly jerky, stiff, awkward demeanour are just right." Benedict Cumberbatch won the award as British Artist of the Year at the Britannia Awards for this film as well as for his work on 12 Years a Slave, August: Osage County, The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug, and Star Trek Into Darkness. We Steal Secrets: The Story of WikiLeaks — a documentary regarding the history of WikiLeaks Mediastan — a documentary about WikiLeaks which was publicly endorsed by the organization Underground: The Julian Assange Story — an Australian television film about his early life Distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures through the Touchstone Pictures banner. Eller, Claudia (February 10, 2009). "DreamWorks gets Disney cash in distribution deal". Los Angeles Times. "The Fifth Estate (2013)". AFI Catalog of Feature Films. Retrieved June 17, 2020. "DreamWorks Studios Announces 10 Additional Strategic International Partnerships Through Its Agreement with Mister Smith Entertainment" (Press release). DreamWorks Studios. Business Wire. February 5, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2020. "THE FIFTH ESTATE (15)". E1 Films. British Board of Film Classification. September 26, 2013. Retrieved September 26, 2013. "The Fifth Estate (2013)". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on May 15, 2015. Retrieved June 18, 2014. "The Fifth Estate (2013) – Box Office Mojo". Retrieved December 11, 2016. Child, Ben (January 23, 2013). "Benedict Cumberbatch as Julian Assange in the WikiLeaks movie – first picture". The Guardian. London. Retrieved January 23, 2013. "The Fifth Estate". DreamWorks Studios. Retrieved March 29, 2013. Dutton, W. H. (2009), "The Fifth Estate Emerging through the Network of Networks", Prometheus, Vol. 27, No. 1, March: pp. 1–15. "Toronto film festival 2013: the full line-up". The Guardian. London. July 23, 2013. Retrieved July 24, 2013. "Nelson Mandela biopic to have world premiere at Toronto". BBC News. July 23, 2013. Retrieved July 24, 2013. McClintock, Pamela (September 18, 2013). "Pixar's 'The Good Dinosaur' Pushed Back Nearly 18 Months After Losing Director". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 18, 2013. Siegel, Tatiana (January 22, 2013). "Participant Joins DreamWorks for WikiLeaks Movie 'The Fifth Estate'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 29, 2013. "PRODUCTION BEGINS ON DREAMWORKS' WIKILEAKS PROJECT "THE FIFTH ESTATE"". The Walt Disney Company. The Walt Disney Studios. August 23, 2013. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2013. Jon Swaine (October 20, 2013). "Wikileaks film The Fifth Estate bombs at the box office". The Telegraph. London. Retrieved February 16, 2014. Lazarus, Susanna (September 6, 2013). "The Fifth Estate reviews: is this Benedict Cumberbatch's finest performance?". RadioTimes. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Brooks, Xan (March 2, 2011). "DreamWorks lines up WikiLeaks film based on Guardian book". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 29, 2013. Fleming, Mike (July 23, 2012). "Jeremy Renner, Bill Condon Eyeing WikiLeaks Film". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 29, 2013. Patten, Dominic (November 9, 2012). "James McAvoy "Close" To Joining DreamWorks' WikiLeaks Movie". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 29, 2013. kauri (January 6, 2013). "WikiLeaks Movie, 'The Man Who Sold the World', headed to Reykjavík, Iceland". Onlocationvacations.com. Retrieved March 29, 2013. Verrier, Richard (January 23, 2013). "WikiLeaks movie 'The Fifth Estate' starts production". The Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 13, 2013. Harrison, Alexa (October 12, 2013). "Benedict Cumberbatch, Stacey Snider Talk Julian Assange at 'Fifth Estate' Screening". Variety. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Cieply, Michael (October 4, 2013). "Delivering the News, All of It, in 2 Minutes". The New York Times. Retrieved October 6, 2013. "'The Fifth Estate' Soundtrack Details". Film Music Reporter. September 20, 2013. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Fleming, Mike (January 22, 2013). "UPDATE: Participant Media Joins DreamWorks For WikiLeaks Movie 'The Fifth Estate'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 29, 2013. "Julian Assange | Sam Adams Awards | Oxford Union". YouTube. January 25, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2013. "Sunshine Week transcript! Julian Assange at Sam Adams Awards". Corrente. March 17, 2013. Archived from the original on August 19, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2013. "Twitter / birgittaj: @wikileaks the Iran scene has". Twitter. Retrieved March 29, 2013. "Twitter / birgittaj: @MeltemArikan not the newest". Twitter. Retrieved March 29, 2013. Child, Ben (September 20, 2013). "WikiLeaks posts The Fifth Estate script and labels film 'irresponsible'". The Guardian. Retrieved October 13, 2013. "Where Julian Assange Lies in Wait—and What He's Planning Next". Vanity Fair. September 6, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2023. Robertson, Adi (September 19, 2013). "WikiLeaks leaks 'Fifth Estate' script, calls it 'irresponsible, counterproductive, and harmful'". The Verge. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Lewis, Hilary (October 12, 2013). "'Fifth Estate' Screening: Benedict Cumberbatch Talks Challenges of Communicating With Julian Assange". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 14, 2013. "Julian Assange writes to Benedict Cumberbatch to complain about 'wretched' Wikileaks film". The Telegraph. October 10, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2023. "Julian Assange refused to meet Benedict Cumberbatch". The Telegraph. May 14, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2023. "Acclaim in Toronto for WikiLeaks thriller". Retrieved December 11, 2016. "Review: Cumberbatch's Assange anchors muddled 'The Fifth Estate'". Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2016. Cumberbatch tells secret to Assange accent | Film and TV | Local Today Roxborough, Scott (September 20, 2013). "WikiLeaks Posts 'Fifth Estate' Script, Calls Assange Film 'Fiction Masquerading as Fact'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 12, 2013. Labrecque, Jeff (September 20, 2013). "WikiLeaks leaks 'The Fifth Estate' script, rips 'work of fiction masquerading as fact'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 13, 2013. Pond, Steve (October 13, 2013). "Assange to Hollywood Foreign Press: 'Fifth Estate' doomed to fail". The Jamestown Sun. Retrieved October 14, 2013. O'Hagan, Andrew (March 6, 2014). "LRB · Andrew O'Hagan · Ghosting: Julian Assange". London Review of Books. 36 (5). Retrieved December 11, 2016. Hayden, Erik (October 9, 2013). "WikiLeaks Posts Julian Assange's Disapproving Letter to Benedict Cumberbatch". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 13, 2013. Aitkenhead, Decca (September 13, 2013). "The peculiar charm of Benedict Cumberbatch". The Guardian. Retrieved October 13, 2013. When Cumberbatch first read the script, he worried that it cast Assange as some kind of cartoon baddie. "I think I may get my head bitten off by Disney for saying so, but everyone agreed with that. Hayden, Erik (October 11, 2013). "Benedict Cumberbatch: Assange's Letter Added 'Real Cause for Concern' About 'Fifth Estate'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 13, 2013. "Benedict Cumberbatch Talks Secrets, Leaks, and Sherlock – TIME". Time. October 28, 2013. Addley, Esther (February 21, 2014). "Julian Assange's ghost writer breaks silence on failed autobiography". The Guardian. Retrieved December 11, 2016. Fritz, Ben (August 29, 2012). "DreamWorks replaces Disney with new international partner". The Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Fleming, Mike (September 17, 2012). "DreamWorks Adds More Offshore Strategic Distribution Partners". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Fleming, Mike (September 16, 2012). "DreamWorks Makes Multi-Year Offshore Output Deal With eOne". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Fleming, Mike (September 6, 2013). "Toronto 2013: Will Deals Take Back Seat As Buyers Focus On Fest Oscar Hopefuls?". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Truitt, Brian (January 28, 2014). "The secrets behind a Cumberbatch bunch in 'Fifth Estate'". USA Today. Retrieved February 4, 2014. Stewart, Andrew (October 20, 2013). "Box Office: 'Gravity' Carries the Weekend With $31 Mil; Wide Entries Pull Down Modest Bows". Variety. Retrieved October 20, 2013. Oldham, Stuart (October 18, 2013). "Wikileaks Drama Getting Hacked at the Box Office". Variety. Retrieved October 20, 2013. Smith, Grady (October 20, 2013). "Box office disaster: Benedict Cumberbatch's 'The Fifth Estate' has worst debut of 2013". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 20, 2013. Oldham, Stuart (October 17, 2013). "Audiences to Hollywood: We Don't Care About WikiLeaks". Variety. Retrieved October 19, 2013. WENN.com. "'The Fifth Estate' a total flop". Archived from the original on September 20, 2016. Retrieved December 11, 2016. Rosen, Christopher (October 21, 2013). "'The Fifth Estate' Is A Huge Flop". Huffington Post. "'Fifth Estate' flops at US box office". Digital Spy. October 21, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2016. McClintock, Pamela (October 20, 2013). "WikiLeaks Sabotages 'Fifth Estate' With Its Own Julian Assange Film". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 28, 2014. Kevin P. Sullivan. "'The Fifth Estate': What Critics Are Saying About Benedict Cumberbatch". MTV. Retrieved February 16, 2014. "The Fifth Estate (2013)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved December 2, 2020. "The Fifth Estate Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved October 14, 2020. "CinemaScore". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved April 16, 2022. Harvey, Dennis (September 5, 2013). "Toronto Film Review: 'The Fifth Estate'". Variety. Retrieved October 14, 2013. DeFore, John (September 5, 2013). "The Fifth Estate: Toronto Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 13, 2013. Robey, Tim (September 6, 2013). "The Fifth Estate, Toronto Film Festival, review". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Scherstuhl, Alan (October 16, 2013). "The Fifth Estate Rarely Gives us a Good Look at Julian Assange". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2013. Gleiberman, Owen (September 6, 2013). "Toronto 2013: 'The Fifth Estate' is a feverish tale of cyberjournalism". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Bradshaw, Peter (October 10, 2013). "The Fifth Estate – review". The Guardian. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Kermode, Mark (October 12, 2013). "The Fifth Estate – review". The Observer. Retrieved October 14, 2013. Travers, Peter (October 17, 2013). "The Fifth Estate". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 18, 2013. Rusbridger, Alan (October 17, 2013). "How accurate is the newest WikiLeaks story?". NewStatesman. Retrieved October 18, 2013. "The Britannia Awards: Benedict Cumberbatch site". British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA). September 4, 2013. Retrieved September 5, 2013. Wikiquote has quotations related to The Fifth Estate (film). The Fifth Estate – official site The Fifth Estate at IMDb The Fifth Estate at Box Office Mojo The Fifth Estate at AllMovie