Farce of the Penguins is a 2007 American direct-to-video parody nature documentary written and directed by Full House star Bob Saget. It is a parody of the French feature-length nature documentary March of the Penguins directed and co-written by Luc Jacquet. The film features Samuel L. Jackson as narrator, with the two main characters voiced by Saget and Lewis Black. Five of Saget's former Full House co-stars also lent their voices to the film. Additional voices were also provided by Tracy Morgan, Christina Applegate, James Belushi, Whoopi Goldberg, Dane Cook, Abe Vigoda, Mo'Nique, David Koechner, Jamie Kennedy, Harvey Fierstein, Alyson Hannigan, and others. Samuel L. Jackson narrates the story about a group of male penguins that make a seventy-mile trek to go to their breeding grounds, where females are waiting to have sex with them. These penguins include Carl (Bob Saget) and Jimmy (Lewis Black), two friends who talk about relationships and other things as they meet new characters including Marcus (Tracy Morgan), a penguin who likes to kid around and brag about his huge penis (an illogical point, since penguins do not have penises, and instead have cloacas), and Steve the snowy owl (Jonathan Katz), who gives Carl advice on his life in a Freudian kind of way while billing him for the two quick sessions. Meanwhile, Melissa (Christina Applegate) and Vicky (Mo'Nique) argue about men and other women who bother them as they wait for their mates to arrive at the breeding grounds. Samuel L. Jackson as Narrator Bob Saget as Carl Christina Applegate as Melissa Jamie Kennedy as Jamie David Koechner as Melvin Harvey Fierstein as Sheila Lewis Black as Jimmy Whoopi Goldberg as Helen Mo'Nique as Vicky Tracy Morgan as Marcus Mario Cantone as Sidney Carlos Mencia as Juan Sanchez Lori Loughlin as Melvin smacking penguin Dane Cook as Online penguin Jason Alexander as Penguin on belly Jason Biggs as Insecure penguin Norm Crosby as Carl's grandfather Norm Macdonald as Join Twosomes penguin Jonathan Katz as Steve the Owl Brie Larson as "I need a Z Pack" penguin James Belushi as "They're all bitches" penguin Dave Coulier as "There's no snow" penguin John Stamos as "What's global warming?" penguin Jodie Sweetin as "He's so gross" penguin Jon Lovitz as "My eyes are up here" penguin Gilbert Gottfried as "I'm freezing my nuts off!" penguin Damon Wayans as "Hey, that's my ass!" penguin Abe Vigoda as Penguin from Boca Alyson Hannigan as Hottie penguin Jonathan Silverman as Seal critics Scott Weinger (uncredited) as Horny penguin THINKFilm describes Farce of the Penguins as the story of "one penguin's search for love while on a seventy mile trek with his libidinous buddies on their way to a hedonistic mating ritual." Despite what the poster suggests, Farce of the Penguins is not an animated feature; it uses real stock footage of penguins. Bob Saget stated on The Howard Stern Show on January 29, 2007, Late Night with Conan O'Brien on January 30, 2007, and on Tom Green Live that he originally wanted to simply redub the documentary March of the Penguins, but did not receive permission from the film producers. Farce of the Penguins at Box Office Mojo "Farce of the Penguins". Turner Classic Movies. Atlanta: Turner Broadcasting System (Time Warner). Retrieved July 4, 2016. "March of the Penguins". Turner Classic Movies. Atlanta: Turner Broadcasting System (Time Warner). Retrieved July 4, 2016. Alex • Monday, April 30, 2007 at 3:59 AM • 1 (2007-04-30). "30 Strangest Animal Mating Habits". Neatorama. Retrieved 2012-08-15.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Wikiquote has quotations related to Farce of the Penguins. Farce of the Penguins at IMDb Farce of the Penguins at AllMovie Farce of the Penguins at Box Office Mojo Farce of the Penguins at Rotten Tomatoes