Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked is a 2011 American jukebox musical adventure comedy film directed by Mike Mitchell and written by the writing team of Jonathan Aibel and Glenn Berger, based on the characters Alvin and the Chipmunks created by Ross Bagdasarian Sr. and the Chipettes created by Janice Karman. It is the third installment in the live-action Alvin and the Chipmunks film series following the 2009 film Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Squeakquel and the first film. The film stars Jason Lee, David Cross and Jenny Slate. Justin Long, Matthew Gray Gubler, Jesse McCartney, Amy Poehler, Anna Faris and Christina Applegate return to voice the Chipmunks and the Chipettes, respectively. In the film, playing around while aboard a cruise ship, the Chipmunks and the Chipettes go overboard and end up marooned in a tropical island, where they discover their new turf is not as deserted as it seems. Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked was released in the United States on December 16, 2011, by 20th Century Fox. The film received generally negative reviews from critics. However, it grossed over $342 million worldwide against an $80 million budget. A fourth and final film, The Road Chip, was released on December 18, 2015 with Kaley Cuoco replacing Amy Poehler as the voice of Eleanor. Dave, the Chipmunks, and the Chipettes go on a cruise ship en route to the International Music Awards. Both parties end up creating trouble, culminating in Dave having dinner with the captain to apologize. He tells them to stay in their room, only for all of them, except Theodore, to escape to the casinos. Dave discovers his former supervisor Ian Hawke is working as the ship's safety monitor dressed as a pelican, and is out to inform the captain if the Chipmunks and Chipettes stir up more trouble. The next day, Alvin decides to go para-sailing on a kite but the kite flies away with him and the other Chipmunks. Dave goes on a hang-glider to try to find them but Ian attempts to stop him, which results in them both ending up stranded in the Pacific Ocean. Meanwhile, the Chipmunks find a deserted island and they sleep for the night. Dave enlists Ian's help to find the same island and begin looking for the Chipmunks. The next morning the Chipmunks go and find food and while doing so, come across a castaway named Zoe, who sees the chipmunks for the first time. They then go to Zoe's tree house where Eleanor sprains her ankle and Simon gets bitten by a spider; its side effects include personality changes and loss of inhibition. The morning after, everyone observes Simon's personality changed where he thinks he is a French adventurer named "Simone". "Simone" is attracted to Jeanette but does not take as kindly to Alvin and Brittany. Later, Zoe takes "Simone", Jeanette, Eleanor and Theodore to a lake with a waterfall and "Simone" finds a cave. He returns with a gold bracelet which he gives to Jeanette as a crown. Brittany and Alvin see an active volcano the next day, so decide they must leave the island with the others. Theodore and "Simone" find Dave and Ian and meet up with the other chipmunks. They all begin to prepare a raft to get them off the island and everyone is assigned a job. When Jeanette and "Simone" go to look for food, "Simone" is knocked unconscious and Jeanette is kidnapped; "Simone" reverts back to Simon. Everyone finds Simon awake and he cannot remember anything after the spider had bitten him. They discover that Zoe has taken Jeanette, so they head towards the waterfall. When they approach the tree log to cross, Dave and Alvin decide to go find Jeanette. As Zoe forces her to get the treasure in the cave by tying her to a rope, she reveals that she was never a castaway, but came to the island especially to find the treasure. However, living alone on the island for ten years wiped her memory and she is now ruthlessly willing to find the treasure at all costs. Alvin and Dave come to Jeanette's rescue. The island begins to rumble again, Zoe lets go of the rope and Jeanette runs with Dave and Alvin back to the raft. When they reach the log to cross, Zoe grabs the rope and drags Jeanette back to her until Alvin cuts it with the pocket knife (Swiss Army knife) Dave confiscated earlier. Dave almost falls. Alvin and a reformed Ian convince Zoe to help save Dave. They then run towards the raft and escape the eruption. While floating away, Zoe apologizes to Jeanette for kidnapping her and trying to force her to get the treasure. As a gift, Jeanette gives Zoe the gold bracelet that Simon had given to her. Alvin reconciles with Dave and they are rescued. The Chipmunks and Chipettes perform at the International Music Awards. Ian also starts a new career as a screenwriter by selling a screenplay about Zoe's story to Hollywood, finally resurrecting his fortune and making Zoe famous. On the plane back to Los Angeles, Alvin tricks the other passengers into thinking they're going to Timbuktu, much to Dave's annoyance. Jason Lee as David "Dave" Seville David Cross as Ian Hawke Jenny Slate as Zoe Justin Long as Alvin Seville (speaking voice) Ross Bagdasarian Jr. as Alvin Seville (singing voice) Matthew Gray Gubler as Simon Seville (speaking voice) Steve Vining as Simon Seville (singing voice) Alan Tudyk as "Simone", Simon's adventurous French alter-ego after getting bitten by a spider that gives him amnesia. (voice) Jesse McCartney as Theodore Seville (speaking voice) Janice Karman as Theodore Seville (singing voice) Christina Applegate as Brittany (speaking voice) Janice Karman as Brittany (singing voice) Anna Faris as Jeanette (speaking voice) Janice Karman as Jeanette (singing voice) Amy Poehler as Eleanor (speaking voice) Janice Karman as Eleanor (singing voice) Luisa D'Oliveira as Tessa Andy Buckley as Captain Correlli Tucker Albrizzi as Kite Kid Phyllis Smith as Flight Attendant On October 26, 2010, according to 24 Frames from the Los Angeles Times, Mike Mitchell, the director behind Shrek Forever After, was in negotiations with 20th Century Fox to direct the new film. The film featured one of Carnival's newest and biggest cruise ships, Carnival Dream. The external shots and interior stateroom suite were filmed during a seven-day Caribbean cruise. The casino, dance club, and dining room were filmed on a set not attempting to match the actual interior of the Carnival Dream cruise ship. The visual effects and animation for the chipmunks were provided by Los Angeles-based Rhythm and Hues Studios, who previously animated the first and second installments of the franchise. Mark Mothersbaugh composed the musical score for the film, replacing David Newman. Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked was released in the U.S. on December 16, 2011, and was the first and only live-action/CGI Chipmunks film to be rated G by the MPAA. Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked was released on DVD and Blu-ray on March 27, 2012, from 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment. The film grossed a total of $133,110,742 in North America, and another $209,584,693 internationally, for a total worldwide gross of $342,695,435. Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked made $6.7 million on its opening day, which was lower than the opening day grosses of the 2007 film Alvin and the Chipmunks ($13.3 million) and The Squeakquel ($18.8 million). For its opening weekend, the film ranked at the #2 spot behind Sherlock Holmes: A Game of Shadows with $23.2 million, which was less than the opening weekends of the franchise's previous two films, the original film's $44.3 million and its sequel's $48.9 million respectively. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 10% of 85 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 3.5/10. The website's consensus reads: "Lazy, rote, and grating, Chipwrecked is lowest-common-denominator family entertainment that's strictly for the very, very, very young at heart." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 24 out of 100, based on 19 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale. John Anderson of Variety wrote: "As impressive as the CG elements are in 'Chipwrecked,' they're a mixed blessing: The more lifelike the techies make the critters—Alvin (voiced by Justin Long), Theodore (Jesse McCartney) and Simon (Matthew Gray Gubler) —the more we're reminded they're rodents." Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter called it "Every bit as frantic, frenetic, groan-inducing and all around grating as its two predecessors." David Cross, who played Ian in this film and the previous two installments, has spoken critically of making the film, calling it "the most miserable experience I ever had in my professional life". He had no problems with the other actors or director, but said there were a couple of people who made it an awful experience. 2012 BMI Film & TV Awards: Film Music Award for Mark Mothersbaugh (winner) 2012 Kids' Choice Awards: Favorite Movie (winner) 2012 Teen Choice Awards: Choice Movie Voice for Jesse McCartney (nominated) Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked: Music from the Motion Picture is the licensed soundtrack based on the film. It was released on November 15, 2011, by Atlantic Records. Released to US Target stores, a limited edition version of the soundtrack was released containing four exclusive bonus tracks. iTunes and Amazon.com released a deluxe edition available only on digital download containing three bonus tracks. Chipwrecked - Queensberry Chipwrecked - Queensberry (feat. The Chipmunks) (*) - denotes original song Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked is a video game based on the film. It was released for the Wii, Nintendo DS, and Xbox 360 on November 15, 2011, in North America and on November 25, 2011, in Europe. Like the previous "Alvin and the Chipmunks" and "Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Squeakquel' video game adaptations, Ross Bagdasarian Jr. and Janice Karman reprised their respective roles. In June 2013, 20th Century Fox announced that a sequel, Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Road Chip, would be released on December 18, 2015. On December 18, 2014, however, it was announced for a December 23, 2015 release. On October 14, 2015, the release date was pushed forward to December 18, 2015. The cast reprised their roles for The Road Chip except Amy Poehler who was replaced by Kaley Cuoco and David Cross does not appear at all. "Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked". AFI Catalog of Feature Films. Retrieved February 22, 2020. "Alvin and the Chipmunks Chipwrecked". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on February 25, 2018. Retrieved December 13, 2020. "ALVIN AND THE CHIPMUNKS - CHIPWRECKED". bbfc.co.uk. Kaufman, Amy; Fritz, Ben (December 15, 2011). "Movie Projector: 'Sherlock,' 'Alvin' sequels kick off holiday season". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 23, 2011. Retrieved December 15, 2011. "Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked (2011)". Box Office Mojo. Lussier, Germain (June 16, 2011). "'Alvin and the Chipmunks 3: Chipwrecked' Teaser Trailer". Slash Film. Retrieved October 9, 2011. Kit, Borys (December 18, 2014). "'Alvin and the Chipmunks 4' Finds a Director (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 18, 2014. Zeitchik, Steven (October 26, 2010). "Alvin and the Chipmunks closes in on its ringleader". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 9, 2011. Casey Broadwater. "Alvin and the Chipmunks 3: Chipwrecked Blu-ray". Blu-ray.com. Ray Subers (December 17, 2011). "Friday Report: 'Sherlock,' 'Alvin' Stumble, 'M:I' Dominant in IMAX". Box Office Mojo. Ray Subers (December 19, 2011). "Weekend Report: Disappointing Debuts From 'Sherlock,' 'Alvin' Sequels". Box Office Mojo. the audience was 54 percent female and 53 percent under the age of 25. The movie earned a "B+" CinemaScore. "Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved April 24, 2020. "Alvin and the Cjipmunks: Chipwrecked Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved February 19, 2017. "Box office: Soft debuts for 'Sherlock,' 'Alvin' sequels [Updated]". Los Angeles Times. December 18, 2011. Those who saw the movie this weekend -- 53% of whom were under the age of 25 -- gave the film an average grade of B+. "CinemaScore". Archived from the original on December 20, 2018. Anderson, John (December 15, 2011). "Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked". Variety. "Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked: Film Review | Hollywood Reporter". The Hollywood Reporter. December 14, 2011. "David Cross calls Alvin And The Chipmunks: Chipwrecked the "the most unpleasant experience" of his career". The A.V. Club. 2011. "David Cross Calls 'Chip-Wrecked' "The Most Unpleasant Experience" of His Career". December 14, 2011. Gallo, Phil (May 17, 2012). "Backbeat: Rolfe Kent Receives Career Achievement Honor at BMI Film and TV Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 19, 2012. Retrieved December 9, 2012. "'Kids Choice Awards': And the winners are..." Entertainment Weekly's EW.com. Philiana Ng (June 14, 2012). "Teen Choice Awards 2012: 'Breaking Dawn,' 'Snow White' Lead Second Wave of Nominees". The Hollywood Reporter. "Various Artists - Alvin & The Chipmunks: Chipwrecked - Amazon.com Music". Amazon.com. 2011. Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked: Music from the Motion Picture (CD). Various Artists. Atlantic Records. 2011. 528215-2.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Liner notes credit the song as "Whip My Hair" NOT "Whip My Tail". Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked: Music from the Motion Picture (CD). Various Artists. Atlantic Records. 2011. 528215-2.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Liner notes credit the song as "The Chipettes" NOT "The Chipmunks & The Chipettes". "Various Artists - Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked - Amazon.com Music". amazon.com. "Amazon.com: Chipwrecked (Music From The Motion Picture) [Deluxe] [+Digital Booklet]: Alvin And The Chipmunks: MP3 Downloads". amazon.com. "Chipwrecked (Music from the Motion Picture) [Deluxe Version]". iTunes. Archived from the original on November 23, 2011. "Australiancharts.com – Soundtrack / Alvin And The Chipmunks – Chipwrecked". Hung Medien. Retrieved August 28, 2021. "Charts.nz – Soundtrack / Alvin And The Chipmunks – Chipwrecked". Hung Medien. Retrieved August 28, 2021. "Soundtrack Chart History (Billboard 200)". Billboard. Retrieved August 28, 2021. "Soundtrack Chart History (Soundtrack Albums)". Billboard. Retrieved August 28, 2021. "Soundtracks – Year-End 2012". Billboard. Retrieved August 28, 2021. Lussier, Germain (June 11, 2013). "Fox Dates 'Frankenstein,' 'Alvin and the Chipmunks 4′ and Animated Films Through 2018". /Film. Retrieved October 19, 2013. Wikiquote has quotations related to Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked. Official website Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked at AllMovie Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked at Box Office Mojo Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked at IMDb Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked at the TCM Movie Database Official Soundtrack Website