Blades of Glory is a 2007 American sports comedy film directed by Will Speck and Josh Gordon, written by Jeff Cox, Craig Cox, John Altschuler and Dave Krinsky, and starring Will Ferrell and Jon Heder with Will Arnett, Amy Poehler, William Fichtner, Jenna Fischer and Craig T. Nelson in supporting roles. It tells the story of a mismatched pair of banned figure skaters who become teammates upon discovering a loophole that will allow them to compete in the sport again. The film's story was conceived by Busy Philipps, who "fleshed out the screenplay". However, co-writers Jeff and Craig Cox dropped her name from the script. The film was produced by DreamWorks Pictures, MTV Films, Red Hour Films and Smart Entertainment and released on March 30, 2007, by Paramount Pictures. The film was met with positive reviews. At the 2002 World Winter Sport Games, raunchy sex addict Chazz Michael Michaels and sheltered, effeminate Jimmy MacElroy tie for the male single skating gold. Standing together on the podium, the two start an argument which escalates into a fistfight. They are stripped of their medals and banned for life from competitive skating. Three and a half years later, both have grudgingly taken on alternative occupations. Chazz performs in a children's ice show. Jimmy works at a sporting goods store. His stalker, Hector, tells him of a loophole: he's only banned from competing in men's singles skating, he can still compete in pairs. Jimmy contacts Coach Goddard in hope of entering the upcoming World Winter Sport Games. Looking for a pairs partner at the local ice arena, he runs into the just-fired Chazz. They fight and are arrested. Watching the news video of their fight, Coach Goddard gets an idea. He visits them in jail to convince them to skate as the first-ever male-male pairs team. Coach Goddard puts them up in his cabin and arranges a secret rink for practice, telling them they must learn to get along to skate together. Jimmy and Chazz perform well at the Winter Sports Games qualifiers, worrying brother and sister competitors Stranz and Fairchild Van Waldenberg. The Van Waldenbergs guilt their sister Katie into secretly filming Jimmy and Chazz practicing. Jimmy and Katie are attracted and Chazz coaches Jimmy on how to ask her out. After they go on a date Katie's siblings threaten to harm Jimmy unless Katie seduces Chazz to make Jimmy jealous. Coach Goddard tells Jimmy and Chazz they must perform the complicated and dangerous "Iron Lotus" maneuver to wow the judges. The only other attempt resulted in the man decapitating the woman; Goddard is convinced it only failed because it should have been two men performing it. Katie pretends to be a member of Chazz's sex addicts meeting, then invites Chazz to her room and tries to seduce him. Chazz refuses out of respect for Jimmy, which delights her. But Chazz can't resist grabbing her breasts. Jimmy arrives and witnesses this, and is outraged at their betrayals and runs off despite Chazz's attempts to apologize. Stranz and Fairchild kidnap Chazz and Jimmy to sabotage their performance. Chazz escapes and skates on the waterways all the way to the arena, with Stranz in hot pursuit. While Fairchild is restraining Jimmy, she reveals that she and her brother demanded that Katie have sex with Chazz to make him jealous, and that Chazz wouldn't go through with it out of respect for him. Jimmy, overjoyed, escapes as well. Chazz and Jimmy arrive at the ice rink just in time to compete. Fairchild breaks her necklace and throws a pearl onto the ice. Chazz skates over it and breaks his ankle, rendering him unable to perform his role in the Iron Lotus. Jimmy and Chazz switch places. Although they have never practiced each other's roles, they perform it perfectly, and win the competition. Jimmy reconciles with Katie. Stranz and Fairchild are arrested. They argue before kissing each other incestuously. Jimmy and Chazz are awarded the gold medal and fly off into the sky via rockets on their skates. Will Ferrell as Chazz Michael Michaels, a professional skater. Chad Brennan serves as a skating double of Chazz. Jon Heder as Jimmy MacElroy, a self-taught professional skater. Ethan Burgess serves as a skating double for Jimmy. Zachary Ferren as young Jimmy MacElroy Will Arnett as Stranz Van Waldenberg, a rival skater of Chazz and Jimmy. Amy Poehler as Fairchild Van Waldenberg, a skater and the sister of Stranz. William Fichtner as Darren MacElroy, a wealthy man and former horse breeder who adopts orphans with exceptional athletic abilities like he did with Jimmy while also said to have controversial training methods for those he adopts. Jenna Fischer as Katie Van Waldenberg, the younger sister of Stranz and Fairchild. Craig T. Nelson as Coach Darren Goddard, the ice skating coach of Jimmy who later assists him and Chazz. Romany Malco as Jesse, a man who helps Coach Goddard train Jimmy and Chazz. Nick Swardson as Hector, an obsessive fan of Jimmy who informs him of a loophole that will enable him to bypass the ban. Scott Hamilton as Sports Anchor Andy Richter as Mountie Nick Jameson as PA Announcer Rob Corddry as Bryce Tom Virtue as Floor Manager William Daniels as Commissioner Ebbers, the commissioner of the National Figure Skating Association. Remy Girard as Father St. Pierre Luciana Carro as Sam Nancy Kerrigan as Attractive Official Luke Wilson as Sex Class Counselor James Michael Connor as Surly Reporter – Montreal Tiffany Scott as Fairchild Skate Double Brian Boitano, Dorothy Hamill and Peggy Fleming as Federation Judges Phil Reeves as Father Matt Levin as Matt Matt Evers as Skate Tree Stephanie Courtney as Reporter at Sign Ups Lisa-Marie Allen as Middle-Aged Sweater Mom Kyle Bornheimer as Rink PA Nationals Jim Lampley as Co-Anchor Sasha Cohen as Sasha Cohen Kerry Rossall as Fire Extinguisher The film was based on Busy Philipps' idea and she worked on the screenplay. However, in an oral history about the movie for Nerdist, Craig Cox fully attributed the idea of Blades of Glory to his brother, Jeff Cox. The oral history has since been updated with information about Philipps' contributions. Phillips discussed the incident in her memoir, This Will Only Hurt A Little, stating that she should be credited as a co-writer in the credits and that she had registered the idea with the Writers Guild of America West at its inception, having come up with the concept – even suggesting Ferrell as one of the two co-leads (alongside Ben Stiller) – while she and then-boyfriend Craig were watching television together when he visited her in Vancouver, during production of White Chicks. Seth Rogen has also said that he and his writing partner Evan Goldberg wrote a draft of the screenplay that included some of the "biggest jokes" featured in the finished movie, but they were ultimately fired and did not receive any credit. All of the scenes at the National Figure Skating Championships and World Wintersport Games were shot at the Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena. The stadium used for the outside shoots is the Montreal Olympic Stadium, built for the 1976 Olympics. The outdoor chase scenes were also shot on-location in Montreal. The building used for athlete housing in Montreal was the unique Habitat 67, built for Expo 67. The film was delayed for a small undetermined period of time when Jon Heder broke his ankle while doing a skating program for the film. Blades of Glory grossed $118.2 million in the U.S. and Canada and $26.3 million in other territories, for a total of $145.7 million. The film grossed $33 million on its opening weekend on March 30 – April 1, 2007, in 3,372 theaters, averaging $9,790 per screen, defeating Disney's Meet the Robinsons to become the number 1 film. It made $22.5 million in its second weekend, losing only 32% of its audience and retaining the Number 1 spot. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gave the film an approval rating of 70% based on 188 reviews, with an average rating of 6.3/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Thanks to the spirited performances of a talented cast – particularly Will Ferrell and Jon Heder as rivals-turned-teammates – Blades of Glory successfully spoofs inspirational sports dramas with inspired abandon." On Metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 64 out of 100, based on 35 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale. The Monthly critic Luke Davies accepted the film as a fun romp, comparing it to Will Ferrell's previous movies Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy and Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby and wrote positively of Ferrell's performance, describing that "there is a parodic exhilaration to everything Ferrell does; there's always the sense that any scene is precariously close to being a blooper reel." However, Davies conceded that, like the other two films, the plot was "formulaic ... [with] an obviousness to the set-ups, a no-nonsense compression, a sometimes clunky transition from one sequence to the next" but that it was the film's ability to "venture to fantastically absurd places – to set aside the rapid and hokey forward movement – and there to idle in neutral, in zones of pure comic exploration" and offer "moments of expansive hilarity ... that made the films worthwhile." The film was released on DVD and HD DVD on August 28, 2007, and released on Blu-ray Disc on May 20, 2008. Citations Blades of Glory at Box Office Mojo Ivie, Devon (18 November 2018). "Busy Philipps Was 'Gaslit' Into Thinking She Didn't Actually Dream Up Blades of Glory". Vulture. Archived from the original on 18 November 2018. Retrieved 18 November 2018. Kile, Meredith (16 October 2018). "13 of Busy Philipps' Best Celeb Stories From 'This Will Only Hurt a Little'". ET. Archived from the original on 18 November 2018. Retrieved 18 November 2018. Philipps, Busy (2018). This Will Only Hurt a Little. Toronto: Touchstone. pp. 192–197. ISBN 978-1-5011-8471-0. Connor Ratliff (June 25, 2020). "Dead Eyes: Neighbors & Pals" (Podcast). Headgum. Event occurs at 20:20. Retrieved March 13, 2022. "Jon Heder Shoots "Blades of Glory" With Broken Ankle". Starpulse. April 7, 2006. Archived from the original on 2006-04-14. "Blades of Glory". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on 2020-09-12. Retrieved 2020-08-11. "'Blades' skates to No. 1 at the box office". Los Angeles Times. April 2, 2007. Archived from the original on November 25, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. "Blades of Glory". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 2020-09-20. Retrieved 2020-08-11. "Blades of Glory". Metacritic. Archived from the original on 2022-09-15. Retrieved 2022-06-05. "Home - Cinemascore". Cinemascore. Archived from the original on 13 April 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2019. Davies, Luke (July 2007). ""Mind Bottling: Will Speck & Josh Gordon's "Blades of Glory"". The Monthly. "Blades of Glory DVD Release Date". dvdsreleasedates.com. Archived from the original on 17 February 2023. Retrieved 17 February 2023. "Blades of Glory Blu-ray". Blu-ray.com. Archived from the original on 17 February 2023. Retrieved 17 February 2023. General references Breznican, Anthony (February 5, 2007). "Heder, Ferrell skate for comedy gold". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 7, 2007. Retrieved February 5, 2007. Tolson, Shaun (March 11, 2007). "Leap into Hollywood: Local skater subs for Will Ferrell in comedy "Blades of Glory"". Boston Herald. Archived from the original on March 23, 2007. Retrieved March 11, 2007. Wikiquote has quotations related to Blades of Glory. Blades of Glory at AllMovie Blades of Glory at IMDb Blades of Glory at Metacritic Blades of Glory at Rotten Tomatoes "Blades of Glory Soundtrack". Lakeshore Records. Archived from the original on 2009-01-05.