This is a list of countries by inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI), as published by the UNDP in its 2024 Human Development Report. According to the 2016 Report, "The IHDI can be interpreted as the level of human development when inequality is accounted for," whereas the Human Development Index itself, from which the IHDI is derived, is "an index of potential human development (or the maximum IHDI that could be achieved if there were no inequality)." The index captures the HDI of the average (calculated using not arithmetic, but geometric mean) person in society, which is less than the aggregate HDI when there is inequality in the distribution of health, education and income. Under perfect equality, the HDI and IHDI are equal; the greater the difference between the two, the greater the inequality. The IHDI, estimated for the world and specific countries, captures the losses in human development due to inequality in health, education and income. Losses in all three dimensions vary across countries, ranging from just a few percent (Czech Republic, Slovenia) up to over 40% (Comoros, Central African Republic). Overall loss takes into account all three dimensions. The table below ranks countries according to their inequality-adjusted human development index (IHDI). Data is based on 2022 estimates. List of countries by Human Development Index List of countries by planetary pressures–adjusted Human Development Index List of countries by income equality List of countries by share of income of the richest one percent Social Progress Index Economic inequality Median income Per capita income Poverty Social inequality Welfare's effect on poverty Human Development Report Human Development Reports, Composite indices — HDI and beyond (2015) 87 "Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI)". Hdr.undp.org. Retrieved 2010-11-05. "Frequently Asked Questions - Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI)". United Nations. "Download IHDI dataset". hdr.undp.org. UNDP. Retrieved 13 September 2022. "All composite indices and components time series (1990-2021)". hdr.undp.org. UNDP. Retrieved 13 September 2022. Human Development Reports