Xenophobia (from Ancient Greek: ξένος (xénos), "strange, foreign, or alien", and φόβος (phóbos), "fear") is the fear or dislike of anything which is perceived as being foreign or strange. It is an expression which is based on the perception that a conflict exists between an in-group and an out-group and it may manifest itself in suspicion of one group's activities by members of the other group, a desire to eliminate the presence of the group which is the target of suspicion, and fear of losing a national, ethnic, or racial identity. A 1997 review article on xenophobia holds that it is "an element of a political struggle about who has the right to be cared for by the state and society: a fight for the collective good of the modern state." According to Italian sociologist Guido Bolaffi, xenophobia can also be exhibited as an "uncritical exaltation of another culture" which is ascribed "an unreal, stereotyped and exotic quality". In Ancient Egypt, foreigners were conceived of through a complex xenophobic discourse. Given ancient Egypt's long history, Egyptians encountered a number of different peoples. Peoples living in present-day Greece, Sudan, and Turkey, for instance, were referred to by various names in Egyptian. According to one source, "...all the names have at the end the same hieroglyphic sign– a determinative or taxogram– indicating the word-group. This is the hieroglyph for a hilly country or the desert– indicating 'foreign land' (khaset)...By contrast, Egypt (Kemet/Black land) is written with the determinative for a town. This indicates that Egyptians regarded their part of the world as cultivated, ordered and civilized, while the other countries were not." This indicates an early example of a xenophobic attitude towards other peoples. In addition, ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics indicate xenophobic ideas about a necessity to conquer non-Egyptians, with Hittites in particular being referred to as "vile". An early example of xenophobic sentiment in Western culture is the Ancient Greek denigration of foreigners as "barbarians", the belief that the Greek people and culture were superior to all other peoples and cultures, and the subsequent conclusion that barbarians were naturally meant to be enslaved. Ancient Romans also held notions of superiority over other peoples. such as in a speech attributed to Manius Acilius: There, as you know, there were Macedonians and Thracians and Illyrians, all most warlike nations, here Syrians and Asiatic Greeks, the most worthless peoples among mankind and born for slavery. Black Africans were considered especially exotic, and perhaps they were considered threateningly alien, so they are seldom if ever mentioned in Roman literature without some negative connotations. The historian Appian claims that the military commander Marcus Junius Brutus, before the battle of Philippi in 42BC, met an 'Ethiopian' outside the gates of his camp: his soldiers instantly hacked the man to pieces, taking his appearance for a bad omen—to the superstitious Roman, black was the colour of death." The COVID-19 pandemic, which was first reported in the city of Wuhan, Hubei, China, in December 2019, has led to an increase in acts and displays of Sinophobia, as well as prejudice, xenophobia, discrimination, violence, and racism against people of East Asian and Southeast Asian descent and appearance around the world.[citation needed] With the spread of the pandemic and the formation of COVID-19 hotspots, such as those in Asia, Europe, and the Americas, discrimination against people from these hotspots has been reported. Despite the majority of the country's population being of mixed (Pardo), African, or indigenous heritage, depictions of non-European Brazilians on the programming of most national television networks is scarce and typically relegated for musicians/their shows. In the case of telenovelas, Brazilians of darker skin tone are typically depicted as housekeepers or in positions of lower socioeconomic standing. Muslim and Sikh Canadians have faced racism and discrimination in recent years, especially since the 2001 terrorist attacks on the U.S. and the spillover effect of the United States' War on Terror. An increase in hate crimes targeting Ontario Muslims was reported after ISIS took responsibility for the November 2015 Paris attacks. A 2016 survey from The Environics Institute, which was a follow-up to a study conducted 10 years prior, found that there may be discriminating attitudes that may be a residual of the effects of the 11 September 2001 attacks in the United States. A poll in 2009 by Maclean's revealed that only 28% of Canadians view Islam favourably, and only 30% viewed the Sikh religion favourably. 45% of respondents believed Islam encourages violence. In Quebec in particular, only 17% of respondents had a favourable view of Islam. According to the UNHCR, by June 2019, 1.3 million of the 4 million Venezuelan refugees were in Colombia. Because of their urgent situation, many migrants from Venezuela crossed the border illegally, indicating they had few opportunities to gain "access to legal and other rights or basic services and are exposed to exploitation, abuse, manipulation and a wide range of other protection risks, including racism, discrimination and xenophobia". Since the start of the migrant crisis, media outlets and state officials have raised concerns about increasing discrimination against migrants in the country, especially xenophobia and violence against the migrants. There have been racial tension between the Indo-Guyanese people and the Afro-Guyanese. Racism in Mexico has a long history. Historically, Mexicans with light skin tones had absolute control over dark skinned Amerindians due to the structure of the Spanish colonial caste system. When a Mexican of a darker-skinned tone marries one of a lighter skinned-tone, it is common for them say that they are " 'making the race better' (mejorando la raza)". This can be interpreted as a self-attack on their ethnicity. Despite improving economic and social conditions of indigenous Mexicans, discrimination against them continues to this day and there are few laws to protect indigenous Mexicans from discrimination. Violent attacks against indigenous Mexicans are moderately common and many times go unpunished. On 15 March 1911, a band of Maderista soldiers entered Torreón, Mexico, and massacred 303 Chinese and five Japanese. Historian Larissa Schwartz argues that Kang Youwei had successfully organized the prosperous Chinese businessmen there, making them a visible target for class antagonism made extreme by xenophobia. The Chinese were easy to identify in northern cities and were frequent targets especially in Sonora in the 1930s. Systematic persecution resulted from economic, political, and psychological fears of the Chinese, and the government showed little interest in protecting them. Theresa Alfaro-Velcamp argues that the Porfiriato, 1876–1910 promoted immigration from the Middle East. However the revolution of 1910–20 saw a surge in xenophobia and nationalism based on "mestizaje." The community divided into the economically prosperous Lebanese Mexicans who took pride in a distinct Lebanese-Mexican identity, while the downscale remainder often merged into the mestizo community. Racism against indigenous people has been a current problem in Mexico. Domestic workers, many of whom are indigenous women who have moved from rural villages to cities, often face discrimination including verbal, physical or sexual abuse. Peter Szok argues that when the United States brought in large numbers of laborers from the Caribbean—called "Afro-Panamanians"—to build the Panama Canal (1905–1914), xenophobia emerged. The local elite in Panama felt its culture was threatened: they cried out, "La Patria es el Recuerdo." ("The Homeland is the Memory") and developed a Hispanophile elitist identity through an artistic literary movement known as "Hispanismo." Another result was the election of the "overtly nationalist and anti-imperialist" Arnulfo Arias as president in 1940. In Venezuela, like other South American countries, economic inequality often breaks along ethnic and racial lines. A 2013 Swedish academic study stated that Venezuela was the most racist country in the Americas, followed by the Dominican Republic. In a 2010 report, a network of more than 300 US-based civil rights and human rights organizations stated that "Discrimination permeates all aspects of life in the United States, and it extends to all communities of color." Discrimination against racial, ethnic, and religious minorities is widely acknowledged, especially in the case of [African Americans] and African Diasporic peoples in the United States], as well as other ethnic groups. Members of every major American ethnic and religious minority group have perceived discrimination in their dealings with members of other minority racial and religious groups. Philosopher Cornel West has argued that "racism is an integral element within the very fabric of American culture and society. It is embedded in the country's first collective definition, enunciated in its subsequent laws, and imbued in its dominant way of life." A 2019 survey by the Pew Research Center suggested that 76% of black and Asian respondents had experienced some form of discrimination, at least from time to time. Studies which have been conducted by the PNAS and Nature have found that during traffic stops, officers spoke to black men in a less respectful tone than they spoke to white men and those same studies have also found that black drivers are more likely to be pulled over and searched by police than white drivers. Black people are also reportedly overrepresented as criminals in the media. In 2020 the COVID-19 epidemic was often blamed on China, leading to attacks on Chinese Americans. This represents a continuation of xenophobic attacks on Chinese Americans for 150 years. In 1991–92, Bhutan is said to have deported between 10,000 and 100,000 ethnic Nepalis (Lhotshampa). The actual number of refugees who were initially deported is debated by both sides. In March 2008, this population began a multiyear resettlement in third countries including the U.S., Canada, New Zealand, Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands and Australia. At present,[when?] the United States is working towards resettling more than 60,000 of these refugees in the US in accordance with its third country settlement program. Brunei law permits positive discrimination in favor of ethnic Malays.[citation needed] The Boxer Rebellion was a violent anti-foreign, anti-Christian, and anti-imperialist uprising which occurred in China between 1899 and 1901. It was led by a new group, the "Militia United in Righteousness', the group was popularly known as the Boxers because many of its members had practiced Chinese martial arts, at the time, these martial arts were popularly referred to as Chinese Boxing. After China's defeat in war by Japan in 1895, villagers in North China feared the expansion of foreign spheres of influence and resented the extension of privileges to Christian missionaries. In a severe drought, Boxer violence spread across Shandong and the North China Plain, destroying foreign property, attacking or murdering Christian missionaries and Chinese Christians. In June 1900, Boxer fighters, convinced that they were invulnerable to foreign weapons, converged on Beijing, and their slogan was "Support the Qing government and exterminate the foreigners." Diplomats, missionaries, soldiers and some Chinese Christians took refuge in the diplomatic Legation Quarter. They were besieged for 55 days by the Imperial Army of the Chinese government and the Boxers. George Makari says that the Boxers, "promoted a violent hatred of all those from other lands and made no effort to distinguish the beneficent from the rapacious ones.... They were unabashedly xenophobic." The Boxers were overthrown by an Eight Nation Alliance of American, Austro-Hungarian, British, French, German, Italian, Japanese, and Russian troops—20,000 in all—that invaded China to lift the siege in August 1900. The allies imposed the Boxer Protocol in 1901, with a massive annual cash indemnity to be paid by the Chinese government. The episode generated worldwide attention and denunciation of xenophobia. Historian Mary C. Wright has argued that the combination of Chinese nationalism and xenophobia had a major impact on the Chinese worldview in the first half of the 20th century. Examining the bitterness and hatred which existed towards Americans and Europeans in the decades before the Communist takeover in 1949, she argues: The crude fear of the white peril that the last imperial dynasty had been able to exploit in the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 had been submerged but not overcome, and expanding special privileges of foreigners were irritants in increasingly wide spheres of Chinese life. These fears and irritations provided a mass sounding board for what otherwise might have been rather arid denunciations of imperialists. It is well to remember that both Nationalists and Communists have struck this note. In China, xenophobia against non-Chinese residents has been inflamed by the COVID-19 pandemic in mainland China, with foreigners being described as "foreign garbage" and targeted for "disposal". Some black people in China were evicted from their homes by police and told to leave China within 24 hours, due to disinformation that they and other foreigners were spreading the virus. Expressions of Chinese xenophobia and discriminatory practices, such as the exclusion of black customers from restaurants, were criticized by foreign governments and members of the diplomatic corps. Black people in Hong Kong have experienced negative comments and instances of discrimination in the job market and on public transport. Expats and South Asian minorities have faced increased xenophobia during the COVID-19 pandemic. Since 2017, China has come under intense international criticism for its treatment of one million Muslims (the majority of them are Uyghurs, a Turkic ethnic minority mostly in Xinjiang) who are being held in detention camps without any legal process. Critics of the policy have described it as the Sinicization of Xinjiang and some have also called it an ethnocide or a cultural genocide. A number of discriminatory laws against Chinese Indonesians were enacted by the government of Indonesia. In 1959, President Sukarno approved PP 10/1959 that forced Chinese Indonesians to close their businesses in rural areas and relocate into urban areas. Moreover, political pressures in the 1970s and 1980s restricted the role of the Chinese Indonesian in politics, academics, and the military. As a result, they were thereafter constrained professionally to becoming entrepreneurs and professional managers in trade, manufacturing, and banking. In 1998, Indonesia riots over higher food prices and rumors of hoarding by merchants and shopkeepers often degenerated into anti-Chinese attacks. Native Papuans in the country have faced racism, and several reports have accused Indonesia of committing a "slow-motion genocide" in West Papua. Hostility towards the LGBT community has been recently reported, especially in Aceh. Japan had successfully isolated itself from the outside world, allowing anti-foreign sentiments and myths to multiply unchecked by actual observation. In 2005, a United Nations report expressed concerns about racism in Japan and it also stated that the government's recognition of the depth of the problem was not total. The author of the report, Doudou Diène (Special Rapporteur of the UN Commission on Human Rights), concluded after a nine-day investigation that racial discrimination and xenophobia in Japan primarily affected three groups: national minorities, Latin Americans of Japanese descent, mainly Japanese Brazilians, and foreigners from poor countries. Surveys conducted in 2017 and 2019 have shown that 40 to nearly 50% of the foreigners who were surveyed have experienced some form of discrimination. Another report has also noted differences in how the media and some Japanese treat visitors from the West as compared to those from East Asia, with the latter being viewed much less positively than the former. Japan accepted just 16 refugees in 1999, while the United States took in 85,010 for resettlement, according to the UNHCR. New Zealand, which is 30 times smaller than Japan, accepted 1,140 refugees in 1999. Just 305 persons were recognized as refugees by Japan from 1981, when Japan ratified the UN Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, to 2002. Former Prime Minister Taro Aso called Japan a "one race" nation. A 2019 Ipsos poll also suggested that Japanese respondents had a relatively lower sympathy for refugees compared to most other countries in the survey. Sharon Yoon and Yuki Asahina argue that Zaitokukai, a right-wing organization, succeeded in framing Korean minorities as undeserving recipients of Japanese welfare benefits. Even as Zaitokukai declined, the perceptions of a Korean internal threat powerfully influences public fears. The racial tension between the dominant poor Malay Muslims and the minority wealthier Chinese has long characterized Malaysia. It was a major factor in the separation of Singapore in 1965 to become an independent, primarily Chinese nation. Amy L. Freedman points to the electoral system, the centrality of ethnic parties, gerrymandering, and systematic discrimination against the Chinese in education and jobs as critical factors in xenophobia. Recently the goal of creating a more inclusive national identity has been emphasized. In Malaysia xenophobia occurs regardless of race. Most xenophobia is towards foreign labourers, who normally came from Indonesia, Bangladesh and Africa. There is also a significant degree of xenophobia towards neighbouring Singaporeans and Indonesians too. Xenophobia in South Korea has been recognized by scholars and the United Nations as a widespread social problem. An increase in immigration to South Korea since the 2000s catalyzed more overt expressions of racism, as well as criticism of those expressions. Newspapers have frequently reported on and criticized discrimination against immigrants, in forms such as being paid lower than the minimum wage, having their wages withheld, unsafe work conditions, physical abuse, or general denigration. After 2010, xenophobia became increasingly prevalent in the widely used social media. Jiyeon Kang reports a common pattern scapegoating dark-skinned migrants by gender, race and class. They are presented as accomplices and beneficiaries of the elite coalition allegedly taking traditional rights away from South Korean male citizens. In a 2010–2014 World Values Survey, 44.2% of South Koreans reported they would not want an immigrant or foreign worker as a neighbor. Racist attitudes are more commonly expressed towards immigrants from other Asian countries and Africa, and less so towards European and white North American immigrants who can occasionally receive what has been described as "overly kind treatment". Related discrimination have also been reported with regards to mixed-race children, Chinese Korean, and North Korean immigrants. There are no laws within the Kingdom of Thailand which criminalize racial discrimination and the use of racist cliches. Unlike neighboring nations which were colonized, Thailand's history as an uncolonized state further shaped its existing laws.[citation needed] Anti-refugee sentiment has been significant in Thailand, with a 2016 Amnesty International survey indicating that 74% of surveyed Thais do not believe (to varying degrees) that people should be able to take refuge in other countries to escape war or persecution. In 2008, a Pew Research Center survey found that negative views concerning Jews were most common in the three predominantly Arab nations which were polled, with 97% of Lebanese having an unfavorable opinion of Jews, 95% of Egyptians and 96% of Jordanians. The Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood leader Mohammed Mahdi Akef has denounced what he called "the myth of the Holocaust" in defense of the former-Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's denial of it. In an article in October 2000 columnist Adel Hammoda alleged in the state-owned Egyptian newspaper al-Ahram that Jews make Matza from the blood of non-Jewish children (see Blood libel). Mohammed Salmawy, the editor of Al-Ahram Hebdo, "defended the use of old European myths like the blood libel against Jews" in his newspapers. Jordan does not allow entry to Jews who have visible signs of Judaism or possess personal religious items. The Jordanian ambassador to Israel replied to a complaint by a religious Jew who was denied entry by stating that security concerns required that travelers who are entering the Hashemite Kingdom should not do so with prayer shawls (Tallit) and phylacteries (Tefillin). Jordanian authorities state that the policy is to ensure the Jewish tourists' safety. In July 2009, six Breslov Hasidim were deported after attempting to enter Jordan to visit the tomb of Aaron / Sheikh Harun on Mount Hor, near Petra. The group had taken a ferry from Sinai, Egypt because they understood that Jordanian authorities were making it hard for visible Jews to enter their country from Israel. According to the 2004 U.S. State Department Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for Israel and the Occupied Territories, the Israeli government had done "little to reduce institutional, legal, and societal discrimination against the country's Arab citizens." The 2005 US Department of State report on Israel wrote: "[T]he government generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however, there were problems in some areas, including... institutional, legal, and societal discrimination against the country's Arab citizens." The 2010 U.S. State Department Country Report stated that Israeli law prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, and the Israeli government effectively enforced these prohibitions. Former Likud MK and Minister of Defense Moshe Arens has criticized the treatment of minorities in Israel, saying that they did not bear the full obligation of Israeli citizenship, nor were they extended the full privileges of citizenship. The Association for Civil Rights in Israel (ACRI) published reports which documented racism in Israel, and the 2007 report suggested that anti-Arab racism was increasing in the country. One analysis of the report summarized it thus: "Over two-thirds of Israeli teens believe that Arabs are less intelligent, uncultured and violent. The Israeli government spokesman responded that the Israeli government was "committed to fighting racism whenever it raises its ugly head and is committed to full equality to all Israeli citizens, irrespective of ethnicity, creed or background, as defined by our declaration of independence". Isi Leibler of the Jerusalem Center for Public affairs argues that Israeli Jews are troubled by "increasingly hostile, even treasonable outbursts by Israeli Arabs against the state" while it is at war with neighboring countries. Khaled Diab of The Guardian wrote in 2012 that demonisation was a two-way street, with Palestinians in Israel reportedly holding negative stereotypes of Israelis as devious, violent, cunning and untrustworthy. A 2018 poll by Pew Research Center also suggested there to be particularly widespread anti-refugee sentiment among surveyed Israelis compared to the people from other selected countries. Israeli people also have a long history of discrimination towards Palestinians In April 2020, an actress said on Kuwaiti TV that migrants should be thrown out "into the desert", amidst reported exploitation of foreign labourers in the country. Reports of Sierra Leonean, Indonesian and Nepalese workers suffering abuse in Kuwait have prompted the 3 countries' governments to ban its citizens from being employed as domestic workers there. Expat surveys done by InterNations have ranked the country amongst the most unfriendly for expatriates. Hezbollah's Al-Manar TV channel has often been accused of airing antisemitic broadcasts, accusing the Jews/Zionists of conspiring against the Arab world, and frequently airing excerpts from The Protocols of the Elders of Zion, which the Encyclopædia Britannica describes as a "fraudulent document which served as a pretext and rationale for anti-Semitism in the early 20th century". In another incident, an Al-Manar commentator recently referred to "Zionist attempts to transmit AIDS to Arab countries". Al-Manar officials denied broadcasting any antisemitic incitement and they also stated that their group's position is anti-Israeli, not antisemitic. However, Hezbollah has directed strong rhetoric against both Israel and Jews, and it has cooperated in publishing and distributing outright antisemitic literature. The government of Lebanon has not criticized Hezbollah's continued broadcast of antisemitic material on television. There are also substantial accounts of abuses against migrant domestic workers in Lebanon, notably from Ethiopia, Bangladesh, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Sudan, and other countries in Asia and Africa, exacerbated by the Kafala system, or "sponsorship system". Increases in abuse occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic. Various Palestinian organizations and individuals have been regularly accused of being antisemitic. Howard Gutman believes that much of Muslim hatred of Jews stems from the ongoing Arab–Israeli conflict and that peace would significantly reduce antisemitism. Anti-US and anti-Israeli sentiment had led some Palestinians to support the 2001 September 11 attacks in New York. In August 2003, senior Hamas official Dr Abd Al-Aziz Al-Rantisi wrote in the Hamas newspaper Al-Risala: It is no longer a secret that the Zionists were behind the Nazis' murder of many Jews, and agreed to it, with the aim of intimidating them and forcing them to immigrate to Palestine. In August 2009, Hamas refused to allow Palestinian children to learn about the Holocaust, which it called "a lie invented by the Zionists" and referred to Holocaust education as a "war crime". A 2016 Gallup International poll had roughly 74% of Palestinian respondents agreeing there was religious superiority, 78% agreeing there was racial superiority, and 76% agreeing there was cultural superiority. The percentages were among the highest out of 66 nations surveyed. Racism in Saudi Arabia is practiced against labor workers who are foreigners, mostly from developing countries. Asian maids who work in the country have been victims of racism and other forms of discrimination, foreign workers have been raped, exploited, under- or unpaid, physically abused, overworked and locked in their places of employment. The international organisation Human Rights Watch (HRW) describes these conditions as "near-slavery" and attributes them to "deeply rooted gender, religious, and racial discrimination". In many cases the workers are unwilling to report their employers for fear of losing their jobs or further abuse. There were several cases of antisemitism in Saudi Arabia and it is common within the country's religious circles. The Saudi Arabian media often attacks Jews in books, in news articles, in its Mosques and with what some describe as antisemitic satire. Saudi Arabian government officials and state religious leaders often promote the idea that Jews are conspiring to take over the entire world; as proof of their claims they publish and frequently cite The Protocols of the Elders of Zion as factual. A study that ran from 2002 to 2015 mapped the countries in Europe with the highest incidents of racial bias towards black people, based on data from 288,076 white Europeans. It used the Implicit-association test (a reaction-based psychological test designed to measure implicit racial bias). The strongest bias was found in Czech Republic, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine, Malta, Moldova, Bulgaria, Italy, Slovakia, and Portugal. A 2017 report by the University of Oslo Center for Research on Extremism tentatively suggests that "individuals of Muslim background stand out among perpetrators of antisemitic violence in Western Europe". Negative views of Muslims have varied across different parts of Europe, and Islamophobic hate crimes have been reported across the region. A 2017 Chatham House poll of more than 10,000 people in 10 European countries had on average 55% agreeing that all further migration from Muslim-majority countries should be stopped, while 20% disagreed. Majority opposition was found in Poland (71%), Austria (65%), Belgium (64%), Hungary (64%), France (61%), Greece (58%), Germany (53%), and Italy (51%). There were recorded well over a hundred antisemitic attacks in Belgium in 2009. This was a 100% increase from the year before. The perpetrators were usually young males of immigrant background from the Middle East. In 2009, the Belgian city of Antwerp, often referred to as Europe's last shtetl, experienced a surge in antisemitic violence. Bloeme Evers-Emden, an Amsterdam resident and Auschwitz survivor, was quoted in the newspaper Aftenposten in 2010: "The antisemitism now is even worse than before the Holocaust. The antisemitism has become more violent. Now they are threatening to kill us." In 2004, France experienced rising levels of Islamic antisemitism and acts that were publicized around the world. In 2006, rising levels of antisemitism were recorded in French schools. Reports related to the tensions between the children of North African Muslim immigrants and North African Jewish children. The climax was reached when Ilan Halimi was tortured to death by the so-called "Barbarians gang", led by Youssouf Fofana. In 2007, over 7,000 members of the community petitioned for asylum in the United States, citing antisemitism in France. In the first half of 2009, an estimated 631 recorded acts of antisemitism took place in France, more than the whole of 2008. Speaking to the World Jewish Congress in December 2009, the French Interior Minister Hortefeux described the acts of antisemitism as "a poison to our republic". He also announced that he would appoint a special coordinator for fighting racism and antisemitism. The period after Germany's loss of World War I led to the increased espousal of anti-Semitism and other forms of racism in the country's political discourse, for example, emotions which were initially expressed by members of the right-wing Freikorps finally culminated in the ascent of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party in 1933. The Nazi Party's racial policy and the Nuremberg Race Laws against Jews and other non-Aryans represented the most explicit racist policies in twentieth century Europe. These laws deprived all Jews (including half-Jews and quarter-Jews) and all other non-Aryans of German citizenship. The official title of Jews became "subjects of the state". At first, the Nuremberg Race Laws only forbade racially mixed sexual relationships and marriages between Aryans and Jews but later they were extended to "Gypsies, Negroes or their bastard offspring". Such interracial relationships were known as "racial pollution" Rassenschande, and they became a criminal and punishable offence under the race laws. The Nazi racial theory regarded Poles and other Slavic peoples as racially inferior Untermenschen. Nazi Germany's Directive No.1306 stated: "Polishness equals subhumanity. Poles, Jews and gypsies are on the same inferior level." After the 1950s the steady arrival of Turkish workers led to xenophobia. According to a 2012 survey, 18% of Turks in Germany believe that Jews are inferior human beings. Anti-refugee sentiment has been strong in Hungary, and Hungarian authorities along the border have been accused of detaining migrants under harsh conditions with some reported instances of beatings and other violence from the guards. Surveys from Pew Research Center have also suggested that negative views of refugees and Muslims are held by the majority of the country's locals. As in other European countries, the Romani people faced disadvantages, including unequal treatment, discrimination, segregation and harassment. Negative stereotypes are often linked to Romani unemployment and reliance on state benefits. In 2008 and 2009 nine attacks took place against Romani in Hungary, resulting in six deaths and multiple injuries. According to the Hungarian curia (supreme court), these murders were motivated by anti-Romani sentiment and sentenced the perpetrators to life imprisonment. A new party emerged in the 1980s, Lega Nord. According to Gilda Zazzara, it started with identity-based claims and secessionist proposals for the North to break away from Southern Italy. It shifted to xenophobia and the demand that job priority be accorded to native Italian workers. Anti-Roma sentiment in Italy takes the form of hostility, prejudice, discrimination or racism directed at Romani people. There's no reliable data for the total number of Roma people living in Italy, but estimates put it between 140,000 and 170,000. Many national and local political leaders engaged in rhetoric during 2007 and 2008 that maintained that the extraordinary rise in crime at the time was mainly a result of uncontrolled immigration of people of Roma origin from recent European Union member state Romania. National and local leaders declared their plans to expel Roma from settlements in and around major cities and to deport illegal immigrants. The mayors of Rome and Milan signed "Security Pacts" in May 2007 that "envisaged the forced eviction of up to 10,000 Romani people." According to a May 2008 poll 68% of Italians, wanted to see all of the country's approximately 150,000 Gypsies, many of them Italian citizens, expelled. The survey, published as mobs in Naples burned down Gypsy camps that month, revealed that the majority also wanted all Gypsy camps in Italy to be demolished. The first example for xenophobic riot in the Netherlands were the riots in Afrikaanderwijk, in which the houses of Turkish people were attacked and windows were smashed. In early 2012 the Dutch right-wing Party for Freedom established an anti-Slavic (predominantly anti-Polish) and anti-Romani website, where native Dutch people could air their frustration about losing their job because of cheaper workers from Poland, Bulgaria, Romania and other non-Germanic Central and Eastern European countries. This led to commentaries involving hate speech and other racial prejudice mainly against Poles and Roma, but also aimed at other Central and Eastern European ethnic groups. According to a 2015 report by the OECD and EU Commission, 37% of young people born in the country with immigrant parents say they had experienced discrimination in their lives. In the Netherlands, antisemitic incidents, from verbal abuse to violence, are reported, allegedly connected with Islamic youth, mostly boys of Moroccan descent. A phrase made popular during football matches against the so-called Jewish football club Ajax has been adopted by Muslim youth and is frequently heard at pro-Palestinian demonstrations: "Hamas, Hamas, Jews to the gas!" According to the Centre for Information and Documentation on Israel, a pro-Israel lobby group in the Netherlands, in 2009, the number of anti-Semitic incidents in Amsterdam, the city that is home to most of the approximately 40,000 Dutch Jews, doubled compared to 2008. In 2010, the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation after one year of research, revealed that antisemitism was common among Norwegian Muslims. Teachers at schools with large shares of Muslims revealed that Muslim students often "praise or admire Adolf Hitler for his killing of Jews", that "Jew-hate is legitimate within vast groups of Muslim students," and "Muslims laugh or command [teachers] to stop when trying to educate about the Holocaust." Additionally that "while some students might protest when some express support for terrorism, none object when students express hate of Jews" and that it says in "the Quran that you shall kill Jews, all true Muslims hate Jews." Most of these students were said to be born and raised in Norway. One Jewish father also told that his child after school had been taken by a Muslim mob (though managed to escape), reportedly "to be taken out to the forest and hanged because he was a Jew". Lien Verpoest explores the era of the Napoleonic wars to identify the formation of conservative ideas ranging from traditionalism to ardent patriotism and xenophobia. Conservatives generally controlled Russia in the 19th century, and imposed xenophobia in education and the academy. In the late 19th century, especially after nationalistic uprisings in Poland in the 1860s, the government displayed xenophobia in its hostility toward ethnic minorities that did not speak Russian. The decision was to reduce the use of other languages, and insist on Russification. By the beginning of the 20th century, most European Jews lived in the so-called Pale of Settlement, the Western frontier of the Russian Empire consisting generally of the modern-day countries of Poland, Lithuania, Belarus and neighboring regions. Many pogroms accompanied the Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing Russian Civil War, an estimated 70,000 to 250,000 civilian Jews were killed in the atrocities throughout the former Russian Empire; the number of Jewish orphans exceeded 300,000. During the civil war era (1917–1922) both the Bolsheviks and the Whites employed nationalism and xenophobia as weapons to delegitimise the opposition. After World War II official national policy was to bring in students from Communist countries in East Europe and Asia for advanced training in Communist leadership roles. These students encountered severe xenophobia on campus. They survived by sticking together, but developed a hostility toward the Soviet leadership. Even after the fall of Communism foreign students faced hostility on campus. In the 2000s, "skinheads" were especially visible in attacking anything foreign. Racism against both the Russian citizens (peoples of the Caucasus, indigenous peoples of Siberia and Russian Far East, etc.) and non-Russian citizens of Africans, Central Asians, East Asians (Vietnamese, Chinese, etc.) and Europeans (Ukrainians, etc.) became a significant factor. Using surveys from 1996, 2004, and 2012, Hannah S. Chapman, et al. reports a steady increase in Russians' negative attitudes toward seven outgroups. Muscovites especially became more xenophobic. In 2016, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty reported that "Researchers who track xenophobia in Russia have recorded an "impressive" decrease in hate crimes as the authorities appear to have stepped up pressure on far-right groups". David Barry uses surveys to investigate the particularistic and xenophobic belief that all citizens should join Russia's dominant Orthodox religion. It is widespread among ethnic Russians and is increasing. A 2016 GlobeScan/BBC World Service poll found that 79% of Russian respondents disapproved of accepting Syrian refugees, the highest percentage out of 18 countries surveyed. A government study in 2006 estimated that 5% of the total adult population and 39% of adult Muslims "harbour systematic antisemitic views". The former prime minister Göran Persson described these results as "surprising and terrifying". However, the rabbi of Stockholm's Orthodox Jewish community, Meir Horden, said, "It's not true to say that the Swedes are antisemitic. Some of them are hostile to Israel because they support the weak side, which they perceive the Palestinians to be." In March 2010, Fredrik Sieradzk told Die Presse, an Austrian Internet publication, that Jews are being "harassed and physically attacked" by "people from the Middle East", although he added that only a small number of Malmö's 40,000 Muslims "exhibit hatred of Jews". Sieradzk also stated that approximately 30 Jewish families have emigrated from Malmö to Israel in the past year, specifically to escape from harassment. Also in March, the Swedish newspaper Skånska Dagbladet reported that attacks on Jews in Malmö totaled 79 in 2009, about twice as many as the previous year, according to police statistics. In December 2010, the Jewish human rights organization Simon Wiesenthal Center issued a travel advisory concerning Sweden, advising Jews to express "extreme caution" when visiting the southern parts of the country due to an increase in verbal and physical harassment of Jewish citizens by Muslims in the city of Malmö. Israel's Antisemitism Report for 2017 stated that "A striking exception in the trend of decrease in antisemitic incidents in Eastern Europe was Ukraine, where the number of recorded antisemitic attacks was doubled from last year and surpassed the tally for all the incidents reported throughout the entire region combined." Ukrainian state historian, Vladimir Vyatrovich dismissed the Israeli report as anti-Ukrainian propaganda and a researcher of antisemitism from Ukraine, Vyacheslav Likhachev said the Israeli report was flawed and amateurish. The extent and the targets of xenophobic attitudes in the United Kingdom have varied over time. It has resulted in cases of discrimination, riots and racially motivated murders. Racism and Xenophobia were mitigated by the attitudes and norms of the British class system during the 19th century, in which race and nationality mattered less than social distinction: a black African tribal chief was unquestionably superior to a white English costermonger. Use of the word "racism" became more widespread after 1936, although the term "race hatred" was used in the late 1920s by sociologist Frederick Hertz. Laws, including the Race Relations Act 1965, were passed in the 1960s that specifically prohibited racial discrimination. At the 1517 Evil May Day riots in London, protestors attacked the prominence of foreigners in London wool and cloth businesses; historians have called the event xenophobic. Bernard Porter argues that Anti-black and anti-Indian themes waxed strong in the late 19th century, not only because of racism but also because of rebellious episodes in the British Empire in Africa and India, empire. Xenophobia in popular literature targeted Germans in the early 20th centuries, based on fears of militarism and espionage. According to scholar Julia Lovell, there has been a history of sinophobia dating back to the early 20th century, propagated by writers like Charles Dickens, which has endured to the present day with current media depictions of China. Racism has been observed as having a correlation between factors such as levels of unemployment and immigration in an area. Some studies suggest Brexit led to a rise in racist incidents, where locals became hostile to foreigners. Studies published in 2014 and 2015 claimed racism was on the rise in the UK, with more than one third of those polled admitting they were racially prejudiced.[needs update] However a 2019 EU survey, Being Black in the EU, ranked the UK as the least racist in the 12 Western European countries surveyed. A 2016 BBC poll found increased hardening attitudes towards refugees from Syria and Libya, with 41% of British respondents saying the UK should accept fewer refugees compared to 24% saying it should accept more. Sectarianism between Ulster Protestants and Irish Catholics in Northern Ireland has been called a form of racism by some international bodies. It has resulted in widespread discrimination, segregation and serious violence, especially during partition and the Troubles. In recent years the intense debates over Brexit has increased xenophobia in London, especially against French living in the city. Recent migrant crossings of the English Channel have also exacerbated xenophobic and racist attitudes.[citation needed] In the past recent years, Ivory Coast has seen a resurgence in ethnic tribal hatred and religious intolerance. In addition to the many victims among the various tribes of the northern and southern regions of the country that have perished in the ongoing conflict, white foreigners residing or visiting Ivory Coast have also been subjected to violent attacks. According to a report by Human Rights Watch, the Ivory Coast government is guilty of fanning ethnic hatred for its own political ends. In 2004, the Young Patriots of Abidjan, a strongly nationalist organisation, rallied by the state media, plundered possessions of foreign nationals in Abidjan. Calls for violence against whites and non-Ivorians were broadcast on national radio and TV after the Young Patriots seized control of its offices. Rapes, beatings, and murders of persons of European and Lebanese descent followed. Thousands of expatriates and white or ethnic Lebanese Ivorians fled the country. The attacks drew international condemnation. Slavery in Mauritania persists despite its abolition in 1980 and mostly affects the descendants of black Africans abducted into slavery who now live in Mauritania as "black Moors" or haratin and who partially still serve the "white Moors", or bidhan, as slaves. The practice of slavery in Mauritania is most dominant within the traditional upper class of the Moors. For centuries, the haratin lower class, mostly poor black Africans living in rural areas, have been considered natural slaves by these Moors. Social attitudes have changed among most urban Moors, but in rural areas, the ancient divide remains. In October 2006, Niger announced that it would deport to Chad the "Diffa Arabs", Arabs living in the Diffa region of eastern Niger. Their population numbered about 150,000. While the government was rounding up Arabs in preparation for the deportation, two girls died, reportedly after fleeing government forces, and three women suffered miscarriages. Niger's government eventually suspended their controversial decision to deport the Arabs. Xenophobia in South Africa has been present in both the apartheid and post–apartheid eras. Hostility between the British and Boers exacerbated by the Second Boer War led to rebellion by poor Afrikaners who looted British-owned shops. South Africa also passed numerous acts intended to keep out Indians, such as the Immigrants Regulation Act of 1913, which provided for the exclusion of "undesirables", a group of people that included Indians. This effectively halted Indian immigration. The Township Franchise Ordinance of 1924 was intended to "deprive Indians of municipal franchise". Xenophobic attitudes toward the Chinese have also been present, sometimes in the form of robberies or hijackings, and a hate speech case in 2018 was put to court the year later with 11 offenders on trial. In 1994 and 1995, gangs of armed youth destroyed the homes of foreign nationals living in Johannesburg, demanding that the police work to repatriate them to their home countries. In 2008, a widely documented spate of xenophobic attacks occurred in Johannesburg. It is estimated that tens of thousands of migrants were displaced; property, businesses and homes were widely looted. The death toll after the attack stood at 56. In 2015, another widely documented series of xenophobic attacks occurred in South Africa, mostly against migrant Zimbabweans. This followed remarks by Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini kaBhekuzulu stating that the migrants should "pack their bags and leave". As of 20 April 2015, 7 people had died and more than 2000 foreigners had been displaced. Following the riots and murders of other Africans from 2008 and 2015, violence again broke out in 2019. In the Sudan, black African captives in the civil war were often enslaved, and female prisoners were often abused sexually, with their Arab captors claiming that Islamic law grants them permission. According to CBS News, slaves have been sold for US$50 apiece. In September 2000, the U.S. State Department alleged that "the Sudanese government's support of slavery and its continued military action which has resulted in numerous deaths are due in part to the victims' religious beliefs." Jok Madut Jok, professor of history at Loyola Marymount University, states that the abduction of women and children of the south is slavery by any definition. The government of Sudan insists that the whole matter is no more than the traditional tribal feuding over resources. Former British colonies in Sub-Saharan Africa have many citizens of South Asian descent. They were brought by the British Empire from British India to do clerical work in imperial service. The most prominent case of anti-Indian racism was the ethnic cleansing of the Indian (called Asian) minority in Uganda by the strongman dictator and human rights violator Idi Amin. The Immigration Restriction Act 1901 (White Australia policy) effectively barred people of non-European descent from immigrating to Australia. There was never any specific policy titled as such, but the term was invented later to encapsulate a collection of policies that were designed to exclude people from Asia (particularly China) and the Pacific Islands (particularly Melanesia) from immigrating to Australia. The Menzies and Holt governments effectively dismantled the policies between 1949 and 1966 and the Whitlam government passed laws to ensure that race would be totally disregarded as a component for immigration to Australia in 1973. The 2005 Cronulla riots were a series of race riots and outbreaks of mob violence in Sydney's southern suburb Cronulla which resulted from strained relations between Anglo-Celtic and (predominantly Muslim) Lebanese Australians. Travel warnings for Australia were issued by some countries but were later removed. In December 2005, a fight broke out between a group of volunteer surf lifesavers and Lebanese youth. These incidents were considered to be a key factor in a racially motivated confrontation the following weekend. Violence spread to other southern suburbs of Sydney, where more assaults occurred, including two stabbings and attacks on ambulances and police officers. On 30 May 2009, Indian students protested against what they claimed were racist attacks, blocking streets in central Melbourne. Thousands of students gathered outside the Royal Melbourne Hospital where one of the victims was admitted. In light of this event, the Australian Government started a Helpline for Indian students to report such incidents. The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, termed these attacks "disturbing" and called for Australia to investigate the matters further. Afrophobia, hostility towards Africa, Africans and people of African descent Anti-intellectualism Aporophobia, hostility towards poor people Authoritarian personality Black genocide conspiracy theory, the notion that African Americans have been subjected to genocide via birth control because of racism against African Americans Chauvinism Conformity Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural genocide Discrimination based on skin color Ethnic cleansing Ethnocentrism Eurabia, the belief that the culture of Europe is being Arabized and Islamized and the belief that Europe's previous alliances with the United States and Israel are being undermined European Commission against Racism and Intolerance Forced assimilation Genocide Great replacement, a variant of the white genocide conspiracy theory Hispanophobia, hostility towards Spaniards, hostility towards people of Spanish descent, dislike of Spanish culture, dislike of Spain and dislike of the Spanish language Index of racism-related articles Kalergi Plan conspiracy theory List of phobias Nationalism Nativism (politics) Negrophobia (also termed anti-Blackness) is characterized by fear of, hatred of or extreme aversion to Black people and Cape Coloureds or Coloureds, and Black & Colored culture Opposition to immigration Perpetual foreigner Racism Stranger danger Supremacism Überfremdung, a German term for excessive immigration Warhammer 40,000 Xenocentrism Xenophilia Xenoracism Oxford Standard English Dictionary' (OED). Oxford Press, 2004, CDROM version. "xenophobia". Lexico UK English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. "xenophobia". Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d. "xenophobia". Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary. Retrieved 22 April 2019. Guido Bolaffi. Dictionary of race, ethnicity and culture. SAGE Publications Ltd., 2003. Pp. 332. "International Migration, Racism, Discrimination and Xenophobia" (PDF). International Labour Office; International Organization for Migration; Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. August 2001. p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 March 2019. Wimmer, Andreas (1997). "Explaining xenophobia and racism: A critical review of current research approaches". Ethnic and Racial Studies. 20 (1): 17. doi:10.1080/01419870.1997.9993946. Cornelius, Sakkie (2010). "Ancient Egypt and the Other". Scriptura: Journal for Biblical, Theological and Contextual Hermeneutics. 104: 322. doi:10.7833/104-0-174. hdl:10019.1/103151. Müller-Wollermann, R; Zimmerman, M (2009). Symbolische Gewalt im Alten Ägypten. In Extreme Formen von Gewalt in Bild und Text des Altertums. München: Herbert Utz. pp. 47–64. Harrison, Thomas (2002). Greeks and Barbarians. Taylor & Francis. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-415-93959-1. Isaac, Benjamin H. (2006). The Invention of Racism in Classical Antiquity. Princeton University Press. p. 317. ISBN 978-0-691-12598-5. of Alexandria, Appian. The Civil Wars. p. 4.17. Reny, Tyler T.; Barreto, Matt A. (28 May 2020). "Xenophobia in the time of pandemic: othering, anti-Asian attitudes, and COVID-19". Politics, Groups, and Identities. 10 (2): 209–232. doi:10.1080/21565503.2020.1769693. ISSN 2156-5503. S2CID 219749159. White, Alexandre I. R. (18 April 2020). "Historical linkages: epidemic threat, economic risk, and xenophobia". The Lancet. 395 (10232): 1250–1251. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30737-6. ISSN 0140-6736. PMC 7154503. PMID 32224298. Devakumar, Delan; Shannon, Geordan; Bhopal, Sunil S; Abubakar, Ibrahim (April 2020). "Racism and discrimination in COVID-19 responses". The Lancet. 395 (10231): 1194. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30792-3. ISSN 0140-6736. PMC 7146645. PMID 32246915. "Instructional Support Center". Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 17 June 2015. Rosana Barbosa, Immigration and xenophobia: Portuguese immigrants in early 19th century Rio de Janeiro (U Press of America, 2008). Rosana Barbosa Nunes, "Immigration, xenophobia and the whitening of the Brazilian population." Journal of Transatlantic Studies 2.1 (2004): 59–74. "9/11: Women In The Fight Against Discrimination". HuffPost. 11 September 2011. Retrieved 6 December 2016. Heribert Adam, and Kogila Moodley, eds. Imagined liberation: Xenophobia, citizenship and identity in South Africa, Germany and Canada (African Sun Media, 2015). online "6 anti-Muslim incidents in Ontario since Paris attacks". CBC News. 21 November 2015. Archived from the original on 8 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "The Environics Institute: Survey of Muslims in Canada" (PDF). The Environics Institute. Retrieved 4 March 2017. Geddes, John (28 April 2009). "What Canadians think of Sikhs, Jews, Christians, Muslims . . ". Maclean's. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 11 June 2018. "Refugees and migrants from Venezuela top 4 million: UNHCR and IOM". Unhcr. United Nations High Commissioner. 7 June 2019. Retrieved 14 June 2019. "Venezuela Situation 2018 Supplementary Appeal | Global Focus". UN Refugee Agency. 1 December 2018. Archived from the original on 4 December 2018. Retrieved 14 June 2019. "Venezuelans brave torrential border river, face exploitation, abuse – UN urges greater protection". UN News. 5 April 2019. Retrieved 15 June 2019. "BBCCaribbean.com – News – Guyana turns attention to racism". Retrieved 17 June 2015. "Conflict between East Indians and Blacks". Retrieved 17 June 2015. "Indian Racism Against Afro Guyanese In Guyana". Barbados Underground. 31 January 2008. Retrieved 17 June 2015. "The World; Racism? Mexico's in Denial.", The New York Times, 11 June 1995 "Racism in Mexico?", The Final Call, 23 June 2005 La Redacción. "Empresario agrede a valet parking, se ampara y evita la cárcel". Proceso. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 12 December 2017. Larissa N. Schwartz, "The Inconveniences Resulting from Race Mixture: The Torreon Massacre of 1911." Chinese America: History and Perspectives (1998): 57–65. Charles C. Cumberland, "The Sonora Chinese and the Mexican Revolution." Hispanic American Historical Review 40.2 (1960): 191–211 online. Lim, Julian (2010). "Chinos and Paisanos: Chinese Mexican Relations in the Borderlands". Pacific Historical Review. 79 (1): 50–85. doi:10.1525/phr.2010.79.1.50. JSTOR 10.1525/phr.2010.79.1.50. Theresa Alfaro-Velcamp, . "Immigrant positioning in twentieth-century Mexico: middle easterners, foreign citizens, and multiculturalism." Hispanic American Historical Review 86.1 (2006): 61–92. 🇲🇽 Ridicule of indigenous Oscar nod highlights racism in Mexico, Al Jazeera, 19 March 2019 "Mexico City's domestic workers: a life being treated as a lesser person". The Guardian. 10 November 2015. Peter Szok, "'La Patria es el Recuerdo', Hispanophile Nationalism in Early Twentieth-Century Panama, 1903–1941." Journal of Caribbean History 31.1 (1997): 149–184. Fisher, Max (15 May 2013). "Map shows world's 'most racist' countries". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 30 April 2017. Retrieved 30 April 2017.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Factbox: U.S. report to U.N. Human Rights Council". Reuters. 5 November 2010. West, Cornel (2002). Prophesy Deliverance!: An Afro-American Revolutionary Christianity. p. 116. "Views on Race in America 2019 (Section titled 'Majorities of blacks, Hispanics and Asians say they have experienced discrimination because of their race or ethnicity')". Pew Research Center's Social & Demographic Trends Project. 9 April 2019. Retrieved 13 December 2019. Amina Khan (16 July 2021). "Police officers treat Black and white men differently. You can hear it in their tone of voice". Microsoft News, Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 8 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "Despite skewed media image, Black men are more likely to be victimized than other groups". MSN News, USA Today. 4 October 2021. Archived from the original on 9 October 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2022. Gover, Angela R.; Harper, Shannon B.; Langton, Lynn (2020). "Anti-Asian Hate Crime During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Exploring the Reproduction of Inequality". American Journal of Criminal Justice. 45 (4): 647–667. doi:10.1007/s12103-020-09545-1. ISSN 1066-2316. PMC 7364747. PMID 32837171. Huang, Junjian; Liu, Raymond (2020). "Xenophobia in America in the Age of Coronavirus and Beyond". Journal of Vascular and Interventional Radiology. 31 (7): 1187–1188. doi:10.1016/j.jvir.2020.04.020. PMC 7188638. PMID 32522506. "IRIN Asia – NEPAL-BHUTAN: Bhutan questions identity of 107,000 refugees in Nepal – Nepal – Refugees/IDPs". IRIN. 30 March 2008. Retrieved 17 June 2015. Bhaumik, Subir (7 November 2007). "Bhutan refugees are 'intimidated'". BBC News. Retrieved 25 April 2008. George Makari, Of Fear and Strangers: A History of Xenophobia (2021), pp 70–71. Makari, Of Fear and Strangers: A History of Xenophobia (2021), ch 4, 5. Paul A. Cohen, History in Three Keys: The Boxers as Event, Experience, and Myth (1998). Mary C. Wright, "Modern China in Transition, 1900–1950." The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 321.1 (1959): 1–8, at p. 3. In further support see Donald Gillin, "China and the Foreigner, 1911 to 1950." South Atlantic Quarterly 58 (1969): 208–219. Walden M, Yang S (9 April 2020). "As coronavirus sparks anti-Chinese racism, xenophobia rises in China itself". ABC News (Australia). Asiedu KG (11 April 2020). "After enduring months of lockdown, Africans in China are being targeted and evicted from apartments". Quartz Africa. Marsh J (13 April 2020). "Beijing faces a diplomatic crisis after reports of mistreatment of Africans in China causes outrage". CNN. "'No blacks': Evicted, harassed and targeted in China for their race amid coronavirus". Los Angeles Times. 16 April 2020. Lam Cho Wai (22 April 2018). "Crossing Divides: Africans fight Hong Kong prejudice with football". BBC News. Chermaine Lee and Miguel Candela (2 August 2020). "What it's like to be black and African in Hong Kong". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 9 November 2021. Lau, Jessie (22 January 2022). "In Hong Kong, COVID-19 and Racism Make an Ugly Mix". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 6 May 2022. Patrick Blennerhassett (15 March 2021). "Covid-19 shaming and racism in Hong Kong needs to stop as gyms find themselves unfairly in the crosshairs". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 1 August 2021. "'Cultural genocide': China separating thousands of Muslim children from parents for 'thought education'". The Independent. 5 July 2019. Archived from the original on 22 April 2020. Retrieved 27 April 2020. "UN: Unprecedented Joint Call for China to End Xinjiang Abuses". Human Rights Watch. 10 July 2019. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2020. JoanneSmith Finley, "Why scholars and activists increasingly fear a Uyghur genocide in Xinjiang." Journal of Genocide Research 23.3 (2021): 348–370. "Jakarta's violent identity crisis: behind the vilification of Chinese-Indonesians". The Guardian. 25 November 2016. Schonhardt, Sara (26 November 2016). "In Indonesia, Fears Rise Among Ethnic Chinese Amid Blasphemy Probe". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 13 February 2022. Retrieved 1 May 2022. Dewi, Karina Utami (10 June 2020). "Comparing Black Lives Matter in the US and Papuan Lives Matter in Indonesia, what are the similarities and differences?". The Conversation. Paddock, Richard C. (12 December 2020). "'Free Papua Movement' Intensifies Amid Escalating Violence". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 30 April 2022. Jones, Rochelle (22 October 2015). "West Papuan women left isolated and beset by violence under Indonesian rule". The Guardian. Webb-Gannon, Camellia; Elmslie, Jim; Kareni, Ronny (27 May 2021). "West Papua is on the verge of another bloody crackdown". The Conversation. University of Wollongong. NAJ Taylor (19 October 2011). "West Papua: A history of exploitation". Al Jazeera. Jed Smith (25 April 2017). "The West Papuan Warriors Are A Rugby League Team Trying To Stop A Genocide". Vice. "Slow-motion genocide for West Papua ethnic minorities and Christians". Asianews.it. 9 March 2016. Stapleton, Dan F. (11 August 2017). "Will hardline Islamic attitudes stop Lombok becoming the 'new Bali'?". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 22 April 2022. Retrieved 1 May 2022. STEPHEN WRIGHT (13 February 2019). "Gay Muslim comic gone from Instagram after Indonesia warning". ABC News. Suroosh Alvi (1 February 2018), This Is What Life Is Like Under Sharia Law with Suroosh Alvi, Vice on HBO Saeed Kamali Dehghan (24 September 2014). "Indonesia's Aceh province debates public floggings for homosexuality". The Guardian. Bob Tadashi Wakabayashi, Anti-Foreignism & Western Learning in Early-Modern Japan: The 'New Theses' of 1825 (1986). "Press Conference by Mr Doudou Diène, Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights". Archived from the original on 29 March 2007. Retrieved 5 January 2007. "Japan racism 'deep and profound". BBC News (11 July 2005). Retrieved 5 January 2007. "'Overcoming "Marginalization" and "Invisibility"', International Movement against all forms of Discrimination and Racism" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 December 2006. Retrieved 5 January 2007. "Half of foreign nationals in Tokyo experience discrimination, survey shows". The Japan Times. 17 April 2019. ISSN 0447-5763. Retrieved 13 December 2019. "Joint Civil Society Report on Racial Discrimination in Japan (page 33)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 December 2019. Retrieved 14 December 2019. "Issues related to the increase in tourists visiting Japan from abroad ('How foreign tourists are portrayed' and 'Acts of hate?' sections)". japanpolicyforum.jp. Archived from the original on 15 November 2019. Retrieved 13 December 2019. "Japan's refugee policy". Archived from the original on 16 February 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2015. "Questioning Japan's 'Closed Country' Policy on Refugees". Archived from the original on 13 April 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2015. "Aso says Japan is nation of 'one race' – The Japan Times Online". 19 May 2007.[dead link] "Global attitudes towards refugees (page 5)" (PDF). "Global attitudes towards refugees". Ipsos. Archived from the original on 14 December 2019. Retrieved 13 December 2019. Sharon J. Yoon, and Yuki Asahina, "The Rise and Fall of Japan's New Far Right: How Anti-Korean Discourses Went Mainstream." Politics & Society 49.3 (2021): 363–402 online[dead link]. Amy L. Freedman, "The effect of government policy and institutions on Chinese overseas acculturation: The case of Malaysia." Modern Asian Studies 35.2 (2001): 411–440. "Uproar over intake of Bangladeshi workers exposes rampant xenophobia in Malaysia". asiancorrespondent.com. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2017. "NYT: Malaysia has xenophobia towards Africans". Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2017. Park, Keumjae (2014), "Foreigners or multicultural citizens? Press media's construction of immigrants in South Korea", Ethnic and Racial Studies, 37 (9): 1565–1586, doi:10.1080/01419870.2012.758860, S2CID 144943847 Kim, Yugyun; Son, Inseo; Wie, Dainn; et al. (19 July 2016), "Don't ask for fair treatment? A gender analysis of ethnic discrimination, response to discrimination, and self-rated health among marriage migrants in South Korea", International Journal for Equity in Health, 15 (1): 112, doi:10.1186/s12939-016-0396-7, PMC 4949882, PMID 27430432, The recent increased influx of immigrants in Korea has ignited racism among Korean natives, which is heightened by economic and cultural nationalism [6]. For example, more than 40 % of Koreans answered that they would not want a foreigner as their neighborhood, based on the recent World Values Survey (2010–2014) [9]. Jiyeon Kang, "Reconciling progressivism and xenophobia through scapegoating: anti-multiculturalism in South Korea's online forums." Critical Asian Studies 52.1 (2020): 87–108. "WVS Database". worldvaluessurvey.org. Campbell, Emma (2015), "The end of ethnic nationalism? Changing conceptions of national identity and belonging among young South Koreans", Nations & Nationalism, 21 (3): 483–502, doi:10.1111/nana.12120 "Refugees Welcome Survey 2016" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 December 2019. Retrieved 4 December 2019. Unfavorable Views of Jews and Muslims on the increase in Europe Archived 18 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine Pew Global Attitudes Research 17 September 2008, page 10 "Egyptian Islamists deny Holocaust", BBC News, 23 December 2005. Al-Ahram (Egypt), 28 October 2000 Clark, Kate (10 August 2003). "Interpreting Egypt's anti-semitic cartoons", BBC News. "Jordan denies entry to Israeli with Jewish prayer items". Haaretz. 10 July 2009. Retrieved 11 April 2014. "Israeli tourists asked to hand over Jewish paraphernalia". eTurboNews. 13 August 2008. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 23 July 2009. Mendel, Arieh (21 July 2009). חסידי ברסלב גורשו מירדן: "הם מאוד מאוכזבים" (in Hebrew). Haredim.co.il. Archived from the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2009. "NTM Pictures8 – NewTrendMag.org". Retrieved 27 April 2016. "Israel and the occupied territories". State.gov. 28 February 2005. Retrieved 22 July 2010. Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor (8 March 2006). "Israel and the occupied territories". Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2005. U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 1 August 2006.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "2010 Human Rights Report: Israel and the occupied territories". State.gov. 8 April 2011. Archived from the original on 13 April 2011. Retrieved 29 May 2012. Quoted in Rebhun, Uzi; Chaim Isaac Waxman (2004). Jews in Israel: contemporary social and cultural patterns. UPNE. p. 472. ISBN 978-1-58465-327-1. Zino, Aviram (12 August 2007). "Racism in Israel on the rise". Ynetnews. "Israeli anti-Arab racism 'rises'". BBC. 10 December 2007. 2003 Terrorism Review. Mfa.gov.il. Retrieved 16 December 2010. Khaled Diab (19 January 2012). "Hacking away at Arab and Israeli stereotypes". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 April 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "Israel's opposition to accepting refugees is highest in West — poll". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 4 December 2019. Hubbard, Ben (13 April 2020). "Coronavirus Fears Terrify and Impoverish Migrants in the Persian Gulf". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. Pete Pattisson (2 April 2015). "Women from Sierra Leone 'sold like slaves' into domestic work in Kuwait". The Guardian. "Expat Insider 2021: The Year of Uncertainty (page 31)" (PDF). InterNations. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 April 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "World's 10 unfriendliest countries for expats revealed". The Independent. 31 August 2016. Sciolino, Elaine; Carole Corm (9 December 2004). "A New French Headache: When Is Hate on TV Illegal?". The New York Times. Retrieved 11 April 2014. "Anti-Semitic Series on Arab Television: Satellite Network Recycles The Protocols of the Elders of Zion". Anti-Defamation League. 9 January 2004. Archived from the original on 15 January 2013. Retrieved 11 April 2014. "Urge President Chirac to Block Hezbollah's Antisemitic and Hate TV". Archived 10 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine Simon Wiesenthal Center. 21 May 2008. "2009 Human Rights Report: Lebanon". State.gov. 11 March 2010. Archived from the original on 15 March 2010. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "We want justice for migrant domestic workers in Lebanon". Amnesty International. 24 April 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2020. "Life for Lebanon's migrant domestic workers worsens amid crisis". Human Rights Watch. 6 March 2020. Retrieved 21 June 2020. Gantz, Menachem (3 December 2011). "Jew-hate stems from conflict". ynet. Retrieved 17 June 2015. "Palestinians Celebrate Here and in Beirut With Gunfire". Haaretz, Reuters. 11 September 2001. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. "David S. Wyman Institute for Holocaust Studies: Welcome". wymaninstitute.org. 2 December 2004. Retrieved 27 March 2015. "Hamas rips U.N. for teaching the Holocaust." Archived 4 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine JTA. 31 August 2009. 31 August 2009. "GLOBAL VALUES: RELIGION, RACE, CULTURE" (PDF). Gallup International Association. October–December 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "This Is Where Intolerance Is Highest on Religion, Culture, Race". Bloomberg. 1 June 2017. Archived from the original on 2 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. Donald, James; Ali Rattansi (1992). Race, Culture and Difference. SAGE Publications. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-8039-8580-3. "Asian maids in Gulf face maltreatment". Middle East Online. 10 October 2004. Archived from the original on 17 June 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2015. Parekh, Rabiya (4 April 2006). "World Service – World Have Your Say: South Asian workers in Saudi". BBC. Retrieved 22 April 2011. "Saudi Arabia: Asian immigrant forced to clean mosques for 'skipping prayers' – Adnkronos Religion". Adnkronos.com. 7 April 2003. Retrieved 22 April 2011. Chamberlain, Gethin (13 January 2013). "Saudi Arabia's treatment of foreign workers under fire after beheading of Sri Lankan maid". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2013. "'Bad Dreams:' Exploitation and Abuse of Migrant Workers in Saudi Arabia". Human Rights Watch. 15 July 2004. Retrieved 11 May 2022. CMIP report: The Jews in World History according to the Saudi textbooks Archived 28 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine. The Danger of World Jewry, by Abdullah al-Tall, pp. 140–141 (Arabic). Hadith and Islamic Culture, Grade 10, (2001) pp. 103–104. "Saudi Arabia's Curriculum of Intolerance" (PDF). Center for Religious Freedom of Freedom House. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 August 2006. Waugh, Rob (3 May 2017). "This map shows the most racist countries in Europe (and how Britain ranks)". Metro. UK. Retrieved 6 May 2017. "Antisemitic Violence in Europe, 2005–2015 Exposure and Perpetrators in France, UK, Germany, Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Russia" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2018. Retrieved 18 May 2021. "Why Is Europe So Islamophobic?". The New York Times. 6 March 2020. "What Do Europeans Think About Muslim Immigration?". Chatham House. "European Public Opinion Three Decades After the Fall of Communism — 6. Minority groups". Pew Research Center. 14 October 2019. AV: per kr. aale. "Hets av jøder er økende i Europa". Aftenposten. Archived from the original on 11 April 2012. Retrieved 29 May 2012. Chirac vows to fight race attacks BBC. 9 July 2004. "Anti-Semitism 'on rise in Europe'". BBC News. 31 March 2004. Retrieved 10 April 2014. Smith, Craig S. (26 March 2006). "Jews in France Feel Sting as Anti-Semitism Surges Among Children of Immigrants". The New York Times. Retrieved 10 April 2014. "French Jews petition U.S. for asylum". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 20 March 2007. Archived from the original on 5 September 2012. Retrieved 10 April 2014. Anti-semitism is making a loud comeback The Jerusalem Post. 13 December 2009 French interior minister says anti-Semitism at an alarming level Archived 7 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine 14 December 2009 Burleigh, Michael (7 November 1991). The Racial State: Germany 1933–1945. Cambridge University Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-521-39802-2. Milton, S. H. (2001). ""Gypsies" as social outsiders in Nazi Germany". In Robert Gellately and Nathan Stoltzfus (ed.). Social Outsiders in Nazi Germany. Princeton University Press. pp. 216, 231. ISBN 978-0-691-08684-2. From Peace to War: Germany, Soviet Russia, and the World, 1939–1941 (1997), by Sheldon Dick ed. Bernd Wegner, p.50 Liljeberg Research International: Deutsch-Türkische Lebens und Wertewelten 2012 Archived 11 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine, July/August 2012, p. 68 Die Welt: Türkische Migranten hoffen auf muslimische Mehrheit, 17 August 2012. Retrieved 23 August 2012 "Hungarian views deeply impacted by country's history". Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication. Retrieved 4 December 2019. "Hungary: 'Refugees not welcome'". InfoMigrants. 9 May 2018. Retrieved 4 December 2019. "Hungary 2017: Detained refugees, persecuted NGOs, lack of legal certainty | Heinrich Böll Stiftung". Heinrich-Böll-Stiftung. Retrieved 4 December 2019. Refugee crisis: Hungary uses water cannon as people head to Serbian border, Channel 4 News, archived from the original on 11 December 2021, retrieved 4 December 2019 "Hungarian border guards 'taking selfies with beaten migrants'". The Independent. 4 March 2017. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. Retrieved 4 December 2019. Sentinel, -Budapest (6 March 2017). "Hungarian police accused of beating, torturing refugees". The Budapest Beacon. Retrieved 4 December 2019. "Europeans Fear Wave of Refugees Will Mean More Terrorism, Fewer Jobs". Pew Research Center's Global Attitudes Project. 11 July 2016. Retrieved 4 December 2019. "Europeans support taking in refugees – but not EU's handling of issue". Pew Research Center. Retrieved 4 December 2019. "Racism, discrimination, intolerance and extremism: learning from experiences in Greece and Hungary" (PDF). European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA). December 2013. Retrieved 22 February 2014. Gilda Zazzara, " 'Italians First': Workers on the Right Amidst Old and New Populisms" International Labor & Working-Class History (2018) Vol. 93, p101-112. Thomas Hammarberg, "Memorandum following the visit to Italy on 19–20 June 2008," the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights, CommDH(2008)18, para. 26, 28 July 2008 Amnesty International, The State of the World's Human Rights 2008: Italy, POL 10/001/2008, June 2008, pp. 171–172 68% of Italians want Roma expelled – poll, The Guardian, Tom Kington, Rome, 17 May 2008 Freehouse: Radicalizing the local "Dutch far right opens anti-Polish hotline". EUobserver. 9 February 2012. Eakin, Hugh; Rose, Flemming; Mchangama, Jacob (23 June 2016). "Racism in the North: An Exchange". New York Review of Books. ISSN 0028-7504. Retrieved 14 December 2019. Berkhout, Karel. (26 January 2010) "Anti-Semitism on the rise in Amsterdam" Archived 2 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine. NRC Handelsblad. Retrieved 1 June 2012. "Nett-TV: Lørdagsrevyen 13.03.10 Jødiske barn blir hetset" (in Norwegian). NRK. 13 March 2010. Archived from the original on 17 March 2010. Retrieved 12 June 2018. Lien Verpoest, "An Enlightened path towards conservatism: critical junctures and changing elite perceptions in early nineteenth-century Russia." European Review of History 24.5 (2017): 704–731 online Archived 4 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine. A. V. Astakhova, "Xenophobia in the Public and Pedagogical Thought of the Russian Empire of the Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries (Pre-Soviet Period)." Russian Social Science Review 62.1–3 (2021): 16–22. "anti-Semitism". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 17 June 2015. Hilary L. Rubinstein, Daniel C. Cohn-Sherbok, Abraham J. Edelheit, William D. Rubinstein, The Jews in the Modern World, Oxford University Press, 2002. Liudmila G. Novikova, "Red Patriots against White Patriots: Contesting Patriotism in the Civil War in North Russia." Europe-Asia Studies 71.2 (2019): 183–202. Benjamin Tromly, "Brother or other? East European students in Soviet higher education establishments, 1948–1956." European History Quarterly 44.1 (2014): 80–102. online[dead link] Alexander Larin, "Students in Russia (Based on materials of sociological survey)." Far Eastern Affairs (2009) 37#2 pp 114–137 Peter Worger, "A mad crowd: Skinhead youth and the rise of nationalism in post-communist Russia." Communist and Post-Communist Studies 45.3–4 (2012): 269–278. "Racist Violence, Rhetoric Plague Russia". Archived from the original on 18 October 2009. Retrieved 17 June 2015. Hannah S. Chapman, et al. "Xenophobia on the rise? Temporal and regional trends in xenophobic attitudes in Russia." Comparative Politics 50.3 (2018): 381–394. "Hate Crimes Said Down In Russia As Kremlin Cracks Down On Nationalist Critics". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL). 19 February 2016. David Barry, "Ethnodoxy, national exceptionalism, and xenophobia: a case study of contemporary Russia." National Identities 21.3 (2019): 223–239. "Identity 2016: 'Global citizenship' rising, poll suggests". BBC News. 28 April 2016. Archived from the original on 23 December 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "Global Citizenship A Growing Sentiment Among Citizens Of Emerging Economies: Global Poll". GlobeScan. 27 April 2016. Henrik Bachner and Jonas Ring. "Antisemitic images and attitudes in Sweden" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 February 2007. Retrieved 21 February 2007.. levandehistoria.se Anti-Semitism, in Sweden? Depends who you're asking Archived 18 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Haaretz, 9 November 2007. Report: Anti-Semitic attacks rising in Scandinavia Archived 25 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine, Jewish Telegraphic Agency (JTA), 22 March 2010. Simon Wiesenthal Center to Issue Travel Advisory for Sweden – Officials Confer With Swedish Justice Minister Beatrice Ask | Simon Wiesenthal Center Archived 18 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Wiesenthal.com (14 December 2010). Retrieved 1 June 2012. "Report 2017: Ukraine had more antisemitic cases than all former USSR countries combined". The Jerusalem Post. 29 January 2018. Malik, Kenan (7 May 2001). "Why the Victorians were colour blind. In the 19th century, race mattered far less than social distinction: A West African tribal chief was unquestionably superior to an East End costermonger". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2021. J. Brown, An early history of British race relations legislation (09/07/18). House of Commons Library, Briefing Paper, Number 8360. Derek Wilson, "Evil May Day 1517: Foreign traders were attracted to the City of London by England's prosperous trade in wool and cloth. They were not always made welcome." History Today (June 2016) 67#6 pp 66–71 Magazine, Smithsonian; Boissoneault, Lorraine. "On Evil May Day, Londoners Rioted Over Foreigners Stealing Their Jobs". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved 19 April 2023. Waddell, Brodie (12 August 2021). "The Evil May Day riot of 1517 and the popular politics of anti-immigrant hostility in early modern London". Historical Research. 94 (266): 716–735. doi:10.1093/hisres/htab024. ISSN 0950-3471. Bernard Porter, "'Bureau and Barrack': Early Victorian Attitudes Towards the Continent." Victorian Studies 27.4 (1984): 407–433. online Donald Gillin, "China and the Foreigner, 1911 to 1950." South Atlantic Quarterly 58 (1969): 208–219. Julia Lovell (30 October 2014). "The Yellow Peril: Dr Fu Manchu & the Rise of Chinaphobia by Christopher Frayling – review". The Guardian. Rzepnikowska, Alina (2019). "Racism and xenophobia experienced by Polish migrants in the UK before and after Brexit vote". Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies. 45: 61–77. doi:10.1080/1369183X.2018.1451308. "One third 'admit racial prejudice'". BBC News. 28 May 2014. "Being Black in the EU Second European Union Minorities and Discrimination Survey" (PDF). FRA. "Attitudes harden towards refugees from Syria and Libya, BBC poll suggests". BBC News. 4 February 2016. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022. Retrieved 1 May 2022. Hate Crime Legislation in Northern Ireland, Independent Review. Equality Commission for Northern Ireland, April 2020. p.53 Saskia Huc-Hepher, "'Sometimes there's racism towards the French here': xenophobic microaggressions in pre-2016 London as articulations of symbolic violence." National Identities 23.1 (2021): 15–39 online. Ivory Coast "fanning ethnic hatred" BBC News. Archived 29 May 2006 at the Wayback Machine "News". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 13 November 2007. Retrieved 17 June 2015. "Europeans flee Ivory Coast violence. 13 November 2004. ABC News Online". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 12 December 2017. "Thomson Reuters Foundation". Thomson Reuters Foundation. Retrieved 17 June 2015. "Africa – Niger starts mass Arab expulsions". Retrieved 17 June 2015. "Thomson Reuters Foundation". Thomson Reuters Foundation. Archived from the original on 10 November 2008. Retrieved 17 June 2015. "Africa – Niger's Arabs to fight expulsion". Retrieved 17 June 2015. United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. "Refworld – The Leader in Refugee Decision Support". Refworld. Retrieved 17 June 2015. Giliomee, Hermann (2003). The Afrikaners: Biography of a People. C. Hurst & Co. Publishers. p. 383. ISBN 978-1-85065-714-9. "Anti-Indian Legislation 1800s – 1959". South African History Online. Retrieved 27 June 2016. Kuo, Lily (30 April 2017). "Chinese migrants have changed the face of South Africa. Now they're leaving". Quartz Africa. Retrieved 4 December 2019. Ho, Ufrieda (14 March 2019). "ANTI-CHINESE SENTIMENT: Hate speech case a message about racism, discrimination". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 4 December 2019. "Xenophobic violence in democratic South Africa". South Africa History Online. Retrieved 29 June 2016. "South Africans Take Out Rage on Immigrants". The New York Times. 20 May 2008. Retrieved 29 June 2016. "Thousands seek sanctuary as South Africans turn on refugees". The Guardian. 20 May 2008. Retrieved 29 June 2016. "Thousands flee S Africa attacks". BBC News. 19 May 2008. Retrieved 29 June 2016. "Analysis: The ugly truth behind SA's xenophobic violence". Daily Maverick. 28 May 2013. Retrieved 29 June 2016. Kazunga, Oliver (20 April 2015). "Xenophobia death toll climbs to 7". The Chronicle. Retrieved 30 June 2016. "Deaths in South Africa as mobs target foreigners". Al Jazeera. 15 April 2015. Retrieved 30 June 2016. "Xenophobic violence flares in South Africa". The Economist. 14 September 2019. Retrieved 13 September 2019. Dozens of people were killed in anti-foreigner riots in 2008 and 2015. But the most recent outbreak of violence shines a particularly harsh light on the rabble-rousing of South African politicians, some of whom have blamed migrants for supposedly taking jobs from locals and committing crimes. "News". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 December 2005. Retrieved 17 June 2015. "Islam and Slavery". Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Curse Of Slavery Haunts Sudan Archived 4 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine CBS News. 25 January 1998 U.S. State Department report says 'religious intolerance remains far too common' around world. September 6, 2000 Archived 23 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine CNN US News Jok Madut Jok (2001), p.3 Patel, Hasu H. (1972). "General Amin and the Indian Exodus from Uganda". Issue: A Journal of Opinion. 2 (4): 12–22. doi:10.2307/1166488. JSTOR 1166488. "Australian Natives Association Centenary – Monument Australia". monumentaustralia.org.au. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2017. See Museum Victoria description Archived 5 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine F. S. Stevens, Racism: The Australian Experience- A study of Race Prejudice in Australia, Vol. 1: Prejudice and Xenophobia (1971). Lewis, Wendy; Simon Balderstone; John Bowan (2006). Events That Shaped Australia. New Holland. p. 102. ISBN 978-1-74110-492-9. "Fact Sheet – Abolition of the 'White Australia' Policy". Australian Immigration. Commonwealth of Australia, National Communications Branch, Department of Immigration and Citizenship. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 27 March 2013. Hogan, Jackie (2008). Gender, Race and National Identity: Nations of Flesh and Blood. Routledge. pp. 152–153. ISBN 978-1-134-17406-5. "Strike Force Neil, Cronulla Riots, Review of the Police Response Media Component Volume 1 of 4" (PDF). Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF-19.4 Mb) on 10 November 2012. Retrieved 3 October 2012. Liz Jackson (presenter) (13 March 2006). "Riot and Revenge". Four Corners. Season 2006. ABC. Archived from the original on 2 January 2010. Transcript. Retrieved 25 December 2009. "18 Indians detained for breaching Australia peace rally". The Times of India. 1 June 2009. Topsfield, Jewel (11 May 2009). "Helpline thrown to Indian students". The Age. Retrieved 11 June 2018. "UN asks Australia to investigate 'root cause' of attacks on Indian". dna. Retrieved 24 January 2015. O'Neill, Claire (3 September 2020). "The "Othering" of Disease: Xenophobia During Past Pandemics". The Wiley Network. Akinola, Adeoye O. ed. The Political Economy of Xenophobia in Africa (Springer, 2018) 128 pp.[ISBN missing] Auestad, Lene, ed. Nationalism and the Body Politic: Psychoanalysis and the Rise of Ethnocentrism and Xenophobia. (Karnac Books, 2013).[ISBN missing] Bernasconi, Robert. "Where is xenophobia in the fight against racism?." Critical Philosophy of Race 2.1 (2014): 5–19. online Bordeau, Jamie. Xenophobia (The Rosen Publishing Group, 2009). global.[ISBN missing] Dovido, John F., Kerry Kawakami, and Kelly R. Beach. "Implicit and Explicit Attitudes: Examination of the Relationship between Measures of Intergroup Bias." in Blackwell Handbook of Social Psychology: Intergroup Processes ed by R. Brown and S. Gaertner, (Blackwell, 2003) pp. 175–197. Cantle, Ted (2005). "Prejudice, Discrimination and the 'Fear of Difference'". Community Cohesion. London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 91–115. doi:10.1057/9780230508712_4. ISBN 978-0-230-50871-2. Frayling, Christopher/ The Yellow Peril: Dr. Fu Manchu and the Rise of Chinaphobia (2014); role of popular culture in promoting xenophobia against Chinese. excerpt Gray, Christopher J. "Cultivating citizenship through xenophobia in Gabon, 1960–1995." Africa today 45.3/4 (1998): 389–409 online Harrison, Faye V. Resisting Racism and Xenophobia: Global Perspectives on Race, Gender, and Human Rights (2005) excerpt Hjerm, Mikael. "Education, xenophobia and nationalism: A comparative analysis." Journal of ethnic and Migration Studies 27.1 (2001): 37–60. online Neocosmos, Michael. From 'Foreign Natives' to 'Native Foreigners': Explaining Xenophobia in Post-apartheid South Africa, Citizenship and Nationalism, Identity and Politics (2010).[ISBN missing] Nyamnjoh, Francis B. Insiders and Outsiders: Citizenship and Xenophobia in Contemporary Southern Africa (Zed, 2006)[ISBN missing] Quillian, Lincoln. "New approaches to understanding racial prejudice and discrimination." Annual Review of Sociology 32 (2006): 299–328. New Approaches to Understanding Racial Prejudice and Discrimination Rydgren, Jens. "The logic of xenophobia." Rationality and society 16.2 (2004): 123–148. Schlueter, Elmar, Anu Masso, and Eldad Davidov. "What factors explain anti-Muslim prejudice? An assessment of the effects of Muslim population size, institutional characteristics and immigration-related media claims." Journal of ethnic and migration studies 46.3 (2020): 649–664. online Sundstrom, Ronald R., and David Haekwon Kim. "Xenophobia and racism." Critical philosophy of race 2.1 (2014): 20–45. online Tafira, Hashi Kenneth. Xenophobia in South Africa: A History (Palgrave Macmillan, 2018).[ISBN missing] Yakushko, Oksana. Modern-Day Xenophobia: Critical Historical and Theoretical Perspectives on the Roots of Anti-Immigrant Prejudice (Springer. 2018) 129 pp, theoretical[ISBN missing] Bartram, David, and Erika Jarochova. "A longitudinal investigation of integration/multiculturalism policies and attitudes towards immigrants in European countries." Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies (2021): 1–20. online Archived 5 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine Baumgartl, Bernd, and Adrian Favell, eds. New xenophobia in Europe (Martinus Nijhoff, 1995).[ISBN missing] Bukhair, Syed Attique Uz Zaman Hyder, et al. "Islamophobia in the West and Post 9/11 Era." International Affairs and Global Strategy 78 (2019): 23–32. online Davidov, Eldad, et al. "Direct and indirect predictors of opposition to immigration in Europe: individual values, cultural values, and symbolic threat." Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 46.3 (2020): 553–573. online De Master, Sara, and Michael K. Le Roy. "Xenophobia and the European Union." Comparative politics (2000): 419–436. online Doty, Roxanne Lynn. Anti-Immigrantism in Western Democracies: Statecraft, desire and the politics of exclusion (Routledge, 2003).[ISBN missing] Finzsch, Norbert, and Dietmar Schirmer, eds. Identity and intolerance: nationalism, racism, and xenophobia in Germany and the United States (Cambridge UP, 2002) 16 essays by scholars.[ISBN missing] Harrison, Faye V. Resisting Racism and Xenophobia: Global Perspectives on Race, Gender, and Human Rights (2005)[ISBN missing] Heath, Anthony, et al. "Contested terrain: explaining divergent patterns of public opinion towards immigration within Europe." (2020): 475–488. online Archived 5 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine Jolly, Seth K., and Gerald M. DiGiusto. "Xenophobia and Immigrant Contact: French Public Attitudes Toward Immigration" The Social Science Journal (2014) 51#3: 464–473. Kende, Anna, and Péter Krekó. "Xenophobia, prejudice, and right-wing populism in East-Central Europe." Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 34 (2020): 29–33. Xenophobia, prejudice, and right-wing populism in East-Central Europe Krumpal, Ivar. "Estimating the Prevalence of Xenophobia and Anti-Semitism in Germany: A Comparison of Randomized Response and Direct Questioning." Social Science Research (2012) 41: 1387–1403. Makari, George. Of Fear and Strangers: A History of Xenophobia (2021), scholarly history focused on US and Europe; excerpt Minkenberg, Michael. "The Radical Right and Anti-Immigrant Politics in Liberal Democracies since World War II: Evolution of a Political and Research Field." Polity 53.3 (2021): 394–417. Quillian, Lincoln. "Prejudice as a response to perceived group threat: Population composition and anti-immigrant and racial prejudice in Europe." American Sociological Review (1995): 586–611. online Schlueter, Elmar, Anu Masso, and Eldad Davidov. "What factors explain anti-Muslim prejudice? An assessment of the effects of Muslim population size, institutional characteristics and immigration-related media claims." Journal of ethnic and migration studies 46.3 (2020): 649–664. online Scully, Richard, and Andrekos Varnava, ed. Comic Empires: Imperialism in Cartoons, Caricature, and Satirical Art (Manchester UP, 2020)[ISBN missing] Strabac, Zan, Toril Aalberg, and Marko Valenta. "Attitudes towards Muslim immigrants: Evidence from survey experiments across four countries." Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 40.1 (2014): 100–118. Tausch, Arno. "Muslim immigration continues to divide Europe: A quantitative analysis of European social survey data." Middle East Review of International Affairs 20.2 (2016). online Thränhardt, Dietrich. "The political uses of xenophobia in England, France and Germany." Party politics 1.3 (1995): 323–345. Todd, Emmanuel. Who is Charlie? Xenophobia and the new middle class. Polity Press, 2015, France.[ISBN missing] Anbinder, Tyler. "Nativism and prejudice against immigrants," in A companion to American immigration, ed. by Reed Ueda (2006) pp. 177–201 excerpt Awan, Muhammad Safeer. "Global terror and the rise of xenophobia/Islamophobia: An analysis of American cultural production since September 11." Islamic Studies (2010): 521–537. online[permanent dead link] Baker, Joseph O., David Cañarte, and L. Edward Day. "Race, xenophobia, and punitiveness among the American public." Sociological Quarterly 59.3 (2018): 363–383. online Bennett, David H. The Party of Fear: The American Far Right from Nativism to the Militia Movement (U of North Carolina Press, 1988). online FitzGerald, David Scott, and David Cook-Martín. Culling the Masses: The Democratic Origins of Racist Immigration Policy in the Americas (Harvard UP, 2014) excerpt Lee, Erika. "America first, immigrants last: American xenophobia then and now." Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era 19.1 (2020): 3–18. online Lee, Erika. America for Americans: A History of Xenophobia in the United States (2019). The mnajor scholarly history; excerpt; also see online review Makari, George. Of Fear and Strangers: A History of Xenophobia (2021), scholarly history focused on US and Europe; excerpt Look up xenophobia in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Media related to Xenophobia at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Xenophobia at Wikiquote