Nicosia District (Greek: Eπαρχία Λευκωσίας) is one of the six districts of Cyprus. Its main town is the island country's capital city, Nicosia. The de-facto TRNC-controlled northern part of the district is the Lefkoşa District of the unrecognized Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. TRNC-controlled areas of the Larnaca District of the Republic of Cyprus are administered as part of Nicosia District, while western parts of the Nicosia District under de facto TRNC control are administered as part of the new Güzelyurt and Lefke Districts. Under Lusignan rule, at least the latter part and then during the Venetian period, the Kingdom of Cyprus was divided into eleven provinces called in French contrées and in Italian contrade. The area around Nicosia was the province of Vicomté (literally the domain of a Viscount). It covered the eastern half of the present District of Nicosia, what would later become the Nahiehs of Dagh and Deyirmenlik (orange on map). The western half of the present district formed the province of Pendaïa (Pendagia). One significant difference in the borders was that Vicomté extended closer to the sea, encroaching upon the Pentadaktylos foothills in the present Kyrenia District. Under Ottoman Turkish rule, Nicosia was one of the six cazas into which the island was divided. The Caza of Nicosia, also known as the Caza of Deyirmenlik, was divided into two nahiehs - Dagh (Orini) and Deyirmenlik (Kythrea). The caza was headed by a Kaimakan. When the British took control of Cyprus in 1878, these administrative units were retained. A British officer styled a Commissioner (later District Officer) was appointed for the caza of Nicosia, while the Turkish Kaimakan was initially retained with certain of his functions. The Nahiehs of Lefka and Morphou were previously in the Caza of Kyrenia. But by 1881, the Nahiehs of the Caza of Nicosia were: Lefka Morphou Dagh Deyirmenlik The town of Nicosia, previously separate, came under the Nahieh of Deyirmenlik (Greek: Kythrea) in the British period. The population of Nicosia Caza or District in 1881 was as follows: At the most recent census the population of the district was as follows: The total figure above includes 1,599 for the communities of Melouseia, Tremetousia and Arsos in Larnaca District and Afania in Famagusta District. Thus, the population of Nicosia District has increased eight-fold since 1881. According to Statistical Codes of Municipalities, Communities and Quarters of Cyprus per the Statistical Service of Cyprus (2015), Nicosia District has 12 municipalities and 162 communities. Municipalities are written with bold. Agia Agia Eirini Agia Marina Agia Marina (Skylloura) Agia Varvara Agioi Iliofotoi Agioi Trimithias Agios Dometios Agios Epifanios Oreinis Agios Epifanios Soleas Agios Georgios Agios Georgios Lefkas Agios Ioannis (Selemani) Agios Ioannis Malountas Agios Nikolaos Lefkas Agios Sozomenos Agios Theodoros, Nicosia Agios Theodoros Tilliria Agios Vasileios Aglandjia Agrokipia Akaki Alampra Alevga Alithinou Alona Ammadies Ampelikou Analiontas Anageia Angolemi Anthoupolis Apliki Arediou Argaki Askas Astromeritis Avlona Beykeuy Dali Deneia Dyo Potamoi Elia Engomi Epicho Episkopeio Ergates Evrychou Exometochi Farmakas Fikardou Flasou Fterikoudi Fyllia Galata Galini Gerakies Geri Gerolakkos Gönyeli Gourri Kakopetria Kaliana Kalo Chorio Kapouti Kalo Chorio Oreinis Kalo Chorio Soleas Kalopanagiotis Kalyvakia Kampi Kampia Kampos Kanli Kannavia Kapedes Karavostasi Kataliontas Kato Deftera Katokopia Kato Koutrafas Kato Moni Kato Pyrgos Kato Zodeia Katydata Kazivera Klirou Kokkina Kokkinotrimithia Korakou Kotsiatis Kourou Monastiri Kyra Kythrea Lagoudera Lakatamia Latsia Lazanias Lefka Linou Livadia Louroujina Loutros Lympia Lythrodontas Malounta Mammari Mandres Mansoura Margi Margo Masari Mathiatis Meniko Mia Milia Mylikouri Mitsero Mora Morphou Mosfileri Moutoullas Neo Chorio Nicosia Nikitari Nikitas Nisou Oikos Orounta Ortaköy Pachyammos Palaichori Morphou Palaichori Oreinis Palaikythro Paliometocho Pano Deftera Pano Koutrafas Pano Pyrgos Pano Zodeia Pedoulas Pentageia Pera Pera Chorio Peristerona Peristeronari Petra Petra tou Digeni Pigenia Platanistasa Politiko Polystypos Potami Potamia Prastio Psimolofou Pyrogi Saranti Selladi tou Appi Sia Sinaoros Skouriotissa Skylloura Spilia Strovolos Syrianochori Temvria Trachoni Trachonas Tsakistra Tseri Tymbou Variseia Voni Vroisha Vyzakia Xerovounos Xyliatos Including de facto Northern Cyprus and UN buffer zone. http://www.cystat.gov.cy/mof/cystat/statistics.nsf/classifications_en/classifications_en?OpenForm Cyprus Statistical Service Classifications] — Degree of Urbanization. "CENSUS OF POPULATION AND HOUSING 2021: PRELIMINARY RESULTS BY DISTRICT AND MUNICIPALITY/COMMUNITY" (PDF). Retrieved 2024-03-10. KKTC 2011 Nüfus ve Konut Sayımı [TRNC 2011 Population and Housing Census] (PDF), TRNC State Planning Organization, 6 August 2013 L’ Ile de Chypre. Sa Situation Presente et ses Souvenirs du Moyen Age, by Louis de Mas Latrie, pub. Firmin-Didot et Cie, Paris. 1879; map and pp. 148-151 History of Cyprus, by George Hill, Cambridge University Press, 1952, vol IV, p.7 Our Home in Cyprus, by Mrs. Scott-Stevenson, publ. Chapman and Hall Ltd, London, 1880; p. 73 Report by Her Majesty's High Commissioner for the Year 1879, Accounts and papers. Great Britain. Parliament. Session 1880. publ. by House of Commons, London, 2006 Census of Cyprus 1881, pr. Eyre and Spottiswoode, London, 1884 "Census of Cyprus 2011". Archived from the original on 2013-12-02. Retrieved 2018-08-01. Census organised by the Turkish Cypriots in the occupied area http://www.devplan.org/Nufus-2011/nufus%20ikinci_.pdf retrieved October 2013 "Statistical Codes of Municipalities, Communities and Quarters of Cyprus per the Statistical Service of Cyprus, 2015". Statistical Service of Cyprus. Archived from the original on 2018-08-04. Retrieved 2018-08-04. 35°04′N 33°12′E﻿ / ﻿35.067°N 33.200°E﻿ / 35.067; 33.200