34°50′N 32°35′E﻿ / ﻿34.833°N 32.583°E﻿ / 34.833; 32.583 Paphos District (Greek: Επαρχία Πάφου, romanized: Eparchía Páfou; Turkish: Baf kazası) is one of the six districts of Cyprus and it is situated in the western part of Cyprus. Its main town and capital is Paphos. The entire district is controlled by the internationally recognized government of Cyprus. There are four municipalities in Paphos District: Paphos, Yeroskipou, Peyia, and Polis Chrysochous. The area of the district is 1,396 km2, which constitutes the 15.1% of the total area of the island, and the population as of 2021[update] was 100,175. Its coastal area is characterized by gulfs and coves, capes and points, beaches and tiny isles. The district can be divided into three morphological regions: the coastal plain, lying mainly below 200 metres, the hilly area extending from plain up to the igneous rocks of Paphos forest and the mountainous region, lying mainly on the igneous rocks of the Paphos forest. North-west of the District is the Akamas peninsula which contains a national park where the green sea turtle is a protected animal. According to Statistical Codes of Municipalities, Communities and Quarters of Cyprus per the Statistical Service of Cyprus (2015), Paphos District has 4 municipalities and 121 communities. Municipalities are written with bold. Acheleia Agia Marinouda Agia Varvara Agios Dimitrianos Agios Georgios Agios Ioannis Agios Isidoros Agios Nikolaos Akoursos Amargeti Anadiou Anarita Androlykou Argaka Arminou Armou Asprogia Axylou Ayia Marina Chrysochous Ayia Marina Kelokedharon Chloraka Choletria Choli Choulou Chrysochou Dhrousha Drymou Eledio Empa Episkopi Evretou Faleia Fasli Fasoula Foinikas Fyti Galataria Geroskipou Gialia Giolou Goudi Inia Istinjon Kallepia Kannaviou Karamoullides Kathikas Kato Akourdhalia Kato Arodes Kedares Kelokedara Kidasi Kilinia Kinousa Kissonerga Koili Konia Kouklia Kourtaka Kritou Marottou Kritou Terra Lapithiou Lasa Lemona Lempa Letymvou Livadi Loukrounou Lysos Makounta Mamonia Mamountali Mandria Marathounta Maronas Meladeia Melandra Mesa Chorio Mesana Mesogi Milia Miliou Mousere Nata Nea Dimmata Neo Chorio Nikokleia Pano Akourdaleia Pano Archimandrita Pano Arodes Pano Panagia Paphos Pegeia Pelathousa Pentalia Peristerona Philousa Kelokedharon Philousa Khrysokhous Pitargou Polemi Polis, Cyprus Pomos Praitori Prastio Psathi Salamiou Sarama Simou Skoulli Souskiou Statos–Agios Fotios Stavrokonnou Steni Stroumpi Tala Terra Theletra Thrinia Timi Trachypedoula Tremithousa Trimithousa Tsada Vretsia Zacharia http://www.cystat.gov.cy/mof/cystat/statistics.nsf/classifications_en/classifications_en?OpenForm Cyprus Statistical Service Classifications] — Degree of Urbanization. "CENSUS OF POPULATION AND HOUSING 2021: PRELIMINARY RESULTS BY DISTRICT AND MUNICIPALITY/COMMUNITY" (PDF). Retrieved 10 March 2024. "CENSUS OF POPULATION AND HOUSING 2021: PRELIMINARY RESULTS BY DISTRICT AND MUNICIPALITY/COMMUNITY" (PDF). Retrieved 10 March 2024. "Cyprus population has grown 9.9% in a decade". Cyprus population has grown 9.9% in a decade. Retrieved 10 March 2024. "Statistical Codes of Municipalities, Communities and Quarters of Cyprus per the Statistical Service of Cyprus, 2015". Statistical Service of Cyprus. Archived from the original on 4 August 2018. Retrieved 4 August 2018. v t e