Fizruk (Russian: Физрук) is a Russian situation comedy television series. The first run started on 7 April 2014. This is a story about the collision of two times: the "dashing" 90s and the "stable" tenths. The main character Foma has been the "right hand" of an influential person with a semi-criminal past all his life. When the "owner" kicked him out of retirement, Foma decided to return back in any way. At first it seemed that everything would be simple: get close to the child of the former boss, bend over, remind yourself of yourself and return to business. But Thomas' plan collapses on the first day. He has to stay at school for a long time. Once in a completely unfamiliar world of children and teachers, which is radically different from his usual circle, Foma not only changes his life, but also changes himself. Dmitry Nagiyev as Foma Anastasiya Panina as Tatyana Chernyshova Vladimir Sychyov as Psikh Alexander Gordon as Mamay Viktor Sukhorukov as Ernest Shilovsky Sofya Rayzman as Sofya Daniil Muravyov-Izotov as Petya Aleksandr Yakin as Sanya Georgy Kudrenko as Vitalik Yelena Muravyova as Lukovka Karina Mishulina as Svetlana Yermakova Yevgeny Kulakov as Truslivy lev Roman Indyk as Albert Moiseyevich Natalya Korennaya as Olga Timofeyevna Yekaterina Lisovaya as Vera Ivanovna Sergey Plaksin as Georgy Kuzmich Daniil Vakhrushev as Valya Artur Sopelnik as Borzy Viktoriya Klinkova as Pupok Andrey Kryzhny as Banan Sergey Zhuravlyov as Minus Dmitry Gogu as Oduvan Varvara Bogdanova as Cheburashka Yan Tsapnik as Khromulya Yekaterina Melnik as Belka "5 причин посмотреть сериал "Физрук"". tele.ru. 2014-11-07. "Какой рекорд побил сериал "Физрук"?". Аргументы и факты. 2014-11-07. "Внимание на экран!". Archived from the original on 2020-08-21. Retrieved 2015-04-20. Физрук // КиноПоиск Вера Цветкова (2014-03-21). "Нагиев таки украл шоу". НГ-Антракт. Retrieved 2014-04-29. Надежда Шульга (2014-04-23). "Анастасия Панина: В такого хулигана, как Дмитрий Нагиев, почему бы не влюбиться?". Комсомольская правда. Fizruk at IMDb v t e