Keeping Up Appearances is a British sitcom created and written by Roy Clarke. It originally aired on BBC1 from 1990 to 1995. The central character is an eccentric and snobbish middle class social climber, Hyacinth Bucket (Patricia Routledge), who insists that her surname is pronounced "Bouquet". The show comprised five series and 44 episodes, four of which are Christmas specials. Production ended in 1995 after Routledge decided to move on to other projects. All 44 episodes have since been released on video, DVD and streaming media, and are regularly repeated on television networks throughout the world. The sitcom follows Hyacinth in her attempts to prove her social superiority, and to gain standing with those she considers upper class. Her attempts are constantly hampered by her lower class extended family, whom she is desperate to hide. Much of the humour comes from the conflict between Hyacinth's vision of herself and the reality of her underclass background. In each episode, she lands in a farcical situation as she battles to protect her social credibility. Keeping Up Appearances was an immense success in the UK, and also captured large audiences in the US, Canada, Australia, Denmark, Finland, Sweden, Norway, Ireland, Belgium, and the Netherlands. By February 2016, it had been sold nearly a thousand times to overseas broadcasters, making it BBC Worldwide's most exported television programme ever. In a 2004 BBC poll it placed 12th in Britain's Best Sitcom. In a 2001 Channel 4 poll, Hyacinth was ranked 52nd on their list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters. The show has been syndicated on Gold and Drama in the UK, on PBS member stations in the United States and on 7TWO and 9Gem in Australia. Hyacinth Bucket (Patricia Routledge) – who insists her surname is pronounced Bouquet (although her husband Richard has said, "It was always 'Bucket' until I met you!") – is an overbearing, social-climbing snob, originally from a lower-class background, whose main mission in life is to impress others with her refinement and pretended affluence. She is terrified that her background will be revealed, and goes to great lengths to hide it. Hyacinth likes to spend her days visiting stately homes (convinced she will meet and strike up a friendship with the upper class owners, especially if they are part of the landed gentry or peerage) and hosting "executive-style" candlelight suppers (with her Royal Worcester double-glazed Avignon china and Royal Doulton china with "the hand-painted periwinkles"). She ostentatiously brags about her possessions, including her "white slimline telephone with automatic redial", which she always answers with "The Bouquet residence, the lady of the house speaking." (She frequently receives misdialled calls asking for a Chinese takeaway, making her angry.) She speaks in an exaggerated RP-like accent with northern undertones, while her relatives speak in broad northern accents. Her neighbours speak in milder RP accents. When flustered, Hyacinth reverts to her native accent. Hyacinth's attempts to impress makes the lives of those around her difficult; her continual efforts to improve her social position usually involve inviting her unwitting neighbours and friends to "exclusive candlelight suppers". Although Hyacinth is not deterred by the lack of response to her attempts, her friends, neighbours, and acquaintances live in fear of being invited, and usually make frantic attempts to excuse themselves. Her husband Richard (Clive Swift) bears the brunt of the suffering. He initially worked for the council in "Finance and General Purposes", but at the beginning of series three, reluctantly accepts early retirement. Though Hyacinth describes his role as "a power in local authority", he appears to be no more than a bureaucratic functionary. Although he loves her with a long-suffering endurance, he is notably exasperated by her plans and her habit of making extravagant and unnecessary purchases. Although she lives to impress others, Hyacinth regularly competes with her middle-class neighbours (whom she considers snobbish showoffs) such as Sonia Barker-Finch, Delia Wheelwright and Lydia Hawksworth (who alone of Hyacinth's rivals seems to be an actual snob, as she disdains kiwifruit as "lower middle class"). Hyacinth sometimes says things like "I haven't a snobbish bone in my body" or "I can't abide such snobbery like that" when talking about those she considers her competition. Always hindering Hyacinth's best efforts to impress, and providing an unwelcome reminder of her less-than-refined roots, are her working-class sisters Daisy (Judy Cornwell) and Rose (Shirley Stelfox in series one; Mary Millar thereafter), and Daisy's proudly "bone-idle" husband Onslow (Geoffrey Hughes). They, along with Hyacinth's senile father, frequently turn up inconveniently (usually in their clapped-out Ford Cortina Mk IV – which always makes a characteristic backfire when it arrives), with Hyacinth going to great lengths to avoid them (saying: "Richard, you know I love my family, but that's no reason why I should have to acknowledge them in broad daylight!"). Rose is very sexually aggressive and promiscuous, adding to Hyacinth's embarrassment. Although Hyacinth is embarrassed by Onslow's laziness and unkempt character, Richard and Onslow get along very well with each other. Hyacinth's senile father frequently has flashbacks to the Second World War, and often exhibits bizarre behaviour, sometimes involving embarrassing situations with women (Onslow describes him as "barmy"). Two relatives of whom Hyacinth is not ashamed are her wealthy sister Violet (Anna Dawson) and her unseen son Sheridan. Violet frequently telephones Hyacinth for advice, allowing her to loudly announce to anyone in earshot, "It's my sister Violet – the one with a Mercedes, swimming pool/sauna and room for a pony". However, Violet's social acceptability is damaged by the eccentric behaviour of her cross-dressing, equestrian-loving turf accountant husband Bruce, whom she attacks because of his behaviour. Hyacinth also tries to impress people with the intellectual prowess of her beloved son Sheridan (who actually only takes a course in needlework at a polytechnic). Hyacinth boasts about the "psychic" closeness of their relationship and how often he writes and telephones her, although he never writes and only telephones his mother to ask for money (much to the despair of Richard). Hyacinth is blissfully oblivious of the seemingly obvious hints that Sheridan, who lives with a man named Tarquin (who makes his own curtains, wears silk pyjamas, and has won prizes for embroidery), is gay, but Richard appears to have caught on, asking Hyacinth if she's ever wondered why Sheridan shows no interest in girls. Hyacinth's neighbour Elizabeth "Liz" Warden (Josephine Tewson) is frequently invited round for coffee. Though she is ordinarily calm, Elizabeth's nerves go to pieces in Hyacinth's house, causing her to smash Hyacinth's china and spill coffee and biscuits on Hyacinth's Burmese rug. She is married with a daughter away at university, yet her husband works abroad and, like Sheridan, neither character ever appears. While everyone else usually addresses her simply as "Liz", Hyacinth almost always calls her by her full name. Elizabeth is occasionally able to "one-up" Hyacinth herself by reminding her neighbour that her daughter is at university, while Sheridan is studying at a mere polytechnic. Liz's brother Emmet (David Griffin) moves in with her at the beginning of series two, after a messy divorce. Hyacinth, upon learning that Emmet is a musician, frequently and abruptly sings out-of-key at him to try to get a part in one of his productions, making him terrified of leaving the house, lest she see him ("She'll sing at me!"). Emmet's problems are made worse by Hyacinth's mistaken belief that his frightened reactions indicate that he is infatuated with her, which, in fact, could not be further from the truth. Hyacinth frequently confronts the postman with complaints, harassing him to the point that he will go to extreme lengths not to face her; she often forces workmen and other visitors to her home to remove their shoes before entering. Michael, the vicar of the local church (Jeremy Gittins) is also loath to face the overbearing Hyacinth, to whom he refers (to others) as "the Bucket woman". The vicar and his wife sometimes exact comic revenge on Hyacinth for her snobbishness; on one occasion, when she was one of a group of volunteer helpers at the church, the vicar's wife saw to it that Hyacinth's hand went up prematurely and assigned her the job of cleaning the church toilets. Keeping Up Appearances aired for five series, four Christmas specials, and one short Children in Need special from 29 October 1990 to 25 December 1995. The series officially ended after the episode "The Pageant", because Patricia Routledge wanted to focus on other TV and theatre work, including Hetty Wainthropp Investigates, which began airing in 1996. Clive Swift, who portrayed Richard, stated in a BBC interview that Routledge "didn't want to be remembered as simply 'Mrs. Bucket'". Exterior shots around Hyacinth's house were recorded at a privately owned residence at 117 Heather Road, Binley Woods, Warwickshire, east of Coventry. Exterior shots around Daisy's and Onslow's council terrace were taken in the Stoke Aldermoor district of Coventry. Other exterior street and town shots were filmed in Leamington Spa and in various towns in Warwickshire, along with many scenes from the large town of Northampton, mainly the church hall. Some scenes were also shot in Swindon, Lydiard Park (the hotel where Hyacinth and Richard are arrested by the police for stealing a Rolls Royce), Oxford market scenes, and Bristol, (Bedminster). One scene was shot in Oslo, Norway. One episode was filmed in Great Yarmouth, mainly in the Great Yarmouth Pleasure Beach Theme Park. The opening sequence shows Hyacinth writing an invitation to one of her trademark candlelight suppers; this invitation lists Hyacinth's address as "Waney Elm, Blossom Avenue, Fuddleton". In the same sequence, the invitation is eventually sent to an address in Eddleton. Neither town actually exists. However, there are several references to the characters being in the West Midlands throughout the series, as when Hyacinth said that she could become the "Barbara Cartland of the West Midlands Social Circuit Scene" in the episode "The Hostess". In another episode, police officers wearing West Midlands Police jumpers escort Richard home and several West Midlands Travel buses are also seen throughout the series. Richard's car is a Rover 200-series (SD3) saloon. Early episodes show a light blue 1987 216S bearing the number plate D541 EXL, but later episodes feature a sky-blue 1989 216SE EFi model (with the same number plate except for one letter, now D541 EFL). Onslow drives a 1978 Ford Cortina (number plate VSD 389S) that is in poor condition and backfires loudly almost every time it starts or stops, embarrassing Hyacinth, and frequently crushing her hopes of creating a perfect impression with new people. (The DVLA website shows that this vehicle's tax was not renewed once the series finished, suggesting that it was scrapped at that point or maybe not since the V5C (logbook) is dated as issued on 5 October 2020). Onslow also has the rusting carcass of a Hillman Avenger in his front garden, in which lives Onslow's dog that always barks at Hyacinth as she approaches. Violet and Bruce own a Mercedes-Benz W126 S-class and later a Mercedes-Benz W202 C-class. Neighbour Elizabeth drives a white 1989 Austin Metro City hatchback with number plate F434 RLA, which, despite being the subject of comments from Hyacinth about its age, is newer than Richard's car. Various spin-off shows related to the programme were broadcast. In March 1997, Geoffrey Hughes and Judy Cornwell reprised their roles as Onslow and Daisy for a special compilation episode, recorded for broadcast in the United States on PBS. The show sees the pair introduce clips from the series using Hyacinth's personal diary. The special was also released on VHS and DVD. In 2004, the documentary series Comedy Connections featured an episode dedicated to Keeping Up Appearances. Stars Clive Swift, Josephine Tewson, Judy Cornwell and David Griffin, along with writer Roy Clarke and producer/director Harold Snoad, all discussed the series. Clips from an interview with Patricia Routledge from 2002 were also included. The episode revealed that there were serious artistic differences between Clarke and Snoad. Specifically, Clarke refused to act as anything but a writer and rarely visited the set or location shoots, necessitating that Snoad make minor rewrites to accommodate the realities of taping. This infuriated Clarke, who disliked any tampering of his work, and Snoad thought Clarke was being unreasonable. The situation was mitigated in later series by the hiring of a script editor whose sole job was to keep Clarke apprised of Snoad's changes, and to keep Snoad informed of Clarke's opinion of them. In early 2008, Geoffrey Hughes reprised his role as Onslow once again for a clipshow of the series; this was for broadcast on American television and sees him teaching a credit course at the Open University having selected "successful relationships" as his subject matter. The programme was also released on Region 1 DVD. When Keeping Up Appearances did not return, after Patricia Routledge announced that she no longer wished to play Hyacinth, Roy Clarke proposed a spin-off series called Mind Your Manors. The series was referenced in BBC in-house literature during 1997 and 1998 and later described by both Clarke and Geoffrey Hughes as part of a discussion of the character of Onslow in Radio 4's Archive on 4: On Northern Men, broadcast in 2009. The spin-off would have seen Onslow forced to take a supposedly "easy" job tending the gardens of a large manor house estate owned by a doddery and rather forgetful old Lord. When the Lord dies suddenly, Onslow, Daisy and Rose (who it is implied was having a fling with the Lord, causing the heart attack which led to his passing) end up 'temporarily' moving into the manor house to mind it, due to a legal dispute with the deceased Lord's estranged brother (who Rose immediately starts lusting after), who wants the land. A mislaid deeds paper left by the forgetful old Lord would supposedly clarify who has rights to the estate, buried somewhere in the gardens that Onslow is left to ineptly try and keep in shape. Most of the conflict would have come from the Lord's brother and the manor's snooty neighbours, the wealthy Hyde-Whytes, who are not happy about the "commoners" who have taken up residence next door (although it later transpires that Mr. Hyde-Whyte used to know Onslow in their youth and is indebted to him after Onslow once took the fall for him to stop him being arrested). Su Pollard was approached to play the role of Miss Dorothy "Dotty" Henshaw, the Lord's eccentric and easily flustered cook/housekeeper who remains with the estate, and some preliminary location shooting was reportedly undertaken. This proposed spin-off series was ultimately not commissioned. In January 2023, Channel 5 aired a 67-minute special retrospective for their "Comedy Classics" series. Cast, crew and celebrities pay tribute to the show. The documentary features an interview with Routledge, who was 93 at the time, sharing her memories of the show, along with supporting cast members Judy Cornwell, Jeremy Gittins and David Janson. In 1998, the BBC released three episodes of the show: "Hyacinth tees off", "Rural Retreat", and "Sea Fever" on audio cassette. Clive Swift reprised his role as Richard recording a narrative to compensate for the lack of images. BBC Video released three videos featuring episodes from the series. How to Enhance Your Husband's Retirement This was released in 1993 and featured the episodes: "Iron Age Remains", "What to Wear when Yachting" and "How to Go on Holiday Without Really Trying". Sea Fever This was released in 1994 and featured the episodes: "Sea Fever" and "A Job for Richard". Rural Retreat This was released in 1995 and featured the episodes: "Country Retreat", "Let There Be Light" and "Please Mind Your Head". In the United States, the complete series was available via streaming through Netflix and Amazon Video. It was also made available for streaming on BritBox. In Australia the complete series was made available for streaming on Stan in 2018. In 2022, in the United Kingdom the entire series was made available on the BBC iPlayer. Three books related to the series have been released in the UK. Two were written by Jonathan Rice and published by BBC Books and the other one was written by Harold Snoad (the director of Keeping Up Appearances) and was published by Book Guild Publishing. Hyacinth Bucket's book of etiquette for the socially less fortunate This was first published in 1993, and is a light-hearted guide to manners, as seen through Hyacinth Bucket's eyes. It is based on the TV series' scripts and contains many black-and-white photos of scenes from the show. Hyacinth Bucket's Hectic Social Calendar This was published in 1995 and is presented in a diary format chronicling a year in Hyacinth Bucket's life, with typical comments about her relations and neighbours. It's Bouquet – Not Bucket This was published in late 2009, the book includes rare photos which were taken during the filming of Keeping Up Appearances. The book contains full plot synopses for all episodes, main cast details, filming locations for all episodes which used outside shots, and stories of some entertaining events which happened during filming. Due to the popularity of Keeping Up Appearances in the United States, books about the series have also been published across the Atlantic. Keeping Up Appearances: A Companion to the Series This comical series guidebook was published in the late 1990s by WLIW21. It was co-authored by mother-and-daughter writers Georgene and Mary Lee Costa. It features summary descriptions of each episode, cast and crew biographies, series photographs and an interview with Harold Snoad. Since it was written during the filming of the final series of episodes, Snoad included the co-authors of the guide as extras in the episode "The Fancy Dress Ball". In 2010, the television show was adapted into a play entitled Keeping Up Appearances that toured theatres in the UK. The cast included Rachel Bell as Hyacinth, Kim Hartman as Elizabeth, Gareth Hale as Onslow, Steven Pinder as Emmet, Debbie Arnold as Rose, David Janson (who had previously appeared in the TV show as the postman) as Mr Edward Milson, a new character created for the stage show, Christine Moore as Daisy and Sarah Whitlock as Mrs Debden. Main character Richard Bucket, Hyacinth's husband, does not appear in the production, but is frequently referred to: Hyacinth addresses him off-stage and talks to him on the phone. The main plot of the show revolves around Emmet directing a play at the local village hall, but when Hyacinth is cast in the play's leading role disaster is in the making. This adaptation, directed by playwright Johnny Culver, made its American premiere in New York City in March 2015, at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church Theater Fellowship/Jones Auditorium. Culver directed an additional production of this adaptation with performances on 5 August 2017 and 6 August 2017 at Saint Luke's Episcopal Church in Forest Hills, Queens. In 2015, it was announced that a prequel to the series entitled Young Hyacinth would be made, with original writer Roy Clarke returning to pen the script, following a 19-year-old Hyacinth Bucket during the early postwar years and set some forty years before the events of Keeping Up Appearances. The cast were announced on 11 April 2016. Hyacinth was played by Kerry Howard; Rose by Katie Redford; Daisy by Katherine Pearce; Violet by Tamla Kari and Daddy by Mark Addy. It was broadcast on BBC One on 2 September 2016. The prequel sees Hyacinth working as a maid and attempting to manage her family so they appear well above their means. In the special, Hyacinth is in a relationship with a Mr. William Hitchcock, whom Hyacinth forces to dress up and wear a hat when they walk. The special ends with her drunken Daddy falling into the canal, which Hyacinth's employers see, causing her great embarrassment. However, she blames Daddy's behaviour on "an old war injury". Approximately 4.14 million viewers watched the show within seven days of its broadcast, making it the 22nd-most-watched BBC One show for the week ending 4 September. A total of 4.39 million viewers watched the show within 28 days of its initial broadcast. The device of a humorously affected pronunciation of Bucket as Bouquet was used previously in the 1944 British comedy film Don't Take It to Heart. "100 Greatest TV Characters". Channel 4. Archived from the original on 31 May 2009. Retrieved 26 May 2019. Keeping Up Appearances. Series 5. Episode 3. Event occurs at 8:57. Yes, I'll give you my name and address. It's "Bouquet." B-u-c-k-e-t. No, it is "Bouquet." Keeping Up Appearances. Series 5. Episode 3. Event occurs at 19:28. It houses my Royal Doulton with the hand-painted periwinkles. Keeping Up Appearances. Series 5. Episode 1. Event occurs at 5:46. Keeping Up Appearances. Series 5. Episode 1. Event occurs at 1:03. Do you think Sheridan's voice is getting deeper?" "It's still asking for money, I know that. "Keeping Up Appearances". www.bbc.co.uk. Keeping Up Appearances. Series 5. Episode 3. Event occurs at 13:40. "Comedy Connections – Keeping Up Appearances". Comedy Connections. 26 July 2004. BBC. BBC One. "Bucket's Residence Street View". Google Maps. Retrieved 5 October 2014. "Onslow and Daisy's Street View". Google Maps. Retrieved 5 October 2014. "Keeping Up Appearances, TV Series, 1990–1995". imdcb.com. Retrieved 25 September 2011. Life Lessons from Onslow: A Keeping Up Appearances Special | Life Lessons from Onslow: A Keeping Up Appearances Special, retrieved 1 June 2021 "Life Lessons From Onslow: A Keeping Up Appearances Special". TVGuide.com. Retrieved 1 June 2021. Various (9 September 2008), Keeping Up Appearances: Onslow Special, BBC Home Entertainment, retrieved 1 June 2021 "BBC Radio 4 FM, 25 July 2009". www.genome.ch.bbc.co.uk. 25 July 2009. Archived from the original on 21 July 2019. Retrieved 14 June 2019. "My5". "Keeping Up AppearancesMy Way Or the Hyacinth Way". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up AppearancesHints from Hyacinth". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up AppearancesHome Is Where the Hyacinth Is". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – Deck the Halls with Hyacinth". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – Hyacinth in Full Bloom Set". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – Everything's Coming Up Hyacinth". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – Some Like It Hyacinth". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – Living the Hyacinth Life". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – Hats Off to Hyacinth". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – Hyacinth Springs Eternal Set". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – The Full Bouquet Set". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances Life Lessons from Onslow". swapadvd.com. 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances: The Full Bouquet – Special Edition". dvdtalk.com. 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances: Collector's Edition". barnesandnoble.com. 7 October 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – Series 1 & 2". comedy.co.uk. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – Series 3 & 4". comedy.co.uk. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – Series 5". comedy.co.uk. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – The Essential Collection [DVD]". amazon.co.uk. 8 October 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – The Complete Collection [DVD] [2013]". amazon.co.uk. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances – Christmas Specials". comedy.co.uk. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances: The Complete Collection". hmv.com. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "Keeping Up Appearances (Roy Clarke's) Series 1 & 2". Booktopia. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances (Roy Clarke's) Series 3 & 4". Booktopia. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances (Roy Clarke's) Series 5". Booktopia. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances Boxset". sanity.com.au. Archived from the original on 17 January 2019. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances (Roy Clarke's) Christmas Specials". Booktopia. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances (Roy Clarke's) Life Lessons From Onslow". Booktopia. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances: The Full Bouquet DVD". blu-ray.com. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Keeping Up Appearances - The Complete Collection". JB Hi-Fi. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Keeping Up Appearances: Season 1, Episode 1 "Daddy's Accident"". Amazon. Retrieved 3 July 2013. "Keeping up Appearances". Clarke, Roy; Rice, Jonathan (1993). Keeping Up Appearances: Hyacinth Bucket's Book of Etiquette for the Socially Less Fortunate. BBC Books. ISBN 978-0563369752. Rice, Jo; Clarke, Roy (1995). Hyacinth Bucket's Hectic Social Calendar. BBC Books. ISBN 978-0563371861. Snoad, Harold (2009). It's Bouquet – Not Bucket!. Book Guild. ISBN 978-1846243516. Berry, Kevin (3 June 2010). "Keeping Up Appearances". thestage.co.uk. Archived from the original on 31 May 2014. Retrieved 4 July 2013. Burbridge, Steve. "Theatre review: Keeping Up Appearances at Darlington Civic Theatre and touring". British Theatre Guide. Retrieved 4 July 2013. Barr, Gordon (12 June 2010). "Preview: Keeping Up Appearances, Playhouse Whitley Bay". The Chronicle. Archived from the original on 18 January 2015. Retrieved 4 July 2013. "Keeping Up Appearances". theaterscene.net. 12 March 2015. Retrieved 9 October 2022. Foster, Patrick (16 November 2015). "Keeping Up Appearances set to return as Young Hyacinth". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 21 November 2015. "Kerry Howard to play Young Hyacinth in a special prequel to Keeping Up Appearances for BBC One". BBC. 11 April 2016. Retrieved 15 April 2016. "Young Hyacinth". BBC. Retrieved 27 April 2017. Warner, Sam (11 April 2016). "Keeping Up Appearances remake casts Kerry Howard as a young Hyacinth". Digital Spy. Retrieved 12 April 2016. Harp, Justin (11 April 2016). "Sacked Coronation Street star Katie Redford lands a new role in the Keeping Up Appearances prequel". Digital Spy. Retrieved 12 April 2016. "Weekly top 30 programmes". Broadcasters' Audience Research Board. Retrieved 27 April 2017. Look up room for a pony in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikiquote has quotations related to Keeping Up Appearances. Keeping Up Appearances at BBC Online Keeping Up Appearances at BBC Online Keeping Up Appearances at British Comedy Guide Keeping Up Appearances at epguides.com Keeping Up Appearances at IMDb Keeping Up Appearances at the BFI's Screenonline