This list of countries by life expectancy provides a comprehensive list of countries alongside their respective life expectancy figures. The data is differentiated by sex, presenting life expectancies for males, females, and a combined average. In addition to sovereign nations, the list encompasses several non-sovereign entities and territories. The figures serve as an indicator of the quality of healthcare in the respective countries and are influenced by various factors, including the prevalence of diseases such as HIV/AIDS. This article introduces the concept of Healthy life expectancy (HALE), which denotes the average number of years a person is expected to live in "full health". There are challenges in comparing life expectancies across countries due to disparities in data reporting and collection standards. The primary source of the most recent data presented is the World Bank Group's 2021 report. The life expectancy is shown separately for males and for females, as well as a combined figure. Several non-sovereign entities and territories are also included in this list. The figures reflect the quality of healthcare in the countries listed as well as other factors including HIV infections. From the beginning of the current century there is a tendency to also estimate Healthy life expectancy (HALE), the average number of years that a person can expect to live in "full health". Comparing life expectancies across countries can be problematic. For example, due to poor reporting in some countries and various local standards in collecting statistics. This is especially true for Healthy life expectancy, the definition of which criteria may change over time, even within a country. For example, Canada is a country with a fairly high overall life expectancy at 81.63 years; however, this number decreases to 75.5 years for Indigenous people in the country. This discrepancy is echoed in most quality of life metrics across Canada. Estimation of the World Bank Group for 2021. Only countries with populations over 50,000 are listed. The values in the World Bank Group tables are rounded. All calculations were done on raw data, therefore, due to the nuances of rounding, in some places illusory inconsistencies of indicators arose, with a size of 0.01 year. Shown is the "period life expectancy" at birth. This is the average number of years a newborn would live if age-specific mortality rates in the current year were to stay the same throughout its life. The data is taken from the 2020 and 2022 United Nations World Population Prospects. It is also used to calculate the Human Development Index. Only countries with populations over 50,000 are listed. Due to this criterion, the table does not include Monaco (LE 85.9 years, population 39,000). By default, the list is sorted by 2021. Data for 2021 can also be viewed via Our World in Data. According to data published by the World Health Organization in December 2020. By default, data is sorted by life expectancy at birth for all population, and in case of equal values by HALE for all population. The US CIA published the following life expectancy data in its World Factbook. Estimation of OECD for 2022. By default, the list is sorted by 2019. List of countries by total health expenditure per capita List of countries by past life expectancy List of European countries by life expectancy List of European regions by life expectancy List of Asian countries by life expectancy List of North American countries by life expectancy List of South American countries by life expectancy List of African countries by life expectancy List of Oceanian countries by life expectancy List of U.S. states and territories by life expectancy List of federal subjects of Russia by life expectancy List of world regions by life expectancy Oldest people "Healthy life expectancy (HALE) at 60 (years)". World Health Organization. "Health Status Statistics: Mortality". World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. https://www.nwac.ca/assets-knowledge-centre/Healthy-Aging-Report.pdf "Life expectancy at birth, total". The World Bank Group. 29 June 2023. Retrieved 6 July 2023. "Life expectancy at birth, male". The World Bank Group. 29 June 2023. Retrieved 6 July 2023. "Life expectancy at birth, female". The World Bank Group. 29 June 2023. Retrieved 6 July 2023. Government of Canada, Statistics Canada (24 January 2022). "Life expectancy and other elements of the complete life table, single-year estimates, Canada, all provinces except Prince Edward Island". www150.statcan.gc.ca. Retrieved 1 December 2023. "Human Development Report 2020 (tables 1 and 4)" (PDF). UN Development Programme. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 December 2020. Retrieved 28 February 2021. "Human Development Report 2021/2022 (tables 1 and 4)" (PDF). UN Development Programme. Retrieved 28 June 2023. "Population & Demography Data Explorer". Retrieved 3 July 2023. "Life expectancy and Healthy life expectancy, data by country". World Health Organization. 4 December 2022. "Life expectancy and Healthy life expectancy, data by WHO region". World Health Organization. 7 December 2022. "The World Factbook". Central Intelligence Agency. "Life expectancy at birth - The World Factbook". www.cia.gov. Retrieved 27 July 2022. "OECD Data: Life expectancy at birth". OECD. 17 December 2023. Global Agewatch Archived 3 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine has the latest internationally comparable statistics on life expectancy from 195 countries. Life expectancy trends interactive graph Life expectancy interactive world map Global Life Expectancy (Infographic)|LiveScience U.S. States life expectancy compared to the world (Infographic & Study)|Simply Insurance