The Emperor's Club is a 2002 American drama film directed by Michael Hoffman and starring Kevin Kline. Based on Ethan Canin's 1994 short story "The Palace Thief", the film follows a prep school teacher and his students at a fictional East Coast boys' prep school, St. Benedict's Academy. In the early 1970s, William Hundert is a revered classics teacher at Saint Benedict's, a boys' boarding school for the sons of wealthy families. Hundert attempts to impart wisdom and a sense of honor to his students. He begins the new school year by making student Martin Blythe read a plaque that hangs over his door. It contains a statement by an ancient Mesopotamian ruler, Shutruk Nahunte. The plaque sings Shutruk Nahunte's praises, but Hundert explains that he contributed nothing of value to his kingdom, and as a result is virtually forgotten today. Hundert's disciplined life and classroom are shaken when a new student, Sedgewick Bell, is enrolled in the middle of the term. Sedgewick, the underachieving, spoiled son of a U.S. senator from West Virginia, frequently disrupts class and does poorly in his homework, even breaks rules by traveling off campus, across the lake to St. Mary's, a girls' boarding school. Hundert meets with Sedgewick's father, Hiram Bell, to talk about his behavior, only to discover that Hiram has minimal interest in Sedgewick's education beyond the passing of his classes. Hundert decides to help Sedgewick, and as they develop a friendship, Sedgewick's grades show improvement. Sedgewick works very hard to earn a spot in the school's annual "Mr. Julius Caesar contest", in which the top three students compete in a classics quiz in front of the entire school. However, Sedgewick only qualifies in fourth place. Hundert, not wanting his efforts with Sedgewick to be all for naught, raises his grade to qualify, which effectively excludes Martin, the rightful third-place contestant. During the competition, Hundert spies Sedgewick using crib notes, but Mr. Woodbridge, the headmaster orders Hundert to ignore it, as Sedgewick's father is a major donor for the school. Hundert then deliberately asks Sedgewick a question on Hamilcar Barca which was not covered in class; it is answered correctly by another contestant who was reading about Roman wars on his own time, Deepak Mehta, who is crowned "Mr. Julius Caesar". The cheating is never made public, but the trust Sedgewick and Hundert had in each other is broken. Sedgewick returns to his old ways and barely graduates in 1976, with Hundert expressing deep disappointment that he failed Sedgewick. Twenty-five years later, Mr. Woodbridge passes away, and Hundert is poised to become the new headmaster, but resigns in shock when a less experienced colleague gets the position due to his fundraising ability. Hundert is later told that Sedgewick, now a wealthy corporate CEO, will make a large donation to Saint Benedict's, contingent upon Hundert hosting a Mr. Julius Caesar rematch at Sedgewick's resort hotel on the Gold Coast, Long Island. The other members of Sedgewick's graduating class are also invited, and all enjoy the reunion. The three original contestants begin the competition, but as it progresses, Hundert realizes that Sedgewick is once again cheating by being fed answers through an earpiece. Hundert asks a question about Shutruk Nahunte, which all the students find laughably easy; however, Sedgewick is unable to answer it. Deepak answers correctly and once again wins. Afterward, Sedgewick formally announces that he is following in the footsteps of his father, now deceased, by running for a seat in the U.S. Senate. While the men applaud, Hundert is appalled that he was used for political grandstanding. After the announcement, Hundert and Sedgewick run into each other in the men's room, leading to a confrontation between the two. Sedgewick tells Hundert that in the real world, dishonesty trumps principles, and that Hundert has let life pass him by. Sedgewick's words are overheard by his young son, who is shocked to learn the truth about his father. That evening at the hotel bar, Hundert apologizes to Martin and admits that he gave his spot to Sedgewick in the competition years ago. Martin tentatively forgives him. The following morning, the resort is apparently empty; however, Hundert is then greeted by a surprise party held in his honor by his former students, who present to him an award engraved with a quote about education. The men wave goodbye to Hundert as he departs in a helicopter, and he reflects that while he failed with Sedgewick Bell, he succeeded with other students. Hundert returns to his old job teaching classics in the present-day Saint Benedict's, now coeducational and more diverse. His class includes Martin's son, Martin Blythe IV. Hundert peers outside the window to see the older Blythe gladly waving to his old teacher. Hundert has the younger Blythe read the plaque above the door. Kevin Kline as William Hundert Emile Hirsch as Sedgewick Bell Joel Gretsch as adult Sedgewick Embeth Davidtz as Elizabeth Rob Morrow as James Ellerby Edward Herrmann as Headmaster Woodbridge Harris Yulin as Senator Hiram Bell Paul Dano as Martin Blythe Steven Culp as adult Martin Jesse Eisenberg as Louis Masoudi Patrick Dempsey as adult Louis Rishi Mehta as Deepak Mehta Rahul Khanna as adult Deepak Caitlin O'Heaney as Mrs. Woodbridge Gabriel Millman as Robert Brewster Tim Realbuto as Jackson Pheiffer Chris Morales as Eugene Field Luca Bigini as Copeland Gray Michael Coppola as Russell Hall Sean Fredricks as Mr. Harris Katherine O'Sullivan as The Nun Jimmy Walsh as Robert Bell Nick Hagelin as Martin Blythe IV The film, originally titled The Palace Thief, was first developed at Fine Line Features, with Kevin Kline reportedly in talks to star and direct. The production went into turnaround and was acquired by Universal Pictures. Michael Hoffman, who had previously collaborated with Kline on Soapdish and A Midsummer Night's Dream, was announced to direct. Principal photography took place in New York City from May to June 2001. The school campus scenes were filmed at the Emma Willard School in Troy, New York. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, The Emperor's Club holds a 50% approval rating based on 128 reviews with an average rating on 5.80/10. The website's critics consensus reads: "Though Kline is excellent in his portrayal of Hundert, the movie is too dull and sentimental to distinguish itself from other titles in its genre." On Metacritic, the film had an average score of 49 out of 100, based on 32 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews". The performances of Kline and Hirsch were lauded, with some saying the former "manages a mix of quiet joy and melancholic disillusionment within the confines of a very reserved role", and others noting the latter plays Sedgewick with "a intuitive brew of cunning, charm and malice". Roger Ebert gave the film three stars and praised the complexity of Hundert's flawed character, noting that as "a portrait of the escalator that speeds the sons of the rich upward toward power, it is unusually realistic". However, multiple critics pointed out the film is weakened by its sentimentality and muddled messaging. The Chicago Tribune's Michael Wilmington said the film "boasts lots of talent" and has the potential to explore "some unusual themes" about ethics and values, but ultimately gives in to plot contrivances and improbabilities. David Stratton of At the Movies opined, "It's decently made, decently acted and moderately interesting but, in the end, pretty forgettable. When it finally gets to the point, which is a potentially interesting one about the duplicity of some sections of the Establishment, interest has waned." Many also opined the film hews too closely to the clichés of the "inspirational teacher" film genre. A.O. Scott of The New York Times said, "The younger actors, especially Mr. Dano and Jesse Eisenberg, as a bright, skittish boy named Masoudi, have the right mix of anxiety and bravado, but the St. Benedict's boys are as thinly conceived as the minor adult characters." He added Hundert "is less a person than a walking moral problem and is in fact more interesting as an ethical puzzle than as a psychological study". Robert Koehler of Variety noted that in the film's third act, the casting of the older students "doesn’t jibe physically with their younger selves." Others lamented the changes from the original short story. Writing for The Washington Post, Stephen Hunter commented, "Where complexity within the characters is suggested, it's quickly milled out in the generic spirit of sentimentality about the school experience. Where the original ending may have been bittersweet and full of self-recrimination, this ending is triumphant and self-congratulatory. You walk out yearning for the rebellious, grungy untidiness of real kids". At the 24th Young Artist Awards in 2003, the film received nominations for Best Family Feature Film – Drama, and for Best Performance in a Feature Film – Supporting Young Actor for Emile Hirsch. Goodbye, Mr. Chips (1934), a novella by James Hilton about a classics teacher at a British boarding school, exploring his legacy and the lives he touched "The Changing of the Guard", a June 1, 1962, episode of The Twilight Zone starring Donald Pleasence as a retiring English teacher at a New England boys' school, who questions whether or not he has made any difference in his students' lives Dead Poets Society (1989), a similar drama film set in a boys' preparatory school, about a teacher influencing a class of young men Mona Lisa Smile (2003), a similar drama film set in a girls' college, about a teacher influencing a class of young women In the House (2012), another film about a complicated instructor–student relationship "The Emperor's Club (PG)". British Board of Film Classification. November 7, 2002. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2013. "The Emperor's Club". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 12, 2020. Cox, Dan (March 29, 1999). "Fine Line breaks into Canin's 'Palace Thief'". Variety. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Brodesser, Claude; Lyons, Charles (February 7, 2000). "Kline to helm 'Palace Thief'". Variety. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Goodridge, Mike (February 13, 2001). "Beacon, UPI reteam to sell The Palace Thief". Screen Daily. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Cannistraci, Casey (March 28, 2001). "Emma Willard hosts Hollywood". Troy Record. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Kennedy, Dana (September 8, 2002). "THE NEW SEASON/MOVIES -- UP AND COMING; 17 Years Old And Gravely Going on 40". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 14, 2023. "The Emperor's Club". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved October 1, 2007. "The Emperor's Club, (2002)". Metacritic. Retrieved October 1, 2007. Wilmington, Michael (November 22, 2002). "'Emperor's Club' puts unlikely premise on a throne". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on February 13, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Koehler, Robert (September 10, 2002). "The Emperor's Club". Variety. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Germain, David (November 22, 2002). "At the Movies: 'The Emperor's Club'". The Edwardsville Intelligencer. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Wuntch, Philip (November 22, 2002). "The Emperor's Club". Dallas Morning News. Archived from the original on December 15, 2002. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Ebert, Roger (November 22, 2002). "The Emperor's Club". RogerEbert.com. Retrieved July 12, 2020. Morgan, Kim (November 22, 2002). "'Club' dumbs down the ethics lessons". The Oregonian. Archived from the original on December 18, 2002. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Clark, Mike (November 21, 2002). "Kline makes a game of 'Emperor's Club'". USATODAY.com. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Tobias, Scott (November 22, 2002). "The Emperor's Club". The A.V. Club. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Schickel, Richard (December 2, 2002). "Outer and Inner Space". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Hunter, Stephen (November 22, 2002). "'Emperor's Club': Dead Romans Society". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 26, 2002. Retrieved February 14, 2023. "The Emperor's Club Review". SBS TV Australia. January 2009. Baumgarten, Marjorie (November 22, 2002). "The Emperor's Club". Austin Chronicle. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Turan, Kenneth (November 22, 2002). "Hello again, Mr. Chips". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 1, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Sragow, Michael (November 22, 2022). "A 'Club' with much left to learn". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on November 29, 2002. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Groen, Rick (November 22, 2002). "Teach is all preach and no practice". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on November 24, 2002. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Scott, A. O. (November 22, 2002). "Film Review; When a Moralistic Teacher Has to Face Up to His Code". The New York Times. Retrieved July 12, 2020. Sartin, Hank (November 22, 2002). "The Emperor's Club". Chicago Reader. Retrieved February 15, 2023. "24th Annual Young Artist Awards". YoungArtistAwards.org. Archived from the original on December 4, 2016. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Wikiquote has quotations related to The Emperor's Club. The Emperor's Club at IMDb The Emperor's Club at AllMovie The Emperor's Club at Rotten Tomatoes