The University of Bialystok is the largest university in the north-eastern region of Poland, educating in various fields of study, including humanities, social and natural sciences and mathematics. It has nine faculties, including a foreign one in Vilnius. Four faculties have been awarded the highest scientific category “A”. The University of Bialystok has the right to confer doctoral degrees in ten fields, as well as postdoctoral degrees in law, economics, chemistry, biology, history and physics. Over 13,000 students are being educated in 31 fields of study, including doctoral studies and postgraduate studies. The university employs nearly 800 academics, almost 200 professors among them. Every year the university carries out approximately 60 research projects, financed from domestic and foreign funds; it also benefits from the structural funds. Among the university's many accomplishments are its participation in 6th and 7th Framework Programme for Research, Technological Development and Demonstration, Horizon 2020, Comenius and Aspera as well as the DAPHNE III programme. University of Białystok was opened on June 19, 1997. The university was established as a result of a transformation of the Branch of the University of Warsaw in Białystok after 29 years of its existence. The university has a branch in Vilnius, Lithuania. The University of Bialystok Foundation, Universitas Bialostocensis (Polish: Fundacja Uniwersytetu w Białymstoku Universitas Bialostocensis) - independent, non-profit, non-governmental organization located in Białystok, Poland. Foundation was chartered on April 22, 2004, by founders from the academic circles of the University of Bialystok. Foundation is governed by an independent Board of Directors. Foundation aims organizational, material and financial support for the academic excellence and future development of the University of Bialystok. It runs such activities as: lectures, seminars, conferences, courses and workshops, business and legal consulting, participation in EU funding programs, providing financial support for academic projects and student scholarships, support students’ organizations at the University of Bialystok Adam Jamróz (1997–2002) Marek Gębczyński (2002–2005) Jerzy Nikitorowicz (2005–2012) Leonard Etel (2012-2016) Robert CIborowski (since 2016) Professors: 162 Habilitated doctors: 7 Senior lecturers: 291 Teachers (total): 348 Total staff: 808 Number of students: 15 034 International cooperation is also carried out based on about 200 bilateral agreements with institutions from the EU within the framework of the Erasmus programme. As the first university in the country the University of Bialystok launched a foreign branch in Vilnius, Lithuania; the Faculty of Economics and Informatics has been created there, which educates people of mostly Polish origin, but it is also increasingly popular among the Lithuanian youth. In 2013 the University of Bialystok initiated the creation of an international consortium of universities from Poland, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine and Russia under the name of Border University Network. It is composed of 10 universities. Cooperation shall include applying jointly for international grants, joint research projects, exchange of research and implementation services. Faculty of Biology Biology Eco-Business Biological Sciences Faculty of Chemistry Chemistry Forensic and Criminal Chemistry Environmental Protection Chemical Sciences Faculty of Economics and Finance Economics (Bachelor's and Master's degrees) Economic and Legal Studies (Bachelor's and Master's degrees) International Economic Relations (Bachelor's and Master's degrees) Faculty of Philology Polish Philology Philology with specializations: English Philology English Philology with German English Philology with Spanish English Philology with Russian French Philology (educational offer for candidates starting French language from scratch) French Language (from scratch) with English – translation profile Applied French Language with Spanish (educational offer for candidates starting French language from scratch) Russian Philology (for candidates starting Russian language from scratch) Russian Philology (for candidates with knowledge of Russian) Russian Philology – Language Communication in Business Faculty of Physics Physics, full-time studies, first degree Physics, full-time studies, second degree Doctoral studies in physics, full-time studies Postgraduate Physics studies Faculty of History and International Relations History (Bachelor's and Master's degrees) International Relations (Bachelor's and Master's degrees) Eastern Studies (Bachelor's degree) Faculty of Mathematics Theoretical Mathematics (Bachelor's and Master's degrees) Financial Mathematics (Bachelor's and Master's degrees) Information Security (Bachelor's degree) Data Analysis and Modeling (Master's degree) Faculty of Education Sciences Pedagogy, full-time studies, first degree Social Work, full-time studies, first degree Pedagogy, full-time studies, second degree Social Work, full-time studies, second degree Faculty of Law Administration, full-time studies, first degree National Security, full-time studies, first degree Criminology, full-time studies, first degree Law, full-time integrated Master's degree Administration, full-time studies, second degree National Security, full-time studies, second degree Criminology, full-time studies, second degree Administration, part-time studies, first degree National Security, part-time studies, first degree Criminology, part-time studies, first degree Administration, part-time studies, second degree National Security, part-time studies, second degree Criminology, part-time studies, second degree Law, part-time integrated Master's degree Tax Advisory, full-time studies, second degree Tax Advisory, part-time studies, second degree Institute of Philosophy Philosophy and Ethics (Bachelor's degree) Philosophy 2º (Master's degree) Cognitive Science and Communication (Bachelor's degree) Institute of Informatics Computer Science (Bachelor's and Master's degrees) Computer Science and Econometrics (Bachelor's degree) Institute of Sociology Sociology (Bachelor's and Master's degrees) Sociology, specialization in Social Communication (Master's degree) Institute of Cultural Studies Cultural Studies, specialization in Media and Communication Cultural Studies, specialization in Advertising and Public Relations Cultural Studies, specialization in Film Studies and Media Studies Cultural Studies, specialization in Digital Media Communication Cultural Studies, specialization in Podlasie Culture Institute of Management Management, specialization in Enterprise Management Management, specialization in Sales Management Management, specialization in Enterprise Management Management, specialization in Psychology in Management Faculty of Economics and Informatics in Vilnius Economics, full-time studies, first degree Computer Science, full-time studies, first degree European Studies, full-time studies, first degree Economics, full-time studies, second degree "QS World University Rankings-Emerging Europe & Central Asia". Retrieved 15 January 2023. EUROPE 2005 The Second International Students’ Meeting in Bialystok "Calendar of Internationalism Archive past events 2005". Archived from the original on 2012-02-18. Retrieved 2012-05-15. 3rd International Students' Meeting Europe 2006 The Foundation for the Preservation of Jewish Heritage in Poland Annual Report 2008 Official Foundation website 53°7′40″N 23°9′30″E﻿ / ﻿53.12778°N 23.15833°E﻿ / 53.12778; 23.15833 Wikimedia Commons has media related to University of Białystok.