Norodom Sihamoni (Khmer: នរោត្តម សីហមុនី, [nɔˈroːɗɑm səjˈhamoniː]; born 14 May 1953) is King of Cambodia. He became King on 14 October 2004, a week after the abdication of his father, Norodom Sihanouk. He is the eldest son of King Sihanouk and former Queen consort Norodom Monineath and is the fourth monarch from the royal House of Norodom. Before his selection by a nine-member throne council as the next monarch, Sihamoni served as Cambodia's ambassador to the United Nations and UNESCO. He was educated in Czechoslovakia and was known for his work as a cultural ambassador in Europe and as a classical ballet instructor when he was still a prince. During his reign, Sihamoni has continued his cultural advocacy alongside supporting various philanthropic causes, while balancing his role as a constitutional monarch amid Cambodia’s political developments. Sihamoni was born on Thursday 14 May 1953, in Phnom Penh, Cambodia when it was still a colonial protectorate within French Indochina. The prince’s birth at the time was viewed as a positive omen as Cambodia gained independence from France later in that year. His given name "Sihamoni" comprises two morphemes from his parents' given names "Sihanouk" and "Monineath". As for "Norodom", this means Narottam in Pali and Prakrit, which translates to 'the best amongst men'. The name has a similar meaning in Khmer as well. At the time of his birth and that of his younger brother, his mother Princess Monique who is of Khmer, French and Corsican descent, had been one of King Norodom Sihanouk's consorts after being a constant companion since the day they met in 1951, when she won first prize in a national beauty contest. The queen was granted the title of Neak Moneang and the name of Monineath at the time of her marriage to King Norodom Sihanouk in 1952. Furthermore, Queen Monineath is a step-granddaughter of the late Prince Norodom Duong Chakr of Cambodia, and the daughter of Pomme Peang and of her second husband, Jean-François Izzi, a Corsican banker. Sihamoni has 14 half-brothers and half-sisters by his father; his only full sibling, a younger brother, Samdech Norodom Narindrapong, was born in 1954 and died in 2003. The then-Prince Sihamoni first began his education in 1959, where he attended Norodom School, followed by Lycée Descartes School in Phnom Penh, developing a keen interest in the arts early on in his life. In 1962 the young Sihamoni was sent to Prague in Czechoslovakia by his father to study abroad. There, he completed his early education at Majakovskeho Primary School and later at Ostrovni Elementary School. When he was in his preadolescence years, he starred in a production of Pyotr Tchaikovsky's The Nutcracker at the prestigious Prague National Theatre, where he pursued private ballet and piano classes and was once even selected for a television rendition of Brundibár, a well-known children's opera. He then concluded his secondary education at the National Prague Conservatory and was regarded as an able student, getting high marks. Here, he further developed his interest in the performing arts, undertaking courses in this field and excelling at the top of his class. Furthermore, he attained great fluency in Czech. A movie directed by Vladimir Sís was shot about the prince in Prague in 1967, under the name The Other Little Prince (Jiný malý princ). The prince would occasionally visit his homeland for holidays of which when he did, he involved himself in Cambodia's arts and cultural scene, including starring in a film made by his father and performing ballet. During the 1970 coup d'état by Lon Nol that saw Sihanouk removed from power and a Khmer Republic being proclaimed, exacerbating the Cambodian Civil War, Sihamoni remained in Czechoslovakia. Between 1971 and 1975, Sihamoni completed his higher education in classical dance and music at the Academy of Performing Arts in Prague, culminating with the attainment of a Master's degree for which he wrote a thesis titled The Conception and Administration of Artistic Schools in Cambodia. After graduation in 1975, he left Prague and began to study filmmaking in North Korea at the National Academy of Cinematography in Pyongyang. The fall of Phnom Penh on 17 April 1975 led to the demise of the Khmer Republic and the creation of Democratic Kampuchea by the Khmer Rouge who oversaw a brutal campaign of genocide. In the following year of 1976, Sihamoni was forced to come back to Cambodia after having been deceived by the Khmer Rouge with a forged telegram, undersigned by King Sihanouk ordering his return. Immediately, the ruling Khmer Rouge regime headed by Pol Pot turned against the monarchy, and put the royal family including Sihamoni, his brother Prince Norodom Narindrapong, his mother Queen Norodom Monineath, his father King Norodom Sihanouk under house arrest in the Royal Palace. The consequent Cambodian genocide saw several members of the wider royal family killed and Sihamoni and his immediate family lived in daily fear for their lives, effectively shut off from the outside world. Throughout their period of house arrest, the prince recounted how they were prohibited from making contact with anyone and was barred from having any staff. The Khmer Rouge soldiers would give them food consisting of rice and fish that was limited to two times a week and they had to for the most part, cultivate their own food from the palace gardens. With the Cambodian–Vietnamese War, which resulted in the ousting of the Khmer Rouge in 1979 and the establishment of the Vietnamese installed People's Republic of Kampuchea, the family, aided by the Chinese government, was airlifted to China. Sihamoni subsequently worked as a secretary for his father who spearheaded a resistance movement in response to the Vietnamese occupation. In 1981 Sihamoni moved to France to teach ballet as a professor of classical dance and artistic pedagogy, a position which he held for almost two decades, at various conservatoires, including the Marius Petipa Conservatory, the Gabriel Faure Conservatory and the W.A. Mozart Conservatory. He was also later president of the Khmer Dance Association there. He lived in France for nearly 20 years and continued his pursuit in the arts, establishing 'Ballet Deva', an original dance troupe, in which he served as its General Manager and Artistic Director, alongside heading the Royal Khmer Cinematic Corporation. In his line of work, he placed emphasis on giving opportunities for men to feature more prominently in traditional Khmer dance where they are often not assigned leading roles when he created "Duel", a unique ballet style inspired by the Russian ballet. During this overseas period, for a time, he also entered into the monkhood under the auspices of Samdech Bour Kry, who would later become a supreme patriarch of Cambodia. In the early 1990s, Cambodia's Supreme National Council, which was recognized by United Nations Security Council Resolution 668 as part of the transitional process in the country pursuant to the 1991 Paris Peace Agreements, unanimously selected Prince Sihamoni in 1992 as its permanent representative to the United Nations, which he served until 1993. That same year of 1993 saw the restoration of the monarchy, with Sihanouk returning as King and the prince being appointed as Cambodia's permanent representative to UNESCO in Paris, a role he held right until he became King in 2004. In this role, Sihamoni became known for his hard work and devotion to Cambodian culture as seen by his advocacy for the international recognition of Khmer classical ballet and shadow theatre as an intangible cultural heritage. He had previously refused an appointment as Cambodia's ambassador to France. In October 2003, he was additionally appointed as a High Privy Counselor to then-King Norodom Sihanouk. On 14 October 2004, Sihamoni was chosen as monarch by the Royal Council of the Throne, a special nine-member constitutional body that is tasked with electing the King of Cambodia. This selection process was quickly put into place after the surprise abdication of King Norodom Sihanouk the week before. At that time, there was no provisions in the nation’s constitution that covered the subject of abdication. Prince Sihamoni's selection was endorsed by Prime Minister Hun Sen and the then National Assembly President Prince Norodom Ranariddh (Sihamoni's half-brother), both members of the throne council. King Sihanouk backed the decision as well. A few years before his selection, there was speculation about potential succession after he was seen deputizing on Sihanouk's behalf at official functions despite him being rarely seen in public, although much of the initial speculation focused on Ranariddh who was the preferred choice of his parents, but who ultimately expressed disinterest in acceding to the throne. Sihamoni was said to have been reluctant to take on the stately role, but nevertheless accepted it in the national interest, returning on 20 October to Phnom Penh, accompanied by his parents, King-Father Norodom Sihanouk and Queen-Mother Norodom Monineath, to an estimated 100,000 people who lined their motorcade route from Phnom Penh International Airport to the Royal Palace to welcome the soon-to-be King. Then-Prince Sihamoni's accession to the throne was reflected upon by journalist Michael Sheridan of The Sunday Times whom on 17 October 2004 remarked: The extraordinary story of the aesthete who flies home this week to become king of Cambodia — and of the men who nearly had him killed — can be summed up for most people in the capital, Phnom Penh by the tale of two buildings on the banks of the Mekong River. One is the glorious golden-roofed royal palace, gaily illuminated by hundreds of festive lights in celebration of the announcement that the bachelor prince, Norodom Sihamoni, is to succeed his father King Norodom Sihanouk . . . Within its walls, father and son endured captivity at the hands of the Khmer Rouge, not knowing from day to day whether the revolutionaries might order their murder. The other building is the concrete 1950s Chaktamuk theatre, nearby, where the surviving members of the Khmer Rouge regime, most now frail old men, are expected to face trial for genocide before an internationally funded tribunal. Two momentous dramas in Cambodia's modern history - the chequered rule of King Sihanouk and the [Khmer Rouge’s] blood-drenched attempt to create a Marxist utopia - are therefore drawing to a close at the same time. Sheridan's reflection encapsulated the symbolism of the moment in Cambodia's monarchical transition as these two indelible chapters etched into its national story; the undisputed significance of King Sihanouk's influential rule and the undeniably traumatic genocidal rule of the Khmer Rouge are juxtaposed with one another as the country entered a new historical era under the reign of King Sihamoni. He was then inaugurated and formally appointed as King on 29 October 2004 in a coronation ceremony centered at the Royal Palace in the capital. The coronation was noted for its relative simplicity, which was specifically requested by King-Father Sihanouk. King Sihamoni himself did not want the ceremonies to be too lavish because he did not wish for the impoverished country to spend too much money on the event, opting for a more modest affair. In a break with precedent, Sihamoni did not assume his seat on the higher, elevated throne nor did he wear the gold-and-diamond monarchial crown that came with the royal regalia. In his first public speech as monarch, he acknowledged words of wisdom imparted to him by his father and pledged to be a king of the people by saying: My august father, at the very moment of my election as King of Cambodia by the highly respected Throne Council, said to me . . . 'it is by being in contact with the people and the realities of the country that one learns how to become more and more capable of serving, defending and developing Cambodia and the Cambodian nation.' My respected and beloved compatriots, I will always be your faithful and devoted servant. I will never live apart from the beloved people. The Royal House will remain a transparent house and for me there will never be an ivory tower. — King Norodom Sihamoni In the first six months after his coronation, Sihamoni ensured to pay regular visits to his fellow Cambodians, especially those in the provinces and countryside, including occasionally making surprise visits. He was praised by observers for "being close to the people and having a gentle touch", though they also noted he still needed time to independently carve out his own role as monarch amid the influential role of his father, former King Sihanouk, notwithstanding his abdication. On 29 October 2014, there were celebrations to mark the 10th anniversary of his coronation. Well-wishers representing different cross sections of the kingdom's population congregated outside the royal palace to commemorate the occasion and pay their respects to the King. On 12 December 2008, it was reported that Sihamoni had selected twenty-six members of the Cambodian royal family to his advisory court, among them his half-brother and former Prime Minister Prince Norodom Ranariddh as chief advisor and president of the council. Other choices included Prince Sisowath Sirirath, Princess Norodom Marie (estranged wife of Prince Ranariddh) and Prince Sisowath Thomico. The King's half-sister and Cambodia's former Ambassador to Malaysia, Princess Norodom Arunrasmy and uncle, Prince Norodom Sirivudh were also duly appointed members. The appointments was seen at the time by observers as signaling the cessation of royal family members participating in politics as theoretically, the constitution did not allow individuals to concurrently serve in both the royal court and government. Indeed, royalism has long been a staple in Cambodian political history, with periods where royalist parties had once governed the country, such as the Sangkum of then-Prince Sihanouk in the 1950s and 1960s and the FUNCINPEC party of Prince Ranariddh in the 1990s. Responding to the commentary, some ruling party officials and members of the royal family insisted that there was no agenda behind the move, and that it should not be construed as the prohibition or end of royal political involvement, despite the influence and electoral success of royalist political parties having waned significantly over time. In late July 2023, upon the resignation of Prime Minister Hun Sen, it was announced that the King will appoint him to take up the position as head of the council, succeeding Ranariddh who had died in 2021. This coincided with the announcement that National Assembly President Heng Samrin, Interior Minister Sar Kheng, Defence Minister Tea Banh, and National Assembly-Senate Relations and Inspection Minister Men Sam An, the latter three of whom concurrently served as Deputy Prime Ministers, will too be appointed as privy counsellors once they have relinquished their respective positions. The appointments came into effect later in the following month. On 4 September 2023, the King made additional appointments to the council that included former Foreign Minister Hor Namhong and former Supreme Court President Dith Munty. The King has limited political powers and rarely gets involved in the Cambodian political space, in conformance with his position as a constitutional monarch, and is considered to be 'above politics'. Some Cambodian opposition figures, however, have called for him to be more vocal and directly involved in the political issues of the country, like his predecessor, King-father Norodom Sihanouk was, contending that the King has the constitutional prerogative to do so, in terms of powers accorded to him. Conversely, others have cautioned against this notion, citing that the constitution strictly warrants for a predominantly ceremonial monarch that "shall reign but shall not govern", noting that resorting to political intervention is neither in the long-term interests of the monarchy nor nation, and Sihamoni, since the outset of his reign, has pledged and adhered to a largely apolitical stance. Indeed, during the monarchical selection process, King Sihanouk touted then Prince Sihamoni's neutral and impartial approach to politics as a key trait for why he is suited to the role. This is reinforced by analysis from observers that Sihamoni "has represented both continuity and change — withdrawing royalty from active politics, but advancing it as a symbol of national reconciliation", thereby restoring the "monarchy's traditional role as an 'umbrella' under which Cambodians could unite." In turn, observers argue that this limits any politicization of the monarchy as an institution whilst maintaining its neutrality as well as legitimacy, especially amid the context of the sometimes controversial and turbulent nature of Cambodian politics. Nevertheless, there has been several occasions where Sihamoni's reluctance to be involved in the political arena have been tested. In 2005, in the first major political challenge of his reign, it was reported that he was hesitant to authorize the royal assent for the government's plans to give effect to a controversial border treaty with neighbouring Vietnam, which was compounded by his predecessor, King-father Sihanouk's objection. This apparently caused tension with the government after Prime Minister Hun Sen expressed frustration about the royal assent delay to the point that abolition of the monarchy was suggested. Sihamoni eventually signed the treaty, after having been assured by government and legislative officials as well as other members of the royal family, that no land would be ceded to Vietnam as a result of the promulgation of the bilateral treaty. In 2006, at the government's petition, he granted a pardon to leading opposition politicians, namely Sam Rainsy and Cheam Channy, who originally had their parliamentary immunity annulled and were facing charges viewed as politically motivated. In regards to Rainsy, he was embroiled in a legal dispute with Prime Minister Hun Sen, over a 1997 grenade attack on a political rally, which injured Rainsy, as he was giving a speech. He had accused Prime Minister Sen of being involved, an accusation that the Prime Minister denies, though Rainsy later expressed regret in making the claim. As for Channy, he was designated as a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International, where he was convicted for fraud and in attempting to conspire to overthrow the government. At the time, the move by Sihamoni was found to be encouraging by international observers as it indicated a conciliatory gesture that points to a reduction of political tensions and restoration of multi-party democracy in the country. In 2009, Sihamoni, upon considering the appeals made to him for the review of the conviction verdict against opposition-affiliated journalist and editor Hang Chakra, who was jailed on charges of "criminal disinformation", sought the government's support for a prospective royal pardon. The appeals were made to him in his capacity as a member of the Supreme Council of the Magistracy. This request was reportedly rejected by the government for reasons not stated, but it was eventually later accepted, of which Sihamoni went on to grant a full pardon to Chakra in 2010. During late 2009, amid then-strained diplomatic relations between Cambodia and Thailand, Sihamoni pardoned a Thai national, Siwarak Chutipongse, on humanitarian grounds after a request by multiple parties, including Siwarak's mother, the Pheu Thai Party and former Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. Siwarak had been controversially charged and jailed by a Cambodian court for espionage due to him leaking sensitive flight-related details of Thaksin to Thai officials. Around that time, Thaksin was living in exile abroad despite being a wanted fugitive for corruption in his homeland, which he challenged. He also served as an advisor to the Cambodian government, which publicly backed Thaksin and resisted the extradition attempt from the Thai government. For the interest of the nation and our people, and for peace and national stability, I would like to appeal to the two political parties that people have voted for . . . to continue to find a peaceful solution to the dispute and the remaining issues. I also would like to appeal to all people to stay calm for the dignity of the nation and continue to conduct business peacefully. King Sihamoni's public statement in August 2013 amid the political crisis arising from that year's election In the lead-up to the 2013 Cambodian general election, Sihamoni at the request of the government, granted a royal pardon which enabled then Opposition Leader Sam Rainsy, who had been in self-imposed exile since 2009, to partake in the election which was welcomed by the United Nations. Prior to the pardoning, Rainsy had found himself in legal jeopardy once again due to another politically-motivated charge brought against him arising from an incident in 2009. When the election outcome became disputed between the ruling Cambodian People's Party (CPP) and opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP), the subsequent aftermath resulted in the 2013–2014 Cambodian protests. Consequently, in what is regarded as the first time he had intervened directly to try to resolve a political dispute, the King attempted to play a mediating role and urged for national reconciliation, by exercising his moral authority to facilitate talks between the two party leaders, Rainsy and Prime Minister Hun Sen. He implored for a de-escalation of tensions, including an end to the violence between the protestors and authorities, and for the parties to find common ground towards a resolution regarding their issues. In late July 2014, the CPP and CNRP eventually reached a mutually agreed deal to resolve the political impasse. After this, in August 2014, Sihamoni would formally swear-in Rainsy and the CNRP members of parliaments who had up until then, refused to assume their seats in the National Assembly because of the dispute, though he had earlier officiated Prime Minister Sen's and CPP lawmakers' swearing-in ceremony in September of the previous year due to a constitutional necessity. He later encouraged the two sides to "continue to work together for the sake of stability, development and national unity" and for a time, there was a 'culture of dialogue' between the rival political parties. This period of dialogue was relatively short-lived as tensions soon manifested again that culminated in the dissolution of the CNRP in late 2017 and the reallocation of the party's seats that they won in the general election to other political parties in concurrence with the gradual persecution of members associated with the CNRP. In the same year, a piece of legislation was introduced, named the Political Parties Law, that human rights organisations saw was a means of further curtailing the power of the opposition in the run-up to the 2018 Cambodian general election. When it came to the formalization of this law through the required royal assent, Sihamoni was coincidentally overseas, thereby delegating the royal assent duties to the President of the Senate, who constitutionally serves as the acting head of state in the King's absence. This then prompted speculation as to whether there was an underlying reason behind the timing of his overseas trip. During the legislative processes that was taking place to enact this law, a letter additionally emerged, of which Sihamoni had encouraged for all Cambodians to vote without intimidation ahead of the 2017 communal elections. Nonetheless, officials of the ruling CPP denied such speculation and insist that the King's trip were non-politically motivated. Similarly, in February 2018, in relation to the Lèse-majesté Law, which too had concerns expressed about it by various observers, speculation was fuelled again, when the King did not directly sign this legislation into law, due to a planned foreign trip. Some analysts maintained that this did not merely occur by chance, though others cautioned that such an assumption cannot be verified without actual official confirmation. Regardless, commentators noted that it added to a perception that Sihamoni tends to be overseas to avoid having to give his signature to highly contentious legislations and that such trips are supposedly timed, which then trigger a delegation of responsibility to the next constitutional office holder. It is theorized that the reason for this is that caught between the dilemmas of his position to concurrently not politically interfere and to also serve as a political guarantor, these absences are a way for the King to meet a middle ground through the "symbolic denial of royal legitimacy." However, the question still remains as to whether they constitute as “legitimate absences or absent legitimacy.” Interestingly, a few years prior in 2015, with respect to the then draft Law on Associations and Non-Governmental Organisations (LANGO), which was equally controversial, the King did sign this into law. This is despite the unprecedented action taken by Cambodian civil society, specifically by 26 non-governmental organisations, to directly lobby Sihamoni to not give his royal assent. They had cited his constitutional imperative as a “guarantor” and the proposed law’s restrictive effects on their collective ability to function effectively as key reasons for why he should agree to their request. To that end, their failed attempt in petitioning the King demonstrated constraints associated with the above-mentioned theory. In 2018, Sihamoni urged for Cambodians to vote in the national elections, notwithstanding calls made by exiled Opposition Leader Sam Rainsy to resist such a move and for the public to boycott the election. After the year's general election and senate election, which saw the ruling CPP retaining power, winning virtually every seat in both houses of parliament, much to the consternation of members of the now-dissolved opposition, international observers and human rights groups, whom all voiced unease about the deteriorating state of political affairs in the country, not least, the lack of a viable opposition, Sihamoni convened the opening of the national legislature. He had urged parliamentarians in both the National Assembly and Senate to protect the rights of all Cambodians and seek ways to bring about national unity and in bettering the lives of the overall populace, whilst highlighting the nation's long path towards peace and development. Several Western countries boycotted the opening, but the King noted in his speech that the opening of parliament was nonetheless constitutionally mandated. In recent years, again at the request of the government, he has approved political clemency requests for several former members of the dissolved CNRP to participate in politics again, like for example in 2020, with respect to former chief whip Son Chhay and in 2021, with Pol Hom, who was a deputy party president. Both Chhay and Ham were amongst at least 32 former CNRP political figures, as of February 2022, that the King has politically rehabilitated. Sihamoni, also had granted a royal pardon for Rainsy's deputy and later successor, Kem Sokha who had defamation charges against him stemming from an alleged adultery, though his separate treason charge remained until he was convicted in early 2023. Aside from the CNRP related cases aforementioned, other high-profile pardons include that of land rights activist Tep Vanny and Australian filmmaker James Ricketson. In the 2022 communal elections, he reiterated his call for all eligible Cambodians to participate in the civic process by exercising their right to vote, and to "not worry about oppression, threats or intimidation from any person or party at all", something that he had previously urged a few years back in the 2017 communal elections. Several political parties expressed appreciation for the King's public appeal. The communal elections result saw a victory for the ruling CPP, although the Candlelight Party, which has links with the dissolved CNRP, made some relatively surprising gains. At the ASEAN summit in November 2022, Sihamoni hosted regional leaders at the royal palace where he reinforced Cambodia's commitment to the bloc of nations and emphasized the continued importance of inter-state collaboration in addressing contemporary issues. Later, at the interrelated 43rd General Assembly of the ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Assembly, he further touched upon several topics. This included the centrality of peace in relation to socio-economic development, healthcare and educational investment, concern regarding the Myanmar conflict, the impact of increasing tensions between global powers, the threat of nuclear weapons, climate change, and the lingering effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In February 2023, several months ahead of the 23 July general election, Sihamoni once again advocated, as he has done in prior years, for electoral participation amongst the public and for free elections to take place. His call was backed by the National Election Committee whom urged the citizenry to heed the King's message, despite insinuations of bias levelled against him by former opposition leader Rainsy. These claims were roundly rejected and condemned by government officials, including multiple cabinet ministers. The election unsurprisingly resulted in the CPP's victory in which they retained their ruling majority in the legislature, though there was controversy involving the disqualification of the opposition Candlelight Party by electoral authorities. On 26 July, just a few days after the election, Prime Minister Hun Sen announced his intention to tender his resignation in favour of his son, Hun Manet. Sen had an audience with Sihamoni at the Royal Palace who reportedly consented "in a formality" to his decision and for the transitional arrangements that was scheduled within August 2023 for Manet's and the new government's appointment. A royal decree was formally issued on 7 August, tasking Manet with forming a new government for the seventh mandate and requesting confidence from the National Assembly. In late August, he received the endorsement and confidence of the National Assembly to serve as head of government. Subsequently, King Sihamoni officially appointed and sworn in Manet as the second Prime Minister of his reign along with the new cabinet and members of parliament as well as officiating the inaugural opening for the new legislative term. King Sihamoni's reign has been focused on the wellbeing of the Khmer people. He has been described by some as a humble monarch because of his philanthropic endeavours and is well-known for carrying out humanitarian activities. This can be soon through various examples such as in 2006, where when the relocation of one of the campuses of the Royal University of Fine Arts caused an inconvenience to students and teachers, including posing safety concerns, he arranged for the donation of three minibuses to assist with transportation. Another example was in the aftermath of the 2010 Phnom Penh stampede at Koh Pich that saw hundreds killed and injured, where he reached out to the victims and their families, donating money to every household who had lost a family member in the incident, as well as financially supporting those who were injured. In 2016, he donated a record-breaking $6.5 million from the proceeds that was gained from the selling of the royal residence in Koh Kong to the Kantha Bopha Foundation, which oversees a group of nationally renowned children's hospitals. Furthermore, in 2018, upon learning of the plight of provincial people affected by flooding, he gave essential goods to over 500 families. At times, he has even assisted his fellow citizens first-hand during adverse events, such as venturing out into flooded areas and handing out goods to victims directly and was once reported to have requested for his official state car to stop so he can give a blanket to an elderly Cambodian who he saw on the roadside. Additionally, Sihamoni is said to donate to the Cambodian Red Cross on a regular basis and has authorized royal grants for infrastructure, schools, orphanages, struggling communities, religious institutions, people affected by a disability, rehabilitation centres, mental health organizations, victims of violence, and sponsoring student's trips among others. His philanthropy extends in the international context as well, like for instance, after Hurricane Katrina, the King made a personal good-will donation to victims of the storm. He has also donated towards multiple relief efforts after the occurrence of natural disasters in China. Amidst the global COVID-19 pandemic, King Sihamoni, alongside Queen Mother Norodom Monineath has donated well over $1 million to the Royal Government of Cambodia's efforts to address the situation in Cambodia, inspiring a concerted public campaign across the country. Moreover, the King has made contributions in the provision of essential supplies, including donations of food, water and face masks to Cambodians severely impacted by COVID-19. In July 2022, he contributed $500,000 towards ongoing demining efforts in the nation, which is still plagued by problematic landmines leftover from decades of conflict. Dancing requires neither pen nor paintbrush. Only one instrument is necessary, the human body. Every motion is imbued with dance. To move is to dance. Dance exacts the utmost dedication of body, mind, and soul. Only the truly committed can pursue this demanding path . . . To us Khmers, dance in its most elaborate form is a means to draw us closer to the gods. Thus, dance becomes prayer. It becomes an indispensable ritual for the world to move forward, transcending us to the divine and raising us to supernatural heights. An excerpt from King Sihamoni's message to mark 2006 International Dance Day Sihamoni also remains an ardent advocate for Cambodian arts and culture. For instance, in 2006, when he was designated by the International Theatre Institute as its "Message Author" for International Dance Day, he extolled the symbolism and virtue of dance, with reference to the Royal Ballet of Cambodia. In September 2012, he presided over the opening of L'ombrello di Beatocello, a documentary film by Georges Gachot showcasing the life's work of famed Swiss pediatrician Beat Richner and his contribution to Khmer society. Likewise, in February 2017, he did the same at the global premiere of acclaimed Cambodian-based film First They Killed My Father, documenting the experiences of Loung Ung, a survivor of the Khmer Rouge and directed by Oscar-winning actress Angelina Jolie, whom he had earlier hosted, along with her family, at The Royal Residence in Siem Reap prior to the occasion. In March 2023, as part of the 12th Cambodian International Film Festival, he presided over the premiere screening for The Perfect Motion, a film directed by Xavier de Lauzanne, which explored the progression of the kingdom's Royal Ballet and one of the interlinked works by Princess Norodom Buppha Devi. The King is a strong proponent of Buddhism and of the integral place it maintains in the cultural life of the Khmer nation, and he usually officiates key festivals on the Buddhist calendar. Moreover, he supports the work of the country's Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts whom reportedly engages regularly in consultations with him on advancing their overall strategic agenda. Additionally, as King, he presides over the annual Bon Om Touk, a major festive cultural event on the yearly calendar with ancient roots dating back to the Khmer Empire, in conjunction with other traditionally important national events like for example, Independence Day, the Royal Ploughing Ceremony, and Khmer New Year. He also presided over the torch lighting ceremony in March 2023 at Angkor Wat marking the start of the torch relay for the 32nd Southeast Asian Games that was held in Phnom Penh that same year in May. Furthermore, Sihamoni has been commended for his dedication to archaeological preservation, conservation and research, with specificity to Cambodia. In particular, as Honorary President of ICC-Angkor (International Coordination Committee for the Safeguarding and Development of Historic Site of Angkor), King Sihamoni places special emphasis on the efforts to protect this national symbol and treasure, engaging frequently with the body's work through fulfilling representative functions or routine briefings given directly to him or via a delegated senior representative. In 2011, he attended the completion ceremony pertaining to restoration works at the Baphuon historical temple in Angkor. In late 2021, he championed Cambodia's bid for the proposed inclusion of Koh Ker, an ancient Khmer archaeological site, alongside Bokator, one of the kingdom's oldest martial arts on the UNESCO Intangible cultural heritage and World Heritage Site lists. The eventual outcome resulted in both being successfully inscribed on to their respective listings. In November 2023, the King inaugurated the formal ceremonies to commemorate the completion of restorative works for the western causeway into Angkor Wat and its reopening, which was closed for several years due to its deteriorating condition. In the international arena, his first official foreign trip as King was to China in 2004, where he met with President Hu Jintao, indicative of a strong friendship long established from the days of his father between China and the Cambodian royal family. Here, he routinely also undertakes yearly health-related visits, usually to Beijing and have formal courtesy calls with members of China's political leadership. In 2015, he attended the United Nations COP21 summit, and gave an impassioned speech highlighting the impact of the climate crisis on Cambodia and urging international efforts on this front to be expedited. He represented Cambodia at the 2019 Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations (CDAC) in Beijing aimed at enhancing regional cooperation and intercultural exchange. Other notable trips include to Japan, where he was the first Cambodian sovereign since the monarchical restoration of the 1990s to visit, his "second homeland" of the Czech Republic where he spent his childhood, a landmark state visit to India, and France, Cambodia's former colonial power. In contrast to his father, former King Norodom Sihanouk's "mercurial" and outspoken reign, commentators note that Sihamoni has maintained a relatively "low-key" profile, with his tenure being characterized by an award-winning article of The Phnom Penh Post as being "Reign of the quiet king." Nonetheless, leading national leaders across the political spectrum recognize the King as a unifying force in Cambodian society. Prime Minister Hun Sen gave praise to Sihamoni for honourably carrying out his role as a "symbol of national unity, stability, happiness and prosperity", noting his humanitarianism, as well as efforts in strengthening national prestige and fostering a "spirit of solidarity" amongst Cambodians. Similarly, de facto Leader of the Opposition Sam Rainsy, shares this sentiment, welcoming his ability to bring people together in the national interest, although amid internal political developments that is seen as indicative of democratic backsliding, this view held by Rainsy has not always been consistent. Thus, it is within this juxtaposition, from a power politics analytical standpoint, including on the limits and extent of constitutional monarchism and given the political polarization, that there are often divergent perspectives concerning the King, between those who implore for his active politicism and those who advocate he sustain his guarded apoliticism. Scholar Milton Osborne, regarded as amongst the world's most distinguished authors specializing in Southeast Asia, commends him as a "dedicated servant of his people" that is "cultured and disciplined", but he questions the monarchical institution's long-term survivability. The latter can be attributed in part due to competing power structures whereby there were periods of past historical tensions between some members of the royal family and the executive branch. However, in recent years, Prime Minister Hun Sen has given steadfast assurances which therefore signals his government's intent to preserve the monarchy well into the future. Prominent Cambodian history professor Sambo Manara credits Sihamoni as a "morale model" for all Khmer people whom exudes a calm and kind demeanor, underscored by a sincere warmth towards his subjects, notwithstanding some misconceived notions about the King's role from within some sectors of the population, in particular, the youth demographic. Reflecting after a royal audience with the King in 2013, then International Monetary Fund Managing Director Christine Lagarde expressed how she was profoundly touched by his "thoughtfulness and compassion" and how he "not only cares deeply about the welfare of his people, but is clearly passionately devoted to promoting the cultural and artistic heritage of his country." On the occasion of his 68th birthday, ASEAN described King Sihamoni as a monarch who is "cherished and well-respected by the people of Cambodia" and as someone who exemplifies "dignified and humbled leadership", characterized by his frequent engagements with the populace through local visitations. The King's birthday on 14 May in conjunction with his coronation day on 29 October are both annual public holidays in Cambodia and in 2019, a special commemorative 15,000 riel was issued in his honour, celebrating the 15th anniversary of his tenure as sovereign. Sihamoni is also featured on the 200, 500, 2,000, 10,000, 20,000 and 100,000 riels respectively and his portrait, alongside the King-father and Queen-mother is prominent across many parts of the country, illustrative of their highly revered status. In February 2018, the penal code was formally revised to incorporate lèse-majesté legislation, which makes it an offence to insult the king, pursuant to its promulgation by Cambodia's National Assembly and Senate, and the law came into effect the following month. Human rights groups had voiced concerns that the law may be potentially used to suppress political opponents of the government and considered it to be incompatible with respect to the freedom of speech, though the Ministry of Justice maintains that the law is necessary in protecting the monarchy from people who push the boundaries of said freedom. After this law was enacted, there have been seldom arrests, charges and convictions, with the most notable case being that of Opposition Leader Sam Rainsy. Prior to this legislative enactment, the constitution did acknowledge the "inviolability" of the monarch and this constitutional provision was tested in 2017, when the Ministry of Interior pursued charges against a few individuals who were indignant towards the King on social media. The King is a bachelor and has no children. As Cambodia is not a hereditary monarchy, but rather an elective monarchy, his future successor will be determined by the Royal Council of the Throne, chosen from the lineage of one of the two royal houses of Cambodia, in accordance with the country's constitution. His parents, King-Father Norodom Sihanouk and Queen-Mother Norodom Monineath, were once questioned by journalists about Sihamoni's marital status and when he was planning to get married. In response, the Queen-Mother replied that her son "only feels Buddhist" and that "he confines himself to Buddhism." The King-Father added that because of this, his son's affection for women is akin to that of "as his sisters" and that "he dares not to make a deep relationship." This reflects Sihamoni's adherence to a monastic way of life which is underpinned by his austere piety and devotion to faith. In some respects, Sihamoni is regarded somewhat as an enigmatic figure, with the available literature pointing to a "reflective, deliberate and cultured man" who apparently had reservations in becoming King, yet in spite of this, humbly assumed the solemn responsibility of his position, whilst holding "his cards close to his chest." Apart from his interest in the arts and culture, which is well-documented, it is reported that the king "is a man of simple tastes." Purportedly, in his free time he enjoys the peace of meditation, reading, exercising, listening to classical music such as by the likes of Beethoven and observance to traditional Buddhist rituals. In addition, it is reported that he enjoys comedy films, is the occasional fan of chocolates, and likes to keep up with current events and news, balancing his personal interests with that of his busy and rigid schedule as head of state. His commitment to the duties of a monarch could be seen in 2011 where he famously declined to attend the royal wedding of then Kate Middleton and Prince William, which the British tabloids headlined as a "snub." This was quickly refuted by Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials who informed that a declination notification was indeed advised and that no snub occurred whatsoever. Moreover, alongside having an interest in DVDs relating to ballet and opera in general, he is also skilled at playing the piano and is reputedly a keen reader of reviews covering the Czech theatre scene. During speeches that Prime Minister Hun Sen delivered in November 2020 and August 2021, he made rare public references about the King’s wealth by mentioning that compared to other monarchies in the world, Cambodia’s monarchy is amongst the poorest. He further added that the King does not have his own private property. However, these factors, Sen noted were irrelevant, as more importantly, Sihamoni has a generous heart towards his people as evident by his philanthropic contributions. Besides his native Khmer, Sihamoni speaks Czech fluently, being the only ruling monarch in the world to do so. The king is also fluent in French and is a conversational speaker of English and Russian. He has basic fluency in Mandarin as well. Then-Prince Sihamoni during the 1960s and 1990s starred in a few films, mainly directed by his father, who was a prolific and accomplished film-maker. He has also been the subject of documentaries and directed a few films himself. Before he was crowned king, his princely royal title granted to him in February 1994 by King Sihanouk was Sdech Krom Khun (Khmer: ស្តេចក្រុមឃុន), or His Royal Highness Sdech Krom Khun Norodom Sihamoni, equating him to the rank of "Great Prince". In August 2004, King Sihanouk elevated the then Prince Sihamoni to the distinguished title of Samdech Preah Boromneath (Khmer: សម្ដេច​ព្រះ​បរមនាថ). As King, his full regnal title is Preahkaruna Preah Bath Samdech Preah Boromneath Norodom Sihamoni Samanphoum Cheatsasna Rakhatkhateya Khemrarothreas Puthinthrea Thoreamohaksat Khemreachnea Samophorpheas Kampuch Ekreachroatboranaksanteh Sopheakmongkulea Sereyvibolar Khemarasreypireas Preah Chao Krong Kampuchea Thipadey (in romanized Khmer); Khmer: ព្រះករុណាព្រះបាទសម្តេចព្រះបរមនាថ នរោត្តម សីហមុនី សមានភូមិជាតិសាសនា រក្ខតខត្តិយា ខេមរារដ្ឋរាស្ត្រ ពុទ្ធិន្ទ្រាធរាមមហាក្សត្រ ខេមរាជនា សមូហោភាស កម្ពុជឯករាជរដ្ឋបូរណសន្តិ សុភមង្គលា សិរីវិបុលា ខេមរាស្រីពិរាស្ត្រ ព្រះចៅក្រុងកម្ពុជាធិបតី, roughly translating to "His Merciful Excellent Majesty Protector, King Norodom Sihamoni, who unites the nation, religion, realms, and people of Khmer state, the great king who is supported by Buddha and Indra, the protector of independence, unification, and peace, the Great King of the Kingdom of Cambodia." The King's shortened official title is His Majesty Preah Bat Samdech Preah Boromneath Norodom Sihamoni, King of the Kingdom of Cambodia (Khmer: ព្រះករុណា ព្រះបាទសម្តេច ព្រះបរមនាថ នរោត្តម សីហមុនី ព្រះមហាក្សត្រ នៃព្រះរាជាណាចក្រកម្ពុជា។). In June 2015, he was bestowed the honorary religious title Preah SriLoka Dhammika Raja (Khmer: ព្រះស្រីលោកធម្មិករាជ), or "Virtuous King for the Propagation of Buddhism in the World", which was recommended for him at the Sixth Buddhist Summit in the year prior in December 2014. During an overseas trip in September 2015, he was conferred the academic title of ‘Honorific Professor’ by the Jiangxi University of Traditional Chinese Medicine in Nanchang, China. On 24 June 2023, the World Fellowship of Buddhists (WFB) awarded the King the honorary title of ‘Royal Patron’ in an event held at the Royal Palace in Phnom Penh. In the military context, one of his concurrent titular styles is ‘Supreme Commander of the Royal Khmer Armed Forces’, which is in line with the country's constitution. As King, Sihamoni has served as the patron of many causes and organizations as well as a range of NGOs and NPOs. This includes, but is not limited to the below list: Honorary President of ICC-Angkor (International Coordination Committee for the Safeguarding and Development of Historic Site of Angkor) Angkor Wat Western Causeway Restoration Project — Patron Baphuon Temple at Angkor Restoration Project — Patron Greater Angkor Collaborative Research Project — Patron Angkor Medieval Hospitals Archaeological Project — Patron Symposium "Deux décennies de coopération archéologique franco-cambodgienne à Angkor" — Patron Guimet Museum — Patron of "Angkor: The Rise of a Myth" Exhibition Preah Norodom Sihanouk-Angkor Museum — Patron of inauguration ceremony Koh Ker Temple — Patron of successful bid for its inclusion on the UNESCO World Heritage Site list Preah Suramarit National Theatre — Patron of attempted restoration efforts Statue of St. John of Nepomuk in Divina, Slovakia — Patron of the project of restoration (2017). Member of the High Council of French-speaking Countries (2004). Foreign Associate Member of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres (2008). International Dance Day — Message Author (2006) Mozart at Angkor Project — Patron Center for Khmer Studies Library, Siem Reap — Patron Nginn Karet Foundation for Cambodia (Preah Ream Buppha Devi Conservatoire) — Patron of dance troupe 'The Sacred Dancers of Angkor' Nuits d'Angkor Festival — Patron Cambodian Living Arts — Patron Cambodian International Film Festival (CIFF) — Patron Technicolour Foundation (MEMORY! International Film Heritage Festival) (2014) — Patron Cie Cabaret des Oiseaux — Patron GoGo Cambodia world record-setting Krama initiative — Patron Angkor Archaeological Park meditation centre — Patron Ricardo Casal's "90 Khmer Figures" Art Exhibition (in collaboration with Royal University of Fine Arts as part of 2013 French Week) — Patron Kep Expo 2018 — Patron United States Embassy in Cambodia's Air Force Band String Quartet special concert (8 May, 2016) — Patron Royal Thai Embassy in Cambodia's "Choral Music for Friendship: A Concert by Suanplu Chorus" (21 June, 2019) — Patron China Disabled Persons' Performing Art Troupe — Patron Battery Dance Company — Patron of performance on 21 October, 2006 First They Killed My Father — Patron of film L'ombrello di Beatocello — Patron of film The Perfect Motion — Patron of film Cambodian Red Cross — Patron Cambodian Children's Fund — Patron Samdech Euv Team — Patron Krousar Thmey Foundation — 25th Anniversary Celebration Ceremony Honorary President Transcultural Psychosocial Organization (Cambodia) — Patron of 20th Anniversary Celebration and new Mental Health Treatment Center Kantha Bopha Foundation — Patron of 25th Anniversary, new ward (Kantha Bopha V), surgery centre (Kantha Bopha I) & major donor Eye Care Foundation — Patron Samdech Techo Project for Mine Action (STP-MA) — Patron Preah Sihamoniraja Buddhist University — Establishing Patron Sihanouk Hospital Center of Hope — Patron Calmette Hospital Neurology Center (Centre De Neurosciences) — Patron Teach Them To Fish Foundation — Patron Cambodian Day of Older People / International Day of Older Persons — Patron International Children's Day — Patron KaisKids Orphanage — Patron Waltzing Around Cambodia Onlus — Patron AIP Foundation — Patron of Cambodia Helmet Vaccine Initiative (CHVI) House of Family — Patron Cambodian National Committee to Fight Covid-19 — Patron Royal University of Fine Arts — Patron of transportation service through the donation of 3 minibuses to the university's north campus Don Bosco Foundation — Patron Hurricane Katrina disaster relief — Patron General disaster relief in China — Patron (the King has made several donations in the aftermath of natural disasters) Royal Angkor Endurance Competition 2018 — Patron of inaugural event Norodom Sihanouk du Cambodge National Show Jumping Championships — Patron 32nd Southeast Asian (SEA) Games — Patron Bokator (Khmer martial art) — Patron of successful bid for its inclusion on the UNESCO Intangible cultural heritage list Airavata Elephant Foundation — Establishing Patron National Arbor Day — Patron Rubbish Project — Patron of Nāga Sculpture in Siem Reap to mark 2008 World Water Day  Cambodia Grand Cross of the Royal Order of Cambodia Grand Cross of the Royal Order of Monisaraphon  France Grand Cross of the Order of the Legion of Honour (2010) Grand Officer of the Order of the Legion of Honour (2004)  Japan Collar and Grand Cordon of the Supreme Order of the Chrysanthemum (11 May 2010) Order of Saint Lazarus: Grand Cross of Merit of the Order of Saint Lazarus (10 May 2008)  Czech Republic: Gratias Agit Award of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2006)  Prague: Honorary Citizen of the City of Prague (2006)  Paris: Silver Medal of the City of Paris Academy of Performing Arts in Prague, Honorary Doctorate (19 March 2010) Naresuan University, Honorary Doctorate in Political Science (12 June 2015) St. Elizabeth University of Health and Social Sciences, Honorary Doctorate in Social Work Dendrobium Norodom Sihamoni, an orchid named in honour of the King (30 March 2006) Musee Preahbat Samdech Preah Boromneath Norodom Sihamoni (Norodom Sihamoni Museum), Royal Palace, Phnom Penh Sattapanniguha Auditorium (named in honour of King Sihamoni), Nenbutsushu Sampozan Muryojuji Temple, Katō, Hyōgo Prefecture, Japan Preah Norodom Sihamoni Primary School, in Chhnuk Trou Commune, Baribour district Preah Norodom Sihamoni General and Technical Lycée, in Kampot Province Preah Bat Samdech Preah Boromneath Norodom Sihamoni General & Technical High School, Aur Russei Commune, Kampong Tralach District Preah Sihamoniraja Buddhist University, in Phnom Penh Kantha Bopha-Sihamoni Monineath (Heart Surgery Centre II) at Kantha Bopha I Children's Hospital, in Phnom Penh King Sihamoni Meditation Centre at Angkor Archaeological Park, Siem Reap province King Norodom Sihamoni Boulevard, in Siem Reap, Siem Reap province King Norodom Sihamoni Avenue, in Siem Reap, Siem Reap province King Norodom Sihamoni Road, in Siem Reap, Siem Reap province "People and Society ::Cambodia". 6 January 2022. "Biography of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni of Cambodia". Official Website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 1 January 2013. Retrieved 5 September 2021. Jeldres, Julio A. (2017). The Royal House of Cambodia (2nd ed.). Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute. p. 134. ISBN 9789924907855. "The strange case of the King of Cambodia". Financial Review. 5 November 2004. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "Naruttama, Nara-uttama, Narottama: 13 definitions". Wisdom Library. 7 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "Norodom". BabyNamesCube.com. 2023. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "The First Lady of the Kingdom"; The Royal House of Cambodia by Julio A. Jeldres, 2003 OCLC 54003889 King's biography Archived 27 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine "Obituary: Norodom Sihanouk, former king of Cambodia". BBC News. 15 October 2012. Retrieved 23 April 2022. Jeldres, Julio A. (2017). The Royal House of Cambodia (2nd ed.). Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute. pp. 198–201. ISBN 9789924907855. Jeldres, Julio A. (2017). The Royal House of Cambodia (2nd ed.). Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute. p. 134. ISBN 9789924907855. Jeldres, Julio A. (2017). The Royal House of Cambodia (2nd ed.). Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute. pp. 136–137. ISBN 9789924907855. "King to visit alma mater in the Czech Republic". The Phnom Penh Post. 16 March 2010. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "Jiný malý princ" [The Other Little Prince]. Česko-Slovenská filmová databáze. Jeldres, Julio A. (2017). The Royal House of Cambodia (2nd ed.). Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute. pp. 139–141. ISBN 9789924907855. Jeldres, Julio A. (2017). The Royal House of Cambodia (2nd ed.). Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute. pp. 139–141. ISBN 9789924907855. "CAMBODIA BEFORE 1975". Holocaust Memorial Day Trust. 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "40 Years After the Fall of the Khmer Rouge, Cambodia Still Grapples With Pol Pot's Brutal Legacy". TIME. 7 January 2019. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Profile: King Sihamoni". BBC News. 14 October 2004. Retrieved 5 September 2021. Jeldres, Julio A. (2017). The Royal House of Cambodia (2nd ed.). Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute. p. 141. ISBN 9789924907855. Jeldres, Julio A. (2017). The Royal House of Cambodia (1st ed.). Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute. p. 80. ISBN 9789924907855. "Norodom Sihamoni - king of Cambodia". Encyclopædia Britannica. 10 May 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "Cambodia profile - Timeline". BBC News. 10 May 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2021. Jeldres, Julio A. (2017). The Royal House of Cambodia (2nd ed.). Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute. p. 142. ISBN 9789924907855. "New god king ends Cambodia's pain". The (Sunday) Times. 17 October 2004. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "Reign of the quiet king". The Phnom Penh Post. 29 October 2014. Retrieved 18 September 2021. The Weekend Australian, 16–17 October 2004 Findlay, Trevor (1995). SIPRI Research Report No. 9 - Cambodia: The Legacy and Lessons of UNTAC (PDF) (Report). Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. "Cambodia king confirms abdication". BBC News. 10 October 2004. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Cambodia's succession riddle". BBC News. 8 October 2004. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Cambodia chooses new monarch". BBC News. 14 October 2004. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Profile: King Sihamoni". BBC News. 14 October 2004. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "Shuffling 'Heirs' to Cambodia Throne". New York Times. 30 November 2002. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "Royal trumps on the table, aces up the sleeve". Phnom Penh Post. 22 March 1996. Retrieved 12 September 2023. "Prince Opts For Politics, Not Throne". Cambodia Daily. 14 November 2001. Retrieved 12 September 2023. "Throne Council Selects Sihamoni to be the Next King". Cambodia Daily. 15 October 2004. Retrieved 12 September 2023. "The Prince who didn't want to be King". Khmer Times. 27 October 2017. Retrieved 2 April 2022. "Son of Cambodian king 'ready to accept crown'". Irish Examiner. 11 October 2004. Retrieved 2 April 2022. "King Sihamoni arrives". Phnom Penh Post. 22 October 2004. Retrieved 24 April 2022. WRAP Arrival of Cambodia's new King Norodom Sihamoni. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 24 April 2022 – via YouTube. {{cite AV media}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Sheridan, Michael (17 October 2004). "New god king ends Cambodia's pain". The (Sunday) Times. Retrieved 31 March 2022. Sheridan, Michael (17 October 2004). "New god king ends Cambodia's pain". The (Sunday) Times. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "In Pictures: King Sihamoni's coronation". BBC News. 29 October 2004. Retrieved 11 June 2012. Ceremonies of the coronation of HM King Norodom Sihamoni of Cambodia, 28-30 October 2004. Monash University Research Repository. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021 – via YouTube. "When Sihamoni became King". The Phnom Penh Post. 14 May 2009. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Cambodia's muted coronation". BBC News. 29 October 2004. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "Cambodia's New King Gives First Address". NBC News. 30 October 2004. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Sihamoni crowned new King". The Phnom Penh Post. 5 November 2004. Retrieved 15 July 2022. "Cambodia's king wins high marks after six months on throne". Taipei Times. 17 May 2005. Retrieved 5 August 2023. Willemyns, Alex (29 October 2014). "10 Years into Sihamoni's Reign, A Changed Palace". The Cambodia Daily. Retrieved 29 October 2014. Cambodia's low-key King Sihamoni celebrates 10 years on throne. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021 – via YouTube. {{cite AV media}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) More royals could face political exit The Phnom Penh Post, 12 December 2008 "Return of Ranariddh?". The Phnom Penh Post. 25 February 2014. Retrieved 11 September 2021. "Cambodian Princess Norodom Arunrasmy appointed as advisor to gov't". Xinhua News Agency. 21 November 2020. Retrieved 11 September 2021. "Board of Directors". Cambodian Institute for Cooperation and Peace. 2021. Retrieved 11 September 2021. "Strong is the Sangkum; the stirrings of discontent". Phnom Penh Post. 27 February 1998. Retrieved 15 July 2022. "Winner, Loser agree to coalition in Cambodia". The Washington Post. 19 June 1993. Retrieved 15 July 2022. A. Norén-Nilsson (2022). The Demise of Cambodian Royalism and the Legacy of Sihanouk. Sojourn: Journal of Social Issues in Southeast Asia, 31(1), 1–36, 11-26, http://www.jstor.org/stable/2477978 "A New Royalist Party Would Have Little Hope, Analysts Say". VOA News. 27 February 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2022. "An end to an era as Hun Sen passes baton to son Manet". Phnom Penh Post. 26 July 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "Cambodian Prince Ranariddh's body arrives home from France". The Star. 5 December 2021. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "End of an era: PM Hun Sen stepping down after helming nation for over 38 years". Khmer Times. 27 July 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "Hun Sen made Privy Council President". Khmer Times. 23 August 2023. Retrieved 26 August 2023. "Two veteran civil servants join the Supreme Privy Council". Khmer Times. 6 September 2023. Retrieved 6 September 2023. "A King to unite the country gives the monarchy life after Sihanouk". The Phnom Penh Post. 14 May 2009. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Sihamoni Marks Reign With Praise for Stability". The Cambodia Daily. 30 October 2014. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Freedom in the World 2016 - Cambodia". Freedom House via UNHCR. 14 July 2016. Retrieved 28 March 2023. Cambodian Opposition Member Urges King Sihamoni to Intervene in Political Deadlock, Radio Free Asia, 14 May 2020, retrieved 7 September 2021 'Be a leader': Sochua calls on king to intervene to ensure her return, Southeast Asia Globe, 5 January 2021, retrieved 17 April 2022 "The Cambodian monarchy must step back from politics". East Asia Forum. 26 October 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2022. "CONSTITUTION OF THE KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA (ANNOTATED)" (PDF). International Labour Organization. 4 March 1999. Retrieved 19 April 2022. "New Cambodian king 'nervous'". BBC News. 15 October 2004. Retrieved 7 September 2021. "Meet Norodom Sihamoni, the Far-Eastern King who spoke Czech". Kafkadesk. 20 September 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2022. "Cambodia's Sihanouk May Play Last Hand". NBC News. 11 October 2004. Retrieved 19 March 2022. "A King to unite the country gives the monarchy life after Sihanouk". The Phnom Penh Post. 14 May 2009. Retrieved 19 March 2022. "King Sihamoni Seeks Neutrality in a Deeply Divided Nation". The Cambodia Daily. 20 October 2013. Retrieved 19 March 2022. "The Cambodian monarchy must step back from politics". East Asia Forum. 26 October 2013. Retrieved 17 April 2022. "Former King Norodom Sihanouk Clarifies his Duties in Border Committee". VOA News. 11 May 2005. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "Former King Sihanouk Corrects Border History". VOA News. 16 November 2005. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "Politicized protection for Cambodian royalty". Asia Times. 3 February 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "Citizens Worry Over PM's Threat to Monarchy". The Cambodia Daily. 19 October 2005. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "King Signs Off On Border Pact With Vietnam Border Treaty". The Cambodia Daily. 1 December 2005. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "PM Thanks King for Signing Border Agreement". The Cambodia Daily. 2 December 2005. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodia: Opposition Politicians Arrested, Forced to Flee". Human Rights Watch. 6 February 2005. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodian politicians pardoned". Aljazeera News. 6 February 2006. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodian King pardons opposition leader". ABC News. 6 February 2006. Retrieved 2 August 2022. "Opposition leader flees Cambodia". The Globe and Mail. 4 February 2005. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "Cambodia: 1997 Grenade Attack on Opposition Still Unpunished". Human Rights Watch. 30 March 2009. Retrieved 2 August 2022. "Channy a 'prisoner of conscience'". Phnom Penh Post. 12 August 2005. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodian lawmaker gets 7 years in prison". The New York Times. 10 August 2005. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodia: Pardons of Opposition Leader and Parliamentarian". US Department of State. 6 February 2006. Retrieved 2 August 2022. "AMNESTY INTERNATIONALPRESS RELEASE -Cambodia: Release of prisoner of conscience Cheam Channy" (PDF). Amnesty International. 6 February 2006. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Senate of the Philippines 19th Congress – PRESS RELEASE: Drilon hails granting of pardon to Cambodian opposition leader". Senate of the Philippines. 9 February 2006. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Media Groups Call for Editor's Release". VOA News Cambodia. 27 August 2009. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodian journalist released from prison in amnesty". Committee to Protect Journalists. 27 April 2010. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "No help for Hang Chakra from council". Phnom Penh Post. 4 September 2009. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Thai jailed in Cambodia over Thaksin flight leak". Reuters. 9 December 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2023. "Cambodian king pardons Thai jailed for spying". Reuters. 12 December 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2023. "Thaksin back in Cambodia as Thai "spy" to be freed". Reuters. 14 December 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2023. "Thailand's ex-leader jumps bail". Los Angeles Times. 12 August 2008. Retrieved 1 April 2023. "King makes appeal for resolution". Phnom Penh Post. 8 August 2013. Retrieved 9 October 2013. "Cambodian opposition leader pardoned by king". Al Jazeera. 12 July 2013. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Cambodia's royal pardon for opposition leader a step towards reconciliation – UN expert". United Nations. 15 July 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "Cambodia: Rainsy Sentence Shatters Pretense of Democracy". Human Rights Watch. 24 September 2010. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodia election: Hun Sen's ruling party claims victory". BBC News. 28 July 2013. Retrieved 1 April 2023. "Cambodia election: Opposition party rejects results". BBC News. 29 July 2013. Retrieved 1 April 2023. "Cambodian election protesters march through Phnom Penh". The Guardian. 15 September 2013. Retrieved 1 April 2023. "In Pictures: Cambodians take to the streets". Aljazeera. 15 September 2013. Retrieved 1 April 2023. "Cambodia's King Invites Hun Sen, Sam Rainsy to Talks". Radio Free Asia. 12 September 2013. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Cambodia PM and opposition leader fail to resolve election standoff". The Guardian. 14 September 2013. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Cambodian king urges opposition to join parliament". Bangkok Post. 18 September 2013. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Cambodia talks after election protest clashes". BBC News. 16 September 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "King makes appeal for resolution". Phnom Penh Post. 8 August 2013. Retrieved 9 October 2013. "Cambodian political rivals reach deal to end deadlock". DW. 22 July 2014. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Cambodia opposition leader Sam Rainsy endorsed by parliament, ends year-long stalemate". Reuters. 28 July 2014. Retrieved 1 April 2014. "King Swears In Opposition Lawmakers". The Cambodia Daily. 6 August 2014. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "King Convenes Opening of Contested National Assembly". The Cambodia Daily. 23 September 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "'Unity' key in King's message". The Phnom Penh Post. 30 October 2014. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "It's good to talk: Cambodia's culture of dialogue". Southeast Asia Globe. 1 September 2015. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Cambodia Issues Arrest Warrant for Rainsy". VOA News. 13 November 2015. Retrieved 8 August 2022. "Cambodia's main opposition party dissolved by Supreme Court". Reuters. 16 November 2017. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "With CNRP gone, minor parties take their National Assembly seats". Phnom Penh Post. 28 November 2017. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodia's Sam Rainsy found guilty of defamation, ordered to pay $1 million". Reuters. 29 December 2017. Retrieved 8 August 2022. "Cambodia: 150 opposition politicians and supporters face jail in mass trials". Amnesty International. 14 January 2021. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Controversial Party Law signed, though King declines to ink changes". Phnom Penh Post. 31 July 2017. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "King Wades Into Politics With Call for Fearless Vote". Cambodia Daily. 21 March 2017. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "King Sihamoni Urges Cambodians to Vote in Upcoming Elections". VOA News Cambodia. 22 March 2017. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "King Flies Out Of Country, Dodging Party Law Signing". Cambodia Daily. 24 July 2017. Retrieved 27 March 2023. "Cambodian King Leaves Signing of Controversial Constitutional Amendments to Ruling Party". Radio Free Asia. 22 February 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2022. B. Lawrence (2022). The Symbolic Safeguard: Royal Absence in Cambodia’s Constitutional Monarchy. Asian Journal of Law and Society, 9(3), 382-398. doi:10.1017/als.2022.31 "Monarchy stuck in middle of Cambodia's conflict". Asia Times. 25 May 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Does Cambodia have a 'puppet king'?". Asia Times. 11 January 2021. Retrieved 9 August 2022. "King Departs for China Amid Coronavirus Pandemic and the Potential State of Emergency". VOA News Cambodia. 31 March 2020. Retrieved 13 August 2022. B. Lawrence (2022). The Symbolic Safeguard: Royal Absence in Cambodia’s Constitutional Monarchy. Asian Journal of Law and Society, 9(3), 382-398. doi:10.1017/als.2022.31 B. Lawrence (2022). The Symbolic Safeguard: Royal Absence in Cambodia’s Constitutional Monarchy. Asian Journal of Law and Society, 9(3), 382-398. doi:10.1017/als.2022.31 "Human Rights NGOs Urge the Rejection of LANGO". ADHOC Cambodia. 31 July 2015. Retrieved 21 September 2023. "Civil society organisations urge Cambodia's king not to sign NGO law". IFEX. 5 August 2015. Retrieved 21 September 2023. "Cambodia: King should reject Law on Associations and Non-Governmental Organizations". Amnesty International. 23 July 2015. Retrieved 21 September 2023. "King urges citizens to vote as Hun Sen says Sihamoni's message is a 'slap' to Sam Rainsy's face". Phnom Penh Post. 7 June 2018. Retrieved 13 April 2023. "Cambodia election: Ruling party claims landslide in vote with no main opposition". BBC News. 30 July 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodia: Hun Sen re-elected in landslide victory after brutal crackdown". The Guardian. 29 July 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodia's Ruling Party Just Held Senate Elections. It Won Every Seat". TIME. 26 February 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodia king urges Senate dominated by ruling party to protect rights". Reuters. 23 April 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodia's parliament holds first session since July vote". Reuters. 5 September 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodia launches one-party legislature". Agencia EFE. 5 September 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "'Unity' urged by King as West 'boycotts' opening". Phnom Penh Post. 6 September 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Senior Cambodian opposition figure allowed back in politics". ABC News (US). 4 September 2020. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "King grants political rehab for Ham and Chansak". Phnom Penh Post. 20 May 2021. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Pol Ham and Sokha's lawyer granted political rehabilitation". Khmer Times. 20 May 2021. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Three more ex-CNRP officials granted political rehabilitation". Phnom Penh Post. 22 February 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodia's King Grants Royal Pardon to Kem Sokha". Radio Free Asia. 12 February 2016. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodia resumes treason trial of opposition leader Kem Sokha". The Guardian. 19 January 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Cambodian opposition figure Kem Sokha sentenced to 27 years of house arrest". Reuters. 3 March 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "Cambodia: Land rights activist Tep Vanny released from prison following royal pardon". Amnesty International. 20 August 2018. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "Cambodian king grants pardons to land rights activists". Channel News Asia. 21 August 2018. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "Australian filmmaker James Ricketson granted royal pardon in Cambodia". Sydney Morning Herald. 21 September 2018. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "Vote without fear, says King". Khmer Times. 11 May 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "King encourages subjects to vote". Phnom Penh Post. 10 May 2022. Retrieved 17 March 2023. "Cambodia's ruling party wins local commune elections but new opposition gains". Reuters. 6 June 2022. Retrieved 17 March 2023. "PM pledges further support to Cambodia's ASEAN Community building efforts". VietnamPlus - Vietnam News Agency. 10 November 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. "King, PM seek parliamentary co-op for ASEAN unity, peace". Phnom Penh Post. 21 November 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. "Myanmar crisis thwarts ASEAN dreams, says King Sihamoni". Khmer Times. 22 November 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. "King asks subjects to vote in general election". Phnom Penh Post. 18 February 2023. Retrieved 22 February 2023. "King appeals to citizens to cast ballots in National Election". Khmer Times. 20 February 2023. Retrieved 22 February 2023. "Rainsy comes under heavy flak over latest insult". Khmer Times. 20 February 2023. Retrieved 22 February 2023. "Cambodia's ruling party says it won a landslide victory in elections". Reuters. 24 July 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "Cambodia's Elections: No Surprises, but an Uncertain Leadership Future". Council on Foreign Relations. 25 July 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "Cambodia Disqualifies Main Opposition Party Ahead of Election". The New York Times. 16 May 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "An end to an era as Hun Sen passes baton to son Manet". Phnom Penh Post. 26 July 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "Asia's longest-ruling leader to hand power to West Point-trained son". NBC News. 26 July 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "King Agrees to Appoint Hun Manet as New Prime Minister in August". Cambojanews. 26 July 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "End of an era: PM Hun Sen stepping down after helming nation for over 38 years". Khmer Times. 27 July 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "Hun Manet will become new Prime Minister on August 22". Khmer Times. 26 July 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. "King issues a Royal Decree appointing His Excellency Dr. Hun Manet as Prime Minister of Cambodia". Khmer Times. 7 August 2023. Retrieved 7 August 2023. "Cambodia: PM's son Hun Manet appointed next ruler in royal formality". BBC News. 7 August 2023. Retrieved 7 August 2023. "Cambodia ushers in new era as National Assembly inaugurated". Phnom Penh Post. 21 August 2023. Retrieved 22 August 2023. "Cambodia: son of long time ruler Hun Sen becomes PM in historic transfer of power". The Guardian. 22 August 2023. Retrieved 22 August 2023. "New Faces in Cambodia's Parliament as King Welcomes Incoming Lawmakers". VOA News. 21 August 2023. Retrieved 22 August 2023. "Hun Manet officially Cambodia's Prime Minister". Phnom Penh Post. 22 August 2023. Retrieved 22 August 2023. "Norodom Sihamoni - king of Cambodia". Encyclopædia Britannica. 10 May 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "The Story of Cambodia's Ballet-Dancing King". The Culture Trip Ltd. 17 January 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "The King visits people in Kratie". Khmer Times. 28 June 2023. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "En Route to Long-Distance Learning". Cambodia Daily. 10 May 2008. Retrieved 1 August 2023. Diamond, Catherine (2012). Communities of Imagination: Contemporary Southeast Asian Theatres. Honolulu, Hawaii, United States: University of Hawaii Press. p. 122. "His Majesty the King visits the Royal University of Fine Arts". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 2 March 2006. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Royal support to Koh Pich Victims Families". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 22 November 2010. Retrieved 22 September 2021. "Royal support for Koh Pich victims". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 22 November 2010. Retrieved 22 September 2021. "Royal support to Koh Pich victims and their families (end)". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 22 November 2010. Retrieved 22 September 2021. "The unspoken truth of King Sihamoni's generous spirit". Khmer Times. 14 May 2021. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "King gives to victims of flood". The Phnom Penh Post. 25 July 2018. Retrieved 4 September 2021. His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni visits flood victims. Feel Great. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021 – via YouTube. "Citizens reflect on King Sihamoni's legacy on Coronation Day". Khmer Times. 30 October 2019. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Royal Grant to the population of Oral District, Kampong speu province". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 2 February 2010. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "School buildings granted to different provinces". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 10 September 2006. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "Food distribution toKean Laing orphanage". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 13 May 2008. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "Royal donation to the poor of Vat Champa". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 13 May 2008. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "Offering to Preah Tvea Pagoda". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 7 January 2006. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "Royal donation to Seiha Samien". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 20 April 2007. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "Food distribution to Chaom Chao rehabilitation center". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 13 May 2008. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "TPO Cambodia Newsletter - 8 April 2015, Issue 6" (PDF). Transcultural Psychosocial Organization Cambodia. 8 April 2015. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "King Sihamoni and Queen Mother Donate to Sunday's Victims". The Cambodia Daily. 18 September 2013. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Royal contribution to the 'Initiative For Change' NGO". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 6 July 2006. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "US Embassy Issues a Statement Thanking King Sihamoni for Donation for Katrina Victims". VOA News Cambodia. 13 September 2005. Retrieved 27 March 2022. "Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Zhao Lijian's Regular Press Conference on June 27, 2022". The Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in New Zealand（Cook Islands, Niue). 27 June 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2023. "Assistant Foreign Minister Wu Jianghao Meets with Cambodian Ambassador to China Khek Caimealy Sysoda". Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the People's Republic of China. 31 August 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2023. "Their Majesties the King and Queen-Mother donate $1 Million for COVID-19 vaccine purchase". Khmer Times. 11 December 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "King, Queen Mother donate $2M for Covid-19 fight". The Phnom Penh Post. 24 June 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "A King who is 'poor' but with a golden heart". Khmer Times. 2 August 2021. Retrieved 20 September 2023. "Covid donations flow in from Monarchy, business community". The Phnom Penh Post. 29 April 2021. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Royals chip in to aid demining efforts". TheStar. 27 July 2022. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "Clearing Cambodia's leftover land mines: A dangerous job". DW. 30 August 2018. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "Sa Majesté Preah Bat Samdech Preah Boromneath Norodom Sihamoni, Roi du Cambodge 2006" (PDF). International Theatre Institute. 2006. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "King Norodom Sihamoni and his love for Arts". Khmer Times. 14 May 2021. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "International Dance Day - His Majesty King Norodom SIHAMONI of Cambodia". International Theatre Institute. 2016. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "Sa Majesté Preah Bat Samdech Preah Boromneath Norodom Sihamoni, Roi du Cambodge 2006" (PDF). International Theatre Institute. 2006. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "L'ombrello di Beatocello screened at festivities honouring Beat Richner's humanitarian work in Cambodia". SWISS FILMS. 25 September 2012. Retrieved 11 July 2022. "Beatocello's Umbrella". IMDB. 2012. Retrieved 11 July 2022. "Cambodian royalty to open Angelina Jolie's film on Khmer Rouge survivor". USA Today. 14 February 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2021. Cambodia The Power of Memory BBC Documentary 2017. teamajolie/ BBC. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 14 September 2021 – via YouTube. "Angelina Jolie And Kids Make First Public Appearance Since Her Split From Brad Pitt". Huffington Post. 19 February 2017. Retrieved 13 March 2023. "Ballet doco premiered for King". Phnom Penh Post. 27 March 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. "King promotes cool shade of Buddhism". Khmer Times. 17 December 2020. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "King Sihamoni and PM lauded on International Buddhist Day". The Phnom Penh Post. 11 April 2022. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Cambodian Culture - Religion". Cultural Atlas. 15 April 2022. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Reign of the quiet king". The Phnom Penh Post. 29 October 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "King Norodom Sihamoni, a 'morale model' to the people". Khmer Times. 14 May 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2022. "Cambodia's Water Festival". Aljazeera. 22 November 2010. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "Bon Om Touk, Cambodian water festival". Cambodia Angkor Air. 2022. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "Cambodia celebrates 66th Independence Day". Phnom Penh Post. 9 November 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "Royal Ploughing Ceremony 2017 in Cambodia". Embassy of the Czech Republic in Phnom Penh. 12 May 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "Celebration of Khmer New Year (1st day)". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 14 April 2021. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "Celebration of Khmer New Year (2nd day)". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 14 April 2021. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "Celebration of Khmer New Year (3rd day)". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 14 April 2021. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "SEA Games regional relay kicks off as King lights torch". Asia News Network. 23 March 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. "French society lauds Sihamoni for supporting art, archaeology". The Phnom Penh Post. 15 March 2010. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "ICC-Angkor: 20 years of international cooperation for conservation and sustainable development". UNESCO. 2013. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "King Sihamoni returns after ICC-Angkor event in Paris". Khmer Times. 27 May 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "His Majesty NORODOM Sihamoni, the King of Cambodia held audience with the ICC-Angkor's delegation". UNESCO. 2 March 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "ICC-Angkor: 25 years of model international cooperation". UNESCO. 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "Celebration of the restoration of the Baphuon Temple". Ecole française d'Extrême-Orient. 3 July 2011. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "King Sihamoni requests new addition to World Heritage list". Khmer Times. 15 November 2021. Retrieved 21 November 2021. "King Sihamoni requests 'Bokator' and 'Koh Ker' on the World Heritage List". Khmer Times. 16 November 2021. Retrieved 21 November 2021. "Cambodia's Bokator now officially in World Heritage List". Phnom Penh Post. 30 November 2022. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "Koh Ker Listed As A World Heritage Site". Ministry of Information of Cambodia. 17 September 2023. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "Angkor grand causeway reopens to public". Phnom Penh Post. 4 November 2023. Retrieved 5 November 2023. "Restoration of the Western Causeway of Angkor Wat Completed; Completion Ceremony to be Held on November 4". Sophia University. 16 October 2023. Retrieved 5 November 2023. "Hu meets Cambodia's new king in Beijing". China Daily. 18 October 2004. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "Why Cambodia's royals need close China ties that are separate from Hun Sen's government". South China Morning Post. 29 November 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "King Sihamoni returns home after routine medical checkup". Khmer Times. 13 April 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "King Sihamoni calls for climate action at COP21". The Phnom Penh Post. 2 December 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "Statement By His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni: Leader Event of the United Nations Climate Change Conference - 30 November 2015" (PDF). Ministry of Environment of Cambodia. 30 November 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations, Beijing". UNESCO. 15 May 2019. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "Foreign leaders speak during opening of Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations in Beijing". China Today. 16 May 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "Emperor meets Cambodia king". The Japan Times. 18 May 2010. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "King Sihamoni of Cambodia receives warm welcome in Prague". Radio Prague International. 20 September 2006. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "Cambodian King's Maiden Visit To India To Mark 70 Years Of Diplomatic Relations". NDTV. 28 May 2023. Retrieved 14 July 2023. "Cambodian King Sihamoni to visit India after 60 years". The Daily Guardian. 26 May 2023. Retrieved 14 July 2023. "French President Jacques Chirac (R) greets visiting Cambodian King Norodom Sihamoni upon his arrival at the Elysee Palace, in Paris ON November 20, 2006. The king is in France on a five-day official visit". Alamy. 20 November 2006. "CO13030 - Norodom Sihanouk: His Mercurial Art of Preserving a Small State". S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies. 9 September 2014. Retrieved 22 March 2022. "Norodom Sihanouk dies at 89; former king led Cambodia through decades of strife". The Washington Post. 15 October 2012. Retrieved 22 March 2022. "Profile: Norodom Sihanouk". BBC News. 14 October 2004. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "Delicate dance for Cambodia king". The Christian Science Monitor. 1 November 2004. Retrieved 1 April 2023. Cambodia's low-key King Sihamoni celebrates 10 years on throne. Archived from the original on 29 October 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2022 – via YouTube. {{cite AV media}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) McPherson, Poppy (29 October 2014). "Reign of the quiet king". The Phnom Penh Post. Retrieved 22 March 2022. "Post earns four awards at annual SOPA event". Phnom Penh Post. 16 June 2015. Retrieved 1 April 2023. "PM praises King for strong humanitarian support". Khmer Times. 27 November 2020. Retrieved 22 September 2023. "King Sihamoni's 14-year reign celebrated". Khmer Times. 29 October 2018. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "Hun Sen: No peace, no hope". The Phnom Penh Post. 12 February 2022. Retrieved 19 March 2022. "'Unity' key in King's message". The Phnom Penh Post. 30 October 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "Cambodia: Stop backsliding and expand freedom – UN expert". United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. 6 October 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Cambodian opposition figure faces royal insult charge". Yahoo News. 20 June 2018. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "Rainsy faces up to five years in prison for insulting King". The Phnom Penh Post. 28 December 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "Sam Rainsy in hot water again for lese majeste". Khmer Times. 24 June 2021. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "10 Years Into Sihamoni's Reign, a Changed Palace". Cambodia Daily. 29 October 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "Cambodia's publicity shy king forced into center of political fracas". Radio Free Asia. 6 November 2022. Retrieved 1 April 2023. A. Kent (2022). Covenantal Pluralism: Resonances and Dissonances in Cambodia, The Review of Faith & International Affairs, 20:1, 11-26, DOI: 10.1080/15570274.2022.2031054 "Never Again? The Legacy of Cambodia's Khmer Rouge Trial". United States Institute of Peace. 3 October 2022. Retrieved 13 April 2023. "Cambodia's King Under Criticism for Not Intervening in Election Dispute". Radio Free Asia. 10 September 2013. Retrieved 1 April 2023. "Cambodia's 'quiet king' must find his political voice". Asia Times. 15 January 2019. Retrieved 9 August 2022. "Southeast Asia -An introductory history". Allen and Unwin Book Publishers. 2002. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "Milton Osborne". LOWY INSTITUTE. 2022. Retrieved 7 May 2022. "Cambodia's king seen as a 'prisoner' in his palace". The Seattle Times. 29 May 2011. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "Cambodian monarchy fading into history". Bangkok Post. 2 February 2013. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "The monarchy's future public role: To reign but not to rule?" (PDF). An International Review of Peace Initiatives – Accord, Issue 5; Safeguarding Peace: Cambodia’s Constitutional Challenge. November 1998. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "Cambodian king speaks of suicide over nation's woes". AP News. 13 October 1997. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "Cambodia Says It Thwarted Coup by Prince, Ex-Official". Los Angeles Times. 4 July 1994. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "Hun Sen: the "worms" that must die". Phnom Penh Post. 1 December 1995. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "Harm King 'over my dead body'". Phnom Penh Post. 25 October 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "'We must protect the throne,' says PM Hun Sen". Khmer Times. 29 December 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "King bestows Samdech title on Hun Neng posthumously". Phnom Penh Post. 8 May 2022. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "As His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni celebrates his 68th birthday, Khmer Times spoke with Pannsastra University of Cambodia's history professor, Sombo Manara to reflect on the King's influence in Cambodia, the Land of Khmers". Khmer Times. 14 May 2021. Retrieved 20 March 2022. "Cambodia's king wins high marks after six months on throne". Taipei Times. 17 May 2005. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "Cambodia: Moving Beyond The Frontier". International Monetary Fund. 4 December 2013. Retrieved 4 September 2021. @ASEAN (14 May 2021). "We wish the happiest birthday to King Norodom Sihamoni of Cambodia! Cherished and well-respected by the people of Cambodia, King Sihamoni shows his dignified and humble leadership by reaching out through a series of visits to the rural and local villages" (Tweet) – via Twitter.[non-primary source needed] HM King Norodom Sihamoni surprise people for his visited. Meng Lyhour. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 4 September 2021 – via YouTube. "Public Holidays 2021". National Bank of Cambodia. 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "New note to mark King's coronation". The Phnom Penh Post. 7 October 2019. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "The 15,000 Riel Commemorative Banknote Issued 29 October 2019" (PDF). Landqart. 2019. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "Banknotes in Circulation". National Bank of Cambodia. 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2021. J. Wolfarth (2019). "Lineage and Legitimacy: Exploring Royal-Familial Visual Configurations in Cambodia". Hampshire College/Michigan Publishing. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "Freedom in the World 2016 - Cambodia". Freedom House via UNHCR. 14 July 2016. Retrieved 28 March 2023. "Cambodia Passes Lèse-Majesté Law | Voice of America - English". 16 February 2018. "Lèse majesté law now in effect". The Phnom Penh Post. 5 March 2018. Retrieved 20 March 2022. "Cambodia parliament adopts lese-majeste law, prompting rights concerns". Reuters. 14 February 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Cambodia: end efforts to introduce lèse-majesté law". International Commission of Jurists. 2 February 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Arrest for lèse majesté violation". The Phnom Penh Post. 14 May 2018. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "Trial begins for duo accused of lese majeste". Khmer Times. 17 February 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Cambodia charges environment activists with insulting the king". BBC News. 22 June 2021. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "Two Cambodians held on rare royal insults charge after Facebook posts". Reuters. 23 March 2023. Retrieved 28 March 2023. "Cambodia jails 70-year-old in first conviction for royal insult". Reuters. 5 October 2018. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "Cambodian man jailed for insulting king in Facebook posts". The Guardian. 9 January 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "Cambodia hunting suspects over doctored porn image of king". BBC News. 2 January 2017. Retrieved 1 April 2022. "About Cambodia - The King of Cambodia". Tourism of Cambodia. 10 May 2020. Retrieved 7 September 2021. "Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia 1993, as amended to 2018". UN Women. 1 January 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2021. "King Sihamoni arrives". The Phnom Penh Post. 22 October 2004. Retrieved 26 April 2022. "City Cheers The Arrival Of New King". Cambodia Daily. 21 October 2004. Retrieved 3 April 2023. Hutt, David. "The Real Danger of Cambodia's 'Gay King' Episode". thediplomat.com. Retrieved 24 June 2020. "Reign of the quiet king". The Phnom Penh Post. 29 October 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "The Story of Cambodia's Ballet-Dancing King". The Culture Trip Ltd. 17 January 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "Kate 'Won't Obey Wills' In Wedding Vows". Sky News. 22 April 2011. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "King's wedding 'snub' denied". The Phnom Penh Post. 25 April 2011. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "A King who is 'poor' but with a golden heart". Khmer Times. 2 August 2021. Retrieved 22 September 2023. "PM praises King for strong humanitarian support". Khmer Times. 27 November 2020. Retrieved 22 September 2023. "King Sihamoni of Cambodia receives warm welcome in Prague". Radio Prague. 20 September 2006. "The Only Monarch in the World Who Speaks Czech Fluently | Tres Bohemes". Everything Czech | by Tres Bohemes. 2 May 2017. Retrieved 24 June 2020. "The Artiste, The Ambassador, The Prince". The Phnom Penh Post. 21 April 1995. Retrieved 6 September 2021. The Curious History Of Cambodia's Beloved Kings - Asia's Monarchies. Real Royalty. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2021 – via YouTube. "My Village at Sunset". IMDb. 1994. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "Prachea Komar". IMDb. 1967. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "BIOGRAPHY OF HIS MAJESTY KING NORODOM SIHAMONI OF CAMBODIA". Khmer Times. 13 May 2019. Retrieved 31 March 2022. "The Dancing King". New York Times. 7 November 2004. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "The Dancing King". New York Times. 7 November 2004. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Norodom Sihanouk, King and Filmmaker". Culture Unplugged. 1997. Retrieved 8 August 2023. "NORODOM SIHANOUK, King and Film-maker". Casadei-Productions. 1997. Retrieved 8 August 2023. Jeldres, Julio A. (2003). The Royal House of Cambodia (1st ed.). Cambodia: Monument Books. p. 81. "KRAM" (PDF). Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International Cooperation of Cambodia. 27 June 2020. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Press Release - 3 September 2023: On 2 September 2023, His Majesty Preah Bat Samdech Preah Boromneath NORODOM SIHAMONI, King of Cambodia, bestowed the distinguished title of "Samdech Moha Borvor Thipadei HUN MANET" upon His Excellency Prime Minister of Cambodia". Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International Cooperation of Cambodia. 3 September 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "King's Coronation Day in Cambodia in 2022". Office Holidays Ltd. 2022. Retrieved 23 April 2022. "Press Release - Congratulatory Letters of His Majesty Preah Bat Samdech Preah Boromneath NORODOM SIHAMONI, King of the Kingdom of Cambodia, and His Excellency Dr. Thongloun SISOULITH, President of the Lao People's Democratic Republic, on the occasion of the 65th Anniversary of the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations between the Kingdom of Cambodia and the Lao People's Democratic Republic". Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International Cooperation of Cambodia. 15 June 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2022. Jeldres, Julio A. (2017). The Royal House of Cambodia (2nd ed.). Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute. p. 132. ISBN 9789924907855. "Cambodian King Granted 'Virtuous' Buddhist Title". VOA News. 4 June 2015. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Royal Parade for King Norodom Sihamoni Honorary Title". VOA News. 3 June 2015. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "ព្រះ មហាក្សត្រ មាន ព្រះ បរមងារ កិត្តិយស ថ្មីគឺ «ព្រះស្រី លោក ធម្មិករាជ»". VOA News Khmer. 3 June 2015. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Royal activities in People Republic of China (continued 08)". Official Website of HM King Norodom Sihamoni. 8 September 2015. Retrieved 24 March 2023. "King Norodom Sihamoni named 'Royal Patron' by WFB". Khmer Times. 26 June 2023. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "CONSTITUTION OF THE KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA (ANNOTATED)" (PDF). International Labour Organization. 4 March 1999. Retrieved 23 April 2022. "Angkor grand causeway reopens to public". Phnom Penh Post. 4 November 2023. Retrieved 5 November 2023. "Restoration of the Western Causeway of Angkor Wat Completed; Completion Ceremony to be Held on November 4". Sophia University. 16 October 2023. Retrieved 5 November 2023. "New publication". Ecole française d'Extrême-Orient. 6 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "MEDIA RELEASE - CELEBRATING A DECADE OF COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH AT ANGKOR" (PDF). Australian Embassy Phnom Penh. 15 December 2009. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "A la découverte d'un hôpital angkorien (An Angkorian Hospital)". Angkor Database. 2008. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Water Management in Angkor: The Cases of North Baray and Neak Poan". Angkor Database. 2014. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Angkor: The Rise of a Myth (Press Release)" (PDF). Guimet Museum (Musée national des arts asiatiques-Guimet). November 2011. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "King Calls for Preservation of Cultural Heritage". VOA Cambodia. 2 November 2007. Retrieved 31 July 2023. "King Sihamoni requests 'Bokator' and 'Koh Ker' on the World Heritage List". Khmer Times. 16 November 2021. Retrieved 21 November 2021. "Koh Ker Listed As A World Heritage Site". Ministry of Information of Cambodia. 17 September 2023. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "Opinion - Meanwhile: The man who would (rather not) be king". The New York Times. 13 January 2005. Retrieved 1 August 2023. Diamond, Catherine (2012). Communities of Imagination: Contemporary Southeast Asian Theatres. Honolulu, Hawaii, United States: University of Hawaii Press. pp. 122–123. "Biskup Galis požehnal obnovenú sochu sv. Jána Nepomuckého v Divine". tkkbs.sk. Retrieved 29 July 2017. "BIOGRAPHY OF HIS MAJESTY KING NORODOM SIHAMONI OF CAMBODIA". Khmer Times. 13 May 2019. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "French society lauds Sihamoni for supporting art, archaeology". The Phnom Penh Post. 15 March 2010. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "Installation de Norodom Sihamoni, roi du Cambodge, associé étranger de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres". Canal Academies. 12 March 2010. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "Sa Majesté Preah Bat Samdech Preah Boromneath Norodom Sihamoni, Roi du Cambodge 2006" (PDF). International Theatre Institute. 2006. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "Mozart gets the Royal seal of approval in Cambodia". SBS Language (Italian). 8 September 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "In-Focus-2010-11" (PDF). Center for Khmer Studies. 2010. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Surviving Covid-19 Appeal TO BE OR NOT TO BE: An uncertain future". The Nginn Karet Foundation for Cambodia. 6 September 2021. "the sacred dancers of angkor". Diethelm Travel. 6 September 2021. "Acclaimed Dancers Headline Eighth Annual Nuits d'Angkor". Cambodia Daily. 17 January 2008. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "CLA Annual Report 2019" (PDF). Cambodian Living Arts. 1 December 2019. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Ballet doco premiered for King". Phnom Penh Post. 27 March 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. "Technicolor Foundation co-founder and co-organizer of MEMORY! International Film Heritage : 2nd edition review". Technicolour Foundation. 11 August 2014. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "CIE CABARET DES OISEAUX". Centre ressource des Arts du Mime et du Geste. 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Cambodia breaks world's longest krama record". Khmer Times. 2018. Retrieved 1 April 2022. "Longest hand woven scarf (team)". Guinness World Records Limited. 1 July 2018. Retrieved 23 April 2022. "New Angkor meditation centre opens". Phnom Penh Post. 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. "Gallic fest brings food and art to the fore". Phnom Penh Post. 4 March 2013. Retrieved 31 July 2023. KepExpo2018. Contact Vimana. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2023 – via YouTube. "U.S. Air Force Band String Quartet Concert". United States Embassy, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 8 May 2016. Retrieved 20 October 2023. "His Majesty Preah Bat Samdech Preah Boromneath NORODOM SIHAMONI, King of Cambodia, and Her Majesty Samdech Preah Mahaksatrey NORODOM MONINEATH SIHANOUK, Queen Mother of Cambodia, graciously graced a special event organised by the Royal Thai Embassy". Royal Thai Embassy, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 23 June 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2023. "King Continues Glowing Support for Local Artists". The Cambodia Daily. 10 May 2008. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Cambodia". Battery Dance Company. October 2006. Retrieved 28 October 2023. "The Battle for Hearts, Minds and Toes". New York Times. 29 October 2006. Retrieved 28 October 2023. "Cambodian royalty to open Angelina Jolie's film on Khmer Rouge survivor". USA Today. 14 February 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "L'ombrello di Beatocello screened at festivities honouring Beat Richner's humanitarian work in Cambodia". SWISS FILMS. 25 September 2012. Retrieved 11 July 2022. "Beatocello's Umbrella". IMDB. 2012. Retrieved 11 July 2022. "Ballet doco premiered for King". Phnom Penh Post. 27 March 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. "King and Queen Mother donate $100,000 to CRC ahead of May 8 anniversary". Khmer Times. 20 April 2023. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "TOP HONOUR FOR SCOTT NEESON". Cambodian Children's Fund. 3 July 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Inauguration of various achievements of the Samdech Euv Team". Official website of His Majesty King Norodom Sihamoni. 6 February 2023. Retrieved 31 July 2023. "Krousar Thmey Annual Report 2016" (PDF). Krousar Thmey. 2016. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "TPO Cambodia Newsletter - 8 April 2015, Issue 6" (PDF). Transcultural Psychosocial Organization Cambodia. 8 April 2015. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Royal Embassy of Cambodia to Switzerland, Year: 5, No: 46, Bulletin: September 2012" (PDF). Royal Embassy of Cambodia to Switzerland. September 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "King opens first heart surgery centre in Phnom Penh after donating $1.2M". Phnom Penh Post. 2019. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "His Majesty the King Cheers 25th Anniversary of Kantha Bopha Children's Hospitals". Press & Quick Reaction Unit - Office of the Council of Ministers. 15 November 2017. Retrieved 31 July 2023. "Eye Care Foundation recognised with Cambodia's highest honour". Phnom Penh Post. 28 March 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. "PREAH SIHAMONI RAJA BUDDHIST UNIVERSITY". The International Association of Theravada Buddhist Universities. 2007. Retrieved 7 August 2022. "Preah Sihamoniraja Buddhist University". Samadhi International Buddhist Counseling Center. 2022. Retrieved 7 August 2022. "Hospital Celebrates a Decade of Free Treatment". Cambodia Daily. 26 October 2006. Retrieved 8 August 2022. "Sihanouk Hospital Center Celebrates 20 Years in Phnom Penh". Cambodia Daily. 8 November 2016. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Neuroscience centre opens". Phnom Penh Post. 8 October 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2022. "Right.Brain Foundation e.V. Provides Advanced Navigation System to New Cambodian Neurology Center". BrainLab. 7 October 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2022. "NATIONAL CONSTRUCTION GOLD MEDAL". Teach Them To Fish Foundation. 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2022. "King Norodom Sihamoni Gives Donations To Older Persons In Kampong Chhnang Province". Ministry of Information of Cambodia. 1 October 2021. Retrieved 9 April 2023. "Royal donations for orphans in Kampong Speu". Khmer Times. 3 June 2021. Retrieved 9 April 2023. "Royal donations for orphans in Kampong Speu". Khmer Times. 3 June 2021. Retrieved 9 April 2023. "018_donations_in_cash_in_cambodia_018.pdf" (PDF). Waltzing Around Cambodia Onlus. 24 April 2022. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Cambodia Helmet Vaccine Initiative - The Passenger Helmet Story 2011-2012" (PDF). AIP Foundation. September 2012. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "His Majesty Norodom Sihamoni, King of Cambodia, visited the House of Family in Phnom Penh". ON OWN FEET - TUSENBENETS VENNER (Centipede). 31 May 2006. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "House of Family". Dvojfarebný svet. 2011. Retrieved 5 April 2023. "King, Queen Mother donate $2M for Covid-19 fight". The Phnom Penh Post. 24 June 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "En Route to Long-Distance Learning". Cambodia Daily. 10 May 2008. Retrieved 1 August 2023. Diamond, Catherine (2012). Communities of Imagination: Contemporary Southeast Asian Theatres. Honolulu, Hawaii, United States: University of Hawaii Press. p. 122. "King Sihamoni Opens Don Bosco Hotel School". Cambodia Daily. 14 February 2007. Retrieved 29 July 2023. "US Embassy Issues a Statement Thanking King Sihamoni for Donation for Katrina Victims". VOA News Cambodia. 13 September 2005. Retrieved 27 March 2022. "Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Zhao Lijian's Regular Press Conference on June 27, 2022". The Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in New Zealand（Cook Islands, Niue). 27 June 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2023. "Assistant Foreign Minister Wu Jianghao Meets with Cambodian Ambassador to China Khek Caimealy Sysoda". Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the People's Republic of China. 31 August 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2023. "Makara, Narith top endurance in Siem Reap". Phnom Penh Post. 26 June 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "Thirty-five saddle up for national show jumping event". Phnom Penh Post. 30 January 2015. Retrieved 16 July 2023. "SEA Games regional relay kicks off as King lights torch". Asia News Network. 23 March 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. "King Sihamoni requests 'Bokator' and 'Koh Ker' on the World Heritage List". Khmer Times. 16 November 2021. Retrieved 21 November 2021. "Cambodia's Bokator now officially in World Heritage List". Phnom Penh Post. 30 November 2022. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "Airavata Elephant Sanctuary". Maads. 6 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Official Meetings". Airavata Elephant Foundation. 2020. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "King urges tree planting on Arbour Day". Phnom Penh Post. 10 July 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "King calls for more trees to be planted". Khmer Times. 11 July 2022. Retrieved 31 July 2022. "Rubbish Naga Sculpture Marks World Water Day". The Cambodia Daily. 24 March 2008. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "King Continues Glowing Support for Local Artists". The Cambodia Daily. 10 May 2008. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "BIOGRAPHY OF HIS MAJESTY KING NORODOM SIHAMONI OF CAMBODIA". Khmer Times. 13 May 2019. Retrieved 24 June 2020. Jeldres, Julio A. (2017). The Royal House of Cambodia (2nd ed.). Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute. p. 152. ISBN 9789924907855. "Foreign honors awarded roster 2010". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. 11 May 2010. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "3 2008 ROČNÍK XXXII - REUNION ČASOPIS VOJENSKÉHO A ŠPITÁLNÍHO ŘÁDU SV. LAZARA JERUZALÉMSKÉHO ČASOPIS VOJENSKÉHO A ŠPITÁLNÍHO ŘÁDU SV. LAZARA JERUZALÉMSKÉHO – BOHEMIA (pg.12)" (PDF). Military and Hospitaller Order of Saint Lazarus of Jerusalem. March 2008. Retrieved 23 April 2022. "GRATIAS AGIT Award". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic. 9 November 2012. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "Gratias Agit Award Laureates 2006" (PDF). Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic. 1 January 2006. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "King of Cambodia considers Czech Republic his second home". Radio Prague International. 19 September 2006. Retrieved 9 May 2021. "TO THE HONOUR OF THE MUSES - Honorary Doctorates Awarded by the Academy of Performing Arts in Prague". Academy of Performing Arts in Prague. 24 May 2021. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Announcement of the Naresuan University Council - Title - Honorary Doctorates to be Conferred in 2015" (PDF). Naresuan University. 12 June 2015. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "12.26.17 International Nonprofit News". Philanthropy Journal - North Carolina State University. 26 December 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "CCF founder Neeson gets honorary degree". The Phnom Penh Post. 28 November 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "GardenWise - The Newsletter of the Singapore Botanical Gardens Volume 27, July 2006 (pg. 29)". Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Search The International Orchid Register - Orchid details: Dendrobium Norodom Sihamoni". Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Phnom Penh - Royal Palace Norodom Sihamoni Museum Name Plaque". (Le Monde1) Flickr. 20 May 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2023. "Event Reports". Nenbutsushu Sampozan Muryojuji Temple. 8 April 2010. Retrieved 1 October 2023. "A TEACHER OF A FORMER FLOATING SCHOOL DESIRES TO FURTHER GROW HIS ICT SKILLS". Save the Children. 27 January 2022. "EDUCATION CONGRESS: THE EDUCATION, YOUTH AND SPORT PERFORMANCE IN THE ACADEMIC YEAR 2017-2018 AND GOALS FOR THE ACADEMIC YEAR 2018 2019" (PDF). Ministry of Education, Youth, and Sport. April 2013. Retrieved 23 January 2022. "His Majesty Norodom Sihamoni Inaugurates a High School in Kampong Chhnang Province (Royal Embassy of Cambodia to Switzerland - Year 6, No 53, Bulletin April 2013)" (PDF). Royal Embassy of Cambodia to Switzerland. April 2013. Retrieved 23 January 2022. "Call for Proposals - Enhancement of Technical Education in Cambodia RESULTS". Embassy of the Czech Republic in Phnom Penh. March 2015. Retrieved 23 January 2022. "King opens first heart surgery centre in Phnom Penh after donating $1.2M". Phnom Penh Post. 2019. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "New Angkor meditation centre opens". Phnom Penh Post. 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. King Norodom Sihamoni Blvវិថីព្រះបាទសម្តេចព្រះបរមនាថ នរោត្តម សីហមុនី. srinfrastructure. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 18 April 2022 – via YouTube. Siem Reap King Norodom Sihamoni Avenue. srinfrastructure. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 18 April 2022 – via YouTube. Siem Reap Norodom Sihamoni Road. srinfrastructure. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 18 April 2022 – via YouTube. Embassy of Cambodia Miroslav Nožina, Jiří Šitler, and Karel Kučera. Royal Ties: King Norodom Sihamoni and the History of Czech-Cambodian Relations. Prague: Knižní klub, 2006. ISBN 978-80-86938-75-2 Julio A Jeldres. The Royal House of Cambodia [First edition]. Cambodia: Monument Books, 2003. ISBN 974-90881-0-8 Julio A Jeldres. The Royal House of Cambodia [Second edition]. Cambodia: The Sleuk Rith Institute, 2017. ISBN 978-99-24907-85-5 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Norodom Sihamoni. King Norodom Sihamoni – Official Website Article about Norodom Sihamoni's coronation by Antonio Graceffo