Gordon Young is a Scottish football manager who was assistant manager of Hartlepool United. Young started his managerial career as youth manager of Scottish top flight side Motherwell. In 2010, he was appointed manager of Motherwell. In 2013, he was appointed youth manager of Sheffield United in the English third division. In May 2016, following the departure of Mixu Paatelainen, Young was appointed caretaker manager of Scottish top flight club Dundee United for their two remaining league matches following their relegation from the Scottish Premiership. Following this, he was appointed assistant manager of East Fife in Scottish League Two. In 2017, he was appointed manager of American youth team Impact Soccer Club. In 2018, Young was appointed assistant manager of Falkirk in the Scottish Championship. After that, he was appointed assistant manager of the Latvian National Team. After that, he was then appointed manager of Latvian club side Liepāja. In 2019, Young was appointed assistant manager of Cove Rangers in the Scottish League Two. "From Cambuslang to Cove via Kazakhstan: Gordon Young on taking the road less travelled". heraldscotland.com. "Motherwell caretaker Gordon Young finds going tough". news.bbc.co.uk. "Profile". lv.linkedin.com. "Dundee United caretaker boss Gordon Young insists there is plenty to play for at Kilmarnock". thecourier.co.uk. "New Addition to Management Team". eastfifefc.info. "Rolling with the punches: Gordon Young turned to boxing after Dundee United axe but bruising time is over as California beckons". dailyrecord.co.uk. "New Falkirk assistant Gordon Young comes with a Scotland manager's seal of approval". fakirkherald.co.uk. "Scottish Latvia assistant Gordon Young has ball, will travel with old pal Mixu Paatelainen". heraldscotland.com. "Par FK Liepāja/Mogo galveno treneri kļūst Gordon Young". fkliepaja.lv. "COVE RANGERS ASSISTANT BOSS GORDON GIVES LOWDOWN ON HIS JOB AND LIFE IN FOOTBALL". coverangersfc.com. Gordon Young on LinkedIn v t e