The Pennine Alps French: Alpes Pennines, German: Walliser Alpen, Italian: Alpi Pennine, Latin: Alpes Poeninae), sometimes referred to as the Valais Alps (which are just the Northern - Swiss - part of the Pennine Alps), are a mountain range in the western part of the Alps. They are located in Italy (the Aosta Valley and Piedmont) and Switzerland (Valais). The Pennine Alps are amongst the three highest major subranges of the Alps, together with the Bernese Alps and the Graian Alps that include the Mont Blanc massif. The Italian side is drained by the rivers Dora Baltea, Sesia and Toce, tributaries of the Po. The Swiss side is drained by the Rhône. The Great St Bernard Tunnel, under the Great St Bernard Pass, leads from Martigny, Switzerland to Aosta. The main chain (watershed between the Mediterranean Sea and the Adriatic Sea) runs from west to east on the border between Italy (south) and Switzerland (north). From Mont Vélan, the first high summit east of St Bernard Pass, the chain rarely goes below 3000 metres and contains many four-thousanders such as Matterhorn or Monte Rosa. The valleys are quite similar on both side of the border, being generally oriented perpendicular to the main chain and descending progressively into the Rhône Valley on the north and the Aosta Valley on the south. Unlike many other mountain ranges, the higher peaks are often located outside the main chain and found themselves between the northern valleys (Grand Combin, Weisshorn, Mischabel, Weissmies). Aerial view of the Pennine Alps from a plane above Mont Blanc (Monte Bianco) Monte Rosa Matterhorn (Cervino) The chief peaks of the Pennine Alps are: Main glaciers: Gorner Glacier Corbassière Glacier Findel Glacier Zmutt Glacier Zinal Glacier Otemma Glacier Allalin Glacier Ferpècle Glacier Fee Glacier Mont Miné Glacier Ried Glacier Turtmann Glacier Moiry Glacier Arolla Glacier Moming Glacier Cheilon Glacier Rossbode Glacier The chief passes of the Pennine Alps are: Some regional nature parks, like the Parco Naturale Alta Valsesia (6,511 ha - Piedmont, IT), the Riserva Naturale Mont Mars (390 ha - Aosta Valley, IT) and the Regional park of Binn valley (15,891 ha - Valais, CH), have been established on both sides of the main water divide. Alpi Cusiane Biellese Alps Swiss Alps Swiss official cartography (Swiss Federal Office of Topography - Swisstopo); on-line version: map.geo.admin.ch Italian official cartography (Istituto Geografico Militare - IGM); on-line version: www.pcn.minambiente.it Natural Wonders of the World. Dorling Kindersley Limited. 2017. p. 138. ISBN 9780241428436. The Alps contain many subranges, some of which are mapped below. The loftiest are the Pennine Alps, which contain 13 of the highest 20 alpine peaks; the Bernese Alps contain four; and the Mont Blanc Massif in the Graian Alps has three. Coolidge, William Augustus Brevoort (1911). "Alps" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 1 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 743. Hilary Sharp, Tour of Monte Rosa: A Trekker's Guide. Parco Naturale Alta Valsesia site on www.parks.it (accessed in April 2012) Parco del Mont Avic park site on www.parks.it (accessed in April 2012) Ein regionaler Naturpark, park site on www.landschaftspark-binntal.ch (accessed in April 2012)