Rebound is a 2005 American sports comedy film directed by Steve Carr. It stars Martin Lawrence as a disgraced college basketball coach who returns to his old middle school to coach the boys' basketball team. This was also Tara Correa's only film role. She was murdered in a gang shooting on October 21, 2005, three months after the film's release. Coach Roy McCormick was once college basketball's top mastermind. His attention began to turn to what endorsement contracts he could secure instead of actually coaching his team. Roy lets his temper get the best of him in most situations. After causing a mishap with a mascot, the board bans McCormick from collegiate basketball until he can show that he can control his anger. Roy's reputation has doomed him to being un-hireable as a long time passes with no job offers. However, McCormick then gets one job offer, from Mount Vernon Junior High School which was also where he graduated as a teenager. His alma mater's basketball team, the Smelters, is looking for somebody to coach the team, and the headmistress thinks an alumnus of his caliber in basketball would be ideal. Although irritated, Roy realizes he has no other options and accepts the coaching job, figuring this is the way to prove he can control his anger and get back into the spotlight of college basketball. As Roy begins coaching the squad, he gets into an embarrassing situation that he's never been in before and decides, enough is enough. He eventually starts teaching the concepts of basketball to his new team, albeit placing paramount emphasis on sportsmanship. With teaching and learning being done between both Roy and the kids, the Smelters eventually start having success. Unexpectedly, this leads Roy to find out he's been missing his simple love of the game the whole time. Eventually Roy gains a new appreciation for his old school and figures that while it does not lead to big money endorsements, he can earn a comfortable living from this job. Martin Lawrence as Coach Roy McCormick / Preacher Don McCormick, Roy's identical twin brother Wendy Raquel Robinson as Jeanie Ellis Breckin Meyer as Tim Fink Horatio Sanz as Mr. Newirth Oren Williams as Keith Ellis, Jeanie's son Patrick Warburton as Larry Burgess Megan Mullally as Principal Mary Walsh Eddy Martin as One Love Steven Christopher Parker as "Sledgehammer" Big Wes Steven Anthony Lawrence as Ralph Logan McElroy as Fuzzy Gus Hoffman as Goggles Tara Correa as Big Mac Alia Shawkat as Amy Amy Bruckner as Annie Fred Stoller as Late Carl Katt Micah Williams as Preacher Don's sidekick Beau Billingslea as NCBA board member Cody Linley as Larry Burgess Jr. Robert Rusler as Falcon coach Tom Arnold as himself Gary Owen as Vulture mascot Laura Kightlinger as Car repo lady Tara Lynne Barr as Student Rebound received negative reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a 14% rating, based on 91 reviews, with an average rating of 3.71/10. The site's consensus reads, "Rebound ought to entertain its target audience, but there's nothing here for those who've seen The Bad News Bears or its countless derivatives." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 36 out of 100, based on 25 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". The film opened on July 1, 2005, and grossed $5,033,848 in its opening weekend, hitting #7; by the end of its run, the film had grossed $16,809,014 domestically and $683,000 internationally for a worldwide total of $17,492,014. Compared to its budget of $33.1 million, Rebound was a flop. Songs featured in the film Treat 'Em Right by Chubb Rock What's Up Doc? (Can We Rock) by Fu-Schnickens Sweet Georgia Brown by Brother Bones Brick House by The Commodores Sledgehammer by Peter Gabriel Keep Movin' by Dub Pistols (Every Time I Turn Around) Back in Love Again by L.T.D. Take Me to the Next Phase by The Isley Brothers Hands Up by The Black Eyed Peas Jump Around by House of Pain Hey Ya! by Outkast Puppy Love by Paul Anka Unbelievable by EMF Eye of the Tiger by Survivor List of basketball films "Rebound". "Gang member convicted of murdering 'Judging Amy' actress". Los Angeles Times. January 23, 2009. Retrieved September 5, 2009. Rebound at Rotten Tomatoes "Rebound Reviews - Metacritic". Metacritic. Weekend Box Office Results for July 1-3, 2005 - Box Office Mojo Rebound at Box Office Mojo Official website Rebound at IMDb Rebound at AllMovie Rebound at Box Office Mojo Rebound at Rotten Tomatoes