The 1999 NBA playoffs was the postseason tournament of the National Basketball Association’s 1998-99 season. The tournament concluded with the Western Conference champion San Antonio Spurs defeating the Eastern Conference champion New York Knicks 4 games to 1. Tim Duncan was named NBA Finals MVP. The 1999 Playoffs are memorable in that a #8 seed (the Knicks) made it to the Finals for the only time in history until 2023, and that came after a lockout–shortened 50–game season. The Philadelphia 76ers’ and Milwaukee Bucks returned to the playoffs for the first time since 1991 (coincidentally they faced each other in the opening round that year), and it was also the 76ers’ first appearance since drafting Allen Iverson with the #1 overall pick in 1996. Iverson later led the Sixers to the 2001 NBA Finals. After spending their first thirteen seasons in Sacramento in mediocrity, with no winning record and two playoff appearances in 1986 and 1996, the Kings franchise made the first of eight consecutive playoff appearances, which included a trip to the Western Conference Finals in 2002. The Bulls, despite being defending champions, missed the playoffs for the first time since 1984 (mostly due to the second retirement of Michael Jordan and the departures of Scottie Pippen and Dennis Rodman). They also became the first defending champion since the 1969–70 Boston Celtics to miss the playoffs. With their first round sweep of the Phoenix Suns, the Portland Trail Blazers won a playoff series for the first time since 1992, when they last made the NBA Finals. Game 4 of the Lakers–Rockets series was the final postseason appearance of Charles Barkley’s Hall of Fame career. It was also the final playoff game ever held at the Compaq Center. Game 5 of the Hawks–Pistons series is the last NBA playoff game played in a college basketball-specific arena (Georgia Tech's then-named Alexander Memorial Coliseum), and among the final NBA games played in a college basketball-specific arena. Many teams formerly played playoff games on college campuses, especially in the NBA's early days, but the increasing professionalization and ownership of arena times made the practice obsolete. Game 5 of the Heat–Knicks series was extremely notable for two reasons Allan Houston's series winning shot to win the game and the series. By doing so, the Knicks became only the second eighth seeded team (after the 1994 Denver Nuggets) to knock off a top seed in the playoffs. The Knicks were eventually joined by the 2007 Golden State Warriors, the 2011 Memphis Grizzlies, the 2012 Philadelphia 76ers, and the 2023 Miami Heat as one of only six eighth seeded teams to eliminate a top seeded team in the playoffs. In addition, Game 5 was the last playoff game ever played at Miami Arena. The Heat continued to host regular season games there for part of the 1999–2000 season before moving to the American Airlines Arena in January 2000. Game 4 of the Spurs–Lakers series was the last regulation NBA game ever played in the Great Western Forum. The Lakers played a handful of preseason games leading up to the 1999–2000 season before Staples Center became the new home of the team for that season. With their conference semifinals sweep of the Atlanta Hawks, the New York Knicks made the conference finals for the first time since 1994. The 1999 Knicks and the 2023 Miami Heat are the only eighth seeded teams (as of 2023) to advance past the conference semifinals. After losing to the Knicks, the Hawks did not return to the playoffs until 2008. This was the last NBA postseason to feature back–to–backs in the conference semifinals until 2012. Game 2 of the Spurs–Trail Blazers series was notable for the San Antonio Spurs overcoming an eighteen point deficit to win the game. The final shot, taken by Sean Elliott, completed what is called the “Memorial Day Miracle.” With their Western Conference Finals sweep of the Portland Trail Blazers, the San Antonio Spurs made the NBA Finals for the first time in franchise history. Game 5 of the Knicks–Pacers series was the last meaningful NBA game ever played at Market Square Arena. With their Game 6 win over the Indiana Pacers, the New York Knicks became the first eighth seeded team to make it to the NBA Finals. With their Game 2 win over the New York Knicks, the San Antonio Spurs won their 12th straight playoff game. The streak included back to back sweeps of the Lakers and Trail Blazers (who would meet in next year’s Western Conference Finals). This playoff winning streak has since been beaten by the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Golden State Warriors in 2017, although the Cavs started their streak by winning the final three games of the 2016 NBA playoffs. With their Game 5 win against the New York Knicks at Madison Square Garden, the San Antonio Spurs became the first former ABA team to win an NBA Championship. The Spurs finished with a 15–2 postseason record, which tied that of the 1991 Chicago Bulls, for the best postseason record at the time. Subsequently, it has been bettered by the 15–1 playoff record of the 2001 Los Angeles Lakers, and the 16–1 playoff record by the 2017 Golden State Warriors. Interestingly, both of the Spurs losses came against #8 seeded teams. Also, although the Spurs had home-court advantage throughout the playoffs, they played more road games (nine) than home games (eight), as all their series were won on the road. For the first time since 1991, no series went to seven games. As of 2023, this remains the most recent NBA postseason not to feature a Game 7. This is the last time an 8 seed went to the Eastern Conference finals and the last time they made it to the NBA Finals until 2023, when the Miami Heat beat the Boston Celtics in 7 games in the Eastern Conference finals, the New York Knicks in 6 games in the Eastern Conference semifinals, and the Milwaukee Bucks in 5 games the first round. * Division winner Bold Series winner Italic Team with home-court advantage Allan Houston hit the series-winning shot with 0.8 seconds left to complete the Knicks first-round upset against the Heat. By winning the decisive Game 5, the Knicks became the first team in NBA history to defeat a top 2 seed in the First Round in consecutive seasons (coincidentally, both times were against the Heat). Conversely, the Heat became the first team in NBA history to not get past the First Round as a top 2 seed in consecutive seasons while also becoming the second #1 seed to lose a playoff series against a #8 seed in the First Round. Game 5 was the final playoff game played at Miami Arena. This was the third playoff meeting between these two teams, with each team winning one series apiece. This was the first playoff meeting between the Pacers and the Bucks. This was the first playoff meeting between the Magic and the 76ers. This was the eighth playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Hawks winning four of the first seven meetings. This playoff series marked the last game of long time Piston and NBA Hall-of-Famer Joe Dumars, who retired at the end of the season. This was the first playoff meeting between the Timberwolves and the Spurs. This was the sixth playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Suns winning three of the first five meetings. This was the first playoff meeting between the Kings and the Jazz. This was the sixth playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Rockets winning three of the first five meetings. This was the second playoff meeting between these two teams, with the 76ers winning the first meeting. This was the second playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Knicks winning the first meeting. In Game 2, Tim Duncan hit a game-winning hook shot with 8.4 seconds remaining. This was the sixth playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Lakers winning four of the first five meetings. This was the fifth playoff meeting between these two teams, with each team winning two series apiece. In Game 2 Reggie Miller hit the game winning free throws with 2 seconds remaining In Game 3 Larry Johnson makes a game-winning 4-point play with 5.7 seconds left. This was the fifth playoff meeting between these two teams, with each team winning two series apiece. In Game 2, Sean Elliott hit a game-winning three-pointer with 9 seconds remaining. This was the third playoff meeting between these two teams, with each team winning one series apiece. The teams did not meet in the regular season. This was the first playoff meeting between the Knicks and the Spurs. NBA records "Team Rivalry Finder — Miami Heat versus New York Knicks (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Indiana Pacers versus Milwaukee Bucks (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Orlando Magic versus Philadelphia 76ers (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 14, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Atlanta Hawks versus Detroit Pistons (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Minnesota Timberwolves versus San Antonio Spurs (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Phoenix Suns versus Portland Trail Blazers (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Sacramento Kings versus Utah Jazz (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Houston Rockets versus Los Angeles Lakers (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Indiana Pacers versus Philadelphia 76ers (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Atlanta Hawks versus New York Knicks (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Los Angeles Lakers versus San Antonio Spurs (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Portland Trail Blazers versus Utah Jazz (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "NBA.com: The 60 Greatest Playoff Moments: Honorable Mention". Archived from the original on October 23, 2006. "Team Rivalry Finder — Indiana Pacers versus New York Knicks (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — Portland Trail Blazers versus San Antonio Spurs (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. "Team Rivalry Finder — New York Knicks versus San Antonio Spurs (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved July 4, 2015. Basketball – Reference.com's 1999 Playoffs section