I Am Losing Weight (Russian: Я худею, romanized: Ya khudeyu) is a 2018 Russian sports comedy film directed by Aleksey Nuzhnyy. The film stars Aleksandra Bortich, Irina Gorbacheva, Yevgeny Kulik and Roman Kurtsyn. The premiere of the film in Russia took place on March 8, 2018, the gross for the first day of the rental amounted to 1.9 million dollars - as of mid-March this was the best achievement among Russian films of 2018, and for the first four days - up to 5.8 million dollars, which brought the film to the ninth place of the weekly ranking. The action takes place in Nizhny Novgorod. Anya Kulikova only loves food and her boyfriend - athlete Zhenya. But Zhenya is not pleased with Anya because she has put on a lot of weight and he decides to leave her. But Anya does not give up and sets a goal to get rid of excess weight. And Kolya Barabanov is there to help her, an overweight man obsessed with the healthy way of living. Aleksandra Bortich as Anna "Anya" Kulikova Irina Gorbacheva as Natalia "Natasha" Yevgeny Kulik as Nikolai "Kolya" Barabanov Roman Kurtsyn as Yevgeny "Zhenya ", coach for swimming Yelena Valyushkina as Olga, Anya's mom Mikhail Orlov as Semyon, friend of Olga Sergey Shnurov as Sergey Kulikov, Anya's father Anna Kotova as Diana, Sergey's wife Alexander Ptashenchuk as Dimas, Natasha's husband, DJ Valeria Dergileva as Christina Andrey Trushin as fitness instructor Oleg Kassin as Grisha, combine operator Anna Ichetokina as laughing woman Alena Ermolaeva as Alena Aleksandra Bortich had to gain and lose 20 kg over the course of the making of the film. The authors of the film offered the main role to Irina Gorbacheva, but she did not wanted to gain weight. Producer Ilya Naishuller played a smoked guest at a party - for this, he spent the whole shooting day on the couch with a blurred look and a bong in his hands. Before starting work on the film, director Aleksey Nuzhnyy and screenwriter Nikolay Kulikov lost 28 and 20 kg, respectively. Work on the script went on for two and a half years. During this time, the authors interviewed a large number of girls and women who are concerned about the topic of losing weight, so that everything in the film is as truthful as possible. There were 17 draft scripts in total. The filming period was divided into two blocks. In the first block - May and June 2017 - Aleksandra Bortich was shot in full. After that, there was a break when Aleksandra Bortich switched to strict nutrition and trained 7 days a week. For a month and a half she lost weight and filming resumed. Aleksandra Bortich herself performed many tricks in the film: she climbed from the balcony to the balcony on the eighth floor, jumped from the pier into the water at a temperature of less than 10 degrees, ran out of the burning bath in a burning sheet. According to film critic Anton Dolin (ru), despite the predictable plot, overkill with views of the city to pop music and the not very appropriate role of Sergey Shnurov, all the "shortcomings are fully paid for by the merits" of the film. The film was released in the Russian Federation by Universal Pictures International on March 8, 2018. The film received mostly positive reviews, acting of Bortich and the script received praise. The fees for the first day of rental amounted to 110 million rubles - as of mid-March this is the best achievement among Russian films in 2018, and for the first four days - up to 331 million rubles ($5.8 million), which brought the film to the ninth place of the weekly world rating. By early August, total fees exceeded 630 million rubles ($10 million). "I Am Losing Weight (2018)". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 9, 2020. ""Кино Экспо", день второй: Презентации компаний Bazelevs, Universal, "Каро Премьер" и Kinodanz" [«Cinema Expo», the second day: Presentations by Bazelevs, Universal Pictures Russia, «Karo Prime» and KinoDanz {KD Studios}]. Kinobusiness.com (in Russian). September 21, 2017. Stepanov, Max (March 12, 2018). "Худей правильно — Комедия "Я худею" стала лидером проката России" [Lose weight correctly - Comedy I Am Losing Weight has become the leader of Russian hire]. Gazeta.Ru (in Russian). Феликс Зилич (2018-03-13). "Мировой бокс-офис: Я худею и попадаю в десятку". Кинопоиск. Retrieved 2018-03-15. "Комедия "Я худею" идёт на великолепный результат около 330 млн рублей в премьерный уик-энд". KinoBusiness. "I'm Losing Weight". Russian Film Week New York. December 9, 2018. Retrieved December 19, 2019. Yudaeva, Nastya (August 17, 2017). "22-летняя актриса Александра Бортич поправилась на 20 килограммов ради роли" [Actress Aleksandra Bortich recovered 20 kilograms for the role]. Cosmopolitan (in Russian). "Новый постер и трейлер фильма "Я худею"" [New poster and trailer for the film I Am Losing Weight]. The Hollywood Reporter (in Russian). December 25, 2017. "Я худею". Kritikanstvo. I Am Losing Weight at IMDb I Am Losing Weight on VK