Avril Ramona Lavigne (/ˈævrɪl ləˈviːn/ AV-ril lə-VEEN, French: [avʁil ʁamɔna laviɲ]; born September 27, 1984) is a Canadian singer-songwriter, fashion designer, and actress. She is considered a key musician in the development of pop-punk music, as she paved the way for female-driven, punk-influenced pop music in the early 2000s. Her accolades include eight Grammy Award nominations, among others. At age 16, Lavigne signed a two-album recording contract with Arista Records. Her debut studio album, Let Go (2002), is the best-selling album of the 21st century by a Canadian artist. It yielded the successful singles "Complicated" and "Sk8er Boi", which emphasized a skate punk persona and earned her the title "Pop-Punk Queen" from music publications. Her second studio album, Under My Skin (2004), became Lavigne's first album to reach the top of the Billboard 200 chart in the United States, going on to sell 10 million copies worldwide. Lavigne's third studio album, The Best Damn Thing (2007), reached number one in seven countries worldwide and saw the international success of its lead single "Girlfriend", which became her first single to reach the top of the Billboard Hot 100 in the United States. Her next two studio albums, Goodbye Lullaby (2011) and Avril Lavigne (2013), saw continued commercial success and were both certified gold in Canada, the United States, and other territories. After releasing her sixth studio album, Head Above Water (2019), she returned to her punk roots with her seventh studio album, Love Sux (2022). Avril Ramona Lavigne was born on September 27, 1984, in Belleville, Ontario. She was named Avril (the French word for April) by her father. He and Lavigne's mother recognized their child's vocal abilities when she was two years old and sang "Jesus Loves Me" on the way home from church. Lavigne has an older brother named Matthew and a younger sister named Michelle, both of whom teased her when she sang. "My brother used to knock on the wall because I used to sing myself to sleep and he thought it was really annoying." She is the sister-in-law of Japanese band One OK Rock bassist Ryota Kohama. Lavigne's paternal grandfather Maurice Yves Lavigne was born in Saint-Jérôme, Quebec. A member of the Royal Canadian Air Force, he married Lucie Dzierzbicki, a French native of Morhange in 1953. Their son, Jean-Claude Lavigne, was born in 1954 at RCAF Station Grostenquin near Grostenquin, Lorraine. When Jean-Claude was a child, the family moved to Ontario, and in 1975, he married Judith-Rosanne "Judy" Loshaw. When Lavigne was 5, the family moved to Napanee (now incorporated as Greater Napanee), a town with a population of approximately 5,000 at the time. Also when she was 5, she was diagnosed with ADHD, which caused her several problems during her school years. Her parents supported her singing; her father bought her a microphone, a drum kit, a keyboard, and several guitars, and he converted their basement into a studio. Following his own love for music, Jean-Claude led the family to church at Third Day Worship Centre in Kingston, where he often played bass. When Lavigne was 14 years old, her parents took her to karaoke sessions. Lavigne performed at country fairs, singing songs by Garth Brooks, the Chicks, and Shania Twain. She began writing her own songs. Her first song was called "Can't Stop Thinking About You", about a teenage crush, which she described as "cheesy cute". Lavigne also played hockey during high school and won MVP twice as a right winger in a boys league. In 1999, Lavigne won a radio contest to perform with Canadian singer Shania Twain at the Corel Centre in Ottawa, before an audience of 20,000 people. Twain and Lavigne sang Twain's song, "What Made You Say That", and Lavigne told Twain that she aspired to be "a famous singer". During a performance with the Lennox Community Theatre, Lavigne was spotted by local folksinger Stephen Medd. He invited her to contribute vocals on his song, "Touch the Sky", for his 1999 album, Quinte Spirit. She later sang on "Temple of Life" and "Two Rivers" for his follow-up album, My Window to You, in 2000. In December 1999, Lavigne was discovered by her first professional manager, Cliff Fabri, while singing country covers at a Chapters bookstore in Kingston. Fabri sent out VHS tapes of Lavigne's home performances to several industry prospects, and Lavigne was visited by several executives. Mark Jowett, co-founder of a Canadian management firm, Nettwerk, received a copy of Lavigne's karaoke performances recorded in her parents' basement. Jowett arranged for Lavigne to work with producer Peter Zizzo during the summer of 2000 in New York, where she wrote the song "Why". Lavigne was noticed by Arista Records during a trip to New York. In November 2000, Ken Krongard, an A&R representative, invited Antonio "L.A." Reid, then head of Arista Records, to Zizzo's Manhattan studio to hear Lavigne sing. Her 15-minute audition "so impressed" Reid that he immediately signed her to Arista with a deal worth $1.25 million for two albums and an extra $900,000 for a publishing advance. By this time, Lavigne had found that she fit in naturally with her hometown high school's skater clique, an image that carried through to her first album, but although she enjoyed skateboarding, school left her feeling insecure. Having signed a record deal, and with support from her parents, she left school to focus on her music career. Lavigne's band, which were mostly the members of Closet Monster, was chosen by Nettwerk, as they wanted young performers who were up and coming from the Canadian punk rock scene who would fit with Lavigne's personality. Reid gave A&R Joshua Sarubin the responsibility of overseeing Lavigne's development and the recording of her debut album. They spent several months in New York working with different co-writers, trying to forge an individual sound for her. Sarubin told HitQuarters that they initially struggled; although early collaborations with songwriter-producers including Sabelle Breer, Curt Frasca and Peter Zizzo resulted in some good songs, they did not match her or her voice. It was only when Lavigne then went to Los Angeles in May 2001 and created two songs with the Matrix production team—including "Complicated", later released as her debut single—that the record company felt she had made a major breakthrough. Lavigne worked further with the Matrix and also with singer-songwriter Clif Magness. Recording of Lavigne's debut album, Let Go, finished in January 2002. Lavigne released Let Go in June 2002 in the US, where it reached number two on the Billboard 200 albums chart. It peaked at number one in Australia, Canada, and the UK—this made Lavigne, at 17 years old, the youngest female soloist to have a number-one album on the UK Albums Chart at that time. By the end of 2002, the album was certified four-times Platinum by the RIAA, making her the bestselling female artist of 2002 and Let Go the top-selling debut of the year. By May 2003, Let Go had accumulated over 1 million sales in Canada, receiving a diamond certification from the Canadian Recording Industry Association. By 2009, the album had sold over 16 million units worldwide. By March 2018, the RIAA certified the album seven-times Platinum, denoting shipments of over seven million units in the US. Lavigne's debut single, "Complicated", peaked at number one in Australia and number two in the US. "Complicated" was one of the bestselling Canadian singles of 2002, and one of the decade's biggest hits in the US, where subsequent singles "Sk8er Boi" and "I'm with You" reached the top ten. With these three singles, Lavigne became the second artist in history to have three top-ten songs from a debut album on Billboard's Mainstream Top 40 chart. Lavigne was named Best New Artist (for "Complicated") at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards, won four Juno Awards in 2003 out of six nominations, received a World Music Award for "World's Bestselling Canadian Singer", and was nominated for eight Grammy Awards, including Best New Artist and Song of the Year for "Complicated". In 2002, Lavigne made a cameo appearance in the music video for "Hundred Million" by the pop punk band Treble Charger. In March 2003, Lavigne posed for the cover of Rolling Stone magazine, and in May she performed "Fuel" during MTV's Icon tribute to Metallica. During her first headlining tour, the Try to Shut Me Up Tour, Lavigne covered Green Day's "Basket Case". Lavigne's second studio album, Under My Skin, was released in May 2004 and debuted at number one in Australia, Canada, Japan, the UK, and the US. The album was certified five-times Platinum in Canada and has sold 10 million copies, including 3.2 million in the US. Lavigne wrote most of the album's tracks with Canadian singer-songwriter Chantal Kreviazuk, and Kreviazuk's husband, Our Lady Peace front man Raine Maida, co-produced the album with Butch Walker and Don Gilmore. Lavigne said that Under My Skin proved her credentials as a songwriter, saying that "each song comes from a personal experience of mine, and there are so much [sic] emotions in those songs". "Don't Tell Me", the lead single off the album, reached the top five in the UK and Canada and the top ten in Australia. "My Happy Ending", the album's second single, was a top five hit in the UK and Australia. In the US, it was a top ten entry on the Billboard Hot 100 and became a number-one pop radio hit. The third single, "Nobody's Home", did not manage to make the top 40 in the US and performed moderately elsewhere. During early 2004 Lavigne went on the 'Live and By Surprise' acoustic mall tour in the US and Canada to promote Under My Skin, accompanied by her guitarist Evan Taubenfeld. In September 2004, Lavigne embarked on her first world tour, the year-long Bonez Tour. Lavigne won two World Music Awards in 2004, for 'World's Best Pop/Rock Artist' and 'World's Bestselling Canadian Artist' and won three Juno Awards from five nominations in 2005, including 'Artist of the Year'. She also won in the category of 'Favorite Female Singer' at the eighteenth annual Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards. Lavigne co-wrote the song "Breakaway", which was recorded by Kelly Clarkson for the soundtrack to the 2004 film The Princess Diaries 2: Royal Engagement. "Breakaway" was released as a single in mid 2004 and subsequently included as the title track on Clarkson's second album, Breakaway. Lavigne performed the Goo Goo Dolls song "Iris" with the band's lead singer John Rzeznik at Fashion Rocks in September 2004, and she posed for the cover of Maxim in October 2004. She recorded the theme song for The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie (released in November 2004) with producer Butch Walker. In February 2006, Lavigne represented Canada at the closing ceremony of the 2006 Winter Olympics. Fox Entertainment Group approached Lavigne to write a song for the soundtrack to the 2006 fantasy-adventure film Eragon; her contribution, "Keep Holding On", was released as a single to promote the film and its soundtrack. Lavigne's third album, The Best Damn Thing, was released in April 2007 and debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200, and subsequently achieved Platinum status in Canada. The album sold more than 2 million copies in the US. Its lead single, "Girlfriend", became Lavigne's first number-one single on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and one of the decade's biggest singles. The single also peaked at number one in Australia, Canada, and Japan, and reached number two in the UK and France. As well as English, "Girlfriend" was recorded in Spanish, French, Italian, Portuguese, German, Japanese, and Mandarin. The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ranked "Girlfriend" as the most-downloaded track worldwide in 2007, selling 7.3 million copies, including the versions recorded in eight different languages. "When You're Gone", the album's second single, reached the top five in Australia and the United Kingdom, the top ten in Canada, and the top forty in the US. "Hot" was the third single and charted only at number 95 in the US, although it reached the top 10 in Canada and the top 20 in Australia. Lavigne won two World Music Awards in 2007, for 'World's Bestselling Canadian Artist' and 'World's Best Pop/Rock Female Artist'. She won her first two MTV Europe Music Awards, received a Teen Choice Award for 'Best Summer Single', and was nominated for five Juno Awards. In December 2007, Lavigne was ranked number eight in Forbes magazine's list of 'Top 20 Earners Under 25', with annual earnings of $12 million. In March 2008, Lavigne undertook a world tour, The Best Damn World Tour, and appeared on the cover of Maxim for the second time. In mid-August, Malaysia's Islamic opposition party, the Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party, attempted to ban Lavigne's tour show in Kuala Lumpur, judging her stage moves "too sexy". It was thought that her concert on August 29 would promote wrong values ahead of Malaysia's Independence Day on August 31. On August 21, 2008, MTV reported that the concert had been approved by the Malaysian government. In January 2010, Lavigne worked with Disney to create clothing designs inspired by Tim Burton's feature film Alice in Wonderland. She recorded a song for its soundtrack, "Alice", which was played over the end credits and included on the soundtrack album Almost Alice. In February, Lavigne performed at the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics closing ceremony. Lavigne's song "I'm with You" was sampled by Rihanna on the track "Cheers (Drink to That)", which is featured on Rihanna's fifth studio album, Loud (2010). "Cheers (Drink to That)" was released as a single the following year, and Lavigne appeared in its music video. In December 2010, American singer Miranda Cosgrove released "Dancing Crazy", a song written by Lavigne, Max Martin and Shellback. It was also produced by Martin. Lavigne began recording for her fourth studio album, Goodbye Lullaby, in her home studio in November 2008. Its opening track, "Black Star", was written to help promote her first fragrance of the same name. Lavigne described the album as being about her life experiences rather than focusing on relationships, and its style as less pop rock than her previous material, reflecting her age. The release date for Goodbye Lullaby was delayed several times, which Lavigne said was because of her label. Goodbye Lullaby was released in March 2011, and its lead single, "What the Hell", premiered in December 2010, ahead of the album's release. Goodbye Lullaby received Juno Award nominations for Album of the Year and Pop Album of the Year. By March 2018, Goodbye Lullaby sold more than 500,000 copies in the US, and it was certified Gold by the RIAA. Three months after the release of Goodbye Lullaby, Lavigne announced that work on her fifth studio album had already begun, describing it as the musical opposite of Goodbye Lullaby and "pop and more fun again". In late 2011, she confirmed that she had moved to Epic Records, headed by L. A. Reid. Lavigne contributed two cover songs to the 2012 Japanese animated film One Piece Film: Z: "How You Remind Me" (originally by Nickelback) and "Bad Reputation" (originally by Joan Jett). The lead single from Lavigne's fifth studio album, "Here's to Never Growing Up" (produced by Martin Johnson of the band Boys Like Girls), was released in April 2013 and reached top 20 positions on the Billboard Hot 100, Australia and the UK. The second single, "Rock n Roll", was released in August 2013 and the third, "Let Me Go" (featuring Lavigne's then-husband Chad Kroeger of Nickelback), was released in October 2013. The album, titled Avril Lavigne, was released in November 2013; in Canada, it was certified gold and received a Juno Award nomination for Pop Album of the Year. The fourth single from Avril Lavigne, "Hello Kitty", was released in April 2014. The music video sparked controversies over racism claims which Lavigne denied. During mid-2014, Lavigne opened for boy band the Backstreet Boys' In a World Like This Tour and played at the Summer Sonic Festival in Tokyo. She released a music video for "Give You What You Like", the fifth single from her self-titled album on February 10, 2015. The song is featured in Lifetime's made-for-TV movie, Babysitter's Black Book. By March 2018, the album sold more than 500,000 copies in the US, and it was certified Gold by the RIAA. In an April 2015 interview with Billboard, Lavigne announced a new single titled "Fly", which was released on April 26 in association with the 2015 Special Olympics World Summer Games. Lavigne was featured in the song "Listen" from Japanese rock band One Ok Rock's eighth studio album, Ambitions, released on January 11, 2017. She was also featured in the song "Wings Clipped" by Grey with Anthony Green for the duo's debut extended play Chameleon, released on September 29, 2017. Lavigne's sixth studio album Head Above Water was released on February 15, 2019, through BMG. The album reached the top ten in Australia, Austria, Canada, Germany, Italy, Japan, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, and peaked at number thirteen on the U.S. Billboard 200. It was preceded by three singles: "Head Above Water", "Tell Me It's Over" and "Dumb Blonde", with the lead single drawing inspiration from Lavigne's battle with Lyme disease. The fourth single, "I Fell in Love with the Devil", was released on June 28, 2019. In support of the album, Lavigne embarked on the Head Above Water Tour, which started on September 14, 2019. European concerts were postponed to 2022 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On April 24, 2020, Lavigne re-recorded the track "Warrior" from her sixth studio album and released it as a single, titled "We Are Warriors". The proceeds from the single support Project HOPE's relief efforts in the COVID-19 pandemic. On January 8, 2021, "Flames", a collaboration between Mod Sun and Lavigne, was released. In the subsequent month, Lavigne confirmed recording for her next album had been completed. On July 16, 2021, Willow Smith released her fourth studio album, titled Lately I Feel Everything, with one of the tracks, "Grow", featuring Avril Lavigne and Travis Barker. A music video for the song was released in October of the same year. After announcing on November 3, 2021, that she had signed with Barker's label DTA Records, Lavigne announced her new single titled "Bite Me", which was released on November 10. On January 13, 2022, Lavigne announced her seventh studio album Love Sux. Much of the album was written and produced by Lavigne's then boyfriend, pop punk artist Mod Sun. The second single off the record, "Love It When You Hate Me", was released on January 14, and featured American singer Blackbear. The album was subsequently released on February 25. Love Sux debuted at number nine on the Billboard 200 chart, and at number three on the Billboard Canadian Albums chart. On June 13, 2022, a new edition of Let Go was released for the album's 20th anniversary. The record contains six previously unreleased bonus tracks, including Kelly Clarkson's "Breakaway", which was originally written by Lavigne. On September 13, 2022, Lavigne attended, presented and performed at the 15th Annual Academy of Country Music (ACM) Honors at the Ryman Auditorium in Nashville, Tennessee. She performed a cover of Shania Twain's "No One Needs to Know" and presented Twain with an ACM Poets Award. The cover received a positive reception. On October 24, 2022, Lavigne announced the release of a single titled "I'm a Mess" featuring English singer Yungblud on November 3, 2022, as the lead single of the deluxe edition of Love Sux, which was released on November 25. While promoting "I'm a Mess", Lavigne confirmed she was working on her eighth studio album with John Feldmann, Barker, Yungblud and Alex Gaskarth of band All Time Low. "Fake as Hell", a collaboration between Lavigne and All Time Low, was eventually released as a single on September 15, 2023. During the 2000s decade, most critics and publications identified Lavigne's first three albums as a mix of pop-punk, alternative rock and pop rock influenced by a post-grunge sound. Let Go was classified as a pop rock and alternative rock album with a slight grunge influence. Meanwhile, the singer was compared to other female artists with the same sound, mainly Alanis Morissette. The album Under My Skin, was noticeably darker musically, with heavier production that showcased ballads and rocker songs which incorporated a more post-grunge sound that verged on nu metal, keeping pop punk power chords influences, that anticipated the emotional intensity and theatrical aesthetics of emo-pop music before it came into the mainstream. Critics compared the album with similar works by contemporary acts at the time like Linkin Park and Evanescence, due to its nu metal influence. In contrast, The Best Damn Thing abandoned the alternative and post-grunge style in favour of pop punk tunes. It is noted a main combination of cheerleader-inspired bubblegum pop melodies with punk rock riffs, which led to compare her as sounding like Toni Basil cheerleading for Blink-182. Teen pop impact on Lavigne's music on this decade was noted, since most of her lyrics were from an adolescent perspective from her teenage years, this made some critics to describe her as an act of alternateen or teen punk music. Later on in the 2010s, her sound went softer and poppier, characterized more by acoustic pop-rock songs and less loud grungy guitar-driven songs that were the signature of her earlier works. With the 2020s pop-punk mainstream resurgence, Lavigne went back to her pop-punk roots, embracing emo-pop angst, and skate punk influences from NOFX, blink-182, Green Day and the Offspring. Lavigne possesses a soprano vocal range. Themes in her music include messages of self-empowerment from a female or an adolescent view. Lavigne believes her "songs are about being yourself no matter what and going after your dreams even if your dreams are crazy and even if people tell you they're never going to come true." On her debut album, Let Go, Lavigne preferred the less mainstream songs, such as "Losing Grip", instead of her more radio-friendly singles, such as "Complicated", saying that "the songs I did with the Matrix ... were good for my first record, but I don't want to be that pop anymore." Lavigne's second album, Under My Skin, had deeper personal themes underlying each song, with Lavigne remarking that "I've gone through so much, so that's what I talk about ... Like boys, like dating or relationships". In contrast, her third album, The Best Damn Thing, was not personal to her. "Some of the songs I wrote didn't even mean that much to me. It's not like some personal thing I'm going through." Her objective in writing the album was simply to "make it fun". Goodbye Lullaby, Lavigne's fourth album, was much more personal than her earlier records, with Lavigne describing the album as "more stripped down, deeper. All the songs are very emotional". Ian McKellen defined her as "a punk chanteuse, a post-grunge valkyrie, with the wounded soul of a poet and the explosive pugnacity of a Canadian" on The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson in 2007. I know my fans look up to me and that's why I make my songs so personal; it's all about things I've experienced and things I like or hate. I write for myself and hope that my fans like what I have to say. — Lavigne on her musical artistry While Lavigne said she was not angry, her interviews were still passionate about the media's lack of respect for her songwriting. She said, "I am a writer, and I won't accept people trying to take that away from me", adding that she had been writing "full-structured songs" since she was 14. Despite this, Lavigne's songwriting has been questioned throughout her career. The songwriting trio the Matrix, with whom Lavigne wrote songs for her debut album, said that they were the main songwriters of Lavigne's singles "Complicated", "Sk8er Boi" and "I'm with You". Lavigne said that she was the primary songwriter for every song on the album, stating that "[N]one of those songs aren't from me". In 2007, Chantal Kreviazuk, who wrote with Lavigne on her second album, accused Lavigne of plagiarism and criticized her songwriting, saying that "Avril doesn't really sit and write songs by herself or anything." Lavigne also disclaimed this, and considered taking legal action against Kreviazuk for "clear defamation" against her character. Kreviazuk later apologized, saying that "Avril is an accomplished songwriter and it has been my privilege to work with her." Shortly after that, Tommy Dunbar, founder of the band the Rubinoos, sued Lavigne, her publishing company, and Lukasz "Dr. Luke" Gottwald for allegedly stealing parts of "I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend" for her song "Girlfriend". Gottwald defended Lavigne, stating, "me and Avril wrote the song together... It has the same chord progressions as ten different Blink-182 songs, the standard changes you'd find in a Sum 41 song. It's the Sex Pistols, not the Rubinoos." In January 2008, the a confidential settlement was reached between the parties. Lavigne's earlier influences came from country music acts such as Garth Brooks, the Chicks, and Shania Twain; and alternative singer-songwriters such as Alanis Morissette, Lisa Loeb, Natalie Imbruglia, and Janis Joplin. By the time she left school to focus on her music career, Lavigne was musically more influenced by skate punk, pop punk, and punk rock acts such as blink-182, the Offspring, Sum 41, NOFX, Pennywise, Dashboard Confessional, Green Day, the Ramones, the Distillers, and Hole. She also enjoyed metal bands such as Marilyn Manson, System of a Down, Incubus, and the Used; as well as alternative bands such as Nirvana, No Doubt, the Goo Goo Dolls, Radiohead, the Cranberries, Coldplay, Oasis, Third Eye Blind, and Matchbox Twenty. Because of these influences, musical genres, and Lavigne's personal style, the media often defined her as punk, something she said she was not. Lavigne's close friend and first guitarist, Evan Taubenfeld, said: "It's a very touchy subject to a lot of people, but the point is that Avril isn't punk, but she never really pretended to claim to come from that scene. She had pop punk music and the media ended up doing the rest". Lavigne commented on the matter: "I have been labelled like I'm this angry girl, [a] rebel ... punk, and I am so not any of them." However, she has also said that her music has punk influences: "I like to listen a lot to punk rock music, you can notice a certain influence of punk in my music. I like an aggressive music, but pretty enough heavy pop-rock, which is what I really do." I have to fight to keep my image really me ... I rejected some gorgeous publicity shots because they just didn't look like me. I won't wear skanky clothes that show my booty, my belly or my boobs. I have a great body. — Lavigne on her image early in her career When Lavigne first gained publicity, she was known for her tomboyish style, in particular her necktie-and-tank-top combinations. She preferred baggy clothes, skater shoes or Converses, wristbands, and sometimes shoelaces wrapped around her fingers. During photo shoots, instead of wearing "glittery get-ups", she preferred wearing "old, crumpled T's". In response to her fashion and musical influences, the media called her the "pop punk princess" and the female answer to Blink-182. Press and fans regarded her as the "anti-Britney", in part because of her less commercial and "real" image, but also because she was noticeably headstrong. "I'm not made up and I'm not being told what to say and how to act, so they have to call me the anti-Britney, which I'm not." By November 2002, however, Lavigne stopped wearing ties, claiming she felt she was "wearing a costume". Lavigne made a conscious effort to keep her music, and not her image, at the forefront of her career. Lavigne eventually took on a more gothic style as she began her second album, Under My Skin, trading her skating outfits for black tutus and developing an image marked by angst. During The Best Damn Thing years, Lavigne changed directions. She dyed her hair blonde with a pink streak, wore feminine outfits, including "tight jeans and heels", and modelled for magazines such as Harper's Bazaar. Lavigne defended her new style: "I don't really regret anything. You know, the ties and the wife-beaters and all ... It had its time and place. And now I'm all grown up, and I've moved on". Lavigne has been the subject of a conspiracy theory that posits that she committed suicide in 2003 and was replaced by a body double who had previously been recruited to distract paparazzi. This originated as a joke on a Brazilian blog, but it has since been embraced by some conspiracy theorists in earnest. In an interview with Australia's KIIS 106.5 in November 2018, Lavigne responded to the rumour, stating: "Yeah, some people think that I'm not the real me, which is so weird! Like, why would they even think that?" Lavigne is considered a highlight in the pop-punk and alternative rock scene, since she helped pave the way for the success of female-driven punk-influenced pop artists such as Paramore, Skye Sweetnam, Fefe Dobson, Lillix, Kelly Osbourne, Krystal Meyers, Tonight Alive, Courage My Love, and Hey Monday. She has been compared to alternative female singer-songwriters of the 1990s such as Alanis Morissette, Liz Phair, and Courtney Love, earning a reputation as the greatest female representative of pop-punk music, and has been called one of the female singers who best represent 2000s rock music. Lavigne also was seen as a fashion icon for her skatepunk and rocker style. Kimberley Schoeman writing for the Mail & Guardian has referred to Lavigne as a "queer icon" and a "sweet spot for those realising, "I like boys and girls"". "Sk8er Boi", "He Wasn't", and "Girlfriend" are frequently listed among the best pop-punk songs of all time by critics. Lavigne has influenced a wide array of musical artists, including acts such as Tramp Stamps, Bebe Rexha,Billie Eilish, Rob Halford (Judas Priest), Courage My Love, 5 Seconds of Summer, Yungblud, Maggie Lindemann, Tonight Alive, Willow Smith, Amanda Palmer, Misono, Rina Sawayama, Hey Monday, Grey, Ed Sheeran, Kailee Morgue, Charli XCX, MercyMe, Palberta, Yeule, Olivia Rodrigo, and Kirstin Maldonado. Amy Studt was hailed as "the U.K.'s answer" to Avril Lavigne. Lavigne also has fuelled a significant influence on indie rock singer-songwriters such as Pale Waves, Graace, Phoebe Bridgers, Soccer Mommy, Snail Mail, and Liz Phair. On the rise of mid-to-late 2010s emo hip hop and emo rap, Lavigne has been noted as an influence of various musicians from that scene, with Nylon magazine noting Lil Uzi Vert, Princess Nokia, Lloyd Banks, Vic Mensa, Nipsey Hussle, John River, Noname, and Rico Nasty. American rapper Fat Tony explained that Lavigne's traces of influences on hip hop and rap music comes because "she [Avril] delivered a great visual catchy package [punk music, pop music and skater culture] that describes all of them". Rico Nasty named one of her alter egos, Trap Lavigne, citing "She is a perfect representation of being hard and soft [...] she hated the term punk, but she was so punk rock". A persistent internet meme about a Lavigne-written song called "Dolphins" has been showing up on various lyric sites since 2007, but she did not write or record this song. The lyrics appear on dozens of lyric sites and various bands have recorded cover versions of the song that was never recorded by Lavigne. Lavigne was featured in the 2003 game The Sims: Superstar as a non-playable celebrity. In mid-2007, Lavigne was featured in a two-volume graphic novel, Avril Lavigne's Make 5 Wishes. She collaborated with artist Camilla d'Errico and writer Joshua Dysart on the manga, which was about a shy girl named Hana who, upon meeting her hero, Lavigne, learned to overcome her fears. Lavigne said, "I know that many of my fans read manga, and I'm really excited to be involved in creating stories that I know they will enjoy." The first volume was released in April 2007, and the second followed in July 2007. The publication Young Adult Library Services nominated the series for "Great Graphic Novels for Teens". In 2003, Lavigne won an International Achievement Award for the song "Complicated" at the SOCAN Awards in Toronto. Lavigne received eight Grammy Awards nominations in two years, including Best New Artist. She has also received three American Music Awards nominations, one Brit Award nomination, and one MTV Video Music Award. She has received a total of 169 awards. Lavigne had sold more than 30 million singles and 40 million copies of her albums worldwide, including over 12.4 million album copies in the US according to Billboard. In 2009, Billboard named Lavigne the number 10 pop artist in the "Best of the 2000s" chart. She was listed as the 28th overall best act of the decade based on album and single chart performance in the US. Lavigne achieved a Guinness World Record as being the youngest female solo artist to top the UK album chart, on January 11, 2003, at the age of 18 years and 106 days. The album Let Go reached number one in its 18th chart week. She held the record until 2004, as the UK charts reported that Joss Stone's Mind Body & Soul took it the following year. She also was the first to reach 100 million views on a YouTube video, with her 2007 single "Girlfriend". Lavigne was the first western artist to do a full tour in China, with The Best Damn Tour in 2008; and is considered the biggest western artist in Asia, especially in Japan, where her first three albums have sold more than 1 million copies, being the only female Western Artist since the 2000s to achieve it. Lavigne is the only artist to have performed on three different multi-sport events, such as two closing ceremonies of Winter Olympic Games (Torino 2006 and Vancouver 2010) and in the opening ceremony of the 2015 Special Olympics World Summer Games. Lavigne became interested in appearing on television and in feature films. The decision, she said, was her own. Although her years of experience in making music videos was to her advantage, Lavigne admitted her experience in singing removed any fear of performing on camera. She specifically mentioned that the video "Nobody's Home" involved the most "acting". Her first television appearance was in a 2002 episode of Sabrina, the Teenage Witch, performing "Sk8er Boi" with her band in a nightclub. She later made a cameo appearance in the 2004 film Going the Distance. The main characters bump into her backstage at the MuchMusic Video Awards after her performance of "Losing Grip". She moved into feature film acting cautiously, choosing deliberately small roles to begin with. In November 2005, after going through an audition to land the role, Lavigne travelled to New Mexico to film a single scene in the 2007 film, The Flock. She played Beatrice Bell, the girlfriend of a crime suspect, appearing alongside Claire Danes and Richard Gere. Gere gave Lavigne acting tips between takes. On her role in The Flock, Lavigne said, "I did that just to see how it was and to not jump into [mainstream acting] too fast". The Flock was not released in American theatres, and because it was not released in foreign markets until late 2007, it is not considered Lavigne's debut. The film made $7 million in the foreign box office. Lavigne's feature film debut was voicing an animated character in the 2006 film Over the Hedge, based on the comic strip of the same name. She voiced the character Heather, a Virginia opossum. Recording the characters' voices was devoid of interaction with other actors. Lavigne stated, "All the actors went in individually, and [director] Tim and [screenwriter Karey] and directors were there with me every time I went in, and they made it go so smoothly; they made me feel comfortable.... That was the interesting part, going in by yourself, with no one else to kind of feed off of."[citation needed] Lavigne found the recording process to be "easy" and "natural", but she kept hitting the microphone as she gestured while acting. "I'd use my hands constantly and, like, hit the microphone stand and make noises, so Tim and Karey had to tell me to hold still.... It's hard to be running or falling down the stairs and have to make those sounds come out of your mouth but keep your body still." Lavigne believed she was hired to perform Heather because of her rock-star status. "[The director] thought I'd give my character... a bit of attitude". The film opened on May 19, 2006, making $38 million over its opening weekend. It went on to gross $336 million worldwide. In December 2005, Lavigne signed to appear in Fast Food Nation, based on the book Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of the All-American Meal. The fictionalized adaptation, directed by Richard Linklater, traces fast-food hamburgers contaminated with cow feces back to the slaughterhouses. Lavigne played Alice, a high school student intent on freeing the cows. The film opened on November 17, 2006, and remained in theatres for 11 weeks, grossing $2 million worldwide. Both Over the Hedge and Fast Food Nation opened at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival, which Lavigne attended. When asked if she would pursue her film career, she stated that she wanted to take her time and wait for the "right parts and the right movies." Lavigne was aware of the roles she had chosen. "I wanted to start off small and to learn. I wouldn't just want to throw myself into a big part." In August 2006, Canadian Business magazine ranked her as the seventh top Canadian actor in Hollywood in their second-annual ranking Celebrity Power List. The results were determined by comparing salary, Internet hits, TV mentions, and press hits. In September 2011, Lavigne appeared on the Hub Network televised singing competition Majors & Minors as a guest mentor alongside other singers, including Adam Lambert and Leona Lewis. In July 2008, Lavigne launched the clothing line Abbey Dawn, featuring a back-to-school collection. It is produced by Kohl's, which is the brand's exclusive US retailer. Named after Lavigne's childhood nickname, Abbey Dawn is designed by Lavigne herself. Kohl's describes Abbey Dawn as a "juniors lifestyle brand", which incorporates skull, zebra, and star patterns, purples and "hot pinks and blacks". Lavigne, who wore some of the clothes and jewellery from her line at various concerts before its official launch, pointed out that she was not merely licensing her name to the collection. "I actually am the designer. What's really important to me is that everything fits well and is well-made, so I try everything on and approve it all." The clothing line incorporates Lavigne's musical style and lyrics, "after the release of my first album, I realized how much fashion was involved in my musical career". The designs were also featured on the Internet game Stardoll, where figures can be dressed up as Lavigne. On September 14, 2009, Lavigne took her then latest collection for her clothing line to be a part of the New York Fashion Week, returning in 2011. In December 2010, the clothing line was made available to over 50 countries through the line's official website. "It's fun to be a chick and design clothes and things I'd like for myself. I design things I [can't] find." Lavigne released her first fragrance, Black Star, created by Procter & Gamble Prestige Products. The fragrance was announced on Lavigne's official website on March 7, 2009. Black Star, which features notes of pink hibiscus, black plum and dark chocolate, was released in summer 2009 in Europe, and later in the US and Canada. When asked what the name meant, Lavigne replied, "I wanted [the bottle] to be a star, and my colours are pink and black, and Black Star resembles being different, and standing out in the crowd, and reaching for the stars; the whole message is just about following your dreams, and it's okay to be unique and be who you are." Black Star won the 2010 Best "Women's Scent Mass" by Cosmetic Executive Women (CEW). Black Star was followed by a second fragrance in July 2010, Forbidden Rose, which took two years to develop. It features notes of red apple, winepeach, black pepper, lotusflower, heliotrope, shellflower, praline agreement, sandalwood, and vanilla. Its message is an extension of Black Star's "follow your dreams", though the tagline for the new perfume is "Dare to Discover". The commercial takes place in a gothic garden setting, where Lavigne, upon entering the garden, finds a single, purple rose. Lavigne launched a third fragrance, Wild Rose, in August 2011 and filmed the commercial for it in late 2010. The tagline for the fragrance is "Dare to discover more". It features notes of mandarin, pink grapefruit, plum, orange blossom, frangipani, blue orchid, musk, sandalwood and crème brûlée. In January 2010, Lavigne began working with Disney to incorporate Alice in Wonderland-inspired designs into her Abbey Dawn line of clothing. Her designs were exhibited at the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising in California beginning in May through September, alongside Colleen Atwood's costumes from the 2010 film. Lavigne has been involved with many charities, including Make Some Noise, Amnesty International, Erase MS, AmericanCPR.org, Special Olympics, Camp Will-a-Way, Music Clearing Minefields, US Campaign for Burma, Make-A-Wish Foundation and War Child. She has also appeared in ALDO ads with YouthAIDS to raise money to educate people worldwide about HIV/AIDS. Lavigne took part in the Unite Against AIDS concert presented by ALDO in support of UNICEF on November 28, 2007, at the Bell Centre in Montréal, Québec, Canada. In November 2010, Lavigne attended the Clinton Global Initiative. Lavigne worked with Reverb, a non-profit environmental organization, for her 2005 east coast tour. She covered "Knockin' on Heaven's Door" for War Child's Peace Songs compilation, and she recorded a cover of the John Lennon song "Imagine" as her contribution to the compilation album Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur. Released on June 12, 2007, the album was produced to benefit Amnesty International's campaign to alleviate the crisis in Darfur. On December 5, 2009, Lavigne returned to the stage in Mexico City during the biggest charity event in Latin America, "Teleton". She performed acoustic versions of her hits "Complicated" and "Girlfriend" with Evan Taubenfeld and band member, Jim McGorman. In 2010, Lavigne was one of several artists who contributed their voices to a cover of K'naan's "Wavin' Flag" as a benefit single to help raise money for several charity organizations related to the 2010 Haiti earthquake. On September 14, 2010, Lavigne introduced her charity, "The Avril Lavigne Foundation", which aims to help young people with serious illnesses and disabilities and works with leading charitable organizations. The foundation partners with the Easter Seals, Make-A-Wish foundation and Erase MS, Lavigne has worked with the latter two. Her work with the Make-A-Wish foundation was the inspiration behind her own charity, with Lavigne stating, "I just really wanted to do more". Lavigne said on the foundation's website, "I have always looked for ways to give back because I think it's a responsibility we all share". Philanthropist Trevor Neilson's 12-person firm, Global Philanthropy Group, advises Lavigne with her foundation as well as several other celebrities, including musician John Legend. In September 2014, she launched a personal fundraising campaign for Special Olympics as part of her birthday celebration. Proceeds from her "Team Rockstar" event helped sponsor athletes from around the world competing in the 2015 Special Olympics World Summer Games in Los Angeles. The athletes were the stars of the music video for "Fly", which was shot in Canada. In September 2020, Lavigne announced a special livestream concert to raise awareness and funds in the fight against Lyme disease called The #FightLyme concert. The concert took place on October 25, with proceeds from all tickets and merchandise going to the Global Lyme Alliance, a pseudoscientific chronic Lyme disease advocacy group, and her charity Avril Lavigne Foundation. After winning her fourth Juno Award in April 2003, in reference to the Iraq War Lavigne said, "I don't believe war is a way to solve problems. I think it's wrong .... I don't have that much respect for [U.S. President George] Bush". She also said that she was "really proud" of then Prime Minister of Canada Jean Chrétien for keeping Canada out of the war. Everything is always spur-of-the-moment. All of my tattoos, I decide that second and do it. Lavigne on her tattoos As well as having some unique designs, most of Lavigne's tattoos match those of her friends. Lavigne had a star tattooed on the inside of her left wrist that was created at the same time as friend and musical associate Ben Moody's identical tattoo. In late 2004, she had a small pink heart around the letter "D" applied to her right wrist, which represented her then-boyfriend, Deryck Whibley. Lavigne and then-husband Whibley got matching tattoos in March 2010, in celebration of his 30th birthday. In April 2010, Lavigne added another tattoo on her wrist, that of a lightning bolt and the number 30. Her love of tattoos, however, gained media attention in May 2010, after Lavigne and Brody Jenner each got matching tattoos of the word "fuck" on their ribs. Lavigne appeared in the June/July cover story for Inked magazine, where she discussed and showed off her tattoos, including an "Abbey Dawn" on her left forearm and an "XXV" and star on her right. Although she confirmed the "fuck" tattoo verbally in the article (calling it her "favourite word") she had it applied after the magazine's photo shoot. She added that she eventually wanted to get a "big-ass heart with a flag through it with a name ... I'm going to wait a few years and make sure I still want it then. I have to wait for that special someone to come back into my life." In July 2010, Lavigne had her then-boyfriend's name, "Brody", tattooed beneath her right breast. In 2018, Lavigne got a traditional heart shaped tattoo with then boyfriend Phillip Sarofim. Lavigne's father was born in France, and through jus sanguinis, she applied for a French passport, which she received in February 2011. In January 2012, Lavigne sold her house in Bel-Air (on the market since May 2011), and moved to Paris to study the French language. She rented an apartment and attended a Berlitz school. Lavigne and Sum 41 lead vocalist/rhythm guitarist Deryck Whibley began dating when Lavigne was 19 years old, after being friends since she was 17. In June 2005, Whibley proposed to her. The couple married on July 15, 2006, in Montecito, California. On October 9, 2009, Lavigne filed for divorce, citing "irreconcilable differences" as the reason. "She married too young and she finally realized that," a source stated. "[Lavigne] realized she needs her own life and needs to explore things without him." Lavigne stated, "I am grateful for our time together, and I am grateful and blessed for our remaining friendship." The divorce was finalized on November 16, 2010. Lavigne started dating The Hills star Brody Jenner in February 2010. After almost two years of dating, the couple split in January 2012. Lavigne began dating fellow Canadian musician Chad Kroeger, frontman of the band Nickelback, in July 2012. The relationship blossomed after they began working together in March 2012 to write and record music for Lavigne's fifth album. Lavigne and Kroeger became engaged in August 2012, after one month of dating. The couple married at the Château de la Napoule, a reconstructed medieval castle on the Mediterranean in the South of France, on July 1, 2013 (which is Canada Day), after a year of being together. On September 2, 2015, Lavigne announced her separation from Kroeger via her official Instagram account, and later divorced. Lavigne began dating billionaire Phillip Sarofim in 2018. She broke up with him in 2019. It was reported by People magazine that she began dating musician Pete Jonas in 2020. She later began dating Mod Sun around March 2021. In April 2022, Lavigne used her social media accounts to announce their engagement, which eventually ended in February 2023. In April 2015, Lavigne revealed to People magazine that she had been diagnosed with Lyme disease after her 30th birthday in 2014. In an interview with Billboard that same month, Lavigne said that she was in the recovery process and that she wanted to increase awareness of the disease. Lavigne has been referred to as a vegan or a vegetarian, though she has not discussed her diet publicly. Let Go (2002) Under My Skin (2004) The Best Damn Thing (2007) Goodbye Lullaby (2011) Avril Lavigne (2013) Head Above Water (2019) Love Sux (2022) Honorific nicknames in popular music List of artists who reached number one in the United States Cipolla, Miranda. "12 Things The World Wouldn't Have Without Canadian Music". Narcity. Archived from the original on August 13, 2017. Retrieved June 18, 2017. 10. And the global pop-punk scene wouldn't have ever even existed without Avril Lavigne. "Complicated" was the pop-punk ballad heard around the world, and the video is responsible for the suspenders and t-shirt trend that basically defined the early 2000s. Rosales, Armando. "Avril Lavigne, the greatest exponent of pop punk". QuarterRockPress.com (in Spanish). Archived from the original on March 31, 2017. Retrieved March 31, 2017. Gamble, Ione. "11 Times Kelly Osbourne's Early 2000 Outfits Were Our Pop Punk Inspiration – PHOTOS". Archived from the original on August 13, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Whether owning the red carpet with then-bestie and reigning queen of pop-punk Avril Lavigne. Lindner, Emily. "Which 2004 Pop Punk Princess Are You?". Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved May 15, 2017. Where have all the pop punk girls gone? Sure, Avril Lavigne still reigns as queen, but when it comes to the kind of angsty, badass ladies who gave us an outlet in the early aughts, we're running short these days. "Rock N' Roll (Walmart Exclusive), Avril Lavigne: Pop". Walmart.com. August 27, 2013. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved November 4, 2013. Chestang, Raphael (April 23, 2013). "How Well Does Avril Lavigne Know Nickelback?". E!. Archived from the original on April 27, 2013. Retrieved April 24, 2013. Corner, Lewis (April 24, 2013). "Avril Lavigne new album scheduled for September?". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on May 16, 2013. Retrieved April 24, 2013. Spanos, Brittany (February 25, 2022). "Avril Lavigne Gets Back to Her Aughts Emo Bubble-Punk Roots on the Absolutely Killer 'Love Sux'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Mardon, Austin (February 5, 2021). "Avril Lavigne". Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Sperling, Daniel (February 21, 2011). "Lavigne: 'Siblings mocked my singing'". Bang Showbiz via DigitalSpy.com. Archived from the original on February 22, 2011. Retrieved February 21, 2011. Kappes, Serena; Caryn Midler (June 30, 2005). "Inside Her Life: The Middle Child". People. Archived from the original on May 28, 2008. Retrieved May 25, 2008. "ONE OK ROCK bassist and Avril Lavigne's sister get married". sbs.com.au. SBS. February 22, 2017. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Hernandez, Helen (May 1, 2022). "The Quebec roots of Avril Lavigne". OICANADIAN. Retrieved June 25, 2022.[permanent dead link] "Avril Lavigne aurait des origines grostenquinoises" [Avril Lavigne said to have Grostenquin origins]. Le Republicain Lorrain (in French). March 15, 2018. Archived from the original on December 29, 2018. Retrieved December 28, 2018. Eliscu, Jenny (March 20, 2003). "Little Miss Can't Be Wrong: If Avil Lavigne says she writes her own songs, who's going to tell her otherwise?". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 10, 2014. Retrieved April 1, 2015. "Judith-Rosanne Loshaw". MyHeritage.com. Archived from the original on January 10, 2018. Retrieved January 9, 2018. Thorley, Joe (2003). Avril Lavigne: the unofficial book. London: Virgin. ISBN 1-85227-049-7. McQueen, Ann Marie. "Avril's wild ride to stardom". Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on December 6, 2012. Retrieved June 8, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Pak, SuChin; D'Angelo, Joe. "Avril Lavigne: The Real Deal". MTV. Archived from the original on March 12, 2009. Retrieved March 14, 2009. Willman, Chris (November 1, 2002). "Avril Lavigne The Anti-Britney". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 25, 2009. Retrieved March 14, 2009. "Successful People With ADHD: How To Turn Your Attention Deficit Into A Strength". MantraCare. May 17, 2022. Pauley, Jane (December 9, 2003). "All about Avril Lavigne". NBC News. Archived from the original on December 20, 2013. Retrieved June 1, 2010. Quigley, Maeve (September 7, 2003). "They think I'm a tomboy .. but I'm looking forward to a white wedding". Sunday Mirror. Archived from the original on July 3, 2011. Retrieved June 1, 2010. Zwerling, Jared (December 2, 2011). "Avril Lavigne recalls life as a hockey star". ESPN. Archived from the original on September 25, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2019. Tracy, Kathleen (2005). "Chapter 1: A Dream Duet". Avril Lavigne. Blue Banner Biographies (1st ed.). Delaware: Mitchell Lane Publishers. p. 5. ISBN 1-58415-314-8. Cantin, Paul. "The Real Lavigne, Behind Ontario's pop-punk princess lurks a not-so-wild past". Sk8ter Faker. Archived from the original on November 4, 2010. Retrieved June 1, 2010. Patch, Nick (October 18, 2010). "Nettwerk battles through losses". The Canadian Press. Archived from the original on April 27, 2011. Retrieved October 19, 2010. "Cdn. teen Avril Lavigne climbing the pop charts". The Canadian Press. June 3, 2002. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved June 8, 2010. "Avril Lavigne Biography – life, family, children, parents, school, mother, young, old, information, born". Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved January 4, 2016. Most inexperienced singers are backed by seasoned musicians, but Nettwerk chose to go with young performers who were up and coming in the Canadian punk-rock scene. As Nettwerk manager Shauna Gold told Shanda Deziel of Maclean's, "[Lavigne] is young, her music's young, we needed a band that would fit well with who she is as a person." "Interview with Joshua Sarubin". HitQuarters. April 2, 2003. Archived from the original on August 28, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2011. Lamb, Bill. "Avril Lavigne". About.com. Archived from the original on January 31, 2016. Retrieved May 14, 2010. "E = 2K2". Recording Industry Association of America. December 20, 2002. Archived from the original on March 24, 2009. Retrieved March 12, 2009. "Avril Lavigne presented with Diamond". Canadian Recording Industry Association. May 2003. Archived from the original on February 12, 2009. Retrieved March 14, 2009. "Avril Lavigne Ends North American Run of Shows with Two Dates in Washington Beginning 9 May". Transworldnews.com. April 5, 2008. Archived from the original on December 5, 2008. Retrieved May 29, 2008. "RIAA GOLD & PLATINUM AWARDS March // 3/1/18 – 3/31/18" (PDF). RIAA. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 23, 2018. "Billboard Hot 100 songs of the decade". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 2, 2009. Retrieved November 12, 2009. "Avril Lavigne". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Trust, Gary (July 14, 2009). "Lady GaGa charts third No. 1 on Mainstream Top 40". Reuters. Archived from the original on July 20, 2009. Retrieved July 13, 2009. "MTV Video Awards; Avril Lavigne receives best new artist award". Waterloo Region Record. August 30, 2002. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010. LeBlanc, Larry (April 7, 2003). "Avril Nabs Four Juno Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013. Retrieved April 6, 2010. Cadorette, Guylaine (January 3, 2003). "Let the Music Play: 2003 Grammy Nominees Announced". Hollywood.com. Archived from the original on May 29, 2012. Retrieved March 29, 2009. "Lavigne, Our Lady Peace among winners of video awards". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. June 23, 2003. Retrieved June 2, 2010.[dead link] Downey, Ryan J.; Iann Robinson (May 5, 2003). "Avril, Snoop Dogg, Lisa Marie Presley Bow Down To Metallica". MTV. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010. Retrieved June 8, 2010. "About the Show: mtvICON: Metallica". MTV. Archived from the original on August 25, 2010. Retrieved May 11, 2010. Sullivan, James (May 2, 2003). "She's talkin' 'bout her generation / Lavigne's energetic show and young fans are all about the music". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved June 2, 2010. Jenison, David (June 2, 2004). "Avril "Skins" Usher". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. Retrieved March 28, 2010. "Gold/Platinum – Music Canada". Archived from the original on July 14, 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2015. Fulton, Rick (January 10, 2011). "Avril Lavigne: Madonna is my idol". Daily Record. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved January 2, 2016. "Ask Billboard: Why do Some Songs Fade Out and Others End Cold?". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 23, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2013. Moody, Nekesa Mumbi (June 1, 2004). "Lavigne's Not Really Angry: The shy Canadian singer shuns the rebel, punk labelling that many people have given her". The Ledger. Florida. Retrieved June 1, 2010. "Artist Summary | the JUNO Awards". Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2015. Moss, Corey (April 4, 2005). "Usher, Hilary Duff, SpongeBob Take Home Orange Blimps From Kids' Choice Awards". MTV. Archived from the original on January 5, 2009. Retrieved March 30, 2009. Moss, Corey (July 30, 2004). "Avril Lavigne Helps Kelly Clarkson Become A Pop 'Princess'". Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved March 29, 2009. Holguín, Jaime (September 9, 2004). "Beyonce Makes Fashionable Splash". CBS News. Archived from the original on August 4, 2012. Retrieved March 31, 2009. "Avril Lavigne 2004 Maxim Cover". Maxim. Archived from the original on April 27, 2011. Retrieved October 1, 2004. D'Angelo, Joe (November 4, 2004). "Avril Lavigne Gives Squishy SpongeBob Song A Harder Edge". MTV. Archived from the original on August 6, 2009. Retrieved March 30, 2009. "Avril Lavigne to feature in closing of Torino Games". CBC News. January 16, 2006. Archived from the original on May 14, 2007. Retrieved September 29, 2010. "Hey guys". November 8, 2006. Archived from the original on December 7, 2006. Retrieved March 30, 2009. ""Keep Holding On" now playing at radio!". AvrilLavigne.com. November 20, 2006. Archived from the original on December 7, 2006. Retrieved March 30, 2009. ""Keep Holding On" now on iTunes". AvrilLavigne.com. November 28, 2006. Archived from the original on December 8, 2006. Retrieved March 30, 2009. Cohen, Jonathan (April 26, 2007). "Lavigne Sweeps Charts As 'Girlfriend' Tops Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 29, 2013. Retrieved April 6, 2010. "Billboard Hot 100 songs of the decade". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 11, 2011. Retrieved November 12, 2009. Vineyard, Jennifer (April 13, 2007). "Avril Goes Multilingual For 'Girlfriend,' But Does It Get Lost in Translation?". MTV. Archived from the original on August 22, 2009. Retrieved March 30, 2009. "Kohl's Partners with Rocker Avril Lavigne for New Juniors' Lifestyle Brand to Launch July 2008" (PDF). Kohlscorporation.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 16, 2010. Retrieved March 30, 2009. "20 Under 25: The Top-Earning Young Superstars". Forbes. December 4, 2007. Archived from the original on March 30, 2009. Retrieved March 30, 2009. Prato, Alison (March 2008). "Pretty in Punk". Maxim (123): 82–87. Kaufman, Gil (August 18, 2008). "Avril Lavigne Faces Possible Ban in Malaysia For Being 'Too Sexy'". Archived from the original on May 29, 2011. Retrieved March 30, 2009. Kaufman, Gil (August 21, 2008). "Avril Lavigne's Malaysia Concert Is Back On, Singer Says – 'Too Sexy' Or Not". MTV. Archived from the original on October 10, 2011. Retrieved March 30, 2009. Walt Disney Records (Press Release) (January 12, 2010). "Buena Vista Records Presents Almost Alice Featuring Other Voices from Wonderland". EarthTimes. Archived from the original on July 7, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2010. Wood, Courtney (March 17, 2010). "Movie Review: Alice in Wonderland". The Pacifican. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011. Retrieved April 9, 2010. Lavigne, Avril (January 26, 2010). "Interview with Avril Lavigne". On Air with Ryan Seacrest (Interview). Interviewed by Ryan Seacrest. Los Angeles, California: KIIS. Archived from the original on August 27, 2013. Retrieved January 26, 2010. Swanner, Rebecca (June 8, 2010). "Avril". Inked (June/July 2010). Pinchazo Publishing Group: 40–45. Copsey, Robert (September 30, 2010). "Rihanna 'samples Avril Lavigne on LP'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2010. Sciarretto, Amy (October 21, 2010). "Rihanna Samples Avril Lavigne on "Loud"". Artistdirect. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved November 7, 2010. Bell, Crystal (September 8, 2011). "Avril Lavigne Interview: Singer Talks Fashion Week, 'Majors & Minors' & Kim Kardashian's Wedding". HuffPost. Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Bain, Becky (December 14, 2010). "Miranda Cosgrove Is 'Dancing Crazy' On Her Avril Lavigne-Written Track". Idolator. Archived from the original on December 18, 2010. Retrieved December 18, 2010. Pastorek, Whitney (July 24, 2009). "Avril Lavigne in the studio: An EW exclusive!". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 27, 2009. Retrieved January 30, 2010. Diehl, Matt (September 3, 2009). "Avril Lavigne Mellows Out, Gets Serious". Rolling Stone. No. #1086. p. 24 LLC. Montgomery, James (November 22, 2010). "Avril Lavigne Says Her New Album 'Is A Departure'". MTV. Archived from the original on November 25, 2010. Retrieved November 23, 2010. Jones, Anthony (November 10, 2010). "Avril Lavigne To Release New Single 'What The Hell'". All Headline News. Archived from the original on March 16, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2010. Hart, Courtney (August 13, 2010). "Avril Lavigne Back in the Studio, Has Strep Throat". Kingston Herald. Archived from the original on August 17, 2010. Retrieved August 13, 2010. Lipshutz, James (December 7, 2010). "Avril Lavigne to Release 'Goodbye Lullaby' Album in March". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 13, 2011. Retrieved December 8, 2010. "Avril Lavigne announces third single off Goodbye Lullaby". ShuffleMe. July 9, 2011. Archived from the original on March 24, 2012. Retrieved October 17, 2011. "Avril Lavigne starts work on new album". NME. June 20, 2011. Archived from the original on August 25, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2011. Corner, Lewis (June 20, 2011). "Avril Lavigne: 'I've started work on new pop album'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 22, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2011. Daw, Robbie (June 20, 2011). "Avril Lavigne Wants To Release 'More Fun'". Idolator. Archived from the original on June 21, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2011. "92.5 THE BEAT Montreal's Best Music Variety Radio Station". 925thebeat.ca. Archived from the original on May 21, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2011. "Avril Lavigne Shifts to Epic Records, Reunites With L.A. Reid". Billboard. November 17, 2011. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. Retrieved April 9, 2012. "Canadian Singer Avril Lavigne Contributes One Piece Film Z Themes – Interest". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on July 24, 2017. Retrieved December 15, 2012. Corner, Lewis (February 8, 2013). "Avril Lavigne announces new single 'Here's To Never Growing Up'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on February 11, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2013. "Avril Lavigne Talks Upcoming Album As First Single, "Rock N Roll", Drops Today " MIX 105.1". Mix1051.cbslocal.com. August 27, 2013. Archived from the original on August 28, 2013. Retrieved August 28, 2013. "Backstreet Boys, Avril Lavigne Announce Summer Tour | Billboard". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved April 9, 2014. "Avril Lavigne Responds To 'Hello Kitty' Video Criticism: 'RACIST??? LOLOLOL!!!'". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved November 28, 2018. Mansfield, Brian (March 14, 2014). "Backstreet Boys announce U.S. dates with Avril Lavigne". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved August 7, 2021. "Avril at Summer Sonic". Archived from the original on August 31, 2014. Retrieved August 19, 2014. "Avril Lavigne Returns With Sexy 'Give You What You Like' Video—Watch Now!". February 10, 2015. Archived from the original on January 31, 2019. Retrieved January 31, 2019. "Avril Lavigne's Post-Illness Plans: Special Olympics Song, Christmas Album & Film Work". Billboard. April 6, 2015. Archived from the original on April 9, 2015. Retrieved April 6, 2015. Dickman, Maggie (November 18, 2016). "ONE OK ROCK announce new album 'Ambitions,' release new song—listen". Alternative Press. Archived from the original on November 21, 2016. Retrieved December 26, 2016. Chameleon – EP by Grey on Apple Music, September 29, 2017, archived from the original on September 29, 2017, retrieved September 28, 2017 "Avril Lavigne's 'Head Above Water' Is Here: Stream It Now". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2019. "Avril Lavigne announces highly-anticipated new single 'Head Above Water' in letter to fans". BMG. September 6, 2018. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved September 6, 2018. "Avril Lavigne announces highly-anticipated new single 'Head Above Water' in letter to fans". BMG. September 6, 2018. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2018. Nied, Mike (December 7, 2018). "Avril Lavigne Reveals The Cover & Tracklist Of 'Head Above Water'". Idolator. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved December 7, 2018. "Avril Lavigne & Nicki Minaj Drop Fiery Collaboration 'Dumb Blonde': Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 29, 2019. Retrieved June 3, 2019. Brent Furdyk (July 7, 2019). "Avril Lavigne's Latest Single 'I Fell in Love with the Devil' Is Creating Controversy". ET Canada. Archived from the original on July 7, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. "Avril Lavigne Announces First North American Tour in 5 Years". Billboard. June 24, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2021. "Avril Lavigne announces UK and European tour for 2022". NME. October 28, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Papadatos, Markos (May 5, 2020). "Avril Lavigne talks 'We Are Warriors,' Project HOPE, digital age". Digital Journal. Archived from the original on January 1, 2021. ""Flames" with @modsun featuring me January 8th pre save now 🔥🔥🔥🔥". Instagram. January 1, 2021. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved January 1, 2021. "Avril Lavigne & Mod Sun Team Up For "Flames"". Idolator. January 1, 2021. Retrieved January 3, 2021. Walsh, Laurel (January 31, 2021). "Avril Lavigne Teases New Album, Says It's Dropping Soon". TheThings. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved February 1, 2021. "Avril Lavigne has finished her new pop-punk album". Kerrang. February 8, 2021. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved February 9, 2021. Moore, Sam (July 12, 2021). "Willow Smith confirms Avril Lavigne, Travis Barker and more on new album tracklist". NME. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved July 15, 2021. "Willow and Avril Lavigne tower above the city in new 'Grow' video". NME. October 20, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. "Avril Lavigne signs to Travis Barker's record label and teases new single". NME. November 4, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Lavin, Will (November 5, 2021). "Avril Lavigne announces new single 'Bite Me' coming next week". NME. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Carter, Emily (January 13, 2022). "Avril Lavigne announces new album Love Sux". Kerrang!. Retrieved January 13, 2022. "Avril Lavigne Previews New LP 'Love Sux' With 'Love It When You Hate Me'". Rolling Stone. January 15, 2022. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Ruggieri, Melissa. "Avril Lavigne knows 'love is a lot of work' as she drops album with MGK, Travis Barker". USA Today. Retrieved February 25, 2022. Caulfield, Keith (March 6, 2022). "'Encanto' Enchants Billboard 200 Albums Chart With Eighth Week at No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved April 2, 2022. "She's Back: Avril Lavigne Debuts At 3 With 'Love Sux'". FYIMusicNews. March 7, 2022. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Blistein, Jon (June 3, 2022). "Avril Lavigne Drops New'Breakway' Version, Unearths Rarities for 'Let Go' Anniversary". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 3, 2022. Shafer, Ellise (June 3, 2022). "Avril Lavigne Celebrates 'Let Go' 20th Anniversary With Expanded Edition, Including New Recording of 'Breakaway'". Variety. Retrieved June 3, 2022. "WATCH: Avril Lavigne Shocks Fans With Stellar Shania Twain Cover On ACM Honors". Country Now. September 13, 2022. Retrieved September 16, 2022. "Avril Lavigne pays homage to 'Canadian queen Shania Twain' on Instagram". Yahoo! News. September 15, 2022. Retrieved September 17, 2022. ""I'm A Mess" featuring @yungblud out Thursday, November 3". Twitter. Retrieved October 29, 2022. "Avril Lavigne and Yungblud announce collaborative single 'I'm A Mess'". Far Out Magazine. October 28, 2022. Retrieved October 29, 2022. Avril Lavigne (November 3, 2022). ""I'm A Mess" is on the deluxe album coming out November 25 🧡🖤 #ImAMess". Twitter. Avril Lavigne (November 3, 2022). "Omfg my new album is coming along so quickly! Nothing like working with your friends. Been working with Alex from All Time Low, Travis, Feldy, and Yungblud…it's been like…Laugh. Talk. Write. Sing. Record. Repeat. #ImAMess". Twitter. "All Time Low and Avril Lavigne join forces for new single Fake As Hell". Kerrang!. September 15, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. "Avril Lavigne Essentials". Apple Music. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved September 20, 2018. Alt-rock upstart Avril Lavigne came crashing into the charts in 2002 with a sound that stuck up a black nail-varnished middle finger at the hyper-polished world of classmates Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera. From the chugging, three-chord pop-punk of "Sk8er Boi" and "My Happy Ending" to the country-hued, catchy melody of "Complicated" and the twinkling balladry of "I'm With You," the Canadian singer proved herself a crossover star, garnering legions of both mainstream and fringe fans with her Cali punk-indebted sound. "Genres: Pop Rock, Post Grunge". Musicmight.com. Archived from the original on June 20, 2013. Retrieved April 23, 2013. Spence D. "Avril Lavigne – The Best Damn Thing". Music.ign.com. Archived from the original on March 19, 2012. Retrieved October 17, 2011. O'Neil, Tim. "Avril Lavigne: Under My Skin". PopMatters. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved October 17, 2011. "A Night Out With: Avril Lavigne; Punk Rocker, Pop Queen And Tomboy All in One". The New York Times. November 10, 2002. Archived from the original on August 27, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2011. Hoard, Christian (April 17, 2007). "The Best Damn Thing – Avril Lavigne". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 4, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2011. "Avril Lavigne – Bio, Pictures, Videos". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 20, 2011. Retrieved October 17, 2011. "Lavigne's grungey pop-rock sound". Thebiographychannel.co.uk. Archived from the original on March 7, 2013. Retrieved April 23, 2013. "Avril Lavigne | Biography, Albums, Streaming Links". AllMusic. Archived from the original on March 27, 2012. Retrieved May 20, 2012. STYLES: Contemporary Pop/Rock, Post-Grunge "Avril Lavigne – Music Biography and Discography – AllRovi.com". Archived from the original on August 28, 2013. Retrieved May 20, 2012. MUSIC STYLES: Contemporary Pop/Rock, Post-Grunge Fanpop, Inc. "She's ... a post-grunge valkyrie, with the wounded soul of a poet and the explosive pugnacity of a Canadian". Fanpop.com. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2013. Carberry, Colin (November 24, 2004). "Girl, you'll be a woman soon". Hot Press. Archived from the original on February 7, 2016. John Perry (June 4, 2002). "Outstanding guitar-pop debut from sassy teenage skateboarder". Blender. Archived from the original on October 27, 2004. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Christina Saraceno. "Let Go – Avril Lavigne – Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Retrieved August 18, 2019. Nick Reynolds (2003). "Review of Avril Lavigne – Let Go". BBC. Retrieved August 23, 2019. "Avril Lavigne: 8 Best Songs That Should've Been Singles". Archived from the original on October 6, 2016. Retrieved January 31, 2017. Leathes, Annabel. "BBC – Music – Review of Avril Lavigne – Under My Skin". Archived from the original on August 13, 2018. Retrieved February 13, 2018. "Avril Lavigne: Under My Skin". The A.V. Club. May 28, 2004. Archived from the original on August 7, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2017. "Under My Skin". Entertainment Weekly. May 28, 2004. Archived from the original on August 7, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2017. O'Neil, Tim. "AVRIL LAVIGNE Under My Skin". PopMatters. Archived from the original on September 23, 2008. Retrieved July 21, 2022. The album's defining sound is that of crunching punk guitars playing mighty power chords, all mixed with the same flawless elan that has characterized pop-punk ever since Green Day dropped Dookie. Bradley, Jonathan (2018). "'It's Not Like We're Dead': The Fascinating Evolution & Non-Linear Maturation of Avril Lavigne, Motherf—king Princess". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 3, 2019. Retrieved December 1, 2019. While emo crossover acts such as Fall Out Boy and My Chemical Romance would remain an underground concern for at least another six months, Under My Skin anticipated that scene's emotional intensity and theatrical aesthetics in the mainstream. Luciana Maria Sanches (April 5, 2004). "Avril Lavigne gótica?". Omelete. Retrieved August 25, 2019. Sal Cinquemani (May 20, 2004). "Avril Lavigne: Under My Skin". Slant Magazine. Retrieved August 25, 2019. Brian Hiatt (May 1, 2004). "Early word on Avril Lavigne's new album". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 3, 2019. Dunk, Marcus (April 20, 2007). "AVRIL LAVIGNE: THE BEST DAMN THING". Express. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2017. ... the perpetual teenager who manages to combine bubblegum pop with punk riffs in pretty much every song. "Shamelessly Anticipating Avrils New Album". Blender. January 2007. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Retrieved July 21, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Callwood, Brett (September 11, 2019). "AVRIL LAVIGNE'S HEAD IS FINALLY ABOVE WATER". Archived from the original on September 23, 2019. Retrieved September 12, 2019. After three albums of the quirky, bouncy skater-punk and post-grunge that saw her build a huge international fanbase, she began the new decade with the pop-rock Goodbye Lullaby in 2011 and followed that with the ultimately pop Avril Lavigne in 2013. Wang, Steffanne (February 25, 2022). "THE MOST EMO LYRICS FROM AVRIL LAVIGNE'S LOVE SUX". Nylon. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Arias, Mateo (March 2022). "Avril Lavigne despierta el sentimiento emo-punk con 'Love Sux'". Revista Diners (in Spanish). Retrieved August 5, 2022. Lavigne returns with a very emo sound loaded with nostalgia and roughness Yang, Katrina. "Avril Lavigne "Love Sux"". Punk Head. Archived from the original on February 26, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Avril Lavigne is back with her aughts emo pop-punk aesthetic. Franco, Kai (March 9, 2022). "Avril Lavigne Brings Emo Back with "Love Sux"". Wonder. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Spanos, Brittany. "Avril Lavigne Gets Back to Her Aughts Emo Bubble-Punk Roots on the Absolutely Killer 'Love Sux'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 30, 2022. "Avril Lavigne's New Album Love Sux is high energy Skate Punk Candy". IndieMusicSpin. February 28, 2022. Retrieved March 16, 2022. Shutler, Ali (December 16, 2021). "Avril Lavigne on her new Green Day inspired album: "It's a love letter to women"". NME. Retrieved March 30, 2022. To the core, I'm a kid from a small town who listened to bands like Blink-182 and Green Day and NOFX in high school, and I tapped into that. Kelly, Tyler. "Nine Songs: Avril Lavigne". The Line of Best Fit. Retrieved March 30, 2022. I was really connecting with punk rock, aggression and rock and roll when I got into writing riffs. That was the style that I gravitated towards when I was picking up the guitar – I was listening to those distorted sounds as well as bands like The Offspring and blink-182 who were so influential. Beats, River (August 18, 2017). "From Glitter to Gold: Why Kesha's New Sound is Her Best Yet". River Beats. Archived from the original on October 18, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018. Meadway, Katie (May 15, 2017). "There's Now So Much 'Evidence' For The 'Avril Lavigne Has Been Dead For 13 Years' Theory That We're Kinda Starting To Believe It". Capital FM. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2018. Camp, Zoe (February 20, 2019). "Avril Lavigne's Tacky Head Above Water Fails to Do Her Legacy Justice". Spin. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2020. DeVille, Chris (February 21, 2019). "Avril Lavigne's Disappointing Return". Stereogum. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2020. Kot, Greg (November 13, 2004). "Avril Lavigne blossoming". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on April 27, 2011. Retrieved December 30, 2010. Flynn, Gaynor. "Avril Lavigne Over the Hedge Interview". Girl.com.au. Archived from the original on July 21, 2006. Retrieved May 31, 2010. Eliscu, Jenny (March 7, 2003). "Smells like teen spirit". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on October 22, 2008. Retrieved December 29, 2010. Soghomonian, Talia (September 2004). "Interview: Avril Lavigne". musicOMH. Archived from the original on July 7, 2009. Retrieved December 29, 2010. Vineyard, Jennifer (February 28, 2007). "Don't Know How To Spell 'Avril Lavigne'? Prepare To Be Scolded". MTV. Archived from the original on March 2, 2007. Retrieved December 30, 2010. Salva, Susie (March 6, 2008). "Avril Lavigne's "The Best Damn Thing" on RCA records". LAsThePlace.com. Archived from the original on March 10, 2008. Retrieved January 31, 2011. "Lavigne gets deep on new record". Irish Examiner. December 31, 2010. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Fanpop, Inc. "She is a punk chanteuse, a post-grunge valkyrie, with the wounded soul of a poet and the explosive pugnacity of a Canadian". Fanpop.com. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2013. "Exclusive Rodney Interview! Your Questions Answered!". Avrillavigneuk.tumblr.com. September 1, 2011. Archived from the original on September 5, 2013. Retrieved August 13, 2012. "Avril Lavigne: songwriter retracts songwriting claims". NME. UK. July 11, 2007. Archived from the original on April 27, 2011. Retrieved December 29, 2010. Mumbi Moody, Nekesa (July 23, 2007). "Singer-Songwriters, or Just Singers?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 19, 2017. Retrieved February 18, 2017. ""Girlfriend" Power for Avril, Chantal". E!. July 11, 2007. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. Retrieved December 29, 2010. "Seventies Band Sues Lavigne Over 'Girlfriend'". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 29, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2010. "Avril Lavigne Settles With Rubinoos Over Copyright Lawsuit". ChartAttack.com. January 10, 2008. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. Retrieved December 29, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Paula Abou-Jaoude (November 16, 2007). "Uma Avril patricinha". Capricho Magazine (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on October 18, 2011. Retrieved September 22, 2012. O que você tem ouvido ultimamente? Tenho escutado coisas como Blink 182, Ramones e Distiller. Gosto de Coldplay, Hole, Alanis Morissette. Tenho escutado muito punk rock, então você poderá notar uma certa influência do punk em meu discos. Gosto de uma música agressiva, mas curto bastante pop rock, que é o que sei fazer realmente. "Avril Lavigne: When Females Lash Out". Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved January 4, 2016. "what music she listens to then, she [Avril] said: "Marilyn Manson, The Used, Hole, Radiohead, The Distillers, NOFX etc" "Q&A: Avril Lavigne". Rolling Stone. June 24, 2004. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved January 4, 2016. "I've been listening to Third Eye Blind, Oasis, Marilyn Manson and System of a Down on my iPod, but I really like the new Blink-182 record. "Evan Taubenfeld: 'Avril Isn't Punk'". Ultimate Guitar Archive. July 2, 2004. Archived from the original on July 14, 2004. Retrieved December 29, 2010. "Avril Lavigne: 'I'll always feel young'". Digital Spy. October 14, 2013. Archived from the original on June 13, 2016. Retrieved June 3, 2016. "For me, my music's always been heavy pop rock ..." O'Brian, Amy (April 21, 2007). "Fame, marriage and hometown pizza: Avril Lavigne is living the life of the megastar, but she's a Canadian smalltown girl at heart". Canwest News Service. Archived from the original on December 6, 2012. Retrieved June 1, 2010. Trebay, Guy (December 10, 2002). "The Necktie as a Gift: Not Such a Bad Idea After All". The New York Times. p. 9. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved June 1, 2010. Anderson, Kyle (June 4, 2010). "Avril Lavigne Drops Her Debut: Wake-Up Video". MTV. Archived from the original on June 7, 2010. Retrieved June 4, 2010. Altman, Billy (August 20, 2008). "Avril Lavigne's Malaysian Malaise". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on August 27, 2008. Retrieved May 17, 2010. "Avril Lavigne bares soul in latest release". The Observer. University of Notre Dame and Saint Mary's College, South Bend, Indiana. September 9, 2004. Archived from the original on August 29, 2013. Retrieved June 1, 2010. "The 11 Hottest Comeback Chicks of 2011". Complex Networks. Archived from the original on June 30, 2014. Retrieved January 17, 2014. "Lavigne somehow devolved into that sk8r girl who was only relevant to the mid-2000s pop punk period as the female answer to Blink 182" Moody, Nekesa Mumbi (July 27, 2002). "New crop of teen pop queens reject sex-symbol status". Manila Standard. XVI (163). Philippines: 42. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2010. D'Angelo, Joe (April 2, 2004). "Avril Lavigne Album Preview: Rock Rules On Under My Skin". MTV. Archived from the original on October 8, 2008. Retrieved June 1, 2010. "Avril Lavigne Talks About Her Fashion Transformation". I'm Not Obsessed. October 18, 2006. Archived from the original on April 2, 2010. Retrieved April 6, 2010. Estatie, Lamia (May 15, 2017). "The Avril Lavigne conspiracy theory returns". BBC News. Archived from the original on August 25, 2018. Retrieved September 20, 2018. Contreras, Cydney (November 1, 2018). "Avril Lavigne Finally Responds to Viral Conspiracy Theory That She Died Years Ago". E Online. USA. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. Monroy, Ana (September 6, 2019). "Avril Lavigne Has Always Known Exactly Who She Is". Grammy. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved September 29, 2021. ... and the impact her [Avril] music has had on the next generation of female alt-rockers. Frank, Alex (June 29, 2017). "Paramore's Hayley Williams Still Gets You". Fader. The Fader. Archived from the original on October 30, 2017. Retrieved November 2, 2017. Avril Lavigne had recently broken through, whetting the industry's appetite for punky alternatives to Britney and Christina. "I don't think I would've been signed if Avril hadn't happened," she says. "Pieces of Avril". The Globe and Mail. January 31, 2004. Archived from the original on March 17, 2017. Retrieved March 16, 2017. Hammond, Amy. "Krystal Meyers is in the Spotlight". Soul Shine. Archived from the original on March 17, 2017. Retrieved March 16, 2017. I've been compared many a time to Avril, which I can see, but you know that's because there aren't a lot of people to compare to. There's not a lot of girls that are doing like the solo, pop/punk thing Fitzmaurice, Larry (February 15, 2019). "Exploring Avril Lavigne's Complicated Influence". Vulture. Archived from the original on October 19, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2019. Lavigne was practically the most visible female-identifying rock-adjacent musician, and her punkish, mall-destroying image packed undeniable appeal for a generational subset otherwise gazing at the masculine, often-misogynistic landscape of nu metal and Bush-era pop-punk. Butler, Josh (2016). "Fella's guide to the greatest pop punk bands". fella.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2017. Retrieved April 5, 2017. "Top 50 Best Musicians/Bands Since 2000: 20 – 11". The Music Observer. Archived from the original on April 6, 2017. Retrieved April 5, 2017. Forget about calling her the Pop Punk Princess; Avril Lavigne is the Pop Punk Queen. She is not only far and away the best pop punk musician of her generation C., Danni (February 15, 2016). "Rock Princess Avril Lavigne: An Important Figure In Pop Punk". CelebMix. Archived from the original on August 13, 2017. Retrieved March 17, 2017. "Avril Lavigne". Biography.com. Archived from the original on March 16, 2017. Retrieved March 17, 2017. Schoeman, Kimberley (June 9, 2022). "The queer icons that paved the way for safer sexual expression". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "The 21 Best Pop-Punk Choruses of the 21st Century". Spin. April 28, 2017. Archived from the original on April 29, 2017. Retrieved April 30, 2017. 5. Avril Lavigne – "Sk8er Boi" The choruses in "Sk8er Boi" are all different, but they all start the same way: "He was a sk8er boi / She said see you later boi," two lines that won't stop being funny until animals stop riding skateboards. Which chorus is best? It might be the first one ("He wasn't good enough for her"), but actually it's the second, the one where Avril might as well say "plot twist" first: "Now he's a superstar / Slammin' on his guitar." — AG Pauker, Lance (January 22, 2014). "49 Phenomenally Angsty Pop-Punk Songs From The 2000s You Forgot Existed". Thought Catalog. Archived from the original on October 10, 2014. Retrieved April 30, 2017. Sherman, Maria. "The 15 Best Pop-Punk Songs For Karaoke". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on April 28, 2016. Retrieved April 30, 2017. 6. Avril Lavigne, "Sk8r Boi" This is the point where pop-punk purists will disagree with me, but there was/is certainly nothing truly punk about Avril, so she belongs on this list. "Sk8r Boi" was one of the few songs that came out in 2002 that my mom and I could both enjoy. ~*~so alt~*~ "Girlfriend – Avril Lavigne". Elepé (in Spanish). Archived from the original on August 7, 2017. Retrieved April 30, 2017. Girlfriend cemented the Canadian artist in the pop punk world scene Al-Sharif, Rabab (April 19, 2021). "Who Are Tramp Stamps + Why Does Everyone Already Hate Them?". Loudwire. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "Pop Shop Podcast: Bebe Rexha Opens Up About Exceeding 'Expectations' With Her Debut Album, 'Meant to Be' Chart Record & More". Billboard. August 7, 2018. Kaplan, Ilana (March 16, 2017). "Pop Newcomer Billie Eilish Wants to Make Sure You Never Forget Her". Paper. Archived from the original on December 11, 2018. Retrieved December 10, 2018. I grew up listening to the Beatles, Green Day and Avril Lavigne "Judas Priest Frontman Rob Halford – "I Think Whatever Small Mark or Point I Was Able to Make by Announcing My Sexuality in a World Famous Heavy Metal Band – I'd Like to Think Some Good Came of It"". Brave Words. June 15, 2007. Archived from the original on April 18, 2017. Retrieved April 17, 2017. In the specifics of Metal, it's still viewed as a male dominated domain (which it isn't). That's why I love bands like EVANESCENCE and AVRIL LAVIGNE (even though she's not totally Metal – she's hard.) Sims, Eddie (July 23, 2018). "INTERVIEW: Courage My Love". Distorted Sound. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved November 16, 2018. Who were the idols that made you want to pick up instruments? – Phoenix: We're Canadian so we can't get away without mentioning Avril Lavigne, pre-kawaii of course. "5 Seconds of Summer: Related". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021. See Influenced by section. Yeniocak, Su (September 20, 2021). "Yungblud Says Avril Lavigne's Authenticity Suggestion Helped His Music Career". Rockcelebrities. Retrieved November 4, 2021. Ginsberg, Gab. "Maggie Lindemann's Boots Were Made For Creeping". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021. Lindemann found inspiration in Gwen Stefani and No Doubt, Avril Lavigne and Paramore – as well as Evanescence and Flyleaf Hingle, James (August 9, 2019). "TONIGHT ALIVE'S JENNA MCDOUGALL: THE 10 SONGS THAT CHANGED MY LIFE". Kerrang!. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2020. AVRIL LAVIGNE – SK8ER BOI (2002) "This song came out when I was 10, and I'd just started learning guitar at the time. I just wanted to be Avril so badly. I guess she wasn't really in a band, she was a solo artist, but this song was the first that made me want to pick up an electric guitar." Cross, Will. "WHEN I WANTED TO CHALLENGE PEOPLE WITH MY IMAGE, IT WAS THROWN BACK IN MY FACE". Rock Sound. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2020. I frickin' love Avril, she was a huge idol for me, just going to throw that in there! Gonzales, Erica (April 27, 2021). "Willow Smith's Punk New Song Sent Me Straight Back to My Angst Era". Harpers Bazaar. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. She was influenced by the emo and rock acts she listened to growing up, like Avril Lavigne, My Chemical Romance, Paramore, and Fall Out Boy. Palmer, Amanda. "Amanda Palmer's Official Facebook Page". Facebook. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2020. nobody back then understood my obsession with avril's second record, the worlds perfect pop masterpiece of candy-coated teen angst, not even me. Hickey, David. "About misono". iTunes Apple. Retrieved August 16, 2020. Citing the likes of Avril Lavigne, Krystal Meyers, the Offspring, and Linkin Park as influences, Misono has turned to a variety of musical collaborators. Barreto, Clyde (2013). "Rising Japanese London-based Artist Rina Sawayma Discusses Her Song Writing Influences". prefix. Archived from the original on June 26, 2020. Retrieved April 22, 2020. It actually all started with Avril Lavigne. I was 12 when I saw her on TV and begged my dad for a guitar. He caved, and I taught myself chords and begun writing that way. It was then that I actually started looking for music myself, and all my pocket money went into buying CDs. Cantor, Brian (October 8, 2013). "Identity Issues Plague Cassadee Pope's "Frame by Frame," Album Review". Headline Planet. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2020. To a segment of pop-punk fans, Pope's shift represented an opportunistic abandonment of a genre she cherished enough to still call poster girl Avril Lavigne a key influence. Russell, Erica (September 29, 2017). "AVRIL LAVIGNE MAKES RARE, ROLLICKING APPEARANCE ON GREY'S 'WINGS CLIPPED'". PopCrush. Archived from the original on February 4, 2019. Retrieved February 3, 2019. She asked if she could jump on it with Anthony and we agreed that it would be perfect! We grew up listening to Avril and Circa Survive so hearing the two of them on one of our songs is surreal to say the least. "Brit breakout Ed Sheeran dishes on upcoming hip-hop-influenced sophomore album – NEWS 1130". www.citynews1130.com. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved August 2, 2021. ". @morguemami 's unique sound was inspired by @AvrilLavigne , and I simply cannot get enough of her!!". MTV (Twitter). Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved September 5, 2020. Pelley, Lauren (December 15, 2014). "10 essential facts about Charli XCX". The Star. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved September 5, 2020. It seems Charli XCX may have taken some of her punk cues from Ontario's own Avril Lavigne. "I used to want to be Avril. I used to wear the ties," Charli told Grantland in 2013. Cox, Rebecca (July 26, 2013). "CharliXCX talks 90s school-girl beauty and going through the Avril Lavigne phase". Glamour. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved September 5, 2020. "MercyMe". April 7, 2003. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2021. Millard, who said the band's influences include U2, Dave Matthews Band, and Avril Lavigne, was openly amazed. Pearis, Bill (January 21, 2021). "Palberta tell us about the influences behind their new album". Brooklyn Vegan. Retrieved December 20, 2023. "Together" – Avril Lavigne: This song informed the vocal production of the record. Very crisp, clear, and at the forefront. You are able to hear all the lyrics very well, which is something that a lot of music is missing. Zhang, Cat (September 11, 2023). "Logging Off and Rocking Out With yeule, Pop's Internet Explorer". Pitchfork. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Logging Off and Rocking Out With yeule, Pop's Internet Explorer Jamieson, Sarah (September 25, 2023). "UNDER THE SKIN: YEULE". DIY. Retrieved November 10, 2023. We have so many references from the '90s and '00s, like Radiohead, My Chemical Romance… Honestly, Gerard Way changed my fucking life," they enthuse giddily. "I was nine years old when I found 'Three Cheers for Sweet Revenge' and did not understand what that was all about until later on, but the emotional lyricism and the musical aspect of it punched me when I was a kid. "Then we were listening to a lot of Avril Lavigne, the stuff that we grew up on with our iPods. Like, 'Oh we should totally do some Pixies shit, or Smashing Pumpkins!' We were listening to all this music that's very sentimental to us, because we're '90s kids." Raza-Sheik, Zoya (October 6, 2023). "Entering yeule's rockstar cyber dimension". Gay Times. Retrieved November 10, 2023. o capture this, the singer trawled through their old listening habits: Avril Lavigne, Smashing Pumpkins, and Hole. "I was listening to so much of what I enjoyed when I was a teenager because it made me feel that age again – that's why I fucking vibed with you! I'm a big fan of Gerard Way. He is so pivotal to my life," they say animatedly. "I don't think I don't think anyone realises how much I love My Chemical Romance or Avril Lavigne. C'mon, 'Sulky Baby' literally sounds like 'Complicated'." Mier, Tomas. "Olivia Rodrigo Fangirls Over Avril Lavigne as She Accepts Songwriter Award: 'So Surreal". People. Retrieved January 27, 2022. Rodrigo admitted she was a huge fan of the "Sk8er Boy" singer, 37. Connel, Charlie (January 24, 2022). "Avril". Inked. Retrieved January 27, 2022. Now there is a new generation of female artists, Olivia Rodrigo perhaps being the most notable, who have been greatly influenced by Lavigne's music Salud, April (October 12, 2017). "Pentatonix's Kirstin Maldonado Adds P!nk, Avril Lavigne & Gwen Stefani to Her 2000s Pop Punk Playlist". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 18, 2017. Retrieved November 2, 2017. O'Brien, Jon. "Amy Studt". AllMusic. Archived from the original on April 17, 2017. Retrieved April 17, 2017. Amy Studt was hailed as the U.K.'s answer to Avril Lavigne. Cyclone. "Making Waves With Heather Baron-Gracie". The Music. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved November 13, 2020. Pale Waves often cite inspirations such as The Cure (for whom they're opening in London this July), Prince and Madonna. There are also guilty pleasures. "I love Avril Lavigne!" Baron-Gracie geeks Phoenix, Stormy. "Album Review: All The Things I Never Said by Pale Waves". Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved November 13, 2020. Heavily influenced by The Cure, The Cranberries, Cocteau Twins, and Avril Lavigne, Pale Waves are the next goth pop band Caminiti, Kasey (May 15, 2018). "Pale Waves Are Gothic Gems". Dujour. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved November 13, 2020. Drawing inspiration from 80s punk bands like The Cure and stylistic aspirations from early punk rock princess Avril Lavigne, Pale Waves are creating their own musical identity "GRAACE covers Avril Lavigne for Like A Version". ABC Au. August 30, 2019. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved September 5, 2020. I wanted to embody a bit of Avril," she says in her ripped jeans. "I definitely went through a bit of an emo stage [when I was younger]. Brodsky, Rachel (February 12, 2021). "Album reviews: Pale Waves – Who am I? and Django Django – Glowing in the Dark". Independent. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2021. Today, a new crop of indie performers cite Lavigne – and her brassy brand of MTV-friendly pop suffused with snarling rage against the machine – as a major influence: Soccer Mommy, Snail Mail, Phoebe Bridgers... Williams, Nick. "Listen To Phoebe Bridgers' #TBT Mixtape, An 'Honest Portrayal' Of Her Early 2000-Era iPod Shuffle". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved September 5, 2020. And I probably wouldn't have made it to Elliott Smith without Avril Lavigne. Havens, Lindsey. "Not So 'Complicated': How Avril Lavigne Became an Unlikely Inspiration To Indie Rock's New Wave". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 12, 2018. Retrieved August 11, 2018. Kot, Greg (June 22, 2003). "Liz Phair complicates her sound by going pop: Singer imitates those who imitated her". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on August 7, 2017. Retrieved April 17, 2017. Herwees, Tasbeeh. "Exploring Avril Lavigne's Strange, Enduring Influence On Hip-Hop". Nylon. Archived from the original on August 12, 2018. Retrieved August 11, 2018. As It Happens (January 27, 2021). "Avril Lavigne and dolphins: the internet conspiracy you've been waiting for". CBC Radio. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved January 29, 2021. Dunn, Thom (January 24, 2021). "The bizarre internet mystery of an Avril Lavigne song that doesn't exist". Boing Boing. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved January 29, 2021. Snider, Shawn (July 14, 2003). "The Sims: Superstar Review". GamingExcellence.com. Archived from the original on January 24, 2005. Retrieved January 2, 2011. "Avril Lavigne's Make 5 Wishes". RandomHouse.com. Archived from the original on May 3, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2010. "2003 Socan Awards | Socan". Archived from the original on October 12, 2016. Retrieved August 30, 2016. Shepherd, Jack. "Avril Lavigne new album Head Above Water gets release date – her first record since Lyme disease diagnosis". The Independent. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. The Canadian Press. "Avril Lavigne releases 'What the Hell,' lead single off album, 'Goodbye Lullaby'". CP24. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Trust, Gary (September 6, 2015). "Ask Billboard: Avril Lavigne's Best-Selling Songs & Albums". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Retrieved September 6, 2015. "Billboard Best of the 2000s". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 2, 2009. Retrieved November 12, 2009. "Billboard Artist of the Decade". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 2, 2009. Retrieved November 12, 2009. C, Jeff (2003). "Avril Lavigne in Guinness Book of World Records 2004". Pop Dirt. Archived from the original on March 31, 2017. Retrieved March 31, 2017. Copsey, Rob (April 5, 2019). "Billie Eilish becomes the youngest ever female solo act to top the Official Albums Chart: 'Thank you for the love!'". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved April 6, 2019. Jarboe, Greg (2009). YouTube and Video Marketing: An Hour a Day. John Wiley & Sons. p. 35. ISBN 978-0-470-45969-0. Retrieved March 31, 2017. "Avril Lavigne's Achievements". wattpad. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2017. "Avril Lavigne – Who Knows @ Turin Olympics 2006". YouTube. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved April 17, 2017. "Avril Lavigne – My Happy Ending & Girlfriend (Winter Olympics Games – Vancouver 2010)". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 20, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2017. "Avril Lavigne – Fly (live on Special Olympics 2015)". YouTube. Archived from the original on September 15, 2021. Retrieved April 17, 2017. Bruce Ferber (writer), Marley Sims (writer) (November 2, 2001). "The Gift of Gab". Sabrina, the Teenage Witch. Season 6. Episode 5. The WB Television Network. "For The Record: Quick News On Puddle Of Mudd, Papa Roach, Jewel, Dave Navarro, Coolio & More". MTV. November 1, 2002. Archived from the original on February 9, 2012. Retrieved May 31, 2010. "For The Record: Quick News On Avril Lavigne, Ashanti, Insane Clown Posse, Jennifer Love Hewitt, Jimmy Eat World & More". MTV. August 28, 2002. Archived from the original on February 19, 2003. Retrieved May 31, 2010. Braun, Liz (August 20, 2004). "Have a laugh, see Canada". Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on January 1, 2013. Retrieved May 31, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Griffiths, Mark (director) (August 20, 2004). Going the Distance (Motion picture). MGM Home Entertainment. Archived from the original on June 18, 2010. Retrieved June 1, 2010. Kaufman, Gil (November 30, 2005). "Avril Lands A Role in Richard Gere Crime Drama 'The Flock'". MTV. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010. West, Dave (May 12, 2006). "Lavigne bags acting role in 'The Flock'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010. "The Flock – International Box Office Results – Box Office Mojo". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010. "Over the Hedge (2006) – Box Office Mojo". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 27, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010. "Lavigne Joins Fast Food Nation". Contactmusic.com. December 20, 2005. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Retrieved May 31, 2010. Germain, David (May 19, 2006). "'Fast Food Nation' Hits Burger Culture". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010. Lemire, Christy (November 14, 2006). "'Fast Food Nation' doesn't have bite". MSN. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2010. Dupont, Joan (May 22, 2006). "Director serves subtler 'Food' at Cannes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010. "Fast Food Nation (2006) – Box Office Mojo". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2010. Mlynek, Alex; Pulfer, Rachel (August 14, 2006). "Power players: Canada's top actors". Canadian Business. Archived from the original on December 11, 2007. Retrieved June 27, 2007. Warech, Jon (July 30, 2008). "OK! Interview: Avril Lavigne". OK!. Archived from the original on August 4, 2009. Retrieved August 28, 2008. Vena, Jocelyn (August 25, 2008). "Avril Lavigne Launches Abbey Dawn Clothing Line: 'It's Absolutely My Wardrobe'". MTV. Archived from the original on March 8, 2009. Retrieved March 30, 2009. Barker, Olivia (March 5, 2008). "Lavigne pins name to clothes line her own Abbey Dawn, for Kohl's". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved June 3, 2010. "Word of Mouse: Creating a Musical Buzz Online". NPR. September 10, 2007. Archived from the original on October 24, 2008. Retrieved August 28, 2008. Moody, Colleen (September 15, 2009). "New York Fashion Week Spring 2010: Abbey Dawn". Cosmo Girl. Archived from the original on June 14, 2010. Retrieved March 27, 2010. Sciarretto, Amy (December 8, 2010). "Avril Lavigne to Release 'Goodbye Lullaby' on March 8". Artistdirect. Archived from the original on April 27, 2011. Retrieved December 14, 2010. Osborne, Grant (March 18, 2009). "Avril Lavigne in London to promote new fragrance, Black Star". Basenotes.net. Archived from the original on March 19, 2009. Retrieved March 20, 2009. Lavigne, Avril (May 6, 2010). "Interview with Avril Lavigne". On Air with Ryan Seacrest (Interview). Interviewed by Ryan Seacrest. Los Angeles, California: KIIS. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved May 14, 2010. "CEW Beauty Award Winners List". Cosmetic Executive Women. 2010. Archived from the original on July 5, 2010. Retrieved June 2, 2010. "Avril Lavigne's "Forbidden Rose", "Black Star" News". 2Day FM. March 16, 2010. Archived from the original on March 9, 2012. Retrieved June 4, 2010. "Watch: Avril Lavigne's fragrance commercial". The Independent. UK. June 4, 2010. Archived from the original on June 8, 2010. Retrieved June 4, 2010. "Forbidden Rose new fragrance by Avril Lavigne". Perfume Blog. March 18, 2010. Archived from the original on July 26, 2010. Retrieved March 27, 2010. Lavigne, Avril (herself) (June 2010). Forbidden Rose commercial (Streaming video). Procter & Gamble. Archived from the original on June 5, 2010. Retrieved June 4, 2010. Osborne, Grant (September 28, 2011). "Avril Lavigne launches Wild Rose". Basenotes. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. "Wild Rose Avril Lavigne for women". Fragrantica.com. Archived from the original on September 7, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2011. "Alice in Downtown: Alice in Wonderland Design Exhibition Opens at FIDM Today". Los Angeles Downtown News. May 27, 2010. Archived from the original on January 3, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Dunlevy, T'cha (November 17, 2007). "Artists keen to take on role of engaged global citizens". The Gazette. CanWest Global Communications. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved June 2, 2010. Ryan, Harriet (November 14, 2010). "Celebrities hire philanthropy consultants to guide their giving". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 3, 2010. Curiel, Nat (April 20, 2006). "Guster's Adam Gardner sits down with the Concordy". Concordiensis. Archived from the original on August 27, 2019. Retrieved June 3, 2010. "Make some noise to save Darfur". Amnesty International. June 25, 2007. Archived from the original on February 11, 2009. Retrieved March 30, 2009. "La cifra reunida en el Teletón asegura más centros de ayuda". El Siglo de Torreón (in Spanish). December 7, 2009. Archived from the original on April 21, 2010. Retrieved June 2, 2010. "Various Artists – Wavin Flag (Young Artists For Haiti)". Celebrifi.com. March 12, 2010. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. Retrieved November 7, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Greenblatt, Leah (December 27, 2010). "Avril Lavigne talks about her new album, (sort of) working with Rihanna, and where she'll be New Years Eve: An EW Q&A". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 30, 2010. Retrieved December 27, 2010. "The Avril Lavigne Foundation: Partners". Theavrillavignefoundation.org. Archived from the original on September 18, 2010. Retrieved September 16, 2010. "The Avril Lavigne Foundation". Theavrillavignefoundation.org. Archived from the original on September 17, 2010. Retrieved September 16, 2010. "Birthday Campaign!: The Avril Lavigne Foundation". theavrillavignefoundation.org. Archived from the original on January 6, 2015. "Special Olympics: Avril Lavigne Fundraiser Supports Special Olympics". specialolympics.org. Archived from the original on January 6, 2015. Retrieved December 15, 2014. "Avril Lavigne – Fly High with Special Olympics". ABILITYMagazine.com. June 1, 2015. Archived from the original on September 1, 2015. Retrieved August 4, 2015. "Scientific Consensus | LymeScience". LymeScience. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved April 22, 2021. Fishburn, Alison (February 11, 2020). "Avril Lavigne announces Lyme disease benefit concert, will donate proceeds from tickets to charity". The Economic Times. Retrieved November 15, 2020. Fischer, Molly (July 24, 2019). "What Happens When Lyme Disease Becomes an Identity?". The Cut. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved April 22, 2021. chronic "Lavigne 'proud' Chrétien kept Canada from war". The Globe and Mail. Ottawa. April 9, 2003. Retrieved December 9, 2021. "Avril Lavigne: No Looking Back". MTV. Archived from the original on February 4, 2011. Retrieved June 2, 2010. Lavigne, Avril (herself, performer); Craig Ferguson (host) (June 18, 2007). "Ioan Gruffudd/Avril Lavigne". The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson. Season 4. Episode 89. NBC. Furtado, Miranda (April 12, 2010). "Avril Lavigne and Brody Jenner Make it Official – With Matching Tattoos". Dose.ca. Archived from the original on May 1, 2010. Retrieved April 26, 2010. "Exclusive: Avril Lavigne And Brody Jenner Get Matching Obscene Tattoos". RadarOnline. May 7, 2010. Archived from the original on May 10, 2010. Retrieved May 30, 2010. "Spencer Pratt Calls Brody Jenner a 'Drunk Idiot'". Us Weekly. May 14, 2010. Archived from the original on May 28, 2010. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Guadiana, MaryHelen (May 19, 2010). "F***Love". Inkedmag.com. Archived from the original on May 25, 2010. Retrieved June 1, 2010. "Avril Lavigne, Brody Jenner Tattoo Their Names on Each Other". MTV. July 7, 2010. Archived from the original on July 9, 2010. Retrieved July 7, 2010. "Here's What Avril Lavigne's Tattoos Really Mean". The list. April 30, 2021. Lavigne, Avril (February 9, 2011). "Interview on NRJ Radio". Archived from the original on September 5, 2014. Retrieved November 15, 2013. I love France, in fact my father was born here, so I have applied for my French passport. I love this country so much that I am getting a French passport. Vallet, Stéphanie (October 22, 2011). "Avril Lavigne: francophone dans l'âme". La Presse. Archived from the original on October 1, 2013. Retrieved June 30, 2013. Morales, Parker (May 16, 2011). "Avril Lavigne Lists Bel Air Home for $9.5 Million". realtor.com. Archived from the original on May 20, 2011. Retrieved April 17, 2013. "Avril Lavigne Spent A Year in Paris To Master French". wenn.com. April 12, 2013. Archived from the original on July 4, 2018. Retrieved April 17, 2013. Malach, Maggie (April 15, 2013). "Avril Lavigne's Move to France: Singer Reveals Motivation For Living Abroad". aolmusic.blog. Archived from the original on April 19, 2013. Retrieved April 17, 2013. Metcalfe, Luisa (October 15, 2009). "Avril Lavigne Files Divorce". OK!. Archived from the original on February 26, 2010. Retrieved April 6, 2010. "Avril Lavigne engaged". AskMen. June 28, 2005. Archived from the original on May 29, 2012. Retrieved March 28, 2010. "Photos from Looking Back on Avril Lavigne's Relationship History". E! Online. Retrieved March 11, 2024. Press, Associated (November 18, 2010). "Avril Lavigne and Deryck Whibley Finalize Divorce". Billboard. Retrieved March 19, 2024. "Why Avril and Deryck Called It Quits". Peoplemag. Retrieved March 11, 2024. Garvey, Marianne (November 17, 2010). "Avril Lavigne's Divorce Approved, Free to Get More Brody Jenner Tattoos". E!. Archived from the original on August 25, 2011. Retrieved November 17, 2010. "Brody Jenner's Single Again! A Look Back at His Laundry List of Lovahs". MTV. Archived from the original on April 11, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2017. Migdol, Erin (April 9, 2013). "Avril Lavigne Wedding: Singer Reveals How Chad Kroeger Proposed, Big Day Plans". HuffPost. Archived from the original on April 11, 2013. Seacrest, Ryan (host); Avril Lavigne (April 9, 2013). Avril Lavigne & Chad Kroeger Spill Wedding Details Part 2, Interview, On Air with Ryan Seacrest (Radio broadcast [video recording]). United States: YouTube. Event occurs at 2:44. Archived from the original on September 5, 2014. Retrieved April 9, 2013. Migdol, Erin (April 12, 2013). "Avril Lavigne Engaged: Singer Talks Couple Tattoos, Wedding Plans". HuffPost. Archived from the original on April 13, 2013. Laudadio, Marisa (August 21, 2012). "Avril Lavigne Engaged to Nickelback's Chad Kroeger". People. Archived from the original on August 22, 2012. Retrieved August 21, 2012. Ehrich Dowd, Kathy; Silverman, Stephen M. (July 2, 2013). "Avril Lavigne and Chad Kroeger Are Now Married (Really)". People. Archived from the original on July 5, 2013. Retrieved July 2, 2013. DZurilla, Christie (July 2, 2013). "Avril Lavigne, Chad Kroeger marry goth-style in south of France". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 17, 2014. Retrieved February 19, 2014. "Avril Lavigne on Instagram: "It is with heavy heart that Chad and I announce our separation today. Through not only the marriage, but the music as well, we've created…"". Instagram. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved September 2, 2015. Nelson, Jeff (February 14, 2019). "Avril Lavigne Reveals She's Still 'Super Close' with Ex-Husband Chad Kroeger: 'He's in My Corner'". People. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. "Avril Lavigne and Billionaire Heir Phillip Sarofim Split After Less Than 2 Years of Dating". People. November 27, 2019. "Avril Lavigne Is Dating Indie Artist Pete Jonas: See the Pic from Their Pre-Grammy Party Date Night". People. January 26, 2020. "Avril Lavigne and Mod Sun's relationship timeline". Cosmopolitan. September 26, 2021. Nelson, Jeff; DeSantis, Rachel (April 7, 2022). "Avril Lavigne Gets Engaged to Mod Sun in Paris: 'The Day We Met I Knew You Were the One'". People. Retrieved April 8, 2022. "Avril Lavigne's Dating History: From Brody Jenner to Mod Sun". Peoplemag. Retrieved February 26, 2023. Telling, Gillian (April 1, 2016). "Avril Lavigne Opens Up About Her Health Crisis: 'I Was Bedridden for 5 Months'". People. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 29, 2016. "Are you strictly wheat and two veg ..." The Guardian. April 28, 2007. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved January 2, 2021. Anna L Mejorada. "Andre 3000, Avril Lavigne Vie For Sexiest Vegetarian Title". MTV News. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved January 2, 2021. Srinivasan, Priya (May 21, 2003). "AVRIL AT HSBC: DON'T TRY TO SHUT HER UP". The Buffalo News. Berkshire Hathaway. Archived from the original on October 1, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022. Ong, Jennifer (April 8, 2005). "A rocked-out night with Avril Lavigne and Simple Plan". The Philippine Star. Archived from the original on October 1, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "On-the-Road Perspectives from The Best Damn Tour". Front of House Magazine. October 15, 2008. Archived from the original on October 1, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Avril Lavigne rocks Manila with her 'Black Star Tour'". GMA Network. February 17, 2012. Archived from the original on October 1, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Cameron, Chole (September 23, 2019). "THE AVRIL LAVIGNE COMEBACK WE'VE ALL BEEN WAITING FOR". HOLR. Archived from the original on October 1, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Juneau, Jen (June 25, 2019). "Avril Lavigne Is Set to Tour America for the First Time in 5 Years". People. Archived from the original on October 1, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022 – via Yahoo! News.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Avril Lavigne forced to postpone LOVE SUX European tour". WRMF. Hubbard Broadcasting. February 8, 2022. Archived from the original on March 20, 2022. Retrieved March 20, 2022. "Avril Lavigne Announces 2024 "The Greatest Hits" Tour". Consequence. January 22, 2024. Retrieved January 22, 2024. D'Angelo, Joe (March 31, 2004). "Avril's Ex-Boyfriend Now Her Ex-Bandmate Too". MTV News. MTV Networks. Retrieved October 13, 2011. "Avril Lavigne actuará por primera vez en China" [Avril Lavigne performs for the first time in China]. Radio Cooperativa (in Spanish). Compañía Chilena de Comunicaciones. July 25, 2007. Archived from the original on October 17, 2011. Retrieved October 17, 2011. Mansfield, Brian (March 14, 2014). "Backstreet Boys announce U.S. dates with Avril Lavigne". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Chareunsy, Don (March 21, 2022). "Machine Gun Kelly's new Mainstream Sellout tour with Avril Lavigne headlines Spokane Arena on July 25". The Spokesman-Review. Archived from the original on October 1, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Avril Lavigne at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Listen to this article (28 minutes) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 16 May 2010 (2010-05-16), and does not reflect subsequent edits. (Audio help · More spoken articles) Official website The Avril Lavigne Foundation Avril Lavigne discography at Discogs Avril Lavigne discography at MusicBrainz Avril Lavigne at IMDb Portals:  Biography  Music  Canada