The 2017 IIHF World Championship Division I was an international ice hockey tournament run by the International Ice Hockey Federation. Group A was contested in Kyiv, Ukraine from 22 to 28 April 2017 and Group B in Belfast, United Kingdom from 23 to 29 April 2017. South Korea and Austria were promoted to the 2018 World Championship. It marked the first time South Korea had earned promotion to the top tier of the World Championship. There were two official bids to host Group A Championships. Austria Ukraine Kyiv Ukraine had never hosted these championships, however, they did host an Olympic Pre-Qualification round in 2012. The proposed arena was the Palace of Sports. The decision on who hosts the tournament was decided on May 20, 2016. The bid from Ukraine gained a majority vote against the Austrian entry. There were also two official bids to host Group B Championships. Estonia Tallinn Estonia last hosted these championships in 2006. The proposed arena was Tallinn Arena. United Kingdom Belfast The United Kingdom had never hosted these championships, however, they did play host to the IIHF Group B Championships in 1952, and again in 1993. The proposed arena was the Odyssey Arena. The decision on who hosts the tournament was decided on May 20, 2016. The bid from the United Kingdom received 18 votes, whilst the Estonia bid received 7. 7 referees and 7 linesmen were selected for the tournament. Source: IIHF Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal difference; 4) head-to-head number of goals scored; 5) result against closest best-ranked team outside tied teams; 6) result against second-best ranked team outside tied teams; 7) seeding before tournament. (H) Host; (P) Promoted; (R) Relegated Notes: Kazakhstan 2–5 South Korea All times are local (UTC+3). Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goalkeeper: Bernhard Starkbaum Best Defenseman: Dominique Heinrich Best Forward: Nigel Dawes Source: IIHF.com Media All-Stars: MVP: Thomas Raffl Goalkeeper: Bernhard Starkbaum Defenceman: Dominique Heinrich / Alex Plante Forwards: Nigel Dawes / Thomas Raffl / Konstantin Komarek Source: IIHF.com List shows the top skaters sorted by points, then goals. GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; +/− = Plus/minus; PIM = Penalties in minutes; POS = Position Source: IIHF.com Only the top five goaltenders, based on save percentage, who have played at least 40% of their team's minutes, are included in this list. TOI = Time on ice (minutes:seconds); SA = Shots against; GA = Goals against; GAA = Goals against average; Sv% = Save percentage; SO = Shutouts Source: IIHF.com 4 referees and 7 linesmen were selected for the tournament. Source: IIHF Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal difference; 4) head-to-head number of goals scored; 5) result against closest best-ranked team outside tied teams; 6) result against second-best ranked team outside tied teams; 7) seeding before tournament. (H) Host; (P) Promoted; (R) Relegated All times are local (UTC+1). Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goalkeeper: Yutaka Fukufuji Best Defenseman: Ben O'Connor Best Forward: Colin Shields Source: IIHF.com List shows the top skaters sorted by points, then goals. GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; +/− = Plus/minus; PIM = Penalties in minutes; POS = Position Source: IIHF.com Only the top five goaltenders, based on save percentage, who have played at least 40% of their team's minutes, are included in this list. TOI = Time on ice (minutes:seconds); SA = Shots against; GA = Goals against; GAA = Goals against average; Sv% = Save percentage; SO = Shutouts Source: IIHF.com "Tournaments Assigned". iihfworlds2016.com. 23 May 2016. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2016. Merk, Martin (29 April 2017). "Korea Promoted!". IIHF.com. Archived from the original on 10 May 2018. Retrieved 29 April 2017. "Belfast wins bid to host 2017 World Ice Hockey Championship competition". BBC.co.uk. 23 May 2016. IA Assignsments IB Assignsments