East Java (Indonesian: Jawa Timur, Javanese: ꦙꦮꦶꦮꦺꦠꦤ꧀, romanized: Jawi Wétan, Madurese: Jhâbâ Tèmor) is a province of Indonesia located in the easternmost third of Java island. It has a land border only with the province of Central Java to the west; the Java Sea and the Indian Ocean border its northern and southern coasts, respectively, while the narrow Bali Strait to the east separates Java from Bali by around 2.29 kilometres (1.42 mi). Located in eastern Java, the province also includes the island of Madura (which is connected to Java by the longest bridge in Indonesia, the Suramadu Bridge), as well as the Kangean islands and other smaller island groups located further east (in the northern Bali Sea) and Masalembu archipelagos in the north. Its capital is Surabaya, the second largest city in Indonesia, a major industrial center and also a major business center. Banyuwangi is the largest regency in East Java and the largest on the island of Java. The province covers an area of 48,036.84 square kilometres (18,547.13 sq mi), and according to the 2010 Census, there were 37,476,757 people residing there, making it Indonesia's second-most-populous province; the 2020 Census showed an increase to 40,665,696 people, while the official estimate for mid 2022 was 41,149,974. Almost a quarter of the population lives inside greater Surabaya metropolitan area. East Java is inhabited by many different ethnic groups, such as the Javanese, Madurese and Chinese. Most of the people in East Java adheres to Islam, forming around 94% of the total population. Other religions are also practiced, such as Christianity, Buddhism and Confucianism which are mostly practised by Tionghoa people and immigrants from Eastern Indonesia and North Sumatra, and also Hinduism which are practised by the Tenggerese people in the Bromo Tengger Semeru National Park and the Balinese people inhabiting the easternmost part of the province bordering Bali. The Indonesian language is the official language of the province as well as the whole nation, but Javanese and Madurese are most frequently used, especially the Surabaya dialect (Javanese: Suroboyoan or Surabayaan — the Javanese dialect of Surabaya) used mainly in the capital Surabaya. Indonesian is only used for inter-ethnic communication and official purposes. East Java offers different types of tourist attractions. There are a variety of natural attractions, including mountains, beaches, caves, and waterfalls. Almost every regency or city in East Java has its own unique tourist destinations, such as the Ijen volcano in Banyuwangi, Baluran National Park in Situbondo, and Bromo Tengger Semeru National Park. East Java has been inhabited by humans since prehistoric times. This was proven by the discovery of fossils remains of the Pithecanthropus mojokertensis in Kepuhlagen, Mojokerto; Pithecanthropus erectus on Trinil, Ngawi; and Homo wajakensis in Wajak, Tulungagung. The Dinoyo inscriptions found near the city of Malang are the oldest written sources in East Java, dating from 760 CE. It tells of many political and cultural events in the Kingdom of Kanjuruhan. The name Malang is thought to come from the name of a sacred building called Malangkuseswara. This name is contained in the Mantyasih inscription written in 907 CE. In 1222, Ken Arok founded the Kingdom of Singhasari, which he ruled until 1292. Before coming to power, Ken Arok seized power in Tumapel (Kediri) from Tungul Ametung. Ken Arok's descendants became kings of Singhasari and Majapahit from the 13th until the 15th century. In 1227, Anusapati killed Ken Arok, and later became king of Singhasari. Anusapati's power only lasted 20 years, before he was killed by Tohjaya. Three years later, Tohjaya was killed in an uprising led by Jaya Wisnuwardhana, son of Anusapati. In 1268, Wisnuwardhana died, and he was succeeded by Kertanegara (1268–1292). In 1292 Kertanegara was defeated by a rebel named Jayakatwang, ending the Singhasari. In 1293, Kublai Khan, founder of the Yuan dynasty, sent a large invasion fleet to Java with 20,000 to 30,000 soldiers, beginning the Mongol invasion of Java. This was a punitive expedition against King Kertanegara of Singhasari, who had refused to pay tribute to the Yuan and maimed one of its ministers. However, it ended with failure for the Mongols. In 1294, the Kingdom of Majapahit was founded by Raden Wijaya. The Majapahit reached its peak during the reign of Hayam Wuruk. He was accompanied by the Mahapatih Gajah Mada. Together they managed to unite the archipelago under the name Dwipantara. Majapahit developed to become one of the strongest empires in Southeast Asia. In 1357, the Battle of Bubat occurred, starting a war between the Sunda Kingdom and the Majapahit. The event stemei from the desire of king Hayam Wuruk to take a Sundanese princess. Dyah Pitaloka as queen. However, because of a misunderstanding about the procedure of marriage, leading to a battle in Bubat. Majapahit troops, under the command of Gajah Mada capturud Pajajaran. In 1389, Hayam Wuruk died, and was succeeded by Wikramawardhana. This resulted in the beginning of the decline of the Majapahit Empire. As the Majapahit Empire went into decline in the late 1300s, Islam moved to fill the vacuum. The precise date when Islam entered Java remains unclear. This is due to the absence of a definite source regarding the arrival of Islam in Java. However, according to some experts[like whom?], it is estimated that Islam entered Java around the 11th century, with the tomb of Fatimah Binti Maimun in the village of Leran in Gresik Regency which dates from 475 AH (1085 AD). The tomb also shows that by the 11th century, the North coast of Java had been frequented by Arab traders from the Middle East. In addition, several Islamic tombs were discovered in Trowulan, located in what is now part of the Mojokerto Regency, near the site of the former Majapahit palace. In the 15th century, a Chinese Hui voyager named Ma Huan visited East Java. He then wrote the book Yingya Shenglan, which tells the story of the countries he visited over the course of the Ming treasure voyages. He mentioned that at that time, there were three different peoples inhabiting Eastern Java: Arabs from the Middle East, the ancestor of the modern Arab Indonesians; Chinese Muslims originating from modern-day Guangdong province, and the native Javanese people. By the 16th century, the Majapahit Empire was defeated by Islamic kingdoms in Java, resulting in the exile of many Majapahit aristocrats to the neighbouring island of Bali. Those who remained in Java were forced to convert to Islam, while a small pocket of isolated people living in the Bromo Tengger Semeru National Park spread around Pasuruan, Probolinggo, Malang, and Lumajang Regencies remains adhered to Hinduism to this day. They are known as the Tenggerese people. Their population of roughly 100,000 is centered in 30 villages in the isolated Tengger mountains. When Islamic sultanates started ruling Java, cities in the northern coast started developing, becoming thriving ports. One of them was the town of Tuban, which was a wealthy and important port with many Chinese settlers. Being a port of the Majapahit and the point of departure for the Moluccas, it exported an abundant supply of foodstuffs and imported a rich variety of products from the Moluccas. At the end of the 16th century, Islam had surpassed Hinduism and Buddhism as the dominant religion in Java. At first, the spread of Islam was very rapid and was accepted by ordinary people, until the da'wah entered and it was carried out by the rulers of the island. The relationship between the Javanese and European colonial powers began in 1522, with the signing of a treaty between the Sunda Kingdom and the Portuguese Empire in Malacca. After the failure of the treaty, the Portuguese presence was then limited to Malacca in the Malay Peninsula and the Maluku Islands. An expedition under the leadership of the Dutch explorer Cornelis de Houtman consisting of four ships in 1596 became the beginning of Dutch presence in the island. At the end of the 18th century, the Dutch had succeeded in expanding their influence on the Islamic sultanates in the interior of the island of Java. At the onset of the Napoleonic Wars, the British conquered Java in 1811. Java briefly became part of the British Empire, with Sir Stamford Raffles as its Governor-General. In 1814, Britain returned Java to the Netherlands as stipulated in the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814. During the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies, there was persistent resistance against the Japanese rule. In Blitar, an uprising by Pembela Tanah Air (PETA) led by Supriyadi, Moeradi, Halir Mangkudijoyo, and Soemarto occurred in early 1945, but it was crushed by the Japanese. Two weeks after the proclamation of independence, Surabaya established its own government under, Raden Sudirman. The formation of government in Surabaya caused disputes between the republican forces and Japanese troops, resulting in various skirmishes across the city. This was because when the Japanese surrendered, they were obliged to remain in power until the allied forces arrived. The arrival of allied forces in Surabaya created tensions with the newly established government of Indonesia, reaching peak on 10 November 1945 where a major battle between the Surabayan residents led by Sutomo and allied forces. The battle forced the governor, Suryo, on the advice of People's Security Army (TKR), to move the seat of the government to Mojokerto. A week later, the government retreated again to a more secure location in Kediri. However, security situation Kediri worsen until finally, in February 1947, the East Java provincial government fled to Malang. While the administration was based in Malang, Governor Soerjo was replaced by R.P. Suroso, who was in turn replaced again by Dr. Moerdjani. On 21 July 1947, although still bound by the Linggadjati Agreement, a ceasefire agreement in effect since 14 October 1946, the Dutch commenced a military action, Operation Product, which led to deteriorating security conditions in Malang. The East Java provincial government moved again to Blitar. This military action ended after the Renville Agreement. However, this agreement reduced the territory controlled by the East Java provincial government. The Netherlands then turned the areas under its control into new federal states, the State of Madura and the State of East Java. Amid the difficulties faced by the government of Indonesia, a left-wing opposition group, Front Demokrasi Rakyat (FDR, People's Democratic Front) launched rebellion in Madiun on 18 September 1948. However, eventually this revolt was defeated by the Indonesian Army. On 19 December 1948, the Dutch launched Operation Kraai. Blitar, the seat of the East Java provincial government was attacked by the Dutch. Governor Moerdjani and his staff were forced to flee and joined the guerrillas on the slopes of Mount Wilis. Operation Kraai ended after the Roem–Van Roijen Agreement on 7 May 1949. Following the Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference, at which the Netherlands agreed to transfer sovereignty to the United States of Indonesia, the Dutch withdrew its troops from East Java. East Java changed its status from a province into a state. However, on 25 February 1950, this was dissolved and became part of the territory of the Republic of Indonesia. The State of Madura also decided to join Indonesia. Along with rapid growth of urbanization in East Java, the governments could not satisfy the population's needs for affordable housing, which led to the building of shanty towns along the rivers and rail tracks. Today, the shanty towns still exist; although some have been transformed into "better" housing. East Java has twice hosted the National Sports Week (PON), the 7th (1969) and 15th PONs (2000), and became the overall champions in 2000 and 2008. East Java province borders the Java Sea in the north, the Strait of Bali in the east, and the Indian Ocean in the south, as well as the Central Java province in the west. The length of the east–west stretch of about 400 km. The width of the stretch of the north–south in the west about 200 km, but in the eastern part of narrower by about 60 km. Madura is the largest island in East Java, separated from the mainland Java by the Strait of Madura. Bawean Island is located about 150 km north of Java. In the east of Madura there are clusters of islands, the easternmost are the Kangean Islands and the northernmost are the Masalembu Islands. Off the south coast of Java there are two small islands namely Nusa Barong and Sempu Island. In physiographic of geology, East Java Province can be grouped into three zones: the southern zone (plato), the middle zone (volcanic), and the northern zone (folds). Lowlands and highlands in the middle (of Ngawi, Blitar, Malang, to Bondowoso) has a fairly fertile soil. In the northern part ( Bojonegoro, Tuban, Gresik, to Madura Island) lies the Kapur Utara mountains and the Kendeng mountains which are relatively barren. In the middle of the province stretch mountain ranges and volcanoes: On the border with Central Java is Mount Lawu (3,265 metres). Southeast from Madiun is Mount Wilis (2,169 metres), and Mount Liman (2,563 metres). In the middle of the corridor lies the Anjasmoro mountains with peaks Mount Arjuno (3,339 metres), Mount Welirang (3,156 metres), Mount Anjasmoro (2,277 metres), Mount Kawi (2,551 metres), and Mount Kelud (1,731 metres); The mountains are located in most Kediri, Blitar, Malang, Pasuruan, Mojokerto and Jombang. The group has the peak of Mount Bromo Tengger (2,329 metres), and Mount Semeru (3,676 metres). Mount Semeru, which is also called Mahameru is the highest mountain in the island of Java. In the easternmost part if the province, there are two groups of mountains: the Iyang mountains with the peak Mount Argopuro (3,088 metres), the Ijen mountains with the peak Mount Raung (3344 metres) In the south there is a series of hills, that of the south coast of Pacitan, Trenggalek, Tulungagung, Blitar, Malang. the Kapur Selatan mountains is a continuation of a series of the Sewu mountains in Yogyakarta. Two of the most important rivers in East Java is the Brantas River (290 kilometres), and the Solo River (548 kilometers). Brantas River has headwaters on the slopes Mount Arjuno near Batu, and flows through most areas in East Java, like Malang, Blitar, Tulungagung, Kediri, Jombang and Mojokerto. In Mojokerto, Brantas River split into two: Kali Mas, and Porong; both empties into the Madura Strait. Solo River has headwaters on the slopes of Mount Lawu which lies on the border of East Java and Central Java, and flows through a portion of the eastern part of Central Java and East Java, which eventually empties in Gresik. Brantas River and Bengawan Solo are managed by Perum Jasa Tirta I. On the slopes of Mount Lawu near the border with Central Java are Sarangan, a natural lake. The main dam in East Java, among others Ir. Sutami and Selorejo Dam, which is used for irrigation, fish farming and tourism. East Java has a tropical monsoon and savanna climate at lower elevation and subtropical at higher elevation. Compared with the western part of Java Island, East Java in general has less rainfall. Average rainfall is 1,900 mm per year, with a rainy season during the 100 days. The average temperature ranges between 19–34 °C. Temperatures in the lower mountain areas, and even in areas Ranu Pani (slopes of Mount Semeru), temperatures can reach –4 °C, causing a frost and fall of light snow. East Java is divided into 29 kabupaten (or regencies), and 9 kotamadya (or cities). This division has remained unchanged since the creation of the province, except for the creation of the new city of Batu on 21 June 2001 (by separation from Malang Regency). These regencies and cities with their areas and populations at the 2000, 2010 and 2020 Censuses, together with the official estimates as at mid 2022, are listed below, grouped geographically into five (unofficial) sub-regions entirely for convenience of access. The sub-regions have no official status. These regencies and cities are divided as at 2023 into 666 districts (kecamatan) which are in turn composed of 8,494 administrative villages (rural desa and urban kelurahan): Note: (a) the 2000 population of Batu City is included in the total for Malang Regency, from which it was separated on 21 June 2001. According to the 2000 census, East Java had 34,765,993 people, which increased to 37,476,757 people at the 2010 Census, and to 40,665,595 at the 2020 Census, making it the second most populous Indonesian province after West Java. The official estimate as at mid 2022 was 41,149,974. Akin to Central Java, the region's birth rates are not necessarily any lower than the rest of Java, however due to net population outflows, especially in times of calamity, not limited to volcanic eruptions or droughts, the region has varying rates of population growth that are generally lower than national average. Ethnic Javanese dominate the Java mainland as well as the total population of the province overall, while ethnic Madurese inhabit Madura and the Kangean and Masalembu archipelagos, though centuries of migrations have led the Java mainland to have a larger proportion of Madurese people than Madura itself. Minorities include distinct Javanese ethnicities such as the Tengger people in the Mount Bromo region, and the Samin and the Osing people in Banyuwangi. East Java also hosts a significant population of foreign ethnic groups, such as Chinese, Indians, and Arabs. Besides the national language (Indonesian), the people of East Java predominantly use the Javanese in daily life. Javanese as spoken in the western part of East Java (Kulonan) is a similar dialect to the one spoken in Central Java, with its hierarchy of high, medium, and low registers. In the eastern part, such as Surabaya, Malang, and others, a more egalitarian version of Javanese is spoken, with less regard of hierarchy and a richer vocabulary for vulgarity. The dialect is notable for its roughness compared to other dialects spoken elsewhere in Java (especially the Mataram dialect spoken around Surakarta and Yogyakarta, which is renowned for its smoothness) and contributes to the stereotype among Javanese people of East Javanese being "blunt" and "loud". Variants of Javanese are also used by Osing and Tengger minorities, the former utilizing a Balinese-influenced Javanese by virtue of its closeness with Bali island, and the latter speaking an archaic form of the language that retains many features now lost in other more-innovative Javanese dialects. Other than Javanese, minority language includes Madurese, spoken by around 4 million ethnic Madurese people inhabiting the Madura Islands; though they live practically next door with the Javanese, the language is actually more closer genetically to Balinese, and Sundanese. A long time ago, Hinduism and Buddhism dominated the island until Islam gradually supplanted Hinduism in the 14th and 15th century. The last nobles and people of the fallen Majapahit fled to Bali. Islam spread from northern cities in Java where many Muslim traders from Gujarat, India stopped by. The eastern part of East Java, from Surabaya to Pasuruan, and the cities along the coast, and back to Banyuwangi to Jember, are known as the eastern salient, or "Kawasan Tapal Kuda" (the Horseshoe Region). A remnant of Hindu tradition and syncretic abangan exists because of Islamic and Hinduism acculturation in Java. Islamic Ampel Mosque, Surabaya (circa 1920s) Kayutangan Catholic Church, Downtown Malang (circa 1935) Traditional East Java Christian Church, Mojowarno, Jombang Tengger (Hindu temple) Pura Luhur Ponten, near Bromo Crater Buddhist Maha Vihara Mojopahit, Trowulan, Mojokerto Kwan Sing Bio Chinese Temple, Tuban East Java is known as the hub and center economy of Central and Eastern Indonesia, and has a high economic significance, which contributes over 15% to the Gross Domestic Product of Indonesia. East Java has a number of large industries, including the largest shipbuilding shipyard in Indonesia, PT PAL in Surabaya, military industrial by Pindad in Southern Malang, largest railway industry in Southeast Asia, Industri Kereta Api (INKA) in Madiun, PT Tjiwi Kimia, a paper mill company based in Sidoarjo, Kertas Leces based in Probolinggo); cigarette factories (Wismilak in Surabaya, Gudang Garam in Kediri, Sampoerna in Surabaya and Bentoel in Malang). In Gresik there are Semen Gresik, and Petrokimia Gresik. In Tuban there are the largest cement factories in Indonesia, namely Semen Indonesia (ex-Semen Gresik), and Semen Holcim and the Petrochemical Refinery Area. The government has established 12 industrial estate companies, including Surabaya Industrial Estate Rungkut (SIER) in Surabaya, Pasuruan Industrial Estate Rembang (PIER) in Pasuruan Regency, Madiun Industrial Estate Balerejo (MIEB) in Madiun, Ngoro Industrial Park (NIP) in the Mojokerto Regency, Jabon Industrial Zone in Sidoarjo Regency, and Lamongan Integrated Shorebase (LIS) in Lamongan Regency. Small industrial centers are spread throughout the districts / cities, and some of them have penetrated exports; The leather craft industry in the form of bags and shoes at Tanggulangin, Sidoarjo is one of the very famous small industries. The Cepu Block, one of the largest oil producers in Indonesia, is refined in Bojonegoro. The power plant in East Java is managed by PT Pembangkit Jawa Bali (PJB), which includes hydroelectricity power plant (Ir. Sutami, Selorejo, Bening), thermal power station in Paiton, Probolinggo Regency; which provides electricity to the Java-Bali system. Some regions develop micro hydro power plants, and solar energy. East Java is crossed by several national roads as primary arterial roads, including the northern coastal national road or locally known as pantura road (Anyer-Jakarta-Surabaya-Banyuwangi), and inland national roads (Jakarta-Bandung-Yogyakarta-Surabaya). The expressway network in East Java covers the Surabaya-Gempol Toll Road; Gempol-Pandaan; Pandaan-Malang; Gempol-Pasuruan; and Pasuruan-Probolinggo which connects the northern and middle East Java regions with the southern and eastern salient (tapal kuda), the Surabaya-Gresik Toll Road that connects the middle and southern East Java to the north, and the Surabaya-Mojokerto Toll Road; Mojokerto-Kertosono; Ngawi-Kertosono; and Solo-Ngawi which connects East Java with Central Java. Suramadu Bridge that crosses the Madura Strait connects Surabaya and Madura Island. In the near future, the construction of the Probolinggo-Banyuwangi Toll Road will be realized, which is the final segment of the Trans Java Toll Road, the Krian-Legundi-Bunder-Manyar Toll Road that connects the industrial estates in the city of Surabaya; Sidoarjo Regency; and Gresik Regency, as well as plans for the Gresik-Tuban Toll Road that connects East Java with cities on the northern coast of Java. The railway system in East Java has been built since the colonial era of the Dutch East Indies. The railway line in East Java consists of the northern line (Surabaya Pasar Turi-Semarang-Cirebon-Jakarta), the middle lane (Surabaya Gubeng-Yogyakarta-Bandung-Jakarta), the southern ring railway line (Surabaya Gubeng-Malang-Blitar-Kertosono-Surabaya), and east line (Surabaya Gubeng-Probolinggo-Jember-Ketapang). East Java also has a commuter train transportation system with Bojonegoro-Surabaya-Sidoarjo, Surabaya-Sidoarjo-Porong, Surabaya-Lamongan, Surabaya-Mojokerto, Surabaya-Malang, and Jember-Banyuwangi routes. At present, the Surabaya Gubeng-Kertosono-Madiun line is being developed into a double track and is planned to be completed by the end of 2018 or early 2019 and ready for use in mid-2019. Tanjung Perak International Port is Indonesia's main hub port in Northern Surabaya. Other international ports in East Java include Gresik Port and Java Integrated Industrial and Port Estate in Gresik Regency, Tanjung Tembaga Probolinggo Port and Banyuwangi Port. National ports are Bawean Port in Gresik Regency, Pasuruan Port in Pasuruan City, Sapudi Port in Sumenep Regency, Kalbut Port and Anchor Port in Situbondo Regency, Sapeken Port in Sumenep Regency, Kangean Port in Sumenep Regency, and Muncar Port in Banyuwangi Regency. East Java has a number of ferry ports, including Ujung Port (Surabaya), Kamal (Bangkalan, Madura) Port, Ketapang Port (Banyuwangi), Kalianget Port (Sumenep), and Jangkar Port (Situbondo). Ujung-Kamal route connects Java island (Surabaya) with Madura island, Ketapang Ferry Port connects Java Island with Bali, Jangkar-Kalianget Route connects Java (Situbondo) with Madura Island, and Kalianget also connects Madura Island with small islands in the Java Sea (Kangean and Masalembu). Juanda International Airport in Sidoarjo Regency, located in the suburb of Surabaya and connects the city with major cities in Indonesia and most major cities outside Indonesia. Other international airport is Banyuwangi International Airport, which connects the city with Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. In Malang, there is a regional airport that connects the city with Jakarta and Bali, namely Abdul Rachman Saleh Airport. In addition, there are other public airports in the province such as Notohadinegoro Airport in Jember Regency, Iswahyudi Air Force Base in Madiun Regency, and Trunojoyo Airport in Sumenep Regency. East Java has a number of distinctive art. Ludruk is one of the East Javanese art is quite well known, namely the art of the stage that generally all the players are male. Unlike the Ketoprak which tells the life of the palace, ludruk tells the daily life of ordinary people, often spiced with humor and social criticism, and generally opened with Dance Remo, and parikan. Currently traditional ludruk groups can be found in the area of Surabaya, Mojokerto and Jombang; although its presence increasingly defeated by modernization. Reog from Ponorogo is a typical art that has been patented since 2001, and has now also become the icon of East Javanese art. Staging reog accompanied by horse braid (kuda lumping) are accompanied by elements of the occult. Famous arts of East Java include puppet purwa East Javanese style, mask mastermind in Madura, and made. In the area Mataraman Middle Javanese arts such as Ketoprak, and shadow puppets are quite popular. Famous legend of East Java, among others Damarwulan, Angling Darma, and Sarip Tambak-Oso. Traditional dance in East Java can be generally grouped into Middle Javanese style, East Javanese style, Osing style and Madurese styles. Classical dances include gandrung, gambyong dance, dance srimpi, dance bondan, and wanderer. There is also a sort of lion dance culture in East Java. Art exists in two districts namely, Bondowoso, and Jember. Singo Wulung is a distinctive culture Bondowoso. While Jember have the tiger kadhuk. Both are art that is rarely encountered. Culture and customs of Javanese in the western part of East Java received a lot of influence from the Middle Javanese, so this area is known as Mataraman, indicating that the area was once the territory of the Sultanate of Mataram. The area includes the former residency of Madiun (Madiun, Ngawi, Magetan, Ponorogo, Pacitan), ex-residency Kediri (Kediri, Tulungagung, Blitar, Trenggalek, Nganjuk), and part of Bojonegoro. As is the case in Central Java, wayang kulit, and Ketoprak quite popular in this region. East Java's west coast region is heavily influenced by the Islamic culture. This area covers an area of Tuban, Lamongan and Gresik. In the past the north coast of East Java is the entry area, and the center of the development of Islam. Five of the nine members of the walisongo are buried in this area. In the area of ex-residency of Surabaya (including Sidoarjo, Mojokerto and Jombang), and ex-residency Malang, had little cultural influence Mataraman, considering this region is an area arek (the term for offspring Kenarok), especially in the area of Malang that make this area difficult to be affected by Mataraman culture. Customs in horse hooves region heavily influenced by the culture of Madura, given the magnitude of Madura tribe population in the region. Osing social mores of the culture is a blend of Java, Madura and Bali. While the Tenggerese tribe is heavily influenced by Hindu culture. Villagers in East Java, as well as in Central Java, has ties based on friendship, and territorial. Various ceremonies were held, among others: tingkepan (ceremony gestational age of seven months for the first child), babaran (ceremony before the birth of the baby), sepasaran (ceremony after the baby was five days), Pitonan (ceremony after the baby was seven months old), circumcision, fiancé. East Java's population generally embraced monogamy. Prior to application, the men doing the show nako'ake (ask if the girl already had a husband), once that is done peningsetan (application). The wedding ceremony was preceded by a gathering or kepanggih. Communities on the west coast: Tuban, Lamongan, Gresik, even Bojonegoro has a habit of women's families applying common man (Ganjuran), different from the usual habits of other regions in Indonesia, where the men apply for women. And generally men will then be entered into the family of the woman. To pray for the deceased person, usually a family party did send donga on day 1, 3rd, 7th, 40th, 100th, 1 year and 3 years after death. East Java is the province with the highest number of public universities in Indonesia. Three major cities for universities are Surabaya, Malang, and Jember; there is also a university at Bangkalan on Madura island. Among them, notable university which are : Airlangga University Sepuluh Nopember Institute of Technology Brawijaya University State University of Surabaya State University of Malang Trunojoyo University University of Jember UIN Sunan Ampel University of Surabaya Wijaya Kusuma University Widya Mandala Catholic University Petra Christian University Another important form of education that is available in most cities in East Java is the pesantren. This is a kind of socio-education organized by Islamic clerics, and associated with local or national Muslim organizations. Jombang and Ponorogo is a famous region for its pesantren. East Java supports several regional media outlets. Local newspapers with provincial news reach their readers earlier than their competitors from Jakarta. In the spirit of "providing more news from around readers", most newspapers even issue municipal sections which are different among their distribution areas. More startups media also develop for younger generation. Jawa Pos Group, one of the major newspaper groups in Indonesia, based in Surabaya Surya, newspaper based in Surabaya (owned by Kompas Group) Suara Surabaya (E100 FM), most famous local radio and internet news in Surabaya and East Java IDN Times, multiplatform media for millennials and generation z people Malang metropolitan region is a famous tourist destination in Indonesia with the City of Batu as its center. East Java has a number of interesting sights. One of the tourist icon is Mount Bromo in East Java, which is inhabited by the Tengger tribe, where the ceremony is held every year Kasada. In the mountainous region of Tengger also there is a waterfall that is Madakaripura which is the last hermitage Mahapatih Gajah Mada before serving in the kingdom of Majapahit. Madakaripura Waterfall has a height of about 200 meters, which makes it the highest waterfall on the island of Java and the second highest in Indonesia. East Java also has some other mountainous tourist area of which is Malang Raya mountainous area known as the natural mountain tourist area that includes Malang and Batu. Tretes and Trawas mountainous areas, are also known to have characteristics such as Puncak area in West Java province. Other natural attractions in East Java is the National Park (4 of 12 National Parks in Java) and Taman Safari Indonesia II in Prigen. East Java is also contained relics of history in the classical era. Trowulan sites in Mojokerto, once the center of the Majapahit Kingdom, there are dozens of temples and tombs of the kings of Majapahit. Other temples spread throughout much of East Java, including Penataran temple in Blitar. In Madura, Sumenep is the center of the kingdom of Madura, where there are Kraton Sumenep, museums, and the tombs of the kings of Madura (Asta Tinggi Sumenep). East Java is known for its coastal scenery. On the south coast there is the Prigi Beach, Pelang Beach and Pasir Putih Beach in Trenggalek, Popoh Beach in Tulungagung, Ngliyep Beach, and tourism areas such as the Jatim Park, Museum Angkut, Batu Secret Zoo, Batu Night Spectacular, Eco Green Park in Batu, and the Watu Ulo Beach in Jember. East Java also has a beach that the waves is one of the best in the world, namely the Plengkung Beach located in Banyuwangi. In addition there Kenjeran Beach in Surabaya, and the White Sand Beach in Situbondo. Lake in East Java, among others Sarangan in Magetan, Ir. Sutami Dam in Malang, and Selorejo Dam in Blitar. In the coastal area of the north there are a number of tombs of the saints, which are places of pilgrimage for Muslims. Five of the nine walisongo are buried in East Java: Sunan Ampel in Surabaya, Sunan Giri, and Maulana Malik Ibrahim in Gresik, Sunan Drajat in Paciran (Lamongan), and Sunan Bonang in Tuban. In the northern coastal region, there are a number of caves, including Maharani Cave in Lamongan and Tuban Akbar Cave and Cave Gong located in Pacitan. Other pilgrimage sites include the tomb of Indonesia's first president Sukarno, in Blitar, as well as the tomb of the fourth Indonesian president Abdurrahman Wahid, known as Gus Dur, in Jombang. Malang Metropolitan Region is a leading tourist destination in Indonesia with the City of Batu as its center. Malang has various tourist areas including volcanoes to beaches, as well as man-made tour of the history of travel to an international-class theme park with the support of inter-provincial transportation via trains, buses, and airplanes are available in Malang. Surabaya is the center of government, entertainment, financial, and business center of East Java, where there are Tugu Pahlawan, the Museum MPU Tantular, Surabaya Zoo, Submarine Monument, Ampel Region, and the Downtown Tunjungan area. Jawa Timur Park in Batu Madakaripura waterfall in Probolinggo Ijen crater in Banyuwangi Kedung Tumpang beach in Tulungagung House of Sampoerna, Surabaya Trowulan ancient city, Mojokerto Maulana Malik Ibrahim tomb complex Sempu Island, located in the south of Malang Meru Betiri National Park – Between Jember and Banyuwangi districts, this park covers 580 km2 (224 sq mi). Hard to get to, it contains coastal rainforest and scenery and is home to abundant wildlife. Alas Purwo National Park – This 434 km2 (168 sq mi) park is formed by the Blambangan Peninsula (southeastern Java). Comprising mangrove, savanna, lowland monsoon forests and beaches, the park's name means First Forest in Javanese. Javanese legend says that the earth first emerged from the ocean here. Baluran National Park – This 250 km2 (97 sq mi) national park is located in northeastern Java, known as The Little Africa, formerly extensive savanna has been largely replaced by Acacia. Bromo Tengger Semeru National Park – Located in East Java at the region of Probolinggo and Pasuruan, 70 km (43 mi) from Surabaya the capital city of East Java province. Mount Bromo is one of the great hiking and trekking destinations for overseas tourists. The scenic view of Bromo also attracts hundreds of photo enthusiasts to see the views there. Raden Soerjo Grand Forest Park [id]—This is located between Pasuruan, Mojokerto and Batu. Covered Mount Arjuna, Mount Welirang, Mount Penanggungan, Mount Anjasmoro, Mount Kawi, and Mt. Kelud. Some typical East Javanese dishes include Bakso Malang, Rawon, and Tahu Campur Lamongan. Surabaya is famous for Rojak Cingur, Semanggi, Lontong Balap, clam satay, mussels, and rice cakes. Malang is popular for a variety of processed fruits (especially apples), tempeh crisps, Bakpao telo, Bakso Malang, rawon, and Cwie noodles. Kediri is famous for tahu takwa, tahu pong, tungku fried rice and getuk pisang. Madiun is known for pecel madiun, and as a producer of Brem. The subdistrict of Babat, Lamongan is famous as a producer of wingko. Bondowoso is also well known as a producer of tape. Gresik famous is for nasi krawu, otak-otak bandeng, and bonggolan. Sidoarjo is famous for shrimp crackers, shrimp paste, and petis. Ngawi is famous for tempeh chips, tahu tepo, and nasi lethok. Blitar has the typical food that is pecel. Rambutan is also native to Blitar. Banyuwangi is famous for sego tempong, salad soup, and pecel rawon. Jember have special food made of tape that is Suwar-suwir and tape proll that is very sweet. Corn is known as one of the staple food of the Madurese, while cassava is processed into gaplek, a staple food used to be a part of the population in Pacitan and Trenggalek. Tulungagung is famous for its lodho, goat satay and pati rice. Ponorogo is famous for Satay Ponorogo, Tiwul Goreng and Dawet Jabung East Java is the province with the highest number of professional football clubs in Indonesia and also province with clubs in top division league. By 2019 season, Indonesian First League clubs from East Java are Persela, Madura United, Arema, and Persebaya. Arema and Persebaya are football clubs from East Java who have become top teams in Indonesia by repeatedly winning championships and national competitions and often as representatives of Indonesia in AFC Champions League and AFC Cup between clubs in Asia. East Java once hosted the National Sports Week (PON), namely PON VII in 1969, and PON XV in 2000, and became the overall champion of PON in 2000, and 2008. Since 1996 the East Java Football Team always won medals gold was included in 2008, and was recorded as the fourth gold medal received consecutively. East Java has several professional basketball clubs, mainly in Surabaya. The famous basketball clubs namely CLS Knights Indonesia and Pacific Cesar Surabaya. East Java is also the venue for several bicycle racing events namely Tour de East Java and Tour de Ijen. East Java is twinned with: Western Australia, Australia  – 1993. Shanghai, China  – 2006. Indonesia portal Districts of East Java Badan Pusat Statistik, Jakarta, 2023, Provinsi Jawa Timur Dalam Angka 2023 (Katalog-BPS 1102001.35) Indonesia's Population: Ethnicity and Religion in a Changing Political Landscape. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. 2003. "Jumlah Penduduk Menurut Agama" (in Indonesian). Ministry of Religious Affairs. 31 August 2022. Retrieved 29 October 2023. Badan Pusat Statistik (2023). "Produk Domestik Regional Bruto (Milyar Rupiah), 2020–2022" (in Indonesian). Jakarta: Badan Pusat Statistik. Badan Pembangunan Nasional (2023). "Capaian Indikator Utama Pembangunan" (in Indonesian). Jakarta: Badan Pembangunan Nasional. "BPS Provinsi Jawa Timur". jatim.bps.go.id. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2018. Biro Pusat Statistik, Jakarta, 2011. Badan Pusat Statistik, Jakarta, 2021. "ArcGIS Web Application". gis.dukcapil.kemendagri.go.id. Archived from the original on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Dennell, Robin (2009). The Palaeolithic Settlement of Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 155. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511818882. ISBN 978-0-521-84866-4. Archived from the original on 1 May 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Curtis, Garniss; Lewin, Roger (2000). Java Man: How Two Geologists Changed Our Understanding of Human Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 70. ISBN 978-0-226-78734-3. Archived from the original on 29 December 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Storm, Paul (1995). The evolutionary significance of the Wadjak skulls. Leiden: Nationaal Natuurhistorisch Museum. Weatherford, Jack (2004), Genghis khan and the making of the modern world, New York: Random House, p. 239, ISBN 0-609-80964-4 "East Java | province, Indonesia". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 26 April 2020. Retrieved 1 March 2019. Affan, Heyder (19 June 2017). "Arkeolog dan ahli naskah tanggapi klaim Majapahit sebagai kerajaan Islam". Archived from the original on 2 March 2019. Retrieved 1 March 2019. Ying-Yai Sheng-Lan. Ma Huan, Translated from the Chinese text edited by Feng Ch’eng-Chün with introduction, notes and appendices by J. V. G. Mills. 1433. p. 138. Mashad, Dhurorudin (1 January 2014). Muslim Bali: Mencari Kembali Harmoni yang Hilang (in Indonesian). Pustaka Al Kautsar. ISBN 9789795926665. Archived from the original on 1 May 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2020. James Minahan (2012). Ethnic Groups of South Asia and the Pacific: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-59884-660-7. Yingya Shenglan. Ma Huan, Translated from the Chinese text edited by Feng Ch’eng-Chün with introduction, notes and appendices by J. V. G. Mills. 1970. p. 89. Ames, Glenn J. (2008). The Globe Encompassed: The Age of European Discovery, 1500–1700. p. 99. Atkins, James (1889). The Coins And Tokens Of The Possessions And Colonies Of The British Empire. London: Quaritch, Bernard. p. 213. "Kota Malang Masih Hadapi Permukiman Kumuh". Republika Online (in Indonesian). 10 February 2017. Archived from the original on 16 March 2018. Retrieved 20 February 2019. "12 Fakta Ranupani, Desa di Kaki Semeru yang Suhu Udaranya Saat Ini Capai Minus 4 Derajat Celcius". MSN (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 26 September 2018. Retrieved 26 September 2018. "Indeks-Pembangunan-Manusia-2014". Archived from the original on 10 November 2016. Retrieved 14 February 2017. "Archived copy". jawapos.com. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)[dead link] Karina, Ernia (17 September 2015). "Serba-Serbi Kehidupan yang Cuma Dialami Oleh Arek-Arek Jowo Timur". Hipwee (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 26 September 2018. Retrieved 26 September 2018. Project, UCLA Language Materials (31 December 1600). "Profile of". Archived from the original on 30 December 2010. Retrieved 26 September 2018. "Madurese language". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 26 September 2018. Retrieved 26 September 2018. "Provinsi Jawa Timur Dalam Angka 2023". Statistics Indonesia. Retrieved 22 September 2023. antaranews.com (7 May 2018). "Khofifah: Perekonomian Indonesia Timur bergantung Jawa Timur". Antara News (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 13 July 2020. Retrieved 2 February 2019. "PDRB Provinsi Jawa Timur Atas Dasar Harga Berlaku Menurut Lapangan Usaha (Sub Kategori) Tahun 2010–2016 (Milyar Rupiah)". jatim.bps.go.id (in Indonesian). Retrieved 2 February 2019. Ibrahim, A. Malik. Purnomo, Slamet Hadi (ed.). "Kontribusi Pertumbuhan Ekonomi Jatim Didominasi Industri Pengolahan – ANTARA News Jawa Timur". Antara News (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 2 February 2019. Retrieved 2 February 2019. Indonesia, Geothermal (20 February 2017). "Daftar Pembangkit Listrik di Indonesia". Geothermal Indonesia (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 2 February 2019. Peter Nas (2002). "Java and De Groote Postweg, La Grande Route, the Great Mail Road, Jalan Raya Pos" (PDF). In: Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde. Vol. 158. pp. 707–725. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 March 2009. Retrieved 25 October 2007. "Jatim akan Bangun Dua Jalan Tol Baru". Republika Online (in Indonesian). 14 July 2011. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. amilliontravels (23 October 2018). "HOW TO TRAVEL ACROSS JAVA BY TRAIN, INDONESIA -". Archived from the original on 8 August 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Indonesia Railway Network and Logistics | GBG". www.gbgindonesia.com. Archived from the original on 5 April 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "HISTORY OF PORT TANJUNG PERAK". www.eastjava.com. Archived from the original on 11 November 2018. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Kompas. "East Java Hunger to be a Maritime City | Nusantara Maritime News". Nusantara Maritime News. Archived from the original on 1 June 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2019. (lyn/agf/rin/c6/oki) (8 September 2017). F. S., Miftakhul (ed.). "Jatim Provinsi dengan Bandara Terbanyak". www.jawapos.com (in Indonesian). JawaPos.com. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Reog Ponorogo Dance from Indonesia – History and Development – Facts of Indonesia". Facts of Indonesia. 10 April 2017. Archived from the original on 7 November 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Budi, Arifina. "Ini Keunikan yang Hanya Dimiliki Masyarakat Jawa Timur | Good News from Indonesia". Good News From Indonesia (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 7 November 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Statistics Indonesia. "Jumlah Perguruan Tinggi, Mahasiswa, dan Tenaga Edukatif (Negeri dan Swasta) di Bawah Kementrian Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan Menurut Provinsi tahun ajaran 2013/2014-2014/2015". www.bps.go.id. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Lukens-Bull, R. (12 May 2005). A Peaceful Jihad: Negotiating Identity and Modernity in Muslim Java. Springer. ISBN 978-1-4039-8029-8. Archived from the original on 1 May 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Sukmasita, Rezza. Yahya, A. (ed.). "Kuliner: Malang Duduki Peringkat Pertama Wisatawan Tertinggi Dari Empat Kota Ini | Malang TIMES". Malang TIMES (in Indonesian). MalangTIMES. Archived from the original on 29 September 2021. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Academy, Himalayan. "Hinduism Today Magazine". www.hinduismtoday.com. Archived from the original on 7 October 2014. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Wijaya, Grace. "25 Pantai Tercantik di Pulau Jawa yang Bikin Kamu Lupa Rumah!". IDN Times (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 18 September 2018. Retrieved 18 September 2018. Walisongo. "Walisongo Pilgrimage : The Java island's First Moslem Missionaries". www.eastjava.com. Archived from the original on 15 November 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2018. "East Java Foods & Fruits | East Java, Indonesia. A Tropical Paradise in The World". eastjava.com. 8 June 2012. Archived from the original on 18 September 2018. Retrieved 18 September 2018. "Surabaya's Best Dishes And Where To Try Them!". Trip101. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Contributor. "Indonesia Travel: Mealtime in Malang". DestinAsian. DestinAsian Media Group. Archived from the original on 7 November 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2018. "Tungku Fried Rice, the Culinary Tour that Must be Tried when Visiting Kediri – LOTUS GARDEN HOTEL". LOTUS GARDEN HOTEL. 21 February 2018. Archived from the original on 7 November 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Iqbal, Reza. "7 Kuliner Paling Lezat di Kediri, Gak Bakal Rugi Nyobain Ini!". IDN Times (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 7 November 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Keenanthy. "Bisa Jadi Oleh-Oleh, 8 Jajanan Khas Madiun Ini Enaknya Pol!". IDN Times (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 7 November 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2018. "√ 8 Makanan Khas Lamongan Favorit Masyarakat | Wisata Negeri". Wisata Negeri (in Indonesian). 12 May 2018. Archived from the original on 7 November 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2018. nusantara, ok. "5 Makanan Khas Ngawi Yang Terkenal". oknusantara.com. Archived from the original on 26 August 2017. Retrieved 18 September 2018. Rachmawati, Ira (25 December 2017). Prodjo, Wahyu Adityo (ed.). "7 Makanan Khas Banyuwangi, Siapkan Perut Anda! - Kompas.com". KOMPAS.com (in Indonesian). Banyuwangi: Kompas Cyber Media. Archived from the original on 18 September 2018. Retrieved 18 September 2018. "7+ Makanan Khas Tulungagung yang Buat Kamu Ketagihan Makan Lagi!". Hamparan (in Indonesian). 7 October 2017. Archived from the original on 19 September 2018. Retrieved 18 September 2018. redaksi (12 October 2018). "Jawa Timur: Provinsi dengan Klub Profesional Terbanyak di Indonesia". Pandit Football Indonesia (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 1 May 2023. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "About Tour de East Java". Tour de East Java. Archived from the original on 16 May 2018. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "International Tour de Banyuwangi Ijen 2019 | Overview". www.procyclingstats.com. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "Sister State Relationships ~ DCA". Dca.wa.gov.au. Department of Culture and Arts. Archived from the original on 31 March 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2019.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: others (link) 市级友好城市 (in Chinese). wsb.sh.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 20 March 2020. Retrieved 8 March 2020. Curtis, Garniss H.; Lewin, Roger; Swisher III, Carl C. (2001). Java Man: How Two Geologists Changed Our Understanding of Human Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 70. ISBN 978-0-226-78734-3. Dennell, Robin (2008). The Palaeolithic Settlement of Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 155. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511818882. ISBN 978-1-316-58307-4. Lukens-Bull, Ronald (2005). A Peaceful Jihad: Negotiating Identity and Modernity in Muslim Java. London: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-6658-2. Pramono, S.B. (2013). Piwulang Basa Jawa Pepak (in Javanese). Yogyakarta: Grafindo Litera Media. p. 148. ISBN 978-979-3-896-380. Weatherford, Jack (2004). Genghis Khan and the Making of the Modern World. New York City: Crown and Three Rivers Press. p. 239. ISBN 0-609-80964-4. Wikimedia Commons has media related to East Java. East Java travel guide from Wikivoyage Official website (in Indonesian)