2008 GP2 Asia Series Drivers' Champion: Romain Grosjean Teams' Champion: ART Grand Prix Previous none Next 2008–09 Support series: Speedcar Series The 2008 GP2 Asia Series season was the first GP2 Asia Series season. It started on 25 January and ended on 12 April. Romain Grosjean became the champion despite his teammate Stephen Jelley scoring no points, with their team, ART Grand Prix, winning the teams' title. In this season, only two drivers scored pole positions. Grosjean took pole in all but one race in Sentul, where Vitaly Petrov secured the first position on the grid. The Frenchman also won four races, including a clean sweep in Dubai and the feature race in Sakhir. Kamui Kobayashi won two sprint races in Sepang and Sakhir, while Sébastien Buemi won the feature race in Sentul. Marco Bonanomi and Fairuz Fauzy won a sprint race each. All of the teams used the Dallara GP2/05 chassis with Renault-badged 4.0 litre (244 cu in) naturally-aspirated Mecachrome V8 engines order and with tyres supplied by Bridgestone. Scoring system Points are awarded to the top 8 classified finishers in the Feature race, and to the top 6 classified finishers in the Sprint race. The pole-sitter in the feature race will also receive two points, and one point is given to the driver who set the fastest lap inside the top ten in both the feature and sprint races. No extra points are awarded to the pole-sitter in the sprint race. Feature race points Sprint race points Points are awarded to the top 6 classified finishers. Notes: † — Drivers did not finish the race, but were classified as they completed over 90% of the race distance. Notes: † — Drivers did not finish the race, but were classified as they completed over 90% of the race distance. Luca Filippi was stripped of the victory after stewards found out he had used tyres allocated to his teammate Hiroki Yoshimoto. Kamui Kobayashi set the fastest lap, but did not finish in the top 10, so was ineligible to be the point-scorer for the fastest lap. Davide Valsecchi was the point-scorer instead for setting the fastest lap of those finishing in the top 10. "Filippi excluded, Buemi wins at Sentul". autosport.com. 2008-02-16. Retrieved 2008-02-16. "Sprint race - GP2 Asia: UAE 2008". Pitpass.com. Archived from the original on 14 June 2008. Retrieved 5 January 2022.