Robyn Rihanna Fenty (/riˈænə/ ree-AN-ə; born February 20, 1988) is a Barbadian singer, businesswoman, actress, and songwriter. Widely regarded as one of the most prominent recording artists of the 21st century, she signed with Def Jam Recordings in 2005 and found mainstream recognition following the release of her first two studio albums, Music of the Sun (2005) and A Girl Like Me (2006). Both influenced by Caribbean music, the albums quickly earned commercial success and peaked within the top ten on the US Billboard 200 chart. Her third album, Good Girl Gone Bad (2007), incorporated elements of dance-pop, and established her status as a major icon in the music industry. Its lead single, "Umbrella" (featuring Jay-Z) peaked atop the US Billboard Hot 100 (among 16 other countries), won her first Grammy Award from three nominations, and remains one of the best-selling songs of all time. Rihanna continued to blend pop, dance, and R&B influences on her next albums, Rated R (2009), Loud (2010), Talk That Talk (2011), and Unapologetic (2012)—the latter of which peaked the Billboard 200. The albums spawned the Billboard Hot 100-number one singles "Rude Boy", "Only Girl (In the World)", "What's My Name?", "S&M", "We Found Love", and "Diamonds". Her eighth album, Anti (2016), showcased new creative control following her departure from Def Jam in favor of Jay-Z's label, Roc Nation. Becoming her second US number one album, it was supported by the chart-topping single "Work". Throughout her career, Rihanna has worked with artists including Coldplay, Drake, Eminem, Kanye West, Ne-Yo, and Shakira. With sales of over 250 million records worldwide, Rihanna is the second-best-selling female music artist of all time and the highest-certified female artist of all time on the RIAA's Top Artists (Digital Singles) ranking. She has achieved 14 number-one singles, 32 top-ten singles in the US, and 31 top-ten entries in the UK. Her accolades include nine Grammy Awards, 13 American Music Awards (including the Icon Award), 12 Billboard Music Awards, six Guinness World Records, the NAACP's President's Award, and an Academy Award nomination. Time named her one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2012 and 2018. Forbes ranked her among the top ten highest-paid celebrities in 2012 and 2014. As of 2024, she is the wealthiest female musical artist with an estimated net worth of $1.4 billion. Aside from music, Rihanna is recognized for her humanitarian involvement, entrepreneurship, and fashion industry influence. She established the Clara Lionel Foundation, cosmetics brand Fenty Beauty, and fashion house Fenty under LVMH, becoming the first black woman to lead a luxury brand for LVMH. Rihanna has acted in major roles in Battleship (2012), Home (2015), Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets (2017), and Ocean's 8 (2018). In 2018, she was appointed as an ambassador by the Government of Barbados and declared a National Hero of Barbados in 2021. Robyn Rihanna Fenty was born on February 20, 1988, in Saint Michael, Barbados. She is the daughter of accountant Monica (née Braithwaite) and warehouse supervisor Ronald Fenty. Her mother is Afro-Guyanese, while her father is a Barbadian of African, Irish, English, and Scottish descent. Rihanna has two brothers, Rorrey and Rajad Fenty, and two half-sisters and a half-brother from her father's side, each born to different mothers from his previous relationships. She grew up in a three-bedroom bungalow in Bridgetown and sold clothes with her father in a stall on the street. Her childhood was deeply affected by her father's alcoholism and crack-cocaine addiction, which contributed to her parents' strained marriage. Rihanna's father used to abuse her mother physically, and Rihanna would try to get in between them to break up fights. As a child, Rihanna had many CT scans for the excruciating headaches that she suffered, recalling, "The doctors even thought it was a tumor, because it was that intense." By the time she was 14, her parents had divorced, and her health began to improve. She grew up listening to reggae music. She attended Charles F. Broome Memorial Primary School and Combermere School, where she studied alongside future international cricketers Chris Jordan and Carlos Brathwaite. At age 11, Rihanna was a cadet in Barbados's Cadet Corps; the later Barbadian singer-songwriter Shontelle was her drill sergeant. She initially wanted to graduate from high school, but she chose to pursue a musical career instead. In 2003, Rihanna formed a musical trio with two of her classmates in her home country of Barbados. Without a name or any material, the girl group auditioned with American record producer Evan Rogers, who commented, "The minute Rihanna walked into the room, it was like the other two girls didn't exist." Rihanna went to Rogers's hotel room, where she performed renditions of Destiny's Child's "Emotion" and Mariah Carey's "Hero". Impressed, Rogers scheduled a second meeting with Rihanna's mother present and then invited Rihanna to his hometown in the United States to record some demo tapes that could be sent to record labels. Recordings were intermittent, taking about a year because she was only able to record during school holidays. "Pon de Replay" and "The Last Time" were two tracks recorded for the demo tape, which were eventually included on her debut album Music of the Sun. That same year, Rihanna was signed to Rogers's and Carl Sturken's production company, Syndicated Rhythm Productions. Rihanna's demo was shipped out to Def Jam Recordings, where Jay Brown, an A&R executive at the record label, was one of the first to hear the demo. Brown played the demo tape for rapper Jay-Z, who had recently been appointed as president and CEO of Def Jam. When Jay-Z first heard the track "Pon de Replay", he felt the song was too big for her. Despite being skeptical, he invited Rihanna to audition for the label. In early 2005, Rihanna auditioned for Def Jam in New York City, where Jay-Z introduced her to music mogul Antonio "L.A." Reid. At the audition, she sang Whitney Houston's cover of "For the Love of You", as well as the demo tracks "Pon de Replay" and "The Last Time". Jay-Z was absolutely certain about signing her after she performed her future single "Pon de Replay". His boss, L.A. Reid, was also impressed with her audition, telling Jay-Z not to let Rihanna leave the building until the contract was signed. Reid left it to Jay-Z and his team to close the deal which resulted in a six-album record deal with Def Jam. She waited in Jay-Z's office until 3:00 in the morning to get lawyers to draft up a contract because he wanted to prevent her from signing with another label. Rihanna canceled other meetings with record labels and relocated from Barbados to the United States to live with Rogers and his wife. After signing with Def Jam, Jay-Z and his team did the A&R for Rihanna's debut album and spent the next three months recording and completing her debut album. She worked with different producers to complete her debut studio album, primarily Rogers and his production partner Carl Sturken. With several songs to pick as a lead single, "Pon de Replay" was chosen because it seemed like the best song suited for a summer release. In May 2005, her debut single, "Pon de Replay", was released under her mononym "Rihanna". It charted successfully worldwide, peaking in the top five in fifteen countries, including at No. 2 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and the UK Singles Chart. The song became a club hit in the United States, peaking at No. 1 on the Billboard Dance Club Songs. Music of the Sun was released in August 2005. It debuted at No. 10 on the Billboard 200 and received a gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), denoting shipments of over 500,000 units. The album sold over 2 million copies worldwide. A second single, "If It's Lovin' that You Want", was not as successful as its predecessor, but reached the top 10 in Australia, Ireland and New Zealand. Aside from her work in music, Rihanna made her acting debut in a cameo role in the successful straight-to-DVD film Bring It On: All or Nothing, released in August 2006. A month after the release of her debut album, Rihanna began working on her second studio album. A Girl like Me was released in April 2006. Rolling Stone felt that "the burning rock guitar" and haunted strings of some of the album's tracks made "A Girl like Me [...] likable." The album was a commercial success, charting in the top 10 in 13 countries. The album reached No. 1 in Canada and No. 5 in the United Kingdom and the United States, where it sold 115,000 copies in its first week. The album became Rihanna's first to be certified Platinum by the RIAA, after selling over 1,000,000 units. Its lead single, "SOS", was an international success, charting in the top five in 11 countries. The song reached No. 1 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and in Australia, her first to reach this chart position. "Unfaithful", the album's second single, reached the top 10 in 18 countries, including No. 1 in Canada and Switzerland. Two more singles were released from the album: "We Ride" and "Break It Off". In early 2007, Rihanna appeared on the single "Roll It" with Jamaican band J-Status and fellow Barbadian singer-songwriter Shontelle. The song appeared on J-Status' debut album The Beginning, released in several European countries only. Around that time, Rihanna had already begun work on her third studio album, Good Girl Gone Bad. With the help of producers Timbaland, Tricky Stewart and Sean Garrett she embraced a new musical direction through uptempo dance tracks. Released in May 2007, the album charted at No. 2 in Australia and the US and topped the charts in multiple countries, including Brazil, Canada, Ireland and the UK. The album received the most positive critical reviews of her first three albums. The lead single, "Umbrella", topped the charts in 13 countries and remained at No. 1 in the UK for 10 consecutive weeks, the longest-running No. 1 single there since Wet Wet Wet's single "Love Is All Around" spent 15 weeks at the top in 1994. It was Rihanna's first single to be named one of the best-selling singles worldwide, with sales of over 8 million copies. The songs "Shut Up and Drive", "Hate That I Love You" (featuring Ne-Yo), and "Don't Stop the Music" were also released as singles, with the latter becoming an international hit. In support of the album, Rihanna began the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour in September 2007, with 80 shows across the US, Canada, and Europe. Rihanna was nominated for several 2008 Grammy Awards for Good Girl Gone Bad, winning Best Rap/Sung Collaboration for "Umbrella" alongside Jay-Z, her first Grammy Award. On June 9, 2008, Rihanna released Good Girl Gone Bad Live, her first live long-form video. The DVD and Blu-ray release featured Rihanna's concert at the Manchester Arena in Manchester, United Kingdom, held on December 6, 2007, as part of the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour. The release also contained a special documentary that presented Rihanna discussing her experiences during the tour. By late 2008, Rihanna still remained on the charts with the release of the fifth single from Good Girl Gone Bad, "Rehab", and was named "Diva of the Year" by Entertainment Weekly for her "newfound staying power". Good Girl Gone Bad has sold over 2.8 million units in the United States alone, receiving a two-times-Platinum certification from the RIAA. It is Rihanna's bestselling album in the country to date. The album has sold 9 million units worldwide. During the late 2000s, Rihanna experimented further with pop, dubstep, and rock music, officially shifting her musical style and image away from the Barbados island girl. Throughout 2008, Rihanna performed on the Glow in the Dark Tour alongside Kanye West, Lupe Fiasco, and N.E.R.D. Her third studio album's reissue, Good Girl Gone Bad: Reloaded, was released in June 2008 with three new songs: "Disturbia", "Take a Bow" and the Maroon 5 duet "If I Never See Your Face Again", plus a Spanglish version of "Hate That I Love You" featuring Spanish pop singer David Bisbal. All four were released as singles and charted highly, reaching peak positions worldwide. In August 2008, Rihanna and a host of other female singers recorded the charity single "Just Stand Up!", the theme song to the anti-cancer campaign Stand Up to Cancer. "Live Your Life", a duet between T.I. and Rihanna, was released that November and topped the Billboard Hot 100. On February 8, 2009, Rihanna's scheduled performance at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards was canceled. Reports surfaced that then-boyfriend, singer Chris Brown, had physically assaulted her. He was arrested on suspicion of making criminal threats. On March 5, 2009, Brown was charged with assault and making criminal threats. A leaked photograph from the police department obtained by TMZ.com revealed that Rihanna had sustained visible injuries. A few months after the incident, Rihanna was featured on the single "Run This Town" by Jay-Z, which also featured Kanye West and was released as the second single from Jay-Z's eleventh studio album The Blueprint 3. In early 2009, Rihanna began working on her fourth studio album, Rated R. Rated R was released in November 2009. The album had Rolling Stone magazine stating that Rihanna "transformed her sound and made one of the best pop records of the year".Rated R featured a darker and more foreboding tone than Rihanna's previous albums.Rated R debuted at No. 4 on the US Billboard 200 chart. The album was supported by six singles, including "Rude Boy", which was the biggest worldwide success from the album, topping the US Billboard Hot 100 for six weeks and reaching top 10 positions in 22 other countries. In January 2010, Rihanna released her charity cover version of "Redemption Song" for the Hope for Haiti Now campaign. She also recorded the song "Stranded (Haiti Mon Amour)" together with Jay-Z, Bono and The Edge for the same campaign to alleviate the 2010 Haiti earthquake. In summer 2010, Rihanna collaborated with rapper Eminem on "Love the Way You Lie", which was a major worldwide success, reaching No. 1 in over 20 countries. Reaching number 2, the song became the biggest-selling song of 2010 in the UK and the first of Rihanna's singles to sell over a million copies in the country. In October 2010, Rihanna switched managers, joining Jay-Z's Roc Nation Management. In late 2010, she was featured on three singles: Kanye West's "All of the Lights", from the album My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy (2010), Nicki Minaj's "Fly", from her debut studio album Pink Friday (2010) and David Guetta's "Who's That Chick?", from the album One More Love (2010). Loud, Rihanna's fifth studio album, was released in November 2010. The album produced three US Billboard Hot 100s. Its lead single, "Only Girl (In the World)", "What's My Name?", featuring rapper Drake and "S&M", following the release of its official remix featuring Britney Spears. Rihanna set a record as the solo artist with the fastest accumulation of 10 chart toppers in the Hot 100s history. At the 53rd Grammy Awards, "Only Girl (In the World)" won the award for Best Dance Recording. "Man Down" and "California King Bed" were released as singles in May 2011 with moderate success. "Cheers (Drink to That)", which interpolates Avril Lavigne's 2002 single "I'm with You", was released as the seventh and final single from the album. To promote the album, Rihanna embarked on her Loud Tour in June 2011, which sold out 10 nights at The O2 Arena in West London, the most sold-out shows for a female artist in the venue's history. The tour was the seventh highest-grossing tour worldwide of 2011. In September 2020 she put her St John's Wood, North London house for sale with a price of £32 million. Rihanna's sixth album, Talk That Talk, was released in November 2011. The album debuted at No. 3 in the U.S. and number No. 1 in the UK The album's lead single, "We Found Love", topped charts in twenty-seven countries and peaked in the top 10 in 30 countries and broke many chart records worldwide. The single topped the Billboard Hot 100 for 10 non-consecutive weeks, becoming Rihanna's longest-running No. 1 single on the chart and the longest-running No. 1 single of 2011 in the US. The song was later named the 24th biggest hit of all time on the Billboard Hot 100. "You Da One" and the album's title track, featuring Jay-Z, were released as the second and third singles, to moderate success. "Where Have You Been", the fifth single, successfully charted worldwide, reaching No. 5 in the US and No. 6 in the UK. "Cockiness (Love It)" was released as the album's sixth and final single in a remixed form featuring rapper ASAP Rocky. In early 2012, two collaborations featuring Rihanna were released: Coldplay's "Princess of China", from their album Mylo Xyloto, and Drake's "Take Care", from his album of the same name. In February 2012, Rihanna won her third Grammy Award for Best Rap/Sung Collaboration at the 2012 Grammy Awards for her Kanye West collaboration "All of the Lights" and was voted the Best International Female Solo Artist at the 2012 BRIT Awards for the second consecutive year. March 2012 saw the simultaneous releases of two collaborations between Rihanna and Chris Brown: remixes of her song "Birthday Cake" and his "Turn Up the Music". The recordings received mainly negative responses due to the pair's history of domestic violence. In September 2012, "We Found Love" won the MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year, making Rihanna the first woman to receive the accolade more than once. Rihanna's seventh studio album, Unapologetic, was released in November 2012. In the United States, the album debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 albums chart, marking Rihanna's first No. 1 album in the country. The lead single from the album, "Diamonds", reached No. 1 in more than 20 countries worldwide, including on the US Billboard Hot 100, where it became Rihanna's 12 No. 1 on the chart. The album's second single, "Stay", featuring Mikky Ekko, reached the top five in over twenty countries, including No. 3 on the Billboard Hot 100. As promotion prior to the album's release, Rihanna embarked on the 777 Tour, a mini tour of seven shows in seven countries in seven days. On May 6, 2013, Fox aired a documentary about the tour, with a documentary DVD being released the following day as Rihanna's third live long-form video release. In February 2013, at the 55th Grammy Awards, Rihanna won her sixth Grammy Award, in the category Best Short Form Music Video for "We Found Love" (2011). Also that month, the United Kingdom's Official Charts Company announced that Rihanna had sold 3,868,000 records in the past year in the country, ranking at No. 1 in the list of 2013 BRIT Awards artist nominees. Rihanna's fifth headlining concert tour, the Diamonds World Tour, began in March 2013, in support of Unapologetic. Rihanna then appeared in the Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg comedy film This Is the End, which was released in June 2013. That same month, American hip hop artist Wale released a remixed version of his single "Bad" featuring Rihanna. In October 2013, Eminem released his Rihanna-assisted single, "The Monster", as the fourth release from his eighth studio album The Marshall Mathers LP 2 (2013). In 2014, Rihanna appeared on Shakira's single, "Can't Remember to Forget You". Following the release of Unapologetic and its accompanying tour, Rihanna aimed to take a hiatus from recording music, stating: "I wanted to have a year to just do whatever I want artistically, creatively." In May 2014, Rihanna left Def Jam Recordings to sign fully with Roc Nation, the record label that had managed her career since October 2010. A year after Rihanna began working on her eighth studio album, the single "FourFiveSeconds" was released, which featured Rihanna paired up with Kanye West and Paul McCartney. Two further singles followed its release: "Bitch Better Have My Money" and "American Oxygen"; neither made the final track listing for Rihanna's eighth studio album. During the creation of the album, Rihanna ventured into other endeavors and appeared in the voice role of Tip in the animated feature film Home alongside Jim Parsons and Jennifer Lopez, the film was based on The True Meaning of Smekday by Adam Rex. Rihanna also released a concept album soundtrack for the film. In late 2015, Rihanna inked a $25 million contract with Samsung that would see her promoting Samsung's Galaxy line of products whilst Samsung would sponsor the release of her eighth studio album and its supporting tour. The Anti World Tour was announced in November 2015 and began in March 2016, with Travis Scott supporting in North America and Big Sean supporting at selected European dates.[non-primary source needed] The Weeknd had also initially planned to support at certain European sites, but he backed out citing "unforeseen changes in upcoming projects". On January 28, 2016, Rihanna released her eighth studio album, Anti, exclusively through streaming service Tidal. The album peaked at No. 1 on the US Billboard 200, becoming Rihanna's second No. 1 and eighth top 10 album on the chart. The album was supported by the release of four singles, including the lead single "Work", featuring Drake, which topped the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. Further Platinum-certified singles "Needed Me" and "Love on the Brain" both peaked inside the top 10 of the US Hot 100. In 2016, Rihanna was featured in several singles. The first collaboration single was Kanye West's "Famous", where Rihanna provided uncredited guest vocals. She was then officially featured on Calvin Harris' "This Is What You Came For", which was a success. Rihanna was also featured on Drake's "Too Good" and on Mike Will Made It's "Nothing Is Promised". In June 2016, Rihanna released "Sledgehammer", a single from the Star Trek Beyond movie soundtrack. On August 28, 2016, Rihanna was honored with the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2016 MTV Video Music Awards after performing various medleys of her hit songs. Rihanna released several collaborations in 2017. First she was the featured part in Future's "Selfish", the lead single from the rapper's sixth studio album, Hndrxx. Summer 2017 saw the release of Rihanna's collaborations with record producer DJ Khaled, "Wild Thoughts", which also featured Bryson Tiller and was a worldwide success, and Kendrick Lamar's single, "Loyalty", which earned Rihanna her ninth Grammy Award at the 60th Annual Grammy Awards. In November 2017, Rihanna was part of N.E.R.D's comeback single "Lemon" from the band's album No One Ever Really Dies. In October 2017, Shakka revealed that he was working with Rihanna on her "absolutely insane" album. In December 2018, Rihanna confirmed that the album would be released in 2019, and later announced that it is a reggae project. In August 2019, fans noticed that Rihanna and co-songwriters Collin Edwards, Monique Lawrence, and Alexander Ogunmokun registered a song titled "Private Loving" with the music publishing organization BMI. In September 2019, it was announced she had signed with Sony/ATV Music Publishing. In December 2019, Rihanna alluded to her album being complete and indefinitely withholding the release date in an Instagram post. She was next featured on Canadian singer PartyNextDoor's song "Believe It", which was released on March 27, 2020. On September 25, 2022, Rihanna announced that she would be headlining the Super Bowl LVII halftime show, which marked her first live performance in over five years, and the end of her previously self-imposed boycott of the event, which she instigated in solidarity with Colin Kaepernick. The show had a mostly positive reception. It was initially reported that the performance gained a total of 118.7 million viewers across TV and digital platforms, however the figure was later revised by Nielsen Media Research, who adjusted the number to 121.017 million viewers, making it the most-watched halftime show in history, surpassing Katy Perry's performance at the Super Bowl XLIX halftime show. On October 28, 2022, Rihanna released the lead single from the Black Panther: Wakanda Forever soundtrack, "Lift Me Up", her first solo musical release since Anti. The song earned her nominations for the Golden Globe and Academy Award for Best Original Song. Rihanna is a mezzo-soprano, with a range spanning from B2 to C♯6. While recording tracks for her third studio album, Good Girl Gone Bad (2007), Rihanna took vocal lessons from Ne-Yo. She said of the experience, "I've never had vocal training, so when I'm in the studio, he'll tell me how to breathe and stuff... He'll call out these big fancy words: 'OK, I want you to do staccato.' And I'm like, 'OK, I don't know what that is.'" Her vocal performance on Loud (2010) received positive reviews from music critics. James Skinner from BBC praised Rihanna's vocals on the song "Love the Way You Lie (Part II)" and wrote that her voice is powerful and that "it is Rihanna's vocal – at once commanding, soulful and vulnerable – that anchors the song, and Loud itself". Andy Gill from The Independent feels that "California King Bed" features her best vocal performance. In a review of Unapologetic, Billboard magazine wrote, "Diamonds finds Rihanna doing one of her throatiest, most impassioned vocals to date, on this inspirational pop ballad." Jon Caramanica of the New York Times stated, "over the years, as her game face froze in place, her voice cured into a weapon of emotional chill and strategic indifference. It's decidedly unfriendly, made to give orders". In 2023, Rolling Stone ranked Rihanna at number 68 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time. "[My music is] just imagination, being creative; that's what my music is composed with. Being creative and thinking of situations, whether situations I went through or situations I've observed people going through. I can't tell you where I'll see myself in five years, but I can tell you I will work my best to be the most successful artist that I can be in five years. [I want to be] Remembered as Rihanna. Remembered as being an artist from the Caribbean who came here and made it internationally. Just remembered as me, 'cause I'm true to my music, and I just want people to realize that and appreciate me for that" —Rihanna during her first interview with MTV News Growing up in Barbados, she mainly listened to reggae, hip hop and soca music. When she first came to the US, she was exposed to different types of music with "rock being one of them, and I fell in love with it. [Now] I love rock music." During her debut, she recorded songs that were inspired by her Caribbean roots and described her early sound as "a fusion of reggae, hip-hop and R&B, with a little something different thrown in". Her early dancehall roots can be found on her debut album, Music of the Sun, and its follow-up, A Girl like Me. Her debut album demonstrates the influence of Rihanna's musical heritage of the Caribbean. Kelefa Sanneh of the New York Times complimented its combination of dancehall and reggae, who said, "Dancehall reggae sometimes seems like a furiously insular form of music, but ... Rihanna is only the latest singer to discover how versatile the genre's spring-loaded electronic rhythms can be". Her debut single, "Pon de Replay" features a dancehall-pop mixture that infuses a reggae style, while "If It's Lovin' that You Want" talks about a girl seducing a guy to be her boyfriend. Aiming for artistic growth, A Girl like Me expresses personal experiences that typical 18-year-old girls go through with ballads that were described as elegant and mature. After her second album, she slowly dismissed her dancehall and reggae roots. Rihanna's musical career has been an experiment with new musical ideas and stated that she wants "to make music that could be heard in parts of the world that I'd never been to". With its provocative subject matter and lyrics, she began incorporating a wide range of genres including, pop, R&B, reggae, dubstep, hip hop and EDM. During a review for Good Girl Gone Bad, Slant Magazine to write that Rihanna "finally figured out that she's a dance artist and the majority of the album is comprised of uptempo dance-pop [songs like]" "Push Up on Me" and "Don't Stop the Music". It represents a departure from the Caribbean sound of her previous albums and is described as a turning point in her career. While the first half of the record shares many 1980s pop influences with songs like "Don't Stop the Music" and "Shut Up and Drive", the second half retreats into standard R&B. Recorded after the assault by her then-boyfriend, Chris Brown, Rated R had a much darker tone and was filled with various emotions she experienced throughout 2009. In her fifth album Loud, Rihanna reflects on the fun and energetic vibe she had while recording the album. The album is a mixture of ballads, party anthems and empowering love songs. Talk That Talk was similar to Rated R, as both contain hip hop, R&B, dancehall and dubstep genres. Loud and Talk That Talk saw her explore sexuality in her work ("S&M" and "Birthday Cake") and return to her dancehall roots ("Man Down" and "Watch n' Learn"). She also branched out into house music with tracks like "We Found Love", "Only Girl (In the World)" and "Complicated". Her songs are also inspired through record sampling from other artists. Rihanna has named Madonna as her idol and biggest influence. She said that she wanted to be the "black Madonna" and praised her ability to reinvent herself throughout her career. She noted, "I think that Madonna was a great inspiration for me, especially on my earlier work. If I had to examine her evolution through time, I think she reinvented her clothing style and music with success every single time. And at the same time remained a real force in entertainment in the whole world." Another major influence on Rihanna's music and career has been Mariah Carey, whose song "Hero" she performed when Rihanna was still a teenager at her high school talent show. She revealed that Carey's song "Vision of Love" "was the song that made [her] want to do music." In her youth, she would see Bob Marley on television because of his fame in the Caribbean. She stated, "He's one of my favourite artists of all time – he really paved the way for every other artist out of the Caribbean". She built a shrine in her home dedicated to the reggae legend and has covered Marley's "Is This Love" and Bob Marley & The Wailers' "Redemption Song" during her concert tours. During her childhood, she would go around singing Whitney Houston songs and "A Whole New World" into her hairbrush so much that her neighbors started calling her "Robyn Redbreast". She also stated that one of the first songs she remembers falling in love with was Houston's version of "I Will Always Love You" and that it "was really inspiring, and it made me develop a passion for music, so really, she's partly responsible for me being here in this industry." Rihanna was also influenced by Janet Jackson, Aaliyah, Tupac, Beyoncé and Destiny's Child. Other musical influences and idols include Celine Dion, Grace Jones, Lil' Kim, Alicia Keys, Prince, Fefe Dobson, and Brandy. Rihanna takes influence from the different types of music she discovered when she came to America and revealed that rock music was one of the first genres she fell in love with. She commented, "as I grow older, I want to know more about music. I want to discover more types of music". She cited Brandy's fourth studio album, Afrodisiac (2004), as her main inspiration for her third album, Good Girl Gone Bad (2007). In her early career, her music contained strong influences of Caribbean music, including reggae and dancehall. The music video of the song "Rude Boy" featured images inspired by her Caribbean roots. Rihanna has worked with music video director Anthony Mandler on more than a dozen music videos, the first being "Unfaithful" (2006). "We've done 16 videos together; they're not all tough, [...] Yeah, I mean, I'm known for the 'Disturbia's and the 'Russian Roulette's and things like that, but 'Only Girl (In the World)' is certainly an ethereal kind of empowering, beauty-filled video," Mandler said. Jocelyn Vena of MTV wrote, "Rihanna, like Madonna, also has a tendency to make truly thought-provoking music videos that fit the songs they represent. Smattered in between glitzier, more glamorous clips, Madge and Ri want us to think about bigger issues". Jon Bream of the Star Tribune commented "[i]n the tradition of Madonna and Janet Jackson, Rihanna has become the video vixen of the '00s ... Rihanna has perfected the pout, the long-legged strut, and trend-setting hairdos that keep women and men alike checking her out on YouTube." George Epaminondas of InStyle considers Rihanna's music videos to be "cinematic" due to her "blend of lush island rhythms and swinging pop and ... mischievous sensuality." Many of her music videos were shot as short films exploring issues such as love triangles, abuse and substance abuse romance, including "We Found Love" and "Man Down". Her music video for "Umbrella" shows Rihanna's transition into adulthood and her newly adopted image. The "dark, creepy" scenes of "Disturbia" have been compared to Michael Jackson's Thriller. The video for "Russian Roulette" features Rihanna in a padded room playing a game of russian roulette with her partner. A scene of Rihanna being approached by a speeding car at night was compared to the altercation with Chris Brown. In 2011, Rihanna released three controversial music videos about sadomasochism, rape and domestic violence. "Man Down", which features Rihanna shooting a man in a train station, was criticized by the Parents Television Council. "We Found Love", which shows Rihanna and her love interest in a drug-filled unhealthy relationship, sparked criticism from the Rape Crisis Centre for its message. Charne Graham of the Houston Press defended her, asking, "Why should Rihanna's music videos get everyone riled up when others' equally sexual and controversial videos are in rotation? [...] she just like[s] to make music videos that give us something to talk about." Rihanna was the first woman to pass 2 billion cumulative views on the music video website Vevo. As of December 2016, she has accumulated over 10 billion views on the site. Denis Armstrong of Canadian Online Explorer commented on her performance at the Ottawa Bluesfest, saying "her show was a Disney-esque choreographed fantasy of non-stop hip-swiveling, sassy attitude and personal endearments and a string of funky, sugar-free hits." Her performance of "Disturbia" at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards was ranked tenth best on the MTV Video Music Awards, according to a Billboard poll. Her revealing leather costumes during her Good Girl Gone Bad Tour were highly criticized by the Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party, who recommended that her concert tour should be banned. Whilst commenting on her third album's accompanying tour, The Times compared Rihanna's stage wardrobe styling to that of Janet Jackson and called her "a vision of Ann Summers couture in thigh-high boots and a few scraps of black PVC." In the October 2011 issue of British Vogue, Rihanna said her performance outfits and appearances are all an act; "[t]hat's not me. That's a part I play. You know, like it's a piece of art, with all these toys and textures to play with". Known for her style and image, the media have constantly followed the evolution of Rihanna's music and fashion sense. In 2009, New York magazine described Rihanna's early look as that of "a cookie-cutter teen queen", noting she has the ability "to shift looks dramatically and with such ease". Around the time of the release of her second studio album, A Girl like Me (2006), many critics felt that Rihanna's style, sound and musical material were too similar to those of Beyoncé. In an interview with Look magazine, Rihanna spoke about comparisons to Beyoncé: "Beyoncé is a great artist and I feel honored to be mentioned in the same sentence, but we're different performers with different styles". She revealed during Oprah's Next Chapter that Def Jam's pop-princess blueprint made her feel claustrophobic during her early years with the label. According to Rihanna, "I felt like they were giving me a blueprint. [...] They had a brand, they had an idea of what they wanted me to be without figuring out who I was." With the release of her third album, Good Girl Gone Bad (2007), Rihanna dismissed her innocent image for an edgier look with a new hairstyle, which was inspired by Charlize Theron's bob cut in the science fiction thriller Æon Flux (2005). She followed the likes of recording artists Janet Jackson and Christina Aguilera who also shed their innocent image for an edgier look and sound. Nico Amarca of Highsnobiety magazine wrote, "over the course of her now 10-year career, [Rihanna] has undergone one of the most significant aesthetic metamorphoses the world has ever seen". Her image and fashion has changed several times with different hairstyles since the release of her third album. She commented that as a child she "used to watch her [mother] get dressed" and that her love and admiration for fashion started with her mother. When putting together her own wardrobe she stated, "It's become more about taking a risk ... I always look for the most interesting silhouette or something that's a little off." Jess Cartner-Morley of The Guardian wrote that "Rihanna's wardrobe is the most talked-about, influential and dissected in pop right now" and that whatever she wears "is immediately reproduced on the high street, because it sells". Country singer Miranda Lambert admires Rihanna's fashion and style stating, "I don't necessarily get inspired by the whole no-bra thing, but I love that you never know what she's going to wear. It always keeps you guessing, which makes her sassy and interesting." In an interview with Alexa Chung during Vogue Festival 2015, Balmain designer Olivier Rousteing praised Rihanna by stylistically comparing her to some of the biggest fashion icons in music history, such as Madonna, David Bowie, Michael Jackson, and Prince. Commenting on the cultural expectation for pop stars to be role models, Rihanna said "[being a role model] became more of my job than I wanted it to be. But no, I just want to make music. That's it." In a May 2013 interview with MTV, The Vagina Monologues writer and feminist Eve Ensler said, "I'm a huge Rihanna fan, I think she has a kind of agency over her sexuality and she's open about her sexuality, she has enormous grace and she's immensely talented." Described as one of the sexiest women of her generation, she revealed that being a sex symbol is not a priority and that "it's definitely flattering, but also uncomfortable." Her appearance has landed her on the cover of magazines such as Maxim, FHM, Rolling Stone, and in December 2012, Rihanna became the first woman to be featured on the cover of GQ magazine's "Men of the Year" issue. Rihanna made her first appearance at the Met Gala in 2007. She has made eight appearances in the years since; notably in 2015, for China: Through the Looking Glass, her Guo Pei-designed yellow dress garnered the most attention of the event, accruing a billion impressions on social media. The dress, which had taken two years to make before Rihanna came across it, became the subject of a documentary by Pietra Brettkelly, entitled Yellow Is Forbidden. She co-chaired the 2018 Heavenly Bodies: Fashion and the Catholic Imagination themed event, wearing Maison Margiela. Rihanna is regarded by the media as a pop and fashion icon, particularly since her third studio album Good Girl Gone Bad (2007). Nick Levine of Digital Spy described Good Girl Gone Bad as "the closest thing to a Thriller that 2007/08 is likely to produce". According to Rolling Stone, her single "Umbrella" and her eighth album Anti are regarded as among the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time and 500 Greatest Albums of All Time, respectively. Her single "We Found Love" was ranked by Billboard as the 24th biggest US Billboard Hot 100 hit of all time and her single "Work" has been credited by a Billboard editor for bringing the dancehall genre to the forefront of mainstream American music. Music critic Jayson Greene of Pitchfork described Rihanna as the most influential singer of the past decade, writing: "Rihanna Voice has become an industry-wide idea, a creative property like the Korg synth or LinnDrum [...] We crave the thrill that you can only get when a dozen or so good ideas manifest themselves in a single voice. For the past 10 years, that voice has more or less been Rihanna's. Now that she's gleefully shredding it apart, she'll probably generate a whole new comet trail of Rihannabes. Inevitably, none of them will carry the charge, the glassy cool and subterranean heat, of the real thing." Time magazine included Rihanna on its 100 Most Influential People in the World issue in 2012 and 2018, with Stella McCartney writing: "She's one of the coolest, hottest, most talented, most liked, most listened to, most followed, most impressive artists at work today, but she does it in her own stride. She works hard, very hard. She gives to her fans, friends and foundation not just herself but her energy and spirit." Rihanna was ranked one of the best dressed women in 2018, by luxury fashion retailer Net-a-Porter. On June 2, 2014, Rihanna was presented with the Fashion Icon lifetime achievement award from Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA), a special prize reserved for "an individual whose style has made a significant impact on popular culture on an international stage". In August 2018, Billboard ranked Rihanna as the tenth biggest Hot 100 artist of all time, as well as the fifth biggest female act of all time.Billboard also ranked Rihanna the top Hot 100 artist of the 2010s decade. In 2014, Time magazine's pop stardom ranking metric ranked Rihanna second in history, based on all-time chart performance and contemporary significance. Rihanna has become a dominating figure on social media and internet streaming, ranking at No. 1 on Forbes' 2012 list of Social Networking Superstars. In 2013, Rihanna was also named the most influential pop star in the United Kingdom by UK channel 4Music. Rihanna's work has directly influenced numerous artists such as Lorde, Sam Smith, Little Mix, Rita Ora, Billie Eilish, Selena Gomez, Justin Bieber, Ellie Goulding, Kim Petras, Jennie from Blackpink, Marilyn Manson, Jessie J, SZA, Fifth Harmony, Camila Cabello, Demi Lovato, Alexandra Stan, Grimes, Sleater-Kinney, Tegan and Sara, Cover Drive, Cher Lloyd, Bad Gyal, and Era Istrefi. Rihanna has an honorary title of Ambassador for Culture and Youth in Barbados. On February 22, 2008, former Barbados Prime Minister David Thompson launched the national "Rihanna Day" in their country. Although it is not a bank holiday, Barbadians celebrate it every year in honor of Rihanna. In February 2017, Rihanna was named Harvard University's "Humanitarian of the Year" by the Harvard Foundation. During Rihanna's third annual "Diamond Ball", former U.S. president Barack Obama, praised Rihanna's work and stated: "[She's] become a powerful force in the fight to give people dignity." On September 20, 2018, Rihanna was appointed by the government of Barbados to be an Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, with special duties of promoting "education, tourism and investment for the island." As of 2021, Rihanna is the world's wealthiest female musician with an estimated net worth of $1.7 billion. She was also listed among Forbes' Top 100 Most Powerful Women of 2019. In 2020, she debuted on the Sunday Times Rich List, claiming third place on the list of Britain's richest musicians. At the 2020 NAACP Image Awards, hosted by BET, Rihanna accepted the President's Award from Derrick Johnson. Johnson stated that "Rihanna has not only enjoyed a groundbreaking career as an artist and musician but has also distinguished herself as a stellar public servant. From her business achievements through Fenty to her tremendous record as an activist and philanthropist, Rihanna epitomizes the type of character, grace, and devotion to justice that we seek to highlight in our President's Award." Rihanna's first fragrance, Reb'l Fleur, was released in January 2011. According to Rolling Stone, Reb'l Fleur was a financial success and was expected to gross US$80 million at retail by the end of 2011. Rihanna's second fragrance, Rebelle, was released in February 2012. The promotional campaign for Rebelle, was shot by director, Anthony Mandler, who also shot the promotional campaign for Reb'l Fleur. In November 2012, Rihanna released her third fragrance, Nude. Rihanna's fourth women's fragrance, titled Rogue was released on September 14, 2013, followed by a male version entitled Rogue Men which was released in 2014. On March 30, 2015, it was announced that Rihanna is a co-owner, with various other music artists, in the music streaming service Tidal. The service specializes in lossless audio and high definition music videos. Jay-Z acquired the parent company of Tidal, Aspiro, in the first quarter of 2015. Including Beyoncé and Jay-Z, sixteen artist stakeholders (such as Kanye West, Beyoncé, Madonna, Chris Martin, Nicki Minaj and more) co-own Tidal, with the majority owning a 3% equity stake. "The challenge is to get everyone to respect music again, to recognize its value", stated Jay-Z on the release of Tidal. In 2016, it was revealed that Rihanna would be releasing her music through her own label Westbury Road Entertainment, which was established in 2005. Westbury Road is the name of her Barbados residence. The music would be distributed through Universal Music Group. Westbury Road Entertainment's artist roster includes Melissa Forde as the label's photographer, and KazeLoon. In November 2015, Rihanna and Benoit Demouy launched a beauty and stylist agency named Fr8me. The business based in Los Angeles was set up to assist artists in booking commercials, editorial shoots, ad campaigns, and red-carpet appearances. Rihanna stated, "Hair, makeup, and styling play an important role in creativity; I am very involved with that part of my process, so this agency was an organic thing for me to do." The roster includes Rihanna's makeup artist Mylah Morales, wardrobe stylist Jason Bolden, hairstylist Patricia Morales and Marcia Hamilton. In addition to Fr8me, Rihanna opened a photo agency called "A Dog Ate My Homework", which represents photographers Erik Asla and Deborah Anderson. Fenty was a fashion brand by Rihanna under the luxury fashion group LVMH, which launched in May 2019. She was the first woman to create an original brand for LVMH and also the first woman of color to lead an LVMH brand. The house launched in a pop-up store on May 22, 2019, in Paris, before launching worldwide online on May 29 and included clothing, accessories, and footwear. It was the first line that LVMH had launched since 1987. The fashion brand was described as groundbreaking, and in a statement regarding the launch, Rihanna said that she had been given a "unique opportunity to develop a fashion house in the luxury sector, with no artistic limits." Due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, in February 2021, Rihanna and LVMH decided to "put on hold" her Fenty fashion house and continue building on the SavagexFenty lingerie line. Rihanna exclusively uses her surname for business endeavors not related to her music career so as not to conflate the two. In January 2019, Rihanna filed a lawsuit against her father, Ronald Fenty, over the use of the Fenty name for commercial purposes. The lawsuit alleges Rihanna's cosmetics brand, Fenty Beauty, was damaged commercially by her father's company, Fenty Entertainment, through misrepresentation of his company being affiliated with her. In September 2021 Rihanna dropped the lawsuit against her father. In 2017, Rihanna launched her cosmetics company Fenty Beauty under LVMH's Kendo Brands. Rihanna owns 50 percent of Fenty Beauty, according to Forbes. The partnership was worth $10 million and would see Rihanna release various beauty products. The first installment of Fenty Beauty was released on September 8, 2017, in stores and online, available in over 150 countries. It included an array of products including foundations, highlighters, bronzers, blush compacts, lip glosses and blotting sheets and was praised for its diverse range for all skin colors. Time magazine named Fenty Beauty as one of "The 25 Best Inventions of 2017", highlighting the breadth of its range. In what has been dubbed the "Fenty Effect", the brand revolutionized the way other cosmetic brands approached diversity in marketing and product formulation: "Suddenly beauty houses – niche, establishment and those in between – began extending their shade ranges to accommodate a wider variety of skin tones. Forty shades became the new standard." In 2018, Rihanna launched a lingerie brand named Savage X Fenty. The line was born from Rihanna's vision creating an inclusive brand. Products come in a variety of shades to match all skin tones and a range of sizes. She showcased the brand at the New York Fashion Week in September 2018. The brand has been positively reviewed by the public for including plus size models in their promotion, though some fans argued there were not enough plus sizes. In September 2019, Rihanna promoted the brand in a show again during the New York Fashion Week held at the Barclays Center with modeling appearances from models Alex Wek, Bella Hadid, Cara Delevingne, actress Laverne Cox, and musicians Normani and 21 Savage. The show featured performances by DJ Khaled, Halsey, ASAP Ferg, Big Sean, Migos, Fat Joe, Fabolous, and Tierra Whack and premiered on Amazon Prime Video on September 20, 2019, as the Savage X Fenty Show. The show was renewed for a third time in 2020, with appearances from musicians such as Travis Scott, Rosalía, Bad Bunny, Ella Mai, Lizzo, Big Sean, Miguel, Roddy Ricch and Rico Nasty. This version also premiered on Amazon Prime Video on October 2, 2020. In July 2020, Rihanna launched a skin care brand called Fenty Skin. Rihanna has ventured into other businesses and industries. In October 2005, Rihanna struck an endorsement deal with Secret Body Spray. In 2010, Rihanna featured in the Optus commercial, in conjunction with Optus supporting Rihanna's Last Girl on Earth. The same year Rihanna also featured in the Kodak commercial along with rapper Pitbull. In October 2010, she released a photo book featuring photos from the Last Girl on Earth tour and served as an accompaniment to her fourth studio album Rated R (2009). In 2011, Rihanna was the face of Nivea and Vita Coco. Her first television program, Styled to Rock, premiered in the UK in August 2012 on Sky Living. In the 10-week series, Rihanna, Nicola Roberts, Lysa Cooper and Henry Holland assist up-and-coming British designers with their clothing lines. The US version of Styled to Rock premiered on October 25, 2013, on Bravo. In 2013, Rihanna collaborated with MAC Cosmetics and released her own summer, fall and holiday lines of makeup called "RiRi hearts MAC". In July 2013, lager production company Budweiser announced that Rihanna had become a part of their global "Made For Music" campaign, also co-starring Jay-Z. Early in her career, Rihanna made clear her interest in fashion and desire to work in the clothing design industry. Regarding this, she said, "Fashion has always been my defense mechanism". In November 2011, Rihanna announced her first fashion venture with Armani. In February 2013, Rihanna presented her first women's fashion collection at London Fashion Week for British brand River Island, collaborating with her personal stylist Adam Selman. They published three more collections for the brand. Rihanna then collaborated with numerous fashion house's including Dior, Stance and Manolo Blahnik. In March 2015, Rihanna was chosen as the new face of Dior; making her the first black woman to be the face of the brand. In 2014, Rihanna became the creative director of the fashion sportswear Puma, overseeing the brand's women's line which will include collaborations in apparel and footwear. The following year, Rihanna released her first trainer with Puma and it sold out online within three hours of its pre-sale launch. Over the next two years, Rihanna released various other footwear in different colorways and styles, which were all met positively by both critics and buyers. 2016 saw Rihanna debut her first clothing line in collaboration with Puma at New York Fashion Week; the collection was met with rave reviews from fashion critics. Rihanna made her acting debut in a cameo role in the straight-to-DVD film Bring It On: All or Nothing, released in August 2006. Rihanna starred as Petty Officer (GM2) Cora Raikes in her first theatrical feature film Battleship, which was released on May 18, 2012. Loosely based on the game of the same name, both the film and Rihanna's performance received mixed-to-negative reviews; the New York Times said she was "just fine in the rather generic role". In 2015, Rihanna appeared in the voice role of Tip in the animated feature film Home alongside Jim Parsons and Jennifer Lopez; the film was based on The True Meaning of Smekday by Adam Rex. Rihanna played the recurring role of Marion Crane in the fifth and final season of Bates Motel. The show received universal acclaim from critics. Rihanna also had a major role in the Luc Besson film Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets, an adaptation of the comic book series Valérian and Laureline. Also starring Dane DeHaan and Cara Delevingne, the film was released by STX Entertainment on July 21, 2017, in the US Rihanna was one of the all-female cast in the heist film Ocean's 8, directed by Gary Ross and released by Warner Bros. on June 8, 2018. The movie grossed $300 million worldwide and became a major box office success. In August 2018, it had been reported that Rihanna had been filming a secret project in Cuba titled Guava Island throughout that summer alongside Donald Glover. Glover's Atlanta collaborator Hiro Murai was directing, with Letitia Wright and Nonso Anozie also involved. The trailer for the full-length movie premiered on November 24 at the PHAROS festival in New Zealand. The exact details project were not announced until April 2019 when advertisements for Guava Island appeared on Spotify indicating something happening on "Saturday Night | April 13". It was later revealed Amazon Studios would distribute the film and Regency Enterprises had financed the film, which was released on April 13. In 2006, she created her Believe Foundation to help terminally ill children. In 2007, Rihanna was named as one of the Cartier Love Charity Bracelet Ambassadors, with each celebrity representing a different global charity. To help raise awareness and combat HIV/AIDS, Rihanna and other public figures designed clothing for the February 2008 H&M Fashion Against AIDS line. In 2008, Rihanna performed a series of charity concerts entitled A Girl's Night Out to benefit the Believe Foundation. The concerts were made free for the public. Money from sponsors and advertisers were to be donated to provide medical supplies, school supplies and toys to children in need. In September 2008, Rihanna contributed to the song "Just Stand Up!" with fifteen other female artists, who shared the stage to perform the song live on September 5, 2008, during the "Stand Up to Cancer" television special. The proceeds from the single were given to the fundraiser. The television special helped raise $100 million for cancer research. I feel strongly that all children everywhere should be afforded the opportunity of a quality education, therefore I'm proud to announce Clara Lionel Foundation's partnership with education advocacy leaders like the Global Partnership for Education and Global Citizen. Working together, I know we can amplify our efforts and ensure that millions of children gain access to education globally.  – Rihanna, discussing the Clara Lionel Foundation's partnership with the Global Partnership for Education Rihanna founded the Clara Lionel Foundation (CLF) in 2012, in honor of her grandparents, Clara and Lionel Braithwaite. Programs include the Clara Braithwaite Center for Oncology and Nuclear Medicine at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Barbados, and education programs. The CLF hosts an annual Diamond Ball charity fundraiser event. The inaugural event in 2014 raised over $2 million and the second raised over $3 million. On February 12, 2012, Rihanna performed a benefit show at the House of Blues to raise money for the Children's Orthopaedic Center and the Mark Taper-Johnny Mercer Artists Program at Children's Hospital. In November 2012, Rihanna gave $100,000 to food bank donation for Hurricane Sandy. On January 3, 2014, Rihanna was part of the MAC Viva Glam campaign, which benefits women, men and children living with HIV/AIDS. In March 2020, Rihanna donated $5,000,000 to COVID-19 relief and followed that up with additional donations of personal protective equipment to the state of New York and an offer of $700,000 worth of ventilators to her home country Barbados. In April 2020, Rihanna further donated an additional $2,100,000, matching Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey for a total of $4,200,000, to provide support and resources to individuals and children suffering from domestic violence amid the lockdown. The Clara Lionel Foundation donated to climate justice and climate resilience. In 2022 it allocated 13 million euro to climate justice. During her performance at the NCAA March Madness Music Festival, Rihanna expressed her disagreement with Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act that allows companies and individuals to use their religious beliefs as protection, in case of being accused of discrimination against LGBT people. Rihanna along with other celebrities featured in an online video titled "23 Ways You Could Be Killed If You Are Black in America". The video was released in partnership with the We Are Here Movement and called for action against police brutality. In January 2017, Rihanna participated in the 2017 Women's March, which took place in New York among protests the day after US President Donald Trump's inauguration. She has also criticized President Trump's immigration policies—including Executive Order 13769, which sought to ban citizens of Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen from entering the United States—and his response to the 2019 shootings in El Paso and Dayton. In October 2019, she stated that she declined to perform at the 2020 Super Bowl halftime show in support of Colin Kaepernick following the controversy surrounding his role in the national anthem protests. In February 2021, Rihanna extended her support to Indian farmers' protest against the farm bills through Twitter. Rihanna called to a transformation of the global financial system so it will be better adjusted to stop climate change and poverty, including giving help to countries heavily suffering from climate change. Rihanna owns a $14 million penthouse in Lower Manhattan. She also purchased a house in West London for £7 million in June 2018, to be closer to her work with her FENTY fashion label. In December 2018, Rihanna put her Hollywood Hills mansion up for sale after a break-in six months before. The mansion was reported to have sold for $10.4m. Forbes began reporting on Rihanna's earnings in 2012. Rihanna began dating American singer Chris Brown in 2007. Their relationship ended in February 2009, following their highly publicized domestic violence case. She then entered an on-again, off-again relationship with Canadian rapper Drake, which lasted from 2009 to 2016. During an interview with Rolling Stone in January 2013, Rihanna confirmed that she had rekindled her relationship with Brown, although he remained under probation for their 2009 domestic violence case. Their reunion followed persistent media speculation that occurred throughout 2012. In May 2013, Brown stated during an interview that he and Rihanna had broken up again. In 2017, Rihanna began dating Saudi businessman Hassan Jameel. They split in January 2020. On May 19, 2021, American rapper ASAP Rocky confirmed during an interview with GQ that he and Rihanna were in a relationship. On January 31, 2022, it was revealed that the couple was expecting their first child. On May 19, 2022, it was confirmed that Rihanna had given birth to a son. On May 10, 2023, Rocky and Rihanna revealed their son's name as RZA Athelaston Mayers, named after Wu-Tang Clan leader and founder RZA. On February 12, 2023, during the Super Bowl LVII halftime show performance, Rihanna revealed she was pregnant with her second child, becoming the first person to headline a Super Bowl halftime show while pregnant. The pregnancy was confirmed in a British Vogue cover story featuring her family, which was released days after the Super Bowl appearance. On August 1, 2023, they welcomed their second son, named Riot Rose Mayers. On February 8, 2009, Rihanna's scheduled performance at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards was canceled. Reports surfaced that her boyfriend at the time, Chris Brown, had physically assaulted her. He turned himself in to the police and was booked on suspicion of making criminal threats. On March 5, 2009, Brown was charged with assault and making criminal threats. Due to a leaked photograph from the police department obtained by TMZ.com—which revealed that Rihanna had sustained extensive visible injuries—an organization known as STOParazzi proposed "Rihanna's Law", which, if enacted, would "deter employees of law enforcement agencies from releasing photos or information that exploits crime victims." Gil Kaufman of VH1 reported the "nonstop coverage of the Rihanna/Brown case has brought up a number of issues regarding the privacy of alleged victims of domestic violence, including the decision by almost all major news outlets to divulge the identity of the victim—which is not typically done in domestic-violence cases" and discussed the controversial distribution of the leaked photograph. Rihanna was subpoenaed to testify during a preliminary hearing in Los Angeles on June 22, 2009. On June 22, 2009, Brown pleaded guilty to felony assault. Brown received five years of probation and was ordered to stay 50 yards (46 m) away from Rihanna unless at public events, which then would be reduced to 10 yards (9 m). On September 2, 2009, Brown spoke about the domestic violence case in a pre-recorded Larry King Live interview, his first public interview about the matter. He was accompanied to the interview by his mother, Joyce Hawkins, and attorney Mark Geragos, as he discussed growing up in a household with his mother being repeatedly assaulted by his stepfather. Brown said of hearing details of his assault of Rihanna, "I'm in shock, because, first of all, that's not who I am as a person, and that's not who I promise I want to be." As of September 2018[update], Rihanna has sold over 250 million records worldwide, making her one of the best-selling music artists of all time. Throughout her career, she has received numerous awards and honors, including 9 Grammy Awards, 12 Billboard Music Awards, 13 American Music Awards, 8 People's Choice Awards, among others. Rihanna received the "Icon Award" at the 2013 American Music Awards and the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2016 MTV Video Music Awards. She holds six Guinness World Records. In the United States, Rihanna has sold over 10 million albums, while Nielsen SoundScan ranked her as the bestselling digital artist in the country, breaking a Guinness World Record for digital single sales of over 58 million as of 2012. On July 1, 2015, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) announced that Rihanna had surpassed more than 100 million Gold and Platinum song certifications. In doing so, Rihanna has the most digital single awards and is the first and only artist to surpass RIAA's 100 million cumulative singles award threshold. In the United Kingdom, she has sold over 7 million albums, making her the third bestselling female artist this century. According to Billboard, her total album sales stand at 54 million copies sold worldwide. Rihanna has accumulated 14 No. 1 singles on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart for the third most No. 1 songs in the chart's history. She has been named the top Mainstream Top 40 chart artist of the past twenty years by Billboard; she ranks first with most entries (36), most top tens (23) and most No. 1 songs (10). As of March 2014[update], Rihanna has sold over 18 million singles and 6 million albums in the United Kingdom. She is the tenth bestselling and the second bestselling female singles artist in the country, only behind Madonna and is second only to the Beatles for the most million-selling singles in the UK of all time. Her collaboration with Eminem, "Love the Way You Lie", along with "Umbrella", "Disturbia", "Only Girl (In the World)", "We Found Love" and "Diamonds", are among the best-selling singles of all time. Rihanna has seven No. 1 singles on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, and Airplay chart, as well as sixteen No. 1 singles on the Rhythmic chart. She has also earned over 30 top-ten songs in the UK and Australia. Music of the Sun (2005) A Girl like Me (2006) Good Girl Gone Bad (2007) Rated R (2009) Loud (2010) Talk That Talk (2011) Unapologetic (2012) Anti (2016) Bring It On: All or Nothing (2006) Battleship (2012) This Is the End (2013) Home (2015) Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets (2017) Ocean's 8 (2018) Guava Island (2019) As a headliner Rihanna: Live in Concert (2006) Good Girl Gone Bad Tour (2007–2009) Last Girl on Earth Tour (2010–2011) Loud Tour (2011) Diamonds World Tour (2013) Anti World Tour (2016) As a co-headliner The Monster Tour (with Eminem) (2014) Promotional tours A Girl's Night Out (2008; a series of charity concerts to benefit the "Believe Foundation") 777 Tour (2012; in support of her seventh studio album Unapologetic) Biography portal Pop music portal Film portal Television portal Culture of Barbados Music of Barbados Honorific nicknames in popular music List of Billboard Social 50 number-one artists List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones Rihanna (given name) It is also common for English-language speakers to pronounce her name /riˈɑːnə/ ree-AH-nə. While she neither unambiguously confirmed or denied the track, she said it is definitely not the title of her album. Sanchez, Chelsey; Park, Sabrina; Mackelden, Amy (January 31, 2022). "Everything We Know About Rihanna and A$AP Rocky's Relationship". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. HLN. "Rihanna shows AJ Hammer how to pronounce her name". Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved May 2, 2017 – via YouTube. GQ (August 26, 2020). "A$AP Rocky Answers 18 Questions From Rihanna". Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved February 17, 2022 – via YouTube. Ibile, Fagbo (August 6, 2022). "Rihanna Forbes". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved August 6, 2022. Pandey, Manish; Brown, Lindsay (August 11, 2021). "Fenty Beauty: How make-up helped Rihanna become a billionaire". BBC News. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved August 12, 2021. Bryant, Kenzie (May 10, 2019). "Rihanna Is the First Black Woman to Head a Luxury Brand for LVMH". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved April 11, 2021. "Barbados National Honours and Decorations 2021". Barbados Government Printing Department. December 1, 2021. Archived from the original on December 4, 2021. Retrieved December 9, 2021. ""Happy Birthday to a Real BOSS," See Who's Wishing Rihanna's A Happy 29th Birthday". BET. February 20, 2017. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved May 16, 2019. Spivey, Lisa (January 2007). "Rihanna, The New Cover Girl". Los Angeles Sentinel. 72 (23): B.5. ISSN 0890-4340. "Rihanna: Biography — Part 1 & 2". People. Archived from the original on December 17, 2008. Retrieved December 16, 2008. Spivey, Lisa (January 2007). "Rihanna, The New Cover Girl". Los Angeles Sentinel. Vol. 72, no. 23. p. B.5. ISSN 0890-4340. Walker, Tim (October 31, 2011). "Rihanna: Out for revenge". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved March 28, 2021. Fulton, Rick (August 22, 2021). "Singer Rhianna opens up about her Scottish roots and wants to find out more". Daily Record (Scotland). Archived from the original on February 9, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2022. "Rihanna, Multi-Media Entertainer born". AAREG. Archived from the original on February 9, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Watson, Margeaux (June 22, 2007). "Caribbean Queen: Rihanna". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Clark, Noelene (April 18, 2011). "Rihanna's secret family: two half-sisters, a half-brother — and two nieces". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved July 21, 2011. Ross, Scott; Daniel Macht (November 6, 2009). "Rihanna: My Dad Used to Hit Mom". NBC Connecticut. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna 1988–". Biography Today. 17 (2). Omnigraphics: 90. 2008. ISSN 1058-2347. Vena, Jocelyn (November 16, 2010). "Rihanna Says Loud's 'Man Down' Is 'Gangsta'". MTV. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved July 27, 2011. Venugopal, Arun (May 15, 2017). "As a kid, I was giving throwdowns to Lara, Chanderpaul and Hooper". ESPN Sports Media Ltd. Archived from the original on May 16, 2017. Retrieved May 16, 2017. "Shontelle on Being Rihanna's Drill Sergeant". ELLE. May 23, 2011. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved October 16, 2023. "Rihanna Exclusive Interview 'I Break The Rules Even When I Don't Intend To'". NME. September 18, 2015. Archived from the original on June 3, 2022. Retrieved June 3, 2022. DePaulo, Lisa (January 2010). "Good Girl Gone Badass". GQ. Archived from the original on November 23, 2011. Retrieved July 27, 2011. Patterson, Sylvia (August 27, 2007). "Singing in the rain". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media Limited. Archived from the original on February 8, 2012. Retrieved September 24, 2011. "2005 Rihanna Interview". Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved February 20, 2016 – via YouTube. "The Island Def Jam Music Group Appoints Shawn "Jay-Z" Carter to President & CEO, Def Jam Recordings". Universal Music Group. December 8, 2004. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved February 22, 2015. Reid, Shaheem. "Jay-Z's Picks: Teairra Mari, Rihanna, Ne-Yo". MTV. Archived from the original on August 30, 2011. Retrieved September 24, 2011. Jones, Steve (August 1, 2005). "Rihanna has her day in the sun". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 18, 2011. Retrieved May 23, 2009. Reid, Antonio (January 7, 2016). "L.A. Reid Recalls Meeting 17-Year-Old Rihanna for the First Time: Exclusive Memoir Excerpt". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Eells, Josh (June 1, 2011). "Rihanna, Queen of Pain: Rolling Stone's 2011 Cover Story". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 14, 2011. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Cinquemani, Sal (August 31, 2005). "Review: Rihanna: Music Of The Sun". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on November 12, 2010. Retrieved May 29, 2009. Kawashima, Dale. "Special Interview (2005): Rihanna Tells How She Got Started, Getting Her Label Deal, And Her First Album". Singer Universe. Archived from the original on February 25, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2016. "Artist Chart History – Rihanna". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 28, 2008. Retrieved February 6, 2009. Murray, Gordon (August 8, 2013). "Rihanna Scores 20th No. 1 on Dance/Club Play Chart; Second-Most No. 1s Ever". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "RIAA – Gold & Platinum". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on December 11, 2012. Retrieved November 28, 2010. Tecson, Brandee (August 19, 2005). "Rihanna Insists She's Got What You Need In 'Pon De Replay' Follow-Up". Archived from the original on March 6, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Tecson, Brandee J. (November 3, 2005). "Rihanna Brings on Acting Career With New 'Bring It On' Flick". Archived from the original on January 4, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Tecson, Brandee J. (February 22, 2006). "Rihanna Getting in Touch With Her Rock Side For Next LP". Archived from the original on December 26, 2008. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Billboard.com – Discography – Rihanna – A Girl Like Me". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 4, 2008. Retrieved May 27, 2009. Walters, Barry. "Rihanna – A Girl like Me". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 12, 2008. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna – A Girl like Me – Music Charts". αCharts.us. Archived from the original on December 24, 2008. Retrieved August 21, 2009. Caulfield, Keith (November 16, 2013). "Rihanna Hits 10 Million in U.S. Album Sales". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna – SOS – Music Charts". Music Charts. Archived from the original on February 24, 2009. Retrieved August 24, 2009. "Rihanna – Unfaithful – Music Charts". Music Charts. Archived from the original on December 27, 2008. Retrieved August 24, 2009. Moss, Corey (July 6, 2006). "Rihanna Lets Fans Be Her Guide, Selects Summer Jam 'We Ride' As Next Single". Archived from the original on October 13, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Hasty, Katie (March 1, 2007). "Mims Puts The 'Hot' In The Hot 100 At No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 5, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Moss, Corey (February 27, 2007). "Rihanna Gets Voice Lessons From Ne-Yo For 'Fresh, Uptempo' New Tracks". MTV News. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2013. Reid, Shaheem; Richard, Yasmine (May 2, 2007). "Rihanna Loses Good Girl Image, Thanks To Jay-Z, Justin, Timbaland, Ne-Yo". MTV. Archived from the original on February 20, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Moss, Corey (February 27, 2006). "Rihanna Gets Voice Lessons From Ne-Yo For 'Fresh, Uptempo' New Tracks". Archived from the original on January 4, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna – Good Girl Gone Bad – Music Charts". Music Charts. Archived from the original on February 4, 2009. Retrieved August 24, 2009. "Rihanna:Good Girl Gone Bad (2007): Reviews". Metacritic. Archived from the original on February 26, 2009. Retrieved March 24, 2009. "Rihanna and Jay-Z – Umbrella – Music Charts". Music Charts. Archived from the original on February 2, 2009. Retrieved August 24, 2009. Sexton, Paul (July 23, 2007). "Rihanna Makes It 10 Weeks Atop UK Singles Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Top 10 Global Digital Singles 2007" (PDF). International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. p. 6. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 26, 2010. Retrieved November 13, 2010. "Top 10 Digital Songs 2009" (PDF). IFPI. February 15, 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 26, 2010. Leong, Cheryl (November 13, 2008). "Rihanna's Good Girl Gone Bad Tour". MTV Southeast Asia. Archived from the original on July 11, 2013. Retrieved May 31, 2009. "The Grammy winners are..." Entertainment Weekly. February 8, 2008. Archived from the original on February 12, 2008. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Watson, Margeaux (December 29, 2008). "Rihanna: Diva of the year". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna Earns Sixth Million-Selling Album". Billboard. May 31, 2013. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Beyoncé, Lady Gaga, Rihanna albums to hit shelves November 23". The Independent. London. November 17, 2009. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved September 10, 2017. Copsey, Rob (June 1, 2017). "Rihanna celebrates the tenth anniversary of her breakthrough album Good Girl Gone Bad: 'I'm forever grateful'". The Official UK Charts Company. Archived from the original on June 4, 2017. Retrieved June 1, 2017. Emina, Kyle (November 28, 2011). "Rihanna revitalizes tired musical style". Archived from the original on January 11, 2016. Retrieved October 9, 2015. Rodriguez, Jayson (January 30, 2008). "Kanye West's Glow in the Dark Tour Will Feature Rihanna, Lupe Fiasco, N.E.R.D." MTV. Archived from the original on December 28, 2008. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Good Girl Gone Bad: Reloaded by Rihanna". iTunes (Spain). Apple. Archived from the original on December 27, 2014. Retrieved January 24, 2012. "Rihanna – Take A Bow – Music Charts". Australian Record Industry Association. Archived from the original on September 24, 2008. Retrieved October 23, 2008. "Maroon 5 and Rihanna – If I Never See Your Face Again – Music Charts". αCharts. Archived from the original on December 22, 2008. Retrieved October 23, 2008. "Rihanna – Disturbia – Music Charts". αCharts. Archived from the original on September 23, 2008. Retrieved October 23, 2008. Kaufman, Gil (August 19, 2008). "Mariah Carey, Beyoncé, Rihanna, Fergie, Miley Cyrus, More Collaborate on Cancer Benefit Single". MTV. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Swash, Rosie (February 9, 2009). "Grammys 2009: Rihanna cancels appearance after boyfriend Chris Brown arrested". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on February 23, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2009. Friedman, Roger (February 10, 2009). "Chaos in Chris Brown-Rihanna Mess". Fox News. Archived from the original on December 13, 2009. Retrieved May 13, 2009. Lee, Ken (March 5, 2009). "Chris Brown Charged with Two Felonies in Rihanna Beating". People. Archived from the original on September 29, 2018. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Kaufman, Gil (February 23, 2009). "Gossip Site Defends Posting of Rihanna Photo". Archived from the original on March 19, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Battlefield 4 (BF4) Announce Trailer with Rihanna [Official]". April 4, 2013. Archived from the original on April 4, 2013. Retrieved February 11, 2018. Vena, Jocelyn (April 23, 2009). "Rihanna Recording 'Inspiring' New Tracks With Producers Stargate". Archived from the original on December 11, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Lynch, Joseph Brannigan (October 14, 2009). "Rihanna's new album: What can we expect?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Rosen, Jody (November 23, 2009). "Rated R: Rihanna: Review". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 11, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Kellman, Andy. "Rated R – Rihanna". AllMusic. Archived from the original on March 15, 2013. Retrieved March 26, 2013. "Rihanna Is MTV News' No. 3 Woman of the Year". MTV. December 17, 2009. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Caulfield, Keith. (December 2, 2009). "Susan Boyle Sees 'Dream' Soar To No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Kaufman, Gil (December 2, 2009). "Susan Boyle Beats Adam Lambert, Rihanna For Billboard No. 1". Archived from the original on March 4, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna and Young Jeezy – Hard – Music Charts". Music Charts. Archived from the original on June 15, 2012. Retrieved June 8, 2012. "Rihanna – Rude Boy – Music Charts". Music Charts. Archived from the original on June 15, 2012. Retrieved June 8, 2012. "Eminem and Rihanna – Love The Way You Lie – Music Charts". Music Charts. Archived from the original on June 22, 2012. Retrieved June 8, 2012. "Eminem/Rihanna & Take That scoop 2010 crowns". OfficialCharts.com. January 2, 2011. Archived from the original on October 26, 2011. Retrieved January 29, 2011. Jones, Alan (February 13, 2012). "Official Chart Analysis: Lana Del Rey scores biggest-selling album of 2012, Gotye shifts another 83k". Music Week. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Fekadu, Mesfin (October 20, 2010). "Rihanna Leaves Manager, Now Under Jay-Z's Umbrella". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved February 23, 2011. Montgomery, James. "Rihanna 'Loved' Working With Kanye West On 'All of the Lights'". MTV. Archived from the original on December 19, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Rodriguez, Jayson (March 22, 2011). "Nicki Minaj Explains Postponing Rihanna 'Fly' Video". MTV. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2017. Bhansalo, Akshay (January 20, 2011). "David Guetta 'Honored' To Have Rihanna On 'Who's That Chick'". MTV. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Kaufman, Gil (September 7, 2010). "Rihanna Reveals Title of New Album: Loud". Archived from the original on December 29, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Billboard Canadian Hot 100: Week of October 2, 2010". Billboard. January 2, 2013. Archived from the original on June 17, 2013. Retrieved October 13, 2015. "Rihanna – Only Girl (In The World)". Archived from the original on March 24, 2016. Retrieved November 27, 2010. "Archive Chart". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on March 7, 2021. Retrieved November 27, 2010. Wete, Brad. "Rihanna's 'What's My Name?' jumps to No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100 chart". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 12, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Trust, Gary (April 20, 2011). "Rihanna's 'S&M' Reigns on Hot 100, Lady Gaga's 'Judas' Debuts". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 12, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "53rd Annual Grammy Awards nominees list". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 5, 2010. Retrieved December 2, 2010. "Rihanna, 'Man Down' – New Song". AOL Music. April 25, 2011. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved April 26, 2011. Copsey, Robert (March 12, 2011). "Rihanna announces next single". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on April 14, 2011. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Cheers (Drink to That) – Rihanna". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved September 23, 2011. Concepcion, Mariel (February 10, 2011). "Rihanna To Kick Off North American 'Loud' Tour in June". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna Breaks O2 Arena Record With Final 'Loud' Tour Gig". Capital FM. February 15, 2012. Archived from the original on November 22, 2012. Retrieved December 22, 2011. "Pollstar: Top 25 Worldwide Tours (1/1/2011 – 12/31/2011)" (PDF). Pollstar. December 28, 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 7, 2012. Retrieved December 29, 2011. Archibald-Powell, Naimah (September 12, 2020). "Rihanna's North West London home is up for sale". GRM Daily. Archived from the original on May 9, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2021. Fowler, Tara (October 11, 2011). "Rihanna unveils new album 'Talk That Talk' cover". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 28, 2011. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Caulfield, Keith (November 30, 2011). "Michael Buble Bests Nickelback, Rihanna on Billboard 200 Archived January 31, 2022, at the Wayback Machine". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna Calvin Harris – We Found Love". Music Charts. Archived from the original on June 14, 2012. Retrieved June 8, 2012. Trust, Gary (November 2, 2011). "Rihanna's 'Found' Her Way Back to Hot 100 Summit". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Trust, Gary (December 21, 2011). "Rihanna's 'Love' Her Longest-Leading Hot 100 No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved September 7, 2012. Bronson, Fred. "Hot 100 55th Anniversary: The All-Time Top 100 Songs Archived July 10, 2017, at the Wayback Machine". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "The Hot 100: Week of July 7, 2012". Billboard. July 7, 2012. Archived from the original on September 30, 2014. Retrieved October 13, 2015. "Archive Chart". OfficialCharts.com. July 7, 2012. Archived from the original on May 29, 2015. Retrieved May 26, 2012. "New Music: Rihanna f/ A$AP Rocky – 'Cockiness (Remix)'". Rap-Up.com. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2012. "Coldplay's 'Paradise' Video Stars Globe-Trotting Elephant". Billboard. October 19, 2011. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Take Care US urban radio release". February 15, 2012. Archived from the original on February 15, 2012. "Kanye West And Rihanna Win Best Rap Song And Collaboration at Grammy Awards 2012". Capital FM. February 12, 2012. Archived from the original on August 23, 2012. Retrieved September 1, 2012. "Rihanna wins BRITs 2012 International Female Artist". The BRIT Awards. February 21, 2012. Archived from the original on April 22, 2012. Retrieved September 1, 2012. Corner, Lewis (June 6, 2012). "Rihanna 'didn't expect negative Chris Brown duet reaction'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 15, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2012. "Rihanna, One Direction Top VMAs". Yahoo!. September 6, 2012. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. Retrieved September 7, 2012. "Rihanna clearly Unapologetic about 777 Tour stop in Toronto". The Vancouver Sun. Archived from the original on November 19, 2012. Retrieved November 16, 2012. Caulfield, Keith (November 27, 2012). "Rihanna Earns First No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Trust, Gary (November 21, 2012). "Rihanna's 'Diamonds' Shines Atop Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Trust, Gary (February 21, 2013). "Baauer's 'Harlem Shake' Debuts Atop Revamped Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Chen, Joyce (November 23, 2012). "Rihanna takes fans, media on party plane trip to 7 countries". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Danton, Eric R. (March 19, 2013). "Rihanna 777' Documentary Coming to Fox in May". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Early Grammy Winners Include Rihanna, Jay-Z and Kanye West". Rolling Stone. February 10, 2013. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "The BRIT Awards 2013: The biggest selling nominees revealed". OfficialCharts.com. February 20, 2013. Archived from the original on February 24, 2013. Retrieved February 20, 2013. Vena, Jocelyn (September 7, 2012). "Rihanna Unveils Diamonds Tour Dates After Big VMA Night". MTV. Archived from the original on September 9, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "'This Is the End': Rihanna doesn't make it in red band trailer". Digital Spy. April 2, 2013. Archived from the original on April 20, 2013. Retrieved April 2, 2013. "iTunes Music – Bad [Remix] (feat. Rihanna) – Single by Wale". iTunes Store. June 5, 2013. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved June 3, 2013. "Shakira, Rihanna Team Up On 'Can't Remember To Forget You': Listen". Billboard. January 13, 2014. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Aguirre, Abby (March 24, 2016). "More From Rihanna's Interview With Vogue". Vogue. Archived from the original on February 21, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Nostro, Lauren (May 5, 2014). "Rihanna Has Left Def Jam and Signed to Jay Z's Roc Nation Label". Complex. Archived from the original on April 30, 2019. Retrieved May 5, 2014. White, Caitlin (January 25, 2015). "Rihanna Dropped Her New Song With Kanye And Paul McCartney—Hear 'FourFiveSeconds'". MTV. Archived from the original on November 28, 2019. Retrieved April 3, 2015. Anderson, Stacey (March 29, 2015). "Rihanna Debuts 'Bitch Better Have My Money' at iHeartRadio Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna Debuts Soulful 'American Oxygen' on Tidal". Time. April 6, 2015. Archived from the original on August 30, 2016. Retrieved April 6, 2015. "Rihanna Debuts 'American Oxygen,' Slams RFRA at March Madness Fest". Yahoo!. April 5, 2015. Archived from the original on August 7, 2017. Retrieved April 6, 2015. Graser, Marc (February 25, 2014). "Rihanna to Make Concept Album for Upcoming Animated Movie". Variety. Archived from the original on May 9, 2014. Retrieved April 23, 2014. "Rihanna inks $25M sponsorship deal with Samsung". New York Post. October 29, 2015. Archived from the original on August 25, 2019. Retrieved November 17, 2015. Rihanna [@rihanna] (November 23, 2015). "#ANTIWorldTour starts Feb 2016! Bringing along @trvisXX in N. America & @theweeknd @bigsean in EU!" (Tweet). Retrieved January 31, 2022 – via Twitter. Levine, Nick (March 23, 2016). "The Weeknd drops out of Rihanna's Anti World Tour". The Independent. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Cox, Jamieson (January 28, 2016). "Rihanna's new album ANTI is available now". The Verge. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved January 28, 2016. Caulfield, Keith (February 7, 2016). "Rihanna's 'Anti' Rules at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Albums Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna and Drake 'Work' Into No. 1 Spot on Hot 100 Again Over Justin Bieber, Flo RIda". Music Times. February 29, 2016. Archived from the original on March 2, 2016. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Trust, Gary (June 6, 2016). "Drake No. 1 on Hot 100 for Fourth Week, P!nk Hits Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Kaufman, Gil (April 29, 2016). "Listen to Rihanna and Calvin Harris' 'This Is What You Came For". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Views (PDF digital booklet). Drake. Young Money Entertainment. 2016.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Brandle, Lars (June 3, 2016). "Mike Will Made-It Releases Rihanna Collab 'Nothing Is Promised'". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna Is in Full Ballad Mode on New Song 'Sledgehammer'". MTV. June 27, 2016. Archived from the original on June 27, 2016. Retrieved June 27, 2016. Geffen, Sasha (August 11, 2016). "Rihanna is Your 2016 VMA Video Vanguard". MTV. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved August 16, 2016. Bitette, Nicole (August 13, 2016). "Rihanna is the recipient of 2016 MTV Video Vanguard Award". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved August 15, 2016. Platon, Adelle (June 15, 2017). "DJ Khaled's 'Wild Thoughts' Collaboration With Rihanna and Bryson Tiller Will Drop Tomorrow". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Roberts, Randall (January 28, 2018). "Kendrick Lamar is 4-for-4 after 'Loyalty' wins the Grammy for rap/sung performance". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 1, 2018. Retrieved February 2, 2018. Ortiz, Edwin (November 5, 2017). "N*E*R*D Debut New Album at ComplexCon With Electrifying Show". Complex. Archived from the original on November 30, 2019. Retrieved November 13, 2017. "Lemon – Single by N.E.R.D". iTunes Store (US). November 2017. Archived from the original on September 5, 2018. Retrieved November 15, 2017. "Rihanna's Songwriter Says Her New Album Is "Absolutely Insane"". MTV UK. Archived from the original on October 21, 2017. Retrieved October 20, 2017. Stiernberg, Bonnie (December 22, 2018). "Rihanna Confirms Her New Album Will Be Out in 2019". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Sapanara, Michael (May 20, 2019). "Rihanna Confirms Upcoming Reggae Album in New Interview". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna Just Registered New Music and People Are Freaking Out". Elle. August 18, 2019. Archived from the original on January 6, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2019. "Rihanna Clears Up Rumor About Upcoming Album". Elle. October 12, 2019. Archived from the original on November 10, 2019. Retrieved October 15, 2019. Aswad, Jem; Halperin, Shirley (September 16, 2019). "Rihanna Signs With Sony/ATV Music Publishing". Variety. Archived from the original on September 16, 2019. Retrieved September 16, 2019. "Rihanna Teases 'R9' Album With House of Pain-Loving Pup: Watch". Billboard. December 22, 2019. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Update: me listening to R9 by myself and refusing to release it. Spanos, Brittany; Legaspi, Althea (March 27, 2020). "PartyNextDoor Recruits Rihanna for New Single 'Believe It'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 9, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2020. Blanchet, Brenton; Rice, Nicholas (September 25, 2022). "Rihanna to Headline 2023 Super Bowl Halftime Show: 'Let's Go'". People. Archived from the original on September 25, 2022. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Reedy, Joe (February 13, 2023). "This year's Super Bowl was the third-most watched in history—and Rihanna's stunning halftime show did even better". Fortune. Archived from the original on February 14, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Richards, Chris (February 12, 2023). "Rihanna won big at the Super Bowl — and without losing her mystique". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on February 13, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2023. "Rihanna's 2023 Super Bowl Halftime Show Is Now the Most-Watched of All Time". Yahoo! Sports. May 2, 2023. Archived from the original on May 2, 2023. Retrieved May 2, 2023. Rindner, Grant (October 26, 2022). "The Rihanna Drought is Finally Ending This Friday with a New Song". GQ. Archived from the original on November 2, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Mckay, Karelle (January 24, 2023). "Rihanna Receives First Oscar Nomination for Original Song 'Lift Me Up'". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on January 24, 2023. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Madden, Sidney (March 21, 2017). "19 of Rihanna's Best Hip-Hop Collaborations Over the Years". XXL. Archived from the original on August 22, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2018. Scott, Walter (July 14, 2017). "5 Things You Didn't Know About Rihanna". Parade. Archived from the original on October 10, 2023. Retrieved April 12, 2018. Kristobak, Ryan (May 20, 2014). "Comparing The Top Artists, Past And Present, By Vocal Range". HuffPost. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Skinner, James (November 15, 2010). "Music – Review of Rihanna – Loud". BBC. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved January 29, 2011. Gill, Andy (November 12, 2010). "Album: Rihanna, Loud (Mercury)". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on November 15, 2010. Retrieved October 25, 2012. Hampp, Andrew (November 17, 2012). "Rihanna, 'Unapologetic': Track-By-Track Review". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Caramanica, Jon (November 20, 2012). "Rihanna's Album 'Unapologetic' Makes Most of Her Talent". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 30, 2018. Retrieved July 10, 2013. "The 200 Greatest Singers of All Time". Rolling Stone. January 1, 2023. Archived from the original on July 14, 2023. Retrieved July 14, 2023. Jones, Steve (November 21, 2009). "Rihanna Plotted Her Path To Success in First MTV News Interview". MTV. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Retrieved February 17, 2016. Tecson, Brandee J. (February 22, 2006). "Rihanna Getting in Touch With Her Rock Side For Next LP". MTV. Archived from the original on June 5, 2014. Retrieved September 27, 2012. "Meet the 8 Artists You'd Never Guess Were in the Rock Hall (#8: Rihanna)". HuffPost. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Jeffries, David. "A Girl Like Me – Rihanna". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on September 19, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2015. Sanneh, Kelefa (September 5, 2005). "Critics Choice: new CDs". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 9, 2010. Retrieved September 27, 2012. Jeffries, David (April 25, 2006). "Review: A Girl like Me". AllMusic. Archived from the original on September 19, 2012. Retrieved September 28, 2012. "Rihanna learned to sing by mimicking Celine Dion". CTV News. Bell Media. March 22, 2015. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2015. Garcia, Patricia (January 28, 2016). "Rihanna's Anti Album Is Anti-Pop—And That's Not a Bad Thing". Vogue. Archived from the original on March 2, 2023. Retrieved July 29, 2017. Cinquemani, Sal (May 22, 2007). "Rihanna Good Girl Gone Bad – Slant Magazine". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on January 11, 2016. Retrieved November 13, 2015. Birchmeier, Jason (April 25, 2006). "Review: A Girl like Me". AllMusic. Archived from the original on November 26, 2015. Retrieved November 13, 2015. "Album Review: Rihanna — Good Girl Gone Bad". BBC. May 25, 2007. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved June 1, 2009. Robinson, Peter (June 16, 2007). "Review: Good Girl Gone Bad". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 25, 2014. Retrieved November 14, 2015. Vena, Jocelyn (November 24, 2009). "Rihanna 'Vented' On Her Just-Released Rated R Album". MTV. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Vena, Jocelyn (October 29, 2010). "Rihanna's Loud Preview: Eminem Gets Dark On Otherwise Light LP". MTV. Archived from the original on August 25, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Sciarretto, Amy (November 23, 2011). "Rihanna – 'Talk That Talk' – Album Review". Popcrush. Archived from the original on November 27, 2011. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Vena, Jocelyn (November 9, 2009). "Rihanna's Loud Continues To Leak Online". MTV. Archived from the original on May 14, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Vena, Jocelyn (October 20, 2011). "Is Rihanna Really The New Madonna?". MTV. Archived from the original on January 29, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Sciarretto, Amy (October 21, 2010). "Rihanna Samples Avril Lavigne on 'Loud'". Artistdirect. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved September 27, 2012. Corner, Lewis (July 21, 2011). "Rihanna: 'Madonna is my biggest inspiration'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Watch a Teenage Rihanna Belt Out Mariah Carey's "Hero" at Her High School Talent Show". VH1. April 29, 2015. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "the tracks that shaped rihanna's life". i-D. February 5, 2015. Archived from the original on November 29, 2015. Retrieved November 15, 2015. "Rihanna says she's inspired by Mariah Carey". The Arizona Republic. The USA Today Network. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved November 15, 2015. "Rihanna Admits Which Divas She Copied While Growing Up". Artistdirect. March 31, 2015. Archived from the original on May 11, 2015. Retrieved November 25, 2015. "Rihanna's Bob Marley Shrine". Contactmusic.com. November 8, 2010. Archived from the original on July 7, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2012. "Rihanna builds shrine to commemorate Bob Marley". NDTV. November 9, 2010. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Retrieved June 13, 2012. Kreps, Daniel (January 20, 2010). "Rihanna Covers Bob Marley's "Redemption Song" for Haiti Relief". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 26, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna: 'I'Ll Learn From Whitney'S Mistakes'". Contactmusic.com. May 5, 2006. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2012. Warner, Kara (April 2, 2012). "Rihanna Would Give Her 'Entire Life' To Play Whitney Houston". MTV. Archived from the original on November 27, 2015. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Collins, Hattie (November 29, 2009). "Janet Jackson on surviving the family circus and missing Michael". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Rihanna – Fashion Inspired By Bob Marley, Tupac & Aaliyah Archived December 13, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Shelby.tv. Retrieved June 5, 2014. "Rihanna advises Idols to work like they have a hit". CTV.ca. Archived from the original on May 19, 2008. Retrieved May 23, 2009. Strecker, Erin (October 30, 2014). "Remember That Time Rihanna Performed Destiny's Child Songs for Destiny's Child?". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "ARTISTdirect's Exclusive Interview With Rihanna!". Artistdirect. May 12, 2006. Archived from the original on April 23, 2008. Retrieved May 23, 2008. those were the kinds of artists that always influenced me. Celine Dion, Mandy Moore, Mariah Carey, Whitney Houston, Destiny's Child. "10 Things You Never Knew About... Grace Jones". Clash. June 22, 2010. Archived from the original on December 2, 2012. Retrieved January 1, 2012. "Rihanna on the '90s Beauty Icon Who Has Inspired Her Many Looks". Vogue. Archived from the original on August 3, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2017. "Jay-Z's Latest Def Jam Artist 'Rihanna' Ready To Take Over!". SixShot.com. June 8, 2005. Archived from the original on April 27, 2006. Retrieved May 23, 2009. "21 Artists That Wouldn't Be The Same Without Prince". NME. Archived from the original on April 26, 2016. "Rihanna Interview". kidzworld. Archived from the original on January 31, 2009. Retrieved February 9, 2009. You mention that some of your musical influences are Beyoncé, Alicia Keys and Mariah Carey. "Rihanna: A Dream Come True". SoundSlam.com. Archived from the original on March 2, 2009. Retrieved May 23, 2009. Rodriguez, Jayson (February 23, 2010). "Rihanna Says Clip For 'Rude Boy' Is 'A Pop Art Video'". MTV. Archived from the original on March 31, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Vena, Jocelyn (May 16, 2011). "Rihanna Director Talks Upcoming 'Man Down' Video". MTV. Archived from the original on February 15, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Bream, Jon (2008). "Hush Hush Rihanna; The decade's hottest pop diva is all a-twitter about Monday's Jingle Ball. But don't ask about costar and boyfriend Chris Brown – her lips are sealed". Star Tribune. p. E.1. ISSN 0895-2825. Epaminondas, George (August 2008). "Rihanna, Revealed". InStyle. Vol. 15, no. 8. p. 196. ISSN 1076-0830. Rodriguez, Jayson (September 5, 2007). "Rihanna's 'Painful' 'Umbrella' Shoot Kept Her on Her Toes: VMA Lens Recap". MTV. Archived from the original on February 14, 2010. Retrieved September 24, 2012. Wener, Ben; Fadroski, Kelli Skye (October 2, 2008). "Making mix discs for your creeptastic party? Pick from our Halloween 50". The Orange County Register. Graham, Charne (October 25, 2011). "Rihanna's Top 5 Most Controversial Videos". Houston Press. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved September 26, 2012. Graham, Charne (October 25, 2011). "Rihanna's Top 5 Most Controversial Videos". Houston Press. Archived from the original on February 26, 2012. Retrieved September 25, 2012. Dinh, James (May 31, 2011). "Rihanna Pulls The Trigger In 'Man Down' Video". MTV. Archived from the original on January 1, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna's video for 'We Found Love' is "a disgrace", say anti-rape campaigners". NME. October 26, 2011. Archived from the original on November 27, 2011. Retrieved September 25, 2012. "Rihanna Beats Lady GaGa To 2 Billion YouTube Hits". May 4, 2013. Archived from the original on January 28, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2012. Armstrong, Denis (July 14, 2006). "Canoe – Jam! Music – Artists – ConcertReviews – Concert Review". Canoe.ca. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved June 4, 2009.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Mapes, Jillan (August 23, 2011). "MTV VMAs' 10 Best Performances Ever: Poll Results". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 30, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Malaysia Muslims want Rihanna concert banned because 'she is too sexy'". The Daily Telegraph. London. January 22, 2009. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved September 24, 2012. Sinclair, David (December 18, 2007). "Rihanna Live Reviews". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on June 15, 2011. Retrieved September 24, 2012. Montgomery, James (October 3, 2011). "MTV Mobile News: Rihanna Says She's No Role Model". MTV. Archived from the original on May 14, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2012. Mangum, Aja (March 24, 2014). "Rihanna to Be Named CFDA Fashion Icon: A Look Back at Her Most Head-Turning Style Moments". People. StyleWatch. Archived from the original on March 24, 2014. Retrieved September 6, 2015. Mangum, Aja (June 3, 2009). "Rihanna: Beauty Chameleon". New York. Archived from the original on June 7, 2009. Retrieved June 5, 2009. Charnas, Dan (April 26, 2006). "Quick Spin". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 20, 2011. Retrieved May 23, 2009. Taylor, Amina (November 25, 2005). "Move over, Beyoncé". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on October 1, 2013. Retrieved June 1, 2009. "Rihanna: "There's nobody really in my league"". Digital Spy. January 9, 2012. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved June 17, 2012. Markman, Rob (August 20, 2012). "Rihanna 'Felt Stifled' By Def Jam's Pop-Princess Blueprint". MTV. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved October 8, 2015. Markman, Rob (August 20, 2012). "Rihanna Felt 'Claustrophobic' In Early Def Jam Days". MTV. Archived from the original on August 24, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna's Hair Through The Years". Us Magazine. May 17, 2012. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Retrieved October 19, 2012. "Rihanna Biography". People. Archived from the original on December 26, 2014. Retrieved November 20, 2014. Amarca, Nico (November 25, 2015). "Rihanna's Aesthetic Evolution". Highsnobiety. Archived from the original on July 3, 2016. Retrieved November 27, 2015. Hebert, Emily (June 3, 2010). "Rihanna's Hairstyles Gallery". Elle. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Retrieved October 19, 2012. "Rihanna's hairstyles in pictures". The Daily Telegraph. London. September 7, 2012. Archived from the original on April 30, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2012. "You'll Never Believe Who Inspires Rihanna's Passion for Fashion". ABC. October 1, 2013. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved November 27, 2015. Harp, Justin (March 17, 2011). "Rihanna: 'I take risks with fashion'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved October 18, 2012. Cartner-Morley, Jess (July 17, 2012). "Rihanna: evolution of a style icon". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on February 20, 2013. Retrieved October 18, 2012. Nome, Valerie (October 2, 2009). "Miranda Miranda Lambert admires Rihanna Admires Rihanna's Fashion Risks". OK!. Archived from the original on December 19, 2012. Retrieved October 18, 2012. Lasane, Andrew (April 27, 2015). "Balmain Designer Olivier Rousteing Says Rihanna Is the New Madonna, David Bowie, Michael Jackson, and Prince of Fashion". Complex. Archived from the original on April 29, 2023. Retrieved November 27, 2015. "Rihanna's 'daring sexuality' praised by 'Vagina Monologues' writer". Digital Spy. May 11, 2013. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved May 9, 2013. Liebling-Goldberg, Melissa (September 17, 2008). "PEOPLE'S 10 Best Dressed Stars of 2008". People. Archived from the original on April 22, 2012. Retrieved May 26, 2009. "Rihanna Is the Sexiest Woman Alive". Esquire. October 11, 2011. Archived from the original on April 17, 2013. Retrieved October 15, 2011. Nostro, Lauren; Patterson, Julian (December 10, 2012). "The 100 Hottest female Singers of All Time". Complex. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved August 11, 2013. "Rihanna "Uncomfortable" Being A Sex Symbol". MTV UK. March 21, 2011. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. Retrieved August 11, 2013. "Rihanna 'Felt Stifled' By Def Jam's Pop-Princess Blueprint". BET. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved August 11, 2013. Barr, Sabrina (May 4, 2019). "Rihanna's Best Looks at the Met Gala Through the Years". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 7, 2019. Retrieved November 7, 2019. "Go Ask Anna: Rihanna Talks Her Dream Wedding Dress, the Met Ball, and Her New Album". Vogue Videos. Archived from the original on November 8, 2019. Retrieved November 7, 2019. Graham, Bre (October 18, 2017). "Guo Pei: the Chinese designer who made Rihanna's omelette dress". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 7, 2019. Retrieved November 7, 2019. Bobb, Brooke (April 23, 2018). "There's a Mesmerizing New Documentary About Guo Pei, Designer of Rihanna's 2015 Met Gala Gown". Vogue. Archived from the original on November 7, 2019. Retrieved November 7, 2019. Park, Andrea (May 8, 2018). "Rihanna Showed Up to the 2018 Met Gala Dressed Like an Actual Pope". Glamour. Archived from the original on November 7, 2019. Retrieved November 7, 2019. Smith, Da'Shan (June 2017). "10 Years After 'Good Girl Gone Bad,' Rihanna Has Surpassed Her Goal of Becoming the 'Black Madonna'". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Agafonov, Mikhael (March 29, 2017). "Ten years ago, 'Umbrella' turned Rihanna into a pop icon". DazeDigital. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 24, 2017. Gracie, Bianca (June 2, 2017). "Rihanna's 'Good Girl Gone Bad' Turns 10: Crafting A Rule-Breaking Pop Culture Icon". Vibe. Archived from the original on September 5, 2017. Retrieved November 24, 2017. Cartner-Morley, Jess (September 15, 2017). "Rihanna: the pop star who became a fashion powerhouse". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 24, 2017. Murphy, Sam (June 6, 2017). "'Good Girl Gone Bad' Transformed Rihanna From A Popstar to an Icon". The Interns. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 24, 2017. Levine, Nick (June 10, 2008). "Rihanna: 'Good Girl Gone Bad Reloaded'". Digital Spy. Hearst Magazines UK. Archived from the original on October 25, 2009. Retrieved April 11, 2013. "500 Greatest Songs of All Time: Rihanna Featuring Jay-Z, 'Umbrella'". Rolling Stone. December 11, 2003. Archived from the original on June 30, 2018. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time". Rolling Stone. September 22, 2020. Archived from the original on October 1, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2020. Rani, Taj (March 2, 2016). "How Rihanna's 'Work' Made Dancehall Reign in Pop (Again)". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 9, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Greene, Jayson (April 5, 2017). "Is Rihanna the Most Influential Pop Singer of the Past Decade?". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on July 4, 2023. Retrieved November 24, 2017. McCartney, Stella (April 18, 2012). "The World's 100 Most Influential People: 2012". Time. Archived from the original on December 24, 2016. Retrieved September 9, 2016. "The 2011 Time Pool". Time. April 4, 2011. Archived from the original on April 7, 2011. Retrieved February 22, 2013. "Best Dressed 2018". Net a Porter. Archived from the original on December 30, 2018. Retrieved December 29, 2018. Introducing the 2014 CFDA Fashion Icon of the Year... Archived April 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. CFDA (March 24, 2014). Retrieved June 5, 2014. "The Hot 100's Top Artists of All Time". Billboard. August 2, 2018. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Zellner, Xander (August 2, 2018). "Hot 100 Turns 60! The Top 60 Female Artists of All-Time, From Madonna to Mariah Carey & More". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Hot 100 55th Anniversary: Top 100 Songs Word Cloud, Top Artists Map & More". Billboard. August 4, 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "The Ultimate Ranking of Pop Stardom". Time. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2016. Pomerantz, Dorothy (August 9, 2012). "Rihanna Tops Our List of Social Networking Superstars". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 4, 2023. Retrieved August 19, 2013. "Rihanna Named Britain's Most Influential Pop Star". Contact Music. March 29, 2013. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved June 23, 2013. Lang, Cady. "Lorde Says Rihanna Inspired One of the Most Emotional Tracks on Her Latest Album". Time. Archived from the original on June 3, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2017. Wright, Hayden. "Sam Smith Talks George Michael, Rihanna's Influence". Radio.com. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 25, 2017. "Little Mix cite Rita Ora and Rihanna as style influences". Press Party. November 22, 2012. Archived from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved November 22, 2013. Garza, Frida (June 28, 2019). "Billie Eilish Says She Uses Fashion As a 'Defense Mechanism'". Jezebel.com. Archived from the original on July 1, 2019. Retrieved November 13, 2019. "Selena Gomez Looks Up To Rihanna". Disney Dreaming. December 1, 2009. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2013. "Rihanna no quiso hablar con Justin Bieber en los Billboard" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved February 23, 2013. "Meet Brit Pop Star Ellie Goulding". Us Weekly. May 12, 2011. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Get to Know: Kim Petras". MTV. August 22, 2019. Archived from the original on February 27, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. "Jennie's No. 1 idol". Elle Korea. Archived from the original on July 18, 2018. Retrieved April 11, 2019. Kaye, Ben (September 11, 2017). "Marilyn Manson announces new album, Heaven Upside Down, shares "We Know Where You Fucking Live": Stream". Consequence. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Jessie J Glad She Kept Rihanna Song for Herself". Rap-Up. January 6, 2011. Archived from the original on October 13, 2012. Retrieved March 23, 2016. "SZA shares 'CTRL' release date & how Rihanna influenced the album". Revolt.TV. January 23, 2017. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved January 11, 2019. "TeenNick Top 10: An Interview With Fifth Harmony". Teen Nick. August 22, 2013. Archived from the original on August 22, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2016. Lee, Christina (February 16, 2017). "Camila Cabello Covers 'Billboard,' Previews New Music: 6 Photos". Idolator. Retrieved November 24, 2017.[permanent dead link] "Lovato 'inspired by Rihanna R&B sound'". Digital Spy. August 7, 2010. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "CLUBGIRL: Alexandra Stan – Wonderland Magazine". June 12, 2012. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Pareles, Jon (November 17, 2015). "Grimes, a D.I.Y. Indie Sensation, Ramps Up Her Sound". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 25, 2023. Retrieved October 10, 2016. Daramola, Israel (July 29, 2019). "Sleater-Kinney Talk Janet Weiss' Departure and Being Inspired by Rihanna in New Interview". Spin. Archived from the original on July 30, 2019. Retrieved July 31, 2019. Trunick, Austin (January 22, 2013). "Track-by-Track: Tegan and Sara's Heartthrob Part Two". Under the Radar. Archived from the original on May 30, 2013. Retrieved April 7, 2015. Copsey, Robert (February 13, 2013). "Tegan and Sara song 'I Was A Fool' inspired by Rihanna". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Corner, Lewis; Allen, Chris (May 3, 2012). "Cover Drive: 'We are influenced by Bob Marley, Gwen Stefani'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 8, 2018. Retrieved December 4, 2015. Lewis, Casey (May 9, 2013). "Cher Lloyd on Her Star-Studded Collaborations with Demi Lovato and Ne-Yo". Archived from the original on June 7, 2023. Retrieved August 19, 2017. Sherburne, Philip (October 5, 2017). "Bad Gyal Is a Rihanna-Loving Dancehall Badass from Barcelona". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on December 5, 2022. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Levine, Nick (August 11, 2016). "Era Istrefi Is the 22-Year-Old Albanian Singer Who Got Famous in 24 Hours". Vice. Retrieved August 17, 2022. G, C (February 22, 2008). "All hail Rihanna". Nation Newspaper. Archived from the original on February 26, 2008. Retrieved February 22, 2008. "Rihanna Day in Barbados". Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved November 17, 2016. "Celebrate 'Rihanna Day' in Barbados". January 31, 2009. Retrieved November 17, 2016. "50 Things You Didn't Know About Rihanna". Complex Networks. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Did You Know That in Barbados People Celebrate a national "Rihanna"…". Archived from the original on November 17, 2016. Retrieved November 17, 2016. "Rihanna named Humanitarian of Year". Harvard Gazette. February 22, 2017. Bruner, Raisa. "What It's Like Inside Rihanna Power Player-Filled Diamond Ball". Time. Retrieved September 28, 2017. Respers France, Lisa (September 21, 2018). "Rihanna appointed an ambassador of Barbados". CNN. Retrieved September 21, 2018. Austin, Sharon (September 20, 2018). "Rihanna – Ambassador Extraordinary & Plenipotentiary". Barbados Government Information Service. Retrieved January 23, 2019. "Rihanna appointed as ambassador by Barbados". BBC News. September 22, 2018. Retrieved September 23, 2018. Gilchrist, Karen (December 12, 2019). "Forbes names the world's most powerful women of 2019". CNBC. "Rihanna rockets on to Sunday Times Rich List". BBC News. May 13, 2020. Retrieved May 13, 2020. Kreps, Daniel (February 23, 2020). "See Rihanna's Powerful NAACP Image Awards Speech". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 30, 2020. "Coco Perez A Sneak Peek at Rihanna's Perfume!". cocoperez.com. October 20, 2010. Archived from the original on December 30, 2010. Retrieved December 18, 2010. Nika, Colleen (November 21, 2011). "Rihanna Rebels With New Fragrance, Shocking Shoes". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 29, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna to Launch New Fragrance Rebelle". BET. November 21, 2011. Archived from the original on November 25, 2011. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Meet Rebelle, Rihanna's New Fragrance – The Hook". Billboard. October 19, 2011. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Kitchens, Simone (November 23, 2012). "Black Friday Deals 2012: Rihanna's New Fragrance Plus Big Deals on Smashbox, MAC Cosmetics And More (PHOTOS)". HuffPost. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna Unveils 'Rogue' Fragrance Ad". Rap-Up.com. July 17, 2013. Retrieved January 19, 2014. "Rihanna Reveals New Fragrance: RiRi". BallerStatus.com. July 22, 2015. Archived from the original on August 19, 2015. Sisario, Ben (March 13, 2015). "Jay Z Buys the Music Streaming Firm, Aspiro". The New York Times. Retrieved March 31, 2015. Flanagan, Andrew (March 30, 2015). "It's Official: Jay Z's Historic Tidal Launches With 16 Artist Stakeholders". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Sisario, Ben (March 30, 2015). "Jay Z Reveals Plans for Tidal, a Streaming Music Service". The New York Times. Retrieved March 31, 2015. Wortham, Jenna (February 8, 2016). "Rihanna's 'Anti' Is the Record You Make When You Don't Need to Sell Records". The New York Times. "Westbury Road Entertainment, LLC". Business Lookup. Archived from the original on September 6, 2017. Retrieved September 5, 2017. "Rihanna Launches Her Own Record Label". January 25, 2015. "Rihanna Is First Artist To Cross 100 Million Song Certifications, Becomes RIAA's Top Awarded Singles Artist". RIAA. July 1, 2015. "Meet Melissa Forde: Everything You Need To Know About Rihanna's BFF". July 23, 2013. "Rihanna Launches Beauty and Photo Agencies". Rap-Up. Retrieved November 17, 2015. "Rihanna makes history with new label". BBC News. May 10, 2019. Retrieved May 11, 2019. Friedman, Vanessa; Paton, Elizabeth (February 10, 2021). "Rihanna and LVMH Are Taking a Break". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Harris, Jeremy O. (May 20, 2019). "Rihanna Opens Up About Her New Clothing Line, the Future of Fashion, and Her Next Album". T. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (January 16, 2019). "Rihanna sues father overuse of Fenty brand name". The Guardian. Retrieved January 17, 2019. "Rihanna drops legal case against her father". BBC News. September 8, 2021. Retrieved January 28, 2022. "Fenty's Fortune: Rihanna Is Now Officially A Billionaire". Forbes. August 4, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2021. "Rihanna to Launch Fenty Beauty Line This Fall". Rap-Up. Retrieved August 19, 2017. Karsen, Shira (September 7, 2017). "Rihanna's Fenty Beauty Collection Has Arrived". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Wu, Sarah (September 7, 2017). "EVERY SINGLE Fenty Beauty Product You Need Is Now on Instagram". Teen Vogue. "The 25 Best Inventions of 2017". Time. November 16, 2017. Retrieved November 16, 2023. Fetto, Funmi (April 6, 2020). "How Fenty Beauty Changed The State Of Play In The Industry". Vogue. Newbold, Alice (June 29, 2018). "Savage X Fenty: Everything We Know About Rihanna's Underwear Line". British Vogue. Moniuszko, Sara M. (May 11, 2018). "Is Rihanna's Savage X Fenty lingerie really size inclusive?". USA Today. Marine, Brooke (September 20, 2019). "Normani Was the Real Star of the Savage x Fenty Fashion Show". W. Retrieved October 24, 2019. Yoo, Noah (September 17, 2020). "Rihanna Announces 2020 Savage x Fenty Fashion Show Special With Travis Scott, Rosalía, More". Pitchfork. Retrieved September 17, 2020. Valenti, Lauren (July 30, 2020). "Fenty Skin Is Finally Here—Here's Everything You Need to Know, According to Rihanna Herself". Vogue. Retrieved December 18, 2020. Block, Valerie (October 24, 2005). "Record biz's new threat: advertising; Brands use spots to promote artists, cut out middleman; licensing fees drop.(News)". AccessMyLibrary.com. Archived from the original on July 3, 2012. Retrieved May 23, 2009. "Optus penguins to rock Rihanna's Last Girl on Earth Tour in February/March, starting tonight". Campaign Brief. August 17, 2010. Retrieved March 7, 2012. "Video: Rihanna's 'So Kodak' Commercial". Rap-Up. Retrieved October 15, 2010. "Rihanna (trade paperback)". Rizzoli USA. Retrieved September 6, 2010. "Long-Haired Rihanna Boards Cruise for Nivea Campaign". PopCrush. May 10, 2011. Retrieved May 30, 2011. Brooks Adickman, Erika (June 4, 2012). "Rihanna's Vita Coco Campaign With Terry Richardson: Go Behind The Scenes". Idolator.com. Retrieved January 19, 2014. Patel, Arati (July 12, 2012). "Rihanna to Appear on UK Fashion Series 'Styled to Rock'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna's fashion show 'Styled to Rock' to air on Bravo". Digital Spy. September 30, 2013. Retrieved January 19, 2014. Hislop, Rachel (October 21, 2013). "Rihanna Announces Holiday Collection With M.A.C. (PHOTOS)". Global Grind. Retrieved January 19, 2014. "Rihanna And Jay-Z Partner With Budweiser For Global 'Made For Music' Campaign". VIBE. July 10, 2013. Archived from the original on July 11, 2013. Retrieved July 10, 2013. "Rihanna says Fashion is her defense mechanism after receiving Fashion Icon Award". Biography.com. April 30, 2005. Retrieved November 8, 2016. "Rihanna Designs". Vogue. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved June 8, 2012. "Rihanna launches River Island collection". MTV. February 17, 2013. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved February 17, 2013. "Rihanna on her second River Island line". Raidió Teilifís Éireann. May 15, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2013. "Rihanna For River Island Final Christmas Collection – Pictures and Videos (Vogue.com UK)". Vogue. UK. October 21, 2013. Archived from the original on August 4, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2014. "Rihanna Teams Up With Stance For Sock Collection". BallerStatus.com. July 15, 2015. Archived from the original on August 19, 2015. "Rihanna's Latest Work: An All-Denim Shoe Line with Manolo Blahnik!". People. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2016. Low, Carver (May 25, 2016). "Rihanna partners with Dior to create sunglasses". Hotnewhiphop. Retrieved May 25, 2016. Thompson, Avery (March 14, 2015). "Rihanna's Dior Campaign: Singer Is First Black Woman To Be Face Of Iconic Brand". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved March 19, 2015. Adamczyk, Alicia (December 16, 2014). "Rihanna Named Creative Director of Puma". Forbes. Retrieved October 13, 2015. Mercer, Amirah (May 25, 2016). "How Rihanna's Puma Creeper Became the Year's Must-Have Shoe". Vanity Fair. Retrieved August 19, 2017. Lang, Cady. "Guess How Quickly Rihanna's Puma Sneakers Sold Out Online". Time. Retrieved August 19, 2017. Rooney, Kyle (June 14, 2016). "Rihanna's PUMA collection set to release". Hotnewhiphop. Retrieved June 14, 2016. "Puma Sales Skyrocket Thanks To Kylie Jenner And Rihanna, Kylie Not Backing Down Despite Kanye's Competition". April 30, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2017. Dinh, James (September 2, 2010). "Rihanna Begins Filming 'Battleship' In Hawaii". MTV. Archived from the original on September 4, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Genzlinger, Neil (May 17, 2012). "Aliens, Your Weapons Are Utterly Useless Against Our Rogues". The New York Times. Retrieved September 11, 2012. Abrams, Natalie (January 31, 2017). "Bates Motel: Get your exclusive first look at Rihanna". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 4, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2017. "Bates Motel: Season 5 Reviews". Metacritic. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved February 25, 2017. Tiffany, Kaitlyn (October 28, 2015). "Rihanna has been cast in 'a big part' in Luc Besson's next sci-fi epic". The Verge. Retrieved October 28, 2015. "Luc Besson's next movie is his biggest sci-fi film since The Fifth Element". May 12, 2015. Washington, Arlene (October 5, 2016). "All-Female 'Ocean's 8' Gets Summer 2018 Release". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 6, 2016. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Coggan, Devan (August 10, 2016). "Ocean's Eight: Rihanna, Helena Bonham Carter, Anne Hathaway, and more join Sandra Bullock". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved August 10, 2016. "Ocean's 8 worldwide box office gross". Box Office Mojo. "Childish Gambino visitó la Fábrica de Arte Cubano (+ Foto)". Vistar Magazine. August 14, 2018. "Watch the surprise trailer for Rihanna and Donald Glover's new film 'Guava Island' – NME". NME. November 25, 2018. Retrieved November 25, 2018. O'Falt, Chris (August 17, 2018). "Rihanna and Donald Glover in Cuba: 'Guava Island' Is Likely Much Bigger Than a Music Video – Report". indiewire.com. Retrieved November 6, 2018. Sperling, Nicole (April 10, 2019). "Exclusive: Inside Amazon's Plan for Donald Glover's Secret, Rihanna-Starring Movie". Vanity Fair. Retrieved April 10, 2019. Silverman, Stephen M. (March 27, 2008). "Rihanna Touring for Kids in Need". People. Retrieved June 9, 2009. "The Believe Foundation – founded by Rihanna". Believerihanna.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2008. Retrieved August 27, 2010. "New "Love" Bracelet Celebs Announced". TMZ.com. February 6, 2007. Retrieved January 19, 2014. Tamar, Anitai (December 20, 2007). "Rihanna, Good Charlotte & Timbaland Team Up With H&M To Fight AIDS". MTV. Archived from the original on May 25, 2009. Retrieved May 14, 2009. "Rihanna Hooks Up With H&M For New Line". Entertainment Tonight. January 1, 2008. Archived from the original on April 18, 2008. Retrieved June 25, 2009. Silverman, Stephen M. (March 28, 2008). "Rihanna Touring for Kids in Need". People. Retrieved February 23, 2010. "Rihanna kicks off series of charity shows". NME. March 27, 2008. Retrieved February 23, 2010. "Buzz Briefs: Remy Ma, Rihanna". CBS News. March 27, 2008. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna Plans Charity Concerts". The Insider. March 30, 2008. Archived from the original on February 15, 2010. Retrieved February 23, 2010. "Female Stars Team for Cancer Charity Tune". Billboard. August 19, 2008. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna is GPE's Global Ambassador". www.globalpartnership.org. Archived from the original on October 8, 2019. Retrieved September 10, 2019. "Mission / Vision of CLF". claralionelfoundation.org. Archived from the original on May 1, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. "Rihanna Donates $1.75 Million to Barbados Hospital in Honor of Her Late Grandma". E!. December 23, 2012. Retrieved April 21, 2016. "Diamond Ball". claralionelfoundation.org. Clara Lionel Foundation. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. "Rihanna Raises Over $3 Million & Lionel Richie Reclaims 'Hello' at Diamond Ball". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Goldberg, Eleanor (January 31, 2012). "Rihanna, Calvin Harris, Other Celebs Perform For Charity on Grammy Night". HuffPost. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Taylor Swift Named 2012's Most Charitable Star, Rihanna Gives $1.75 Million". Billboard. December 26, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna Strips Down for MAC Viva Glam". Rap-Up.com. Retrieved January 19, 2014. Lee, Wendy (March 21, 2020). "Rihanna's Clara Lionel Foundation donates $5 million toward coronavirus relief". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 5, 2020. Shaffer, Claire (March 27, 2020). "Rihanna Donates COVID-19 Protective Supplies to New York State". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Davis, Jessica (March 24, 2020). "Rihanna donates $5 million to help coronavirus relief". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Murphy, Chris (April 9, 2020). "Rihanna Donates $2.1 Million to Domestic Violence Victims Affected by Quarantine". Vulture. Retrieved April 9, 2020. "Rihanna calls for financial reform to help climate-struck communities. Here's why she can talk". Euronews. June 21, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Sieczkowski, Cavan (February 2, 2016). "Rihanna Gets Explicit Telling Indiana Crowd How She Really Feels About Anti-LGBT Law". HuffPost. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Beyonce, Rihanna: '23 Ways You Could Be Killed If You Are Black'". July 14, 2016. Iasimone, Ashley (January 28, 2017). "Rihanna Calls President Trump 'An Immoral Pig' Over Immigration Order". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Petter, Olivia (June 24, 2019). "Rihanna criticises Trump's immigration policies with Fenty Instagram post". The Independent. Ramos, Dino-Ray (August 4, 2019). "Hollywood Reacts To El Paso and Dayton Shootings; Celebs Call Out Trump and McConnell, Demand Gun Control". Deadline Hollywood. Gajanan, Mahita (October 9, 2019). "'I Couldn't Be an Enabler.' Rihanna Discusses Why She Turned Down the 2019 Super Bowl Halftime Show". TIME. "Rihanna on India protests: 'Why aren't we talking about this?!'". Al Jazeera English. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Rihanna will pay $39K per month for Chinatown penthouse". October 11, 2013. Retrieved October 11, 2013. "A Look inside the Hollywood Hills home Rihanna is selling". Vogue Australia. December 10, 2018. Pomerantz, Dorothy (May 16, 2012). "The World's Most Powerful Celebrities". Forbes. Retrieved October 18, 2012. Penrose, Nerisha (May 3, 2018). "A Timeline of Rihanna & Drake's Complicated Relationship". Billboard. Retrieved June 6, 2019. "Rihanna breaks silence over Chris Brown: 'if it's a mistake, it's my mistake'". The Daily Telegraph. London. January 30, 2013. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2013. "Judge Seeks More Review of Chris Brown's Probation". The New York Times. September 24, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2012. "Rihanna And Chris Brown's Road To Friendship". MTV News. October 5, 2012. Archived from the original on October 7, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Chris Brown Expresses His Love For Both Rihanna And Karreuche Tran". MTV News. October 5, 2012. Archived from the original on October 7, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Ravitz, Justin (May 6, 2013). "Chris Brown Confirms Rihanna Breakup: "I Can't Focus on Wife-ing" Her". Us Weekly. Retrieved May 6, 2013. "A Complete Timeline of Rihanna and Hassan Jameel's Romance". Vogue Arabia. February 1, 2018. Retrieved May 4, 2018. Nnadi, Chioma (May 3, 2018). "Rihanna on Body Image, Turning 30, and Staying Real—No Matter What". Vogue. Retrieved May 4, 2018. Boucher, Ashley (January 22, 2020). "Rihanna and Billionaire Boyfriend Hassan Jameel Split After Nearly 3 Years of Dating". People. Retrieved January 25, 2020. Hine, Samuel (May 19, 2021). "A$AP Rocky on Rihanna, Swedish Prison, and His Next Album". GQ. Retrieved October 23, 2021. "A$AP Rocky confirms he is dating Rihanna". BBC News. May 20, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2021. Carras, Christi (May 19, 2021). "ASAP Rocky confirms what everyone knew: He and Rihanna are in love". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 25, 2021. Gulla, Emily (September 23, 2021). "Rihanna just shared an insight into her and ASAP Rocky's sex life". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved October 23, 2021. VanHoose, Benjamin; Slater, Georgia (January 31, 2022). "Rihanna Is Pregnant! Singer and Fashion Icon Expecting First Baby with A$AP Rocky". People. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Slater, Georgia (May 19, 2022). "Rihanna Welcomes First Baby with A$AP Rocky". People. Retrieved May 19, 2022. Yasharoff, Hannah. "Rihanna, A$AP Rocky welcome first child after internet-breaking pregnancy: Reports". USA Today. Retrieved May 19, 2022. Mier, Tomás (May 19, 2022). "Rihanna Welcomes Baby With A$AP Rocky". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 19, 2022. Savoy, Starr. "Rihanna and ASAP Rocky's Son Allegedly Shares Name With Wu-Tang Icon RZA". Complex. Retrieved September 29, 2023. Earl, William (February 13, 2023). "Rihanna Is Officially Pregnant, Rep Confirms After Super Bowl Performance". Variety. Retrieved February 13, 2023. Wendowski, Andrew (February 12, 2023). "BREAKING: Rihanna Confirms She's Pregnant, Becomes First Pregnant Woman To Headline Super Bowl Halftime Show". Music Mayhem Magazine. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Millington, Maxwell (February 13, 2023). "Rihanna first to perform pregnant at Super Bowl halftime". Axios. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Hattersley, Giles (February 15, 2023). "Rihanna Reborn: How a Megastar Became a Mother". British Vogue. "Rihanna and A$AP Rocky's Newborn Baby's Name Revealed". People. September 8, 2023. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "Sources: Brown's alleged victim was girlfriend Rihanna". CNN. February 9, 2009. Retrieved March 30, 2010. Kaufman, Gil (March 25, 2009). "'Rihanna's Law,' Spurred By Photo Leak, Aims To Prevent Victim Exploitation". MTV. Archived from the original on March 27, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Greenblatt, Leah (May 28, 2009). "Rihanna may testify in Chris Brown hearing June 22". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Chris Brown Cops Plea – No Jail Time". TMZ.com. June 22, 2009. Retrieved June 22, 2009. Huggins, Amy (August 31, 2009). "Chris Brown says he still loves Rihanna". CNN. Retrieved September 3, 2009. "Yes, Chris Brown remembers Rihanna beating". Today.com. September 1, 2009. Retrieved September 3, 2009. Kreps, Daniel (September 1, 2009). "Chris Brown Clarifies King Interview, Says He Recalls Rihanna Incident". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Lapowsky, Issie (August 31, 2009). "Chris Brown on 'Larry King Life': Relationship with Rihanna 'was sort of like Romeo and Juliet'". New York Daily News. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Rihanna appointed as ambassador by Barbados". BBC News. September 22, 2018. Retrieved December 14, 2018. "Rihanna to Receive 'AMA Icon Award'". Billboard. November 15, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Tewari, Nidhi (November 21, 2012). "Rihanna to Perform and Receive First Ever Icon Award at the 2013 American Music Awards". International Business Times. Archived from the original on January 6, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2013. "Rihanna to Receive Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at 2016 MTV Video Music Awards". Billboard. August 11, 2016. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "List of Rihanna's Guinness world records". Go Barbados. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved October 11, 2018. Caulfield, Keith (November 17, 2013). "Rihanna Hits 10 Million in U.S. Album Sales". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Hampp, Andrew (November 20, 2012). "Rihanna's 'Unapologetic': The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "The Nielsen Company & Billboard's 2011 Music Industry Report" (Press release). Business Wire. Archived from the original on January 8, 2012. "Rihanna, Lady Gaga and Adele break World Records with digital music sales". Guinness World Records. September 9, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2013. "Rihanna Surpasses 100 Million Singles Certifications". Rap-Up. Jones, Alan (March 16, 2015). "Official Charts Analysis: Sam Smith returns to top Singles and Albums Charts". Music Week. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015.(subscription required) Platon, Adelle (January 28, 2016). "Rihanna Celebrates a Million 'Anti' Downloads on Twitter". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Trust, Gary (February 23, 2016). "Rihanna & Drake Rise to No. 1 on Hot 100 With 'Work'". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Macklemore & Ryan Lewis Make History on Pop Songs Chart". Billboard. June 10, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2022. "Official Charts Analysis: Pharrell Williams LP sells 69k". MusicWeek. March 10, 2014. Archived from the original on March 10, 2014. Retrieved March 10, 2014. "Rihanna racks up 20 million record sales in the UK!". Official Charts Company. April 12, 2013. Retrieved June 26, 2012. "The Official Singles Charts' biggest selling artists of all time revealed!". Official Charts Company. April 12, 2013. Retrieved June 4, 2012. "The Official Top 10 biggest selling female singles artists of all time revealed!". Official Charts Company. April 12, 2013. Archived from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved October 27, 2012. "Adele and Rihanna score UK's latest million selling singles". Official Charts Company. March 7, 2014. Retrieved March 25, 2014. "Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs", Billboard, retrieved October 8, 2017 "R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay", Billboard, retrieved October 8, 2017 "Rhythmic", Billboard, retrieved October 8, 2017 "Rihanna's 30 Top 10 UK singles". Official Charts. Rihanna at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Rihanna at IMDb Rihanna on Twitter