Limassol District (/ˈlɪməsɒl/) or Lemesos (Greek: Λεμεσός) is one of the six districts of Cyprus. As of 2021[update], it had a population of 262,238, 75,7% of which was urban The district's capital city is Limassol. Part of the British Overseas Territory of Akrotiri and Dhekelia forms an enclave on the Akrotiri Peninsula, under the sovereignty of the United Kingdom. The buried ancient city of Amathus is 11 kilometres (6.8 mi) from Limassol. Archaeological excavations have unearthed ruins of the Byzantine period and a tomb of the 7th century BC. The ancient Kolossi Castle, which is located 9 kilometres (5.6 mi) to the west of Limassol, reflects the fall of Acre and history of the Templars and their confiscated property allotted to the Limassol District for cultivation of wine and sugarcane. Limassol District forms much of the southwestern-central part of Cyprus. The Kouris River rises in the southern slopes of Troodos mountains, which lie in the northern part of the district towards the centre of Cyprus, and flows to the sea near the ancient city of Kourion. This river has been dammed by the Kouris Dam, which has caused the near drying up of the river in its lower reaches. Limassol, to the northeast of the Akrotiri peninsula lies on Akrotiri Bay, while Pissouri, to the northwest of the peninsula, lies on Episkopi Bay. Episkopi Bay is a nesting ground for green and loggerhead turtles, both of which are on the IUCN list of endangered species. Amathous Beach, Dassoudi Beach and part of Governor's Beach are also situated in the district. According to Statistical Codes of Municipalities, Communities and Quarters of Cyprus per the Statistical Service of Cyprus (2015), Limassol District has 6 municipalities and 106 communities. Municipalities are written with bold. Agios Amvrosios, Limassol Agios Athanasios, Cyprus Agios Dimitrios, Cyprus Agios Georgios, Limassol Agios Ioannis, Limassol Agios Konstantinos, Cyprus Agios Mamas, Limassol Agios Pavlos, Cyprus Agios Theodoros, Limassol Agios Therapon Agios Thomas, Cyprus Agios Tychonas Agridia Agros, Cyprus Akapnou Akrotiri (village) Akrounta Alassa Alektora Amiantos Anogyra Apesia Apsiou Arakapas Armenochori, Cyprus Arsos, Limassol Asgata Asomatos, Limassol Avdimou Chandria Dierona Dora, Cyprus Doros, Cyprus Dymes Episkopi, Limassol Eptagoneia Erimi Fasoula, Limassol Foini Foinikaria Gerasa, Cyprus Germasogeia Gerovasa Kalo Chorio, Limassol Kaminaria Kantou, Cyprus Kapilio Kato Kivides Kato Mylos Kato Platres Kato Polemidia Kellaki Kissousa Klonari Koilani Kolossi Korfi Kouka, Cyprus Kyperounta Laneia Lemithou Limassol Limnatis, Limassol Lofou Louvaras Malia, Cyprus Mandria, Limassol Mathikoloni Mesa Geitonia Monagri Monagroulli Moni, Cyprus Moniatis Mouttagiaka Omodos Pachna Palaiomylos Palodeia Pano Kivides Pano Polemidia Paramali Paramytha Parekklisia Pelendri Pentakomo Pera Pedi Pissouri Platanisteia Platres Potamiou Potamitissa Prastio (Avdimou) Prastio (Kellaki) Prodromos, Cyprus Pyrgos, Limassol Sanida Silikou Sotira, Limassol Souni–Zanatzia Spitali Sykopetra Trachoni, Limassol Treis Elies Trimiklini Troodos (community) Tserkezoi Vasa Kellakiou Vasa Koilaniou Vikla Vouni Ypsonas Zoopigi The municipalities of Limassol, for administrative purposes, are divided into quarters. An exception is the Ypsonas Municipality. The list below shows alphabetically the quarters per municipality. Agios Athanasios Municipality Agios Athanasios Apostolos Loukas Agios Georgiou Fragkoudi Agios Stylianos Germasogeia Municipality Agia Paraskevi Potamos Germasogeias Kato Polemidia Municipality Archangelou Michael Anthoupolis Apostolos Varnavas Makarios Agios Nikolaos Panayias Evaggelistrias Limassol Municipality Agia Zoni Agia Napa Agia Trias Agia Fyla Agios Antonios Agios Georgiou Agios Ioannis Agios Nektarios Agios Nikolaos Agios Spiridonas Petrou Kai Pavlou Apostolos Andreas Arnaoutogeitonia Zakaki Κatholiki Kapsalos Neapolis Omonoia Panayias Evaggelistrias Tzami Tzentit Tsiflikoudia Mesa Geitonia Municipality Kontovathkia Panthea Prodromos Halkoutsa Agios Athanasios Municipality Agios Athanasios Apostolos Loukas Agios Georgiou Fragkoudi Agios Stylianos Germasogeia Municipality Ayia Paraskevi Potamos Germasogeias Kato Polemidia Municipality Archangelou Michael Anthoupolis Apostolos Varnavas Makarios Agios Nikolaos Panayias Evaggelistrias Limassol Municipality Agia Zoni Agia Napa Agia Trias Agia Fyla Agios Antonios Agios Georgiou Agios Ioannis Agios Nektarios Agios Nikolaos Agios Spiridonas Petrou Kai Pavlou Apostolos Andreas Arnaoutogeitonia Zakaki Κatholiki Kapsalos Neapolis Omonoia Panayias Evaggelistrias Tzami Tzentit Tsiflikoudia Mesa Geitonia Municipality Kontovathkia Panthea Prodromos Halkoutsa Ypsonas Municipality Limassol, as the regional capital and a major centre for European tourism, contains many of the administrative and cultural buildings, and a large number of hotels along the seafront. Limassol District Court is located on Lord Byron Avenue near the Limassol city centre. It consists of a court complex with multiple buildings. The city is known for its wineries, and revelry and nightlife. The Limassol District Archaeological Museum, located in Limassol, has historical artefacts from the towns of Kourion and Amathus. The collections cover several periods, including Preneolithic (Akroteri culture), Early Neolithic (Shillourokambos culture), Neolithic I, Neolithic II (Sotira culture), Chalcolithic, Erimi Culture, Early Bronze Age, Μiddle Bronze Age, Late Bronze Age, Cypro-Geometric period, Cypro-Archaic period, Cypro-Classical period, Hellenistic period, Roman period, and Late Roman/Early Christian/Early Byzantine period. The Painted Churches in the Troödos Region is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and one of the churches, Timios Stavros (Holy Cross) is situated in Pelendri, Limassol District. Including Akrotiri. http://www.cystat.gov.cy/mof/cystat/statistics.nsf/classifications_en/classifications_en?OpenForm Cyprus Statistical Service Classifications] — Degree of Urbanization. "CENSUS OF POPULATION AND HOUSING 2021: PRELIMINARY RESULTS BY DISTRICT AND MUNICIPALITY/COMMUNITY" (PDF). Retrieved 2024-03-10. "CENSUS OF POPULATION AND HOUSING 2021: PRELIMINARY RESULTS BY DISTRICT AND MUNICIPALITY/COMMUNITY" (PDF). Retrieved 2024-03-10. "Cyprus population has grown 9.9% in a decade". Cyprus population has grown 9.9% in a decade. Retrieved 2024-03-10. Weiß et al. 2001, p. 28. Weiß et al. 2001, pp. 26, 28. Jasink & Bombardieri 2010, p. 1. Google (19 April 2015). "Limassol District" (Map). Google Maps. Google. Retrieved 19 April 2015. "Sea turtle mortality in the British Sovereign Base Areas (SBAs) of Episkopi and Akrotiri (Cyprus)". 31st Standing Committee Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitat. Retrieved 19 April 2015. "Statistical Codes of Municipalities, Communities and Quarters of Cyprus per the Statistical Service of Cyprus, 2015". Statistical Service of Cyprus. Archived from the original on 2018-08-04. Retrieved 2018-08-04. "ΣΤΑΤΙΣΤΙΚΟΙ ΚΩΔΙΚΟΙ ΔΗΜΩΝ/ΚΟΙΝΟΤΗΤΩΝ ΚΑΙ ΕΝΟΡΙΩΝ ΤΗΣ ΚΥΠΡΟΥ, 2015". Στατιστική Υπηρεσία της Κυπριακής Δημοκρατίας. Archived from the original on 2018-01-13. Retrieved 2018-07-03. "Limassol District Court". Supreme Court of Cyprus. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2015. Weiß et al. 2001, p. 25. Weiß et al. 2001, p. 26. "The Limassol District Archaeological Museum". Limassol Municipal Government. Archived from the original on 15 May 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2015. "Painted Churches in the Troodos Region". UNESCO. Retrieved 10 May 2015. Jasink, Anna Margherita; Bombardieri, Luca (2010). Researches in Cypriote History and Archaeology: Proceedings of the Meeting Held in Florence, April 29–30th 2009. Firenze University Press. ISBN 978-88-6453-134-2. Weiß, Waldemar; Sabo, Alexander; Peitz-Hlebec, Darja; Schwarz, Berthold (2001). Croatie – Istrie et Dalmatie: un guide de voyage actualisé. Hunter Publishing, Inc. ISBN 978-3-88618-772-0. Media related to Limassol District at Wikimedia Commons