Dikson (Russian: Ди́ксон, IPA: [dʲiksən]) (also spelled Dixon) is a port located in northern Russia and is one of the world's northernmost settlements. Dikson is an urban locality (an urban-type settlement) situated in Taymyrsky Dolgano-Nenetsky District of Krasnoyarsk Krai. It is situated on the Kara Sea, located on a headland at the mouth of the Yenisei Gulf (the Yenisei River estuary), on Russia's Arctic Ocean coast. As of the 2021 Census, its population was 319. It is the world's northernmost settlement on a continental mainland. Dikson is the northernmost port in Russia and the northernmost settlement on the Asian continent, and the northernmost settlement on a continental mainland. It is so far north that no civil twilight appears from 8 December to 5 January, but it has 24 hours of civil twilight from 18 April to 26 August. It is one of the world's most isolated settlements. Dikson's inhabitants informally call their settlement "Capital of the Arctic", taken from a popular Soviet song. Dikson and Dikson Island were named after Swedish Arctic pioneer Baron Oscar Dickson. Dickson, along with Aleksandr Mikhaylovich Sibiryakov, was the patron of a number of early Arctic expeditions, including Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld's Russian Arctic explorations. The population crashed following the demise of the Soviet Union, like many other cities in the far north of Russia, as the perceived lack of economic prospects by many of the residents resulted in large-scale emigration from the region. Children under age 12 make up 20% of the population, compared to 15% nationwide. Dikson has a tundra climate (Köppen: ET) where arboreal vegetation is unknown. For a polar climate temperatures are relatively moderate, similar to coastal Antarctica. Its climate is semiarid (below 350 mm annual precipitation) but covered with ice and snow. Pitch precipitation is in dry form. Usually, in these climates in the warmest month, most of the days feature temperatures below 10 °C, however on some occasions the city can have fresh summers instead of cold, with temperatures between 15 and 18 °C. For most of the year, the temperatures are below freezing which results in long and rigorous winters. Liquid precipitation is concentrated between late spring and early fall. Temperatures do not fall below −50 °C (as happens in much lower latitudes) due to marine moderation. The place is known for pronounced climate change, with the highest Arctic temperatures, correlated with permafrost and marine ice pack melting. It has experienced the fastest warming in recent decades. Dikson Airport "Об исчислении времени". Официальный интернет-портал правовой информации (in Russian). June 3, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2019. Почта России. Информационно-вычислительный центр ОАСУ РПО. (Russian Post). Поиск объектов почтовой связи (Postal Objects Search) (in Russian) Russian Federal State Statistics Service (2011). Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года. Том 1 [2010 All-Russian Population Census, vol. 1]. Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года [2010 All-Russia Population Census] (in Russian). Federal State Statistics Service. Barents Observer. "The dogs protect us from polar bears". "Dikson, Russia Köppen Climate Classification (Weatherbase)". Weatherbase. Retrieved December 19, 2018. "The Typical Weather Anywhere on Earth - Weather Spark". weatherspark.com. Retrieved December 19, 2018. "This place on Russia's Arctic coast has most dramatic climate change". The Independent Barents Observer. Retrieved December 19, 2018. Staalesen, Atle; Observer, The Independent Barents (October 3, 2018). "Arctic coastal town of Dikson is fastest-warming place in Russia". Eye on the Arctic. Retrieved December 19, 2018. Погода и Климат – Климат Острова Диксон (in Russian). Retrieved October 3, 2009. "Climatological Information for Dikson, Russia". Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2011.