Monninkylä (Finnish: [ˈmonːiŋˌkylæ]; Swedish: Monby, Finland Swedish: [ˈmoːnbyː], formerly known as Månby) is a village in Askola municipality in Eastern Uusimaa. Together with Askola's church village, it is one of the main settlement centers of the municipality. Monninkylä has a population of 1,339, which makes it the largest village of the municipality in terms of population. The location of the village, near the main road between Porvoo and Mäntsälä, has greatly influenced population growth. The village is located just off the Porvoo border, but the distance to the city centre is about 17 kilometres. Also, the distance from Monninkylä to Mäntsälä is about 21 kilometres and to Kirveskoski of the neighbouring municipality Pornainen is about 10 kilometres. The nearest lake is Vahijärvi in the northern part of the village, across the main road. Monninkylä is home to three schools: Askola High School, Vocational College (AMISTO) maintained by the Regional Council of Eastern Uusimaa and Monninkylä Primary School, that was reported after the arsonist set fire to the school in July 2017. In Monninkylä, the municipal services include: clinic, dentist, library, kebab pizzeria, Sale grocery store, hairdressing salon, driving school and Osuuspankki bank office. The village is also home to Finland's only outdoor swimming pool maintained by a parish, which is open from June to August. There is also an indoor mini golf called Monacon minigolfkeskus in the Monninkylä centre. Mäntsälä (village) "Taajamat väkiluvun ja väestöntiheyden mukaan 31.12.2018" (in Finnish). Tilastokeskus. Retrieved December 7, 2019. "Monninkylä in Askola (Uusimaa)". City Population. Retrieved August 7, 2019. Monby Askola, Nyland, "Amisto ja lukio ovat tärkeitä lähipalveluita Askolassa – "Tätä ei pidä sössiä pilalle"" (in Finnish). Uusimaa. Retrieved August 8, 2019. "KATSO VIDEO: Monninkylän koulun tuhopoltto: korjaamistarve selvitettävänä, väistötilat ovat jo selvillä" (in Finnish). Uusimaa. Retrieved August 11, 2019. "Borgåelever kan få skola i Askola" (in Swedish). Östnyland. Retrieved August 11, 2019. "Riku Honkasalon valtuustoaloitteet kotihoidon tuen kuntalisän korottamisesta, Monninkylän kauppapaikasta ja Maauimalan juhlavuodesta. Lisäksi Honkasalon loppusanat vaalikaudelle 2013-17" (in Finnish). Askolan Kokoomus. Retrieved August 7, 2019. Monacon minigolfkeskus – Facebook Media related to Monninkylä at Wikimedia Commons Monninkylä - Official Facebook Group v t e