John Wick is a 2014 American action thriller film directed by Chad Stahelski and written by Derek Kolstad. Keanu Reeves stars as John Wick, a legendary hitman who comes out of retirement to seek revenge against the men who killed his dog, a final gift from his recently deceased wife. The film also stars Michael Nyqvist, Alfie Allen, Adrianne Palicki, Bridget Moynahan, Dean Winters, Ian McShane, John Leguizamo, and Willem Dafoe. Kolstad's script drew on his interest in action, revenge, and neo noir films. Producer Basil Iwanyk purchased the rights as his first independent film production. Reeves, whose career was declining, liked the script and recommended that the experienced stunt choreographers Stahelski and David Leitch direct the action scenes; Stahelski and Leitch successfully lobbied to co-direct the project. Principal photography began in October 2013, on a $20–$30 million budget, and concluded that December. Stahelski and Leitch focused on highly choreographed and long single takes to convey action, eschewing the rapid cuts and closeup shots of contemporary action films. Iwanyk struggled to secure theatrical distributors because industry executives were dismissive of an action film by first-time directors, and Reeves's recent films had underperformed. Lionsgate Films purchased the distribution rights to the film two months before its release date on October 24, 2014. Following a successful marketing campaign that changed its perception from disposable entertainment to a prestige event helmed by an affable leading actor, John Wick exceeded box-office projections and became a modest success, grossing $86 million worldwide. It received generally positive reviews for its style and action sequences. Critics hailed John Wick as a comeback for Reeves, in a role that played to his acting strengths. The film's mythology of a criminal underworld with rituals and rules was praised as its most distinctive and interesting feature. John Wick began a successful franchise which includes three sequels (John Wick: Chapter 2 (2017), John Wick: Chapter 3 – Parabellum (2019), and John Wick: Chapter 4 (2023)), the prequel television series The Continental: From the World of John Wick (2023), the spin-off film Ballerina (2025), as well as video games and comic books. Some retrospective assessments have identified John Wick to be among the best action films made; it is seen as having revitalized the genre and popularized long single takes with choreographed, detailed action. In New York City, John Wick is grieving the death of his wife Helen, who had arranged for him to receive a beagle puppy to help cope with his loss. A few days later, a group of Russian gangsters, led by Iosef Tarasov, accost John at a gas station and fail to intimidate him into selling them his 1969 Boss 429 Mustang. That night, they break into John's home, assault him, kill the puppy, and steal the car. Iosef takes the Mustang to a chop shop to remove its identifying details, but the shop owner, Aurelio, recognizes it and refuses service. Aurelio informs John that Iosef is the son of Viggo Tarasov, the boss of New York City's Russian mafia. Upon learning of his son's actions, Viggo berates Iosef for incurring John's wrath. He reveals John was once a hitman in his employ, and was renowned and feared in the criminal underworld as the Baba Yaga, a ruthless, relentless "man of focus, commitment, and sheer will". After John fell in love with Helen, a civilian, Viggo gave him a seemingly impossible task to earn his freedom; he succeeded. John recovers a concealed stash from his former career that includes weapons and gold coins. He rejects Viggo's attempt to make amends and kills the hit squad subsequently sent to his home. Viggo puts a $2 million bounty on John and enlists John's former mentor, Marcus, to kill him. John lodges at the Continental, a luxurious hotel that serves as neutral ground for the underworld and where conducting criminal business is forbidden. Winston, the hotel's owner and John's old friend, informs him that Iosef is at a nightclub called Red Circle. John infiltrates Red Circle and confronts Iosef, but he is attacked by Viggo's henchman Kirill and forced to retreat to the Continental for medical attention. As John rests, a hitwoman, Ms. Perkins, sneaks into his room. Marcus sees Perkins from an adjacent building and fires a warning shot to alert John, who wakes up and subdues her. Perkins reveals Viggo has doubled the bounty for her to kill John in the hotel and has concealed a high-value stash in a church. John hires another hitman, Harry, to secure Perkins but she kills Harry and escapes. At the church, John destroys Viggo's cache of cash and extensive blackmail material. When Viggo arrives to assess the damage, John assaults him and his men but is hit by Kirill's car and captured. John tells Viggo he will not stop until Iosef is dead because the puppy gave him hope and a chance to not be alone in his grief for Helen. Marcus again intervenes to save John, who kills Kirill and threatens Viggo into revealing Iosef's location in a safehouse. John attacks the safehouse and kills Iosef. Marcus encourages John to return to his everyday life. Perkins witnesses this and reveals Marcus's duplicity to Viggo, who has him tortured and killed. Viggo calls John to taunt him with the details, drawing him back to the city. Winston has Perkins executed for breaking the Continental's rules, then informs John that Viggo is preparing to leave the city by helicopter. John races to New York Harbor, where he fights and mortally wounds Viggo. John, resigned to dying from his injuries, watches on his phone a video of Helen telling him they need to go home. He breaks into a nearby animal clinic, treats his wounds, and adopts a pit bull puppy scheduled to be euthanized before beginning to walk home. Keanu Reeves as John Wick: A retired hitman who is legendary in the criminal underworld Michael Nyqvist as Viggo Tarasov: A vicious Russian crime boss and John's former employer Alfie Allen as Iosef Tarasov: Viggo's reckless and arrogant son Adrianne Palicki as Ms. Perkins: A ruthless and highly skilled hitwoman Bridget Moynahan as Helen: John's beloved and devoted wife Dean Winters as Avi: Viggo's attorney Lance Reddick as Charon / Hotel Manager: The Continental's concierge Toby Leonard Moore as Victor: A Russian gangster working with Iosef Ian McShane as Winston: The enigmatic owner of the Continental John Leguizamo as Aurelio: A mechanic who owns a high-end chop shop Willem Dafoe as Marcus: A skilled sniper and John's old friend The cast also includes Omer Barnea as Gregori, Iosef's underling who kills John's dog; Daniel Bernhardt as Kirill, a former Russian military commander-turned-henchman for Viggo; Thomas Sadoski as Jimmy, a police officer; and David Patrick Kelly as Charlie, a cleaner who destroys criminal evidence, including bodies. The Continental staff includes Bridget Regan as Addy, a bartender fond of John, and Randall Duk Kim as a hotel doctor. Clarke Peters portrays Harry, a hitman; Kevin Nash appears as Francis, a bouncer at the Red Circle night club; and Munro M. Bonnell plays a corrupt priest protecting Viggo's vault beneath a church. A beagle puppy called Andy portrays John's dog, Daisy. During the early 2000s, Derek Kolstad struggled to gain recognition as a screenwriter, producing up to eight screenplays per year, none of which went into production. Although he continued to write, he stopped pursuing it as a full time career until his wife encouraged him to try again. Kolstad secured a manager and wrote 60 screenplays before finding success with the low-budget action films One in the Chamber (2012) and The Package (2013). Over four days in either 2012 or 2013, Kolstad wrote a spec script titled Scorn, the inspiration for which came from two "terrible revenge movies" he had watched. The script's story centered around the character John Wick, a long-retired hitman in his mid-60s to mid-70s who is forced back into his former life. John was modeled on actors such as Clint Eastwood and Paul Newman. The script included elements such as John's long-deceased wife, his elderly dog, the Continental, Charon, Winston, and the underworld gold coins; it had a kill count of 11 compared to the film's several dozen. John was portrayed as an underworld legend who had been absent for decades, causing younger criminals to dismiss tales of his deeds. Kolstad aimed to explore the character as "the worst man in existence" who finds and loses salvation through love and events that followed this. He had difficulty determining the incident that would lead to John's return, ultimately choosing his dog's murder over the cliché of the killing of the protagonist's wife and family. Kolstad focused his efforts on the first act, believing a solid opening would make later acts easier to write. The draft was influenced by the variety of action films of which Kolstad was fond, including Aliens (1986), Predator (1987), and Die Hard (1988); and revenge films, westerns, and neo-noir films such as Miller's Crossing (1990). Kolstad included black comedy because he found that levity added to the characters' humanity, drawing influence from silent comedy actors such as Buster Keaton, Harold Lloyd, Charlie Chaplin, and Roscoe Arbuckle; and his favorite animated television series, including Rick and Morty and SpongeBob SquarePants. After garnering feedback from family and agents, Kolstad made minor changes and the spec script was put out for sale. At the same time, producer Basil Iwanyk was developing films for Warner Bros. Pictures through his studio Thunder Road Films. Iwanyk was frustrated at not being involved beyond sourcing scripts; he wanted the autonomy to develop independent films so he could be more involved in the process. He focused on action films that could be made on relatively low budgets. Iwanyk read Kolstad's spec script, appreciating its subversive tone and emotional throughline, as well as the relatability and accessibility of a man seeking revenge after losing his wife, his dog, and his car; and his home being violated. Kolstad received multiple offers for the script, but his agent advised him to consider the lowest bid from Iwanyk because Thunder Road Films was ready to start work immediately. The deal was completed in February 2013. Kolstad began rewrites alongside Iwanyk and producer Erica Lee over two months. Iwanyk originally envisioned older actors such as Eastwood (then 83-years-old) or Harrison Ford (71-years-old) as John but later opted for an experienced actor rather than an elderly one. In April 2013, Iwanyk's friend was serving as Keanu Reeves's talent agent. Iwanyk shared the script after the agent expressed Reeves's interest in pursuing a new action project. Reeves was interested in the dynamics between the real world and the underworld, and the emotional connection to John's wife. The script was sent to multiple directors, many of whom suggested expanding John's family and having them killed to drive the plot, but Kolstad opposed this idea. Others were uninterested because the idea appeared to be a typical Reeves action film. While Reeves was negotiating his involvement, he sent the script to Chad Stahelski and David Leitch, both of whom had worked with him as stunt coordinators and performers on the initial The Matrix trilogy of films and later projects, and had founded the action, design, and stunt company 87Eleven Productions. He recommended them to choreograph or direct the action sequences, feeling their style matched the script's tone. Stahelski and Leitch were interested in the variety of action scenes, but they wanted to direct the film itself. Stahelski and Leitch gained Reeves's support after pitching him their vision of an assassin thriller with a realistic tone in an otherworldly setting, in which John was an urban legend. Reeves said they impressed him with their intent to make each character memorable and thoughts on the theme of living a double life. In May, Reeves was confirmed for the lead role, and Stahelski and Leitch were to direct it. For the next two months, Kolstad and Reeves spent weekends rewriting the script six times to fit Reeves's acting style. John was made younger, and Reeves, then 49-years-old, intended to portray him as a 35-year-old. Dialogue was trimmed to emphasize John's slick and tough persona; a five-page conversation between John and the priest was trimmed to John simply responding "Uh-huh". They decided not to depict the impossible task that earned John his freedom, believing they should never show his life before Helen's death. John Wick's principal characters were cast in September and October 2013. Casting focused on affordable actors who were available in the two and a half weeks before filming began. The task was eased by filming in New York City, allowing the producers to secure local actors such as Ian McShane, who only had to be present to film their scenes without traveling long distances. Character actors who could vivify Kolstad's characters were preferred; despite little screentime, they were considered essential for providing details about John Wick's past and the underworld. Kolstad named John Wick after his grandfather, and Helen was named for his grandmother. Keanu Reeves was paid $1–$2 million for his performance. Reeves's personal experience with bereavement, having lost his daughter in 1998 and his partner in 2001, helped him relate to John's emotional state. Describing the character, Reeves said: "[John] thought [his old life] was something he would never go back to ... John thought he was stronger than he is, when really he'd been drawing that strength from his wife, Helen ... I always thought of it as being a kind of Old Testament revenge story. When someone takes the things he cherishes, violence erupts and John can't temper it." Stahelski and Leitch prioritized themes of loss and humanity as fundamental aspects of John, wanting to avoid making him a cliché "badass" assassin. They had Reeves grow his hair and beard, and dressed him in stylish suits to create recognizable visual elements. Reeves underwent four months of training, including several hours per day in a gym, strict diet, and stretches, and learned choreography. Despite his previous martial arts experience, the directors aimed to craft a unique style fitting for John, and had Reeves train in judo, Japanese jujutsu, Brazilian jiu-jitsu, and arnis, as well as undergoing tactical-gun training with the Los Angeles SWAT and Navy SEALs. He also learned stunt driving skills, including how to drift a car while aiming a gun. Michael Nyqvist described the relationship between Viggo and John as akin to a father and son, built on love and respect for John's prowess as an assassin. Nyqist trained in the Russian martial art sambo, reflecting the character's impoverished street-brawler origins, and partly based his performance on his Russian trainers. He generally played his character straight with some eccentricities. Kolstad described Alfie Allen's Iosef as "a dinner-theater version of his father," depicting a wealthy and spoiled youth who perceives himself as tough but lacks his father's strength. Allen, attracted to the challenge of speaking different languages and accents, immersed himself in Russian bathhouses in New York to refine his dialect. He faced difficulties, including the physical demands his character endured and the spontaneous additions of Russian dialogue to the script, requiring quick adaptation. The character Ms. Perkins was originally conceived as a male figure until Adrianne Palicki was cast in the role. Palicki characterized the role as a cold, cunning, and ruthless assassin who derives pleasure from killing. Palicki trained in judo and jujitsu for a few months, and spent two weeks learning the choreography for her fight scene with Reeves. Bridget Moynahan, who portrayed John's wife Helen, chose not to read the script in its entirety. Her decision was based on the desire to understand only as much about John as Helen would know, contributing to a more authentic portrayal of her character. Kolstad depicted Ian McShane's Winston as a character who speaks sparingly but commands attention when he does, likening him to a titan in the realm of New York. McShane accepted the role based on his affinity for neo-noir films. John Leguizamo in his portrayal of Aurelio, drew inspiration from the character's stylish wardrobe, embodying a sense of confidence and swagger. Leguizamo explained, "I'm walking through the set and all of a sudden I start feeling a little cocky, like I'm somebody." Willem Dafoe described Marcus as a high-level assassin and father figure to John. He added traits to his aging character such as a scene in which Marcus makes juice because he reasoned the character would maintain his health to stay competitive with younger assassins. Financial issues beset the production before and during filming; Iwanyk had limited assets compared to the major studios and he considered his backers unreliable. He said an investor failed to pay on time and that when he did, "he did things like children do, if he owed us $2.4 million he'd send us a check for $2,400 and go 'whoops! I messed up'". Iwanyk and his executives also lacked experience in film financing. He contemplated cancelling the project five days before the scheduled filming date before his lawyer advised that he would likely be sued into bankruptcy by those involved and their guild unions. Iwanyk twice deferred his own fees to cover costs and lent the costume designer his personal credit card for resources, saying he would at least earn air miles. The lack of financial security delayed filming by two weeks, which Iwanyk described as the most difficult and stressful weeks of his career; his family visited to ensure he was safe because he was not sleeping or eating. When financing was secured, it was less than the originally promised sum. Some principal cast made salary concessions; Reeves put his own money into the project, and Stahelski and Leitch modified scenes to keep the budget low. The majority of funding came from Michael Witherill of MJW Films, actor Eva Longoria, and DefyNite Films. New York City was chosen as the main filming location. Although filming there cost millions more than alternatives such as Baton Rouge, Chicago, and Detroit, Iwanyk said "if I shoot [John Wick] with the Brooklyn Bridge in the background, it feels like a big movie". Kolstad considered a city setting in a noir story to be its own character. Budget constraints meant some ideas were abandoned to prioritize financing for the location or departments such as art design and music deemed instrumental to creating the world of John Wick. Stahelski highlighted New York's visual verticality as well as areas like downtown Manhattan, which provided a subterranean atmosphere ideal for creating the mythological underworld setting they envisioned. There were also many restrictions because residents were resistant to mobile trailers used by cast and crew, car chases, and gunfire in their streets. Even on closed streets, the filmmakers had to adhere to speed limits, impacting the execution of car-chase sequences. Staheliski and Leitch drew on a broad amalgamation of their favorite films and directors for John Wick's visual style. Stahelski described the crime thriller Point Blank (1967) as a significant influence, as well as the classic visual composition of films from the period 1960–1990, including Le Cercle Rouge (1970) and The Return of the Pink Panther (1975)—a comedy in which hired killers pursue the central character. They also drew on Akira Kurosawa's style of holding on the composition, John Woo's use of wide shots and multi-opponent combat in films such as The Killer (1989), and spaghetti westerns by Sergio Leone. Stahelski referenced Eastwood's enigmatic portrayal in The Good, the Bad and the Ugly (1966), emphasizing the power of unspoken backstories. He noted, "we just give you some gold coins ... 'Where do the gold coins come from?' ... Have your imagination do some work there." The directors said the value of the gold coins was unimportant, comparing them to business cards that grant access to underworld services and inform the audience they are entering a different world. Further influences were drawn from the works of director Quentin Tarantino; graphic novels; and action films such as Police Story (1985), Armour of God, Lethal Weapon (both 1987), Die Hard (1988), and The Matrix (1999). Stahelski and Leitch eschewed the style of rapid cuts showing different angles and close-up shots common in many contemporary action films, which they thought often led to confusing action sequences. They committed to lengthy, single takes with a wide view of the action, reserving cuts only for covering up mistakes. This was also a practical decision—they had only enough budget for a single-camera setup, and no time for elaborate wire stunts and additional coverage footage that could be used in editing to hide mistakes. Iwanyk said if they had an extra $5–$10 million, they could have afforded a multi-camera setup and second-unit filming but that economic restrictions resulted in a better action film. The directors focused on practical stunts but used computer-generated imagery (CGI) when necessary to add gun-muzzle flashes and to complete a stunt in which John is struck by a car. The settings were intended to be recognizable but distinct, contrasting the private, rural setting of John and Helen—which Leitch described as "organic and warm; very cinéma vérité real"—with the hyper-real underworld where everything is exaggerated. Production designer Dan Leigh emphasized the visual transformation of the underworld, stating that it transcends reality with unique lighting, atmospheric textures, and unexpected elements scattered throughout. Kolstad did not describe the underworld rules and settings in detail, which gave the designers considerable scope. Iwanyk said the lack of detail prevented them from focusing too much on worldbuilding. Luca Mosca led costume design, which focused on stylish suits with some functionality over practical combat outfits to provide a high-class aesthetic to the underworld. Mosca utilized variant shades of black in the designs and made them form-fitting and sleek to fit the immaculate nature of the underworld. John's suit took inspiration from 1970s-style three-piece suits worn by film stars such as Lee Marvin and Steve McQueen. In the film, John's car is identified as a 1969 Boss 429 Mustang. However, due to the limited production of only 1,359 Boss 429s and the need for five cars for filming, which would all be destroyed, using the authentic model was too expensive. Instead, Ford Mustang Mach 1 models were substituted. John's combat style was developed for a previous film by supervising stunt coordinator J. J. Perry, along with contributions from Stahelski and 87Eleven Productions associates John Valera, Jon Eusebio, Danny Hernandez, Guillermo Grispo, Eric Brown, the Machado brothers, Jackson Spidell, and armorer Taran Butler. The combat style blends grappling martial arts with gun combat and a focus on restricting limbs with the left hand, leaving the right hand free for gun action. Combat training, which took place at 87Eleven's facility, included an obstacle course to prepare for the Wick house invasion. Principal photography began on October 7, 2013, on a $20–$30 million budget, in and around New York City. Filming was arduous, with stresses over the schedule and budget. There was reduced daylight for associated scenes and extensive night-time filming in very cold weather. The initial five days of filming took place in Mill Neck village with scenes at John's house. Iwanyk recalled thinking John Wick would not work after watching the crew lighting a stuffed dog stand-in and several scenes of Reeves brooding. He changed his mind watching John's interaction with the police officer after killing a hitman squad, an absurd situation played with earnestness. Cinematographer Jonathan Sela intended to use anamorphic lenses for scenes depicting John's domestic life to create a soft, clean image, and spherical lenses for his return to the underworld to create a grittier, darker, and sharper aesthetic. Once filming began, however, he opted to use the lenses for, respectively, day-and-night filming, and contrast the use of a static camera position for the early segments and dynamic movements for the remainder of the film. He lit scenes in a gothic manner to make the underworld appear with a mix of American and European designs, and illuminated characters in a manner that preserved the mystery of whether they were allies or adversaries to John. Scenes at The Red Circle nightclub were filmed at Surrogate's Courthouse (exterior), Edison Theatre (club interior), and Aire Ancient Baths (below-ground spa). The production design added red-and-blue lighting and misted windows to the spa. Sela said they wanted it to look like a part of the underground but they were constrained by the budget; he said this sometimes worked in their favor because it forced them to develop creative solutions. Perry was hired to choreograph the nightclub sequence at the last minute because Stahelski was occupied filming the final confrontation between John and Viggo. Perry, who portrays four characters killed by John in The Red Circle, was only told to begin in the nightclub and move up to the top level. Despite the choreography, improvisation based on spontaneous additions often took place during filming. Reeves's training allowed him to rapidly adapt to the changes and perform many of his own stunts, so filming often operated quickly. Iwanyk said they could capture as much footage in an afternoon as some others could over three days. The combat sequences adhered strictly to the number of bullets available in John's weapons, and scenes were crafted to include segments of John reloading at realistic intervals. Any alterations, such as the introduction of additional enemies, prompted corresponding adjustments to the bullet count, necessitating the relocation of reloading segments. Challenges arose during the club sequence due to incorrect gear acquisitions, including a holster that impeded Reeves's ability to draw his gun and the use of a silencer attachment that proved impractical. Minor timing issues in scenes at the spa and the club's upper floor posed difficulties, and insufficient footage to conceal the inconsistencies led to alterations in choreography and scenes to more clearly establish character locations. Reeves was also ill; according to Iwanyk, he would vomit between takes then insist on continuing filming. The film's insurers refused to approve Reeves performing a fall from the club's upper floor; Spidell stood in for falls and other hard impacts. The fight scene between John and Viggo posed challenges during its filming over five nights at Brooklyn Navy Yard. The temperature was regularly 36 °F (2 °C) and the production was prohibited from using artificial rain on one evening because temperatures dropped too low. Reeves also refused to wear a wetsuit to help prevent hypothermia. Iwanyk thought the scene was an ill-fitting end to the film and would not fare well with audiences because John was fighting an older man. Additionally, the directors had initially planned for a more elaborate vehicle sequence involving several cars, but only two vehicles arrived. The Beaver Building served as the location for exterior scenes at The Continental, and interior scenes were filmed at various buildings across Manhattan and Brooklyn, including the Cunard Building, Hotel Wolcott, and a bank vault in the Financial District; Marble was glued to its surfaces to make it appear expensive. Exterior scenes set at Viggo's headquarters were filmed at the Maritime Exchange Building and on the roof of ModernHaus SoHo on Grand Street. Filming also took place at Calvary Cemetery, a gas station in Upper Nyack, Republic Airport, Manhattan Bridge, Schaefer Landing, and Bethesda Terrace and Fountain. The church scene was conceived as a bank heist but scouts had difficulty finding a suitable location. Ultimately, directors Stahelski and Leitch opted for a church setting, considering it an interesting hideout. Interior scenes were filmed at St. Francis Xavier Church, while the exterior combines the Williamsburgh Savings Bank Building in New York and the Immanuel Presbyterian Church in Los Angeles. Filming concluded on December 20, 2013, after nine weeks. The directors described it as a difficult learning experience that included many mistakes, and stretched the limits of the budget and schedule, but was ultimately successful. Kolstad lamented the loss of his favorite scene due to scheduling, in which two men at Aurelio's garage see John's car, recognize it, and promptly vacate the premises. John Wick entered post-production on January 10, 2014. Iwanyk characterized this phase as challenging, given the prevailing skepticism about the film's potential success, and with most of the principal cast and crew having already transitioned to other projects. Editor Elísabet Ronaldsdóttir was mainly known for her work on low-budget independent drama films but her shared dislike for close-up action shots won over the directors. There was no budget for reshoots and no coverage material so she had to work with the available footage. Iwanyk disliked an early, longer cut because the excessive action made the experience numbing and there were too many establishing shots of people walking or driving. Ronaldsdóttir edited the film substantially to reduce the runtime to 101 minutes; this version was more positively received. Stahelski was unhappy with the removal of some scenes but Ronaldsdóttir said they generally removed repetitiveness and shortened action scenes to focus on action and spend less time on John's mourning. John's fight with Ms. Perkins was trimmed to avoid depicting excessive violence against women by a man. Ronaldsdóttir, expressing no regret for the cuts, highlighted her enjoyment in trimming dialogue. She emphasized that, while the written words may be perfect on the page, much of it becomes redundant when brought to life by actors with props, sets, and lighting. The directors found balancing the tone with the exaggerated action to be the most difficult part of the production. Stahelski wanted the action to be an integral continuation of the story rather than just a set piece, while Leitch emphasized the delicate balance needed to avoid being too cheesy, serious, funny, or action-oriented. John Wick was shown to a few of Iwanyk's close associates, who gave a tepid response. A public test screening took place in Orange County, California; Iwanyk said he knew it was well received when the audience loudly laughed after the scene in which Aurelio tells Viggo his son has upset John and Viggo replies "oh". The response was positive enough they held no more test screenings. The death of John's dog remained a point of contention in post-production for Iwanyk, who believed it would alienate audiences and did not justify the number of deaths in response, but Kolstad and Reeves lobbied to retain it. Stahelski recounted Reeves telling him: You guys wanted to make a hard-core action movie, right? You wanted to do something genre, outside the box, right? So what's wrong? ... So we went back and adjusted our attitude to being unapologetic, and we just went, "John Wick kills 80 guys because of a puppy. Fuck you, we're done." Test audiences were supportive of John avenging his puppy. Despite Stahelski's and Leitch's collaboration, the Directors Guild of America refused to co-credit them as directors due to internal rules, and Leitch was credited as a producer. Tyler Bates and Joel J. Richard composed the score. Stahelski and Leitch requested a "fun, raw, aggressive, unorthodox" score that reflected John's connection to his wife and his hitman past. They also wanted a clear difference between the music in each action sequence. Bates and Richard used a separate tone for the underscore that would allow it to move into the score's "more rocking aspects". Bates said they tried to understand John's thought process and establish the essence of his story; they began writing with the opening scene, which initially featured quicker transitions between John's mourning and the action sequence at the film's denouement. John Wick's soundtrack also includes songs such as "Killing Strangers" by Marilyn Manson, "The Red Circle" by Le Castle Vania, "Evil Man Blues" by The Candy Shop Boys, "In My Mind" by M86 & Susie Q, and "Who You Talkin' To Man" by Ciscandra Nostalghia. Ronaldsdóttir suggested the use of "Think" by Kaleida. By August 2014, John Wick had no secured distributor. Industry professionals blamed the lack of interest on the film's untested directors, and Iwanyk's relative inexperience in independent film production. Additionally, Reeves's recent films, such as 47 Ronin and Man of Tai Chi (both 2013), had performed poorly, even in countries where he was expected to have a strong following, such as China and Japan. Despite having secured strong presales in certain countries, Iwanyk said significant territories were not showing interest. A screening arranged for studio acquisition executives went poorly; one viewer walked out shortly after it started. Lionsgate Films emerged as the sole bidder, offering terms that included no upfront payment and a minimal release commitment, which Iwanyk interpreted as meaning John Wick would go straight to home video. However, Lionsgate executives Jason Constantine and Tim Palen championed John Wick, and set an October release date through its subsidiary Summit Entertainment. The John Wick title came late in production; dissatisfied with the original title Scorn, Reeves regularly referred to the film as John Wick in interviews, which Lionsgate executives equated to "seven million dollars in free press". A trailer created by Palen was well received, as were pre-release screenings at the 2014 Austin Film Festival and Fantastic Fest. Audience demand at Fantastic Fest led to two additional screenings. In the week leading up to its release, John Wick was screened at no cost to audiences in 42 cities across the United States. Box office analyst Scott Mendelson wrote Lionsgate's marketing campaign had taken a film with little audience awareness and generated interest by turning a "theoretical B-movie action pick-up into something of an A-level event... [and] a coronation for its iconic star [Reeves]". According to Lionsgate executives, audiences had a favorable opinion of Reeves because of his candid nature in interviews regarding his personal and professional successes and failures. In October, Lionsgate announced John Wick would play in IMAX theaters, which was considered a superior theatrical experience and further raised the film's profile. Even so, expectations for John Wick were low due to Reeves's recent box-office failures and the film's short promotion cycle. As a promotional tie-in, the first-person shooter game Payday 2 (2013) added John Wick as a playable character in the week leading up to the film's release. Free copies of the game were given to people who purchased tickets for the film early via online ticket retailer Fandango. Variety praised the idea for targeting the same male audience as John Wick without the cost of making a full game based on it. John Wick was premiered at Regal Union Square Theater in New York City on October 13, 2014; Reeves was accompanied by Andy, the puppy that portrays John's dog. The event was hosted in partnership with watch company Carl F. Bucherer. John Wick was released in the United States and Canada on October 24. During its opening weekend, the film grossed $14.4 million across 2,589 theaters—an average of $5,568 per theater, making it the number-two film of the weekend behind the debut of Ouija ($19.9 million) and ahead of Fury ($13.3 million), which was in its second weekend. The success of John Wick was a surprise, nearly doubling analysts' low expectations and pre-release estimates of $7–$10 million, and over-performing across 347 IMAX theaters with $2.5 million, accounting for 18% of its total box-office take. The film primarily drew a male audience, and approximately 77% of the viewers were over 25 years old. John Wick fell to number six in its second weekend with a gross of $8 million, and number eight in its third with $4.1 million. It left the top-ten highest-grossing films by its fourth weekend with a gross of $2.2 million. John Wick left theaters by January 22, 2015, with a total box-office take of $43 million, making it the 79th-highest-grossing film of the year. Outside the U.S. and Canada, John Wick is estimated to have grossed a further $43 million, with its highest grosses coming from Germany ($3.7 million), France ($3.2 million), Australia ($2.8 million), Taiwan ($2.6 million), Russia ($2.59 million), the United Kingdom ($2.4 million), and Japan ($2.3 million). This made it the 114th-highest-grossing film of the year outside of the U.S. and Canada. Worldwide, John Wick grossed an estimated $86 million, making it the 89th-highest-grossing film of 2014. John Wick received generally positive reviews. On the website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an 86% approval rating from the aggregated reviews of 219 critics and an average score of 6.9/10. The consensus reads; "Stylish, thrilling, and giddily kinetic, John Wick serves as a satisfying return to action for Keanu Reeves – and what looks like it could be the first of a franchise". The film has a score of 68 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 40 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+-to-F scale. Critics, including Peter Travers and Stephanie Zacharek, praised Reeves's performance, describing it as a return to form. Richard Corliss, among others, said it was a fitting role for the actor that benefits from his stoic, taciturn demeanor for a character who conveys intent through actions. Bilge Ebiri said John Wick would have been a typical revenge story with any other actor but the "ethereal and ageless" Reeves makes it "mythic". The Atlantic and The New York Times praised Reeves for being able to suggest depths to his character and portray a physical charisma while maintaining a relatively blank expression. Others said his believable physicality and athleticism enhances the many combat sequences and long single takes. Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian, however, wrote Reeves's deadpan style could only work when contrasted with humorous dialogue, and considered John Wick to be humorless. Praise was also given to the main supporting cast, particularly McShane and Nyqvist, though The Atlantic believed the supporting cast were underused. The directors' decades of experience in stunt work was seen as a major benefit to the action sequences, which Stephanie Zacharek described as among the "most beautifully choreographed" set-pieces in an American action film for a long time. Reviews commended the fluidity of the action sequences and the skill displayed by the performers. They considered the choreography to be inventive, opting for a straightforward and impactful style over slow-motion effects, resulting in heightened shock value. The action scenes were lauded for their adeptness, with their ruthless and effective nature mirroring the demeanor of the film's central character. Some publications highlighted the film's deliberate avoidance of shaky camera movements and quick editing in favor of long takes that help immerse the audience in the sleek choreography, which differentiated John Wick from its peers. Variety said the large number of equally impressive action sequences compensated for the weak script. While critics generally described the narrative as a self-serious, cliché-filled, and predictable action script with a stylistic approach, they said it offered a novel setting, creating intrigue related to John's past and the mythology that developed around the criminal underworld. The mythology in John Wick was identified as a key aspect that differentiated it from other action movies, particularly the codes and rules that govern the criminals, and the Continental hotel, which provided a reprieve to the otherwise non-stop violence in the rest of the film. Entertainment Weekly praised the rich and stylish world-building, and The Guardian's Jordan Hoffman hoped for future films to explore this setting, even without the John Wick characters. At the 2014 Golden Schmoes Awards, John Wick was named the Biggest Surprise of the Year, and was nominated for Most Underrated Movie and Coolest Character (Wick). Reeves received a nomination for the Razzie Redeemer Award at the 35th Golden Raspberry Awards. At the 2015 Taurus World Stunt Awards, John Wick won the award for Best Fight for the scene in which Wick defends his home against Viggo's hitmen. The award was presented to Reeves's stunt double Jackson Spidell; stunt coordinators Darrin Prescott and Jonathan Eusebio; fight coordinator Jon Valera; and stunt performers Carlos Lopez, Daniel Hernandez, Dean Neistat, Justin Yu, Akos Schenek, and Luis Moco. Prescott was also nominated for Best Stunt Coordinator and/or 2nd Unit Direction. At the Golden Trailer Awards, which recognizes marketing campaigns, the film's poster was named Best Thriller Poster, and was nominated for Best Action Trailer and Best Action Poster. Dafoe received the Body of Work award at the San Diego Film Critics Society Awards 2014 for films including John Wick. John Wick was released as a digital download in January 2015. This was followed by a DVD and Blu-ray release in February. The physical release includes a commentary track by Stahelski and Leitch; and six brief featurettes about the training and design of the stunt work, the making of the film, Stahelski's and Leitch's history as stunt coordinators, aspects of the film's criminal underworld, the nightclub action sequence, and the influence of New York City on John Wick. The home-media release was the second-best-selling home release of February behind Dracula Untold (2014), and the number-one rental during its release week. About 50% of its sales were on Blu-ray. A 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray version was released in 2017, containing all of the previously released features. The digital release had grossed about $20 million by May 2015, and the physical release about $44 million by 2022. Varèse Sarabande released the film's music soundtrack in October 2014. John Wick Chronicles (2017) is a virtual reality, first-person shooter video game based on the film for HTC Vive and Steam VR, allowing users to play as John while assassinating powerful targets. John Wick Hex (2019) is a tactical, third-person video game that serves as a prequel to the film; the game involves John rescuing Winston and Charon. The video game Fortnite added John Wick as a playable character in 2019. A five-issue comic book series based on the franchise was released between September 2017 and January 2018. The series, which was written by Greg Pak, is a prequel to John Wick, depicting John's integration into the assassin underworld. According to professor Ann C. Hall, John Wick is a postmodern epic hero in a contemporary epic universe. She said the John Wick franchise satisfies five of the six requirements to be classified as an epic: the imposing hero is of national or international importance and legendary significance; the setting is vast; the hero conducts great deeds of valor or superhuman courage; the tale involves powerful forces; and characters speak in stylized ways. Hall believed it fails the requirement of objectivity because John is the protagonist and is generally presented positively. Hall links the film's narrative to elements of Samurai lore, Russian folktales, and historical epics from Christianity, ancient Greece, Rome and the Mediterranean. Wayne Wong wrote Stahelski and Reeves have collaborated throughout their careers with choreographers familiar with action in Kung fu films, such as Yuen Woo-ping and Tiger Chen, and that John Wick can be seen as a synthesis of Eastern and Western action styles. Professor Scott T. Alison and Doctor George R. Goethal said while John has faults and is a ruthless killer, he does not have to objectively do good and his heroism is retaining his integrity against the unjust, violent criminal underworld. John's puppy serves as a connection to his wife and demonstrates his soft side, and Iosef killing it unites the audience against him and anyone obstructing John's quest for revenge. Owen R. Horton described John as "one of the deadliest and most brutal heroes in modern action cinema", but said unlike other contemporary action heroes, John regularly retreats to his soft side, which is defined by his love for his wife. This, Horton says, represents the conflicting multiplicities of manhood. According to critic Emanuel Levy, the central question of John Wick is whether John is a bad person who became good or a good person who has done bad things; and whether he can truly change or be redeemed. Kolstad said even though John had left his former life behind, he remains in the outskirts of the city, sees a reminder of it every time he leaves his home, and does not truly escape its shadow. Hall also analyzed John from the perspective of Reeves's personal life. She said the character and hero share many characteristics, and that in the vein of epic heroes, Reeves faced obstacles in his career but persisted with acting despite criticism; he faced personal trials of courage and loss that inspire his character and make audiences sympathetic to him. Both professor Lisa Coulthard and author Lindsay Steenberg said Reeves's and John's personalities are almost interchangeable, sharing a similar mixed-race background, personal tragedies, professionalism, and an inherent likeability—all of which add authenticity to the character and film. Professor Sarah Thomas wrote that while The Matrix was a defining role for Reeves, it was not originally tailored specifically for him. It was not until the 2010s that Reeves effectively established his own unique star persona, partly influenced by online discussions about his public image, which generated an almost mythical and malleable perception of Reeves. Thomas argued that because the script for John Wick was reworked with Reeves in mind, his public image played a significant role in shaping and interpreting the character. This is in contrast to his role in The Matrix, where the character's meaning would likely remain unchanged with a different actor in the part. According to Thomas, this alignment between Reeves's authenticity and image and the character of John Wick made it a perfect fit, as Reeves's persona filled gaps in the film's narrative. Analysts considered John Wick's success to be an example of a cult sleeper hit driven by strong word-of-mouth, and a positive critical reception from critics and audiences. Some publications, such as Empire and Time Out, and critics including Stephanie Zacharek have listed John Wick among the best action films. Others, such as IGN and Syfy listed John Wick among the best films in Reeves's filmography. Commentary by Rolling Stone and Collider said that before John Wick, the action genre had been in decline. They wrote that popular film series such as Die Hard and Rambo had been replaced with "forgettable" fare that heavily relied on CGI, shaky camera movements, and rapid edits, or a focus on larger-than-life superhuman bouts in superhero films. In contrast, publications described John Wick as a groundbreaking entry in the action genre, in part because of its extensively choreographed sequences and practical effects that were filmed in long takes. Author Ray Morton said the film revitalized the action genre by combining choreography, video-game style visuals, and explicit gore and violence. John Wick's popularity grew following its release on home video and streaming services, increasing support for a sequel, which in turn led to a financially and critically successful action film series, and gave Reeves his most-mainstream success since The Matrix films. Rolling Stone named it "The Last Great American Action-Movie Franchise", transforming what would normally be a B-movie into an "action-cinema connoisseur's dream come true". The mythology involved in the film's criminal underworld is also seen as contributing to the film's success. Iwanyk said the filmmakers had no idea during the production how evocative the underworld would be with audiences. Just as John Wick drew inspiration from the history of action cinema, it has subsequently been regarded as a significant influence on numerous action films that followed. These include Atomic Blonde (2017), Guns Akimbo (2019), and Extraction (2020), as well as several 2021 releases such as Gunpowder Milkshake, Jolt, The Protégé, and Nobody; the latter was written by Kolstad and produced by Leitch. Far Out described John as a groundbreaking role for Reeves, the character's pragmatic attitude, slick appearance, and relatable revenge story serving to revive the actor's career. MovieWeb wrote that John's in-narrative status as a legendary character before the film begins was a "genius" decision that adds depth to the character and his universe while the film keeps him sympathetic through the loss of his wife and puppy. The publication said Reeves's iconic status contributed to the character's popularity, and that his dedication to performing many of his own stunts and learning combat techniques led to similar approaches from other actors, such as Charlize Theron in Atomic Blonde and Bob Odenkirk in Nobody. John Wick's success made Stahelski and Leitch in-demand action directors; Stahelski directed the film's sequels while Leitch moved outside the series to direct films such as Atomic Blonde, Deadpool 2 (2018), Hobbs & Shaw (2019), and Bullet Train (2022). John Wick was not intended to have a sequel but its success, particularly outside the U.S., led to immediate development on a follow-up. John Wick: Chapter 2 (2017) doubled the box-office take of John Wick, and received a similarly positive critical and audience response. It was followed by John Wick: Chapter 3 – Parabellum (2019), which nearly quadrupled the box-office take of John Wick. A fourth film, John Wick: Chapter 4, was released in March 2023, receiving critical praise and becoming the highest-grossing film in the series. A fifth film is in development as of 2023. The success of the John Wick films led to several spin-offs. The Continental: From the World of John Wick (2023) is a miniseries focusing on the Continental hotel and its clientele, and Ballerina (2025) is an upcoming film starring Ana de Armas as Rooney, an assassin on her own quest for revenge. As of 2023[update], an anime and television series based on John Wick is in development. Chad Stahelski and David Leitch co-directed John Wick, but the Directors Guild of America awarded sole directorial credit to Stahelski; Leitch is instead listed as a producer. John Wick's car is identified in the film as a 1969 Boss 429 Mustang but is portrayed by a 1969 Ford Mustang Mach 1. The 2013 budget of $20–$30 million budget is equivalent to $26.2 million–$39.2 million in 2023. The 2014 box office gross of $86 million is equivalent to $111 million in 2023. Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Abrams, Bryan (October 20, 2014). "Stuntmen Turned Directors Light Up Screen With John Wick". Motion Picture Association. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Graham, Bill (October 21, 2014). "John Wick Filmmakers On How To Direct Action, DGA, Keanu Reeves' Advice, And More". The Film Stage. Archived from the original on December 16, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Thomas, Charlie (March 31, 2023). "Why John Wick's Ford Mustang Is More Iconic Than Steve Mcqueen's". GQ. Archived from the original on April 11, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2023. Jamieson, Craig (March 24, 2023). "Unsung Movie Cars: The Ford Mustang From John Wick". Top Gear. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2023. Nashawaty, Chris (November 3, 2014). "John Wick". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved February 2, 2023. "John Wick Production Notes" (PDF). Lionsgate. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 29, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2023. Lemire, Christy (October 24, 2014). "John Wick". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Robinson, Tasha (October 23, 2014). "John Wick". The Dissolve. Archived from the original on February 3, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Noonan, Kevin (October 23, 2014). "Keanu Reeves, Adrianne Palicki on John Wick, Dogs and Stunts". Variety. Archived from the original on October 27, 2022. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Topel, Fred (September 23, 2014). "Fantastic Fest 2014: Adrianne Palicki On John Wick & Agents of SHIELD". Mandatory. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved February 5, 2023. "Few Action Heroes Can Hold A Candle To Keanu Reeves' John Wick". Boston Herald. October 24, 2014. Archived from the original on February 4, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Davies, Steven (July 6, 2021). "10 MCU Actors You Didn't Realise Were Australian". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Goodykoontz, Bill (October 22, 2014). "Review: Absurd Story But Superb Action In John Wick". The Arizona Republic. Archived from the original on February 8, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Dyche, Olly (September 16, 2022). "John Wick: The Best Characters in the Franchise, Ranked". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on February 4, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. "John Wick: 15 Secrets Only Real Fans Know (And 10 Juicy Rumors About Part 3)". Comic Book Resources. June 29, 2018. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2023. "Movie Reviews – John Wick". Wigan Post. April 13, 2015. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2023. "John Wick (2014)". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2023. "Daniel Bernhardt Joins John Wick; Dan Fogler & Steve-O Added To Barely Lethal". Deadline Hollywood. November 27, 2013. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2023. Ito, Robert (March 22, 2023). "John Wick Sure Has a Lot of Friends for a Lone Assassin". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 22, 2023. Retrieved September 4, 2023. Mathai, Jeremy (November 11, 2021). "The Continental Casts Younger Version Of Lance Reddick's John Wick Regular And More". /Film. Archived from the original on February 4, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2023. Morrison, Matt (September 1, 2021). "Who Is Bridget Regan? Where You Know Arrowverse's Poison Ivy From". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2023. Reilly, Travis (November 6, 2014). "Marvel's Agent Carter Casts White Collar Star Bridget Regan". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on February 3, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2023. Etell, Christian Colby (November 16, 2021). "John Wick Is A Series That Would Benefit From A Prequel Movie". Game Rant. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2023. Gilbert, Sophie (October 24, 2014). "John Wick: An Idiot Killed His Puppy and Now Everyone Must Die". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved February 4, 2023. "Clarke Peters On Horseback Riding Through The Cape Winelands And His Dark Materials – The New Show That You Should Be Watching". News24. November 19, 2019. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Colangelo, BJ (May 20, 2023). "The WWE Superstar Who Made A Cameo In John Wick (And Actually Survived The Movie)". /Film. Archived from the original on May 20, 2023. Retrieved September 4, 2023. Debruge, Peter (October 16, 2014). "Film Review: John Wick". Variety. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 93. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 71–72. Lincoln, Kevin (February 2017). "By Killing a Puppy, the Creators of John Wick Birthed A Franchise". Vulture. Archived from the original on August 19, 2022. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 70–73, 186. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 72, 76–77. Levy, Emanuel (October 22, 2014). "John Wick: Keanu Reeves In Top Form As Iconic Action Star". Emanuellevy.com. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 73, 112. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 73. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 72, 77. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 30, 71, 73, 95, 105, 213. Tan, Andre (October 21, 2014). "Reeves Returns In Wicked Action Flick". AsiaOne. Archived from the original on December 11, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 72–74, 85. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 74. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 74–75. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 76. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 76–77. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 78. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 78–79. "Keanu Reeves Plays Hitman In John Wick — Surprises With Unexpected Use Of Artillery In Action Scenes". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on December 19, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Kay, Jeremy (May 7, 2013). "Keanu Reeves To Star In John Wick". Screen International. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 79. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 81–82. Patches, Matt (October 22, 2014). "Excessive Forces: The Mad Genius Stuntmen Behind Keanu Reeves's Dead-Dog Revenge Thriller John Wick". Grantland. Archived from the original on October 23, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Lewis, Hilary (October 24, 2014). "Keanu Reeves, John Wick Directors On How Their Matrix Past Helped With Assassin Film". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 82. "Directors David Leitch And Chad Stahelski Talk New Film John Wick". The Source. October 13, 2014. Archived from the original on October 20, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Cohen, Sandy (October 17, 2014). "Veteran Stuntmen Become Directors With John Wick". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 82–83. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 83, 85. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 78–80. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 105. Eames, Tom (September 19, 2013). "Alfie Allen, Michael Nyqvist Join Keanu Reeves Film John Wick". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2023. "John Wick Adds Quartet To Cast; Brad William Henke Joins Fury". Deadline Hollywood. September 19, 2013. Archived from the original on December 27, 2019. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Trumbore, Dave (September 12, 2013). "Willem Dafoe Joins Keanu Reeves In John Wick; Amber Heard Takes To London Fields; Jeremy Garelick's The Wedding Ringer Adds To Cast". Collider. Archived from the original on September 14, 2013. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Kilday, Gregg (October 14, 2013). "Bridget Moynahan Joins Keanu Reeves Thriller John Wick". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 1, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 94. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 126. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 134. "Hollywood Salaries 2016: Who Got Raises (And Who Didn't), From Movie Stars to Showrunners". The Hollywood Reporter. September 29, 2016. Archived from the original on November 21, 2022. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Freeman, Hadley (May 18, 2019). "Keanu Reeves: 'Grief And Loss, Those Things Don't Ever Go Away'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 13, 2023. Retrieved February 15, 2023. "Ultimate Killing Machine John Wick Back For Vengeance". GMA Integrated News. October 28, 2014. Archived from the original on October 29, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Dickson, Evan (October 9, 2014). "How John Wick And 87Eleven Taught Me To Shoot People In The Face". Collider. Archived from the original on October 11, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Lees, Jonathan (October 24, 2014). "Keanu Reeves Came Up With A Badass Hashtag for John Wick". Complex. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Whittaker, Richard (October 24, 2014). "Don't Shoot The Dog". The Austin Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 88. Murphy, Mekado (May 19, 2019). "Inside The Five Best John Wick Action Scenes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 3, 2023. Retrieved February 23, 2023. Moore, Ben (October 26, 2014). "John Wick Video Interview: Alfie Allen & Michael Nyqvist". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2023. "JoBlo.com Gets Into The Action At 87Eleven Action Design For John Wick!". JoBlo.com. October 9, 2014. Archived from the original on October 11, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2023. "Actor Alfie Allen Talks Latest Film John Wick". The Source. October 22, 2014. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Topel, Fred (September 22, 2014). "Fantastic Fest 2014: Adrianne Palicki On John Wick & Agents Of SHIELD". CraveOnline. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 84. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 90. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 91. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 95, 126. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 96. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 91, 128. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 128. Hunter, Rob (February 2, 2015). "38 Things We Learned From The John Wick Commentary". Film School Rejects. Archived from the original on February 15, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Starner, Nina (January 30, 2023). "The Untold Truth Of John Wick". Looper.com. Archived from the original on February 15, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. "DefyNite Films". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Cullins, Ashley (December 11, 2018). "John Wick Producer Challenges Lender's Claim In Bankruptcy". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 15, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 96, 126. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 98. Moore, Ben (October 24, 2014). "John Wick Directors Talk World-Building & Not Killing A Dog In The Sequel". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on December 12, 2019. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Lees, Jonathan (October 24, 2014). "Keanu Reeves Came Up With A Badass Hashtag for John Wick". Complex. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 61. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 250. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 152. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 29, 52, 54, 62. Lee, Ashley (October 14, 2014). "John Wick: Keanu Reeves, Willem Dafoe Talk "Fantasy" Drifting and Gun Fu Stunts". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 63, 65, 102, 115–117. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 115–117. "John Wick DP Jonathan Sela Achieves Two Distinctive Looks With ARRI Alexa X". Arri. Archived from the original on October 29, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 115. Levy, Emanuel. "John Wick: Visual Style". Emanuellevy.com. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 105–106. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 60, 64–65. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 95, 126, 128, 135. "Film Tax Credit – Quarterly Report" (PDF). Empire State Development Corporation. March 31, 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 18, 2017. Retrieved July 23, 2017. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 95. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 1–2. "The John Wick House". Architizer. Archived from the original on October 14, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 2, 104. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 2. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 94–95, 108. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 111. Moon, Ra. "Where Was John Wick Filmed? Guide To All The Filming Locations". Atlas of Wonders. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 121–122. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 52, 118–119. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 118–119. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 118–119, 121, 124. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 120, 124–125. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 87, 124–125. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 87. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 108. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 106. Jones, Nate (December 7, 2021). "There's No Better Set Than New York City An Iconic Scene Was Shot On Nearly Every Corner Of The City". Vulture. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Demarest, Bill (October 29, 2013). "People Spotting: Keanu Reeves Films At Upper Nyack Gas Station". Sloatsburg Village. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Ruggiero, Nina (December 22, 2013). "Keanu Reeves Films John Wick At Republic Airport In Farmingdale". Newsday. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Bakija, Mary (October 23, 2013). "Keanu Reeves Thriller John Wick Films In Park Slope Thursday". Bklyner. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Rampton, Mike (June 8, 2019). "A Deep Dive Into My Chemical Romance's Video For "Helena"". Kerrang!. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 95, 126, 128. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 113, 129. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 129. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 97, 102. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 130. "John Wick". Australian Classification Board. October 10, 2014. Archived from the original on March 1, 2023. Retrieved March 1, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 108, 130. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 133. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 131. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 132. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 3–4, 104. "John Wick Score By Tyler Bates & Joel J. Richard To Be Released". Soundtrack.Net. October 8, 2014. Archived from the original on January 29, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Florino, Rick (February 23, 2015). "Interview: Tyler Bates". Artistdirect. Archived from the original on May 1, 2016. Retrieved February 22, 2023. "John Wick (CD)". Varèse Sarabande. Archived from the original on September 29, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 98, 123. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 128, 132. Kay, Jeremy (August 11, 2014). "Lionsgate Picks Up Action Thriller John Wick". Screen International. Archived from the original on September 11, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 89–90. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 132–133. "John Wick – Trademark Details". Justia. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. "Summit Entertainment's John Wick To Bust Into IMAX Theatres Domestically On Oct. 24". IMAX Corporation. October 2, 2014. Archived from the original on February 11, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Berardinelli, James (October 24, 2014). "John Wick (United States, 2014)". Reelviews.net. Archived from the original on February 15, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Mendelson, Scott (October 15, 2014). "Review: John Wick, With Keanu Reeves, Is A Terrific Action Blast". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 15, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 134–135. Ford, Rebecca (August 27, 2014). "Fantastic Fest Adds Keanu Reeves' John Wick". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved February 7, 2023. Orange, B. Alan (September 20, 2014). "John Wick Fantastic Fest Poster Featuring Keanu Reeves". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on September 20, 2014. Retrieved September 20, 2014. Weintraub, Steve (October 10, 2014). "John Wick Is Coming To 42 Cities For Free; Get Tickets Here". Collider. Archived from the original on May 21, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Mendelson, Scott (October 26, 2014). "Box Office: Ouija Summons $20M Weekend, Keanu Reeves' 'John Wick' Nabs $14M". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2014. Lang, Brent (October 26, 2014). "Box Office: Ouija Tops Charts, John Wick Surprises". Variety. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2014. Mendelson, Scott (October 3, 2014). "Is IMAX/Netflix Deal An "Et Tu, Brute?" Moment?". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved October 26, 2014. "Summit Entertainment's John Wick To Bust Into IMAX Theatres Domestically On Oct. 24". IMAX Corporation. October 2, 2014. Archived from the original on February 10, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Alexander, Bryan (October 21, 2014). "Keanu Reeves Seeks A Killer Return With John Wick". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Gajewski, Ryan (October 21, 2014). "Keanu Reeves: "It Sucks" Not Getting More Studio Offers". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 6, 2022. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Cunningham, Todd (October 13, 2014). "Keanu Reeves' John Wick Scores 100 Percent 'Fresh' Rating On Rotten Tomatoes After String Of Flops". TheWrap. Archived from the original on February 3, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2022. Surrey, Miles (May 16, 2019). "A Complete Guide To The John Wick Universe". The Ringer. Archived from the original on February 3, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Dafnis, Jason (October 21, 2014). "Overkill Software And Lionsgate Team Up For Free John Wick Payday 2 DLC". Game Informer. Archived from the original on October 23, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014. Graser, Marc (October 21, 2014). "Keanu Reeves' John Wick Becomes Playable Character in Payday 2 Video Game". Variety. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved October 21, 2014. Jarvey, Natalie (October 21, 2014). "Play Hitman John Wick In Online Game Payday 2". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014. Alexander, Bryan (October 21, 2014). "John Wick Beagle Is 'Cutest Dog In The World'". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved February 4, 2023. "Keanu Reeves, John Leguizamo & More Attend John Wick Premiere". The Source. October 16, 2014. Archived from the original on December 3, 2022. Retrieved August 27, 2023. "John Wick Domestic Weekends". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. "Domestic 2014 Weekend 43 October 24–26, 2014". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Hamedy, Saba (October 26, 2014). "Ouija Scares Up $20 Million In Opening Weekend; John Wick No. 2". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2014. "Domestic 2014 Weekend 44 October 31 – November 2, 2014". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. "Domestic 2014 Weekend 45 November 7–9, 2014". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. "Domestic Box Office For 2014". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (November 3, 2014). "Turtles, Maze Runner Top Int'l Box Office Ahead Of Interstellar Start: Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 3, 2014. Retrieved November 3, 2014. "John Wick Original Release – All Territories". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. "International Box Office For 2014". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. "2014 Worldwide Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Busch, Anita (October 27, 2014). "Ouija Says Yes To No. 1, John Wick No. 2 With A Bullet, St. Vincent, Superb Exit Polls – B.O. Weekend". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2014. Gettell, Oliver (October 24, 2014). "Keanu Reeves Is On Fire In John Wick, Reviews Say". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 4, 2018. Retrieved April 4, 2018. "John Wick (2014)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on September 16, 2019. Retrieved July 23, 2021. "John Wick Reviews". Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved December 18, 2014. "Cinemascore". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on December 20, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2019. Travers, Peter (October 24, 2014). "Keanu Reeves Goes Ballistic In This Bloody Bit Of B-movie fun". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. Zacharek, Stephanie (October 22, 2014). "Keanu Reeves Is Just Plain Awesome In John Wick". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved October 22, 2014. Catsoulis, Jeannette (October 23, 2014). "Pet's Slaughter Uncorks A Latent Inner Assassin". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 23, 2014. Corliss, Richard (October 24, 2014). "Review: In John Wick, Keanu Reeves Is Back Up To Speed". Time. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. Ebiri, Bilge (October 23, 2014). "John Wick Is A Violent, Violent, Violent Film, But Oh-So Beautiful". Vulture. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 23, 2014. Semley, John (October 24, 2014). "John Wick: The New Name In Crummy Action Cinema". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2016. Bradshaw, Peter (October 23, 2014). "John Wick Review – The Action Sequences Grind On And On". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved October 23, 2014. Wickman, Forrest (October 24, 2014). "John Wick". Slate. Archived from the original on February 8, 2015. Retrieved February 11, 2015. Lowe, Justin (October 22, 2014). "John Wick: Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 23, 2014. Retrieved October 22, 2014. Hoffman, Jordan (October 23, 2014). "John Wick Review – A Thrill Ride Driven By A Relentless Vengeance Machine". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 23, 2014. Vishnevetsky, Ignatiy (October 23, 2014). "Keanu Reeves Shoots His Way Through The Entertaining Action Fantasy John Wick". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 23, 2014. Haas, Ealasaid A. (October 30, 2014). "Review: John Wick Is A Disappointingly Standard Revenge Movie". The Mercury News. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2016. Tilly, Chris (September 22, 2014). "John Wick Review". IGN. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 23, 2023. "Golden Schmoes Winners And Nominees (2014)". JoBlo.com. Archived from the original on October 1, 2022. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Cameron Diaz, Kirk Cameron, Transformers Top Razzie Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. February 21, 2015. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2023. "2015 Taurus World Stunt Awards – Winners & Nominees". Taurus World Stunt Awards. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 10, 2015). "Golden Trailer Nominations: Jurassic World, Furious 7 Propel Universal To Leading 44". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 18, 2022. Retrieved February 12, 2023. Pedersen, Erik (May 6, 2015). "Golden Trailer Awards: Furious 7 Peels Out With Best In Show". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved November 26, 2023. Lattanzio, Ryan (December 15, 2014). "Nightcrawler Wins 7 San Diego Film Critics Prizes, Cotillard Takes Best Actress". IndieWire. Archived from the original on October 27, 2016. Retrieved February 12, 2023. Dickson, Evan (January 13, 2015). "John Wick Stunts Unveiled In This Behind The Scenes Clip". Collider. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Truitt, Brian (January 14, 2015). "Whoa! Keanu Reeves Is Golden In This Exclusive John Wick Clip". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. O'Connell, Max (February 3, 2015). "This Week in Home Video: John Wick, Dear White People, Starred Up". IndieWire. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Dellamorte, Andre (February 20, 2015). "John Wick Blu-ray Review". Collider. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Latchem, John (February 12, 2015). "Dracula Untold Defeats John Wick On Home Video Sales Charts". Variety. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Duarte, M. Enois (January 31, 2017). "John Wick – Ultra HD Blu-ray Ultra HD Review". High-Def Digest. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Mendelson, Scott (May 4, 2015). "Keanu Reeves is Back: Lionsgate Announces John Wick 2". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 138. Mott, Nathaniel (February 9, 2017). "John Wick Chronicles Now Available For HTC Vive". Tom's Hardware. Archived from the original on February 8, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Sandwell, Ian (January 31, 2017). "Now You Can Be John Wick In This First-person Shooter VR Game". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 31, 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2023. McCown, Alex (August 7, 2015). "John Wick Is Being Turned Into A VR Game, Hopefully Sans Puppy Death". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on August 10, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Zak, Robert (October 8, 2019). "John Wick Hex review". PC Gamer. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Reuben, Nic (October 8, 2019). "Wot I Think: John Wick Hex". Rock Paper Shotgun. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Hernandez, Patricia (May 17, 2019). "Fortnite's Official John Wick Skin Has Made Things Kinda Awkward". Polygon. Archived from the original on April 2, 2022. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 240. Matadeen, Renaldo (May 15, 2019). "How The John Wick Comic Book Prequel Reveals His Secret History". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2023. "Vampirella: Year One, John Carter Of Mars, Red Sonja Vol. 6, The Boys And More!". Dynamite Entertainment. Archived from the original on August 8, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Hall 2022, pp. 2, 4–5. Hall 2022, p. 5. Wong 2022, p. 84. Hall 2022, pp. 2, 5. Hall 2022, pp. 7–9. Gross & Altman 2022, p. 85. Horton 2022, pp. 340–341. Hall 2022, pp. 5–6. Coulthard & Steenberg 2022, p. 42. Thomas 2022, p. 246. Thomas 2022, p. 247. Thomas 2022, p. 248. Tallerico, Brian (June 22, 2017). "Home Entertainment Consumer Guide: June 22, 2017". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Kelley, Aidan (January 3, 2023). "Ballerina: Cast, Plot, Creative Team, And Everything We Know So Far About The John Wick Spin-off". Collider. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2023. "The 60 Best Action Movies". Empire. October 1, 2016. Archived from the original on November 23, 2018. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Rothkopf, Joshua; Huddleston, Tom (April 5, 2019). "The 101 Best Action Movies Ever Made". Time Out. Archived from the original on April 18, 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "These Are The 20 Best Action Movies Ever Made". Men's Health. February 22, 2019. Archived from the original on April 22, 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Carey, Emma (June 10, 2020). "The Best Action Movies Of All Time Are a Direct Burst of Adrenaline". Esquire. Archived from the original on June 19, 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "140 Essential Action Movies To Watch Now". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Patches, Matt; Jackson, Dan; Silman, Anna (January 20, 2016). "The 33 Best Action Movies Of All Time". Thrillist. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Doyle, Jack (September 30, 2022). "The Best Action Movies Of All Time (That You Probably Haven't Seen Yet)". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Fear, David (August 11, 2021). "50 Best Action Movies of All Time". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved September 4, 2023. Shah, Furvah (July 20, 2023). "The Best Action Movies Of All Time". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved September 5, 2023. Jackson, Matthew (June 8, 2021). "The 30 Greatest Action Movies Of All Time". Mental Floss. Archived from the original on June 26, 2023. Retrieved September 5, 2023. Lloyd, Brian (2020). "The 100 Greatest Action Movies Ever Made, Part V". Entertainment.ie. Archived from the original on December 7, 2022. Retrieved September 5, 2023. Mundy, Jon (March 12, 2023). "The Best Action Movies Of All Time". ShortList. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved September 5, 2023. Maddeaux, Sabrina (July 25, 2021). "Sabrina Maddeaux: Please. John Wick Is The Only Action Movie That Doesn't Compromise". National Post. Archived from the original on September 5, 2023. Retrieved September 5, 2023. Leatham, Thomas (September 2, 2023). "Point Break: The Moment Keanu Reeves Became An Action Hero". Far Out. Archived from the original on September 5, 2023. Retrieved September 5, 2023. "The Best Action Movies of All Time". Complex. July 17, 2019. Archived from the original on September 4, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Zacharek, Stephanie (November 13, 2019). "The 10 Best Movies Of The 2010s". Time. Archived from the original on December 4, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Crow, David; Kaye, Don; Ching, Gene; Howard, Kirsten; Cecchini, Mike; Fletcher, Rosie (July 29, 2022). "Best Action Movies Of The Last 15 Years". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2022. "Keanu's Best Action Movies, Ranked From The Matrix To John Wick". SyFy. February 7, 2023. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Schedeen, Jesse; Fowler, Matt (November 11, 2022). "The 15 Best Keanu Reeves Movies". IGN. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Timkang, Marijim Dy (March 24, 2023). "Best Keanu Reeves Movies of All Time". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on March 24, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2023. Fear, David (May 16, 2019). "In Praise Of John Wick, The Last Great American Action-Movie Franchise". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Dyche, Olly (June 29, 2022). "John Wick: Why The Trilogy Belongs Among The Best Action Franchises". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 113–114. Sims, David (May 5, 2015). "John Wick 2 and the Magic of the Surprise Sequel". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on September 11, 2022. Retrieved September 4, 2023. Laman, Lisa (February 20, 2015). "How John Wick Went From a Low-Budget Action Movie to a Mega-Franchise". Collider. Archived from the original on April 28, 2023. Retrieved September 4, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (May 6, 2015). "Box Office: John Wick: Chapter 4 Crushes Franchise Record With $73.5 Million Opening Weekend". Variety. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved September 4, 2023. Mendelson, Scott (September 10, 2019). "John Wick Is A Huge Box Office Success. Can It Level Up Overseas To Become A Top Action Franchise". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 13, 2022. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Russell, Calum (April 8, 2022). "The 10 Best Action Movie sequences of the 21st Century". Far Out. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved September 4, 2023. Hoyte, Luka (March 31, 2023). "From John Wick to Mission Impossible: 11 Best Modern Action Franchises, Ranked". Collider. Archived from the original on August 20, 2023. Retrieved September 4, 2023. "The 12 Best Action Movie Franchises, Ever!". Rotten Tomatoes. May 21, 2019. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023. Retrieved September 4, 2023. Wiese, Jason (March 30, 2023). "I Think It's Finally Time To Declare John Wick The Greatest Action Movie Franchise Of All Time". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on August 2, 2023. Retrieved September 5, 2023. Gross & Altman 2022, pp. 54, 213. Russell, Calum (March 6, 2022). "The 18 films Keanu Reeves Personally Recommends You Watch". Far Out. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. O'Connell, Mikey (March 14, 2023). "John Wick Filmmaker Chad Stahelski Talks Sequels, Oscar Stunt Snubs And Why Guns Still Show Up On Sets". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 31, 2023. Retrieved September 18, 2023. Lawrence, Derek (August 4, 2022). "How David Leitch Became The King Of Hollywood Action". The Ringer. Archived from the original on July 19, 2023. Retrieved September 18, 2023. Paxton-Gillilan, Rachel (February 4, 2015). "John Wick 2 Is In Early Development". IGN. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Mancuso, Vinnie (September 26, 2021). "John Wick 4: Everything We Know About Release Date, Cast, Plot Details, And More". Collider. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Box Office History For John Wick Movies". The Numbers. Archived from the original on May 7, 2023. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Kazi, Safeeyah (April 16, 2023). "John Wick: Chapter 4 Passes $349 Million At The Global Box Office". Collider. Archived from the original on April 25, 2023. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Stedman, Alex (June 14, 2023). "John Wick 5: Producer Confirms It's in Development But 'The Story Isn't There Yet'". IGN. Archived from the original on June 14, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Hibberd, James (August 9, 2023). "John Wick Continental Trailer Reveals Mel Gibson's Mysterious Villain". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 11, 2023. Retrieved August 11, 2023. Stedman, Alex (November 9, 2023). "John Wick Anime And TV Show Separate From The Continental Are In The Works, Says Director". IGN. Archived from the original on November 9, 2023. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Coulthard, Lisa; Steenberg, Lindsay (2022). "Red Circle of Revenge: Anatomy of the Fight Sequence in John Wick". The Worlds Of John Wick: The Year's Work At The Continental Hotel. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-06241-3. OCLC 1298389868. Gross, Edward; Altman, Mark A. (2022). They Shouldn't Have Killed His Dog – The Complete Uncensored Ass-Kicking Oral History Of John Wick, Gun Fu, And The New Age Of Action. New York City, New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-1-250-27843-2. OCLC 1263340546. Hall, Ann C. (2022). "John Wick: Keanu Reeves's Epic Adventure". Heroism Science. 7 (2). Richmond, Virginia: University of Richmond. doi:10.26736/hs.2022.01.08. Horton, Owen R. (2022). "Masculinity, Isolation, and Revenge: John Wick's Liminal Body". The Worlds Of John Wick: The Year's Work At The Continental Hotel. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-06241-3. OCLC 1298389868. Thomas, Sarah (2022). "Keanu Reeves, John Wick, And The Myths And Tensions Between Star Brands And Franchise Properties". Celebrity Studies. 13 (2). Abingdon-on-Thames, Oxfordshire: Routledge: 244–258. doi:10.1080/19392397.2022.2063405. Wong, Wayne (2022). "Killing in Equanimity: Theorizing John Wick's Action Aesthetics". The Worlds Of John Wick: The Year's Work At The Continental Hotel. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-06241-3. OCLC 1298389868. Official website John Wick at IMDb John Wick at AllMovie John Wick at the Internet Movie Firearms Database Portals:  2010s  Film  United States John Wick (film) at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata