Ängelholm is a locality and the seat of Ängelholm Municipality in Skåne, Sweden with 42,131 inhabitants in 2017. The old settlement Rynestad was mentioned around the year 1600.[clarification needed] The city was founded in 1516 as Engelholm by King Christian II of Denmark, who moved the settlement from Luntertun on the coast because it was difficult to defend. As a founder, King Christian II personally identified the boundaries of the new city, granting the city a charter in 1516. At Luntertun there is only a church garden left today. The town remained small for centuries. Following the Treaty of Roskilde in 1658, Ängelholm, together with the rest of Skåne, was assigned by Denmark to Sweden. The town began to grow in the 19th century due to industrialization. It was also a garrison town until 1883 and had a Swedish Air Force base between 1941 and 2009. The older spelling Engelholm was retained until 1912, when the city council decided to adopt a more modern spelling in line with the Swedish spelling reform of 1906. The high-performance car manufacturer Koenigsegg Automotive is based on the premises of the decommissioned Scania Wing (F 10). Tourism is an important industry for the city. There is a 6-kilometer long sandy beach right outside the town. The winds in Skälder Bay make the beach a popular place for sailors, wave surfers and wind surfers. There is also an ice cream manufacturer, Engelholms Glass which produces about 1.2 million litres of ice-cream every year. A special sight of Ängelholm is the UFO-Memorial Ängelholm. The city is known for its clay cuckoos — a special kind of ocarina. This is however a dying tradition as there is now only one producer of clay cuckoos, Sofia Nilsson. Ängelholm has the only orchestra of clay cuckoos in the whole world with which performed at the "Allsång på Skansen" in 2007.[citation needed] Ängelholm is also the home of hockey team Rögle BK that competes in the SHL. Emma Andersson, singer, model, chef, and TV personality Sebastian Andersson, Footballer Sofie Andersson, golfer Malik Bendjelloul, Academy Award winning filmmaker Frans G. Bengtsson, author Gösta Carlsson, road racing cyclist Jörgen Elofsson, songwriter Anna Fiske, illustrator and writer Roger Hansson, ice hockey player Jill Johnson, singer Jörgen Jönsson, ice hockey player Kenny Jönsson, ice hockey player Christian von Koenigsegg, automotive mogul Jarl Kulle, actor and director Timothy Liljegren, ice hockey player Christopher Liljewall, ice hockey player Robert Mirosavic, footballer Rikard Nilsson, chef Gustav Olhaver, ice hockey player Maria Rooth, ice hockey player Sven Rydenfelt, economist Anton Santesson (born 1994), ice hockey defenceman Jenny Silver, singer Peter Svensson, tennis player Peter Wichers, musician Heliga korsets kapell, Ängelholm Koenigsegg "Tätorternas landareal, folkmängd och invånare per km2 2005 och 2010" (in Swedish). Statistics Sweden. 14 December 2011. Archived from the original on 27 January 2012. Retrieved 10 January 2012. "SHL.se". SHL.se. Archived from the original on 22 March 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2018. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Ängelholm. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ängelholm. Ängelholm' municipality Ängelholm's tourist web page v t e