A blind arcade or blank arcade is an arcade (a series of arches) that has no actual openings and that is applied to the surface of a wall as a decorative element: i.e., the arches are not windows or openings but are part of the masonry face. It is designed as an ornamental architectural element and has no load-bearing function. Whereas a blind arch is usually a single arch or a series of joined arches as a frieze (sometimes called Lombard band), a blind arcade is composed of a series of arches that have well-defined columns in between its arches. A blind arcade may resemble several blind windows (false/blank windows or sealed-up windows) or blind niches that are side by side. Blind arcades are a common decorative features on the facades of Romanesque and Gothic buildings throughout Western Europe, and are also a common feature in Byzantine Orthodox churches in Eastern Europe, and in Armenian churches. Dwarf gallery Flying butress Camposanto Monumentale, Pisa, Italy Canton Viaduct, Canton, Massachusetts Córdoba, Spain Norwich Cathedral, Norfolk, United Kingdom Apse interior of Church of Santa María a Real do Sar, Santiago de Compostela, Spain Canterbury Cathedral, England Torre del Oro, Seville, Spain Apse exterior of Norman church of Santi Pietro e Paolo d'Agrò, Casalvecchio Siculo, Sicily Linköping Cathedral, Sweden San Miniato al Monte, Florence, Italy Armenian church, Lviv, Ukraine Great Mosque of Kairouan (Mosque of Uqba), Tunisia Blind arcade on Ardmore Cathedral, Ireland, with sculpted Biblical scenes (12th century) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Blind arcades. Harris, Cyril M. (2013). Illustrated Dictionary of Historic Architecture. Courier. ISBN 978-0-486-13211-2. Blank arcade. Same as blind arcade. […] blank/blind/false window. 1. A recess […] having the external appearance of a window. 2. A window which has been sealed off but is still visible. Dictionary of French Architecture from the 11th to 16th century/Volume 1/Blind Arcade The Monasery of Marmashen v t e