Ye (/jeɪ/ YAY; born Kanye Omari West /ˈkɑːnjeɪ/ KAHN-yay; June 8, 1977) is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, record producer, and fashion designer. One of the world's best-selling music artists with 160 million records sold, West has won 24 Grammy Awards, the joint tenth-most of all time and most awarded for any hip hop artist jointly with Jay-Z. His other accolades include a Billboard Artist Achievement Award, a joint-record three Brit Awards for Best International Male Solo Artist and the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award. West's first six solo albums—The College Dropout (2004), Late Registration (2005), Graduation (2007), 808s & Heartbreak (2008), My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy (2010), and Yeezus (2013)—were included on Rolling Stone's 2020 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list, with the same publication naming him one of the 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time. He has also released the collaborative albums Watch the Throne (2011) with Jay-Z, Kids See Ghosts (2018) with Kid Cudi, and Vultures 1 (2024) with Ty Dolla Sign. West holds the joint record (with Bob Dylan) for most albums (4) topping the annual Pazz & Jop critic poll. Time named him one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2005 and 2015. As a fashion designer, he has collaborated with Nike, Inc., Louis Vuitton, Gap Inc., and A.P.C. on clothing and footwear and led the Yeezy collaboration with Adidas. West's outspoken views have received significant media coverage. He has been a frequent source of controversy due to his conduct on social media and at awards shows and public settings, as well as his comments on the music and fashion industries, U.S. politics, race, and slavery. His Christian faith, high-profile marriage to Kim Kardashian, and mental health have also been topics of media attention. In 2020, West launched an unsuccessful independent presidential campaign that advocated for a consistent life ethic. In October 2022, he was widely condemned and lost many sponsors and partnerships—including his collaborations with Adidas, Gap, and Balenciaga—after making a series of antisemitic statements, including praising Adolf Hitler and denying the Holocaust. West was born on June 8, 1977, in Atlanta, Georgia. After his parents divorced when he was three years old, he moved with his mother to Chicago, Illinois. His father, Ray West, is a former Black Panther and was one of the first black photojournalists at The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Ray later became a Christian counselor, and in 2006, opened the Good Water Store and Café in Lexington Park, Maryland, with startup capital from his son. West's mother, Donda C. West (née Williams), was a professor of English at Clark Atlanta University and the Chair of the English Department at Chicago State University before retiring to serve as his manager. West was raised in a middle-class environment, attending Polaris School for Individual Education in suburban Oak Lawn, Illinois, after living in Chicago. At the age of 10, West moved with his mother to Nanjing, China, where she was teaching at Nanjing University as a Fulbright Scholar. According to his mother, West was the only foreigner in his class, but he settled in well and quickly picked up the language, although he has since forgotten most of it. When asked about his grades in high school, West replied, "I got A's and B's." West demonstrated an affinity for the arts at an early age; he began writing poetry when he was five years old. West started rapping in the third grade and began making musical compositions in the seventh grade, eventually selling them to other artists. West crossed paths with producer No I.D., who became West's friend and mentor.: 557  After graduating from high school, West received a scholarship to attend Chicago's American Academy of Art in 1997 and began taking painting classes. Shortly after, he transferred to Chicago State University to study English. At age 20, he dropped out to pursue his musical career. This greatly displeased his mother, who was also a professor at the university, although she would later accept the decision.: 558  West began his early production career in the mid-1990s, creating beats primarily for burgeoning local artists in the Chicago area. He received his first official production credits at age nineteen, when he produced eight tracks on Down to Earth, the 1996 debut album of Chicago-based underground rapper Grav. In 1998, West was the first producer signed to the management-production company Hip Hop Since 1978, founded by Gee Roberson and Kyambo "Hip-Hop" Joshua. For a time, West acted as a ghost producer for Deric "D-Dot" Angelettie. Due to his association with Angelettie, West was not able to release a solo album, so he formed the Go-Getters, a hip hop group composed of him and fellow Chicago natives GLC, Timmy G, Really Doe, and Arrowstar. The Go-Getters independently released their first and only studio album, World Record Holders in 1999 through West's company, Konman Productions. West spent much of the late 1990s further producing for several musical acts. He produced the third track on Foxy Brown's second studio album Chyna Doll (1999), which became the second hip-hop album by a female rapper to peak atop the US Billboard 200 chart. In 2000, West began producing for artists on Roc-A-Fella Records as an in-house producer. West is often credited with revitalizing Jay-Z's career with extensive contributions to his 2001 album The Blueprint, which Rolling Stone ranked among their list of greatest hip-hop albums. West produced songs for label cohorts such as Beanie Sigel and Freeway, but also produced beats which were used by artists on other labels including Ludacris, Alicia Keys, and Janet Jackson. Meanwhile, West struggled to attain a record deal as a rapper. Multiple record companies, including Capitol Records, denied or ignored him because he did not portray the gangsta image prominent in mainstream hip hop at the time.: 556  Desperate to keep West from defecting to another label, then-label head Damon Dash reluctantly signed West to Roc-A-Fella as a recording artist.: 556  A 2002 car accident, which shattered his jaw, inspired West; two weeks after being admitted to the hospital, he recorded "Through the Wire" at the Record Plant Studios with his jaw still wired shut. The song was first included on West's debut mixtape Get Well Soon..., which was released in December 2002. At the same time, West announced that he was working on an album titled The College Dropout, whose overall theme was to "make your own decisions. Don't let society tell you, 'This is what you have to do.'" West recorded the remainder of the album in Los Angeles while recovering from the car accident. It was leaked months before its release date, and West used the opportunity to remix, remaster, and revise the album before its release; West added new verses, string arrangements, gospel choirs, and improved drum programming. The album was postponed three times from its initial date in August 2003, and was eventually released in February 2004, reaching No. 2 on the Billboard 200 as his debut single, "Through the Wire" peaked at No. 15 while on the Billboard Hot 100 chart for five weeks. "Slow Jamz", his second single, featuring Twista and Jamie Foxx, became the three musicians' first No. 1 hit. The College Dropout received critical acclaim, was nominated for the top album of the year by American Music Awards and Billboard, and has consistently been ranked among the great hip-hop works and debut albums by artists. "Jesus Walks", the album's fourth single, reached the top 20 of the Billboard pop charts, despite industry executives' predictions that a song containing such blatant declarations of faith would never make it to the radio. The College Dropout was certified triple platinum in the US, and garnered West 10 Grammy nominations, including Album of the Year, and Best Rap Album (which it received). During this period, West founded GOOD Music, a record label and management company that housed affiliate artists and producers, such as No I.D. and John Legend, and produced singles for Brandy, Common, Legend, and Slum Village. West invested $2 million and took over a year to make his second album. West was inspired by Roseland NYC Live, a 1998 live album by English trip hop group Portishead, produced with the New York Philharmonic Orchestra, incorporating string arrangements into his hip-hop production. Though West had not been able to afford many live instruments around the time of his debut album, the money from his commercial success enabled him to hire a string orchestra for his second album Late Registration. West collaborated with American film score composer Jon Brion, who served as the album's co-executive producer for several tracks. Late Registration sold over 2.3 million units in the United States alone by the end of 2005 and was considered by industry observers as the only successful major album release of the fall season, which had been plagued by steadily declining CD sales. When his song "Touch the Sky" failed to win Best Video at the 2006 MTV Europe Music Awards, West went onto the stage as the award was being presented to Justice and Simian for "We Are Your Friends" and argued that he should have won the award instead. Hundreds of news outlets worldwide criticized the outburst. On November 7, 2006, West apologized for this outburst publicly during his performance as support act for U2 for their Vertigo concert in Brisbane. He later spoofed the incident on the 33rd-season premiere of Saturday Night Live in September 2007. West's third studio album, Graduation, garnered major publicity when its release date pitted West in a sales competition against rapper 50 Cent's Curtis. Upon their September 2007 releases, Graduation outsold Curtis by a large margin, debuting at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart and selling 957,000 copies in its first week. Graduation continued the string of critical and commercial successes by West, and the album's lead single, "Stronger", garnered his third number-one hit. "Stronger", which samples French house duo Daft Punk, has been accredited to not only encouraging other hip-hop artists to incorporate house and electronica elements into their music, but also for playing a part in the revival of disco and electro-infused music in the late 2000s. His mother's death in November 2007 and the end of his engagement to Alexis Phifer profoundly affected West, who set off for his 2008 Glow in the Dark Tour shortly thereafter. Recorded mostly in Honolulu, Hawaii in three weeks, West announced his fourth album, 808s & Heartbreak, at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards, where he performed its lead single, "Love Lockdown". Music audiences were taken aback by the uncharacteristic production style and the presence of Auto-Tune, which typified the pre-release response to the record. 808s & Heartbreak was released by Island Def Jam in November 2008. Upon its release, the lead single "Love Lockdown" debuted at number three on the Billboard Hot 100, while follow-up single "Heartless" debuted at number four. While it was criticized prior to release, 808s & Heartbreak is considered to have had a significant effect on hip-hop music, encouraging other rappers to take more creative risks with their productions. While Taylor Swift was accepting her award for Best Female Video at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards, West went on stage and grabbed the microphone from her to proclaim that Beyoncé deserved the award instead. He was subsequently removed from the remainder of the show for his actions. West was criticized by various celebrities for the outburst, and by President Barack Obama, who called West a "jackass". The incident sparked a large influx of Internet photo memes. West subsequently apologized, including personally to Swift. However, in a November 2010 interview, he seemed to recant his past apologies, describing the act at the 2009 awards show as "selfless". Following the highly publicized incident, West took a brief break from music and threw himself into fashion, only to hole up in Hawaii for the next few months writing and recording his next album. Importing his favorite producers and artists to work on and inspire his recording, West kept engineers behind the boards 24 hours a day and slept only in increments. Noah Callahan-Bever, a writer for Complex, was present during the sessions and described the "communal" atmosphere as thus: "With the right songs and the right album, he can overcome any and all controversy, and we are here to contribute, challenge, and inspire." A variety of artists contributed to the project, including close friends Jay-Z, Kid Cudi and Pusha T, as well as collaborations with artists including Justin Vernon of Bon Iver and Gil Scott Heron. My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy, West's fifth studio album, was released in November 2010 to widespread acclaim from critics, many of whom considered it his best work and said it solidified his comeback. In stark contrast to his previous effort, which featured a minimalist sound, Dark Fantasy adopts a maximalist philosophy and deals with themes of celebrity and excess. The record included the international hit "All of the Lights", and Billboard hits "Power", "Monster", and "Runaway", the latter of which accompanied a 35-minute film of the same name directed by and starring West. During this time, West initiated the free music program GOOD Fridays through his website, offering a free download of previously unreleased songs each Friday, a portion of which were included on the album. This promotion ran from August to December 2010. Dark Fantasy went on to go platinum in the United States, but its omission as a contender for Album of the Year at the 54th Grammy Awards was viewed as a "snub" by several media outlets. 2011 saw West embark on a festival tour to commemorate the release of My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy performing and headlining numerous festivals including; SWU Music & Arts, Austin City Limits Music Festival, Oya Festival, Flow Festival, Live Music Festival, The Big Chill, Essence Music Festival, Lollapalooza and Coachella which was described by The Hollywood Reporter as "one of greatest hip-hop sets of all time", West released the collaborative album Watch the Throne with Jay-Z in August 2011. By employing a sales strategy that released the album digitally weeks before its physical counterpart, Watch the Throne became one of the few major label albums in the Internet age to avoid a leak. "Niggas in Paris" became the record's highest-charting single, peaking at number five on the Billboard Hot 100. The co-headlining Watch the Throne Tour kicked off in October 2011 and concluded in June 2012. In 2012, West released the compilation album Cruel Summer, a collection of tracks by artists from West's record label GOOD Music. Sessions for West's sixth solo effort begin to take shape in early 2013 in his own personal loft's living room at a Paris hotel. Determined to "undermine the commercial", he once again brought together close collaborators and attempted to incorporate Chicago drill, dancehall, acid house, and industrial music. Primarily inspired by architecture, West's perfectionist tendencies led him to contact producer Rick Rubin fifteen days shy of its due date to strip down the record's sound in favor of a more minimalist approach. Initial promotion of his sixth album included worldwide video projections of the album's music and live television performances. Yeezus, West's sixth album, was released June 18, 2013, to rave reviews from critics. It became his sixth consecutive number one debut, but also marked his lowest solo opening week sales. In September 2013, West announced he would be headlining his first solo tour in five years, to support Yeezus, with fellow American rapper Kendrick Lamar accompanying him as a supporting act. The tour was met with rave reviews from critics. Rolling Stone described it as "crazily entertaining, hugely ambitious, emotionally affecting (really!) and, most importantly, totally bonkers". Writing for Forbes, Zack O'Malley Greenburg praised West for "taking risks that few pop stars, if any, are willing to take in today's hyper-exposed world of pop", describing the show as "overwrought and uncomfortable at times, but [it] excels at challenging norms and provoking thought in a way that just isn't common for mainstream musical acts of late". West subsequently released a number of singles featuring Paul McCartney, including "Only One" and "FourFiveSeconds", also featuring Rihanna. In November 2013, West stated that he was beginning work on his next studio album, hoping to release it by mid-2014, with production by Rick Rubin and Q-Tip. Having initially announced a new album entitled Yeezus II slated for a 2014 release, West announced in March 2015 that the album would instead be tentatively called So Help Me God. In May 2015, West was awarded an honorary doctorate by the School of the Art Institute of Chicago for his contributions to music, fashion, and popular culture. The next month, West headlined at the Glastonbury Festival in the UK, despite a petition signed by almost 135,000 people against his appearance. Another petition aimed to block West from headlining the 2015 Pan American Games, garnering 50,000 supporters. West announced in January 2016 that SWISH would be released on February 11, and later that month, released new songs "Real Friends" and a snippet of "No More Parties in LA" with Kendrick Lamar. On January 26, 2016, West revealed he had renamed the album from SWISH to Waves. In the weeks leading up to the album's release, West became embroiled in several Twitter controversies. Several days ahead of its release, West again changed the title, this time to The Life of Pablo. On February 11, West premiered the album at Madison Square Garden as part of the presentation of his Yeezy Season 3 clothing line. Following the preview, West announced that he would be modifying the tracklist once more before its release to the public. He released the album exclusively on Tidal on February 14, 2016, following a performance on SNL. Following its release, West continued to tinker with mixes of several tracks, describing the work as "a living breathing changing creative expression" and proclaiming the end of the album as a dominant release form. Despite West's earlier comments, in addition to Tidal, the album was released through several other competing services starting in April. In February 2016, West stated on Twitter that he was planning to release another album in the summer of 2016, tentatively called Turbo Grafx 16 in reference to the 1990s video game console of the same name. In June 2016, West released the collaborative lead single "Champions" off the GOOD Music album Cruel Winter, which has yet to be released. Later that month, West released a controversial video for "Famous", which depicted wax figures of several celebrities (including West, Kardashian, Taylor Swift, businessman and then-presidential candidate Donald Trump, comedian Bill Cosby, and former president George W. Bush) sleeping nude in a shared bed. In August 2016, West embarked on the Saint Pablo Tour in support of The Life of Pablo. The performances featured a mobile stage suspended from the ceiling. West postponed several dates in October following the Paris robbery of several of his wife's effects. On November 21, 2016, West cancelled the remaining 21 dates on the Saint Pablo Tour, following a week of no-shows, curtailed concerts and rants about politics. He was later admitted for psychiatric observation at UCLA Medical Center. He stayed hospitalized over the Thanksgiving weekend because of a temporary psychosis stemming from sleep deprivation and extreme dehydration. Following this episode West took an 11-month break from posting on Twitter and the public in general. It was reported in May 2017 that West was recording new music in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, with a wide range of collaborators. In April 2018, West announced plans to write a philosophy book entitled Break the Simulation, later clarifying that he was sharing the book "in real time" on Twitter and began posting content that was likened to "life coaching". Later that month, he also announced two new albums, a solo album and self-titled collaboration with Kid Cudi under the name Kids See Ghosts, both of which would be released in June. Additionally, he revealed he would produce upcoming albums by GOOD Music label-mates Pusha T and Teyana Taylor, as well as Nas. Shortly thereafter, West released the non-album singles "Lift Yourself" and "Ye vs. the People", in which he and T.I. discussed West's support of Donald Trump. Pusha T's Daytona, "the first project out of Wyoming", was released in May to critical acclaim, although the album's artwork—a photograph of deceased singer Whitney Houston's bathroom that West paid $85,000 to license—attracted some controversy. The following week, West released his eighth studio album, Ye. West has suggested that he scrapped the original recordings of the album and re-recorded it within a month. The week after, West released a collaborative album with Kid Cudi, titled Kids See Ghosts, named after their group of the same name. West also completed production work on Nas' Nasir and Teyana Taylor's K.T.S.E., which were released in June 2018. In September, West announced his ninth studio album Yandhi to be released by the end of the month and a collaborative album with fellow Chicagoan rapper Chance the Rapper titled Good Ass Job. That same month, West announced that he would be changing his stage name to "Ye". Yandhi was originally set for release in September 2018 but was postponed multiple times. In January 2019, West pulled out of headlining that year's Coachella festival after negotiations broke down due to discord regarding stage design. In July, it was reported that songs from West's unreleased album Yandhi were leaked online. The following month, Kim Kardashian announced that West's next album would be titled Jesus Is King, effectively scrapping Yandhi. By October, the entire unfinished album was available for a short time on streaming services Spotify and Tidal. On January 6, 2019, West started his weekly "Sunday Service" events, which included soul variations of both West's and others' songs and were attended by multiple celebrities, including the Kardashians, Charlie Wilson, and Kid Cudi. West previewed a new song, "Water" at his "Sunday Service" orchestration performance at Coachella 2019, which was later revealed to feature on his upcoming album Jesus Is King; West released the album on October 25, 2019. It became the first to ever top the Billboard 200, Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, Top Rap Albums, Top Christian Albums and Top Gospel Albums at the same time. On December 25, 2019, West and Sunday Service released Jesus Is Born, containing 19 songs, including several re-workings of older West songs. West released a single titled "Wash Us in the Blood" on June 30, 2020, featuring fellow American rapper and singer Travis Scott, along with the music video, which was set to serve as the lead single from his tenth studio album Donda. However, in September 2020, West stated that he would not be releasing any further music until he is "done with [his] contract with Sony and Universal". On October 16, he released the single "Nah Nah Nah". West held several listening parties at Mercedes-Benz Stadium for his upcoming album Donda in the summer of 2021, where he had taken up temporary residence in one of the stadium's locker rooms, converting it into a recording studio to finish the recording. After multiple delays, Donda was released on August 29, 2021. West claimed the album was released early without his approval and alleged that Universal had altered the tracklist. He released a deluxe edition of Donda, including five new songs, to streaming services on November 14, 2021. On November 20, days after ending their long-running feud, West and rapper Drake confirmed that they would stage the "Free Larry Hoover" benefit concert on December 9 at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum. On January 5, 2022, West was announced as one of the 2022 headliners of Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival. Later that month on January 15, West released the first single for his upcoming album Donda 2, "Eazy" featuring The Game, to be executive produced by American rapper Future. West hosted a listening event for the album at LoanDepot Park in Miami, Florida, on February 22. In April, shortly before Coachella, West pulled out as headlining act, then proceeded to pull out of headlining Rolling Loud. West and The Game performed the single on July 22, marking West's first performance in five months following the low profile he had been keeping since Donda 2 remained unfinished. A day later, despite cancelling as headliner, he appeared at Rolling Loud during Lil Durk's set. In December 2022, after weeks of controversial antisemitic statements, West released a new song "Someday We'll All Be Free" on his Instagram. On August 25, 2023, West was reported to be in the process of recording his eleventh studio album, with two sources close to him stating that the release of new music was "imminent". On October 13, Billboard reported that West had finished recording a collaborative studio album with Ty Dolla Sign and was in the process of shopping the album to distributors, adding that the album was originally intended for an official release that day but was ultimately pushed back for unknown reasons and expected to drop within the coming weeks. On October 23, Ty Dolla Sign announced that he and West would be holding a "multi-stadium listening event" on November 3 to promote their collaborative project. On November 22, 2023, West and Ty Dolla Sign released the eponymous lead single for the album, "Vultures" featuring Bump J. Two additional versions of the song were later released: A version of the song featuring Lil Durk alongside Bump J on November 23, 2023, and a version of the song produced by Mobb Deep rapper Havoc on February 8, 2024. West and Ty Dolla $ign held several listening parties prior to the release of Vultures, including "Vultures Rave" performances in Miami and Las Vegas in December 2023 and listening parties at United Center in Chicago and UBS Arena in the New York City area on February 7 and 8, 2024. On January 23, 2024, West released a trailer for Vultures directed by Jon Rafman. Through the trailer, West announced that Vultures would instead be released as a trilogy of albums, with each of the album's three volumes set to be released on February 9, March 6, and April 5, 2024. In January 2024, Kanye West co-signed 4Batz and called him his favorite new artist. On February 8, 2024, West released the first volume's second single, "Talking / Once Again" featuring his eldest daughter North, as well as a compilation pack entitled Vultures Pack composed of the eponymous song's three released versions. On February 9, 2024, during an interview of Erick Sermon on the Bootleg Kev podcast, Sermon revealed that West's upcoming eleventh studio album was titled Y3, while also stating that he had originally contributed to Y3 in May – June 2023 and later contributed to Vultures after traveling to Florence and discovering West had switched his focus entirely towards the latter project. On February 10, 2024, hours after West held a listening party at UBS Arena, the first volume of the Vultures trilogy, entitled Vultures 1, was officially released. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, becoming West eleventh consecutive and Ty Dolla Sign's first number one album, respectively. West's musical career is defined by frequent stylistic shifts and different musical approaches. In the subsequent years since his debut, West has both musically and lyrically taken an increasingly experimental approach to crafting progressive hip hop music while maintaining accessible pop sensibilities. Ed Ledsham of PopMatters said that "West's melding of multiple genres into the hip-hop fold is a complex act that challenges the dominant white notions of what constitutes true 'art' music." West's rhymes have been described as funny, provocative and articulate, capable of seamlessly segueing from shrewd commentary to comical braggadocio to introspective sensitivity. West imparts that he strives to speak in an inclusive manner so groups from different racial and gender backgrounds can comprehend his lyrics, saying he desired to sound "just as ill as Jadakiss and just as understandable as Will Smith". Early in his career, West pioneered a style of hip-hop production dubbed "chipmunk-soul", a sampling technique involving the manipulation of tempo in order to chop and stretch pitched-up samples from vintage soul songs. On his debut studio album, The College Dropout (2004), West formed the constitutive elements of his style, described as intricate hip-hop beats, topical subject matter, and clumsy rapping laced with inventive wordplay. The record saw West diverge from the then-dominant gangster persona in hip hop in favor of more diverse, topical lyrical subjects, including higher education, materialism, self-consciousness, minimum-wage labor, institutional prejudice, class struggle, family, sexuality, his struggles in the music industry, and middle-class upbringing. Over time, West has explored a variety of music genres, encompassing and taking inspiration from chamber pop on his second studio album, Late Registration (2005), arena rock and europop on his third album, Graduation (2007), synth-driven electropop on his fourth album, 808s & Heartbreak (2008), acid-house, drill, industrial rap and trap on Yeezus (2013), gospel and Christian rap on The Life of Pablo (2016), Jesus is King (2019) and Donda (2021), and psychedelic music on Kids See Ghosts (2018). Early in his career, West made clear his interest in fashion and desire to work in the clothing design industry. He launched his own clothing line in spring 2006, and developed it over the following four years before the line was ultimately cancelled in 2009. In January 2007, West's first sneaker collaboration was released, a special-edition Bapesta from A Bathing Ape. In 2009, West collaborated with Nike to release his own shoe, the Air Yeezys, becoming the first non-athlete to be given a shoe deal with the company. In January 2009, he introduced his first shoe line designed for Louis Vuitton during Paris Fashion Week. The line was released in summer 2009. West has additionally designed shoewear for Italian shoemaker Giuseppe Zanotti. In fall 2009, West moved to Rome, where he interned at Italian fashion brand Fendi, giving ideas for the men's collection. In March 2011, West collaborated with M/M Paris for a series of silk scarves featuring artwork from My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy. In October 2011, West premiered his women's fashion label at Paris Fashion Week. His debut fashion show received mixed-to-negative reviews. In March 2012, West premiered a second fashion line at Paris Fashion Week. Critics deemed the sophomore effort "much improved" compared to his first show. On December 3, 2013, Adidas officially confirmed a new shoe collaboration deal with West. After months of anticipation and rumors, West confirmed the release of the Adidas Yeezy Boosts. In 2015, West unveiled a Yeezy clothing line, premiering in collaboration with Adidas early that year. In June 2016, Adidas announced a new long-term contract with Kanye West that extended the Yeezy line to a number of stores, planning to sell sports performance products like basketball, football, and soccer, although Adidas terminated the partnership with West in October 2022 due to his antisemitic remarks. In May 2021, West signed a 10-year deal linking Yeezy with GAP to create Yeezy Gap, however, in September 2022, West announced that he was ending the deal. West founded the record label and production company GOOD Music in 2004, in conjunction with Sony BMG, shortly after releasing his debut album, The College Dropout. West, alongside then-unknown Ohio singer John Legend and fellow Chicago rapper Common were the label's inaugural artists. The label houses artists including West, Big Sean, Pusha T, Teyana Taylor, Yasiin Bey / Mos Def, D'banj and John Legend, and producers including Hudson Mohawke, Q-Tip, Travis Scott, No I.D., Jeff Bhasker, and S1. GOOD Music has released ten albums certified gold or higher by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). In November 2015, West appointed Pusha T the new president of GOOD Music. In August 2008, West revealed plans to open 10 Fatburger restaurants in the Chicago area; the first was set to open in September 2008 in Orland Park. The second followed in January 2009, while a third location is yet to be revealed, although the process is being finalized. His company, KW Foods LLC, bought the rights to the chain in Chicago. Ultimately, in 2009, only two locations actually opened. In February 2011, West shut down the Fatburger located in Orland Park. In January 2012, West announced his establishment of the creative content company Donda, named after his late mother. In his announcement, West proclaimed that the company would "pick up where Steve Jobs left off"; Donda would operate as a "design company" with a goal to "make products and experiences that people want and can afford". In stating Donda's creative philosophy, West articulated the need to "put creatives in a room together with like minds" in order to "simplify and aesthetically improve everything we see, taste, touch, and feel." West is notoriously secretive about the company's operations, maintaining neither an official website nor a social media presence. Contemporary critics have noted the consistent minimalistic aesthetic exhibited throughout Donda creative projects. West expressed interest in starting an architecture firm in May 2013, saying "I want to do product, I am a product person, not just clothing but water bottle design, architecture ... I make music but I shouldn't be limited to one place of creativity" and then later in November 2013, delivering a manifesto on his architectural goals during a visit to Harvard Graduate School of Design. In May 2018, West announced he was starting an architecture firm called Yeezy Home, which will act as an arm of his already successful Yeezy fashion label. In June 2018, the first Yeezy Home collaboration was announced by designer Jalil Peraza, teasing an affordable concrete prefabricated home as part of a social housing project. In March 2015, it was announced that West is a co-owner, with various other music artists, in the music streaming service Tidal. The service specialises in lossless audio and high definition music videos. Jay-Z acquired the parent company of Tidal, Aspiro, in the first quarter of 2015. Sixteen artist stakeholders including Jay-Z, Rihanna, Beyoncé, Madonna, Chris Martin, Nicki Minaj co-own Tidal, with the majority owning a 3% equity stake. In October 2022, in direct response to bans he received on Twitter and Instagram stemming from his antisemitic comments, West reached an agreement in principle to acquire the alt-tech social network Parler for an undisclosed amount. Parler and West mutually agreed to terminate the proposed deal in mid-November. West, alongside his mother, founded the Kanye West Foundation in Chicago in 2003, tasked with a mission to battle dropout and illiteracy rates, while partnering with community organizations to provide underprivileged youth access to music education. In 2007, West and the Foundation partnered with Strong American Schools as part of their "Ed in '08" campaign. As spokesman for the campaign, West appeared in a series of PSAs for the organization, and hosted an inaugural benefit concert in August of that year. In 2008, following the death of West's mother, the foundation was rechristened The Dr. Donda West Foundation. The foundation ceased operations in 2011. In 2013, Kanye West and friend Rhymefest founded Donda's House, Inc., a program aimed at helping at-risk Chicago youth. West has contributed to hurricane relief in 2005 by participating in a Hurricane Katrina benefit concert after the storm had ravaged black communities in New Orleans and in 2012 when he performed at a Hurricane Sandy benefit concert. In January 2019, West donated $10 million towards the completion of the Roden Crater by American artist James Turrell. In June 2020, in the wake of the murder of George Floyd and the following protests, he donated $2 million between the family of Floyd and other victims of police brutality, Ahmaud Arbery and Breonna Taylor. The donation funded legal fees for Arbery and Taylor's families, as well as establishing a 529 plan to fully cover college tuition for Floyd's daughter. West made cameo appearances as himself in the films State Property 2 (2005) and The Love Guru (2008), and in an episode of the television show Entourage in 2007. West provided the voice for "Kenny West", a rapper, in the animated sitcom The Cleveland Show. In 2009, he starred in the Spike Jonze-directed short film We Were Once a Fairytale (2009), playing himself acting belligerently while drunk in a nightclub. West wrote, directed, and starred in the musical short film Runaway (2010), which heavily features music from My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy. The film depicts a relationship between a man, played by West, and a half-woman, half-phoenix creature. In 2012, West wrote and directed another short film, titled Cruel Summer, which premiered at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival in a custom pyramid-shaped screening pavilion featuring seven screens constructed for the film. The film was inspired by the compilation album of the same name. West made a cameo appearance in the comedy Anchorman 2: The Legend Continues (2013) as a MTV News representative in the film's fight scene.[citation needed] In September 2018, West announced the starting of a film production company named Half Beast, LLC. A documentary shot over 21 years featuring footage of West's early days in Chicago through the death of his mother to his presidential run was announced to debut in 2021. Titled Jeen-Yuhs, it was acquired by Netflix for $30 million. On July 4, 2020, West announced on Twitter that he would be running in the 2020 presidential election. On July 7, West was interviewed by Forbes about his presidential run, where he announced that his running mate would be Wyoming preacher Michelle Tidball, and that he would run as an independent under the "Birthday Party", explaining his decision of why he chose the name, saying, "Because when we win, it's everybody's 'birthday'." West also said he no longer supported Trump because he "hid in [a] bunker" during the COVID-19 pandemic. Continuing, he said, "You know? Obama's special. Trump's special. We say Kanye West is special. America needs special people that lead. Bill Clinton? Special. Joe Biden's not special." Various political pundits speculated that West's presidential run was a publicity stunt to promote his latest music releases. On July 15, 2020, official paperwork was filed with the Federal Election Commission for West, under the "BDY" Party affiliation amid claims that he was preparing to drop out. West held his first rally that weekend, on July 19. West aligned himself with the philosophy of a consistent life ethic, a tenet of Christian democracy. His platform advocated for the creation of a culture of life, endorsing environmental stewardship, supporting the arts, buttressing faith-based organizations, restoring school prayer, providing for a strong national defense, and "America First" diplomacy. In July 2020, West told Forbes that he is ignorant on issues such as taxes and foreign policy. West conceded on Twitter on November 4, 2020. He received 66,365 votes in the 12 states he had ballot access in, receiving an average of 0.32%. Reported write-in votes gave West an additional 3,931 votes across 5 states. In addition, the Roque De La Fuente / Kanye West ticket won 60,160 votes in California (0.34%). According to Reuters, on January 4, 2021, a Kanye West-linked publicist pressured a Georgia election worker to confess to bogus charges of election tampering to assist Trump's claims of election interference. In December 2021, The Daily Beast reported that West's presidential campaign received millions of dollars in services from a secret network of Republican operatives, payments to which the committee did not report. According to campaign finance experts, this was done to conceal a connection. West has stated his intentions to run for president again in the 2024 presidential election. In November 2019, he said at an event, "When I run for president in 2024, we would've created so many jobs that I'm not going to run, I'm going to walk." He was met with laughter from the audience. On October 24, 2020, while running for president, West told Joe Rogan on his podcast that he would be open to running for Governor of California. On May 19, 2021, Fox News reported that it had obtained a letter concerning an RFAI (Request for further information) from the Federal Election Commission regarding an exploratory presidential committee. West's representatives stated, "Kanye West has not decided whether to become a candidate for president in the 2024 election, and the activity of the Kanye 2020 committee that prompted this RFAI is strictly exploratory." West said he approached former president Donald Trump and asked him if he would be interested in being his running mate. On subsequent interviews, merchandise, and in songs lyrics, West would repeatedly insinuate that he will indeed run. On November 20, 2022, Kanye announced his intention to run in 2024. In October 2023, an attorney for West said that he "is not a candidate for office in 2024". Wikinews has related news: Rapper Kanye West denounces Bush response, American media at hurricane relief telethon West has been an outspoken and controversial celebrity throughout his career, receiving criticism from the mainstream media, industry colleagues and entertainers, and three U.S. presidents. In a 2005 speech, West criticized both the media and the government's racial disparities in their response to Hurricane Katrina, stating on live television that "George Bush doesn't care about black people". West has voiced his opposition to abortion in 2013, citing his belief in the Sixth Commandment, and in 2022 deemed abortion "genocide and population control" of black people. He has stated that the 400-year enslavement of Africans "sounds like a choice", before elaborating that his comment was in reference to mental enslavement and argued for free thought. He later apologized for the comment. In late 2022, West made a series of antisemitic statements, resulting in the termination of his collaborations, sponsorships, and partnerships with Vogue, Universal Music Group, CAA, Balenciaga, Gap, and Adidas. West was widely condemned after appearing at a dinner hosted by Donald Trump at Mar-a-Lago beside Nick Fuentes, a white nationalist. In a subsequent December appearance on Alex Jones's InfoWars, West praised Adolf Hitler, denied the Holocaust, and identified as a Nazi. Following the interview, West's Twitter account was terminated after he posted an image depicting a swastika entangled within a Star of David. In July 2023, Twitter reversed the ban, citing assurances from West not to post harmful content in the future. According to a 2023 report published by the Anti-Defamation League, West's antisemitic rhetoric has caused several instances of hate-speech vandalism, harassment, and violence across the United States. In December 2023, weeks ahead of the slated release of his upcoming album, West apologized for his antisemitic remarks in a written statement on Instagram. West's net worth was as high as $1.8 billion in 2021. In October 2022, Forbes estimated his net worth to have dropped to $400 million in large part due to Adidas's termination of their partnership following a series of public antisemitic statements. In August 2021, West applied to have his legal name changed from "Kanye Omari West" to "Ye," with no middle or last name; he cited "personal reasons" for the change. The request was granted in October. West had alluded to wishing to change his name since 2018 and had used Ye as a nickname for several years prior, stating in a 2018 interview that "ye" (/jiː/) was the most commonly used word in the Bible: "In the Bible it means 'you'. So, I'm you. I'm us. It's us. It went from being Kanye, which means the only one, to just Ye." In April 2012, West began dating reality television star Kim Kardashian, with whom he had already been long-time friends. West and Kardashian became engaged in October 2013, and married at Fort di Belvedere in Florence in May 2014. Their private ceremony was subject to widespread mainstream coverage, with which West took issue. The couple's high-profile status and respective careers have resulted in their relationship becoming subject to heavy media coverage; The New York Times referred to their marriage as "a historic blizzard of celebrity". West and Kardashian have four children: North West (born June 2013), Saint West (born December 2015), Chicago West (born via surrogate in January 2018), and Psalm West (born via surrogate in May 2019). In July 2020, during a presidential campaign rally of his, West revealed that he had previously considered abortion during Kardashian's first pregnancy but has since taken anti-abortion views. In April 2015, West and Kardashian traveled to Jerusalem to have North baptized in the Armenian Apostolic Church at the Cathedral of St. James. In September 2018, West announced that he would be permanently moving back to Chicago to establish his Yeezy company headquarters there. This did not actually occur, and West instead went on to purchase two ranches near Cody, Wyoming, where he recorded his eighth solo studio album, Ye. Kardashian resides with their children in a home that the now-divorced couple owns in California, whereas West moved into a home across the street to continue to be near their children. In October 2021, West began the process of selling his Wyoming ranch. In July 2020, West acknowledged the possibility of Kardashian ending their marriage due to his adoption of anti-abortion views. Later that month, West wrote on Twitter that he had been attempting to divorce Kardashian. He also wrote that the Kardashian family was attempting "to lock [him] up". In January 2021, CNN reported that the couple were discussing divorce. A month later, Kardashian filed for divorce, with the couple citing "irreconcilable differences", agreeing to joint custody of their children, and declining spousal support from each other. The divorce settlement was finalized in November 2022, and West was ordered to pay $200,000 in monthly child support and be responsible for half of the children's medical, educational, and security expenses. West began an on-and-off relationship with the designer Alexis Phifer in 2002, and they became engaged in August 2006. They ended their 18-month engagement in 2008. Phifer stated that the pair had split amicably and remained friends. West dated model Amber Rose from 2008 until mid-2010. In an interview following their split, West stated that he had to take "30 showers" before committing to his next relationship with Kim Kardashian. In response, Rose stated that she had been "bullied" and "slut-shamed" by West throughout their relationship. In January 2022, actress Julia Fox confirmed in an Interview essay that she was dating West. West continued to say that he wanted his "family back" and publicly lashed out at Kardashian's new boyfriend, comedian Pete Davidson. His treatment of Davidson and Kardashian has been described by commentators as harassment and abusive; the 64th Annual Grammy Awards dropped him as a performer in response to his "concerning online behavior". Less than two months after confirming their relationship, Fox said that she and West had split up but remained on good terms. She later said that she dated West purely to "give people something to talk about" during the COVID-19 pandemic and to "get him off Kim's case". In January 2023, it was reported that West had informally married Australian architect Bianca Censori, who works for West's Yeezy brand, in a private ceremony in Beverly Hills. The ceremony had no legal standing; the couple did not file for a marriage license. In response to West's subsequent trips to Australia to visit Censori's family, Australian Minister for Education Jason Clare commented that West may be denied a visa due to his recent antisemitic remarks. The Executive Council of Australian Jewry and the Anti-Defamation Commission further argued against granting West entry. In December 2006, Robert "Evel" Knievel sued the rapper for trademark infringement of his name and likeness in West's video for "Touch the Sky". Knievel took issue with the "vulgar and offensive" and "sexually charged video" in which West takes on the persona of "Evel Kanyevel" that Knievel claimed damaged his reputation. The suit sought monetary damages and an injunction to stop distribution of the video. West's attorneys argued that the music video amounted to satire and therefore was covered under the First Amendment. Days before his death in November 2007, Knievel amicably settled the suit after being paid a visit by West, saying, "I thought he was a wonderful guy and quite a gentleman." In 2014, after an altercation with a paparazzo at the Los Angeles Airport, West was sentenced to serve two years' probation for a misdemeanor battery conviction, and was required to attend 24 anger management sessions, perform 250 hours of community service, and pay restitution to the photographer. A separate civil lawsuit brought by the paparazzo was settled in 2015, a week before it was due for trial. According to TMZ, an appeal to have West's conviction expunged from his criminal record was granted by a judge in 2016. After the success of his song "Jesus Walks" from the album The College Dropout, West was questioned on his beliefs and said, "I will say that I'm spiritual. I have accepted Jesus as my Savior. And I will say that I fall short every day." In a 2008 interview with The Fader, West stated that "I'm like a vessel, and God has chosen me to be the voice and the connector". In a 2009 interview with online magazine Bossip, West stated that he believed in God, but at the time felt that he "would never go into a religion". In 2014, West referred to himself as a Christian during one of his concerts. Kim Kardashian stated in September 2019: "He has had an amazing evolution of being born again and being saved by Christ." In October 2019, West said with respect to his past, "When I was trying to serve multiple gods it drove me crazy" in reference to the "god of ego, god of money, god of pride, the god of fame", and that "I didn't even know what it meant to be saved" and that now "I love Jesus Christ. I love Christianity." In September 2012, West donated $1,000 to Barack Obama's re-election campaign, and in August 2015 he donated $2,700 to Hillary Clinton's 2016 campaign. He also donated $15,000 to the Democratic National Committee in October 2014. In December 2016, West met with President-elect Donald Trump to discuss bullying, supporting teachers, modernizing curriculums, and violence in Chicago. West subsequently stated he would have voted for Trump had he voted. In February 2017, however, West deleted all his tweets about Trump in purported dislike of the new president's policies, particularly the travel ban. West reiterated his support for Donald Trump in April 2018. In October 2018, West donated to progressive Chicago mayoral candidate Amara Enyial. On November 19, 2016, West abruptly ended a concert before being committed at the recommendation of authorities to the UCLA Medical Center with hallucinations and paranoia. While the episode was first described as one of "temporary psychosis" caused by dehydration and sleep deprivation, West's mental state was abnormal enough for his 21 cancelled concerts to be covered by his insurance policy. He was reportedly paranoid and depressed throughout the hospitalization, but remained formally undiagnosed. Some have speculated that the Paris robbery of his wife may have triggered the paranoia. On November 30, West was released from the hospital. In his song "FML" and his featured verse on Vic Mensa's song "U Mad", he refers to using the antidepressant medication Lexapro, and in his unreleased song "I Feel Like That", he mentions feeling many common symptoms of depression and anxiety. In a 2018 interview, West said that he had become addicted to opioids when they were prescribed to him after liposuction. The addiction may have contributed to his nervous breakdown in 2016. In addition to his opioid addiction, West has stated that he has had addictions to alcohol, sex, and pornography. West said that he often has suicidal ideation. West was diagnosed with bipolar disorder in 2016, though his diagnosis was not made public until his 2018 album Ye. He told President Donald Trump that it was a misdiagnosis. He had reportedly accepted the diagnosis again by 2019, but again suggested that it had been a misdiagnosis in 2022. In December 2022, he suggested that he may be autistic. West is among the most critically acclaimed popular music artists of the 21st century, earning praise from music critics, industry peers, and cultural figures. In 2014, NME named him the third most influential artist in music. Billboard senior editor Alex Gale declared West "absolutely one of the best, and you could make the argument for the best artist of the 21st century." Sharing similar sentiments, Dave Bry of Complex Magazine called West the twenty-first century's "most important artist of any art form, of any genre." The Atlantic writer David Samuels commented, "Kanye's power resides in his wild creativity and expressiveness, his mastery of form, and his deep and uncompromising attachment to a self-made aesthetic that he expresses through means that are entirely of the moment: rap music, digital downloads, fashion, Twitter, blogs, live streaming video." Joe Muggs of The Guardian argued that "there is nobody else who can sell as many records as West does [...] while remaining so resolutely experimental and capable of stirring things up culturally and politically." Rolling Stone credited West with transforming hip-hop's mainstream, "establishing a style of introspective yet glossy rap" while deeming him "a producer who created a signature sound and then abandoned it to his imitators, a flashy, free-spending sybarite with insightful things to say about college, culture, and economics, an egomaniac with more than enough artistic firepower to back it up." Writing for Highsnobiety, Shahzaib Hussain stated that West's first three albums "cemented his role as a progressive rap progenitor". AllMusic editor Jason Birchmeier described West as "[shattering] certain stereotypes about rappers, becoming a superstar on his own terms without adapting his appearance, his rhetoric, or his music to fit any one musical mold". Lawrence Burney of Noisey has credited West with the commercial decline of the gangsta rap genre that once dominated mainstream hip-hop. The release of his third studio album has been described as a turning point in the music industry, and is considered to have helped pave the way for new rappers who did not follow the hardcore-gangster mold to find wider mainstream acceptance. Hip-hop artists like Drake, Nicki Minaj, Travis Scott, Lil Uzi Vert, and Chance the Rapper have acknowledged being influenced by West. Several other artists and music groups of various genres have named West as an influence on their work. West is the fourth-highest certified artist in the US by digital singles (69 million). He had the most RIAA digital song certifications by a male artist in the 2000s (19), and was the fourth best-selling digital songs artist of the 2000s in the US. In Spotify's first ten years from 2008 to 2018, West was the sixth most streamed artist, and the fourth fastest artist to reach one billion streams. West has the joint-most consecutive studio album to debut at number one on the Billboard 200 (9). He ranked third on Billboard's 2000s decade-end list of top producers and has topped the annual Pazz & Jop critics' poll the joint-most times (four albums) with Bob Dylan. West has been nominated for 75 Grammys, out of which he has won 24. He has been the most nominated act at five ceremonies, and has received the fourth-most wins overall in the 2000s. In 2008, West became the first solo artist to have his first three albums receive nominations for Album of the Year. West has won a Webby Award for Artist of the Year, an Accessories Council Excellence Award for being a stylemaker, International Man of the Year at the GQ Awards, a Clio Award for The Life of Pablo Album Experience, and an honour by The Recording Academy. West is one of eight acts to have won the Billboard Artist Achievement Award. In 2015, he became the third rap act to win the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award. West's first six solo studio albums were included on Rolling Stone's 2020 list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. Entertainment Weekly named The College Dropout the best album of the 2000s, Complex named Graduation the best album released between 2002 and 2012, 808s & Heartbreak was named by Rolling Stone as one of the 40 most groundbreaking albums of all time, The A.V. Club named My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy the best album of the 2010s, Yeezus was the most critically acclaimed album of 2013 according to Metacritic, and The Life of Pablo was the first album to top the Billboard 200, go platinum in the US, and go gold in the UK, via streaming alone. The College Dropout Video Anthology (2004) Late Orchestration (2006) VH1 Storytellers (2010) Runaway (2010) Jesus Is King (2019) Jeen-Yuhs (2022) Raising Kanye: Life Lessons from the Mother of a Hip-Hop Superstar (2007) Thank You and You're Welcome (2009) Through the Wire: Lyrics & Illuminations (2009) Glow in the Dark (2009) Album era Black conservatism in the United States List of people with bipolar disorder List of Christian hip hop artists Ye has been his legal name since late 2021 West and Censori were reported to have married in a private ceremony in December 2022, though without an official marriage license. Censori has since been referred to as West's wife by media publications, as well as West himself. Most biographies and reference works state that West was born in Atlanta, although some sources give his birthplace as Douglasville, a small city west of Atlanta. The school rescinded the honorary degree in late 2022 in light of West's public antisemitic statements. In the King James Bible, the most commonly used translation of the Christian Bible in the United States, the word that appears the most is not "ye", but rather "Lord" (not counting indefinite articles). Musical artists and groups naming West as an influence: Casey Veggies Adele Lily Allen Daniel Caesar Lorde Rosalía Halsey Arctic Monkeys Kasabian MGMT Yeah Yeah Yeahs Fall Out Boy James Blake Daniel Lopatin Tim Hecker Rakim John Legend Ocho, Alex (February 12, 2024). "Kanye West Responds to Fans Commenting About Posting His Wife Three Times: 'Leave the King the F*ck Alone'". Complex. Archived from the original on February 13, 2024. Retrieved February 13, 2024. 'I just wanted to tell everybody I posted my wife three times on purpose,' said Ye in a new video also shared on Monday from an airport. Birchmeier, Jason (2007). "Kanye West—Biography". Allmusic. All Media Guide. Archived from the original on February 17, 2011. Retrieved April 24, 2008. Ellie Abraham, Ellie (July 19, 2021). "Kanye West is rumoured to be dropping a new album this week – but not everyone's convinced". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 19, 2021. Retrieved July 19, 2021. Grein, Paul (August 12, 2018). "Missy Elliott to Become First Female Rapper to Receive MTV's Video Vanguard Award". Billboard. Retrieved November 27, 2019. "100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 13, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Tyrangiel, Josh (April 18, 2005). "The 2005 TIME 100 – Kanye West". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Archived from the original on October 30, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2021. Selby, Jenn (April 17, 2015). "Emma Watson and Kanye West named in TIME 100 most influential people of 2015". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 12, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2021. "Instagram Restricts Kanye West's Account and Deletes Content for Violating Policies". The Hollywood Reporter. October 8, 2022. Archived from the original on October 9, 2022. Retrieved October 9, 2022. Graham, Ruth (October 28, 2019). "Evangelicals Are Extremely Excited About Kanye's Jesus Is King". Slate. Archived from the original on October 29, 2019. Retrieved October 29, 2019. Schaffstall, Katherine (October 25, 2019). "Kanye West Unveils New 'Jesus Is King' Album; Talks "Cancel Culture" and "Christian Innovation"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 29, 2019. Retrieved October 29, 2019. Borus, Audrey; Lynne, Douglas (2013). Kanye West: Grammy-Winning Hip-Hop Artist & Producer. ISBN 978-1-61783-623-7. Retrieved June 8, 2020. Revolt TV (June 8, 2018). "A timeline of Kanye West's 41 years of excellence". Revolt. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020. Arney, Steve (March 8, 2006). "Kanye West Coming To Redbird". Pantagraph. Archived from the original on April 28, 2013. Retrieved April 26, 2008. Christian, Margena A. (May 14, 2007). "Dr. Donda West Tells How She Shaped Son To Be A Leader In Raising Kanye". Jet. Archived from the original on November 13, 2007. Retrieved August 19, 2007. "About". Westar Waterworks, LLC t/a The Good Water Store and Café. Archived from the original on June 23, 2012. Retrieved December 31, 2012. Tunison, Michael (December 7, 2006). "How'd You Like Your Water?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 8, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2012. Borus, Audrey; Lynne, Douglas (2013). Kanye West: Grammy-Winning Hip-Hop Artist & Producer. ISBN 978-1-61783-623-7. Retrieved September 2, 2013. Davis, Kimberly (June 2004). "The Many Faces of Kanye West". Ebony. p. 92. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved July 19, 2007. Tyrangiel, Josh (August 21, 2005). "Why You Can't Ignore Kanye". Time. Archived from the original on April 1, 2007. Retrieved June 7, 2007. Dillon, Nancy (November 14, 2007). "Donda West gave her all to enrich son Kanye West's life". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on July 23, 2023. Retrieved July 31, 2021. West, Donda (2007). Raising Kanye: Life Lessons from the Mother of a Hip-Hop Superstar. New York City: Pocket Books. pp. 85–93. ISBN 978-1-4165-4470-8. Mos, Corey (December 5, 2005). "College Dropout Kanye Tells High School Students Not To Follow in His Footsteps". MTV. Archived from the original on December 8, 2010. Retrieved July 28, 2006. "Kanye and His Mom Shared Special Bond". Chicago Tribune. November 13, 2007. Archived from the original on February 21, 2016. Retrieved August 7, 2012. Calloway, Sway; Reid, Shaheem (February 20, 2004). "Kanye West: Kanplicated". MTV. Archived from the original on April 6, 2009. Retrieved April 21, 2009. Dills, Todd (2007). Hess, Mickey (ed.). Icons of Hip Hop: An Encyclopedia of the Movement, Music, and Culture. Vol. 2. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 555–578. ISBN 978-0-313-33904-2. Archived from the original on July 23, 2023. Retrieved September 2, 2017. West, Donda, p. 106 "Photos: Kanye West's Career Highs—and Lows 1 of 24". Rolling Stone. December 10, 2010. Archived from the original on February 16, 2013. Retrieved March 4, 2013. "Gee Starts Own Label". Hits Daily Double. December 21, 2012. Archived from the original on February 3, 2020. Retrieved February 3, 2020. "Gee, Is He Making Moves?". HitsDailyDouble. September 20, 2017. Archived from the original on February 3, 2020. Retrieved February 3, 2020. Barber, Andrew (July 23, 2012). "93. Go-Getters "Let Em In" (2000)". Complex. Archived from the original on July 27, 2012. Retrieved August 7, 2012. Reid, Shaheem (September 30, 2005). "Music Geek Kanye's Kast of Thousands". MTV. Archived from the original on April 15, 2006. Retrieved April 23, 2006. Kanye West: Hip-Hop Biographies. Saddleback Education Publishing. 2013. p. 18. ISBN 978-1-62250-016-1. Mitchum, Rob. Review: The College Dropout Archived July 31, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Pitchfork. Retrieved July 23, 2009. "500 Greatest Albums of All Time: #464 (The Blueprint)". Rolling Stone. November 18, 2003. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved December 11, 2022. Serpick, Evan. Kanye West. Rolling Stone Jann Wenner. Retrieved December 26, 2009. Reid, Shaheem (February 9, 2005). "Road to the Grammys: The Making Of Kanye West's College Dropout". MTV. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved January 4, 2009. Williams, Jean A (October 1, 2007). "Kanye West: The Man, the Music, and the Message. (Biography)". The Black Collegian. Archived from the original on January 25, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2008. Kearney, Kevin (September 30, 2005). Rapper Kanye West on the cover of Time: Will rap music shed its "gangster" disguise? Archived April 1, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. World Socialist Web Site. Retrieved September 23, 2007. "How Kanye West's 2002 Car Crash Shaped His Entire Career". Yahoo-Finance. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Kamer, Foster (March 11, 2013). "9. Kanye West, Get Well Soon ... (2003)—The 50 Best Rapper Mixtapes". Complex. Archived from the original on March 13, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Reid, Shaheem (December 10, 2002). "Kanye West Raps Through His Broken Jaw, Lays Beats For Scarface, Ludacris Archived December 28, 2013, at the Wayback Machine". MTV. Retrieved October 23, 2007. Patel, Joseph (June 5, 2003). "Producer Kanye West's Debut LP Features Jay-Z, ODB, Mos Def". MTV. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. Retrieved April 21, 2009. Goldstein, Hartley (December 5, 2003). "Kanye West: Get Well Soon / I'm Good". PopMatters. Archived from the original on June 21, 2013. Retrieved March 21, 2013. Ahmed, Insanul (September 21, 2011). "Kanye West × The Heavy Hitters, Get Well Soon (2003)—Clinton Sparks' 30 Favorite Mixtapes". Complex. Archived from the original on January 19, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2012. Kanye West—Through the Wire—Music Charts Archived September 30, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. aCharts.us. Retrieved July 3, 2010. Billboard Staff (September 14, 2004). "32nd American Music Awards Nominees". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 12, 2024. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Billboard Staff (November 30, 2004). "2004 Billboard Music Awards Finalists". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 12, 2015. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Jones, Steve (February 10, 2005). "Kanye West runs away with 'Jesus Walks'". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved January 7, 2009. Leland, John (August 13, 2004). "Rappers Are Raising Their Churches' Roofs". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved January 7, 2009. Montgomery, James (December 7, 2004). "Kanye Scores 10 Grammy Nominations; Usher And Alicia Keys Land Eight". MTV. Archived from the original on April 11, 2011. Retrieved January 7, 2009. Sheffield, Rob (November 22, 2010). Review: My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy Archived December 18, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 11, 2010. "2004–2005 production credits". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2016. Brown, p. 120 Scaggs, Austin (September 20, 2007). "Kanye West: A Genius In Praise of Himself". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 9, 2009. Retrieved August 9, 2015. Perez, Rodrigo (August 12, 2005). "Kanye's Co-Pilot, Jon Brion, Talks About The Making Of Late Registration" Archived November 5, 2005, at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Viacom. Retrieved March 2, 2006. Brown, p. 124 Knopper, Steve (November 15, 2005). "Kanye Couldn't Save Fall". Rolling Stone. RealNetworks, Inc. Archived from the original on December 1, 2005. Retrieved November 27, 2005. "Kanye West Unleashes Tirade After Losing at MTV Europe Music Awards". Fox News. November 3, 2006. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved April 24, 2008. "EMAs Shocker: Kanye Stage Invasion!". MTV. Archived from the original on June 3, 2007. Retrieved June 7, 2007. Olsen, Jan M. (November 3, 2006). "Kanye West Upset at MTV Video Award Loss". Fox News. Archived from the original on May 10, 2008. Retrieved April 24, 2008. Navaroli, Joel (September 29, 2007). "SNL Archives | Episodes | September 29, 2007 #13". SNL Archives. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved January 10, 2015. Reid, Shaheem. 50 Cent Or Kanye West, Who Will Win? Nas, Timbaland, More Share Their Predictions Archived November 23, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Viacom. Retrieved December 24, 2009. Mayfield, Geoff (September 12, 2007). "Kanye Well Ahead of 50 Cent in First-Day Sales Race". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 4, 2013. Retrieved September 12, 2007. Cohen, Jonathan (September 20, 2007). "Kanye Caps Banner Week With Hot 100 Chart-Topper". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 28, 2013. Retrieved September 28, 2007. Frere-Jones, Sasha (March 30, 2009). "Dance Revolution". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on March 26, 2009. Retrieved April 16, 2009. "Entertainment | Kanye's mother dies after surgery". BBC News. November 12, 2007. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved September 2, 2013. McGee, Tiffany. "Kanye West's Fiancée 'Sad' Over Breakup". People. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved November 23, 2008. Thorogood, Tom. "Kanye West Opens Up His Heart". MTV UK. Viacom International Media Networks. Archived from the original on December 17, 2008. Retrieved November 24, 2008. Macia, Peter. "FADER 58: Kanye West Cover Story and Interview". The Fader. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008. Retrieved November 25, 2008. "Urban Review: Kanye West, 808s and Heartbreak". The Observer. London. November 9, 2008. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved November 24, 2008. Reid, Shaheem. "Kanye West Inspires The Question: Should Rappers Sing?". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on December 4, 2008. Retrieved November 24, 2008. Montgomery, James (November 10, 2008). "New Albums From Kanye West, Ludacris, Killers To Get Rare Monday Release on November 24". MTV. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved August 12, 2008. "T.I. Back Atop Hot 100, Kanye Debuts High". Billboard. July 2, 2009. Archived from the original on May 2, 2013. Retrieved July 11, 2012. Heartless: Hot 100 Charts Archived May 5, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Billboard. Retrieved April 20, 2009. Carmichael, Emma (September 21, 2011). "Kanye's '808s': How A Machine Brought Heartbreak To Hip Hop". The Awl. Archived from the original on December 29, 2011. Retrieved March 13, 2012. Respers, Lisa (September 14, 2009). "Anger over West's disruption at MTV awards". CNN. Archived from the original on October 17, 2018. Retrieved September 15, 2009. "Kanye West Storms the VMAs Stage During Taylor Swift's Speech". Rolling Stone. September 13, 2009. Archived from the original on January 19, 2013. Retrieved September 13, 2009. Vozick, Simon (September 13, 2009). "Kanye West interrupts Taylor Swift's VMAs moment: What was he thinking? by Simon Vozick-Levinson". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 18, 2010. Retrieved September 5, 2010. "2009 MTV Video Music Awards—Best Female Video". MTV. Archived from the original on March 3, 2010. Retrieved September 15, 2009. Martens, Todd; Villarreal, Yvonne (September 15, 2009). "Kanye West expresses Swift regret on blog and 'The Jay Leno Show'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 23, 2009. Retrieved September 15, 2009. "Adam Lambert, Donald Trump, Joe Jackson Slam Kanye West's VMA Stunt". MTV. September 13, 2009. Archived from the original on February 7, 2010. Retrieved September 13, 2009. "Obama calls Kanye West a jackass". BBC News. September 16, 2009. Archived from the original on September 3, 2018. Retrieved September 16, 2009. Gavin, Patrick (September 15, 2009). "Obama calls Kanye 'jackass'". The Politico. Archived from the original on February 9, 2010. Retrieved September 15, 2009. "Audio: President Obama Calls Kanye West a 'Jackass'". People. September 15, 2009. Archived from the original on December 5, 2012. Retrieved September 16, 2009. "Obama Calls Kanye West a 'Jackass'". Fox News Channel. September 15, 2009. Archived from the original on September 16, 2009. Retrieved September 16, 2009. Anderson, Kyle (September 16, 2009). "Kanye West's VMA Interruption Gives Birth To Internet Photo Meme". MTV. Archived from the original on October 1, 2009. Retrieved October 3, 2009. Booth, Jenny (September 14, 2009). "Kanye West spoils the show at MTV awards". The Times. Archived from the original on June 15, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2009. Vena, Jocelyn (September 15, 2009). "Taylor Swift Tells 'The View' Kanye West Hasn't Contacted Her. The country star discusses her reaction to the VMA incident". MTV. Archived from the original on March 28, 2010. Retrieved September 15, 2009. "Kanye calls Taylor Swift after 'View' appearance". Today. September 15, 2009. Archived from the original on October 6, 2013. Retrieved September 16, 2009. "VIDEO: Kanye West Backtracks On Taylor Swift Apology | Radar Online". November 8, 2010. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved July 27, 2019. "Kanye West Backtracks on Taylor Swift Apology". Archived from the original on August 14, 2011. Callahan-Bever, Noah (November 2010). "Kanye West: Project Runaway". Complex. Archived from the original on December 28, 2010. Retrieved November 30, 2010. Hermes, Will (October 25, 2010). Lost in the World by Kanye West feat. Bon Iver and Gil Scott-Heron | Rolling Stone Music. Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 2, 2011. Fastenberg, Dan (December 9, 2010). "Kanye's Beautiful, Dark Twittered Fantasy—The Top 10 Everything of 2010". Time. New York. Archived from the original on December 12, 2010. Retrieved September 18, 2012. Kanye West Album & Song Chart History—Hot 100. Billboard. Retrieved November 30, 2010. Concepcion, Mariel (October 7, 2010). "Kanye West Premieres 35-Minute-Long 'Runaway' Video in London". Billboard, Inc. Archived from the original on July 13, 2014. Retrieved January 16, 2018. Reiff, Corbin (November 22, 2015). "Cataloging G.O.O.D. Fridays: Kanye West's beautiful dark twisted promotional campaign". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on December 28, 2022. Retrieved December 28, 2022. "Searchable Database". Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Search: Kanye West. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Abebe, Nitsuh (December 1, 2011). "Explaining the Kanye Snub, and Other Thoughts on the Grammy Nominations". New York. Archived from the original on January 22, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2012. Miller, Jeff (April 18, 2011). "Kanye West Delivers One of Greatest Hip-Hop Sets of All Time at Coachella". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 27, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2013. Gissen, Jesse (August 8, 2011). "Jay-Z & Kanye West Miraculously Manage to Keep Watch the Throne Leak-Free". XXL. Harris Publications. Archived from the original on August 16, 2011. Retrieved August 12, 2011. Perpetua, Matthew (August 8, 2011). "Jay-Z and Kanye West Avoid 'Watch the Throne' Leak". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved August 12, 2011. Doherty, Maggie (October 28, 2011). "Jay-Z & Kanye West Tease 'Watch The Throne' Tour Set List: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 10, 2018. Retrieved January 16, 2018. Caramanica, Jon (June 11, 2013). "Behind Kanye's Mask". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 12, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2013. Dombal, Ryan (June 24, 2013). "The Yeezus Sessions". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on June 26, 2013. Retrieved June 26, 2013. Kot, Greg (June 16, 2013). "Kanye West's 'Yeezus' an uneasy listen". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved June 17, 2013. Blistein, Jon (June 27, 2013). "Rick Rubin: Finishing Kanye West's Yeezus Seemed Impossible". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 30, 2013. Retrieved June 27, 2013. Battan, Carrie (May 17, 2013). "Watch: Kanye West Projects New Video "New Slaves" on Buildings Around the World". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Coleman, Miriam (May 19, 2013). "Kanye West Unleashes the Fury of 'Black Skinhead' on 'SNL'". Rolling Stone. New York. Archived from the original on June 5, 2013. Retrieved May 20, 2013. Torrente, Ria Kristina (June 19, 2013). "Kanye West's Yeezus Gets Rave Reviews". International Business Times. New York. Archived from the original on September 25, 2013. Retrieved June 22, 2013. "Official: Kanye West's 'Yeezus' Sells 327,000; Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. June 25, 2013. Archived from the original on June 29, 2013. Retrieved June 29, 2013. "Kanye West Announces Tour With Kendrick Lamar". Pitchfork Media. September 6, 2013. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved June 9, 2014. "Kanye West Announces Fall Arena Tour—Kendrick Lamar Opening". Glide Magazine. September 6, 2013. Archived from the original on October 10, 2014. Retrieved June 9, 2014. Ringen, Jonathan (November 22, 2013). "11 Reasons Kanye West's 'Yeezus' Tour Is Actually Incredible". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley. "Kanye West Makes His Own Artpop on Yeezus Tour". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 24, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. Young, Alex. "Kanye West premieres 'Only One' featuring Paul McCartney—listen". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on April 23, 2021. Retrieved January 1, 2015. Moore, Sam (June 21, 2018). "Paul McCartney on writing with Kanye West: "I was tootling around on guitar, and Kanye spent a lot of time looking at pictures of Kim"". NME. Archived from the original on December 28, 2022. Retrieved December 28, 2022. Jackson, Reed (November 25, 2013). "Kanye West Hopes To Have New Album Out By Summer" Archived October 12, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. XXL. Rys, Dan (December 3, 2013). "Q-Tip Will Produce Kanye West's Next Album With Rick Rubin—XXL". Xxlmag.com. Archived from the original on May 27, 2014. Retrieved June 9, 2014. Peters, Mitchell (May 3, 2015). "Kanye West Announces Name Change of His New Album on Twitter". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 7, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015. "Kanye West receives honorary doctorate in Chicago". The Guardian. May 11, 2015. Archived from the original on June 23, 2018. Retrieved June 19, 2018. "Kanye West Receives Honorary Doctorate From SAIC: Listen". Pitchfork Media. May 11, 2015. Archived from the original on May 13, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015. "Kanye West's honorary degree rescinded by School of the Art Institute of Chicago". ABC7 Chicago. December 8, 2022. Archived from the original on December 8, 2022. Retrieved December 8, 2022. Renshaw, David (March 22, 2015). "Kanye West Glastonbury petition crosses 100,000 signature mark". NME. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2020. "NME News 50,000 people sign petition to stop Kanye West from playing Pan Am Games closing ceremony". NME. July 20, 2015. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Kanye West Announces New Album Title, Shares Final Tracklist—Pitchfork". pitchfork.com. February 10, 2016. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2016. Wilstein, Dave (February 10, 2016). "Kanye West Declares Bill Cosby 'Innocent'". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved April 2, 2016. McHenry, Jackson (February 10, 2016). "Kanye Shares the 'Final' Track List for His New Album, Which Is Now Called The Life of Pablo". Vulture. Archived from the original on December 28, 2022. Retrieved December 28, 2022. Britton, Luke Morgan (March 23, 2016). "Wiz Khalifa opens up about Kanye West beef and reconciliation". NME. Archived from the original on December 28, 2022. Retrieved December 28, 2022. Phillips, Amy (February 11, 2016). "Kanye West New Album The Life Of Pablo Debut Live Stream: Watch It Here" Archived February 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Pitchfork. Retrieved February 11, 2016. West, Kanye (February 12, 2016). "The album is being mastered and will be out today ... added on a couple of tracks ...". Twitter. Retrieved February 16, 2016. "Chance The Rapper Annotated His Verse on Kanye West's "Ultralight Beam"". pigeonsandplanes.com. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2016. Greene, Jayson (February 15, 2016). "Kanye West: The Life of Pablo". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 15, 2016. Dandridge-Lemco, Ben. "Kanye West Is Updating "Wolves"". The Fader. Archived from the original on March 17, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Hamilton, Jack (February 19, 2016). "The Life of Pablo Is an Attack on the Very Idea of the Album". Slate. Archived from the original on March 24, 2016. Retrieved March 25, 2016. Shah, Neil (April 2016). "Kanye West's 'The Life of Pablo' Now Widely Available to Stream". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2016. "Kanye West Says New Album Coming This Summer—Pitchfork". pitchfork.com. Retrieved November 22, 2016.[permanent dead link] West, Kanye [@kanyewest] (February 27, 2016). "My next album is titled "Turbo Grafx 16" as of now ..." (Tweet). Archived from the original on March 13, 2016 – via Twitter. Lang, Cady (June 3, 2016). "Kanye West debuts 6-minute track". Time. Archived from the original on August 28, 2018. Retrieved June 3, 2016. "Kanye West debuts single with a bunch of all-stars". Consequence of Sound. June 3, 2016. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2016. "Kanye West Gets Almost No Reactions From Stars Depicted Naked in "Famous" Video". E! Online. June 26, 2016. Archived from the original on June 28, 2016. Retrieved June 28, 2016. Mitchell, Chris (August 26, 2016). "Kanye West Soars Above Crowd To Kick Off Saint Pablo Tour". HipHopDX. Archived from the original on October 18, 2016. Retrieved October 14, 2016. Brandle, Lars (October 4, 2016). "Kanye West Reschedules 'Saint Pablo' Tour Dates Following Kim Kardashian Robbery". Billboard Magazine. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved October 14, 2016. "'Exhausted' Kanye West Cancels Tour After Bizarre Rants". Reuters. November 21, 2016. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 7, 2018. Blankstein, Andrew; Johnson, Alex; Margolin, Emma (November 21, 2016). "Kanye West Hospitalized After Canceling Tour: Sources". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved October 17, 2022. D'Zurilla, Christie (November 22, 2016). "Kanye West's doctor called 911 during breakdown, report says; Kim Kardashian skips public return". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 23, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2016. Lilah, Rose (November 24, 2016). "Kanye West enters hospital due to sleep deprivation and extreme dehydration". Hotnewhiphop. Archived from the original on November 25, 2016. Retrieved November 24, 2016. Nevins, Jake (April 18, 2018). "Kanye West returns to Twitter, writing a philosophy book 'in real time'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 19, 2018. Retrieved April 20, 2018. "Kanye West Is Reportedly Busy Creating His Next Album ... On a Mountain". May 9, 2017. Archived from the original on April 20, 2018. Retrieved April 19, 2018. "Everything We Know So Far About Kanye West's New Album". Archived from the original on August 31, 2020. Retrieved April 19, 2018. Romano, Nick (April 14, 2018). "Kanye West says he's writing a philosophy book called Break the Simulation". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 20, 2018. Retrieved April 20, 2018. Raspers France, Lisa (April 19, 2018). "Kanye West is life coaching on Twitter". CNN. Archived from the original on April 20, 2018. Retrieved April 20, 2018. Strauss, Matthew (April 19, 2018). "Kanye Announces 2 New Albums, Including Kid Cudi Collaboration". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on April 19, 2018. Retrieved April 20, 2018. Wicks, Amanda (April 23, 2018). "Kanye Says He's Producing Nas' New Album". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Wicks, Amanda; Blais-Billie, Braudie (April 28, 2018). "Kanye West Drops New Song "Ye vs. the People" With T.I.: Listen". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved June 7, 2018. @kanyewest (May 24, 2018). "Daytona is the first project out of Wyoming. I'm really proud of what we put together. We've spent a year and a half digging for samples and writing. I really appreciate the overwhelmingly positive response that we've been receiving. 🙏🙏🙏 x" (Tweet). Retrieved May 24, 2018 – via Twitter. "Kanye West Unveils New Album YE | Pitchfork". Pitchfork. June 2018. Archived from the original on June 2, 2018. Retrieved June 1, 2018. Skelton, Erik (June 3, 2018). "Kanye West Says He Completely Redid His Album After TMZ". Pigeons & Planes. Archived from the original on June 5, 2018. Retrieved June 7, 2018. "The Hip-Hop Community Reacts to Nas' New Kanye West-Produced Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 19, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2019. Blais-Billie, Braudie; Strauss, Matthew (June 23, 2018). "Listen to Teyana Taylor's Kanye-Produced New Album K.T.S.E." Pitchfork. Archived from the original on December 19, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2019. "Hear Ye: Kanye West announces name change ahead of SNL". The Guardian. September 29, 2018. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved September 29, 2018. Blais-Billie, Braudie (November 12, 2018). "Kanye Postpones Release of New Album Yandhi Again". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on December 28, 2022. Retrieved December 28, 2022. Snapes, Laura (January 14, 2019). "Kanye West ruled out of Coachella after he demands a new stage". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 18, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2019. "Songs From Kanye West's 'Yandhi' Have Apparently Leaked". Spin. July 18, 2019. Archived from the original on May 11, 2022. Retrieved March 3, 2020. Richards, Will (September 17, 2019). "Kanye West confirms release date of new album 'Jesus Is King'". NME. Archived from the original on September 21, 2019. Retrieved September 22, 2020. "Kanye West Says New Album Jesus Is King Is Out This Week". Pitchfork. October 21, 2019. Archived from the original on October 21, 2019. Retrieved March 3, 2020. "Kanye West's 'YANDHI' Album "Leaks" on Spotify and TIDAL (UPDATE)". HypeBeast. October 8, 2019. Archived from the original on January 11, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2020. Penrose, Nerisha. "Everything You Need to Know About Kanye West's Sunday Services". Elle. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved March 28, 2019. Vera, Amir (April 21, 2019). "Kanye West debuts new song 'Water' during Sunday Service at Coachella". CNN. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved April 23, 2019. Holmes, Charles (August 29, 2019). "Kim Kardashian Teases Track List for New Kanye West Album 'Jesus Is King'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved November 1, 2019. Ryan, Patrick. "Review: Kanye West finds God (and Chick-fil-A) on frustrating new album 'Jesus is King'". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved October 28, 2019. "Jesus is King," the rapper's most clear-cut foray into Christian hip hop, was released midday Friday after multiple delays and tracklist changes. "Kanye West's 'Jesus Is King' Makes History on Hot Christian Songs, Hot Gospel Songs Charts". The Hollywood Reporter. November 7, 2019. Archived from the original on November 7, 2019. Retrieved November 28, 2019. Asmelash, Leah, ed. (December 25, 2019). "Kanye West dropped a new album on Christmas and called it—what else?—'Jesus Is Born'". C.N.N. Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved December 30, 2019. Welch, Will (April 16, 2020). "Inside Kanye West's Vision for the Future". GQ. Archived from the original on April 15, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020. "Kanye West Says He Won't Release New Music Until Freed From Sony and Universal Contracts". HypeBeast. September 15, 2020. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved October 2, 2020. "Kanye West Remixes "Nah Nah Nah" With DaBaby & 2 Chainz". HotNewHipHop. November 13, 2020. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved December 6, 2020. Abubaker, Mustafa (July 23, 2021). "We Still Don't Know What's on Kanye's Mind". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 26, 2021. Retrieved July 27, 2021. "Kanye West living in Atlanta stadium to work on new album". Associated Press. July 26, 2021. Archived from the original on July 27, 2021. Retrieved July 27, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (August 29, 2021). "Kanye West Finally Releases 'Donda' to Streaming Services". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 29, 2021. Retrieved August 29, 2021. "Kanye West: Donda released by Universal without my say, artist claims". BBC News. August 30, 2021. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2021. "Ye (Formerly Kanye West) Releases 'Donda' Deluxe Edition Featuring New Big Names". American Songwriter. November 16, 2021. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Brandle, Lars (November 17, 2021). "No More War? Drake and Kanye West Pose For Photographs". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (November 20, 2021). "Kanye West and Drake Confirm 'Free Larry Hoover' Benefit Concert". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved November 21, 2021. Brooks, Dave (January 5, 2022). "Kanye West to Headline Coachella 2022, Considering Sunday Service". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 4, 2023. Retrieved January 5, 2022. Legaspi, Althea (January 15, 2022). "Kanye West Calls Out Kim Kardashian, Pete Davidson On New Track 'Eazy'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 15, 2022. Jones, Marcus (January 27, 2022). "Kanye West shares Donda 2 release date, Future is executive producer". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved January 28, 2022. Kreps, Daniel (February 13, 2022). "Kanye West Sets 'Donda 2' 2.22.22 Event in Miami. Kid Cudi Likely Won't Be There". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Aswad, Jem (April 4, 2022). "Kanye West Pulls Out of Coachella". Variety. Archived from the original on August 19, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2023. Peters, Mitchell (July 17, 2022). "Kanye West Pulls Out of Rolling Loud Miami 2022 Headlining Set". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved July 17, 2022. Kreps, Daniel (July 10, 2022). "Kanye West Returns to Stage to Deliver 'Eazy' at the Game's L.A. Show". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Hussey, Allison (July 23, 2022). "Kanye West, After Canceling Headlining Set, Shows Up at Rolling Loud to Do "Hot Shit" With Lil Durk". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2023. Gee, Andre (December 8, 2022). "Kanye West Vents About the Consequences of His Actions on New Track". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2022. Melas, Chloe (August 25, 2023). "Ye plans to drop a new album". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 19, 2023. Retrieved October 14, 2023. Stutz, Colin (October 13, 2023). "Kanye West Is Shopping a New Album to Distributors". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 28, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Coleman II, Vernon (October 23, 2023). "Kanye West and Ty Dolla Sign Hosting Multi-Stadium Listening Event for New Album in November". XXL. Archived from the original on October 24, 2023. Retrieved October 23, 2023. Moore, Sam (November 22, 2023). "Lil Durk Seemingly Reacts To Being Cut From Kanye West & Ty Dolla $ign's 'Vultures' Single". HipHopDX. Archived from the original on November 22, 2023. Retrieved November 22, 2023. Mendez, Marisa (November 24, 2023). "Lil Durk Fans Rejoice As He's Reinstated On Kanye West & Ty Dolla $ign's 'Vultures'". HipHopDX. Archived from the original on February 16, 2024. Retrieved February 11, 2024. Saponara, Michael (February 8, 2024). "Kanye West & Ty Dolla $ign Release Ominous 'Vultures (Havoc Version)' Video Ahead of New Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 11, 2024. Retrieved February 11, 2024. "Kanye West Calls TikTok Sensation 4Batz His New Favorite Artist". Vibe. January 31, 2024. Archived from the original on February 17, 2024. Retrieved February 16, 2024. Cole, Alexander (January 21, 2024). "Kanye West Co-Signs 4batz Again And Prompts A Plethora Of "Industry Plant" Accusations". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on February 22, 2024. Retrieved February 20, 2024. Cummings-Grady, Mackenzie Cummings-Grady (February 7, 2024). "Kanye and North West Plus Ty Dolla Sign and His Daughter Come Together in 'Talking / Once Again' Video". XXL Mag. Archived from the original on February 7, 2024. Retrieved February 11, 2024. Strauss, Matthew (February 10, 2024). "Kanye West and Ty Dolla $ign Release New Album Vultures 1". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on February 11, 2024. Retrieved February 11, 2024. Cummings-Grady, Mackenzie (February 9, 2024). "Kanye West's Next Solo Album Is Called Y3, Erick Sermon Says". XXL Mag. Archived from the original on February 10, 2024. Retrieved February 11, 2024. Aswad, Jem (February 10, 2024). "Kanye West and Ty Dolla $ign Finally Release 'Vultures 1' Album". Variety. Archived from the original on February 10, 2024. Retrieved February 11, 2024. Lamarre, Carl (February 10, 2024). "Kanye West & Ty Dolla $ign Team Up for New Album 'Vultures 1': Stream It Now". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 10, 2024. Retrieved February 11, 2024. Caulfield, Keith (February 18, 2024). "Kanye West & Ty Dolla $ign's 'Vultures 1' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 18, 2024. Retrieved February 18, 2024. Gates; Henry Louis; et al. (2010). "Kanye West". In Bradley, Adam; DuBois, Andrew (eds.). The Anthology of Rap. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. pp. 705–713. ISBN 9780300141900. Caramanica, Jon (August 26, 2007). "The Education of Kanye West". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved September 17, 2007. Tannenbaum, Rob. "Playboy Interview: Kanye West." Playboy (March 2006), 49. Ledsham, Ed (June 2, 2015). "Who Will Survive in America? Kanye West's Hybridization of Hip-Hop". PopMatters. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved November 25, 2019. McCormick, Neil (July 2, 2014). "Kanye West: Hip hop's David Bowie". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2014. VH1 staff (October 12, 2005). "Kanye West: Greatness, Perfection, Gucci". Archived from the original on October 27, 2005. Retrieved January 8, 2009.. VH1. Viacom. Retrieved May 16, 2008. "100 Best Debut Albums Ever". Rolling Stone. October 13, 2013. Archived from the original on March 25, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2016. Cowie, Del (February 27, 2004). "The Many Sides of Kanye West". Exclaim!. Archived from the original on January 30, 2005. Retrieved February 17, 2008. Burrell, Ian (September 22, 2007). "Kanye West: King of rap". The Independent. UK. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved April 26, 2008. Ryan, Patrick (February 9, 2016). "Is Kanye West the greatest artist of the 21st century?". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 10, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "Behind Kanye's Mask". The New York Times. June 16, 2013. Archived from the original on June 12, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2016. Davis, Kimberly. "The Many Faces of Kanye West" Archived March 2, 2024, at the Wayback Machine (June 2004) Ebony. Love, Josh. Review: The College Dropout Archived September 15, 2006, at the Wayback Machine. Stylus Magazine. Retrieved on July 23, 2009. James, Jim (December 27, 2009). "Music of the decade". The Courier-Journal. Archived from the original on July 22, 2012. Retrieved June 17, 2011. Alt URL Archived November 7, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Greene, Jayson (September 10, 2007). "Kanye West Graduation—Music Review". Stylus Magazine. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved September 10, 2007. Laws, Angel (October 5, 2007). "Exclusive Interview W/ Kanye West". Concrete Loop. concreteloop.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2007. Retrieved October 5, 2007. Graves, Kirk Walker (2014). "A (Very) Brief Aside Re: '808s & Heartbreak'". Kanye West's My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy. A&C Black. p. 49. ISBN 978-1-62356-542-8. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved August 3, 2014. "Album: Kanye West, 808s & Heartbreak(Roc-a-Fella/Mercury)". The Independent. London. November 28, 2008. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved August 3, 2014. Kornhaber, Spencer (June 18, 2013). "The Shocking Poignance of Kanye West's 'Yeezus'". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved June 19, 2013. Kot, Greg (2016). "Kanye West's bewildering, frustrating 'Pablo'". Chicago Tribune. No. February 16. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved April 6, 2016. Holmes, Charles (September 30, 2019). "Kanye West's 'Jesus Is King' Still Sounds Like a Work-in-Progress". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 1, 2019. Retrieved October 2, 2019. Robinson, Samuel J. (September 28, 2019). "Inside Kanye West's Album (and Film) Premiere in Detroit". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 1, 2019. Retrieved October 2, 2019. Shorter, Marcus (August 30, 2021). "Kanye West Channels His Vulnerability on Donda, Delivering His Best Album in Years". Consequence. Archived from the original on August 30, 2021. Retrieved August 30, 2021. Thiessen, Christopher (June 20, 2018). "Kids See Ghosts: Kids See Ghosts (album review)". PopMatters. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2019. "Stuff Style Icon of the Year". Stuff. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved June 7, 2007. Mdudu, Naomi (October 9, 2009). "Perfectionist Kanye West's Pastelle Line Cancelled?". The FashPack. Archived from the original on November 4, 2017. Retrieved February 4, 2013. Tharpe, Frazier (October 11, 2011). "What Could've Been: A History of Kanye's Defunct Pastelle Line". Complex Magazine. Archived from the original on August 27, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2013. "Kanye West x Bapesta FS-001 Low 'College Dropout'". Kick Game. Archived from the original on March 27, 2022. "The Kanye West Sneaker Collaboration That's Cooler Than Yeezys". GQ. January 5, 2007. Archived from the original on December 27, 2021. Facey, Robert (May 7, 2012). "A Complete History of Hip-Hop Sneaker Deals". Complex. Archived from the original on January 21, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2019. "Kanye West x Louis Vuitton Sneakers for June 2009". Hypebeast. March 5, 2011. Archived from the original on November 6, 2018. Retrieved February 2, 2013. Hislop, Rachel (September 26, 2012). "Renaissance Man: Kanye West's Complete History Of Shoe Designs". Global Grind. Archived from the original on November 28, 2012. Retrieved February 4, 2013. Cochrane, Lauren (August 13, 2011). "Kanye West's fashion journey". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 31, 2017. Retrieved June 9, 2017. "Kanye West x M/M (Paris) Silk Scarves—A Closer Look". Hypebeast. May 4, 2011. Archived from the original on March 2, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2011. Kanye West—Spring/Summer 2012 ready-to-wear show—The Internet Fashion Database Retrieved and verified on October 2, 2011 Odell, Amy (August 17, 2011). "What Kanye West Got Right and Wrong With His First Paris Fashion Week Show—The Cut". New York. Archived from the original on October 4, 2011. Retrieved October 5, 2011. Wilson, Julee (March 7, 2012). "Kanye West Debuts Fall 2012 Collection During Paris Fashion Week". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on March 7, 2012. Retrieved February 2, 2012. Leitch, Luke (March 6, 2012). "Paris Fashion Week: Kanye West autumn/winter 2012". Telegraph (UK). London. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved February 2, 2013. Frank, Alex (March 7, 2012). "Kanye West at Paris Fashion Week Round II: The Reviews". The Fader. Archived from the original on September 9, 2018. Retrieved February 6, 2013. Little, Lyneka (December 4, 2013). "Adidas Confirms New Deal with Kanye West". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved December 6, 2013. Fumo, Nicola (September 8, 2015). "Yeezy Season 1: How to Shop Kanye West x Adidas [Updated]". racked.com. Archived from the original on September 9, 2018. Retrieved November 22, 2016. Rooney, JKyle (June 29, 2016). "Adidas announces long-term contract with Adidas Yeezys". Hotnewhiphop. Archived from the original on June 30, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. "ADIDAS TERMINATES PARTNERSHIP WITH YE IMMEDIATELY" (Press release). Herzogenaurach: adidas. October 25, 2022. Archived from the original on December 31, 2022. Retrieved January 2, 2023. D'innocenzio, Anne (September 15, 2022). "Kanye West says he's splitting with Gap after 2 years". CP24. Archived from the original on September 16, 2022. Retrieved September 18, 2022. Chesna, Benjamin (September 26, 2012). "G.O.O.D. Music is Founded by Kanye West". The Complete History of G.O.O.D. Music. Complex.com. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved December 3, 2013. "Pusha T Named President of G.O.O.D. Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 12, 2015. Retrieved November 9, 2015. "Kanye West To Open Chain of Fatburger Restaurants in Chicago". BallerStatus.com. August 2010. Archived from the original on February 4, 2015. "Kanye West Shuts Down His Chicago Fatburger Restaurant". Starpulse.com. February 1, 2011. Archived from the original on July 11, 2017. Retrieved December 24, 2014. Osei, Anthony (January 5, 2012). "Kanye West Announces Creative Company DONDA". Complex Magazine. Archived from the original on January 8, 2012. Retrieved January 9, 2012. Graham, Mark, Kanye West's Epic 1600-word Twitter Rant: Neatly Organized for your Reading Pleasure, January 5, 2012, 'VH1', retrieved August 4, 2015. Hope, Clover, Kanye West has a Dream: Inside his Creative Agency DONDA Archived February 7, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, August 19, 2013, 'VIBE', retrieved August 4, 2015. Pasori, Cedar, How Kanye West's Creative Company DONDA is making its own Brand of Cool Archived December 23, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, November 3, 2014, 'Complex Magazine', retrieved August 4, 2015. Sargent, Jordan, DONDA: Kanye West Goes G.O.O.D. Trill Hunting with His Minimalist Design Company Archived August 20, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, November 13, 2013, 'Spin Magazine', retrieved August 4, 2015. Babcock, Gregory, Kanye's Stylish Pastor Releases DONDA-Designed Book Archived March 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, June 23, 2015, 'Complex Magazine', retrieved August 4, 2015. Lewis, Brittany (November 3, 2014). "Every Music Cover Kanye West's Creative House DONDA Has Created So Far... (LIST)". Global Grind. Archived from the original on February 12, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2023. "'I'm working with five architects at a time'—Kanye West". Dezeen. September 24, 2013. Archived from the original on September 28, 2018. Retrieved September 28, 2018. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (May 7, 2018). "Kanye West announces architecture arm to his company Yeezy". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 29, 2018. Retrieved September 28, 2018. "Kanye West Goes to Harvard, Delivers Manifesto on Architecture". CityLab. Archived from the original on September 29, 2018. Retrieved September 28, 2018. "Kanye West to launch architecture arm of Yeezy fashion label". Dezeen. May 7, 2018. Archived from the original on September 28, 2018. Retrieved September 28, 2018. "Is Kanye West's first architecture project an affordable concrete prefab?". Curbed. Archived from the original on September 28, 2018. Retrieved September 28, 2018. "Kanye West begins Yeezy Home architecture venture with social-housing project". Dezeen. June 4, 2018. Archived from the original on September 29, 2018. Retrieved September 28, 2018. Sisario, Ben (March 13, 2015). "Jay Z Buys the Music Streaming Firm, Aspiro". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 8, 2019. Retrieved March 31, 2015. Flanagan, Andrew (March 30, 2015). "It's Official: Jay Z's Historic Tidal Launches With 16 Artist Stakeholders". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved March 31, 2015. Wagner, Kurt; Bhashin, Kim (October 17, 2022). "Ye Says He Bought Parler Because Instagram, Twitter Penalized Him". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Browne, Ryan (October 17, 2022). "Kanye West, who now goes by Ye, agrees to buy conservative social media platform Parler, company says". CNBC. Archived from the original on January 19, 2023. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Coster, Helen; Datta, Tiyashi; Balu, Nivedita (October 17, 2022). "Kanye West agrees to buy social media app Parler". Reuters. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Fung, Brian (December 1, 2022). "Kanye West is no longer acquiring Parler, company says". CNN Business. Archived from the original on December 1, 2022. Retrieved December 2, 2022. "About the Dr. Donda West Foundation". Kanye West Foundation website (archived). 2008. Archived from the original on August 6, 2008. Retrieved February 6, 2013. Herszenhorn, David M. (April 25, 2007). "Billionaires Start $60 Million Schools Effort". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 30, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2013. "Kanye West to Politicians: Yo, Education Is Important". Education Portal Stone. August 24, 2007. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved February 6, 2013. Webb, Tracey (August 26, 2007). "Hip Hop Superstar Kanye West Combats School Drop Out Rate Through Hip Hop Music". Black Gives Back. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2013. "Dr. Donda West foundation". Look to the Stars. Archived from the original on March 12, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2013. Horowitz, Steven J. (April 19, 2011). "Kanye West's Charity Closes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 9, 2018. Retrieved February 6, 2013. Minsker, Evan Minsker. (July 28, 2013). "Kanye West's Donda's House Launches Free Music Writing Program for Chicago Youth". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on March 12, 2016. Retrieved March 11, 2016. Terry, Josh (September 2, 2015). "10 years ago today, Kanye West said, 'George Bush doesn't care about black people'". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on August 30, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2022. Pareles, Jon (December 13, 2012). "Wave After Wave of the Right Tunes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 11, 2022. Retrieved December 11, 2022. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (January 15, 2019). "Kanye West donates $10m for James Turrell art installation". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 21, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2019. Melas, Chloe (June 5, 2020). "Kanye West donates $2 million, pays college tuition for George Floyd's daughter". CNN. Archived from the original on June 6, 2020. Retrieved June 6, 2020. Rabin, Nathan (August 16, 2005). "State Property 2". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on January 17, 2018. Retrieved January 17, 2018. Newman, Jason (August 29, 2011). "High Five: Kanye West, Comedy Lover". MTV. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved January 17, 2018. Sundermann, Eric (June 8, 2015). "The Kanye West Scene in 'Entourage' Is One of the Greatest Moments in Television History". Noisey. Vice Media. Archived from the original on September 17, 2018. Retrieved January 17, 2018. Itzkoff, Dave (October 22, 2009). "Spike Jonze Explains His Kanye West Mini-Movie, 'We Were Once a Fairytale'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 17, 2018. Retrieved January 17, 2018. Barshad, Amos (October 19, 2010). "Vulture Talks to Selita Ebanks, the Star of Kanye's Movie". New York. Archived from the original on October 22, 2010. Retrieved January 17, 2018. "Kanye West is launching a new company: Find out what he's doing next". MSN. Archived from the original on September 17, 2018. Retrieved September 17, 2018. Blanchet, Brenton (April 7, 2021). "Kanye West Documentary Reportedly Sold to Netflix for $30 Million". Complex. Archived from the original on September 18, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2021. Seipel, Brooke (July 4, 2020). "Kanye tweets he's running for president". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2020. Drury, Sharareh (July 4, 2020). "Kanye West Announces 2020 Presidential Run". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 5, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2020. Lane, Randall (July 7, 2020). "Kanye West Says He's Done With Trump—Opens Up About White House Bid, Damaging Biden And Everything In Between". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 8, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2020. France, Lisa Respers (July 8, 2020). "Kanye West says he no longer supports Trump and that he had coronavirus". CNN. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2020. Rolli, Bryan. "Kanye West's 2020 Presidential Run Is Just His Latest Outrageous Promotional Stunt". Forbes. No. July 5, 2020. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2020. Kreps, Daniel (July 15, 2020). "A 'Kanye 2020' Committee Just Filed With the FEC, But Is It Legit?". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved August 16, 2020. "Kanye West has reportedly dropped out of the presidential race". NME. July 15, 2020. Archived from the original on July 15, 2020. Retrieved July 15, 2020. "Kanye West launches unconventional 2020 campaign". BBC News. July 20, 2020. Archived from the original on July 20, 2020. Retrieved July 20, 2020. "Kanye West picks 'biblical life coach' as presidential running mate". Premier Christian Radio. July 10, 2020. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved August 31, 2020. Kornhaber, Spencer (August 14, 2020). "Kanye West, Political Pawn". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on November 23, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2020. Lane, Randall (July 8, 2020). "Kanye West Says He's Done With Trump—Opens Up About White House Bid, Damaging Biden And Everything In Between". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 8, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2020. Leonardi, Anthony (November 4, 2020). "'Welp': Kanye West admits defeat while teasing 2024 run". The Washington Examiner. Archived from the original on November 5, 2020. Retrieved November 6, 2020. Carras, Christi (November 4, 2020). "Well, one thing is certain: Kanye West will not be elected president". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 5, 2020. "OFFICIAL 2020 PRESIDENTIAL GENERAL ELECTION RESULTS" (PDF). FEC. Retrieved June 4, 2021. Szep, Jason; So, Linda (December 10, 2021). "Kanye West publicist pressed Georgia election worker to confess to bogus fraud charges". Reuters. Retrieved December 12, 2021. Olding, Barbie Latza Nadeau, Rachel (December 10, 2021). "Of Course Trump's Jan. 6 Plot Now Involves Kanye's Henchwoman". The Daily Beast. Retrieved December 12, 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Jenkins, Cameron (December 10, 2021). "Publicist linked to Kanye West pushed election worker to confess to Trump's fraud claims: Reuters". The Hill. Retrieved December 12, 2021. Sollenberger, Roger; Bredderman, William (December 17, 2021). "Kanye West's 'Independent' Campaign Was Secretly Run by GOP Elites". The Daily Beast. Retrieved December 18, 2021. McLaughlin, Kelly (December 17, 2021). "Kanye West's presidential campaign was run by GOP operatives who were trying to re-elect Trump, investigation finds". Business Insider. Retrieved December 18, 2021. "Kanye West on joining 2024 presidential race: 'I'm not going to run, I'm going to walk'". USA Today. "Kanye West Open to Running for CA Governor on Joe Rogan's Podcast". TMZ. McCarthy, Tyler (May 19, 2021). "Kanye West 'has not decided' if he'll run for president again in 2024". Fox News. Retrieved January 6, 2022. Helmore, Edward (November 25, 2022). "Kanye West announces 2024 presidential bid amid far-right ties". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "Kanye West announces he's running for president". ABC News. Retrieved June 27, 2023. Thompson, Eliza (April 29, 2022). "Kanye West Hints at Running in 2024 Election in New Song — and Hopes Kim Kardashian Will Support Him". US Weekly. Seitz, Loree (November 21, 2022). "Kanye 'Ye' West Says He Will Run for President in 2024 (Video)". Yahoo! Entertainment. Retrieved December 4, 2022. Kaufman, Gil (October 20, 2023). "Kanye West Not Running For President in 2024". Billboard. Retrieved November 20, 2023. Moraes, Lisa (September 3, 2005). "Kanye West's Torrent of Criticism, Live on NBC". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 2, 2022. Rinkunas, Susan (October 28, 2019). "Kanye West Claimed Democrats Make Black People Kill Their Children". Vice. Archived from the original on December 15, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2020. "Kanye West assails Jews, abortion in new interview with Lex Fridman". Los Angeles Times. October 25, 2022. Lee, Benjamin; Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (May 2, 2018). "Kanye West on slavery: 'For 400 years? That sounds like a choice'". The Guardian. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Kaur, Harmeet (May 2018). "Kanye West just said 400 years of slavery was a choice". CNN. Merrett, Robyn (August 29, 2018). "Kanye West Apologizes for Saying 'Slavery Was a Choice' in Tearful Interview". People. Retrieved August 30, 2018. Kinery, Emma (December 2, 2022). "Biden condemns antisemitism as Ye praises Hitler days after dinner with Trump, white nationalist Fuentes". CNBC. Retrieved December 6, 2022. King, Ashley (October 25, 2022). "UMG Confirms Termination of Kanye West Relationship – Gap Removes Yeezy Products From Stores". Digital Music News. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Allyn, Bobby (October 25, 2022). "Adidas cuts ties with Ye over antisemitic remarks that caused an uproar". NPR. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Adragna, Anthony; Olander, Olivia (December 1, 2022). "'A deranged Anti-semite': GOP outraged at Ye's latest horror show". Politico. Retrieved December 2, 2022. "Kanye West praises Hitler, calls himself a Nazi in unhinged interview". The Times of Israel. December 1, 2022. Retrieved December 3, 2022. Levin, Bess (December 1, 2022). "Kanye West, Donald Trump's Dining Companion, Tells Alex Jones, "I'm a Nazi," Lists Things He Loves About Hitler". Vanity Fair. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Mohammed, Leyla (December 2, 2022). "Kanye West Leaked Messages Showing Elon Musk Told Him He'd 'Gone Too Far' Before Suspending His Twitter Account For Promoting His Presidential Campaign With A Swastika". Buzzfeed News. Retrieved December 22, 2022. Milmo, Dan (December 2, 2022). "Kanye West suspended from Twitter after posting swastika inside the Star of David". The Guardian. Retrieved December 2, 2022. Busby, Mattha (July 30, 2023). "Elon Musk reinstates Kanye West's Twitter account after ban". The Guardian. Retrieved July 30, 2023. "Twitter, now called X, reinstates Kanye West account". Al Jazeera. July 30, 2023. Retrieved July 30, 2023. Dickinson, Tim (February 13, 2023). "Report: Kanye's Anti-Semitic Rhetoric Led to Assaults, Vandalism". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 7, 2023. Sherman, Maria (December 26, 2023). "The rapper Ye, who has a long history of making antisemitic comments, issues an apology in Hebrew". Associated Press. Retrieved December 28, 2023. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (December 26, 2023). "Kanye West apologises to Jewish community for 2022 antisemitic remarks". The Guardian. Retrieved December 28, 2023. Zemler, Emily (December 26, 2023). "Kanye Suddenly Decides His Hitler Talk Was Bad". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 28, 2023. Goldsmith, Jill (April 6, 2021). "Tyler Perry, Kim Kardashian & Kanye West Hit Forbes Billionaires List For First Time; Jeff Bezos, Elon Musk Are No. 1 & 2 For 2021". Deadline. Retrieved December 3, 2021. Voytko, Lisette (October 25, 2022). "Billionaire No More: Kanye West's Anti-Semitism Obliterates His Net Worth As Adidas Cuts Ties". Forbes. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Tapp, Tom (October 18, 2021). "Kanye West Officially Changes His Name To "Ye," With Judge's Approval Today". Deadline. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Henderson, Cydney (October 18, 2021). "It's official: Kanye West legally changes name to Ye for 'personal reasons,' reports say". USA Today. Retrieved October 19, 2021. Aubrey, Elizabeth (October 18, 2021). "Kanye West officially changes his name to 'Ye'". The Independent. Retrieved October 19, 2021. Desborough, Jenny (October 19, 2021). "Why Has Kanye West Changed His Name? Meaning Behind Ye Explained". Newsweek. Retrieved October 20, 2021. Galla, Brittany (June 7, 2013). "Khloe Kardashian: I Told Kim Kardashian To Date Kanye West "For Years!"". Us Weekly. Retrieved June 7, 2013. Garibaldi, Christina (June 21, 2012). "Kim Kardashian Explains Why It Took 'So Long' To Date Kanye West". MTV. Retrieved August 12, 2012. "Kimye forever: Kim Kardashian, Kanye West get engaged". CNN. October 22, 2013. Retrieved October 22, 2013. Finn, Natalie (October 21, 2013). "Kim Kardashian Is Engaged to Kanye West!". E!. Retrieved October 22, 2013. Corriston, Michelle (May 24, 2014). "It's Official: Kim Kardashian and Kanye West Are Married". People. Retrieved May 24, 2014. Lee, Christina. "Kanye West Blasts Media Coverage Of Kim Kardashian In Wedding Speech." Idolator. May 28, 2014. Caramanica, Jon (April 10, 2015). "The Agony and the Ecstasy of Kanye West". The New York Times. Shira, Dahvi (June 15, 2013). "Kim Kardashian Is a Mom!". People. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Garcia, Jennifer; Dyball, Rennie (June 20, 2013). "Kim Kardashian's Baby Name: Finally Revealed!". People. Retrieved June 21, 2013. Ross, Ashley (December 7, 2015). "The Long History Behind Kim and Kanye's New Baby's Name". Time. Retrieved December 8, 2015. "Kim Kardashian's Third Child Is Named After Kanye West's Hometown". Travel + Leisure. Retrieved January 22, 2018. Juneau, Jen (January 16, 2018). "Kanye and Kim Kardashian West Welcome a Daughter". People. Retrieved January 16, 2018. Juneau, Jen (May 10, 2019). "'He's Here!' Kim Kardashian and Kanye West Welcome Son: 'He's Perfect'". People. Retrieved May 10, 2019. Bloom, Madison (May 17, 2019). "Kanye West and Kim Kardashian Reveal Fourth Child's Name". Pitchfork. Retrieved May 17, 2019. Henderson, Cydney (February 19, 2021). "Kim Kardashian West officially files for divorce from Kanye West after almost 7 years of marriage". USA Today. Retrieved February 21, 2021. Willis, Jackie (June 15, 2015). "Kim Kardashian Shares North West's Baptism Pics on Daughter's Birthday". ET Online. Retrieved December 29, 2023. Ward, Mary (April 13, 2015). "Kim Kardashian baptises North West on trip to the Middle East". The Sydney Morning Herald. Greene, Morgan (September 19, 2018). "Kanye West to local high schoolers: 'I'm Moving Back to Chicago'". Chicago Tribune. Cohen, Jess (September 19, 2018). "Kanye West Says He's Moving Back to Chicago Permanently". E Online!. Melas, Chloe (January 6, 2021). "Kim Kardashian and Kanye West discussing divorce". CNN. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Wenger, Stephanie; Charles, Marissa. "Kanye West on Why He Bought House Across from Kim Kardashian: 'Nothing Is Gonna Keep Me from My Children'". People. Wolfson, Leo (November 2, 2021). "Kanye era comes to end in Cody". Casper Star Tribune. Archived from the original on January 4, 2024. Dasarth, Diana (February 19, 2021). "Kim Kardashian files for divorce from Kanye West". NBC News. Retrieved February 19, 2021. "Kim Kardashian and Kanye West agree joint custody after divorce". BBC News. April 13, 2021. Retrieved April 13, 2021. Wenger, Stephanie (November 29, 2022). "Kim Kardashian and Kanye West Finalize Divorce, Rapper Must Pay $200K Per Month in Child Support". People. Retrieved November 30, 2022. "Kanye West's Ex-Fiancee Alexis Phifer Talks About Breakup". MTV News. April 21, 2008. Retrieved September 18, 2009. "Kanye West's Ex-Fiancee Alexis Phifer Talks About Breakup". MTV News. April 21, 2008. Retrieved January 24, 2023. "Kanye West Confirms Amber Rose Split". MTV UK. August 13, 2010. Archived from the original on May 26, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2012. Peters, Mitchell (January 17, 2022). "Amber Rose Expresses Regret Over Dissing Kim Kardashian in 2015 Tweet About Kanye West: 'Learn From My Mistakes'". Billboard. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Ritschel, Chelsea (October 22, 2022). "Amber Rose says Kanye West has 'bullied' her for 10 years: 'Just move on with your life'". The Independent. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Garner, Glenn (January 6, 2022). "Kanye West and Julia Fox Confirm Their Romance and Share Intimate Photos of Lavish Second Date". People. Retrieved January 7, 2022. Hoffman, Jordan (February 13, 2022). "Kanye West Goes on Civil War-Themed Meme Rampage Against Kid Cudi, Billie Eilish, and Pete Davidson, Then Deletes Everything". Vanity Fair. "What's going on with Ye — and why does it matter?". NPR.org. Retrieved March 22, 2022. Helmore, Edward (March 19, 2022). "Kanye West barred from Grammys over 'concerning online behavior'". The Guardian. Retrieved March 22, 2022. Ryu, Jenna. "Kanye West's behavior is 'triggering' for those who have been in Kim Kardashian's shoes". USA Today. Retrieved March 22, 2022. VanHoose, Benjamin (February 14, 2022). "Julia Fox Splits from Kanye West After Whirlwind Romance: 'I Have Love for Him But I Wasn't in Love'". People. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Soteriou, Stephanie (February 16, 2022). "Julia Fox Has Revealed The Bizarre Reason Why She And Kanye West Were So Public With Their Whirlwind Romance Before Their Split". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved February 17, 2022. Cohen, Rebecca (November 21, 2022). "Julia Fox said she dated Kanye West so he would leave ex-wife Kim Kardashian alone". Insider. Retrieved November 21, 2022. Kirkpatrick, Emily (January 13, 2023). "WEDDING BELLS Kanye West Reportedly Marries Yeezy Designer Bianca Censori". Vanity Fair. Crock, Mary (January 25, 2023). "Should Australia let Kanye West in?". The Conversation. Retrieved January 27, 2023. Porterfield, Carlie. "Kanye West Reportedly Married Again—What To Know About Bianca Censori". Forbes. Retrieved March 3, 2023. Jackson, Lewis (January 25, 2023). "Australian minister says Kanye West could be denied entry". Reuters. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Dalley, Hannah (January 23, 2023). "Kanye West Should Be Refused Entry Into Australia, Country's Anti-Defamation Commission Says". Billboard. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "Evel Knievel Sues Kanye West". The Smoking Gun. Retrieved June 7, 2007. "Evel Knievel, Kanye West settle lawsuit". USA Today. November 27, 2007. Retrieved November 27, 2007. Duke, Alan (March 17, 2014). "Kanye West gets probation in paparazzi attack". CNN. Retrieved March 17, 2015. "Kanye West settles lawsuit with paparazzo over 2013 LA airport attack". The Guardian. April 7, 2015. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Stutz, Colin (May 2, 2016). "Kanye West's Charge in Paparazzi Scuffle Cleared From Record: Report". Billboard. Retrieved January 24, 2023. "Kanye West has clean criminal record after judge erases beating conviction". Fox News. December 4, 2016. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Ogunnaike, Lola (June 23, 2004). "A Trinity of Videos for One Religious Rap". The New York Times. Retrieved March 24, 2015. Lyons, Margaret (June 19, 2013). "Does Kanye West Think He's God? Or Has He Given Up on God?". Vulture. Retrieved May 1, 2016. "Kanye Discusses Religion". Bossip. Archived from the original on February 11, 2009. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Bess, Gabby (September 16, 2014). "Kanye West Proclaims: "I'm a Married, Christian Man!"". Paper. Retrieved November 11, 2017. Conner, Paul (September 30, 2019). "Kanye West quits secular music, says he'll make only gospel music: report". Fox Business. Retrieved October 28, 2019. Gibson, Charity (October 25, 2019). "Kanye West drops album 'Jesus is King' on streaming services". The Christian Post. Retrieved October 29, 2019. "Individual contributions". Federal Elections Commission. Retrieved August 29, 2020. Dandridge-Lemco, Ben (November 18, 2016). "Kanye West Donated Over $2,000 To Hillary Clinton's Campaign In 2015". The Fader. Retrieved August 29, 2020. Lawler, Kelly (December 13, 2016). "Kanye West visits Trump Tower". USA Today. Retrieved December 13, 2016. "Kanye West Says He Discussed 'Multicultural Issues' With Trump". ABC News. December 13, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2016. "Kanye West: I didn't vote but if I did, 'I would have voted for Trump'". USA Today. November 18, 2016. Retrieved December 13, 2016. Canfield, David (February 6, 2017). "Kanye West Has Deleted His Pro-Trump Tweets". Slate. Retrieved February 7, 2017. "Kanye West to Hot 97's Ebro: 'I Love Donald Trump'". Complex. Retrieved April 23, 2018. "Kanye West Donates $73K to Progressive Chicago Mayoral Candidate Amara Enyia". MSN. Retrieved October 25, 2018. "Kanye West says Jay Z has hitmen: "Please don't send them at my head"". Consequence of Sound. November 20, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016. Winton, Richard (November 24, 2016). "Authorities spent 2 hours persuading West to be hospitalized, sources say". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 24, 2016. Weinstein, Max (November 24, 2016). "Kanye West Will Remain in the Hospital for Now". XXL. Retrieved November 24, 2016. Hautman, Nicholas (November 26, 2015). "Kanye West Is Paranoid and Depressed as He Remains Hospitalized: Report". Us Weekly. Retrieved November 27, 2016. Bueno, Antoinette (November 28, 2016). "Kanye West Still Hospitalized and Undiagnosed, Kim Kardashian Remains 'by His Side 24/7'". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved November 29, 2016. Schillaci, Sophie (November 29, 2016). "Kanye West Suffered 'Paranoia' Before Hospitalization, Was 'Unsettled' by Kim Kardashian Robbery". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on December 1, 2016. Retrieved November 30, 2016. Melas, Chloe (November 30, 2016). "Kanye West released from the hospital". CNN. Retrieved November 30, 2016. Bassil, Ryan (October 20, 2016). "One of the Most Powerful Kanye West Songs is One You've Probably Not Heard". Vice. Claymore, Gabriela Tully (May 1, 2018). "Kanye Tells TMZ He Got Addicted To Opioids After Liposuction". Stereogum. Retrieved May 1, 2018. "Kanye West sounds off on slavery, his opioid addiction and Trump". Reuters. "Kanye West says he was a 'functioning alcoholic' and drank vodka in the morning". The Independent. April 15, 2020. Retrieved December 16, 2023. "Kanye West: 'I'm the greatest artist of all time'". BBC News. October 25, 2019. Retrieved December 16, 2023. Ogunnaike, Lola (February 9, 2006). "The Passion of Kanye West". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 16, 2023. Roundtree, Matt Sullivan,Cheyenne; Sullivan, Matt; Roundtree, Cheyenne (November 24, 2022). "Kanye West Used Porn, Bullying, 'Mind Games' to Control Staff". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 16, 2023.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Respers France, Lisa (June 26, 2018). "Kanye West: 'I've thought about killing myself all the time'". CNN. Retrieved June 26, 2018. "Kim Kardashian West Is Right. We Need To Confront The Stigma Around Bipolar Disorder". British Vogue. July 29, 2020. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Millard, Anna. "Kanye West Opens Up About Being Bipolar & Mental Health In The U.S." rRefinery29.com. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Haglage, Abby (October 11, 2018). "Kanye West says he was misdiagnosed with bipolar disorder: 'I had sleep deprivation'". Yahoo!. Retrieved October 26, 2022. "The Awakening of Kim Kardashian West". Vogue. April 10, 2019. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Murphy, Helen (May 28, 2019). "Kanye West Gets Candid About His Bipolar Diagnosis, Says at One Point He Had to Be Handcuffed". People. Kaufman, Gil (October 25, 2022). "Kanye West Claims '50% of Black People' Die Due to Abortion, Blames 'Jewish Record Labels'". Billboard. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Palmada, Belinda (December 13, 2022). "Kanye West says he's not 'bipolar' but might be 'slightly autistic'". News.com.au. Bisnoff, Jason (November 19, 2018). "The Perfectionism of Kanye West". Forbes. Retrieved November 25, 2018. Westhoff, Ben (June 25, 2015). "The enigma of Kanye West—and how the world's biggest pop star ended up being its most reviled, too". The Guardian. London. Retrieved February 13, 2016. "NME's 100 Most Influential Artists: 50—1". NME. Retrieved June 30, 2014. Bry, Dave. "Kanye West Is the Most Important Artist of the 21st Century". Complex Magazine. Retrieved June 26, 2016. "Kanye West, American Mozart". The Atlantic. April 2, 2012. Retrieved June 26, 2016. Muggs, Joe (January 19, 2016). "Kanye West wants to cover David Bowie—and there is no one more fitting". The Guardian. London. Retrieved February 15, 2016. "Kanye West: Album Guide". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 5, 2011. Retrieved August 5, 2012. Hussain, Shahzaib (November 23, 2008). "Renegade Man: The Legacy of Kanye West's '808s & Heartbreak'". Highsnobiety. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Burney, Lawrence (September 11, 2017). "Kanye West's 'Graduation' Gave Birth to Rap's First Real Rock Star". Noisey. Vice Media. Retrieved September 12, 2017. Callahan-Bever, Noah (September 11, 2015). "The Day Kanye West Killed Gangsta Rap". Complex. Archived from the original on February 19, 2016. Retrieved February 17, 2016. Lamarre, Carl (September 11, 2017). "Vic Mensa, KYLE, A Boogie Wit Da Hoodie & More Reflect on Their Fondest Memories of Kanye's 'Graduation' Album". Billboard. Retrieved June 24, 2018. Christgau, Robert (October 2007). "Consumer Guide". MSN Music. Archived from the original on November 4, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2009. Theisen, Adam (February 18, 2015). "Rap's Latest Heavyweight Championship". The Michigan Daily. The Michigan Daily. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved May 8, 2015. "Drake Says Kanye West Is 'The Most Influential Person' On His Sound". MTV News. May 28, 2009. Archived from the original on October 1, 2013. Banks, Thembi (December 3, 2010). "Nicki Minaj on Image, Criticism, and Success". Essence. Retrieved February 23, 2016. "Op-Ed | How Did Travis Scott Become One of Music's Most Divisive Artists?". Highsnobiety. August 1, 2018. Retrieved August 26, 2022. Diep, Eric (January 20, 2016). "Next Wave: Meet Lil Uzi Vert, the Next Phenom in Rap". Complex. Retrieved April 6, 2016. "Chance The Rapper Discusses Kanye West Influence With Stretch & Bobbito". HotNewHipHop. August 9, 2017. Retrieved August 26, 2022. "Casey Veggies Speaks on Influences, Names Kanye West & Nas". HipHopDX. August 10, 2011. Adkins, Adele (November 1, 2010). "Adele: I'm very excited, nervous, eager, anxious but chuffed to announce my new album!". Adele.tv. XL Recordings. Archived from the original on April 24, 2011. Retrieved April 24, 2011. "Lily Allen: 'Kanye West amused by 'Sheezus' album title'". NME. May 15, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2016. "Get to know Daniel Caesar, the artist baring his soul on gospel-tinged r'n'b". Mixmag. "Billboard Cover: Lorde on Her 'Hero' Kanye West, the 'Hunger Games' Soundtrack and Hype-Proofing Her Career". Billboard. October 31, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2016. "Rosalía Levels Up as a Global Pop Superstar". The New Yorker. March 18, 2022. Retrieved April 8, 2022. Pais, Matt (March 24, 2015). "Honesty is the best policy for rising star Halsey". RedEye. Retrieved February 11, 2016. "k-punk: Their own musical hero". abstractdynamics.org. Retrieved November 22, 2016. Trendell, Andrew. "Kasabian: 'Our new album's influenced by Nirvana + Kanye West'". gigwise.com. Moreno, Chino (January 25, 2010). "MGMT's new album influenced by Lady Gaga and Kanye West". NME. Retrieved July 6, 2015. Ahmed, Insanul (April 4, 2013). "Even The Yeah Yeah Yeahs Love Kanye West". Complex. Retrieved March 23, 2016. Trendell, Andrew (April 28, 2017). "Fall Out Boy discuss 'extreme' new single 'Young And Menace' and their 'political' new album 'M A N I A'". NME. Retrieved June 16, 2018. "Kanye Wants James Blake for Next Album". Rolling Stone. February 21, 2014. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2016. Dazed (September 25, 2013). "Oneohtrix Point Never". dazeddigital.com. Retrieved November 22, 2016. "Tim Hecker Announces New Album Love Streams". Pitchfork. January 27, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2016. "Rakim Speaks On Kanye West's Influence On Hip-Hop". Complex. Retrieved December 14, 2022. "John Legend details Kanye West's influence in popularizing his stage name". Yardbarker. March 2, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2022. "Top Artists (Digital Singles)". RIAA. Retrieved November 22, 2019. "RIAA Tallies The Decade's Top Gold & Platinum Award Winners". RIAA. February 17, 2010. Archived from the original on February 21, 2010. Retrieved November 23, 2019. "2009 U.S. Music Purchases up 2.1% over 2008; Music Sales Exceed 1.5 Billion for Second Consecutive Year". Business Wire. January 6, 2010. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "Celebrating a Decade of Discovery on Spotify". Spotify. October 10, 2018. Retrieved November 23, 2019. Elizabeth Wolfe and Braden Goyette (November 4, 2019). "Kanye West's 'Jesus Is King' just became his ninth consecutive No. 1 album, tying Eminem's record". CNN. Retrieved November 23, 2019. "Decade End Charts—Hot 100 Producers". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 13, 2010. Retrieved November 27, 2019. McManus, Brian (January 15, 2014). "For the Fourth Time in Six Albums, Kanye West Takes the Top Pazz & Jop Prize". Village Voice. Archived from the original on February 11, 2017. Retrieved November 27, 2019. Coleman II, C. Vernon (April 3, 2022). "These Rappers Have The Most Grammy Nominations But Never Won". XXL. Retrieved March 7, 2023. "Kanye West Leads Grammy Nominees". Billboard. Retrieved December 7, 2004. "Mariah Carey, Kanye West, John Legend Lead Grammy Nominees". MTV. Retrieved December 8, 2004. "Kanye West Leads 50th GRAMMY Nominees". Grammy. Retrieved May 15, 2017. "Grammys 2011: Kanye, Adele, Foo Fighters Lead Nominations". ABC News. Retrieved December 1, 2011. "Frank Ocean, fun. Lead 2013 Grammy Nominations With Album of the Year Nods". Spin. Retrieved December 6, 2012. "Beyoncé to U2: The top 4 GRAMMY winners of the 2000s". Grammy. Retrieved November 13, 2017. Montgomery, Daniel (June 21, 2019). "Will Lady Gaga ('A Star is Born') win her first Album of the Year Grammy on her 4th try?". Goldderby. Retrieved November 23, 2019. "Artist of the Year—Kanye West". Archived from the original on November 20, 2016. Retrieved December 20, 2017. "2010 ACE Awards Presented By The Accessories Council—Red Carpet". Zimbio. October 31, 2010. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "Kanye West Named International Man of the Year at GQ Awards". XXL. September 4, 2007. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "Kanye West—The Life Of Pablo Album Experience". Clios. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "The Recording Academy Honors 2007". Unrated Magazine. October 11, 2007. Archived from the original on November 26, 2019. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "Who Has Won the Artist Achievement Award?". Billboard Music Awards. April 12, 2016. Archived from the original on November 26, 2019. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "West To Receive Billboard Artist Achievement Award". Billboard. November 17, 2005. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "Rolling Stone: 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: 2020 edition". Rolling Stone. September 22, 2020. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved September 24, 2020. "10 Best Albums of Decade". Entertainment Weekly. December 3, 2009. Archived from the original on March 24, 2018. Retrieved August 5, 2019. "The 100 Best Albums of the Complex Decade". Complex. April 2, 2012. Retrieved November 1, 2019. "The 40 Most Groundbreaking Albums Of All Times". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 21, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2017. "The 50 Best of the 2010s". The A.V. Club. November 20, 2019. Archived from the original on November 20, 2019. Retrieved November 21, 2019. Dietz, Jason (December 4, 2013). "Critics Pick Best Albums of 2013". Metacritic. Archived from the original on January 23, 2018. Retrieved November 26, 2019. Yoo, Noah (April 4, 2017). "Kanye's Life of Pablo Becomes First Streaming-Only Album to Go Platinum". Pitchfork. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "Kanye West's The Life of Pablo becomes the UK's first album to be certified Gold on streams only". Official Charts. October 3, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2019. Kanye in Oxford: The #YeezOx highlights. Retrieved April 27, 2015. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kanye West. Wikiquote has quotations related to Kanye West. Kanye West on Twitter Kanye West at AllMusic Kanye West at IMDb Kanye West discography at Discogs Appearances on C-SPAN Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission Portals:  Biography  Chicago  Fashion  Music  Politics  Pop music  Record production  United States