The Bristol child sex abuse ring was a group of 13 men who committed sexual offences against underage teenage girls in Bristol, in Southwestern England. In November 2014, they were convicted of offences including rape, paying a child for sex, causing or inciting child prostitution, sexual acts with children and sex trafficking. The men abused and prostituted their victims across Bristol, using hotels, private houses, parks and public toilets. Some were drug-dealers selling heroin and cocaine, while others were described as "well-educated men with good prospects". As in similar sex-abuse cases in other parts of Britain, their victims were typically "vulnerable girls" who were supposedly under local authority care. The gang coerced the girls into sex with small payments of money, gifts of drugs and alcohol, and by persuading them that having sex with many men was part of "Somali 'culture and tradition'". In a police interview, Said Zakaria referred to two thirteen-year-old victims of one incident of abuse as "dirty slags" who knew that their function was to "suck dick and then fuck off". He had trafficked a "small 13-year-old girl" to a "sex party" in a hotel room in Bristol, where he raped her twice in what the trial judge, Julian Lambert, described as a "rough, callous and very nasty manner" and using "significant" force. Zakaria left the girl "totally humiliated and bleeding". The girl was then raped again by Jusuf Abdirazak, whom the judge described as acting "without humanity and with no pity whatsoever". A total of thirteen men were convicted, their names, convictions and sentences are listed below. The Guardian reported that the case had caused "huge concern" in Bristol and sent "shockwaves" through the close-knit Somali community there. Muna Abdi, chair of the Bristol Somali Forum, said that the offences were "evil acts ... utterly condemned" by the community. Hugh Sherriffe, regional director for the children's charity Barnardo's, said the case was the "tip of the iceberg" and that similar sexual abuse was still taking place in Bristol and across the rest of the country. Police in Bristol have active investigations under way into similar sex crimes committed by "49 other suspects" of "various communities and ethnic backgrounds". Responding to the convictions, a local headteacher wrote in The Guardian's dedicated education section of how "schools can't cope with the tide of child sexual exploitation". The headteacher expressed dismay at the way in which the perceived ethnicity of the offenders had harmed race relations in Bristol and described how it had been necessary to devote the month before the verdict to "redoubling our focus on combating racism". The headteacher noted how already "struggling" communities had been further demoralised by a "case on this scale" and spoke of feeling "dread" at "what else is out there". List of sexual abuses perpetrated by groups Morris, Steven (27 November 2014). "13 men guilty of enforced prostitution and rape of vulnerable girls in Bristol". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 28 November 2014. Laville, Sandra (3 March 2015). "Professionals blamed Oxfordshire girls for their sexual abuse, report finds". The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com. Morris, Steven (28 November 2014). "13 men jailed over Bristol sex-abuse ring". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 September 2015. "Gang jailed for teens sex abuse". Keighley News. Press Association. 27 November 2014. Archived from the original on 18 February 2018. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "Bristol sex gang: The horrifying ordeals of the brave 13-year-old who came forward". The Independent. 27 November 2014. Retrieved 28 November 2014. https://www.pressreader.com/uk/the-independent/20141128 – via PressReader. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |title= (help) "A gang who were part of an inner city sex ring involving the abuse, rape and prostitution of British girls have been jailed for more than 40 years". London Evening Standard. 28 November 2014. Retrieved 16 April 2015. "Seven jailed for part in Bristol sex abuse gang – BBC News". BBC News. 28 November 2014. Retrieved 9 September 2015. "'Schools can't cope with the tide of child sexual exploitation'". The Guardian. 2 December 2014. Retrieved 2 December 2014. 13 men guilty of enforced prostitution and rape of vulnerable girls in Bristol, The Guardian, 27 November 2014 Bristol sex gang: The horrifying ordeals of the brave 13-year-old who came forward, The Independent, 27 November 2014 A gang who were part of an inner city sex ring involving the abuse, rape and prostitution of British girls have been jailed for more than 40 years, The Evening Standard, 28 November 2014 ‘Schools can’t cope with the tide of child sexual exploitation’, The Guardian, 2 December 2014