Riga State Gymnasium No.1 (Latvian: Rīgas Valsts 1. ģimnāzija), the oldest school in the Baltic states, offers secondary education (grades 7 to 12) in Riga, the capital of Latvia. The school traces its origins to school of Riga Cathedral, which was founded in 1211, a decade after the foundation of Riga itself. Its name and language of instruction have changed several times during its history. The school language was German from the school's foundation until 1892, when it became Russian. Latvian became the main language of instruction in 1919. Today, the gymnasium is known for its strong programs in the natural sciences, mathematics and computer science. Students wishing to enroll at the school take an admissions test in mathematics. Its admissions rate, with as many as nine candidates competing for each position, is one of the lowest in the country. Since 1997 the school enrolls 30 to 40 people in its International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme each year, where instruction is offered in English. It was the first school in the Baltic states to offer the IBO Diploma Programme. Each year a number of 12th grade students finish the DSD (Das Deutsches Sprachdiplom) programme by taking an exam along with the regular school leaving exams. Passing the exam enables them to pursue their higher education in German speaking countries. Riga State Gymnasium No.1 is consistently ranked first among the schools in Latvia. Its students' average results on school leaving (state) exams are the highest in the country. Riga State Gymnasium No.1 is also the best school in Latvia based on its students' achievements at various domestic and international academic competitions. Many of the graduates continue their education at highly ranked universities abroad, particularly in the UK, the Netherlands, Denmark, Germany, Austria, Switzerland and the USA. The percentage of these students is very high among the ones who graduate from the IBO Diploma Programme. Agnis Andžāns – Latvian mathematician Ingus Baušķenieks – Latvian musician Gunnar Birkerts – Latvian American architect Uldis Cērps – Chairman of the Financial and Capital Market Commission in Latvia Tomass Dukurs – Latvian skeleton racer Indulis Emsis – Latvian politician, former Prime Minister of Latvia Andrejs Ērglis – Latvian cardiologist Māris Gailis – Latvian businessman, former Prime Minister of Latvia Ivars Godmanis – Latvian politician, former Prime Minister of Latvia Garlieb Merkel – Baltic German writer and activist Wilhelm Ostwald – Baltic German Nobel Prize winning chemist Friedrich Parrot – Baltic German naturalist and traveler Kristjan Jaak Peterson – Estonian poet, commonly regarded as the founder of modern Estonian poetry Mārtiņš Pļaviņš – Latvian beach volleyball player, 2012 Olympic medalist Krista Puisite – First Latvian golfer to earn LPGA Tour Card Māris Purgailis – Latvian politician, former Mayor of Riga Rainis – Latvian poet and politician Einars Repše – Latvian politician, former Prime Minister of Latvia Justs Sirmais – Latvian singer Pēteris Stučka – Latvian politician, head of the Bolshevik government in Latvia during the Latvian War of Independence Daina Taimiņa – Latvian mathematician List of oldest schools dati.e-skola.lv "Latvijas Valsts arhīvs". www.lvarhivs.gov.lv. Karsten Brüggemann language. Johannes Paulmann (ed.). Als Land und Leute »russisch" werden sollten: Zum Verständnis des Phänomens der "Russifizierung« am Beispiel der Ostseeprovinzen des Zarenreichs. Veröffentlichungen des Instituts für Europäische Geschichte Mainz. Vol. Beiheft 90. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. "deutschessprachdiplom.eu". www.deutschessprachdiplom.eu. "DSD-Schulen in Estland und Lettland". Archived from the original on 25 June 2011. Retrieved 21 May 2011. "Valsts pārbaudes darbi. Statistika. 2010.g." Archived from the original on 25 May 2011. Retrieved 21 May 2011. "TVNET – Apollo". TVNET. "Skolu top 100 - nra.lv". Archived from the original on 26 July 2011. Retrieved 21 May 2011. "Ata Kronvalda fonds – Par jauniešu talanta attīstību zinātnē un pētniecībā". www.atakronvaldafonds.lv. Official website [1] – Deutsches Sprachdiplom 56°57′10″N 24°06′46″E﻿ / ﻿56.95278°N 24.11278°E﻿ / 56.95278; 24.11278