Anna Levandi, née Kondrashova, (born 30 June 1965) is a former Russian competitive figure skater who represented the former Soviet Union in international competition. She was the 1984 World silver medalist and four-time European bronze medalist. She competed at two Winter Olympic Games. Levandi was born Anna Anatolevna Kondrashova, and grew up in Moscow, Russia (then Soviet Union). She is married to Allar Levandi, an Estonian former Olympic Nordic combined skier she met at the 1988 Winter Olympics. The couple lives in Estonia and she now works as a coach in Tallinn. Their son, Arlet Levandi, is a figure skater who competes for Estonia. Kondrashova began skating at age 6 and was trained by Edouard Pliner. She started competing at senior ISU events in 1983. At her second European Championships in 1984, she won the bronze medal, and she represented the Soviet Union at the 1984 Winter Olympics, where she placed 5th. She won the silver medal at the 1984 World Figure Skating Championships after performing a free program with three triple jumps. Her marks were considered high by the crowd, which booed. She changed coaches to Stanislav Zhuk in 1984, but in 1986 she and Marina Zoueva sent a letter of complaint about his abusive behavior to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and he was made to retire. After Zhuk, she trained with Stanislav Leonovich. Kondrashova was fifth at the 1985 European championships, but she won three more bronze medals at the European championships from 1986 through 1988, for a total of four. She once again represented the Soviet Union at the 1988 Winter Olympics, where she placed 8th. She retired from competitive skating following that season. Levandi works as a coach and choreographer at Anna Levandi Figure Skating Club in Tallinn. Among her current and former students and choreography clients are Johanna Allik,Jasmine Alexandra Costa,Alisa Drei,Jelena Glebova,Mari Hirvonen,Christian HorvathSvetlana Issakova,Taru Karvosenoja,Viktor Romanenkov,Viktoria Shklover & Valdis Mintals,Dmitri Tchumak, Arlet Levandi and Eva-Lotta Kiibus. On February 21, 2024, it was reported that the Estonian Anti-Doping and Sports Ethics Foundation had received allegations of abuse, such as derisive language and directing skaters to ignore injuries, from multiple former students of Levandi's. Levandi said that she was a demanding coach but denied that her behavior was abusive. In 2007, she was named Woman of the Year of Estonia and in 2008 Coach of the Year of Estonia. On 4 February 2009, she was decorated with the Third Class Order of the White Star. Russian: Анна Анатольевна Леванди Russian: Кондрашова In her maiden name that follows Eastern Slavic naming conventions, the patronymic is Anatolevna and the family name was Kondrashova "Anna Levandi: Venelane, keda Eestis kõige rohkem armastatakse - Eesti Ekspress - Uudised, Eesti, Maailm, Ilm, Meelelahutus, Video, Raadio- & Telesaade, Arvamuslood". Archived from the original on 10 March 2009. Retrieved 14 March 2009. "Arlet LEVANDI". International Skating Union. Värv, Maarja (21 February 2024). "Levandi's own complaint ended former coach Zhuk's career in 1980s". Eesti Rahvusringhääling. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Cleary, Martin (22 March 1984). "Witt wins, Thomson takes fifth". Ottawa Citizen. p. 53. Goldstein, Wesley (22 March 1984). "Katarina Witt doesn't do much talking, but when she..." UPI. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Johanna Allik at the International Skating Union Jasmine Alexandra Costa at the International Skating Union Alisa Drei at the International Skating Union Jelena Glebova at the International Skating Union Mari Hirvonen at the International Skating Union Christian Horvath at the International Skating Union Svetlana Issakova at the International Skating Union Taru Karvosenoja at the International Skating Union Viktor Romanenkov at the International Skating Union Shklover & Mintals at the International Skating Union Dmitri Tchumak at the International Skating Union Värv, Maarja; Kärmas, Mihkel; Koppel, Karin (21 February 2024). "Former students accuse figure skating coach Anna Levandi of abuse". Eesti Rahvusringhääling. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "Vabariigi President". www.president.ee (in Estonian). Retrieved 12 March 2020. Remmel, Ia (2010). "Anna Levandi: The popularity of a sport is built over the years". AbsoluteSkating.com. Archived from the original on 29 April 2010. Retrieved 22 December 2010. Evans, Hilary; Gjerde, Arild; Heijmans, Jeroen; Mallon, Bill; et al. "Anna Kondrashova". Olympics at Sports-Reference.com. Sports Reference LLC. Archived from the original on 18 April 2020. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anna Levandi. Anna Levandi at Olympedia Anna Levandi at ESBL (in Estonian) Anna Levandi Iluuisutamisklubi, treener Anna Levandi (in Estonian)