Rock Dog (simplified Chinese: 摇滚藏獒; traditional Chinese: 搖滾藏獒; pinyin: Yáogǔn Zàng'áo literally Rock and Roll Tibetan Mastiff) is a 2017 animated comedy film directed by Ash Brannon (in his solo directorial debut), from a script by Brannon and Kurt Voelker. Produced by Mandoo Pictures and Huayi Brothers, the film is loosely based on the Chinese graphic novel Tibetan Rock Dog by Zheng Jun. It features the voices of Luke Wilson, J. K. Simmons, Eddie Izzard, Lewis Black, Kenan Thompson, Mae Whitman, Jorge Garcia, Matt Dillon, and Sam Elliott. The film focuses on a young Tibetan Mastiff who leaves his mountain home village to become a rock musician in the big city after a radio falls from the sky. Rock Dog was released on July 8, 2016, in China by Huayi Brothers and on February 24, 2017, in the United States by Summit Premiere. The film received mixed reviews from critics and underperformed at the box office, grossing $24 million worldwide against a production budget of $60 million. Two straight-to-DVD and blu-ray sequels followed. The second, titled Rock Dog 2: Rock Around the Park, was released on June 15, 2021, and the third, titled Rock Dog 3: Battle the Beat, was released on January 24, 2023. None of the principal voice cast from the original film reprised their roles in the later titles, except for Izzard as Angus Scattergood. Teenage Tibetan Mastiff Bodi is expected to be the next guard of the village of Snow Mountain; succeeding his father Khampa, who years ago drove out a pack of gangster grey wolves, led by the villainous Linnux. Khampa has some local sheep disguised as Mastiffs to give the illusion the village has multiple guards to keep the wolves at bay, but Bodi has trouble perfecting his father's signature move the Iron Paw, which projects a powerful blast that can only happen if Bodi "finds the fire". Khampa has forbidden music in the village as it distracted Bodi from his duties when he was younger. One day after a disastrous training session, Bodi indirectly causes a nearby flying plane to drop a package. Among the items, Bodi becomes interested in a radio and listens to rock music, becoming entranced with British rock legend Angus Scattergood. Bodi steals a traditional dramyin from a den of locked up instruments, adds additional strings to make it a conventional Western guitar, and neglects his duties in favor of becoming a musician, putting him at odds with his father. After Khampa and some of the guard sheep accidentally cause Bodi to unleash a false alarm on the village while dressed as wolves (in an attempt to scare him straight), village elder Fleetwood Yak convinces Khampa to let Bodi follow his dream. Bodi is given a bus ticket to a nearby city, but Khampa makes him promise to give up music if his trip doesn't work out. At the bus station, Bodi is discovered by two of Linnux's henchman, Riff and Skozz, and he orders them to kidnap Bodi, reasoning it is his chance to take over Snow Mountain. Bodi arrives at the city, and heads to Rock and Roll Park as it is where Scattergood began his career. He attempts to join a band consisting of the down-to-earth fox Darma and absent-minded goat drummer Germur. However, Bodi is humiliated after losing a guitar contest to arrogant snow leopard Trey, who after discovering Bodi's idolization for Scattergood, manipulates him into convincing Scattergood to give him some guitar lessons at his mansion. At Scattergood's mansion, he is revealed to be a white Persian cat who wears black sunglasses all the time and has a serious case of writer's block, with his only companion being his robot butler Ozzie. Angus' manager, Ian, gives him three days to create a new song. When Bodi tries to meet Scattergood, he is put off by Bodi's attitude and tries to evade him. Eventually, Bodi and Scattergood get lost in a back alley and Bodi decides to play music at Rock and Roll Park to get money for Scattergood to return to his mansion. However, Riff and Skozz mistakenly kidnap Scattergood after they see Bodi at the park. After Riff and Skozz realize their error, Linnux angrily sends them to find Bodi again and they drop Scattergood off at his home. Scattergood believes his career is over since he has less than a day to write a new song, when he hears Bodi playing on his guitar and invites him into his home with the facade of a "guitar lesson", creating a new song called "Glorious". Bodi later realizes that Angus used him after hearing him take full credit for the song they wrote together on a radio. Trey mocks Bodi and everyone in the park leaves, with Darma and Germur feeling sorry for him. Soon after, Bodi is captured by Linnux's henchmen via tranquilizer darts, and under their effects he reveals the fake Mastiff guards when Linnux interrogates him. Linnux and his gang head to Snow Mountain while Bodi is put into a boxing match at Linnux's Fight Palace, but Bodi cleverly has his opponent break the cage surrounding them so he can escape. Scattergood, guilt-tripped by Ozzie for exploiting Bodi for his own selfishness, uses his old tour bus to find him and apologize. At Rock and Roll Park, Scattergood meets with Darma and Germur and discover Bodi's capture when they see his dart-covered guitar. Scattergood forgoes sending in his new song to rescue Bodi. Meeting Bodi outside of Linnux's hideout, Scattergood makes amends by giving his old acoustic guitar with his autograph as a sign of gratitude and takes him to Snow Mountain to stop Linnux and his henchmen. Linnux and his gang overpower Khampa and the whole village and attempt to devour the villagers, but Bodi appears. After a climactic chase, Bodi subdues the wolves by "finding the fire" by playing Scattergood's guitar and making the wolves, the villagers, and his friends levitate. Khampa banishes Linnux with his Iron Paw and accepts Bodi's ambition to play rock music. At the city, Scattergood gives full credit of "Glorious" to Bodi. Bodi forms a band with Darma and Germur as they (including Scattergood, Ozzie, Fleetwood, and the sheep) sing and play "Glorious" to the city, the Snow Mountain villagers, Khampa, and most of the redeemed wolves (including Riff and Skozz) at Linnux's old Fight Palace. Meanwhile, Trey tries to get in the Fight Palace claiming that he's with the band only to be turned away by a bear bouncer. Luke Wilson as Bodi (博迪; Bódí), a young Tibetan Mastiff who is eternally optimistic and wants nothing more than to play rock music. Adam Friedman provides Bodi's English singing voice, including the final song "Glorious". J. K. Simmons as Khampa (坎帕; Kǎnpà), Bodi's father, an elder Tibetan Mastiff who takes his duties as the village guard extremely seriously and despises music after defeating the wolves at one point. Eddie Izzard as Angus Scattergood (安格斯·史卡特古德), a British Persian cat rock legend who is suffering from a serious case of songwriter's block. Lewis Black as Linnux, the CEO of Linnux Industries, alpha male wolf of a sinister wolf gang, and club owner of the Fight Palace. Kenan Thompson as Riff (Chinese: 里夫; pinyin: Lǐfū), the smallest henchman in the wolf pack. He tries to take on jobs bigger than himself just to impress his boss Linnux, but they almost always result in epic failure due to the lack of unity between him and his absent-minded partner, Skozz. Mae Whitman as Darma (达玛; 達瑪; Dámǎ), a red fox who has been playing her bass guitar at Rock n' Roll Park for years. Jorge Garcia as Germur (格尔穆尔), an absent-minded goat drummer. Matt Dillon as Trey (特雷), an arrogant and egotistic snow leopard who humiliates Bodi in Rock n' Roll park. Sam Elliott as Fleetwood Yak, a wise and elderly yak who is Snow Mountain's village elder. His name is a pun on the British rock band Fleetwood Mac. Liza Richardson as Radio DJ Ash Brannon as Ian, Scattergood's impatient manager who is only heard when he talks to Scattergood on the phone. Will Finn as Floyd, a sheep barber Finn also voices Carl, another sheep Additional voices are provided by Julie Craig, Deng Feng, Kellen Goff, Jennifer Hale, and Matt Taylor. The film was animated by Reel FX, which produced Free Birds (2013) and the Golden Globe-nominated The Book of Life (2014). Rock Dog cost $60 million[clarification needed] to produce, making it the most expensive Chinese-financed animated production. The film is dedicated to producer David B. Miller who died while riding his mountain bike near his Topanga home. The film premiered at the Shanghai International Film Festival, which took place between June 11 and June 19, 2016. It was released in China the following month on July 8. In the United States, the film was theatrically released on February 24, 2017, by Lionsgate through its Summit Premiere label. During its original theatrical run, Wanda Cinema Line withheld most Chinese theaters from showing Rock Dog, limiting the film's box office in China. Allegedly, this was due to a conflict with Huayi Bros. Rock Dog was released on Digital HD on May 9, 2017, and on DVD and Blu-ray on May 23. Rock Dog grossed $9.4 million in the United States and $14.7 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $24.1 million, against a production budget of $60 million. In the United States, Rock Dog was released alongside Collide and Get Out, and was expected to gross $6–7 million from 2,077 theaters in its opening weekend. It ended up grossing just $3.7 million, finishing 11th at the box office and marking one of the worst-ever debuts for a film playing in over 2,000 theaters. The film had a poor opening weekend in China, eventually earning $5.7 million. It was suggested that the largest Chinese theater chain, Wanda Cinema Line, attempted to limit the number of screens the film would be shown on. The film was shown only on seven of Wanda's screens—0.3 percent of all its screens in China. Huayi Bros., the film's production company and an owner of a competing theater chain, poached Wanda's executive Jerry Ye a few months before the film's release and made him CEO of its film division. On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 46% based on 56 reviews, with an average rating of 5.30/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "Rock Dog is amiable enough, but its second-tier animation and uninspired story add up to a movie whose meager charms are likely to escape all but the youngest and least demanding viewers." On Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average to reviews, the film has a score 48 out of 100, based on 16 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale. A sequel to the film, Rock Dog 2: Rock Around the Park, was made available for digital download on June 11, 2021, followed by a June 15 release for DVD and Blu-ray. Taking place a year later, Bodi and his band True Blue work with pop sensation Lil' Foxy, while learning about the price of fame and being true to yourself. Another sequel, titled Rock Dog 3: Battle the Beat, which is the third installment of the trilogy, was released on DVD, Blu-ray and digital download on January 24, 2023. In the film, Bodi is compelled to join the music competition show Battle the Beat to restore Angus Scattergood's good name. None of the original cast members reprised their roles for both sequels except Izzard. "Rolfe Kent Scoring 'Tibetan Rock Dog'". Film Music Reporter. March 19, 2015. Retrieved August 4, 2015. "Rock Dog". Box Office Mojo. Frater, Patrick (June 2, 2016). "Shanghai Festival Unveils Competition Lineup". Variety. Retrieved January 8, 2017. "摇滚藏獒 (2016)". movie.douban.com (in Chinese). douban.com. "摇滚藏獒（2016）". cbooo.cn (in Chinese). "Rock Dog". The Numbers. Retrieved March 16, 2017. Amidi, Amid (July 7, 2016). "Report: Duelling Chinese Businessmen Are Sabotaging The Release of 'Rock Dog', Director Ash Brannon Caught in the Middle". Cartoon Brew. Retrieved October 14, 2016. Ryan, Fergus (July 6, 2016). "Is Wanda Sabotaging Huayi's 'Rock Dog's Box Office Chances?". China Film Insider. Retrieved January 7, 2018. "Rock Dog". The Numbers. Retrieved July 13, 2018. Amidi, Amid (October 7, 2016). "'Rock Dog' Gets U.S. Release Date, New American Trailer". Cartoon Brew. Retrieved October 14, 2016. Milligan, Mercedes (April 30, 2022). "'Rock Dog 2: Rock Around the Park' Gives an Encore with Lionsgate". Animation Magazine. Retrieved April 30, 2021. "Animated 'Rock Dog 3: Battle the Beat' Due on Blu-ray Combo Pack Jan. 24". Media Play News. November 30, 2022. Retrieved December 1, 2022. Amidi, Amid (August 3, 2015). "5 Things You Need To Know About The Chinese/American Feature 'Rock Dog'". Cartoon Brew. Retrieved September 6, 2016. Soundtrack.net "OFFICIAL TRAILER: Reel FX "Rock Dog" – Animation Scoop". "Rock Dog Blu-ray". Blu-ray.com. Retrieved August 17, 2017. "Audiences Plan To Get Into 'Get Out' – Weekend B.O. Preview". Deadline Hollywood. February 22, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2017. "Universal/Blumhouse's 'Get Out' Now Grabbing A $30M+ Opening". Deadline Hollywood. February 27, 2017. Retrieved February 27, 2017. "China Shocker: Indie 'Big Fish & Begonia' Scores Massive Launch, Expensive 'Rock Dog' Flops". Cartoon Brew. July 11, 2016. Retrieved October 14, 2016. "Rock Dog (2017)". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved February 24, 2017. "Rock Dog reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved February 28, 2017. "CinemaScore". CinemaScore. Retrieved June 1, 2017. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 27, 2017). "Jordan Peele's 'Get Out' Jumps To $33.4M Opening – Monday AM Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 24, 2017. "《天籁梦想》摘得第十三届中国国际儿童电影节最佳儿童片大奖-新华网". www.xinhuanet.com. Retrieved October 15, 2020. Tencent VFE Team. "第31届中国电影金鸡奖颁奖典礼_腾讯视频". v.qq.com (in Chinese (China)). Retrieved October 11, 2020. "《摇滚藏獒》入围金爵最佳动画片 郑钧6年磨一剑--江西频道--人民网". jx.people.com.cn. Retrieved October 15, 2020. Rock Dog 2: Rock Around The Park (2021 Movie) Official Trailer on YouTube Rock Dog 2|Redefine "Rock Dog 3: Battle the Beat Blu-ray Disc Details | High-Def Digest". Rock Dog 3: Battle the Beat (2023 Movie) Official Trailer on YouTube Wikiquote has quotations related to Rock Dog. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rock Dog. Official website Rock Dog at IMDb Rock Dog at Box Office Mojo