Andrićgrad (Serbian Cyrillic: Андрићград, lit. "Andrić's town") is the name of a construction project located in Višegrad, Republika Srpska, Bosnia and Herzegovina by film director Emir Kusturica. The town is dedicated to the Yugoslav novelist and Nobel Prize for Literature laureate Ivo Andrić. Construction of Andrićgrad, also known as Kamengrad (Каменград, "Stonetown") started on 28 June 2011, and was officially opened on 28 June 2014, on Vidovdan. Andrićgrad is located several kilometers from Kusturica's first town, Drvengrad, in Serbia. Andrićgrad was, in 2022, the venue used for the twelfth edition of Bina Mira, a youth festival that focuses on peace and equality between nations, that drew over 80 students from Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Germany, Romania, Serbia and Slovenia. Andrićgrad is located near the Mehmed Paša Sokolović Bridge, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and stretches from the bridge up to the confluence of the Rzav River. After Küstendorf (English: coastal village), this is the second village Kusturica created from scratch. Andrićgrad is to be used as a location for Kusturica's film adaptation of the novel The Bridge on the Drina by Ivo Andrić.[citation needed][needs update] The town has a lot of shops and services for incoming guests, amongst them are a gift shop, a kneipe, a restaurant, a cinema, a book shop and a gallery. Honorary citizens are people who have been awarded with Key to the City. They are: Milorad Dodik, President of Republika Srpska Vuk Jeremić, President of the 67th session of the UN General Assembly Matija Bećković, writer Novak Đoković, tennis player Drvengrad Main entrance of Andrićgrad. Main square of Andrićgrad. Andrićgrad during opening ceremony on 28 June 2014. Main street in Andrićgrad. Square in Andrićgrad. Serbian medieval architecture Oriental architecture Andrićgrad at night. Petar II Petrović-Njegoš monument Tourist boat Mural Petar II Petrović Njegoš Square "Почела градња "Андрићграда"". "The town that Emir Kusturica built". 27 June 2014. Uz ćupriju novi Kusturicin grad[permanent dead link] [1] "Đokoviću ključevi Andrićgrada". Večernje Novosti. Retrieved 16 November 2014. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Andrićgrad. Official website Official website (under construction, under name Kamengrad) About Andricgrad at website of Tourist organization of Visegrad