Radisson Blu is an international chain of hotels operated by Radisson Hotels. With roots dating back to the 1960s, the Radisson Blu brand name came into existence in 2009 with a rebranding from Radisson SAS. Its hotels are found in major cities, key airport gateways and leisure destinations. SAS Hotels has roots dating to the opening of the SAS Royal Hotel in Copenhagen, Denmark in 1960. Architect Arne Jacobsen designed every aspect of the hotel for the SAS Group, from the building, to the now-iconic furniture (including the Egg chair), to the tableware.: 378–379  The hotel was initially operated by the catering division of the group, but merged with the hospitality division to become SAS Catering and Hotels.: 379  In 1982, the hotels were spun off as a separate division, operating under the name SAS International Hotels.: 379  In 1994, Radisson SAS Hotels was created, as a partnership between Radisson Hotels International and SAS International Hotels, for operations in Europe, the Middle East and Africa. By the year 2000, the brand was operating 100 hotels. In 2009, the partnership with SAS ended and the Radisson SAS properties were rebranded as Radisson Blu. The name ‘Blu’ was chosen as part of a research project to find a new visual identity as the company looked to replace the familiar SAS blue box. Radisson Blu entered the United States market with the opening of its first hotel in Chicago, Illinois in 2011. The hotel occupies part of the Aqua skyscraper developed by Studio Gang Architects. In 2013, it opened its second location. It is connected to the Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota. In 2010, Radisson Blu was named the largest upper upscale hotel chain in Europe. Radisson Blu hotels are mainly located in major cities, key airport gateways and leisure destinations. It is described as an "upper upscale" hotel brand. Radisson Blu Astrid hotel in Antwerp, Belgium Radisson Blu hotel in Shanghai, China Radisson Blu Collection hotel in Copenhagen, Denmark Radisson Blu Resort Fiji Denarau Island in the Denarau Island, Fiji Radisson Blu hotel in Frankfurt am Main, Germany Radisson Blu Hamburg Airport hotel in Hamburg, Germany Mehari Radisson Blu hotel in Tripoli, Libya Radisson Blu Astorija hotel in Vilnius, Lithuania Radisson Blu hotel in Amsterdam, Netherlands Radisson Blu Anchorage hotel in Lagos, Nigeria Radisson Blu hotel in the Nydalen neighborhood in Oslo, Norway Radisson Blu hotel in Trondheim, Norway Radisson Blu hotel in Bucharest, Romania Radisson Blu Olympiyskiy hotel in Moscow, Russia Radisson Blu hotel in Chelyabinsk, Russia Radisson Blu hotel in Gothenburg, Sweden Radisson Blu Riverside hotel in Gothenburg, Sweden Radisson Blu Waterfront hotel in Stockholm, Sweden Radisson Blu hotel in Ankara, Turkey Radisson Blu Resort in Sharjah, United Arab Emirates Radisson Blu hotel in Bristol, United Kingdom Radisson Blu Edwardian hotel in London, United Kingdom Radisson Blu Aqua hotel in Chicago, United States Radisson Blu Water Garden Hotel, Dhaka, Bangladesh Radisson Blu Hotel Lietuva in Vilnius, Lithuania 2015 Bamako hotel attack AquaDom  Hotels portal Cohen, M. L. (2010). Pederson, Jay P. (ed.). "Rezidor Hotel Group AB". International Directory of Company History. 118. Farmington Hills, Michigan: St. James Press (Gale, Cengage Learning group). ISBN 978-1-4144-4729-2. McDowell, Edwin (August 12, 1994) [digitalized on n.d.]. "Radisson and SAS Form Hotel Pact". The New York Times. Retrieved January 17, 2019. "RADISSON SAS HOTELS AND RESORTS TO CHANGE THEIR NAME TO RADISSON BLU" (Press release). Globe Newswire. February 4, 2009. "Radisson SAS Hotels & Resorts In Europe, the Middle East and Africa to Change Their Name to Radisson Blu". Franchising.com. Retrieved 2019-09-18. Citation error. See inline comment how to fix.[verification needed] "LOOK: The Surprising Location Of This New Hotel". HuffPost. 2013-03-14. Retrieved 2019-09-18. TAYLOR, MIA (April 9, 2018). "Radisson Blu is Europe's Largest Upper-Upscale Hotel Brand". TravelPulse. "Radisson Blu Hotel, Kyiv". Hospitality Net. 22 February 2020.