Hilton Garden Inn is an American chain of mid-priced, limited or focused service hotels owned by Hilton Worldwide. As of December 2019[update], it has 862 properties with 126,086 rooms in 49 countries and territories, including 81 that are managed with 15,678 rooms and 781 that are franchised with 110,408 rooms. The Hilton Garden Inn brand began in the late 1980s under the name CrestHill by Hilton. Due to a slow real estate phase, only four of 25 proposed hotels were built. Of these four original hotels, three are still part of the chain today. They are located in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, Southfield, Michigan, and Valencia, California. The other hotel, located in Buffalo Grove, Illinois, is now a Four Points. The brand was reintroduced in 1991 as Hilton Garden Inn and has grown from four hotels to more than 860 limited or select service properties in about 25 years. In 2012, the first Hilton Garden Inn outside of North America was opened in Netherlands—the Hilton Garden Inn Leiden. It is located on the Old Rhine River, featuring 173 guestrooms and providing all of the brand's signature features. Hilton Garden Inn Nuevo Laredo (now Fiesta Inn Nuevo Laredo) Hilton Garden Inn Toronto/Markham Hilton Garden Inn Leiden in the Netherlands Hilton Garden Inn Munich City West Hilton Garden Inn Konya Hilton Garden Inn Hong Kong Mongkok The lobby of the Hilton Garden Inn in Trussville, Alabama The Hilton Garden Inn brand plans to open properties in Albania, Argentina, Armenia, Busselton, Faroe Islands, Hong Kong, Saudi Arabia, Thailand, Turkey, India, Kenya, Ireland, and additional locations throughout the United States, Canada, UK, Italy, Germany, Romania, Namibia, Colombia, Panama, Costa Rica, and Poland. Hilton Garden Inn announced the opening of one of its hotels in the port city of Santa Marta, Colombia, by 2016.[needs update] "Inline XBRL Viewer". www.sec.gov. Retrieved 2020-08-19. "Hilton Garden Inn Welcomes First Hotel to The Netherlands" (Press release). Hilton Garden Inn. "New Hilton Garden Inn hotel to open in Bucharest's Old Town in 2017". Europa Property.com. "Hilton Garden Inn Announced for the Caribbean Port City of Santa Marta, Colombia". Official website Hilton Garden Inn Media Center