A National Olympic Committee (NOC) is a national constituent of the worldwide Olympic movement. Subject to the controls of the International Olympic Committee, NOCs are responsible for organizing their people's participation in the Olympic Games. They may nominate cities within their respective areas as candidates for future Olympic Games. NOCs also promote the development of athletes and the training of coaches and officials at a national level within their geographies. As of 2023, there are 206 National Olympic Committees. These include each of the 193 member states of the United Nations, one UN observer state (Palestine), two states without UN recognition (Kosovo and Taiwan) and one associated state of New Zealand (the Cook Islands). There are also nine dependent territories with recognized NOCs: four territories of the United States (American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the United States Virgin Islands), three British Overseas Territories (Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, and the Cayman Islands), one constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands (Aruba) and one special administrative region of China (Hong Kong). Prior to 1996, rules for recognising dependent territories or constituent countries as separate countries within the IOC were not as strict as those within the United Nations, which allowed these territories to field teams separately from their sovereign state. Following an amendment to the Olympic Charter in 1996, NOC recognition can only be granted after recognition as an independent country by the international community. Since the rule does not apply retroactively, the dependent territories and constituent countries which were recognised before the rule change are allowed to continue sending separate teams to the Olympics, while the Faroe Islands and Macau send their own Paralympic teams. The only state which thus qualifies to participate in the future is the Vatican City, a UN observer state. Niue, an associated state of New Zealand, could also be eligible as it conducts its own foreign relations and participates independently in UN specialized agencies and treaties, though this is unclear. Currently, all other remaining states are ineligible to join the IOC as they are not recognised by a majority of United Nations member countries. Constituent countries and dependent territories such as Curaçao, the Faroe Islands, Gibraltar, Greenland, Macau, New Caledonia and Tahiti can also no longer be recognised, so athletes from these territories can only participate in the Olympics as part of their parent nation's national team. This rule also applies to territories experiencing a change in status – the Netherlands Antilles Olympic Committee was dissolved at the 123rd IOC session in July 2011 as the Netherlands Antilles ceased to exist in 2010. For those countries and territories that are part of the Commonwealth of Nations, their National Olympic Committees usually also serve as the members of the Commonwealth Games Association, though not for the constitunent countries of the United Kingdom (England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland), nor for Canada or Australia, who maintain separate organisations for Commonwealth and Olympic sport. For the other Commonwealth members, their NOCs are responsible for organising and overseeing their national teams at the Commonwealth Games. This section lists the current: 206 National Olympic Committees who are recognised by the International Olympic Committee, and so are the members of the Association of National Olympic Committees.[citation needed] 7 National Olympic Committees who are recognised by their continental Olympic associations, but are not recognised by the International Olympic Committee (Italics).[citation needed] The ANOC members are eligible to enter the Olympic Games. Some National Olympic Committees who are members of a continental Olympic association but not ANOC members compete in continental-level and subregional-level tournaments. These committees, however, are not allowed to participate in the Olympic Games. The five continental Olympic associations are:[citation needed] Africa – Association of National Olympic Committees of Africa (ANOCA) America – Pan American Sports Organization (PASO) Asia – Olympic Council of Asia (OCA) Europe – European Olympic Committees (EOC) Oceania – Oceania National Olympic Committees (ONOC) The IOC runs the Summer Olympic Games and the Winter Olympic Games as competitions in which all IOC-recognised NOCs can participate. Each continent also runs its own championships for their members:[citation needed] ANOCA – African Games PASO – Pan American Games and Pan American Winter Games OCA – Asian Games and Asian Winter Games EOC – European Games ONOC – Pacific Games While not continental unions in themselves, the Union of Arab National Olympic Committees (UANOC) and International Committee of Mediterranean Games (CIJM) organise multi-sport events between Arabic-speaking countries and Mediterranean countries respectively.[citation needed] All 22 National Olympic Committees that form the UANOC and the 26 from CIJM are also members of either the ANOCA, EOC or OCA and are eligible to send their athletes to either the African, European or Asian Games. National Olympic Committees from the UANOC and CIJM are noted in the list below.[citation needed] 1: National Olympic Committee is a member of the UANOC. 2: National Olympic Committee is a member of the CIJM. 3: National Olympic Committee is also National Commonwealth Games Association 1: National Olympic Committee is suspended by the IOC 2: National Olympic committee also a member of the Commonwealth Games Federation 1: National Olympic Committee is a member of the UANOC. 2: National Olympic Committee is a member of the OCA but not an ANOC member. 3: Official name used by the IOC, ANOC and OCA for the Republic of China (Taiwan). 4: National Olympic Committee is a member of the CIJM. 5: National Olympic committee also the national Commonwealth Games Association 1: Israel was a member of the OCA, but left the organisation in 1981. It joined the EOC in 1994. 2: National Olympic Committee is a member of the CIJM. 3: National Olympic committee also the national Commonwealth Games Association. 4: National Olympic Committee is suspended by the IOC. 1: National Olympic Committee is an associate member of the ONOC but not an ANOC member. The NOCs are all members of the Association of National Olympic Committees (ANOC), which is also split among five continental associations: See the article for each continental association for the complete lists of all NOCs. The Faroe Islands and Macau both have recognized National Paralympic Committees and compete at the Paralympic Games. However, neither territory's National Olympic Committee is recognized by the IOC, so they cannot participate in the Olympics. Macau remains recognized by the Olympic Council of Asia and takes part in the Asian Games. Other existing countries/regions with unrecognized Olympic committees: Catalonia, Gibraltar, French Polynesia, Niue, New Caledonia, Curaçao, Guadeloupe, French Guiana, Martinique, Sint Maarten, the Northern Mariana Islands, Anguilla, Montserrat, Turks & Caicos Islands, Transnistria, Kurdistan, Northern Cyprus,Somaliland, Abkhazia, and Native Americans. South Ossetia intends to establish a National Olympic Committee, National Paralympic Committee List of IOC country codes District of Columbia Olympic Committee Commonwealth Games Association Designated as Chinese Taipei by the IOC. "National Olympic Committees". International Olympic Committee. "Palestine". International Olympic Committee. "Kosovo". International Olympic Committee. "Chinese Taipei". International Olympic Committee. "Cook Islands". International Olympic Committee. "American Samoa". International Olympic Committee. "Guam". "Puerto Rico". International Olympic Committee. "Virgin Islands, US". International Olympic Committee. "Bermuda". International Olympic Committee. "Virgin Islands, British". International Olympic Committee. "Cayman Islands". International Olympic Committee. "Aruba". International Olympic Committee. "Hong Kong, China". International Olympic Committee. "Overseas Territories (3rd February 2012)". Publications.parliament.uk. Retrieved 23 January 2014. "Faroe Islands". International Paralympic Committee. Retrieved 12 February 2023. "Macao, China". International Paralympic Committee. Retrieved 12 February 2023. "Status of Treaties – Niue". United Nations Treaty Collection. 2 December 1975. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "Niue". insidethegames.biz. 30 October 2012. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "127th IOC Session comes to close in Monaco". International Olympic Committee. 9 December 2014. Retrieved 6 August 2016. The NOC of Kosovo met the requirements for recognition as outlined in the Olympic Charter. These include the sport and technical requirements as well as the definition of "country" as defined in Rule 30.1 – "an independent State recognised by the international community". Kosovo is recognised as a country by 108 of the 193 UN Member States. "Executive Board concludes first meeting of the new year". olympic.org ("Official website of the Olympic movement"). 13 January 2011. Retrieved 13 January 2011. "Curtain comes down on 123rd IOC Session". Olympic.org. "Belize - National Olympic Committee (NOC)". 27 July 2021. "Seychelles Olympic and Commonwealth Games Association: ANOC". IOC Executive Board suspends NOC of Guatemala Czechia Olympics.com Türkiye Olympics.com IOC Executive Board suspends Russian Olympic Committee with immediate effect The OCA includes 45 NOCs; the Macau Sports and Olympic Committee is not recognized by the IOC and Macau does not compete at the Olympic Games. "For the Faroe Islands, Paralympics offer rare chance to wave the flag on global stage". The Japan Times. 25 August 2021. Retrieved 27 November 2021. Hargreaves, John (2000). Freedom for Catalonia? : Catalan nationalism, Spanish identity and the Barcelona Olympic Games ([Online-Ausg.]. ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521586153. "andalucia.com". andalucia.com. Retrieved 20 June 2012. "Full Page - Niue Island Sports Association and National Olympic Committee - FOX SPORTS PULSE". Sportingpulse.com. Retrieved 23 January 2014. "New Caledonia National Olympic Committee". SportingPulse. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "Centro Caribe Sports Members". Centro Caribe Sports. Retrieved 21 August 2023. "ODESUR CON's". ODESUR. Retrieved 21 August 2023. "CANOC Members". canoc.net. Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Display Article". Kurdishglobe.net. 16 January 2010. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 10 October 2009.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "Turkish Cypriots denied access to London Olympics 2012". Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 6 March 2015. "Website ka wasaaradda Dhalinyaradda Iyo Ciyaaraha Somaliland - Homepage". Somalilandolympics.org. 18 January 2010. Archived from the original on 18 June 2013. Retrieved 16 August 2010. Smoltczyk, Alexander (27 August 2009). "The ABC Republic: Abkhazia Attempts to Invent Itself - SPIEGEL ONLINE". Der Spiegel. Retrieved 23 January 2014. "Native Americans seek recognition". Nativevoices.org. 27 February 2006. Archived from the original on 28 September 2011. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "Jim Thorpe's Sons Bolster Native American Olympic Dream : Fri, 10 Jul 2009 : eNewsChannels". Enewschannels.com. 10 July 2009. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "В Южной Осетии продолжат работу над созданием национального олимпийского комитета - Политика, выборы, власть - Новости - ИА REGNUM". Regnum.ru. Archived from the original on 19 February 2014. Retrieved 23 January 2014. "Zanzibar loses membership in Caf U-turn". BBC Sport. "Senior Challenge Cup - CECAFA FOOTBALL". "Ethiopia score five against Zanzibar in CECAFA Senior Women's Championship". "National Olympic Committees". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 21 January 2008. Association of National Olympic Committees website Media related to National Olympic Committees at Wikimedia Commons Official website Portal:  Olympics