Dame Jacinda Kate Laurell Ardern GNZM (/dʒəˈsɪndə ɑːrˈdɜːrn/ jə-SIN-də ar-DURN; born 26 July 1980) is a New Zealand former politician who served as the 40th prime minister of New Zealand and leader of the Labour Party from 2017 to 2023. She was a Labour member of Parliament (MP) as a list MP from 2008 to 2017, and for Mount Albert from 2017 to 2023. Born in Hamilton, Ardern grew up in Morrinsville and Murupara. She joined the Labour Party at the age of 17. After graduating from the University of Waikato in 2001, Ardern worked as a researcher in the office of Prime Minister Helen Clark. She later worked in London as an adviser in the Cabinet Office during Tony Blair's premiership. In 2008, Ardern was elected president of the International Union of Socialist Youth. Ardern was first elected as an MP in the 2008 general election, when Labour lost power after nine years. She was later elected to represent the Mount Albert electorate in a by-election on 25 February 2017. Ardern was unanimously elected as deputy leader of the Labour Party on 1 March 2017, after the resignation of Annette King. Exactly five months later, with an election due, Labour's leader Andrew Little resigned after a historically low opinion polling result for the party, with Ardern elected unopposed as leader in his place. Labour's support increased rapidly after Ardern became leader, and she led her party to gain 14 seats at the 2017 general election on 23 September, winning 46 seats to the National Party's 56. After negotiations, New Zealand First chose to enter a minority coalition government with Labour, supported by the Green Party, with Ardern as prime minister. She was sworn in by the governor-general on 26 October 2017. She became the world's youngest female head of government at age 37. Ardern gave birth to her daughter on 21 June 2018, making her the world's second elected head of government to give birth while in office (after Benazir Bhutto). Ardern describes herself as a social democrat and a progressive. The Sixth Labour Government faced challenges from the New Zealand housing crisis, child poverty, and social inequality. In March 2019, in the aftermath of the Christchurch mosque shootings, Ardern reacted by rapidly introducing strict gun laws, winning her wide recognition. Throughout 2020 she led New Zealand's response to the COVID-19 pandemic, for which she won praise for New Zealand being one of the few Western nations to successfully contain the virus. It is estimated that her government's actions saved as many as 80,000 lives. Ardern moved the Labour Party further to the centre towards the October 2020 general election, promising to cut spending during the remainder of the COVID-19 recession. She led the Labour Party to a landslide victory, gaining an overall majority of 65 seats in Parliament, the first time a majority government had been formed since the introduction of a proportional representation system in 1996. On 19 January 2023, Ardern announced she would resign as Labour leader. Following the unopposed election of Chris Hipkins as her successor, she resigned as leader of the Labour Party on 22 January and submitted her resignation as prime minister to the governor-general on 25 January. Ardern was born on 26 July 1980 in Hamilton, New Zealand. She grew up in Morrinsville and Murupara, where her father, Ross Ardern, worked as a police officer, and her mother, Laurell Ardern (née Bottomley), worked as a school catering assistant. She has an older sister named Louise. Ardern was raised in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), and her uncle, Ian S. Ardern, is a general authority in the church. She studied at Morrinsville College, where she was the student representative on the school's board of trustees. Whilst still at school she found her first job, working at a local fish-and-chip shop. She joined the Labour Party at the age of 17. Her aunt, Marie Ardern, a longstanding member of the Labour Party, recruited the teenaged Ardern to help her with campaigning for New Plymouth MP Harry Duynhoven during his re-election campaign at the 1999 general election. Ardern attended the University of Waikato, graduating in 2001 as a Bachelor of Communication Studies in politics and public relations, a specialist three-year degree. She took a semester abroad at Arizona State University in 2001. After graduating from university, she spent time working in the offices of Phil Goff and of Helen Clark as a researcher. After a period of time in New York City, United States, where she volunteered at a soup kitchen and worked on a workers' rights campaign, Ardern moved to London, England, in 2006, where she became a senior policy adviser in an 80-person policy unit of the United Kingdom Cabinet Office under prime minister Tony Blair. (She did not meet Blair in person while in London, but later at an event in New Zealand in 2011 she questioned him about the 2003 invasion of Iraq.) Ardern was also seconded to the United Kingdom Home Office to help with a review of policing in England and Wales. On 30 January 2008, at 27, Ardern was elected president of the International Union of Socialist Youth (IUSY) at their world congress in the Dominican Republic for a two-year term until 2010. The role saw her spend time in several countries, including Hungary, Jordan, Israel, Algeria and China. It was mid-way through her presidency term that Ardern became a list MP for the Labour Party. She then continued to manage both roles for the next 15 months. Ahead of the 2008 election, Ardern was ranked 20th on Labour's party list. This was a very high placement for someone who was not already a sitting MP, and virtually assured her of a seat in Parliament. Accordingly, Ardern returned from London to campaign full-time. She also became Labour's candidate for the safe National electorate of Waikato. Ardern was unsuccessful in the electorate vote, but her high placement on Labour's party list allowed her to enter Parliament as a list MP. Upon election, she became the youngest sitting MP in Parliament, succeeding fellow Labour MP Darren Hughes, and remained the youngest MP until the election of Gareth Hughes on 11 February 2010. Opposition leader Phil Goff promoted Ardern to the front bench, naming her Labour's spokesperson for Youth Affairs and as associate spokesperson for Justice (Youth Affairs). She made regular appearances on TVNZ's Breakfast programme as part of the "Young Guns" feature, in which she appeared alongside National MP (and future National leader) Simon Bridges. Ardern contested the seat of Auckland Central for Labour in the 2011 general election, standing against incumbent National MP Nikki Kaye for National and Greens candidate Denise Roche. She lost to Kaye by 717 votes. However, she returned to Parliament via the party list, on which she was ranked 13th. Ardern maintained an office within the electorate while she was a list MP based in Auckland Central. After Goff resigned from the Party leadership following his defeat at the 2011 election, Ardern supported David Shearer over David Cunliffe. She was elevated to the fourth-ranking position in his Shadow Cabinet on 19 December 2011, becoming a spokesperson for social development under the new leader. Ardern stood again in Auckland Central at the 2014 general election. She again finished second though increased her own vote and reduced Kaye's majority from 717 to 600. Ranked 5th on Labour's list, Ardern was still returned to Parliament where she became Shadow spokesperson for Justice, Children, Small Business, and Arts & Culture under new leader Andrew Little. In 2014 Ardern was also selected, attended and graduated from the World Economic Forum's (WEF) Forum of Young Global Leaders, founded by Klaus Schwab, which takes place in Switzerland. She remains involved publicly as a part of the Young Global Leaders Alumni Community, and speaks at WEF events. Ardern put forward her name for the Labour nomination for the Mount Albert by-election to be held in February 2017 following the resignation of David Shearer on 8 December 2016. When nominations for the Labour Party closed on 12 January 2017, Ardern was the only nominee and was selected unopposed. On 21 January, Ardern participated in the 2017 Women's March, a worldwide protest in opposition to Donald Trump, the newly inaugurated president of the United States. She was confirmed as Labour's candidate at a meeting on 22 January. Ardern won a landslide victory, gaining 77 per cent of votes cast in the preliminary results. Following her win in the by-election, Ardern was unanimously elected as deputy leader of the Labour Party on 7 March 2017, following the resignation of Annette King, who was intending to retire at the next election. Ardern's vacant list seat was taken by Raymond Huo. On 1 August 2017, just seven weeks before the 2017 general election, Ardern assumed the position of leader of the Labour Party, and consequently became leader of the Opposition, following the resignation of Andrew Little. Little stood down due to the party's historically low polling. Ardern was unanimously confirmed in an election to choose a new leader at a caucus meeting the same day. At 37, Ardern became the youngest leader of the Labour Party in its history. She is also the second female leader of the party after Helen Clark. According to Ardern, Little had previously approached her on 26 July and said he thought she should take over as Labour leader then, as he was of the opinion he could not turn things around for the party, although Ardern declined and told him to "stick it out". At her first press conference after her election as leader, she said that the forthcoming election campaign would be one of "relentless positivity". Immediately following her appointment, the party was inundated with donations by the public, reaching NZ$700 per minute at its peak. After Ardern's ascension to the leadership, Labour rose dramatically in opinion polls. By late August, the party had reached 43 per cent in the Colmar Brunton poll (having been 24 per cent under Little's leadership) as well as managing to overtake National in opinion polls for the first time in over a decade. Detractors observed her positions were substantially similar to those of Andrew Little, and suggested that Labour's sudden increase in popularity were due to her youth and good looks. In mid-August, Ardern stated that a Labour government would establish a tax working group to explore the possibility of introducing a capital gains tax but ruled out taxing family homes. In response to negative publicity, Ardern abandoned plans to introduce a capital gains tax during the first term of a Labour government. Finance spokesperson Grant Robertson later clarified that Labour would not introduce new taxes until after the 2020 election. The policy shift accompanied strident allegations by Minister of Finance Steven Joyce that Labour had an $11.7 billion "hole" in its tax policy. The Labour and Green parties' proposed water and pollution taxes also generated criticism from farmers. On 18 September 2017, the farming lobby group Federated Farmers staged a protest against the taxes in Ardern's hometown of Morrinsville. New Zealand First leader Winston Peters attended the protest to campaign but was jeered at by the farmers because they suspected he was also in favour of the taxes. During the protest, one farmer displayed a sign calling Ardern a "pretty communist". This was criticised as misogynistic by former prime minister Helen Clark. In the final days of the general election campaign, the opinion polls narrowed with National taking a slight lead. During the general election held on 23 September 2017, Ardern retained her Mount Albert electorate seat by a margin of 15,264 votes. Labour increased its vote share to 36.89 per cent while National dropped back to 44.45. Labour gained 14 seats, increasing its parliamentary representation to 46 seats, the best result for the party since losing power in 2008. The rival Labour and National parties lacked sufficient seats to govern alone and held talks with the Greens and New Zealand First parties about forming a coalition. Under the country's mixed-member proportional (MMP) voting system, New Zealand First held the balance of power and chose to be part of a coalition government with Labour. On 19 October 2017, New Zealand First leader Winston Peters agreed to form a coalition with Labour, making Ardern the next prime minister. This coalition received confidence and supply from the Green Party. Ardern named Peters as deputy prime minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs. She also gave New Zealand First five posts in her government, with Peters and three other ministers serving in Cabinet. The next day, Ardern confirmed that she would hold the ministerial portfolios of National Security and Intelligence; Arts, Culture and Heritage; and Vulnerable Children; reflecting the shadow positions she held as Leader of the Opposition. Her position as Minister for Vulnerable Children was later replaced with the role of Minister for Child Poverty Reduction, while New Zealand First MP Tracey Martin took on the role of Minister for Children. She was officially sworn in by Governor-General Dame Patsy Reddy on 26 October, alongside her ministry. Upon taking office, Ardern said that her government would be "focused, empathetic and strong". Ardern is New Zealand's third female prime minister after Jenny Shipley (1997–1999) and Helen Clark (1999–2008). She is a member of the Council of Women World Leaders. Entering office aged 37, Ardern is also the youngest individual to become New Zealand's head of government since Edward Stafford, who became premier in 1856 also aged 37. On 19 January 2018, Ardern announced that she was pregnant, and that Winston Peters would take the role of acting prime minister for six weeks after the birth. Following the birth of a daughter, she took her maternity leave from 21 June to 2 August 2018. Ardern promised to halve child poverty in New Zealand within a decade. In July 2018, Ardern announced the start of her government's flagship Families Package. Among its provisions, the package gradually increased paid parental leave to 26 weeks and introduced a $60 per-week universal BestStart Payment for low and middle-income families with young children. The Family Tax Credit, Orphans Benefit, Accommodation Supplement, and Foster Care Allowance were all substantially increased as well. In 2019, the government began the roll-out of a school lunches pilot programme to assist in reducing child poverty numbers; this was then extended to support 200,000 children (about 25 per cent of school rolls) in low decile schools. Other efforts to reduce poverty have included increases to main welfare benefits, expanding free doctor's visits, providing free menstrual hygiene products in schools and adding to state housing stock. However, as of 2022 critics say rising housing costs are continuing to cripple families and systemic changes are needed to ensure any gains are lasting. Economically, Ardern's government has implemented steady increases to the country's minimum wage and introduced the Provincial Growth Fund to invest in rural infrastructure projects. The National Party's planned tax cuts were cancelled, saying instead it would prioritise expenditure on healthcare and education. The first year of post-secondary education was made free from 1 January 2018 and, after industrial action, the government agreed to increase primary teachers' pay by 12.8 (for beginning teachers) and 18.5 per cent (for senior teachers without other responsibilities) by 2021. Despite the Labour Party campaigning on a capital gains tax for the last three elections, Ardern pledged in April 2019 that the government would not implement a capital gains tax under her leadership. However, since then the period for which capital gain on rental properties sold is taxed has increased from five to ten years since purchase. Ardern travelled to Waitangi in 2018 for the annual Waitangi Day commemoration; stayed in Waitangi for five days, an unprecedented length. Ardern became the first female prime minister to speak from the top marae. Her visit was largely well received by Māori leaders, with commentators noting a sharp contrast with the acrimonious responses received by several of her predecessors. On 24 August 2018, Ardern removed Broadcasting Minister Clare Curran from Cabinet after she failed to disclose a meeting with a broadcaster outside of parliamentary business, which was judged to be a conflict of interest. Curran remained a minister outside Cabinet, and Ardern was criticised by the Opposition for not dismissing Curran from her portfolio. Ardern later accepted Curran's resignation. In 2019, she was criticised for her handling of an allegation of sexual assault against a Labour Party staffer. Ardern said she had been told the allegation did not involve sexual assault or violence before a report about the incident was published in The Spinoff. Media questioned her account, with one journalist stating that Ardern's claim was "hard to swallow". Ardern opposes criminalising people who use cannabis in New Zealand, and pledged to hold a referendum on the issue. A non-binding referendum to legalise cannabis was held in conjunction with the 2020 general election on 17 October 2020. Ardern admitted to past cannabis use during a televised debate prior to the election. In the referendum, voters rejected the proposed Cannabis Legalisation and Control Bill by 51.17 per cent. A retrospective article published in a medical journal suggested that Ardern's refusal to publicly back the 'yes' campaign "may have been a decisive factor in the narrow defeat". In September 2020, Ardern announced that her government had abandoned plans to make tertiary education tuition-free. On 5 November 2017, Ardern made her first official overseas trip to Australia, where she met Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull for the first time. Relations between the two countries had been strained in the preceding months because of Australia's treatment of New Zealanders living in the country, and shortly before taking office, Ardern had spoken of the need to rectify this situation, and to develop a better working relationship with the Australian government. Turnbull described the meeting in cordial terms: "we trust each other...The fact we are from different political traditions is irrelevant". In 2020, Ardern criticised Australia's policy of deporting New Zealanders, many of whom had lived in Australia but had not taken up Australian citizenship, as "corrosive" and damaging to Australia–New Zealand relations. Ardern attended the 2017 APEC summit in Vietnam, the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2018 in London (featuring a private audience with Queen Elizabeth II) and a United Nations summit in New York City. After her first formal meeting with Donald Trump she reported that the US president showed "interest" in New Zealand's gun buyback programme. In 2018, Ardern raised the issue of Xinjiang internment camps and human-rights abuses against the Uyghur Muslim minority in China. Ardern has also raised concerns over the persecution of the Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar. Ardern travelled to Nauru, where she attended the 2018 Pacific Islands Forum. Media and political opponents criticised her decision to travel separately from the rest of her contingent, costing taxpayers up to NZ$100,000, so that she could spend more time with her daughter. At a 2018 United Nations General Assembly meeting, Ardern became the first female head of government to attend with her infant present. Her address to the General Assembly praised the United Nations for its multilateralism, expressed support for the world's youth, called for immediate attention to the effects and causes of climate change, for the equality of women, and for kindness as the basis for action. Trade and Export Growth Minister David Parker and Ardern announced that the government would continue participating in the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations despite opposition from the Green Party. New Zealand ratified the revised agreement, the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, which she described as being better than the original TPP agreement. On 15 March 2019, 51 people were fatally shot and 49 injured in two mosques in Christchurch. In a statement broadcast on television, Ardern offered condolences and stated that the shootings had been carried out by suspects with "extremist views" that have no place in New Zealand, or anywhere else in the world. She also described it as a well-planned terrorist attack. Announcing a period of national mourning, Ardern was the first signatory of a national condolence book that she opened in the capital, Wellington. She also travelled to Christchurch to meet first responders and families of the victims. In an address at the Parliament, she declared she would never say the name of the attacker: "Speak the names of those who were lost rather than the name of the man who took them ... he will, when I speak, be nameless." Ardern received international praise for her response to the shootings, and a photograph of her hugging a member of the Christchurch Muslim community with the word "peace" in English and Arabic was projected onto the Burj Khalifa, the world's tallest building. A 25-metre (82 ft) mural of this photograph was unveiled in May 2019. In response to the shootings, Ardern announced her government's intention to introduce stronger firearms regulations. She said that the attack had exposed a range of weaknesses in New Zealand's gun law. Less than one month after the attack, the New Zealand Parliament passed a law that bans most semiautomatic weapons and assault rifles, parts that convert guns into semiautomatic guns, and higher capacity magazines. Ardern and French President Emmanuel Macron co-chaired the 2019 Christchurch Call summit, which aimed to "bring together countries and tech companies in an attempt to bring to an end the ability to use social media to organise and promote terrorism and violent extremism". On 14 March 2020, Ardern announced in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in New Zealand that the government would be requiring anyone entering the country from midnight 15 March to isolate themselves for 14 days. She said the new rules will mean New Zealand has the "widest ranging and toughest border restrictions of any country in the world". On 19 March, Ardern stated that New Zealand's borders would be closed to all non-citizens and non-permanent residents, after 11:59 pm on 20 March (NZDT). Ardern announced that New Zealand would move to alert level 4, including a nationwide lockdown, at 11:59 pm on 25 March. National and international media covered the government response led by Ardern, praising her leadership and swift response to the outbreak in New Zealand. The Washington Post's Fifield described her regular use of interviews, press conferences and social media as a "masterclass in crisis communication". Alastair Campbell, a journalist and adviser in Tony Blair's British government, commended Ardern for addressing both the human and economic consequences of the coronavirus pandemic. In mid-April 2020, two applicants filed a lawsuit at the Auckland High Court against Ardern and several government officials including Director-General of Health Ashley Bloomfield, claiming that the lockdown imposed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic infringed on their freedoms and was made for "political gain". The lawsuit was dismissed by Justice Mary Peters of the Auckland High Court. On 5 May 2020, Ardern, her Australian counterpart Scott Morrison and several Australian state and territorial leaders agreed that they would collaborate to develop a trans-Tasman COVID-safe travel zone that would allow residents from both countries to travel freely without travel restrictions as part of efforts to ease coronavirus restrictions. Post-lockdown opinion polls showed the Labour Party with nearly 60 per cent support. In May 2020, Ardern rated 59.5 per cent as 'preferred prime minister' in a Newshub-Reid Research poll—the highest score for any leader in the Reid Research poll's history. The number of lives saved by the response Ardern spearheaded was estimated as up to 80,000 by a team led by Shaun Hendy. In the 2020 general election, Ardern led her party to a landslide victory, winning an overall majority of 65 seats in the 120-seat House of Representatives, and 50 per cent of the nationwide party vote (moreover Labour won the party vote in 71 out of the 72 electorates). She also retained the Mount Albert electorate by a margin of 21,246 votes. Ardern credited her victory to her government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the economic impacts it has had. On 2 December 2020, Ardern declared a climate change emergency in New Zealand and pledged that the Government would be carbon neutral by 2025 in a parliamentary motion. As part of this commitment towards carbon neutrality, the public sector will be required to buy only electric or hybrid vehicles, the fleet will be reduced over time by 20 per cent, and all 200 coal-fired boilers in public service buildings will be phased out. This motion was supported by the Labour, Green, and Māori parties but was opposed by the opposition National and ACT parties. However, climate activist Greta Thunberg said about Ardern: "It's funny that people believe Jacinda Ardern and people like that are climate leaders. That just tells you how little people know about the climate crisis ... the emissions haven't fallen." In response to worsening housing affordability issues, Minister of Housing and Urban Development Megan Woods announced new reforms. These reforms included the removal of the interest rate tax-deduction, lifting Housing Aid for first home buyers, renewed allocation of infrastructure funds (named Housing Acceleration Fund) for district councils, an extension of the Bright Line Test from five to ten years. On 14 June 2021, Ardern confirmed that the New Zealand Government would formally apologise for the Dawn Raids at the Auckland Town Hall on 26 June 2021. The Dawn Raids were a series of police raids which disproportionately targeted members of the Pasifika diaspora in New Zealand during the 1970s and early 1980s. In September 2022, Ardern led the nation's tributes following the death of New Zealand's longest-reigning monarch, Queen Elizabeth II. Ardern described her as an "incredible woman", and a "constant in our lives". She also described the Queen as a "much admired and respected" monarch. Ardern also stated that republicanism was currently not on the agenda but believed that the country would head in that direction in the future. In mid-December 2022, Ardern was recorded on a hot mic calling the leader of the ACT Party, David Seymour, an "arrogant prick" during Parliament's Question Time. Since New Zealand parliamentary debates are televised, the comment was aired on television during Question Time. Ardern later texted Seymour to apologise for her comment. The two politicians subsequently reconciled and joined forces to raise NZ$60,000 for the Prostate Cancer Foundation by auctioning a signed and framed copy of the Prime Minister's remark. On 17 June 2020, Prime Minister Ardern met with Bill Gates and Melinda Gates via a teleconference in a meeting requested by Bill Gates. In the meeting, Ardern was asked by Melinda Gates to "speak up" in support of a collective approach to a COVID-19 vaccine. Ardern said she'd be happy to assist, an Official Information Act request response has shown. A month earlier in May, Ardern's Government had pledged $37 million to help find a COVID-19 vaccine, which included $15 million to CEPI (Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations) founded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the World Economic Forum among others, and $7 million to GAVI (Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunisation), also founded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. During the meeting Gates noted this contribution. Ardern had also met the Gateses the year before in New York. On 12 December 2020, Ardern and Cook Islands Prime Minister Mark Brown announced that a travel bubble between New Zealand and the Cook Islands would be established in 2021, allowing two-way quarantine-free travel between the two countries. On 14 December, Prime Minister Ardern confirmed that the New Zealand and Australian Governments had agreed to establish a travel bubble between the two countries the following year. On 17 December, Ardern also announced that the Government had purchased two more vaccines from the pharmaceutical companies AstraZeneca and Novavax for New Zealand and its Pacific partners in addition to the existing stocks from Pfizer/BioNTech and Janssen Pharmaceutica. On 26 January 2021, Ardern stated that New Zealand's borders would remain closed to most non-citizens and non-residents until New Zealand citizens have been "vaccinated and protected". The COVID-19 vaccination programme began in February 2021. An outbreak of the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant in August 2021 prompted the government to enact a nationwide lockdown again. By September, the number of new community infections began to fall again; comparisons were made with an outbreak in neighbouring Australia, which was unable to contain a Delta variant outbreak at the same time. On 29 January 2022, Ardern entered into self-isolation after she was identified as a close contact of a COVID-19 case on an Air New Zealand flight from Kerikeri to Auckland on 22 January. In addition, Governor-General Cindy Kiro and chief press secretary Andrew Campbell, who were aboard the same flight, also went into self-isolation. On 14 May 2022, Ardern tested positive for COVID-19. Her partner Gayford had tested positive for COVID-19 several days earlier on 8 May. In early December 2020, Ardern expressed support for Australia during a dispute between Canberra and Beijing over Chinese Foreign Ministry official Zhao Lijian's Twitter post alleging that Australia had committed war crimes against Afghans. She described the image as not being factual and incorrect, adding that the New Zealand Government would raise its concerns with the Chinese Government. On 9 December 2020, Ardern delivered a speech virtually at the Singapore FinTech Festival, applauding the Digital Economy Partnership Agreement (DEPA) among New Zealand, Chile and Singapore as "the first important steps" to achieve the regulatory alignment to facilitate businesses. On 16 February 2021, Ardern criticised the Australian Government's decision to revoke dual New Zealand–Australian national Suhayra Aden's Australian citizenship. Aden had migrated from New Zealand to Australia at the age of six and acquired Australian citizenship. She subsequently travelled to Syria to live in the Islamic State as a ISIS bride in 2014. On 15 February 2021, Aden and two of her children were detained by Turkish authorities for illegal entry. Ardern accused the Australian Government of abandoning its obligations to its citizens and also offered consular support to Aden and her children. In response, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison defended the decision to revoke Aden's citizenship, citing legislation stripping dual nationals of their Australian citizenship if they were engaged in terrorist activities. Following a phone conversation, the two leaders agreed to work together to address what Ardern described as "quite a complex legal situation". In response to the 2021 Israel–Palestine crisis, Ardern stated on 17 May that New Zealand "condemned both the indiscriminate rocket fire we have seen from Hamas and what looks to be a response that has gone well beyond self-defence on both sides." She also stated that Israel had the "right to exist" but Palestinians also had a "right to a peaceful home, a secure home." In late May 2021, Ardern hosted Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison during a state visit at Queenstown. The two heads of governments issued a joint statement affirming bilateral cooperation on the issues of COVID-19, bilateral relations, and security issues in the Indo-Pacific. Ardern and Morrison also raised concerns about the South China Sea dispute and human rights in Hong Kong and Xinjiang. In response to the joint statement, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Wang Wenbin criticised the Australian and New Zealand governments for interfering in Chinese domestic affairs. In early December 2021, Ardern participated in the virtual Summit for Democracy that was hosted by US President Joe Biden. In her address, she talked about bolstering democratic resilience in the age of COVID-19 followed by panel discussions. Ardern also announced that New Zealand would contribute an additional NZ$1 million to supporting Pacific countries' anti-corruption efforts, as well as contributing to UNESCO's Global Media Defence Fund and the International Fund for Public Interest Media. In April 2022, Ardern was banned from entering Russia along with 129 other parliamentarians and senior government officials after the New Zealand Parliament unanimously imposed sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine. In late May 2022, Ardern led a trade and tourism mission to the United States. During her trip, she urged the Biden Administration to join the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP); the successor to the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement which the previous Trump Administration had abandoned in 2017. While attending the Late Show with Stephen Colbert, Ardern also condemned the Robb Elementary School shooting and advocated stronger gun control measures, citing New Zealand's ban on semi-automatic firearms following the 2019 Christchurch mosque shootings. On 27 May, Ardern gave the annual commencement address at Harvard University, speaking about gun reform and democracy. She was also awarded an honorary doctorate in law. On 28 May, Ardern signed a memorandum of understanding with Governor of California Gavin Newsom formalising bilateral cooperation between New Zealand and California in climate change mitigation and research. On 1 June 2022, Ardern met with US President Joe Biden and Vice-president Kamala Harris to reaffirm bilateral relations between the two countries. The two leaders also issued a joint statement reaffirming bilateral cooperation on various issues including the South China Sea dispute, support for Ukraine in response to the Russian invasion, Chinese tensions with Taiwan, and alleged human-rights violations in Xinjiang and Hong Kong. In response, Chinese Foreign Ministry official Zhao Lijian accused New Zealand and the United States of seeking to spread disinformation about China's engagement with Pacific Islands countries, interfering in Chinese internal affairs, and urged New Zealand to adhere to its stated "independent foreign policy". On 10 June 2022, Ardern visited the newly elected Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese. The two leaders discussed a range of issues including Australia's controversial Section 501 deportation policy, Chinese influence in the Pacific region, climate change, and working with Pacific neighbours. In response to Ardern's concerns, Albanese stated that he would explore ways of addressing New Zealand's concerns about the adverse impact of its deportation policies on New Zealanders residing in Australia. In late June 2022, Ardern attended the NATO's Leader Summit, which marked the first time that New Zealand had formally addressed a NATO event. During her speech, she emphasised New Zealand's commitment to peace and human rights. Ardern also criticised China for challenging international norms and rules in the South Pacific. She also alleged that Russia was conducting a disinformation campaign targeting New Zealand due to its support for Ukraine. In response, the Chinese Embassy defended China's engagement with the South Pacific region, claiming that China was only interested in promoting regional development and did not seek to militarise the region. On 30 June 2022, Ardern spoke by telephone with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky. Though Zelensky had earlier invited Ardern to visit Ukraine during her European trade mission, Ardern had declined due to scheduling issues. During the conversation, Ardern reassured Zelensky that New Zealand would continue imposing sanctions on Russia. Zelensky also thanked New Zealand for providing aid to Ukraine and called for assistance in rebuilding Ukraine. In early August 2022, Ardern led a delegation of New Zealand political leaders, officials, civil society leaders, and journalists including National Party and opposition leader Christopher Luxon, Arts, Culture and Heritage Minister Carmel Sepuloni and Pacific Peoples Minister William Sio on a state visit to Samoa to marked the 60th anniversary of Samoa's independence. This visit preceded an earlier visit to New Zealand in June 2022 by Samoan Prime Minister Fiame Naomi Mata'afa. On 2 August, Ardern met with Fiame to discuss issues of concern to bilateral relations including climate change, economic resilience, COVID-19, health and Samoan seasonal workers in New Zealand. Ardern also confirmed that New Zealand would commit NZ$15 million in aid to support Samoa's climate change mitigation efforts and NZ$12m to rebuild Apia's historical Savalalo Market. In September 2022, Ardern along with her fiancé Clarke Gayford and their daughter Neve attended Queen Elizabeth II's funeral. During the funeral, she wore a traditional Māori cloak designed by Māori fashion designer Kiri Nathan. In late October 2022, Ardern and Gayford visited New Zealand's Antarctica base Scott Base to mark the research base's 65th anniversary. The Government had already committed NZ$344 million to the redevelopment of Scott base. After Ardern's C-130 Hercules aircraft of the Royal New Zealand Air Force broke down, she and her entourage returned to Christchurch on an Italian C-130 Hercules aircraft. In mid-November 2022, Ardern attended the East Asia Summit in Cambodia where she condemned the Myanmar military regime's execution of political prisoners and called for consensus in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. During the East Asia Summit, she met with US President Biden to discuss New Zealand milk company A2 Milk's efforts to supply infant formula to help address the infant formula milk shortage in the United States. On 30 November, Ardern hosted Finnish Prime Minister Sanna Marin, which marked the first visit by a Finnish head of government to New Zealand. During her visit, the two leaders discussed bilateral trade relations, the global economic situation, the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and human rights in Iran. During the ensuing press conference, Ardern rebuffed a suggestion by a journalist that the two heads of government had met because they were of a similar age and gender. On 19 January 2023, at the Labour Party's summer caucus retreat, Ardern announced she would resign as Labour leader and prime minister by 7 February and leave Parliament by the 2023 general election. She cited a desire to spend more time with her partner and daughter and an inability to commit to another four years. Ardern had indicated in November 2022 that she would seek a third term as prime minister. Speaking to the press during the caucus retreat as she announced her resignation plan, Ardern said, "I know what this job takes and I know that I no longer have enough in the tank to do it justice. It is that simple. We need a fresh set of shoulders for that challenge." Ardern's announcement prompted reactions from across the New Zealand political establishment. The opposition National and ACT parties' leaders Christopher Luxon and David Seymour thanked Ardern for her service while expressing disagreement with her government's policies. Green Party co-leader James Shaw credited Ardern with fostering a constructive working relationship between their parties while fellow co-leader Marama Davidson praised Ardern for her compassion and determination to promote a "fairer and safer" Aotearoa. Similar sentiments were echoed by the Māori Party's co-leaders Debbie Ngarewa-Packer and Rawiri Waititi, who praised her leadership qualities and contributions to New Zealand society. New Zealand First leader and former Deputy Prime Minister Winston Peters attributed Ardern's resignation to her government's failure to deliver on promises and targets during the 2020–2023 parliamentary term. Prominent New Zealanders, including actor Sam Neill, comedian and writer Michèle A'Court, and Internet entrepreneur Kim Dotcom, expressed gratitude for Ardern's service. Overseas, Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese and several state leaders paid tribute to Ardern. In several opinion polls, Ardern's domestic popularity had reached all-time lows as of 19 January 2023, although she denied this would affect the Labour Party's chances of winning the next election. Ardern's final event as prime minister was a birthday celebration for Tahupōtiki Wiremu Rātana, a Māori prophet. At the event, Ardern called her work as the Prime Minister the "greatest privilege" and stated that she loved the country and its people. On 25 January 2023, she was succeeded as prime minister and leader of the New Zealand Labour Party by Chris Hipkins, who had been elected unopposed during the Labour Party leadership election. On 4 April 2023 Ardern was announced as a trustee of the Earthshot Prize. Ardern was selected for the post by Prince William, who stated that Ardern had a life-long commitment to supporting sustainable and environmental solutions. According to the Prince, Ardern was one of the first people to encourage him to establish the prize. That same day, Prime Minister Hipkins appointed Ardern as Special Envoy for the Christchurch Call, which she had established following the Christchurch mosque shootings to combat online extremist content. During her valedictory speech, Ardern called on political leaders and parties in New Zealand to take the politics out of climate change while highlighting her role in getting cross-party support for the passage of the Climate Change Response (Zero Carbon) Amendment Act. Ardern accepted dual fellowships at the Harvard Kennedy School for a semester beginning in fall 2023, to serve as the 2023 Angelopoulos Global Public Leaders Fellow and as a Hauser Leader at the Center for Public Leadership, where she intends to share and learn leadership and governance skills. She will also work with Harvard's Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society as its first Knight Tech Governance Leadership Fellow during that period where she will focus on the study of online extremism. Ardern has described herself as a social democrat, a progressive, a republican, and a feminist, citing Helen Clark as a political hero. She has described the extent of child poverty and homelessness in New Zealand as a "blatant failure" of capitalism. Asked by reporters to comment on the 2021 Budget, Ardern stated to "have always described myself as a Democratic Socialist", but she does not consider the term to be useful in New Zealand, as it is not commonly used in the political sphere. The leftist magazine Jacobin asserts that, despite identifying as socialist, her government was effectively neoliberal. Referring to New Zealand's distinctive nuclear-free policy, she described taking action on climate change as "my generation's nuclear-free moment". Ardern has spoken in support of same-sex marriage, and she voted for the Marriage (Definition of Marriage) Amendment Act 2013 which legalised it. In 2018, she became the first New Zealand prime minister to march in a pride parade. Ardern supported the removal of abortion from the Crimes Act 1961. In March 2020, she voted for the Abortion Legislation Act that amends the law to decriminalise abortion. Ardern voted in favour of legalising cannabis in the 2020 New Zealand cannabis referendum, though she refused to reveal her position on legalisation until after the referendum had concluded. With regard to the future of the Māori electorates—a contentious topic in New Zealand politics—Ardern believes the retention or abolition of the electorates (seats) should be decided by Māori, stating, "[Māori] have not raised the need for those seats to go, so why would we ask the question?" She supports compulsory study of the Māori language in schools. In September 2017, Ardern said she wanted New Zealand to debate removing the monarch of New Zealand as head of state. During her announcement on 24 May 2021 of the appointment of Dame Cindy Kiro as the governor-general, Ardern said she believed that New Zealand would become a republic within her lifetime. She has, however, met regularly with members of the Royal Family over the years and said that, "My particular views do not change the respect that I have for Her Majesty and for her family and for the work that they've done for New Zealand. I think you can hold both views, and I do." Following the death of Queen Elizabeth II, Ardern reaffirmed her support for republicanism but stated that official moves towards New Zealand becoming a republic was not "on the agenda anytime soon." Ardern advocates a lower rate of immigration, suggesting a drop of around 20,000–30,000. Calling it an "infrastructure issue", she argues that "there hasn't been enough planning about population growth, we haven't necessarily targeted our skill shortages properly"; however, she wants to increase the intake of refugees. In foreign affairs, Ardern has voiced support for a two-state solution to resolve the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. She condemned the Israeli killing of Palestinians during protests at the Gaza border. Following the Supreme Court's landmark Make It 16 Incorporated v Attorney-General ruling in November 2022, Ardern has voiced support for lowering the voting age to 16 years. She announced that the Government would introduce legislation lowering the voting age to 16 years; with such legislation requiring a 75 per cent majority. Ardern was frequently described, often critically, as a "celebrity politician". After becoming the Labour Party leader, Ardern received positive coverage from many sections of the media, including international outlets such as CNN, with commentators referring to a "Jacinda effect" and "Jacindamania". Jacindamania was cited as a factor behind New Zealand gaining global attention and media influence in some reports, including the Soft Power 30 index. In a 2018 overseas trip, Ardern attracted much attention from international media, particularly after delivering a speech at the United Nations in New York. She contrasted with contemporary world leaders, being cast as an "antidote to Trumpism". Writing for Stuff, Tracy Watkins said Ardern made a "cut-through on the world stage" and her reception was as a "torch carrier for progressive politics as a young woman who breaks the mold in a world where the political strongman is on the rise. She is a foil to the muscular diplomacy of the likes of US President Donald Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin." A year after Ardern formed her government, The Guardian's Eleanor Ainge Roy reported that Jacindamania was waning in the population, with not enough of the promised change visible. When Toby Manhire, the editor of The Spinoff, reviewed the decade in December 2019, he praised Ardern for her leadership following the Christchurch mosque shootings and the Whakaari / White Island eruption, saying that "Ardern ... revealed an empathy, steel and clarity that in the most appalling circumstances brought New Zealanders together and inspired people the world over. It was a strength of character that showed itself again this week following the tragic eruption at Whakaari." Towards the end of her tenure Ardern faced decreased levels of popularity domestically and increased levels of criticism from across the political spectrum. Part of the reason was the country's economic downturn in the early 2020s. Ardern, along with several other politicians, experienced abuse from anti-vaxxers, anti-government protestors, and right-wing populist protestors. Ardern was one of fifteen women selected to appear on the cover of the September 2019 issue of British Vogue, by guest editor Meghan, Duchess of Sussex. Forbes magazine has consistently ranked her among the 100 most powerful women in the world, placing her 34th in 2021. She was included in the 2019 Time 100 list and shortlisted for Time's 2019 Person of the Year. The magazine later incorrectly speculated that she might win the 2019 Nobel Peace Prize among a listed six candidates, for her handling of the Christchurch mosque shootings. In 2020, she was listed by Prospect as the second-greatest thinker for the COVID-19 era. On 19 November 2020, Ardern was awarded Harvard University's 2020 Gleitsman International Activist Award; she contributed the US$150,000 (NZ$216,000) prize money to New Zealanders studying at the university. In 2021, New Zealand zoologist Steven A. Trewick named the flightless wētā species Hemiandrus jacinda in honour of Ardern. A spokesperson for Ardern said that a beetle (Mecodema jacinda), a lichen (Ocellularia jacinda-arderniae), and an ant (Crematogaster jacindae, found in Saudi Arabia) had also been named after her. In mid-May 2021, Fortune magazine gave Ardern the top spot on their list of world's 50 greatest leaders, citing her leadership during the COVID-19 pandemic as well as her handling of the Christchurch mosque shootings and the Whakaari / White Island eruption. On 26 May 2022, Ardern was awarded an honorary Doctor of Laws degree by Harvard University for contributions that "shape the world". In the 2023 King's Birthday and Coronation Honours, Ardern was appointed a Dame Grand Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit (GNZM), for services to the State. Raised as a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in New Zealand, Ardern left the church in 2005 at age 25 because, she said, it conflicted with her personal views, in particular her support for gay rights. In January 2017, Ardern identified as agnostic, saying "I can't see myself being a member of an organised religion again". As prime minister in 2019, she met the president of the LDS Church, Russell M. Nelson. Ardern is a second cousin of Hamish McDouall, former mayor of Whanganui. She is also a distant cousin of former National MP for Taranaki-King Country Shane Ardern. Shane Ardern left Parliament in 2014, three years before Jacinda Ardern became prime minister. Ardern's husband is television presenter Clarke Gayford. The couple first met in 2012 when they were introduced by mutual friend Colin Mathura-Jeffree, a New Zealand television host and model, but they did not spend time together until Gayford contacted Ardern regarding a controversial Government Communications Security Bureau bill. Ardern and Gayford were living together when she became prime minister, and on 3 May 2019, it was reported that they were engaged to be married. The wedding was scheduled for January 2022 but was postponed due to an outbreak of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant. Ardern and Gayford married eventually on 13 January 2024, at Craggy Range Winery near Havelock North in Hawke's Bay. On 19 January 2018, Ardern announced that she was expecting her first child in June, making her New Zealand's first prime minister to be pregnant in office. Ardern was admitted to Auckland City Hospital on 21 June 2018, and gave birth to a girl the same day, becoming only the second elected head of government to give birth while in office (after Benazir Bhutto in 1990). Her daughter's given names are Neve Te Aroha. Neve is an anglicised form of the Irish name Niamh, meaning 'bright'; Aroha is Māori for 'love', and Te Aroha is a rural town west of the Kaimai Range, near Ardern's former home town of Morrinsville. After growing rumours that Gayford was under police investigation for criminal offences, in 2018 both Ardern and the Police Commissioner Mike Bush took the unusual step of confirming that Gayford was not, and had not been, under any such investigations. List of New Zealand governments Politics of New Zealand Paddles (cat), Ardern's former pet cat "Members Sworn". Parliamentary Debates (Hansard). New Zealand Parliament. p. 2. Archived from the original on 23 February 2013. "Talking work-related hearing loss with NZ Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern". WorkSafe New Zealand. 28 September 2018. Archived from the original on 8 January 2022. Retrieved 8 January 2022. "2008 GENERAL ELECTION – OFFICIAL RESULT". 6 December 2008. Archived from the original on 6 December 2008. Retrieved 18 July 2022. "Ardern, Jacinda – New Zealand Parliament". New Zealand Parliament. 17 April 2023. Davison, Isaac (1 August 2017). "Andrew Little quits: Jacinda Ardern is new Labour leader, Kelvin Davis is deputy". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 13 May 2019. Retrieved 1 August 2017. "2017 General Election – Official Results". Electoral Commission. Archived from the original on 7 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. Griffiths, James (19 October 2017). "Jacinda Ardern to become New Zealand Prime Minister". CNN. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 19 October 2017. "The world's youngest female leader takes over in New Zealand". The Economist. 26 October 2017. Archived from the original on 26 October 2017. Khan, M Ilyas (21 June 2018). "Ardern and Bhutto: Two different pregnancies in power". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2018. Now that New Zealand's Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has hit world headlines by becoming only the second elected head of government to give birth in office, attention has naturally been drawn to the first such leader – Pakistan's late two-time Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto. Murphy, Tim (1 August 2017). "What Jacinda Ardern wants". Newsroom. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "Live: Jacinda Ardern answers NZ's questions". Stuff. 3 August 2017. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 11 August 2017. Fifield, Anna (18 March 2019). "New Zealand's prime minister receives worldwide praise for her response to the mosque shootings". The Washington Post. Retrieved 24 June 2022. Friedman, Uri (19 April 2020). "New Zealand's Prime Minister May Be the Most Effective Leader on the Planet". The Atlantic. Retrieved 21 June 2022. "The government valued your life at $4.53m – until Covid came along". Newsroom. 15 October 2020. Retrieved 27 January 2023. Cooke, Henry (8 August 2020). "Election 2020: Labour launches an extremely centrist campaign". Stuff. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "The 2020 General Election and referendums: results, analysis, and demographics of the 53rd Parliament" (PDF). Parliament.nz. Retrieved 18 July 2022. "Election 2020: The big winners and losers in Auckland". Stuff. 17 October 2020. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Schwartz, Matthew (17 October 2020). "New Zealand PM Ardern Wins Re-Election In Best Showing For Labour Party In Decades". NPR. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Malpass, Luke (19 January 2023). "Live: Jacinda Ardern announces she will resign as prime minister by February 7th". Stuff. Archived from the original on 19 January 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2023. McClure, Tess (19 January 2023). "Jacinda Ardern resigns as prime minister of New Zealand". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 January 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2023. "Jacinda Ardern: New Zealand PM to step down next month". BBC News. 19 January 2023. Archived from the original on 19 January 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2023. McClure, Tess (22 January 2023). "New Zealand: Chris Hipkins taking over from Jacinda Ardern on Wednesday". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 January 2023. Retrieved 22 January 2023. "Candidate profile: Jacinda Ardern". 3 News. 19 October 2011. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Cumming, Geoff (24 September 2011). "Battle for Beehive hot seat". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 12 February 2013. Bertrand, Kelly (30 June 2014). "Jacinda Ardern's country childhood". Now to Love. Archived from the original on 21 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017. Keber, Ruth (12 June 2014). "Labour MP Jacinda Ardern warms to Hairy and friends". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Jacobson, Julie. "Jacinda Ardern on her sister's wedding day surprise". Now To Love. Retrieved 14 January 2024. Walch, Tad (20 May 2019). "President Nelson meets New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, says church will donate to mosques". Deseret News. Retrieved 9 April 2022. "Elder Ian S. Ardern: 'Go and do'". Church News. 23 April 2011. Retrieved 9 April 2022. "Jacinda Ardern visits Morrinsville College". The New Zealand Herald. 10 August 2017. Archived from the original on 1 March 2018. Retrieved 28 February 2018. "Ardern, Jacinda: Maiden Statement". Parliamentary Debates (Hansard). New Zealand Parliament. 16 December 2008. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 6 June 2018. Tanirau, Katrina (10 August 2017). "Labour leader Jacinda Ardern hits hometown in campaign trail". Stuff. Archived from the original on 8 December 2019. Retrieved 8 December 2019. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (7 August 2017). "Jacinda Ardern becomes youngest New Zealand Labour leader after Andrew Little quits". Archived from the original on 12 September 2017. Cooke, Henry (16 September 2017). "How Marie Ardern got her niece Jacinda into politics". Stuff. Archived from the original on 17 September 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2017. "Waikato BCS grad Jacinda Ardern becomes leader of the NZ Labour Party". University of Waikato. 2 August 2017. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "2018". waikato.ac.nz. Retrieved 27 October 2022. "'Jacindamania' sweeps New Zealand as it embraces a new prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, who isn't your average pol". Los Angeles Times. 9 March 2018. Archived from the original on 15 May 2021. Retrieved 12 September 2021. "Ardern pays tribute to lives lost 20 years on from 9/11". Archived from the original on 12 September 2021. Retrieved 12 September 2021. Tweed, David; Withers, Tracy (21 October 2017). "Kiwi PM Jacinda Ardern will be world's youngest female leader". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 20 February 2018. Duff, Michelle. Jacinda Ardern: The Story Behind An Extraordinary Leader. Allen & Unwin. p. 70. Dudding, Adam (17 August 2017). "Jacinda Ardern: I didn't want to work for Tony Blair". Stuff. Archived from the original on 25 September 2017. "People – New Zealand Labour Party". Archived from the original on 23 December 2008. "New Voices: Jacinda Ardern, Chris Hipkins and Jonathan Young". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 18 August 2021. Kirk, Stacey (1 August 2017). "Jacinda Ardern says she can handle it and her path to the top would suggest she's right". The Dominion Post. Stuff. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "Jacinda Ardern to lead IUSY". The Standard. 31 January 2008. Archived from the original on 21 August 2021. Retrieved 18 August 2021. "Labour Party list for 2008 election announced | Scoop News". Scoop. 31 August 2008. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2017. "Official Count Results – Waikato". electionresults.govt.nz. 2008. Archived from the original on 7 April 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2017. Trevett, Claire (29 January 2010). "Greens' newest MP trains his sights on the bogan vote". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018. Retrieved 22 April 2018. "Jacinda Ardern". New Zealand Parliament. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. Huffadine, Leith; Watkins, Tracy. "'Bridges and Ardern': the young guns who are now in charge". Stuff. Archived from the original on 5 October 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2018. "Auckland Central electorate results 2011". Electionresults.org.nz. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 21 October 2017. Miller, Raymond (2015). Democracy in New Zealand. Auckland University Press. pp. 79–80. ISBN 978-1-77558-808-5. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 22 November 2019. "Official Count Results – Auckland Central". Electoral Commission. 4 October 2014. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 4 October 2014. Small, Vernon (24 November 2014). "Little unveils new Labour caucus". Stuff. Archived from the original on 17 August 2018. "The Forum of Young Global Leaders". The Forum of Young Global Leaders. Archived from the original on 16 May 2021. Retrieved 4 February 2022. "Community". The Forum of Young Global Leaders. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2022. Sachdeva, Sam (19 December 2016). "Labour MP Jacinda Ardern to run for selection in Mt Albert by-election". Stuff. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 19 December 2016. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (15 September 2017). "'I've got what it takes': will Jacinda Ardern be New Zealand's next prime minister?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 September 2017. Retrieved 16 September 2017. "Jacinda Ardern Labour's sole nominee for Mt Albert by-election". Stuff. Archived from the original on 17 August 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2017. Jones, Nicholas (12 January 2017). "Jacinda Ardern to contest Mt Albert byelection". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 13 January 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2017. "Jacinda Ardern wins landslide victory Mt Albert by-election". The New Zealand Herald. 25 February 2017. Archived from the original on 25 February 2017. Retrieved 25 February 2017. "Mt Albert – Preliminary Count". Electoral Commission. Archived from the original on 26 February 2017. Retrieved 25 February 2017. "Jacinda Ardern confirmed as Labour's new deputy leader". The New Zealand Herald. 6 March 2017. Archived from the original on 19 November 2018. Retrieved 25 July 2019. "Labour's Raymond Huo set to return to Parliament after Maryan Street steps aside". The New Zealand Herald. 21 February 2017. Archived from the original on 21 February 2017. Retrieved 21 February 2017. "Andrew Little's full statement on resignation". The New Zealand Herald. 31 July 2017. ISSN 1170-0777. Archived from the original on 24 May 2018. Retrieved 24 May 2018. "Jacinda Ardern is Labour's new leader, Kelvin Davis as deputy leader". 7 August 2017. Archived from the original on 13 May 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2017. Kwai, Isabella (4 September 2017). "New Zealand's Election Had Been Predictable. Then 'Jacindamania' Hit". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 13 September 2017. Retrieved 13 September 2017. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (31 July 2017). "Jacinda Ardern becomes youngest New Zealand Labour leader after Andrew Little quits". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 September 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2017. "Little asked Ardern to lead six days before he resigned". The New Zealand Herald. 14 September 2017. Archived from the original on 15 September 2017. Retrieved 15 September 2017. "Donations to Labour surge as Jacinda Ardern named new leader". The New Zealand Herald. 2 August 2017. Archived from the original on 1 September 2017. Retrieved 7 September 2017. "Video: Jacinda Ardern won't rule out capital gains tax". Radio New Zealand. 22 August 2017. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. Tarrant, Alex (15 August 2017). "Labour leader maintains 'right and ability' to introduce capital gains tax if working group suggests it next term; Would exempt family home". Interest.co.nz. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. Kirk, Stacey (1 September 2017). "Jacinda Ardern tells Kelvin Davis off over capital gains tax comments". Stuff. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. Hickey, Bernard (24 September 2017). "Jacinda stumbled into a $520bn minefield". Newsroom. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. Cooke, Henry (14 September 2017). "Election: Labour backs down on tax, will not introduce anything from working group until after 2020 election". Stuff. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. "Steven Joyce still backing Labour's alleged $11.7b fiscal hole". Newshub. 19 September 2017. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. "Farmers protest against Jacinda Ardern's tax policies". The New Zealand Herald. 18 September 2017. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. "Labour leader Jacinda Ardern unshaken by Morrinsville farming protest". Newshub. 19 August 2017. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. Vowles, Jack (3 July 2018). "Surprise, surprise: the New Zealand general election of 2017". Kōtuitui: New Zealand Journal of Social Sciences Online. 13 (2): 147–160. doi:10.1080/1177083X.2018.1443472. "Mt Albert – Official Result". Electoral Commission. Archived from the original on 15 January 2020. Retrieved 17 November 2020. "Preliminary results for the 2017 General Election". Electoral Commission. Archived from the original on 2 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. "'Jacindamania' fails to run wild in New Zealand poll". The Irish Times. Reuters. 23 September 2017. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. "2017 General Election – Official Result". Electoral Commission. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 17 November 2020. "Ardern and Davis to lead Labour negotiating team". Radio New Zealand. 26 September 2017. Archived from the original on 26 September 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. "NZ First talks with National, Labour begin". Stuff. 5 October 2017. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. Haynes, Jessica. "Jacinda Ardern: Who is New Zealand's next prime minister?". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2017. Chapman, Grant. "New PM Jacinda Ardern joins an elite few among world, NZ leaders". Newshub. Archived from the original on 26 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. "Green Party ratifies confidence and supply deal with Labour". The New Zealand Herald. 19 October 2017. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 19 October 2017. "Jacinda Ardern reveals ministers of new government". The New Zealand Herald. 26 October 2017. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. "New government ministers revealed". Radio New Zealand. 25 October 2017. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. Small, Vernon (20 October 2017). "Predictable lineup of ministers as Ardern ministry starts to take shape". Stuff. Archived from the original on 21 October 2017. Retrieved 21 October 2017. "Ministerial List". Ministerial List. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Cheng, Derek (26 October 2017). "Jacinda Ardern sworn in as new Prime Minister". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. Steafel, Eleanor (26 October 2017). "Who is New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern – the world's youngest female leader?". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. "Premiers and Prime Ministers". Ministry for Culture and Heritage. 12 December 2016. Archived from the original on 11 July 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2017. "It's Labour! Jacinda Ardern will be next PM after Winston Peters and NZ First swing left". The New Zealand Herald. 19 October 2017. Archived from the original on 22 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. "Members – President Of The Council Of Women World Leaders". lrp.lt. Archived from the original on 13 September 2018. Retrieved 13 September 2018. Atkinson, Neill. "Jacinda Ardern Biography". Ministry for Culture and Heritage. Archived from the original on 19 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "Jacinda Ardern on baby news: 'I'll be Prime Minister and a mum'". Radio New Zealand. 19 January 2018. Archived from the original on 19 January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. Patterson, Jane (21 June 2018). "Winston Peters is in charge: His duties explained". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2018. "Winston Peters is now officially Acting Prime Minister". The New Zealand Herald. 21 June 2018. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "'Throw fatty out': Winston Peters fires insults on last day as PM". The New Zealand Herald. 1 August 2018. ISSN 1170-0777. Archived from the original on 1 August 2018. Retrieved 1 August 2018. Mercer, Phil (16 October 2018). "A country famed for quality of life faces up to child poverty". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (2 July 2018). "Jacinda Ardern welcomes new welfare reforms from the sofa with new baby". The Guardian. Dunedin. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 3 April 2019. "Supporting New Zealand families". Beehive.govt.nz. New Zealand Government. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 2 April 2019. Biddle, Donna-Lee (28 November 2019). "Free lunches for low-decile school kids: What's on the menu?". Stuff. Archived from the original on 28 November 2019. Retrieved 7 May 2020. Andelane, Lana (19 April 2020). "$25 benefit increase 'making a difference' for beneficiaries during lockdown – Carmel Sepuloni". Newshub. Archived from the original on 22 April 2020. Retrieved 7 May 2020. Klar, Rebecca (6 June 2020). "New Zealand providing free sanitary products in schools". The Hill. Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Heyward, Emily (4 March 2018). "Blenheim to get 13 new state houses in nationwide pledge". Stuff. Archived from the original on 7 January 2020. Retrieved 7 April 2020. Neilson, Michael (25 January 2022). "Benefit increases go to 330,000 families – more than half in New Zealand". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 10 February 2022. Molyneux, Vita (16 April 2020). "Coronavirus: Business expert condemns Government decision to raise minimum wage amid pandemic". Newshub. Archived from the original on 19 April 2020. Retrieved 7 May 2020. Jones, Shane (23 February 2018). "Provincial Growth Fund open for business". New Zealand Government. Archived from the original on 22 February 2020. Retrieved 7 May 2020. Jones, Nicholas (20 October 2017). "Jacinda Ardern confirms new government will dump tax cuts". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 16 August 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2020. Collins, Simon (26 June 2019). "Teachers accept pay deal – but principals reject it". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 7 January 2020. Retrieved 10 May 2020. Wilson, Peter (18 April 2019). "Week in Politics: Labour's biggest campaign burden scrapped". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 22 April 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2019. Williams, Larry. "Jack Tame: No CGT is 'enormous failure' for PM". Newstalk ZB. Archived from the original on 25 April 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2019. "Ordinary New Zealanders bearing brunt of bright-line test". RNZ News. 29 January 2022. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 10 February 2022. Ainge-Roy, Eleanor (6 February 2018). "Jacinda Ardern defuses tensions on New Zealand's sacred Waitangi Day". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 16 June 2018. Sachdeva, Sam (6 February 2018). "Jacinda Ardern ends five-day stay in Waitangi". Newsroom. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 16 June 2018. O'Brien, Tova; Hurley, Emma (9 July 2018). "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern accepts Clare Curran's resignation as a minister". Newshub. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. "Clare Curran situation has 'done real damage' to Jacinda Ardern and Government's credibility – Simon Bridges". TVNZ. 7 September 2018. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Manhire, Toby (11 September 2019). "Timeline: Everything we know about the Labour staffer inquiry". The Spinoff. Archived from the original on 15 May 2020. Retrieved 29 April 2020. Vance, Andrea. "Labour Party president Nigel Haworth has resigned – but it's not over". Stuff. Archived from the original on 20 December 2019. Retrieved 29 April 2020. Ardern says she didn't know the allegations were sexual until this week. That's hard to swallow. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (12 September 2019). "Ardern under pressure as staffer accused of sexual assault quits". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 December 2019. Retrieved 29 April 2020. "New Zealand sets 2020 cannabis referendum". BBC News. 18 December 2018. Archived from the original on 17 October 2019. Retrieved 3 June 2020. Cave, Damien (1 October 2020). "Jacinda Ardern Admits Having Used Cannabis. New Zealanders Shrug: 'Us Too.'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 October 2020. Retrieved 1 October 2020. "Official referendum results released". Electoral Commission. Archived from the original on 7 October 2021. Retrieved 7 October 2021. Rychert, Marta; Wilkins, Chris (7 March 2021). "Why did New Zealand's referendum to legalise recreational cannabis fail?". Drug and Alcohol Review. 40 (6): 877–881. doi:10.1111/dar.13254. PMID 33677836. S2CID 232140948. "Students disappointed Labour Party dropped fees-free plan". RNZ. 16 September 2020. Retrieved 17 July 2022. Walters, Laura; Small, Vernon. "Jacinda Ardern makes first state visit to Australia to strengthen ties". Stuff. Archived from the original on 12 November 2017. Retrieved 11 November 2017. Trevett, Claire (5 November 2017). "Key bromance haunts Jacinda Ardern's first Australia visit". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 11 November 2017. Retrieved 11 November 2017. "Jacinda Ardern: Australia's deportation policy 'corrosive'". BBC News. 28 February 2020. Archived from the original on 1 March 2020. Retrieved 2 March 2020. "Jacinda Ardern blasts Scott Morrison over Australia's deportation policy – video". The Guardian. Australian Associated Press. 28 February 2020. Archived from the original on 2 March 2020. Retrieved 2 March 2020. Cooke, Henry (28 February 2020). "Extraordinary scene as Jacinda Ardern directly confronts Scott Morrison over deportations". Stuff. Archived from the original on 2 March 2020. Retrieved 2 March 2020. O'Meara, Patrick (9 November 2017). "PM heads to talks hoping to win TPP concessions". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 9 November 2017. Retrieved 10 November 2017. McCulloch, Craig (20 April 2018). "CHOGM: Ardern to toast Commonwealth at leaders' banquet". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 21 April 2018. Retrieved 21 April 2018. Ensor, Jamie; Lynch, Jenna (24 September 2019). "Jacinda Ardern, Donald Trump meeting: US President takes interest in gun buyback". Newshub. Archived from the original on 14 October 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2019. Gambino, Lauren (23 September 2019). "Trump showed interest in New Zealand gun buyback program, Ardern says". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 October 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2019. Coughlan, Thomas (30 October 2018). "Ardern softly raises concern over Uighurs". Newsroom. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Christian, Harrison (7 November 2018). "The disappearing people: Uighur Kiwis lose contact with family members in China". Stuff. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Mutch Mckay, Jessica (14 November 2018). "Jacinda Ardern meets with Myanmar's leader, voices concern on Rohingya situation". TVNZ. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Bracewell-Worrall, Anna (5 September 2018). "'I am Prime Minister – I have a job to do': Jacinda Ardern defends separate Nauru flight". Newshub. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 8 September 2018. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (24 September 2018). "Jacinda Ardern makes history with baby Neve at UN general assembly". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 September 2018. Retrieved 27 September 2018. Cole, Brendan. "Jacinda Ardern: New Zealand Prime Minister Makes History By Becoming First Woman to Bring Baby into U.N.Assembly". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 27 September 2018. Retrieved 28 September 2018. "Full speech: 'Me too must become we too' – Jacinda Ardern calls for gender equality, kindness at UN". TVNZ. Archived from the original on 28 September 2018. Retrieved 29 September 2018. "TPP deal revived once more, 20 provisions suspended". Radio New Zealand. 12 November 2017. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2020. "Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership" (PDF). New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 February 2020. Retrieved 2 May 2020. Satherley, Dan (12 November 2017). "TPP 'a damned sight better' now – Ardern". Newshub.co.nz. Archived from the original on 19 May 2018. Retrieved 2 May 2020. Wahlquist, Calla (24 March 2019). "An image of hope: how a Christchurch photographer captured the famous Ardern picture". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 7 April 2019. McConnell, Glenn (18 March 2019). "Face of empathy: Jacinda Ardern photo resonates worldwide after attack". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 7 April 2019. Britton, Bianca (15 March 2019). "New Zealand PM full speech: 'This can only be described as a terrorist attack'". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Three in custody after 49 killed in Christchurch mosque shootings". Stuff. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2019. Greenfield, Charlotte; Westbrook, Tom. "New gun laws to make NZ safer after mosque shootings, says PM Ardern". Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. George, Steve; Berlinger, Joshua; Whiteman, Hilary; Kaur, Harmeet; Westcott, Ben; Wagner, Meg (19 March 2019). "New Zealand mosque terror attacks". CNN. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Christchurch shootings: Ardern vows never to say gunman's name". BBC News. 19 March 2019. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Collman, Ashley (19 March 2019). "People around the world are praising New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern for her compassionate response to the Christchurch mosque shootings". Thisisinsider. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 18 March 2019. Newson, Rhonwyn (18 March 2019). "Christchurch terror attack: Jacinda Ardern praised for being 'compassionate leader'". Newshub. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. "New Zealand's prime minister receives worldwide praise for her response to the mosque shootings". The Washington Post. 19 March 2019. Archived from the original on 19 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. Shad, Saman (20 March 2019). "Five ways Jacinda Ardern has proved her leadership mettle". SBS World News. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Picheta, Rob. "Image of Jacinda Ardern projected onto world's tallest building". CNN. Archived from the original on 25 March 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2019. Prior, Ryan. "A painter has revealed an 80-foot mural of New Zealand's prime minister comforting woman after mosque attacks". CNN. Archived from the original on 23 May 2019. Retrieved 23 May 2019. Walls, Jason (16 March 2019). "Christchurch mosque shootings: New Zealand to ban semi-automatic weapons". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 22 May 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (19 March 2019). "Jacinda Ardern says cabinet agrees New Zealand gun reform 'in principle'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. Graham-McLay, Charlotte (10 April 2019). "New Zealand Passes Law Banning Most Semiautomatic Weapons, Weeks After Massacre". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 24 May 2020. Retrieved 3 June 2020. "Core group of world leaders to attend Jacinda Ardern-led Paris summit". The New Zealand Herald. 29 April 2019. Archived from the original on 23 June 2019. Retrieved 24 June 2019. "Everyone travelling to NZ from overseas to self-isolate". Radio New Zealand. 14 March 2020. Archived from the original on 18 April 2020. Retrieved 16 March 2020. Keogh, Brittany (14 March 2020). "Coronavirus: Prime Minister Ardern updates New Zealand on Covid-19 outbreak". Stuff. Archived from the original on 14 March 2020. Retrieved 16 March 2020. Whyte, Anna (19 March 2020). "PM places border ban on all non-citizens and non-permanent residents entering NZ". TVNZ. Archived from the original on 19 March 2020. Retrieved 20 March 2020. "Live: PM Jacinda Ardern to give update on coronavirus alert level". Stuff. Archived from the original on 23 March 2020. Retrieved 23 March 2020. Ensor, Jamie (24 April 2020). "Coronavirus: Jacinda Ardern's 'incredible', 'down to earth' leadership praised after viral video". Newshub. Archived from the original on 21 April 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Khalil, Shaimaa (22 April 2020). "Coronavirus: How New Zealand relied on science and empathy". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 April 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Fifield, Anna (7 April 2020). "New Zealand isn't just flattening the curve. It's squashing it". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 23 April 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Campbell, Alastair (11 April 2020). "Jacinda Ardern's coronavirus plan is working because, unlike others, she's behaving like a true leader". The Independent. Archived from the original on 23 April 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Boyle, Chelseas (23 April 2020). "Lockdown lawsuit fails: Legal action against Jacinda Ardern dismissed". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 24 April 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Earley, Melanie (23 April 2020). "Coronavirus: Man's lawsuit over Covid-19 lockdown restrictions dismissed". Stuff. Archived from the original on 27 April 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Trans-Tasman bubble: Jacinda Ardern gives details of Australian Cabinet meeting". Radio New Zealand. 5 May 2020. Archived from the original on 5 May 2020. Retrieved 7 May 2020. Wescott, Ben (5 May 2020). "Australia and New Zealand pledge to introduce travel corridor in rare coronavirus meeting". CNN. Archived from the original on 5 May 2020. Retrieved 7 May 2020. O'Brien, Tova (18 May 2020). "Newshub-Reid Research Poll: Jacinda Ardern goes stratospheric, Simon Bridges is annihilated". Newshub. MediaWorks TV. Archived from the original on 21 May 2020. Retrieved 18 May 2020. "Pressure mounts as National falls to 29%, Labour skyrockets in 1 NEWS Colmar Brunton poll". 1 News. TVNZ. 21 May 2020. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2020. Pandey, Swati (18 May 2020). "Ardern becomes New Zealand's most popular PM in a century – poll". Reuters. Archived from the original on 20 May 2020. Retrieved 19 May 2020. O'Brien, Tova (18 May 2020). "Newshub-Reid Research Poll: Simon Bridges still confident he will lead National into election despite personal poll rating below 5 percent". Newshub. Archived from the original on 21 May 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2020. "New Zealand election: Jacinda Ardern's Labour Party scores landslide win". BBC News. 17 October 2020. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 18 October 2020. "2020 General Election and Referendums – Official Result". Electoral Commission. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 11 November 2020. Shaw, Richard; Hayward, Bronwyn; Vowles, Jack; Curtin, Jennifer; MacDonald, Lindsey (17 October 2020). "Jacinda Ardern and Labour returned in a landslide — 5 experts on a historic New Zealand election". The Conversation. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 18 October 2020. "Mt Albert – Official Result". Electoral Commission. Retrieved 12 November 2020. "New Zealand's Ardern credits virus response for election win". The Independent. 18 October 2020. Archived from the original on 19 October 2020. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Taylor, Phil (2 December 2020). "New Zealand declares a climate change emergency". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 December 2020. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Cooke, Henry (2 December 2020). "Government will have to buy electric cars and build green buildings as it declares climate change emergency". Stuff. Archived from the original on 2 December 2020. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Hattenstone, Simon (25 September 2021). "Interview: The transformation of Greta Thunberg". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 October 2021. Retrieved 25 September 2021. Sam Sachdeva (23 March 2021). "'No silver bullet', but Govt fires plenty at housing crisis". Newsroom. Archived from the original on 10 February 2022. Retrieved 1 April 2021. Jeremy Couchman (25 March 2021). "Higher house price caps would have helped only a few hundred first home buyers". Newsroom. Archived from the original on 24 March 2021. Retrieved 1 April 2021. Neilson, Michael (14 June 2021). "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announces apology for dawn raids targeting Pasifika". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 14 June 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2021. Whyte, Anna (14 June 2021). "Government Minister Aupito William Sio in tears as he recalls family being subjected to dawn raid". 1 News. Archived from the original on 14 June 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2021. Davison, Isaac (9 September 2022). "How NZ will honour Elizabeth, PM praises 'incredible woman'". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 9 September 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2022. "PM mourns death of Queen Elizabeth II". New Zealand Government. 9 September 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2022. Brockett, Matthew (12 September 2022). "Ardern Expects New Zealand to Eventually Become a Republic". Bloomberg UK. Retrieved 19 September 2022. "Jacinda Ardern caught on hot mic calling minor opposition party leader an 'arrogant prick'". The Guardian. 13 December 2022. Archived from the original on 19 December 2022. Retrieved 13 December 2022. McConnell, Glenn (14 December 2022). "Jacinda Ardern apologises for calling David Seymour an 'arrogant prick'". Stuff. Archived from the original on 18 December 2022. Retrieved 20 December 2022. Morgan, Ella (18 December 2022). "Jacinda Ardern and David Seymour's 'arrogant prick' charity auction reaches $60,000". Stuff. Archived from the original on 18 December 2022. Retrieved 20 December 2022. "Melinda Gates' plea to Ardern over Covid-19 vaccine". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 4 February 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2022. "Goalkeepers 2019 NYC Event Press Release". Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Archived from the original on 4 February 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2022. "Covid 19 coronavirus: Cook Islands, New Zealand travel bubble without quarantine from early next year". The New Zealand Herald. 12 December 2020. Archived from the original on 11 December 2020. Retrieved 11 December 2020. Galloway, Anthony (14 December 2020). "New Zealand travel bubble with Australia coming in early 2021, NZ PM confirms". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020. Retrieved 16 December 2020. "Govt secures another two Covid-19 vaccines, PM says every New Zealander will be able to be vaccinated". Radio New Zealand. 16 December 2020. Archived from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 16 December 2020. de Jong, Eleanor (26 January 2021). "New Zealand borders to stay closed until citizens are 'vaccinated and protected'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2021. "Covid 19 coronavirus: No new community cases – Ashley Bloomfield and health officials give press conference as first Kiwis receive vaccinations". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 11 September 2021. Retrieved 11 September 2021. "New Zealand enters nationwide lockdown over one Covid case". BBC News. 17 August 2021. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 11 September 2021. "Against all odds: how New Zealand is bending the Delta curve". The Guardian. 10 September 2021. Archived from the original on 11 September 2021. Retrieved 11 September 2021. "Covid-19: Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern in self-isolation, identified as close contact of Covid case". Stuff. 29 January 2022. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern tests positive for Covid-19". Radio New Zealand. 14 May 2022. Archived from the original on 14 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2022. Cooke, Henry (8 May 2022). "Covid-19 NZ: Jacinda Ardern isolating at home as partner Clarke Gayford infected". Stuff. Archived from the original on 8 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. Perry, Nick (2 December 2020). "New Zealand joins Australia in denouncing China's tweet". Associated Press News. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Patterson, Jane (1 December 2020). "New Zealand registers concern with China over official's 'unfactual' tweet". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 1 December 2020. Ng, Qi Siang (9 December 2020). "For Jacinda Ardern, the digital economy is about people too". The Edge. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 13 December 2020. Welch, Dylan; Dredge, Suzanne; Dziedzic, Stephen (16 February 2021). "New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern criticises Australia for stripping dual national terror suspect's citizenship". ABC News. Archived from the original on 16 February 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2021. Whyte, Anna (16 February 2021). "Jacinda Ardern delivers extraordinary broadside at Australia over woman detained in Turkey – 'Abdicated its responsibilities'". 1 News. Archived from the original on 16 February 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2021. "Ardern condemns Australia for revoking ISIL suspect's citizenship". Al Jazeera. 16 February 2021. Archived from the original on 16 February 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2021. Manch, Thomas (17 February 2021). "Jacinda Ardern, Scott Morrison agree to work in 'spirit of our relationship' over alleged Isis terrorist". Stuff. Archived from the original on 16 February 2021. Retrieved 17 February 2021. "'I despair at what's happening' — Ardern condemns both Israel and Hamas over deadly violence in Gaza". 1 News. 17 May 2021. Archived from the original on 16 May 2021. Retrieved 17 May 2021. McClure, Tess (30 May 2021). "Jacinda Ardern hosts Scott Morrison in New Zealand for talks with post-Covid 'rulebook' on agenda". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 June 2021. Retrieved 3 June 2021. Ardern, Jacinda (31 May 2021). "Joint statement: Prime Ministers Jacinda Ardern and Scott Morrison". Beehive.govt.nz. New Zealand Government. Archived from the original on 2 June 2021. Retrieved 3 June 2021. Cooke, Henry (1 June 2021). "China slams 'gross interference' from Jacinda Ardern and Scott Morrison's joint statement on Hong Kong and Xinjiang". Stuff. Archived from the original on 1 June 2021. Retrieved 3 June 2021. Ardern, Jacinda (10 December 2021). "NZ attends US President's Democracy Summit". Beehive.govt.nz. Ministry of Health. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. "Russia bans Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern from entering country". Radio New Zealand. 8 April 2022. Archived from the original on 3 May 2022. Retrieved 8 April 2022. Burns-Francis, Anna (25 May 2022). "Jacinda Ardern busy promoting NZ on US visit". 1 News. TVNZ. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022. "New Zealand's Ardern urges US to return to regional trade pact". Al Jazeera. 26 May 2022. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022. McClure, Tess (25 May 2022). "New Zealand PM Jacinda Ardern responds to Texas school shooting". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022. Malpass, Luke; Jack, Amberleigh (27 May 2022). "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern responds to Texas school shooting on Late Show with Stephen Colbert". Stuff. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022. "New Zealand PM Jacinda Ardern addresses Harvard on gun control and democracy". The Guardian. Australian Associated Press. 27 May 2022. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 5 June 2022. "New Zealand signs partnership with California on climate change". Radio New Zealand. 28 May 2022. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2022. "United States – Aotearoa New Zealand Joint Statement". The White House. 31 May 2022. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022. Malpass, Luke (1 June 2022). "Joe Biden meeting has strengthened NZ's relationship with US, Jacinda Ardern says". Stuff. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022. "Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Zhao Lijian's Regular Press Conference on June 1, 2022". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China. 1 June 2022. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022. Manch, Thomas; Morrison, Tina (2 June 2022). "China heavily criticises New Zealand for 'ulterior motives' after Biden meeting". Stuff. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022. Mann, Toby; Burrows, Ian (10 June 2022). "Anthony Albanese says New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern's concerns around deportations need to be considered". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 10 June 2022. Retrieved 10 June 2022. Whyte, Anna (10 June 2022). "Ardern, Albanese to take trans-Tasman relationship 'to a new level'". 1 News. TVNZ. Archived from the original on 10 June 2022. Retrieved 10 June 2022. McClure, Tess (30 June 2022). "West must stand firm as China challenges 'rules and norms', Ardern tells Nato". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022. McConnell, Glenn (30 June 2022). "Jacinda Ardern calls for nuclear disarmament, criticises China over human rights during Nato speech". Stuff. Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022. "Statement by the Spokesperson of the Chinese Embassy in New Zealand on New Zealand's Comments to NATO Session". Embassy of the People's Republic of China in New Zealand. 1 July 2022. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022. Scotcher, Katie (30 June 2022). "Ardern speaks to Zelensky, reiterates support and continued sanctions". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. "After 865 days, Samoa reopens to tourists". 1 News. TVNZ. Australian Associated Press. 31 July 2022. Archived from the original on 31 July 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2022. "Ardern, Luxon and ministers to visit Samoa for treaty anniversary". Radio New Zealand. 28 July 2022. Archived from the original on 28 July 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2022. Dexter, Giles (2 August 2022). "PM announces $15m to support Samoa with climate change priorities". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 2 August 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2022. Tran, Cindy (20 September 2022). "Hidden meaning behind New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern's outfit at Queen's funeral". Seven News. Archived from the original on 21 September 2022. Retrieved 13 November 2022. Witton, Bridie (27 October 2022). "Jacinda Ardern: New Zealand's presence in Antarctica at 'critical juncture'". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 13 November 2022. Gibbens, Krystal (29 October 2022). "Jacinda Ardern's plane breaks down in Antarctica". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 12 November 2022. Retrieved 13 November 2022. Beckford, Gyles (13 November 2022). "Myanmar govt's executions 'a stain on region' – Jacinda Ardern". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 13 November 2022. Retrieved 13 November 2022. Trevett, Claire (13 November 2022). "Jacinda Ardern in Cambodia: Catch-up with Joe Biden at East Asia Summit and a trade upgrade". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 13 November 2022. Retrieved 13 November 2022. "Jacinda Ardern and Sanna Marin dismiss claim they met due to 'similar age'". BBC News. 30 November 2022. Archived from the original on 2 December 2022. Retrieved 3 December 2022. McConnell, Glenn (30 November 2022). "Finnish PM Sanna Marin wants to go 'next level' with New Zealand, as she rallies against autocrats". Stuff. Archived from the original on 1 December 2022. Retrieved 3 December 2022. Witton, Bridie (30 November 2022). "The not-so-subtle sexism that followed Finland's Sanna Marin from Helsinki to Auckland". Stuff. Archived from the original on 2 December 2022. Retrieved 3 December 2022. McClure, Tess (7 November 2022). "Jacinda Ardern rallies party faithful as Labour faces difficult re-election path". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 November 2022. Retrieved 13 November 2022. "Jacinda Ardern to step down as New Zealand's prime minister". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 19 January 2023. "Jacinda Ardern: New Zealand PM to step down next month". BBC News. 19 January 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2023. "Political rivals react to Ardern's shock resignation". 1 News. TVNZ. 19 January 2023. Archived from the original on 19 January 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2023. "Jacinda Ardern quits: Prime Minister 'driven from politics' due to 'constant personalisation and vilification' – Te Pāti Māori". The New Zealand Herald. 19 January 2022. Archived from the original on 19 January 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2023. "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern resigns: Politicians and New Zealanders pay tribute". Radio New Zealand. 19 January 2023. "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern resigns: The world reacts". Newshub. "Leading New Zealand was 'greatest privilege', says Jacinda Ardern at final event". The Guardian. 24 January 2023. Retrieved 24 January 2023. "Chris Hipkins sworn in as prime minister". Radio New Zealand. 25 January 2023. Retrieved 25 January 2023. Whyte, Luke Malpass and Anna (20 January 2023). "Chris Hipkins set to become New Zealand's next prime minister". Stuff. Archived from the original on 21 January 2023. Retrieved 23 January 2023. tom_tep (4 April 2023). "Jacinda Ardern joins The Earthshot Prize as a Trustee". The Earthshot Prize. Retrieved 4 April 2023. Wood, Patrick (6 April 2023). "New Zealand's Jacinda Ardern takes on a new role after leaving politics this week". NPR. Retrieved 6 March 2023. Adams, Charley (4 April 2023). "Jacinda Ardern appointed trustee of Prince William's Earthshot Prize". BBC News. Retrieved 5 April 2023. "Former PM Jacinda Ardern appointed as Christchurch Call Envoy". Radio New Zealand. 4 April 2023. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. Neilson, Michael; Franks, Raphael (5 April 2023). "Jacinda Ardern says leaders can be 'anxious, sensitive, kind and wear your heart on your sleeve' in farewell valedictory address". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. LeBlanc, Steve (25 April 2023). "Ex-New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern to join Harvard". Associated Press. McClure, Tess (25 April 2023). "Jacinda Ardern takes up leadership and online extremism roles at Harvard". The Guardian. Lagan, Bernard (7 September 2017). "Jacinda Ardern, New Zealand's contender for PM, says: let's lose the Queen". The Times. Archived from the original on 8 September 2017. Retrieved 8 September 2017. Ardern, Jacinda (20 May 2015). "Jacinda Ardern: I am a feminist". Villainesse. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "Ardern confirmed as new Labour leader". Otago Daily Times. 1 August 2017. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. Satherley, Dan; Owen, Lisa (21 October 2017). "Homelessness proves capitalism is a 'blatant failure' – Jacinda Ardern". Newshub. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 24 October 2017. Asked directly if capitalism had failed low-income Kiwis, Ms. Ardern was unequivocal."If you have hundreds of thousands of children living in homes without enough to survive, that's a blatant failure. What else could you describe it as? . . . . It all comes down to whether or not you recognize where the market has failed and where intervention is required. Has it failed our people in recent times? Yes. Baynes, Chris (1 April 2019). "New Zealand's new prime minister calls capitalism a 'blatant failure'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Watch: Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern says Budget 2021 is 'a real milestone for us'". Radio New Zealand. 21 May 2021. Archived from the original on 7 September 2021. Retrieved 7 September 2021. "The New Zealand "Socialists" Who Govern Like Neoliberals". jacobin.com. Retrieved 17 July 2022. Trevett, Claire (20 August 2017). "Jacinda Ardern's rallying cry: Climate change the nuclear-free moment of her generation". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 19 November 2018. Retrieved 12 November 2017. "Broadsides: Do you support same-sex marriage?". The New Zealand Herald. 22 June 2011. Archived from the original on 22 February 2017. Retrieved 24 March 2020. "Marriage equality bill: How MPs voted". Waikato Times. 18 April 2013. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 3 September 2015. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (17 February 2018). "Jacinda Ardern becomes first New Zealand PM to march in gay pride parade". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 21 February 2018. Retrieved 21 February 2018. Miller, Corazon (11 September 2017). "Labour leader Jacinda Ardern tackles 'smear campaign' on abortion stance". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. "English, Little, Ardern on abortion laws". Your NZ. 13 March 2017. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017. Retrieved 11 August 2017. "Parliament removes abortion from Crimes Act". The Beehive. Archived from the original on 23 March 2020. Retrieved 23 March 2020. "Abortion Legislation Bill passes third and final reading in Parliament". Radio New Zealand. 18 March 2020. Archived from the original on 24 March 2020. Retrieved 24 March 2020. "PM defends no comment stance on cannabis referendum". Stuff. 31 October 2020. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 25 July 2021. "Labour's leadership duo talk tax, Maori prisons and who'll be deputy leader in a coalition". Stuff. 5 August 2017. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "Jacinda Ardern believes New Zealand will become a republic 'in her lifetime'". The New Zealand Herald. 24 May 2021. Archived from the original on 24 May 2021. Retrieved 27 May 2021. "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern meets the Queen in 'warm' exchange". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 25 June 2021. Retrieved 28 May 2021. Brockett, Matthew (12 September 2022). "Ardern Expects New Zealand to Eventually Become a Republic". Bloomberg UK. Retrieved 13 September 2022. "Video: Ardern committed to cutting immigration numbers". Radio New Zealand. 15 August 2017. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "Labour's new leader shakes up New Zealand's election". The Economist. 14 September 2017. Archived from the original on 15 September 2017. "NZ won't be bullied on Israel vote – Ardern". Radio New Zealand. 21 December 2017. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. Trevett, Claire (15 May 2018). "PM Jacinda Ardern: Gaza deaths show US Embassy move to Jerusalem hurt chance of peace". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. McClure, Tess (21 November 2022). "Ardern promises bill to lower voting age to 16 in New Zealand after discrimination ruling". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 November 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2022. Bala, Thenappan (16 March 2019). "Jacinda Ardern: The Celebrity". Penn Political Review. Archived from the original on 3 May 2021. Retrieved 16 March 2019. Hehir, Liam (6 May 2019). "The growth of celebrity politics should be resisted". Stuff. Archived from the original on 6 May 2019. Retrieved 6 May 2019. Kapitan, Sommer (4 September 2020). "The Facebook prime minister: how Jacinda Ardern became New Zealand's most successful political influencer". The Conversation. Archived from the original on 6 September 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2020. Griffiths, James (1 September 2017). "'All bets are off' in New Zealand vote as 'Jacindamania' boosts Labour". CNN. Archived from the original on 1 September 2017. Retrieved 1 September 2017. Peacock, Colin (3 August 2017). "'Jacinda effect' in full effect in the media". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2017. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (10 August 2017). "New Zealand gripped by 'Jacindamania' as new Labour leader soars in polls". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 14 September 2017. Retrieved 13 September 2017. Bateman, Sophie (16 July 2018). "Jacindamania helped NZ's global influence, index reveals". Newshub. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 17 July 2018. Peacock, Colin (30 September 2018). "Jacindamania goes global: the PM in US at the UN". Radio New Zealand. Archived from the original on 14 August 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. Watkins, Tracy (24 September 2018). "What lies behind Jacinda Ardern's appeal in the US? To her followers, it's hope". Stuff. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (21 October 2018). "Ardern's first year: New Zealand grapples with hangover from Jacindamania". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 4 March 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2020. Manhire, Toby (11 December 2019). "The decade in politics: From Team Key to Jacindamania". The Spinoff. Archived from the original on 1 June 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2020. Maynard, Roger (24 January 2023). "Jacinda Ardern denies quitting over criticism she faced as PM". The Telegraph. McClure, Tess (23 December 2022). "Jacinda Ardern's popularity plummeted this year. Things could get worse in 2023". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 18 March 2024. "Why Jacinda Ardern's star waned in New Zealand". 19 January 2023. Retrieved 18 March 2024. "Meghan Markle puts Sinéad Burke on the cover of Vogue's September issue". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 29 July 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2019. Bernadette, Basagre (9 December 2021). "Jacinda Ardern makes Forbes list of world's most powerful women for fourth year, drops two places". Stuff. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 15 December 2021. Khan, Sadiq (2019). "Jacinda Ardern". Time. Archived from the original on 10 December 2019. Retrieved 10 December 2019. Stump, Scott (9 December 2019). "Who will be TIME's 2019 Person of the Year? See the shortlist". Today. Archived from the original on 10 December 2019. Retrieved 10 December 2019. Bunyan, Rachael. "Here Are the Favorites to Win the 2019 Nobel Peace Prize". Time. Archived from the original on 8 October 2019. Retrieved 8 January 2020. "The world's top 50 thinkers for the Covid-19 age" (PDF). Prospect. 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 September 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2020. "Jacinda Ardern wins Harvard leadership award for handling of Covid-19, Christchurch terrorist attack". 1 News. Australian Associated Press. 19 November 2020. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 19 November 2020. Trewick, Steven A. (12 March 2021). "A new species of large Hemiandrus ground wētā (Orthoptera: Anostostomatidae) from North Island, New Zealand". Zootaxa. 4942 (2): 207–218. doi:10.11646/zootaxa.4942.2.4. PMID 33757066. Hunt, Elle (12 March 2021). "Hemiandrus jacinda: insect named after New Zealand prime minister". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 March 2021. Retrieved 12 March 2021. "Jacinda's Lichen-ness". UNITEC Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on 5 May 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. The Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has inspired the name for a new species of lichen, discovered in Auckland last year by Environmental and Animal Sciences professors Dan Blanchon and Peter de Lange, along with Peter's 17-year-old son Theo and former Unitec student Andrew Marshall. Ocellularia jacinda-arderniae, or Jacinda's barnacle lichen, recognises that the lichen was found during the 125th anniversary of women's suffrage. So far the lichen been found on tanekaha, kauri and rewarewa trees in Auckland. "Jacinda Ant-dern? New insect species named after NZ prime minister". 1 NEWS. TVNZ. 12 December 2019. Archived from the original on 6 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. A newly discovered ant species in Saudi Arabia has been named after Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern. 'That's quite an unusual thing' – Jacinda Ardern responds to having ant species named after her. The name, Crematogaster jacindae, was to honour Ms Ardern for her work following the Christchurch terrorist attack on March 15. "Jacinda Ardern". Fortune. 14 May 2021. Archived from the original on 15 May 2021. Retrieved 15 May 2021. Forrester, Georgina (14 May 2021). "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern tops Fortune magazine's world greatest leaders list". Stuff. Archived from the original on 15 May 2021. Retrieved 15 May 2021. "Harvard awards seven honorary degrees". Harvard University. 26 May 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022. "The King's Birthday and Coronation honours list 2023". Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. 5 June 2023. Retrieved 5 June 2023. Knight, Kim (29 January 2017). "The politics of life: The truth about Jacinda Ardern". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. Park, Benjamin (14 November 2018). "Commentary: What the two 'Mormon' senators tell us about the LDS battle over sexuality". The Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on 13 December 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2018. "President Nelson Meets with New Zealand Prime Minister". newsroom.churchofjesuschrist.org. 20 May 2019. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 19 October 2020. Manhire, Toby (19 September 2017). "'My final, final plea': a day in Whanganui with Jacinda Ardern". The Spinoff. Archived from the original on 5 July 2020. Retrieved 6 July 2020. "Things we learned about Jacinda Ardern". Newshub. 6 November 2014. Archived from the original on 19 December 2019. Retrieved 19 December 2019. "Shane Ardern to Step Down". Radio New Zealand. 3 December 2013. Archived from the original on 2 April 2018. Retrieved 15 February 2021. Knight, Kim (16 July 2016). "Clarke Gayford: Jacinda Ardern is the best thing that's ever happened to me". The New Zealand Herald. ISSN 1170-0777. Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 15 July 2016. "Clarke Gayford". NZ On Screen. Archived from the original on 18 September 2017. Retrieved 18 September 2017. "Jacinda Ardern was on a date with another man when she first met Clarke Gayford". Stuff. 1 May 2018. Archived from the original on 1 May 2018. Retrieved 1 May 2017. "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern engaged to partner Clarke Gayford". Radio New Zealand. 3 May 2019. Archived from the original on 3 May 2019. Retrieved 3 May 2019. "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern and Clarke Gayford engaged". The New Zealand Herald. 3 May 2019. Archived from the original on 4 May 2019. Retrieved 3 May 2019. "Covid 19 Omicron outbreak: PM Jacinda Ardern cancels wedding as country moves to red". The New Zealand Herald. 23 January 2022. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 23 January 2022. "'Such is life': NZ PM calls off wedding". BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 23 January 2022. "Jacinda Ardern wedding: First official photo of former PM wearing Juliette Hogan as she marries Clarke Gayford". The New Zealand Herald. 13 January 2024. Retrieved 13 January 2024. "Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announces pregnancy". The New Zealand Herald. 19 January 2018. Archived from the original on 24 January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "Here comes the baby: Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern in labour, at Auckland Hospital with partner Clarke Gayford". The New Zealand Herald. 21 June 2018. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "Live: Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern's baby is on the way". Stuff. 21 June 2018. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "It's a girl! Jacinda Ardern gives birth to her first child". Newshub. 21 June 2018. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. She is only the second world leader in history to give birth while in office. Former Prime Minister of Pakistan Benazir Bhutto gave birth to a baby girl in 1990. "Watch: PM Jacinda Ardern leaves hospital with 'Neve Te Aroha'". Radio New Zealand. 24 June 2018. Archived from the original on 13 February 2019. Retrieved 23 June 2018. "PM's baby named: Neve Te Aroha Ardern Gayford". Radio New Zealand. 24 June 2018. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 24 June 2018. "'Dirty politics': PM, police respond to fake Gayford rumours". 28 May 2023. "Apology and payment for Clarke Gayford after 'baseless lies'". 29 July 2022. Jacinda Ardern at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Jacinda Ardern's Archived 2 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine profile on the New Zealand Parliament website Jacinda Ardern at the New Zealand Labour Party Appearances on C-SPAN Portals:  Biography  Environment  New Zealand  Politics  Socialism