Sekondi-Takoradi is a city in Ghana comprising the twin cities of Sekondi and Takoradi. It is the capital of Sekondi – Takoradi Metropolitan Assembly and the Western Region of Ghana. Sekondi-Takoradi is the region's and largest Fante city as well as an industrial and commercial center, with a population of 445,205 people (2012). The chief industries in Sekondi-Takoradi are timber, cocoa processing, plywood, shipbuilding, its harbour and railway repair, and recently, sweet crude oil and crude oil. The fundamental job in Sekondi-Takoradi is fishing. Sekondi-Takoradi lies on the main railway lines to Kumasi. Sekondi, an older town, was the site of Dutch Fort Orange (1642) and English Fort Sekondi (1682). It prospered from a railroad built in 1903 to hinterland mineral and timber resources. Takoradi was the site of Dutch Fort Witsen (1665) and has an important deepwater seaport, Ghana's first, built in 1928. During World War II, RAF Takoradi was an important staging point for British aircraft destined for Egypt. Spitfire fighter planes were shipped in crates from England to Takoradi where they were assembled then flown via Nigeria and Sudan to the war in Libya. 26 Squadron SAAF was also based in Takoradi during World War II, flying anti-submarine and convoy protection patrols over the Atlantic. A number of South African airmen are buried in the Takoradi European Public cemetery. The cities combined in 1946. On 20 November 1969, the city became the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Sekondi–Takoradi. The city is currently named (although not officially) as the Oil City of Ghana due to the massive discovery of oil in the Western region and has attracted massive migration from people all around the world. For example, of the 248,680 people in the Sekondi-Takoradi metro area in 2010, some 148,000, or well above half, were indigenous Ahanta people, 30,000 came from the central region of Ghana, 60,000 are from other regions of Ghana and 10,000 are foreign nationals. Sekondi-Takoradi's population is overwhelmingly Christian. 35% of the region are Pentecostal/Charismatic, 26% are Protestant and 14% are Catholic with the remaining 12% comprising numerous minor denominations. 9% of the population are Muslim, 3.5% identify as non-religious and 0.2% practice traditional African religions. The major ethnic group found in Sekondi are the Fanti people. Sekondi has a rich cultural heritage, and the city is home to several landmarks and tourist attractions. The city's most notable landmark is the Sekondi European Town, which was built by the British during the colonial era. The town features several well-preserved colonial buildings, including the Governor's Residence, the Post Office, and the District Commissioner's Office. Sekondi is a bustling commercial center with a thriving economy. The city's location on the coast makes it an essential hub for fishing and trading activities. The Sekondi Fishing Harbour is the largest fishing port in Ghana and provides employment to thousands of people in the region. The city is also a center for the timber and cocoa industries, which are vital to the country's economy. Takoradi houses the Harbour and has timber, energy and technology industries. Over the years it has attracted a good number of investors, including miners, as the city is close to the mining towns in the western part of Ghana. Ghana's recent discovery of oil gave the Sekondi-Takoradi township to be known as the Oil City. Sekondi is well-connected to other parts of Ghana and neighboring countries through a network of roads and railways. The city's port is a vital transportation hub, with several shipping lines providing regular services to other West African countries and Europe. The Takoradi Airport (TDI), located about 5 km from Sekondi, provides air transportation to other parts of Ghana and international destinations. There are public transport connections from Takoradi to major cities such as Accra; Kumasi; Mim; Cape Coast; Sunyani; Tamale; Tema; Ho; Wa; Bolgatanga; Elubo; Aflao; and Techiman. Sekondi-Takoradi has plenty of beaches, however they are not a major tourist attraction. Many of the beaches are found to the west of Takoradi, with small resorts such as Fanta's Folly, The Hideout, Allan Beach and Vienna Beach. It also has an annual street carnival, which is popular with tourists. Sekondi-Takoradi city has several secondary schools, colleges, and special schools, ranging from single-sex to coeducational institutions. Among the tertiary institutions are: Takoradi Technical University (a public institution), Nurses and Midwifery Training College, Holy Child Teachers Training College (now a College of Education). The Sekondi-Takoradi city currently has several secondary schools and Special schools, ranging from single-sex to coeducational institutions. These include: St. John's School (The Saints) Ghana Senior High Technical School (GSTS) Baidoo Bonsoe Senior High Technical School (BBSTS) Takoradi Secondary School (Tadisco) Methodist senior high school ( The Young legend) Sekondi College (Sekco) Ahantaman Senior High School Fijai Secondary School Adiembra Secondary School Bompeh senior high technical school Archbishop Porter Girls Secondary School and many others. Takoradi Technical Institute houses a fab lab, equipped by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), which is the first of its kind in Africa. Takoradi has a well-equipped technical training center (Takoradi Technical Institute, TTI, 1,400 students in two shifts) assisted by the German government through GIZ / GOPA. Apart from TTI, Takoradi has a technical university and other renowned secondary schools including Ghana Secondary Technical School, St. Mary Secondary School, Bompeh Secondary School, Takoradi Secondary School and many others. Sekondi-Takoradi has many internet cafés and computer training centers to encourage familiarity with computers and acquire computer skills. The Western Regional Library was established in Sekondi in 1955. Sekondi-Takoradi Stadium Essipong Stadium Gyandu Park Professional sports teams based in Sekondi-Takoradi include: FC Takoradi Sekondi Hasaacas Sekondi Wise Fighters Empire FM Sekondi-Takoradi has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen climate classification: Aw). Palermo, Italy (2021) Boston, United States (2001) Oakland, United States (1975) Sekondi-Takoradi in pictures Virgin Island in Sekondi-Takoradi. Beach on Virgin Island in Sekondi-Takoradi. Aerial view of Takoradi Harbour. Sekondi-Takoradi Stadium at night. Aerial view of the Sekondi-Takoradi Shores. Highway in Sekondi-Takoradi. Commuters on street in Sekondi-Takoradi. Takoradi Airport (Sekondi-Takoradi Airport). A house in Takoradi (Sekondi-Takoradi). Takoradi Airport Takoradi Harbour Market Circle, Takoradi Railway stations in Ghana Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sekondi-Takoradi. "World Gazetteer online". World-gazetteer.com. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 8 February 2014. "Betway extends support to Volleyball Teams in the Western and Western North Regions". Citi Sports Online. 21 May 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2021. "Twin-Cities project to plant 5,000 fruit-trees in Sekondi-Takoradi". Citinewsroom - Comprehensive News in Ghana. 4 February 2022. Retrieved 22 July 2023. "Private Tutor". Infoplease.com. Retrieved 8 February 2014. "Ministry of Railways Development - Ghana - railways development construction on western and eastern lines speeds off steadily". www.mrd.gov.gh. Retrieved 22 July 2023. "Takoradi Port", Ghana Ports and Harbour Authority. Archived 31 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine Nancy Lawler (2002). Soldiers, Airmen, Spies, and Whisperers: The Gold Coast in World War II. Ohio University Press. ISBN 9780821414309. Retrieved 8 February 2014 – via BiblioVault. "South Africa War Graves Project". Southafricawargraves.org. 8 October 2011. Retrieved 8 February 2014. Obeng-Odoom F., 2014, Oiling the Urban Economy: Land, Labour, Capital, and the State in Sekondi-Takoradi, Ghana, Routledge, London. Stats Ghana report on Sekondi-Takoradi population Ghana Statistical Service report on Sekondi-Takoradi "Sekondi-Takoradi Masqueraders Street Carnival". CNN iReport. Retrieved 2 September 2016. [1] Archived 25 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine World Guide to Libraries (25th ed.), De Gruyter Saur, 2011, ISBN 9783110230710 Starrfm.com.gh (15 July 2021). "Tarkwa: Awudua Gyaasehene reportedly kidnapped – Starr Fm". Retrieved 22 May 2022. "Klimatafel von Takoradi (Sekondi-Takoradi) / Ghana" (PDF). Baseline climate means (1961-1990) from stations all over the world (in German). Deutscher Wetterdienst. Retrieved 18 October 2016. Afrosages.com, Tourist Destinations Of Western Ghana, January 13, 2020 Wildcat Beauty, Cosmetics & More, Market Circle (behind Bank of Africa (Takoradi, Ghana [2] Mytakoradi.com Ghana-pedia webpage – Takoradi Media related to Sekondi-Takoradi at Wikimedia Commons 04°55′N 01°46′W﻿ / ﻿4.917°N 1.767°W﻿ / 4.917; -1.767