Kamala Devi Harris (/ˈkɑːmələ ˈdeɪvi/ KAH-mə-lə DAY-vee; born October 20, 1964) is an American politician and attorney who is the 49th and current vice president of the United States under President Joe Biden. She is the first female vice president and the highest-ranking female official in U.S. history, as well as the first African-American and first Asian-American vice president. A member of the Democratic Party, she was previously attorney general of California from 2011 to 2017 and a U.S. senator from California from 2017 to 2021. Born in Oakland, California, Harris graduated from Howard University and the University of California, Hastings College of the Law. She began her career in the office of the district attorney (DA) of Alameda County, before being recruited to the San Francisco DA's Office and later the City Attorney of San Francisco's office. In 2003, she was elected DA of San Francisco. She was elected AG of California in 2010 and re-elected in 2014. Harris served as the junior U.S. senator from California from 2017 to 2021; she defeated Loretta Sanchez in the 2016 Senate election to become the second African-American woman and the first South Asian American to serve in the U.S. Senate. As a senator, she advocated for healthcare reform, federal de-scheduling of cannabis, a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, the DREAM Act, strict gun control laws, and progressive tax reform. She gained a national profile for her pointed questioning of Trump administration officials during Senate hearings, including Trump's second Supreme Court nominee, Brett Kavanaugh, who was accused of sexual assault. Harris sought the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination, but withdrew from the race prior to the primaries. She was selected by Joe Biden to be his running mate, and their ticket went on to defeat the then incumbent president and vice president, Donald Trump and Mike Pence, in the 2020 election. Harris and Biden were inaugurated on January 20, 2021. Kamala Devi Harris was born in Oakland, California, on October 20, 1964. Her mother, Shyamala Gopalan, was a Tamil Indian biologist, whose work on the progesterone receptor gene stimulated advances in breast cancer research. She moved to the United States from India as a 19-year-old graduate student in 1958, after studying home science at Lady Irwin College in New Delhi. After studying nutrition and endocrinology at the University of California, Berkeley, she received her PhD in 1964. Kamala Harris's Jamaican American father, Donald J. Harris, is of Afro-Jamaican and Irish-Jamaican ancestry. He is a Stanford University professor of economics (emeritus) who arrived in the United States from British Jamaica in 1961, for graduate study at UC Berkeley, receiving a PhD in economics in 1966. Donald Harris met his future wife Shyamala Gopalan at a college club for African-American students (though Indian American, Gopalan was allowed to join). In 1966, the Harris family moved to Champaign, Illinois (where Kamala's younger sister Maya was born) when her parents took positions at the University of Illinois. The family moved around the Midwest, with both parents working at multiple universities in succession over a brief period. Kamala Harris, along with her mother and sister, moved back to California in 1970, while her father remained in the Midwest. They stayed briefly on Milvia Street in central Berkeley, then at a duplex on Bancroft Way in West Berkeley, an area often called the "flatlands" with a significant black population. When Harris began kindergarten, she was bused as part of Berkeley's comprehensive desegregation program to Thousand Oaks Elementary School, a public school in a more prosperous neighborhood in northern Berkeley which previously had been 95 percent white, and after the desegregation plan went into effect became 40 percent black. Her parents divorced when she was seven. Harris has said that when she and her sister visited their father in Palo Alto on weekends, other children in the neighborhood were not allowed to play with them because they were black. A neighbor regularly took the Harris girls to an African American church in Oakland where they sang in the children's choir, and the girls and their mother also frequently visited a nearby African American cultural center. Their mother introduced them to Hinduism and took them to a nearby Hindu temple, where Gopalan occasionally sang. As children, she and her sister visited their mother's family in Madras (now Chennai) several times. She says she has been strongly influenced by her maternal grandfather P. V. Gopalan, a retired Indian civil servant whose progressive views on democracy and women's rights impressed her. Harris has remained in touch with her Indian aunts and uncles throughout her adult life. Harris has also visited her father's family in Jamaica. When she was twelve, Harris and her sister moved with their mother to Montreal, Quebec, where Shyamala had accepted a research and teaching position at the McGill University-affiliated Jewish General Hospital.[citation needed] Harris attended a French-speaking primary school, Notre-Dame-des-Neiges, then F.A.C.E. School, and finally Westmount High School in Westmount, Quebec, graduating in 1981. Wanda Kagan, a high school friend of Harris, later told CBC News in 2020 that Harris was her best friend and described how she confided in Harris that Kagan had been molested by her stepfather. She said that Harris told her mother, who then insisted Kagan come to live with them for the remainder of her final year of high school. Kagan said Harris had recently told her that their friendship, and playing a role in countering Kagan's exploitation, helped form the commitment Harris felt in protecting women and children as a prosecutor. After high school, in 1982, Harris attended Howard University, a historically black university in Washington, D.C. While at Howard, she interned as a mailroom clerk for California senator Alan Cranston, chaired the economics society, led the debate team, and joined Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority. Harris graduated from Howard in 1986 with a degree in political science and economics. Harris then returned to California to attend law school at the University of California, Hastings College of the Law through its Legal Education Opportunity Program (LEOP). While at UC Hastings, she served as president of its chapter of the Black Law Students Association. She graduated with a Juris Doctor in 1989 and was admitted to the California Bar in June 1990. In 1990, Harris was hired as a deputy district attorney in Alameda County, California, where she was described as "an able prosecutor on the way up". In 1994, Speaker of the California Assembly Willie Brown, who was then dating Harris, appointed her to the state Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board and later to the California Medical Assistance Commission. Harris took a six-month leave of absence in 1994 from her duties, then afterward resumed as prosecutor during the years she sat on the boards. Harris's connection to Brown was noted in media reportage as part of a pattern of Californian political leaders appointing "friends and loyal political soldiers" to lucrative positions on the commissions. Harris has defended her work. In February 1998, San Francisco district attorney Terence Hallinan recruited Harris as an assistant district attorney. There, she became the chief of the Career Criminal Division, supervising five other attorneys, where she prosecuted homicide, burglary, robbery, and sexual assault cases – particularly three-strikes cases. In 2000, Harris reportedly clashed with Hallinan's assistant, Darrell Salomon, over Proposition 21, which granted prosecutors the option of trying juvenile defendants in Superior Court rather than juvenile courts. Harris campaigned against the measure, which passed. Salomon opposed directing media inquiries about Prop 21 to Harris and reassigned her, a de facto demotion. Harris filed a complaint against Salomon and quit. In August 2000, Harris took a job at San Francisco City Hall, working for city attorney Louise Renne. Harris ran the Family and Children's Services Division representing child abuse and neglect cases. Renne endorsed Harris during her D.A. campaign. In 2002, Harris prepared to run for District Attorney of San Francisco against Hallinan (the incumbent) and Bill Fazio. Harris was the least-known of the three candidates but persuaded the Central Committee to withhold its endorsement from Hallinan. Harris and Hallinan advanced to the general election runoff with 33 and 37 percent of the vote, respectively. In the runoff, Harris pledged never to seek the death penalty and to prosecute three-strike offenders only in cases of violent felonies. Harris ran a "forceful" campaign, assisted by former mayor Willie Brown, Senator Dianne Feinstein, writer and cartoonist Aaron McGruder, and comedians Eddie Griffin and Chris Rock. Harris differentiated herself from Hallinan by attacking his performance. She argued that she left his office because it was technologically inept, emphasizing his 52-percent conviction rate for serious crimes despite an 83-percent average conviction rate statewide. Harris charged that his office was not doing enough to stem the city's gun violence, particularly in poor neighborhoods like Bayview and the Tenderloin, and attacked his willingness to accept plea bargains in cases of domestic violence. Harris won with 56 percent of the vote, becoming the first person of color elected as district attorney of San Francisco. Harris ran unopposed for a second term in November 2007. In the summer of 2005, Harris created an environmental crimes unit. In 2007, Harris and city attorney Dennis Herrera investigated San Francisco supervisor Ed Jew for violating residency requirements necessary to hold his supervisor position; Harris charged Jew with nine felonies, alleging that he had lied under oath and falsified documents to make it appear he resided in a Sunset District home, necessary so he could run for supervisor in the 4th district. Jew pleaded guilty in October 2008 to unrelated federal corruption charges (mail fraud, soliciting a bribe, and extortion) and pleaded guilty the following month in state court to a charge of perjury for lying about his address on nomination forms, as part of a plea agreement in which the other state charges were dropped and Jew agreed to never again hold elected office in California. Harris described the case as "about protecting the integrity of our political process, which is part of the core of our democracy". For his federal offenses, Jew was sentenced to 64 months in federal prison and a $10,000 fine; for the state perjury conviction, Jew was sentenced to one year in county jail, three years' probation, and about $2,000 in fines. Under Harris, the D.A.'s office obtained more than 1,900 convictions for marijuana offenses, including persons simultaneously convicted of marijuana offenses and more serious crimes. The rate at which Harris's office prosecuted marijuana crimes was higher than the rate under Hallinan, but the number of defendants sentenced to state prison for such offenses was substantially lower. Prosecutions for low-level marijuana offenses were rare under Harris, and her office had a policy of not pursuing jail time for marijuana possession offenses. Harris's successor as D.A., George Gascón, expunged all San Francisco marijuana offenses going back to 1975. In the early 2000s, the San Francisco murder rate per capita outpaced the national average. Within the first six months of taking office, Harris cleared 27 of 74 backlogged homicide cases by settling 14 by plea bargain and taking 11 to trial; of those trials, nine ended with convictions and two with hung juries. She took 49 violent crime cases to trial and secured 36 convictions. From 2004 to 2006, Harris achieved an 87-percent conviction rate for homicides and a 90-percent conviction rate for all felony gun violations. Harris also pushed for higher bail for criminal defendants involved in gun-related crimes, arguing that historically low bail encouraged outsiders to commit crimes in San Francisco. SFPD officers credited Harris with tightening the loopholes defendants had used in the past. In addition to creating a gun crime unit, Harris opposed releasing defendants on their own recognizance if they were arrested on gun crimes, sought minimum 90-day sentences for possession of concealed or loaded weapons, and charged all assault weapons possession cases as felonies, adding that she would seek prison terms for criminals who possessed or used assault weapons and would seek maximum penalties on gun-related crimes. Harris created a Hate Crimes Unit, focusing on hate crimes against LGBT children and teens in schools. In early 2006, Gwen Araujo, a 17-year-old American Latina transgender teenager, was murdered by two men who later used the "gay panic defense" before being convicted of second-degree murder. Harris, alongside Araujo's mother Sylvia Guerrero, convened a two-day conference of at least 200 prosecutors and law enforcement officials nationwide to discuss strategies to counter such legal defenses. Harris subsequently supported A.B. 1160, the Gwen Araujo Justice for Victims Act, advocating that California's penal code include jury instructions to ignore bias, sympathy, prejudice, or public opinion in making their decision, also making mandatory for district attorney's offices in California to educate prosecutors about panic strategies and how to prevent bias from affecting trial outcomes. In September 2006, California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger signed A.B. 1160 into law; the law put California on record as declaring it contrary to public policy for defendants to be acquitted or convicted of a lesser included offense on the basis of appeals to "societal bias". In August 2007, state assemblyman Mark Leno introduced legislation to ban gun shows at the Cow Palace, joined by Harris, police chief Heather Fong, and mayor Gavin Newsom. City leaders contended the shows were directly contributing to the proliferation of illegal guns and spiking homicide rates in San Francisco. (Earlier that month Newsom had signed into law local legislation banning gun shows on city and county property.) Leno alleged that merchants drove through the public housing developments nearby and illegally sold weapons to residents. While the bill would stall, local opposition to the shows continued until the Cow Palace Board of Directors in 2019 voted to approve a statement banning all future gun shows. Harris has said life imprisonment without parole is a better and more cost-effective punishment than the death penalty, and has estimated that the resultant cost savings could pay for a thousand additional police officers in San Francisco alone. During her campaign, Harris pledged never to seek the death penalty. After a San Francisco Police Department officer, Isaac Espinoza, was shot and killed in 2004, U.S. senator (and former San Francisco mayor) Dianne Feinstein, U.S. senator Barbara Boxer, Oakland mayor Jerry Brown, and the San Francisco Police Officers Association pressured Harris to reverse that position, but she did not. (Polls found that seventy percent of voters supported Harris's decision.) When Edwin Ramos, an illegal immigrant and alleged MS-13 gang member, was accused of murdering a man and his two sons in 2009, Harris sought a sentence of life in prison without parole, a decision Mayor Gavin Newsom backed. In 2004, Harris recruited civil rights activist Lateefah Simon to create the San Francisco Reentry Division. The flagship program was the Back on Track initiative, a first-of-its-kind reentry program for first-time nonviolent offenders aged 18–30. Initiative participants whose crimes were not weapon- or gang-related would plead guilty in exchange for a deferral of sentencing and regular appearances before a judge over a twelve- to eighteen-month period. The program maintained rigorous graduation requirements, mandating completion of up to 220 hours of community service, obtaining a high-school-equivalency diploma, maintaining steady employment, taking parenting classes, and passing drug tests. At graduation, the court would dismiss the case and expunge the graduate's record. Over six years, the 200 people graduated from the program had a recidivism rate of less than ten percent, compared to the 53 percent of California's drug offenders who returned to prison within two years of release. Back on Track earned recognition from the U.S. Department of Justice as a model for reentry programs. The DOJ found that the cost to the taxpayers per participant was markedly lower ($5,000) than the cost of adjudicating a case ($10,000) and housing a low-level offender ($50,000). In 2009, a state law (the Back on Track Reentry Act, A.B. 750) was enacted, encouraging other California counties to start similar programs. Adopted by the National District Attorneys Association as a model, prosecutor offices in Baltimore, Philadelphia, and Atlanta have used Back on Track as a template for their own programs. In 2006, as part of an initiative to reduce the city's skyrocketing homicide rate, Harris led a city-wide effort to combat truancy for at-risk elementary school youth in San Francisco. Declaring chronic truancy a matter of public safety and pointing out that the majority of prison inmates and homicide victims are dropouts or habitual truants, Harris's office met with thousands of parents at high-risk schools and sent out letters warning all families of the legal consequences of truancy at the beginning of the fall semester, adding she would prosecute the parents of chronically truant elementary students; penalties included a $2,500 fine and up to a year in jail. The program was controversial when introduced. In 2008, Harris issued citations against six parents whose children missed at least fifty days of school, the first time San Francisco prosecuted adults for student truancy. San Francisco's school chief, Carlos Garcia, said the path from truancy to prosecution was lengthy, and that the school district usually spends months encouraging parents through phone calls, reminder letters, private meetings, hearings before the School Attendance Review Board, and offers of help from city agencies and social services; two of the six parents entered no plea but said they would work with the D.A.'s office and social service agencies to create "parental responsibility plans" to help them start sending their children to school regularly. By April 2009, 1,330 elementary school students were habitual or chronic truants, down 23 percent from 1,730 in 2008, and down from 2,517 in 2007 and from 2,856 in 2006. Harris's office prosecuted seven parents in three years, with none jailed. Nearly two years before the 2010 election, Harris announced she planned to run. She also stated she would run only if then-Attorney General Jerry Brown did not seek re-election for that position. Brown instead chose to run for governor and Harris consolidated support from prominent California Democrats. Both of California's senators, Dianne Feinstein and Barbara Boxer, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, United Farm Workers cofounder Dolores Huerta, and mayor of Los Angeles Antonio Villaraigosa all endorsed her during the Democratic primary. In the June 8, 2010, primary, she was nominated with 33.6 percent of the vote, defeating Alberto Torrico and Chris Kelly. In the general election, she faced Republican Los Angeles County district attorney Steve Cooley, who led most of the race. Cooley ran as a nonpartisan, distancing himself from Republican gubernatorial candidate Meg Whitman's campaign.[citation needed] The election was held November 2 but after a protracted period of counting mail-in and provisional ballots, Cooley conceded on November 25. Harris was sworn in on January 3, 2011; she was the first woman, the first African American, and the first South Asian American to hold the office of Attorney General in the state's history. Harris announced her intention to run for re-election in February 2014 and filed paperwork to run on February 12. The Sacramento Bee, Los Angeles Daily News, and Los Angeles Times endorsed her for re-election. On November 4, 2014, Harris was re-elected against Republican Ronald Gold, winning 57.5 percent of the vote to 42.5 percent. In 2011, Harris announced the creation of the Mortgage Fraud Strike Force in the wake of the 2010 United States foreclosure crisis. That same year, Harris obtained two of the largest recoveries in the history of California's False Claims Act – $241 million from Quest Diagnostics and then $323 million from the SCAN healthcare network – over excess state Medi-Cal and federal Medicare payments. In 2012, Harris leveraged California's economic clout to obtain better terms in the National Mortgage Settlement against the nation's five largest mortgage servicers – JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Citigroup and Ally Bank. The mortgage firms were accused of illegally foreclosing on homeowners. After dismissing an initial offer of $2–4 billion in relief for Californians, Harris withdrew from negotiations. The offer eventually was increased to $18.4 billion in debt relief and $2 billion in other financial assistance for California homeowners. Harris worked with Assembly speaker John Pérez and Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg in 2013 to introduce the Homeowner Bill of Rights, considered one of the strongest protections nationwide against aggressive foreclosure tactics. The Homeowner Bill of Rights banned the practices of "dual-tracking" (processing a modification and foreclosure at the same time) and robo-signing and provided homeowners with a single point of contact at their lending institution. Harris achieved multiple nine-figure settlements for California homeowners under the bill mostly for robo-signing and dual-track abuses, as well as prosecuting instances in which loan processors failed to promptly credit mortgage payments, miscalculated interest rates, and charged borrowers improper fees. Harris secured hundreds of millions in relief, including $268 million from Ocwen Financial Corporation, $470 million from HSBC, and $550 million from SunTrust Banks. From 2013 to 2015, Harris pursued financial recoveries for California's public employee and teacher's pensions, CalPERS and CalSTRS against various financial giants for misrepresentation in the sale of mortgage-backed securities. She secured multiple nine-figure recoveries for the state pensions, recovering about $193 million from Citigroup, $210 million from S&P, $300 million from JP Morgan Chase, and over half a billion from Bank of America. In 2013, Harris declined to authorize a civil complaint drafted by state investigators who accused OneWest Bank, owned by an investment group headed by future U.S. treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin (then a private citizen), of "widespread violation" of California foreclosure laws. During the 2016 elections, Harris was the only Democratic Senate candidate to receive a donation from Mnuchin. Harris was criticized for accepting the donation because Mnuchin purportedly profited from the subprime mortgage crisis through OneWest Bank; she later voted against his confirmation as treasury secretary in February 2017. In 2019, Harris's campaign stated that the decision not to pursue prosecution hinged on the state's inability to subpoena OneWest. Her spokesman said, "There was no question OneWest conducted predatory lending, and Senator Harris believes they should be punished. Unfortunately, the law was squarely on their side and they were shielded from state subpoenas because they're a federal bank." In 2014, Harris settled charges she had brought against rent-to-own retailer Aaron's on allegations of incorrect late charges, overcharging customers who paid off their contracts before the due date, and privacy violations. In the settlement, the retailer refunded $28.4 million to California customers and paid $3.4 million in civil penalties. In 2015, Harris obtained a $1.2 billion judgment against for-profit post-secondary education company Corinthian Colleges for false advertising and deceptive marketing targeting vulnerable, low-income students and misrepresenting job placement rates to students, investors, and accreditation agencies. The Court ordered Corinthian to pay $820 million in restitution and another $350 million in civil penalties. That same year, Harris also secured a $60 million settlement with JP Morgan Chase to resolve allegations of illegal debt collection with respect to credit card customers, with the bank also agreeing to change practices that violated California consumer protection laws by collecting incorrect amounts, selling bad credit card debt, and running a debt-collection mill that "robo-signed" court documents without first reviewing the files as it rushed to obtain judgments and wage garnishments. As part of the settlement, the bank was required to stop attempting to collect on more than 528,000 customer accounts. In 2015, Harris opened an investigation of the Office of Ratepayer Advocates, San Diego Gas and Electric, and Southern California Edison regarding the closure of San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station. California state investigators searched the home of California utility regulator Michael Peevey and found handwritten notes that allegedly showed he had met with an Edison executive in Poland, where the two had negotiated the terms of the San Onofre settlement, leaving San Diego taxpayers with a $3.3 billion bill to pay for the closure of the plant. The investigation was closed amidst Harris's 2016 run for the U.S. Senate position. In February 2012, Harris announced an agreement with Apple, Amazon, Google, Hewlett-Packard, Microsoft, and Research in Motion to mandate that apps sold in their stores display prominent privacy policies informing users of what private information they were sharing, and with whom. Facebook later joined the agreement. That summer, Harris announced the creation of a Privacy Enforcement and Protection Unit to enforce laws related to cyber privacy, identity theft, and data breaches. Later the same year, Harris notified a hundred mobile-app developers of their non-compliance with state privacy laws and asked them to create privacy policies or face a $2,500 fine each time a non-compliant app is downloaded by a resident of California. In 2015, Harris secured two settlements with Comcast, one totaling $33 million over allegations that it posted online the names, phone numbers and addresses of tens of thousands of customers who had paid for unlisted voice over internet protocol (VOIP) phone service and another $26 million settlement to resolve allegations that it discarded paper records without first omitting or redacting private customer information. Harris also settled with Houzz over allegations that the company recorded phone calls without notifying customers or employees. Houzz was forced to pay $175,000, destroy the recorded calls, and hire a chief privacy officer, the first time such a provision has been included in a settlement with the California Department of Justice. In November 2013, Harris launched the California Department of Justice's Division of Recidivism Reduction and Re-Entry in partnership with district attorney offices in San Diego, Los Angeles, and Alameda County. In March 2015, Harris announced the creation of a pilot program in coordination with the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department called "Back on Track LA". Like Back on Track, first time, non-violent, non-sexual, offenders aged between 18 and 30[failed verification] – 90 men participated in the pilot program for 24–30 months. Assigned a case manager, participants received education through a partnership with the Los Angeles Community College District and job training services. Harris's record on wrongful conviction cases as attorney general has engendered criticism from academics and activists. Law professor Lara Bazelon contends Harris "weaponized technicalities to keep wrongfully convicted people behind bars rather than allow them new trials". After the 2011 United States Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Plata declared California's prisons so overcrowded they inflicted cruel and unusual punishment, Harris fought federal supervision, explaining "I have a client, and I don't get to choose my client." Harris declined to take any position on criminal sentencing-reform initiatives Prop 36 (2012) and Prop 47 (2014), arguing it would be improper because her office prepares the ballot booklets. John Van de Kamp, a predecessor as attorney general, publicly disagreed with the rationale. In September 2014, Harris's office argued unsuccessfully in a court filing against the early release of prisoners, citing the need for inmate firefighting labor. When the memo provoked headlines, Harris spoke out against it, saying she was unaware that her office had produced the memo. Since the 1940s, qualified California inmates have the option of volunteering to receive comprehensive training from the Cal Fire in exchange for sentence reductions and more comfortable prison accommodations; prison firefighters receive about $2 a day, and another $1 when battling fires. In 2008, California voters passed Prop 8, a state constitutional amendment providing that only marriages "between a man and a woman" are valid. Legal challenges were made by opponents soon after its approval, and a pair of same-sex couples filed a lawsuit against the initiative in federal court in the case of Perry v. Schwarzenegger (later Hollingsworth v. Perry). In their 2010 campaigns, California attorney general Jerry Brown and Harris both pledged to not defend Prop 8. After being elected, Harris declared her office would not defend the marriage ban, leaving the task to Prop 8's proponents. In February 2013, Harris filed an amicus curiae brief, arguing Prop 8 was unconstitutional and that the initiative's sponsors did not have legal standing to represent California's interests by defending the law in federal court. In June 2013, the Supreme Court ruled, 5–4, that Prop 8's proponents lacked standing to defend it in federal court. The next day Harris delivered a speech in downtown Los Angeles urging the Ninth Circuit to lift the stay banning same-sex marriages as soon as possible. The stay was lifted two days later. In 2014, Attorney General Kamala Harris co-sponsored legislation to ban the gay and trans panic defense in court, which passed and California became the first state with such legislation. In February 2014, Michelle-Lael Norsworthy, a transgender inmate at California's Mule Creek State Prison, filed a federal lawsuit based on the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation's failure to provide her with what she argued was medically necessary sex reassignment surgery (SRS). In April 2015, a federal judge ordered the state to provide Norsworthy with SRS, finding that prison officials had been "deliberately indifferent to her serious medical need". Harris, representing CDCR, appealed the order to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, arguing that psychotherapy, as well as the hormone therapy Norsworthy had been receiving for her gender dysphoria over the preceding fourteen years, were sufficient medical treatment, and there was "no evidence that Norsworthy is in serious, immediate physical or emotional danger". While Harris defended the state's position in court, she said she ultimately pushed the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation to change their policy. In August 2015, while the state's appeal was pending, Norsworthy was released on parole, obviating the state's duty to provide her with inmate medical care and rendering the case moot. In 2019, Harris stated that she took "full responsibility" for briefs her office filed in Norsworthy's case and others involving access to gender-affirming surgery for trans inmates. In 2011, Harris urged criminal penalties for parents of truant children as she did as District Attorney of San Francisco, allowing the court to defer judgment if the parent agreed to a mediation period to get their child back in school. Critics charged that local prosecutors implementing her directives were overzealous in their enforcement and Harris's policy adversely affected families. In 2013, Harris issued a report titled "In School + On Track", which found that more than 250,000 elementary school students in the state were "chronically absent" and the statewide truancy rate for elementary students in the 2012–2013 school year was nearly thirty percent, at a cost of nearly $1.4 billion to school districts, since funding is based on attendance rates. Harris prioritized environmental protection as attorney general, first securing a $44 million settlement to resolve all damages and costs associated with the Cosco Busan oil spill, in which a container ship collided with San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge and spilled 50,000 gallons of bunker fuel into the San Francisco Bay. In the aftermath of the 2015 Refugio oil spill, which deposited about 140,000 gallons of crude oil off the coast of Santa Barbara, California, Harris toured the coastline and directed her office's resources and attorneys to investigate possible criminal violations. Thereafter, operator Plains All American Pipeline was indicted on 46 criminal charges related to the spill, with one employee indicted on three criminal charges. In 2019, a Santa Barbara jury returned a verdict finding Plains guilty of failing to properly maintain its pipeline and another eight misdemeanor charges; they were sentenced to pay over $3 million in fines and assessments. From 2015 to 2016, Harris secured multiple multi-million-dollar settlements with fuel service companies Chevron, BP, ARCO, Phillips 66, and ConocoPhillips to resolve allegations they failed to properly monitor the hazardous materials in its underground storage tanks used to store gasoline for retail sale at hundreds of California gas stations. In summer 2016, automaker Volkswagen AG agreed to pay up to $14.7 billion to settle a raft of claims related to so-called Defeat Devices used to cheat emissions standards on its diesel cars while actually emitting up to forty times the levels of harmful nitrogen oxides allowed under state and federal law. Harris and the chair of the California Air Resources Board, Mary D. Nichols, announced that California would receive $1.18 billion as well as another $86 million paid to the state of California in civil penalties. California's Prop 69 (2004) required law enforcement to collect DNA samples from any adult arrested for a felony and from individuals arrested for certain crimes. In 2012, Harris announced that the California Department of Justice had improved its DNA testing capabilities such that samples stored at the state's crime labs could now be analyzed four times faster, within thirty days. Accordingly, Harris reported that the Rapid DNA Service Team within the Bureau of Forensic Services had cleared California's DNA backlog for the first time). Harris's office was later awarded a $1.6 million grant from the Manhattan District Attorney's initiative to eliminate the backlogs of untested rape kits. In 2015, Harris conducted a 90-day review of implicit bias in policing and police use of deadly force. In April 2015, Harris introduced the first of its kind "Principled Policing: Procedural Justice and Implicit Bias" training, designed in conjunction with Stanford University psychologist and professor Jennifer Eberhardt, to help law enforcement officers overcome barriers to neutral policing and rebuild trust between law enforcement and the community. All Command-level staff received the training. The training was part of a package of reforms introduced within the California Department of Justice, which also included additional resources deployed to increase the recruitment and hiring of diverse special agents, an expanded role for the department to investigate officer-related shooting investigations and community policing. The same year, Harris's California Department of Justice became the first statewide agency in the country to require all its police officers to wear body cameras. Harris also announced a new state law requiring every law enforcement agency in California to collect, report, and publish expanded statistics on how many people are shot, seriously injured or killed by peace officers throughout the state. Later that year, Harris appealed a judge's order to take over the prosecution of a high-profile mass murder case and to eject all 250 prosecutors from the Orange County district attorney's office over allegations of misconduct by Republican D.A. Tony Rackauckas. Rackauckas was alleged to have illegally employed jailhouse informants and concealed evidence. Harris noted that it was unnecessary to ban all 250 prosecutors from working on the case, as only a few had been directly involved, later promising a narrower criminal investigation. The U.S. Department of Justice began an investigation into Rackauckas in December 2016, but he was not re-elected. In 2016, Harris announced a patterns and practices investigation into purported civil rights violations and use of excessive force by the two largest law enforcement agencies in Kern County, California, the Bakersfield Police Department and the Kern County Sheriff's Department. Labeled the "deadliest police departments in America" in a five-part Guardian expose, a separate investigation commissioned by the ACLU and submitted to the California Department of Justice corroborated reports of police using excessive force. In 2016, Harris's office seized videos and other information from the apartment of an antiabortion activist who had made secret recordings and then accused Planned Parenthood doctors of illegally selling fetal tissue. Harris had announced that her office would investigate the activist in the summer of 2015. She was facing increasing criticism for not taking public action by the time Planned Parenthood filed a lawsuit against the activist. In 2011, Harris obtained a guilty plea and a four-year prison sentence from a stalker who used Facebook and social engineering techniques to illegally access the private photographs of women whose social media accounts he hijacked. Harris commented that the Internet had "opened up a new frontier for crime". Later that year, Harris created the eCrime Unit within the California Department of Justice, a 20-attorney unit targeting technology crimes. In 2015, several purveyors of so-called revenge porn sites based in California were arrested, charged with felonies, and sentenced to lengthy prison terms. In the first prosecution of its kind in the United States, Kevin Bollaert was convicted on 21 counts of identity theft and six counts of extortion and sentenced to 18 years in prison. Harris brought up these cases when California Congresswoman Katie Hill was targeted for similar cyber exploitation by her ex-husband and forced to resign in late 2019. In 2016, Harris announced the arrest of Backpage CEO Carl Ferrer on felony charges of pimping a minor, pimping, and conspiracy to commit pimping. The warrant alleged that 99 percent of Backpage's revenue was directly attributable to prostitution-related ads, many of which involved victims of sex trafficking, including children under the age of 18. The pimping charge against Ferrer was dismissed by the California courts in 2016 on the grounds of Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, but in 2018, Ferrer pleaded guilty in California to money laundering and agreed to give evidence against the former co-owners of Backpage. Ferrer simultaneously pleaded guilty to charges of money laundering and conspiracy to facilitate prostitution in Texas state court and Arizona federal court. Under pressure, Backpage announced that it was removing its adult section from all its U.S. sites. Harris welcomed the move, saying, "I look forward to them shutting down completely." The investigations continued after she became a senator, and, in April 2018, Backpage and affiliated sites were seized by federal law enforcement. During her term as attorney general, Harris's office oversaw major investigations and prosecutions targeting transnational criminal organizations for their involvement in violent crime, fraud schemes, drug trafficking, and smuggling. Significant arrests and seizures (of weapons, drugs, cash, and other assets) under Harris targeted the Tijuana Cartel (2011), the Nuestra Familia, Norteños, and the Vagos Motorcycle Club (2011), the Norteños (2015), the Crips (2015), the Mexican Mafia (2016), and businesses in the Los Angeles Fashion District accused of operating a major money-laundering hub for Mexican narcotics traffickers (2014). In summer 2012, Harris signed an accord with the Attorney General of Mexico, Marisela Morales, to improve coordination of law enforcement resources targeting transnational gangs engaging in the sale and trafficking of human beings across the San Ysidro border crossing. The accord called for closer integration on investigations between offices and sharing best practices. In 2012, Governor Jerry Brown signed into law two bills advanced by Harris to combat human trafficking. In November, Harris presented a report titled "The State of Human Trafficking in California 2012" at a symposium attended by U.S. Secretary of Labor Hilda Solis and Attorney General Morales, outlining the growing prevalence of human trafficking in the state, and highlighting the involvement of transnational gangs in the practice. In early 2014, Harris issued a report titled, "Gangs Beyond Borders: California and the Fight Against Transnational Crime", addressing the prominent role of drug, weapons, and human trafficking, money laundering, and technology crimes employed by various drug cartels from Mexico, Armenian Power, 18th Street Gang, and MS-13 and offering recommendations for state and local law enforcement to combat the criminal activity. Later that year, Harris led a bipartisan delegation of state attorneys general to Mexico City to discuss transnational crime with Mexican prosecutors. Harris then convened a summit focused on the use of technology to fight transnational organized crime with state and federal officials from the U.S., Mexico, and El Salvador. After more than 20 years as a U.S. Senator from California, Senator Barbara Boxer announced in January 2015 that she would not run for reelection in 2016. Harris announced her candidacy for the Senate seat the following week. Harris was a top contender from the beginning of her campaign. The 2016 California Senate election used California's new top-two primary format where the top two candidates in the primary would advance to the general election regardless of party. In February 2016, Harris won 78% of the California Democratic Party vote at the party convention, allowing Harris's campaign to receive financial support from the party. Three months later, Governor Jerry Brown endorsed her. In the June 7 primary, Harris came in first with 40% of the vote and won with pluralities in most counties. Harris faced representative and fellow Democrat Loretta Sanchez in the general election. It was the first time a Republican did not appear in a general election for the Senate since California began directly electing senators in 1914. On July 19, President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden endorsed Harris. In the November 2016 election, Harris defeated Sanchez, capturing over 60% of the vote, carrying all but four counties. Following her victory, she promised to protect immigrants from the policies of President-elect Donald Trump and announced her intention to remain Attorney General through the end of 2016. On January 28, after Trump signed Executive Order 13769, barring citizens from several Muslim-majority countries from entering the U.S. for ninety days, she condemned the order and was one of many to describe it as a "Muslim ban". She called White House Chief of Staff John F. Kelly at home to gather information and push back against the executive order. In February, Harris spoke in opposition to Trump's cabinet picks Betsy DeVos for Secretary of Education and Jeff Sessions for United States Attorney General. In early March, she called on Sessions to resign, after it was reported that Sessions spoke twice with Russian Ambassador to the United States Sergey Kislyak. In April, Harris voted against the confirmation of Neil Gorsuch to the U.S. Supreme Court. Later that month, Harris took her first foreign trip to the Middle East, visiting California troops stationed in Iraq and the Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan, the largest camp for Syrian refugees. In June, Harris garnered media attention for her questioning of Rod Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, over the role he played in the May 2017 firing of James Comey, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The prosecutorial nature of her questioning caused Senator John McCain, an ex officio member of the Intelligence Committee, and Senator Richard Burr, the committee chairman, to interrupt her and request that she be more respectful of the witness. A week later, she questioned Jeff Sessions, the attorney general, on the same topic. Sessions said her questioning "makes me nervous". Burr's singling out of Harris sparked suggestions in the news media that his behavior was sexist, with commentators arguing that Burr would not treat a male Senate colleague in a similar manner. In December, Harris called for the resignation of Senator Al Franken, asserting on Twitter, "Sexual harassment and misconduct should not be allowed by anyone and should not occur anywhere." In January, Harris was appointed to the Senate Judiciary Committee after the resignation of Al Franken. Later that month, Harris questioned Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen for favoring Norwegian immigrants over others and claiming to be unaware that Norway is a predominantly white country. In May, Harris heatedly questioned Secretary Nielsen about the Trump administration family separation policy, under which children were separated from their families when the parents were taken into custody for illegally entering the U.S. In June, after visiting one of the detention facilities near the border in San Diego, Harris became the first senator to demand Nielsen's resignation. In the September and October Brett Kavanaugh Supreme Court confirmation hearings, Harris questioned Brett Kavanaugh about a meeting he may have had regarding the Mueller Investigation with a member of Kasowitz Benson Torres, the law firm founded by the President's personal attorney Marc Kasowitz. Kavanaugh was unable to answer and repeatedly deflected. Harris also participated in questioning the FBI director's limited scope of the investigation on Kavanaugh regarding allegations of sexual assault. She voted against his confirmation. Harris was a target of the October 2018 United States mail bombing attempts. In December, the Senate passed the Justice for Victims of Lynching Act (S. 3178), sponsored by Harris. The bill, which died in the House, would have made lynching a federal hate crime. In March 2019, after Special Counsel Robert Mueller submitted his report on Russian interference in the 2016 election, Harris called for U.S. Attorney General William Barr to testify before Congress in the interests of transparency. Two days later, Barr released a four-page "summary" of the redacted Mueller Report, which was criticized as a deliberate mischaracterization of its conclusions. Later that month, Harris was one of twelve Democratic senators to sign a letter led by Mazie Hirono questioning Barr's decision to offer "his own conclusion that the President's conduct did not amount to obstruction of justice" and called for an investigation into whether Barr's summary of the Mueller Report and his statements at a news conference were misleading. On May 1, 2019, Barr testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee. During the hearing, Barr remained defiant about the misrepresentations in the four-page summary he had released ahead of the full report. When asked by Harris if he had reviewed the underlying evidence before deciding not to charge the President with obstruction of justice, Barr admitted that neither he, Rod Rosenstein, nor anyone in his office reviewed the evidence supporting the report before making the charging decision. Harris later called for Barr to resign, and accused him of refusing to answer her questions because he could open himself up to perjury, and stating his responses disqualified him from serving as U.S. attorney general. Two days later, Harris demanded again that the Department of Justice inspector general Michael E. Horowitz investigate whether Attorney General Barr acceded to pressure from the White House to investigate Trump's political enemies. On May 5, 2019, Harris said "voter suppression" prevented Democrats Stacey Abrams and Andrew Gillum from winning the 2018 gubernatorial elections in Georgia and Florida; Abrams lost by 55,000 votes and Gillum lost by 32,000 votes. According to election law expert Richard L. Hasen, "I have seen no good evidence that the suppressive effects of strict voting and registration laws affected the outcome of the governor's races in Georgia and Florida." In July, Harris teamed with Kirsten Gillibrand to urge the Trump administration to investigate the persecution of Uyghurs in China by the Chinese Communist Party; in this question she was joined by colleague Marco Rubio. In November, Harris called for an investigation into the death of Roxsana Hernández, a transgender woman and immigrant who died in ICE custody. In December, Harris led a group of Democratic senators and civil rights organizations in demanding the removal of White House senior adviser Stephen Miller after emails published by the Southern Poverty Law Center revealed frequent promotion of white nationalist literature to Breitbart website editors. Before the opening of the impeachment trial of Donald Trump on January 16, 2020, Harris delivered remarks on the floor of the Senate, stating her views on the integrity of the American justice system and the principle that nobody, including an incumbent president, is above the law. Harris later asked Senate Judiciary chairman Lindsey Graham to halt all judicial nominations during the impeachment trial, to which Graham acquiesced. Harris voted to convict the president on charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress. Harris has worked on bipartisan bills with Republican co-sponsors, including a bail reform bill with Senator Rand Paul, an election security bill with Senator James Lankford, and a workplace harassment bill with Senator Lisa Murkowski. Following her election as Vice President of the United States, Harris resigned from her seat on January 18, 2021, prior to taking office on January 20, 2021, and was replaced by California Secretary of State Alex Padilla. While in the Senate, Harris was a member of the following committees: Committee on the Budget Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Subcommittee on Federal Spending Oversight and Emergency Management Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs and Federal Management Select Committee on Intelligence Committee on the Judiciary Subcommittee on the Constitution Subcommittee on Oversight, Agency Action, Federal Rights and Federal Courts Subcommittee on Privacy, Technology and the Law Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus Congressional Black Caucus Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues Harris had been considered a top contender and potential frontrunner for the 2020 Democratic nomination for president. In June 2018, she was quoted as "not ruling it out". In July 2018, it was announced that she would publish a memoir, a sign of a possible run. On January 21, 2019, Harris officially announced her candidacy for president of the United States in the 2020 United States presidential election. In the first 24 hours after her candidacy announcement, she tied a record set by Bernie Sanders in 2016 for the most donations raised in the day following an announcement. More than 20,000 people attended her formal campaign launch event in her hometown of Oakland, California, on January 27, according to a police estimate. During the first Democratic presidential debate in June 2019, Harris scolded former vice president Joe Biden for "hurtful" remarks he made, speaking fondly of senators who opposed integration efforts in the 1970s and working with them to oppose mandatory school bussing. Harris's support rose by between six and nine points in polls following that debate. In the second debate in August, Harris was confronted by Biden and Representative Tulsi Gabbard over her record as attorney general. The San Jose Mercury News assessed that some of Gabbard's and Biden's accusations were on point, such as blocking the DNA testing of a death row inmate, while others did not stand up to scrutiny. In the immediate aftermath, Harris fell in the polls following that debate. Over the next few months her poll numbers fell to the low single digits. At a time when liberals were increasingly concerned about the excesses of the criminal justice system, Harris faced criticism from reformers for tough-on-crime policies she pursued while she was California's attorney general. For example, in 2014, she decided to defend California's death penalty in court. Prior to and during her presidential campaign an online informal organization using the hashtag #KHive formed to support her candidacy and defend her from racist and sexist attacks. According to the Daily Dot, Joy Reid first used the term in an August 2017 tweet saying "@DrJasonJohnson @ZerlinaMaxwell and I had a meeting and decided it's called the K-Hive." On December 3, 2019, Harris withdrew from seeking the 2020 Democratic nomination, citing a shortage of funds. In March 2020, Harris endorsed Joe Biden for president. In May 2019, senior members of the Congressional Black Caucus endorsed the idea of a Biden–Harris ticket. In late February, Biden won a landslide victory in the 2020 South Carolina Democratic primary with the endorsement of House whip Jim Clyburn, with more victories on Super Tuesday. In early March, Clyburn suggested Biden choose a black woman as a running mate, commenting that "African American women needed to be rewarded for their loyalty". In March, Biden committed to choosing a woman for his running mate. On April 17, 2020, Harris responded to media speculation and said she "would be honored" to be Biden's running mate. In late May, in relation to the murder of George Floyd and ensuing protests and demonstrations, Biden faced renewed calls to select a black woman to be his running mate, highlighting the law enforcement credentials of Harris and Val Demings. On June 12, The New York Times reported that Harris was emerging as the frontrunner to be Biden's running mate, as she was the only African American woman with the political experience typical of vice presidents. On June 26, CNN reported that more than a dozen people close to the Biden search process considered Harris one of Biden's top four contenders, along with Elizabeth Warren, Val Demings, and Keisha Lance Bottoms. On August 11, 2020, Biden announced that he had chosen Harris. She was the first African American, the first Indian American, and the third woman after Geraldine Ferraro and Sarah Palin to be picked as the vice-presidential nominee for a major party ticket. Harris is also the first resident of the Western United States to appear on the Democratic Party's national ticket. Harris became the vice president–elect following the Biden-Harris ticket's victory in the 2020 United States presidential election. After the major networks called the election for Biden/Harris, Harris was recorded calling Biden, saying, "We did it! We did it, Joe. You're going to be the next President of the United States." The quote became one of the top 10 tweets of 2020. Following the election of Joe Biden as U.S. president in the 2020 election, Harris assumed office as vice president of the United States on January 20, 2021. She is the United States' first female vice president, the highest-ranking female elected official in U.S. history, and the first African-American and first Asian-American vice president. She is also the second person of color to hold the post, preceded by Charles Curtis, a Native American and member of the Kaw Nation, who served under Herbert Hoover from 1929 to 1933. She is the third person with acknowledged non-European ancestry to reach one of the highest offices in the executive branch, after Curtis and former president Barack Obama. Harris resigned her Senate seat on January 18, 2021, two days before her swearing-in as vice president. Her first act as vice president was swearing in her replacement Alex Padilla and Georgia senators Raphael Warnock and Jon Ossoff, who were elected in the 2021 Georgia runoff elections. Upon taking office on January 20, 2021, the 117th Congress's Senate was divided 50–50 between Republicans and Democrats; this meant that Harris had to be frequently called upon to exercise her power to cast tie-breaking votes as president of the Senate. Harris cast her first two tie-breaking votes on February 5, 2021. In February and March, Harris's tie-breaking votes were crucial in passing the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 stimulus package proposed by Biden, since no Republicans in the Senate voted for the package. On July 20, 2021, Harris broke Mike Pence's record for tie-breaking votes in the first year of a vice presidency when she cast the seventh tie-breaking vote in her first six months and cast 13 tie-breaking votes during her first year in office, the most tie-breaking votes in a single year in U.S. history, surpassing John Adams who cast 12 votes in 1790. On December 5, 2023, Harris broke the record for the most tie-breaking votes cast by a vice president casting her 32nd vote, exceeding John C. Calhoun, who cast 31 votes during his nearly eight years as vice president, in less than half the time. In April 2021, Harris indicated that she was the last person in the room before Biden decided to remove all U.S. troops from Afghanistan and commented that the president has "an extraordinary amount of courage" and "make(s) decisions based on what he truly believes ... is the right thing to do." National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan said that Biden "insists she be in every core decision-making meeting. She weighs in during those meetings, often providing unique perspectives." On March 24, 2021, Biden tasked Harris with reducing the number of unaccompanied minors and adult asylum seekers. She is also tasked with leading the negotiations with Mexico, Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador. Harris conducted her first international trip as vice president in June 2021, visiting Guatemala and Mexico in an attempt to address the root causes of an increase in migration from Central America to the United States. During her visit, in a joint press conference with Guatemalan president Alejandro Giammattei, Harris issued an appeal to potential migrants, stating "I want to be clear to folks in the region who are thinking about making that dangerous trek to the United States-Mexico border: Do not come. Do not come." Her work in Central America led to creation of task forces on corruption and human trafficking; a women's empowerment program, and an investment fund for housing and businesses. Harris met with French president Emmanuel Macron in November 2021 to strengthen ties after the cancellation of a submarine program. During her time in office, Harris has had one of the lowest approval ratings of any vice president in recorded history. On November 19, 2021, Harris served as acting president from 10:10 to 11:35 am EST, while President Biden underwent a colonoscopy. She became the first woman, and the third person overall, to assume the powers and duties of the U.S. presidency under Section 3 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment. Harris's term in office has seen high staff turnovers that included the departures of her chief of staff, deputy chief of staff, press secretary, deputy press secretary, communications director, and chief speechwriter. An anonymous source said that they resigned because they and other staffers "often feel mistreated" by senior staffers. "Symone Sanders, senior advisor and chief spokesperson for Harris, pushed back against the complaints" and defended their management style, especially for giving opportunities to black women. Sanders herself resigned from her position in December 2021. In 2005, the National Black Prosecutors Association awarded Harris the Thurgood Marshall Award. That year, she was included in a Newsweek report profiling "20 of America's Most Powerful Women". A 2008 New York Times article also identified her as a woman with potential to become president of the United States, highlighting her reputation as a "tough fighter". In 2013, 2020, and 2021, Time included Harris on the Time 100, Time's annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world. In 2016, the 20/20 Bipartisan Justice Center awarded Harris the Bipartisan Justice Award along with Senator Tim Scott. Biden and Harris were jointly named Time Person of the Year for 2020. Harris was selected for the inaugural 2021 Forbes 50 Over 50; made up of entrepreneurs, leaders, scientists and creators who are over the age of 50. In the 1990s, Harris dated Speaker of the California Assembly Willie Brown. In 2001, Harris had a brief dating relationship with talk show host Montel Williams. Harris met her future husband, attorney Doug Emhoff, through a mutual friend who set up Harris and Emhoff on a blind date in 2013. Emhoff was an entertainment lawyer who became partner-in-charge at Venable LLP's Los Angeles office. Harris and Emhoff were married on August 22, 2014, in Santa Barbara, California. Harris is a stepmother to Emhoff's two children, Cole and Ella, from his previous marriage to the film producer Kerstin Emhoff. As of August 2019, Harris and her husband had an estimated net worth of $5.8 million. Harris is a Baptist, holding membership of the Third Baptist Church of San Francisco, a congregation of the American Baptist Churches USA. She is a member of The Links. Harris's sister, Maya, is a lawyer and MSNBC political analyst; her brother-in-law, Tony West, is general counsel of Uber and a former United States Department of Justice senior official. Her niece, Meena, is the founder of the Phenomenal Women Action Campaign and former head of strategy and leadership at Uber. Harris has written two non-fiction books and one children's book. Harris, Kamala; O'C Hamilton, Joan (2009). Smart on Crime: A Career Prosecutor's Plan to Make Us Safer. San Francisco, CA: Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-6528-9. Harris, Kamala (2019). Superheroes Are Everywhere. London: Penguin Young Readers Group. ISBN 978-1-984837-49-3. Harris, Kamala (2019). The Truths We Hold: An American Journey. London: Penguin. ISBN 978-1-984886-22-4. Biography portal California portal United States portal Politics portal Law portal Black women in American politics List of African-American United States Cabinet members List of African-American United States senators List of female state attorneys general in the United States List of female United States Cabinet members List of female United States presidential and vice presidential candidates List of United States politicians of Indian descent List of United States senators from California Women in the United States Senate She was originally named Kamala Iyer Harris by her parents, who two weeks later filled an affidavit by which her middle name was changed to Devi. Harris has said she struggled with understanding her French immersion, so her mother sent her to an English-speaking school for high school. This would no longer have been possible the next year, when Quebec passed a law requiring all immigrants who did not previously have English schooling in Quebec to enroll their children in French-speaking schools. For a first-term vice president, Harris' approval rating is the worst in the recorded history of many pollsters, such as NBC News. Overall, however, she has not broken the record across multiple credible pollsters, being Dick Cheney's 30% at the end of his second term. Debolt, David (August 18, 2020). "Here's Kamala Harris' birth certificate. Scholars say there's no VP eligibility debate". The Mercury News. San Jose, California. Archived from the original on February 17, 2021. Retrieved November 27, 2021. Thomas, Ken (February 15, 2013). "You Say 'Ka-MILLA;' I Say 'KUH-ma-la.' Both Are Wrong". The Wall Street Journal. p. 1. Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2020. Woodsome, Kate. "You don't need to like Kamala Harris. But you should say her name properly". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021 – via YouTube. Kalita, S. Mitra (August 12, 2020). "Kamala Harris' Indian roots and why they matter". CNN. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2020. Sudeep, Theres (November 21, 2020). "Indian-origin politicians around the world". Deccan Herald. Archived from the original on November 22, 2020. Retrieved February 27, 2020. "Kamala D. Harris: US Senator from California". United States Senate. Archived from the original on October 14, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. In 2017, Kamala D. Harris was sworn in as a United States senator for California, the second African-American woman, and first South Asian-American senator in history. Weinberg, Tessa; Palaniappan, Sruthi (December 3, 2019). "Kamala Harris: Everything you need to know about the 2020 presidential candidate". ABC News. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2020. Harris is the daughter of an Indian mother and Jamaican father, and is the second African-American woman and first South Asian-American senator in history. "Kamala Harris Advocated For Stricter Gun Laws As A Candidate. What About As Joe Biden's VP?". WUNC. August 12, 2020. Retrieved March 22, 2024. "Here's Where Kamala Harris Stands on Gun Control". Harper's BAZAAR. January 20, 2021. Retrieved March 22, 2024. Viser, Matt (January 21, 2019). "Kamala Harris enters 2020 Presidential Race". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 25, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2019. Kim, Catherin; Stanton, Zack (August 11, 2020). "55 Things You Need to Know About Kamala Harris". Politico. Archived from the original on August 22, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. United States Congress. "Kamala Harris (id: H001075)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Retrieved May 20, 2020. "In Memoriam: Dr. Shyamala G. Harris". Breast Cancer Action. June 21, 2009. Archived from the original on January 23, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2019. Travernise, Sabrina (August 15, 2020). "Kamala Harris, Daughter of Immigrants, Is the Face of America's Demographic Shift". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. When Kamala Harris's mother left India for California in 1958, the percentage of Americans who were immigrants was at its lowest point in over a century. ... Her arrival at Berkeley as a young graduate student ... Bengali, Shashank; Mason, Melanie (October 25, 2019). "The progressive Indian grandfather who inspired Kamala Harris". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved April 24, 2020. In 1958, she surprised them by applying for a master's program at UC Berkeley, a campus they had never heard of. She was 19, the eldest of their four children, and had never set foot outside India. Her parents dug into Gopalan's retirement savings to pay her tuition and living costs for the first year. ... left to study nutrition and endocrinology at Berkeley, eventually earning a PhD. Biswas, Soutik (August 11, 2020). "Biden's VP pick: Why Kamala Harris embraces her biracial roots". BBC News. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. Gopalan picked up her doctorate degree at age 25 in 1964, the same year Ms Harris was born. Harris, Kamala (2019). The Truths We Hold: An American Journey. Penguin Publishing Group. pp. 320, 330. ISBN 978-0-525-56072-2. Archived from the original on March 3, 2024. Retrieved April 17, 2023. my paternal grandfather, Oscar Joseph … my paternal grandmother, Beryl "PM Golding congratulates Kamala Harris-daughter of Jamaican – on appointment as California's First Woman Attorney General". Jamaican Information Service. December 2, 2010. Archived from the original on January 15, 2012. Retrieved February 2, 2011. "Stanford University – Department of Economics". web.stanford.edu. Archived from the original on April 5, 2015. Retrieved May 19, 2020. Barry, Ellen (September 13, 2020). "How Kamala Harris's Immigrant Parents Found a Home, and Each Other, in a Black Study Group". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved March 23, 2021. Clarke, Chevaz (August 14, 2020). "Get to know Kamala Harris' family". CBS News. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Kacich, Tom (August 2, 2019). "Tom's #Mailbag, Aug. 2, 2019". The News-Gazette. Archived from the original on August 25, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. Dinkelspiel, Frances (March 8, 2021). "Update: Change in Berkeley law not needed to landmark the childhood home of Kamala Harris". Berkeleyside. Archived from the original on August 19, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. "Kamala Harris Makes Her Case". The New Yorker. July 12, 2019. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2022. Horwitz, Sari (February 27, 2012). "Justice Dept. lawyer Tony West to take over as acting associate attorney general". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Martinez, Michael (October 23, 2010). "A 'female Obama' seeks California attorney general post". CNN. Archived from the original on November 16, 2016. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Orenstein, Natalie (January 24, 2019). "Did Kamala Harris' Berkeley childhood shape the presidential hopeful? Long before she was a 2020 presidential contender, Kamala Harris was a resident of the Berkeley flats and a student at Thousand Oaks". Berkeleyside. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2020. Dale, Daniel (June 29, 2019). "Fact check: Kamala Harris was correct on integration in Berkeley, school district confirms". CNN. Archived from the original on January 2, 2020. Retrieved June 29, 2019. Finnegan, Michael (September 30, 2015). "How race helped shape the politics of Senate candidate Kamala Harris". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 28, 2020. Retrieved December 1, 2018. Quote: "Steeped in Indian culture, Harris and her sister, Maya, now a civil rights lawyer and senior policy advisor to Hillary Rodham Clinton, visited family in Madras on occasion." Bruinius, Harry (August 19, 2020). "In Kamala Harris' richly textured background, a portrait of America today". Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on August 20, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2020. Shimron, Yonat (August 12, 2020). "5 faith facts about Biden's VP choice Kamala Harris – a Black Baptist with Hindu family". National Catholic Reporter. Religion News Service. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2020. But because her parents divorced when she was 7, she also grew up in Oakland and Berkeley attending predominantly Black churches. Her downstairs neighbor, Regina Shelton, often took Kamala and her sister, Maya, to Oakland's 23rd Avenue Church of God in Oakland. Harris now considers herself a Black Baptist. Rissacher, Tessa; Saul, Scott (September 14, 2020). "Where Kamala Harris' Political Imagination Was Formed". Slate. Archived from the original on February 9, 2021. Retrieved November 27, 2020. Gettleman, Jeffrey; Raj, Suhasini (August 16, 2020), "How Kamala Harris's Family in India Helped Shape Her Values", The New York Times, archived from the original on August 17, 2020, retrieved August 17, 2020 Dolan, Casey (February 10, 2019). "How Kamala Harris' immigrant parents shaped her life – and her political outlook". The Mercury News. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020. Kamala also visited far-flung family in India and Jamaica as she grew up, getting her first taste of the broader world. Whiting, Sam (May 14, 2009). "Kamala Harris grew up idolizing lawyers". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 1, 2020. Retrieved January 11, 2014. Givhan, Robin (September 16, 2019). "Kamala Harris grew up in a mostly white world. She then went to a black university in a black city". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved August 15, 2020. Dunlevy, T'Cha (November 20, 2020). "Dunlevy: Before Westmount High, Kamala Harris went to FACE". Montreal Gazette. Archived from the original on February 6, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2020. Black, Peter (August 20, 2020). "Kamala Harris's Montreal experience". Press-Republican. Archived from the original on November 21, 2020. Retrieved November 9, 2020. Dale, Daniel (December 29, 2018). "U.S. Sen. Kamala Harris's classmates from her Canadian high school cheer her potential run for president". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved July 1, 2019. "Kamala Harris's friend reacts to her historic win". CBC News. November 7, 2020. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2020. Wanda Kagan has known vice president-elect Kamala Harris for nearly 40 years. Kagan says that in their most recent conversation, Harris credited her for inspiring her career path. Owens, Donna (November 8, 2016). "Meet Kamala Harris, the second Black woman elected to the U.S. Senate". NBC News. Archived from the original on January 2, 2024. Retrieved February 18, 2017. "Howard Alumna Becomes First Woman Elected as California Attorney General" (Press release). Howard University. December 17, 2010. Archived from the original on January 12, 2011. Retrieved November 14, 2014. Costley, Drew (July 4, 2017). "Kamala Harris' life in the political limelight and all the times she made history". SFGATE. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved December 27, 2020. "LEOP: Opening Doors for Students of Promise". UC Hastings Magazine. August 14, 2018. Archived from the original on September 25, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. "UC Hastings Congratulates Kamala Harris '89: California's next U.S. Senator". UC Hastings Law. San Francisco. November 9, 2016. Archived from the original on January 9, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2020. "Kamala Harris '89 Wins Race for California Attorney General". UC Hastings News Room. November 24, 2010. Archived from the original on November 30, 2010. Retrieved February 2, 2011. "Attorney Licensee Profile, Kamala Devi Harris #146672". The State Bar of California. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. Retrieved August 1, 2020. Morain, Dan (November 29, 1994). "2 More Brown Associates Get Well-Paid Posts : Government: The Speaker appoints his frequent companion and a longtime friend to state boards as his hold on his own powerful position wanes". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 17, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. Byrne, Peter (September 24, 2003). "Kamala's Karma". SF Weekly. Archived from the original on February 13, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Carlsen, William (March 10, 2002). "Lawmakers put cronies in plum jobs / Big pay, few hours on 3 state panels". SFGate. Archived from the original on January 12, 2021. Retrieved August 17, 2020. "DA Names New Head of Career Crime Unit". The San Francisco Examiner. February 3, 1998. Archived from the original on April 22, 2020. Hartlaub, Peter (August 21, 2000). "DA's top aide quits among turmoil (paywalled)". The San Francisco Examiner. Archived from the original on October 16, 2020. Retrieved August 25, 2020. Fred, Gardener (February 13, 2019). "Kamala vs. Kayo (2003)". Anderson Valley Advertiser. Boonville, CA: Bruce Anderson, editor and publisher. Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved April 22, 2020. Gardner, Fred (June 24, 2020). "Kayo & Kamala". Anderson Valley Advertiser. Archived from the original on August 17, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2020. "Women's Radio: This DA Makes a Difference For Women". Womensradio.com. Archived from the original on December 19, 2010. Retrieved November 18, 2010. Byrne, Peter (September 24, 2003). "Kamala's Karma". San Francisco Weekly. Archived from the original on February 13, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. Kruse, Michael (August 9, 2019). "How San Francisco's Wealthiest Families Launched Kamala Harris". Politico. Archived from the original on November 28, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019. Martin, Nina (August 2007). "Why Kamala Matters". San Francisco Magazine. Archived from the original on February 15, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015. Soltau, Alison; Fletcher, Ethan (December 10, 2003). "Harris ousts veteran Hallinan". The San Francisco Examiner. VanDerbeken, Jaxson (January 9, 2004). "New D.A. promises to be 'smart on crime' / Harris speaks well of Hallinan, will continue some of his policies". SFGate. Archived from the original on October 17, 2020. Retrieved May 10, 2020. Hampton, Adriel (July 28, 2003). "Harris stumps in the Sunset". The San Francisco Examiner. Dineen, J.K.; Hampton, Adriel (December 9, 2003). "Clinton Tops List of Celebrity Supporters". The San Francisco Examiner. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved April 22, 2020. Bulwa, Demian (December 6, 2003). "Harris puts D.A. on trial / Performance, not philosophy, an issue". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021. Retrieved May 6, 2020. Bulwa, Demian (December 10, 2003). "Harris defeats Hallinan after bitter campaign". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on January 10, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2020. Bulwa, Demian (November 12, 2003). "Harris slams Hallinan on city's gun violence / D.A. candidate points to bus shooting victim". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved May 6, 2020. Bulwa, Demian (December 5, 2003). "No-holds-barred debate in D.A. race". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2020. Zernike, Kate (February 11, 2019). "'Progressive Prosecutor': Can Kamala Harris Square the Circle?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 11, 2019. Knight, Heather (November 7, 2007). "Kamala Harris celebrates unopposed bid for district attorney". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on January 11, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2011. Johnson, Jason B. (June 1, 2005). "D.A. creates environmental unit: 3-staff team takes on crime mostly affecting the poor". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on April 22, 2020. Retrieved May 4, 2020. "Ed Jew surrenders for felony arrest, out on bail". San Francisco Chronicle. June 13, 2007. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 2, 2020. Buchanan, Wyatt (October 11, 2008). "Former S.F. supervisor pleads guilty to federal extortion, bribery, plans to accuse others". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2020. Coté, John (November 19, 2008). "Ex-Supe Ed Jew guilty of lying about residence". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2020. Coté, John (April 4, 2009). "Former S.F. supervisor sentenced to prison: Ed Jew dealt 64 months in prison for shakedown". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2020. "More Jail Time for Ed Jew". NBC Bay Area. April 22, 2009. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2020. Tolan, Casey (September 11, 2019). "Campaign fact check: Here's how Kamala Harris really prosecuted marijuana cases". San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021. Retrieved May 6, 2020. Soltau, Alison (July 21, 2004). "New DA claims higher success rate vs. violent felons". San Francisco Examiner. p. 4. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Eslinger, Bonnie (September 15, 2006). "SF's Felony conviction rate improves". San Francisco Examiner. p. 4. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Van Derbeken, Jaxon (March 20, 2006). "Trials and tribulations of Kamala Harris, D.A. / 2 years into term, prosecutor, police have their differences". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 5, 2019. Retrieved March 9, 2019. Garofoli, Joe (May 29, 2004). "D.A. vows to go after gun law violators / Harris takes tough approach, pledges maximum penalties". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 2, 2020. "Marriage Equality". Kamalaharris.org. Archived from the original on November 25, 2010. Retrieved November 18, 2010. "Harris challenges 'gay panic' strategy". The San Francisco Examiner. July 5, 2006. p. 4. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2020. "Gwen Araujo Justice for Victims Act". California Legislative Information. September 28, 2006. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 23, 2015. Hemmelgarn, Seth; Laird, Cynthia (October 4, 2012). "Ten years later, Araujo's murder resonates". The Bay Area Reporter. Archived from the original on March 20, 2020. Retrieved June 23, 2015. Lagos, Marisa (August 9, 2007). "Measure would ban gun shows at Cow Palace". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on January 13, 2021. Retrieved May 3, 2020. Pereira, Alyssa (April 16, 2019). "Cow Palace to stop hosting gun shows beginning in 2020". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 7, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2020. "San Francisco District Attorney Kamala Harris". Californiascapitol.com. April 15, 2009. Archived from the original on October 27, 2013. Retrieved November 18, 2010. Matier, Phillip; Ross, Andrew (April 21, 2004). "Feinstein's surprise call for death penalty puts D.A. on spot". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on April 25, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2020. Matier, Phillip; Ross, Andrew (May 5, 2004). "Sen. Boxer joins throng calling for death in killing of cop". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021. Retrieved May 3, 2020. Matier, Phillip; Ross, Andrew (May 19, 2004). "D.A.'s death penalty no-go gets a thumbs-up in S.F. poll". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2020. Van Derbeken, Jaxon (September 11, 2009). "Edwin Ramos won't face death penalty". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved April 22, 2020. Knight, Heather; Lagos, Marisa (September 16, 2009). "Newsom backs Harris' decision". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved October 20, 2009. Ho, Vivian (January 21, 2019). "'Nobody works harder': insiders recall Kamala Harris's meteoric rise". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 10, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2020. Solis, Niki. "Public defender: I worked with Kamala Harris. She was the most progressive DA in California". USA TODAY. Archived from the original on February 14, 2021. Retrieved November 15, 2020. Fraley, Malaika (October 26, 2009). "Book 'em, Kamala—S.F. District Attorney Harris adds author to list of credits". East Bay Times. Walnut Creek, California: Bay Area News Group. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2019. "Back on Track: A Problem-Solving Reentry Court" (PDF). U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance. September 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2020. Harris, Kamala (November 9, 2009). "Kamala Harris: Finding the Path Back on Track". HuffPost. New York City. Archived from the original on August 5, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2010. Begin, Brent (October 14, 2009). "District Attorney program is now statewide example". San Francisco Examiner. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved April 22, 2020. Knezevich, Alison (May 14, 2015). "Mosby: New program gives nonviolent offenders a second chance". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2020. "Preventing Future Crime and Preserving Judicial Resources Through Non-Traditional Prosecution" (PDF). Philadelphia District Attorney's Office. September 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2020. "Jail to jobs, Mayor Bottoms announces new reentry program". WGCL-TV. CBS. April 11, 2018. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2020. Knight, Heather (October 19, 2004). "City opens campaign to cut truancy by thousands of students". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020. Knight, Heather (September 14, 2006). "City trying to get worst truants to school. Help for students, criminal prosecution part of crackdown". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 20, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020. Asimov, Nanette (June 11, 2008). "Citations go to parents of truant kids". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved May 2, 2020. "Fighting truancy yields big dividends". San Francisco Chronicle. June 14, 2009. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 2, 2020. "Kamala Harris, an early Barack Obama backer, begins her ascent". LA Times Blogs – Top of the Ticket. November 12, 2008. Archived from the original on January 29, 2021. Retrieved November 18, 2020. Marinucci, Carla (November 12, 2008). "D.A. Harris plans run for attorney general". SFGATE. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021. Retrieved November 18, 2020. Harris said she will run [for attorney general] only if Brown, who was governor before term limits were imposed, makes another run for governor. "I will not run against Jerry Brown," Harris told The Chronicle on Tuesday. Rizo, Chris (April 16, 2010). "Villaraigosa eschews local candidates, backs Harris for Calif. attorney general". Legal Newsline. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved August 20, 2010. "Statement of Vote June 8, 2010, Direct Primary Election" (PDF). California Secretary of State. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 31, 2019. Retrieved April 22, 2020. "With L.A.'s help, Cooley leads in attorney general's race, Times/USC poll finds". LA Times Blogs – PolitiCal. October 22, 2010. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Lagos, Marisa (October 27, 2010). "Harris leads in at least one poll, Cooley supporters think Democrats will claim gov's office". SF Gate. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. "Cooley says he'd be a nonpartisan attorney general". Southern California Public Radio. October 28, 2010. Archived from the original on May 4, 2022. Retrieved May 3, 2022. Leonard, Jack (November 24, 2010). "Kamala Harris wins attorney general's race as Steve Cooley concedes". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Bacerra, Xavier (January 3, 2011), Kamala D. Harris Takes Oath as California Attorney General, State of California Department of Justice, Office of the Attorney General, archived from the original on September 29, 2020, retrieved August 31, 2020, Harris is the first woman, and the first African American and the first South Asian American, to hold the office of Attorney General in the history of California Chitnis, Deepak (February 14, 2014). "As Kamala Harris announces bid for re-election, GOP scratching their heads for a candidate to face her". The American Bazaar. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Reilly, Mollie (August 25, 2014). "Endorsement: Attorney General Kamala Harris, all but unchallenged, deserves a second term". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on May 20, 2020. Retrieved April 25, 2020. "Re-elect Kamala Harris as attorney general – but demand more: Endorsement". Los Angeles Daily News. October 3, 2014. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "For attorney general, Kamala Harris". Los Angeles Times. September 23, 2014. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Reilly, Mollie (November 5, 2014). "Kamala Harris Re-Elected As California Attorney General". HuffPost. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Veiga, Alex (May 23, 2011). "Calif. creates task force to probe mortgage fraud". San Diego Union Tribune. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "Quest Diagnostics settles Medi-Cal whistleblower suit". Los Angeles Times. May 20, 2011. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. "Harris: $323M SCAN settlement record recovery for Calif. program". Legal Newsline. May 20, 2011. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Parker, Barbara; Kaplan, Rebecca (March 5, 2012). "Kamala Harris' foreclosure deal a win for state". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2012. Lazo, Alejandro (May 12, 2012). "Mortgage deal cash is divvied". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved June 18, 2012. Willon, Phil (October 16, 2016). "$25-billion foreclosure settlement was a victory for Kamala Harris in California, but it wasn't perfect". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 12, 2020. Retrieved July 11, 2020. "Calif. attorney general Kamala Harris fights for struggling homeowners". CBS News. July 30, 2012. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved June 18, 2012. "Gov. Brown signs Homeowner Bill of Rights". ABC 7 News. July 12, 2012. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Sangree, Hudson (December 19, 2013). "Sacramento homeowners to receive $20 million under settlement with Ocwen Financial". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Smythe, Christie (February 5, 2016). "HSBC Reaches $470 Million Accord Over Foreclosure Abuses". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on February 6, 2016. Retrieved June 18, 2012. Reckard, E. Scott (July 30, 2012). "SunTrust to pay nearly $1 billion to settle mortgage-abuse allegations". CBS News. Archived from the original on June 19, 2014. Retrieved June 18, 2012. Vigil, Jennifer (July 14, 2014). "California to Receive $200 Million in Citibank $7 Billion Mortgage Settlement". Times of San Diego. Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Starkman, Dean (February 3, 2015). "S&P to pay $1.4 billion in claims it misled investors with rosy ratings". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "Public Employee Pensions Gets $299M In JPMorgan Chase Settlement". CBS San Francisco. November 19, 2013. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "California To Receive Hundreds Of Millions in Bank Of America Settlement". CBS San Francisco. Sacramento. August 22, 2014. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Fitzpatrick, David (January 4, 2017). "California investigators wanted to sue Mnuchin bank over foreclosures". CNN. Archived from the original on September 24, 2019. Retrieved July 4, 2020. Chappell, Carmin (January 26, 2019). "Kamala Harris' complicated history with Wall Street will come under scrutiny in the 2020 race". CNBC. Archived from the original on June 12, 2020. Retrieved July 2, 2020. Marinucci, Carla (October 22, 2019). "New book whacks Kamala Harris' AG record during housing crisis". Politico. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved December 5, 2020. Armental, Maria (October 13, 2014). "Aaron's to Settle Spyware Allegations in California". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved November 17, 2020. "California lawsuit claims for-profit colleges misled students, investors". The Sacramento Bee. October 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2020. "Corinthian Colleges must pay nearly $1.2 billion for false advertising and lending practices". Los Angeles Times. March 23, 2016. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2020. Thompson, Don (November 2, 2015). "California settles debt collection suit with JPMorgan Chase". Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Anderson, Erik (November 20, 2014). "San Onofre Settlement Puts Ratepayers On Hook For $3.3B". KPBS Public Media. Archived from the original on February 28, 2017. Retrieved February 28, 2017. Sharma, Amita (April 5, 2016). "Critics Unhappy With Kamala Harris' Approach To San Onofre Probe". KPBS Public Media. Archived from the original on February 28, 2017. Retrieved February 28, 2017. Guynn, Jessica; Olivarez-Giles, Nathan (February 22, 2012). "Atty. Gen. Kamala Harris, tech giants agree on mobile app privacy". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Elinor, Mills (July 19, 2012). "California beefing up privacy-protection enforcement". CNet. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Thomson, Iain (October 31, 2012). "California begins crackdown on mobile app developers". The Register. Archived from the original on July 1, 2018. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "Comcast agrees to pay $33 million in California privacy breach". Los Angeles Times. September 18, 2015. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "California reaches $26 million settlement with Comcast over electronic waste". Los Angeles Times. December 15, 2015. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Paresh, Dave (October 2, 2015). "Why Kamala Harris is making start-up Houzz hire a "chief privacy officer"". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Palta, Rina (November 20, 2013). "Calif. Attorney General Kamala Harris announces new division to stop ex-prisoners from committing new crimes". Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Veiga, Alex (March 11, 2015). "Sheriff, AG Harris Unveil Program to Curb Recidivism". SCV News. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Bazelon, Lara (December 4, 2019). "Kamala Harris's Criminal Justice Record Killed Her Presidential Run". The Appeal. Archived from the original on August 17, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Bazelon, Emily (May 25, 2016). "Kamala Harris, a 'Top Cop' in the era of Black Lives Matter". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on March 1, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Tolan, Casey (August 1, 2019). "Democratic debate: Fact-checking the attacks on Kamala Harris' criminal justice record". Mercury News. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Singh, Lakshmi (November 18, 2018). "Serving Time And Fighting California Wildfires". NPR.org. NPR. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Egelko, Bob (November 8, 2010). "Kamala Harris-Steve Cooley race could affect Prop. 8". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2020. Baume, Matt (December 2, 2010). "Kamala Harris Vows to Abandon Prop 8". NBC Bay Area. San Francisco, CA: NBC News. Archived from the original on April 26, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2020. "Attorney General Kamala D. Harris Files U.S. Supreme Court Brief in Support of Marriage Equality". Office of the California Attorney General. February 27, 2013. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Savage, David G. (June 26, 2013). "Prop. 8: Supreme Court clears way for gay marriage in California". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved December 3, 2013. Almendrala, Anna (June 27, 2013). "Kamala Harris On Prop 8 Decision: Same-Sex Marriages In California Should Begin Immediately". HuffPost. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Dolan, Maura (June 28, 2013). "Prop 8: Gay marriages can resume in California, court rules". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved December 3, 2013. "California On Track To Become First State To Ban 'Gay Panic' Defense in Courtrooms". September 5, 2014. Archived from the original on October 7, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2020. Chokshi, Niraj (September 5, 2014). "California could become the first state to ban the 'gay panic' defense". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2021. "Jeffrey B. Norsworthy (a/k/a Michelle-Lael B. Norsworthy), Plaintiff, v. Jeffrey Beard, et al., Defendants". United States District Court, N.D. California, Case No. 14-cv-00695-JST. November 18, 2014. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Retrieved August 2, 2017. Egelko, Bob (February 10, 2017). "Parolee has sex-reassignment surgery after years of battling state". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 3, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2017. "Norswrthy v. Beard et al 14-cv-00695-". Transgender Law Center. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 12, 2017. St. John, Paige (May 21, 2015). "Inmate who won order for sex reassignment surgery recommended for parole". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 31, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2017. Strangio, Chase (February 5, 2019). "Op-ed: I'm Not Ready to Trust Kamala Harris on LGBTQ+ Issues". Out. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Johnson, Chris (April 10, 2015). "Harris appeals order granting gender reassignment to trans inmate". Washington Blade. Archived from the original on October 13, 2017. Retrieved October 12, 2017. Gilchrist, Tracy E. (September 20, 2019). "Kamala Harris on Denying Gender Affirmation Surgery to Trans Inmates". Advocate. Archived from the original on December 6, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Barmann, Jay (March 21, 2016). "Former Trans Inmate Michelle-Lael Norsworthy Speaks Out About Her New Transition, To Civilian Life". SFist. San Francisco, California: Gothamist. Archived from the original on November 5, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2017. Brown, Annie (May 17, 2016). "Michelle's Case". The California Sunday Magazine. San Francisco, CA: Emerson Collective. Archived from the original on August 3, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2017. Johnson, Chris (January 21, 2019). "Harris takes 'full responsibility' for briefs against surgery for trans inmates". Washington Blade. Archived from the original on December 24, 2020. Retrieved December 24, 2020. Redden, Molly (March 29, 2019). "The Human Costs Of Kamala Harris' War On Truancy". HuffPost. Archived from the original on May 25, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. "In School + On Track: Attorney General's 2013 Report on California's Elementary School Truancy and Absenteeism Crisis" (PDF). California Attorney General. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 22, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Fimrite, Peter (September 19, 2011). "$44 million settles Cosco Busan oil spill in bay". SFGate. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 8, 2020. White, Randol; Bell, Jordan; Osborn, Lisa (June 4, 2015). "State Attorney General investigates whether oil spill was result of criminal activity". KCBXfm. Archived from the original on November 10, 2018. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Smith, Doug; Mejia, Brittny (May 17, 2016). "Pipeline company indicted in 2015 Santa Barbara County oil spill". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 10, 2018. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Gorman, Steve; McWilliams, Garry (September 8, 2018). "Plains All American Pipeline convicted in 2015 California oil spill". Reuters. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Veklerov, Kimberley (September 16, 2011). "Chevron settlement helps Sacramento Co. district attorney avoid job cuts". Sacramento Business Journal. Archived from the original on March 17, 2012. Retrieved May 31, 2020. Veklerov, Kimberley (November 17, 2016). "BP, Arco to pay $14 million in suit over gas tanks in California". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Siciliano, Stephen (May 10, 2015). "ConocoPhillips, Phillips 66 to Spend $11.5 Million in California Tank Settlement". Bloomberg Law. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Egelko, Bob (September 1, 2016). "Judge approves Volkswagen-state settlement over diesel cheating". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2020. Megerian, Chris (January 25, 2012). "California attorney general says DNA backlog is gone". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "Grant awarded to test rape kits". Turlock Journal. September 17, 2015. Archived from the original on June 29, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "California Attorney General Launches Top-Down Policing Reforms". KQED. April 17, 2015. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 29, 2020. "Harris on requiring police to wear body cameras". The Washington Post. June 27, 2019. Archived from the original on June 14, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "State to Improve Police Use-of-Force Data Next Year Under New Law". KQED. December 30, 2015. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Powell, Sidney (October 17, 2016). "California AG Appeals Booting Of Orange County DA From Mass Murder Case Over Misconduct Allegations". HuffPost. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020. Saavedra, Tony (February 25, 2019). "New Orange County DA willing to undergo federal probation to end 'snitch' investigation". Orange County Register. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020. Laughland, Oliver; Swaine, Jon (December 22, 2016). "Two 'deadliest' police departments in US to be investigated in California". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 30, 2020. Retrieved May 29, 2020. Laughland, Oliver; Swaine, Jon (November 9, 2017). "ACLU says violence at Kern County police departments violated rights". The Guardian. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 29, 2020. St John, Paige (April 6, 2016). "State attorney general seizes videos behind Planned Parenthood sting". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Breningstall, Jeremy (March 30, 2018). "How anti-abortion activists used undercover Planned Parenthood videos to further a political cause". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Mandell, Nina (July 24, 2011). "Facebook stalker turned email hacker sentenced to four years in prison; sent nude photos of victims". Daily News. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Margie, Shafer (December 11, 2011). "California Attorney General Creates eCrime Unit". San Jose: KPIX. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. O'Brien, Sara Ashley (July 2, 2015). "Revenge porn hacker pleads gulty, faces 7 years". New York: CNN. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Larry, Gordon (February 2, 2014). "Oklahoma man arrested in alleged 'revenge porn' extortion". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Littlefield, Dana (April 3, 2015). "Revenge porn site operator gets 18 years". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Clancy, Molly Hensley (October 28, 2019). "Let's Also Speak the Truth": Kamala Harris Said Katie Hill is a Victim of "Cyber-Exploitation". Buzzfeed News. BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "California attorney general pursues new pimping charges against Backpage site". The Guardian. Associated Press. December 23, 2016. Archived from the original on April 18, 2020. Retrieved May 12, 2020. Jackman, Tom (April 13, 2018). "Backpage CEO Carl Ferrer pleads guilty in three states, agrees to testify against other website officials". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 22, 2020. Retrieved April 22, 2020. Thompson, Don (April 12, 2018). "Backpage.com CEO pleads guilty to California money charges". Business Insider. Associated Press. Archived from the original on April 25, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2018. Hawkins, Derek (January 10, 2017). "Backpage.com shuts down adult services ads after relentless pressure from authorities". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 10, 2017. Retrieved January 11, 2017. Wire, Sarah D. (January 10, 2017). "Sen. Kamala Harris praises closure of Backpage.com adult section". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2020. Retrieved April 22, 2020. Dean, Monica (February 18, 2011). "Murder-for-Hire Plot Tied to Cartel: Feds". NBC San Diego. NBC News. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "17 Charged in East Bay Meth, Weapons Bust". CBS Bay Area. May 4, 2011. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. McKinley, Jesse (June 8, 2011). "California Raids Net Dozens Suspected of Being Gang Members". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 31, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "Vagos gang crackdown nets arrests, weapons, drugs'". The San Bernardino Sun. Digital First Media. October 6, 2011. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "52 arrested in Tulare County Norteño gang sweep". KFSN-TV. October 1, 2015. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "75 arrests, guns and drugs seized in Merced gang take down". Merced Sun-Star. May 28, 2015. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "32 Gang Members, Associates Indicted In $14.3M ID Theft, Tax Fraud Scheme". CBS. August 10, 2015. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "Attorney General Kamala D. Harris Announces Bust of Corona Varrio Locos and La Eme Gangs Operating in Riverside County". Highland Community News. June 9, 2016. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Gorman, Steve (September 10, 2014). "Los Angeles Fashion District raided in drug money-laundering probe". Reuters. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "Porous Mexican Border Allows Alarming Trend in Human Trafficking into US". Fox News. October 1, 2012. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. "Gov. Jerry Brown signs bills targeting human trafficking". Los Angeles Times. September 24, 2012. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Harris, Kamala. "The State of Human Trafficking in California 2012" (PDF). California Department of Justice. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Simmonds, Yussuf (November 21, 2012). "Attorney General Harris takes on Human Trafficking". Los Angeles Sentinel. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2020. Harris, Kamala (March 2014). "Gangs Beyond Borders: California and the Fight Against Transnational Organized Crime" (PDF). California Department of Justice. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. White, Jeremy (March 20, 2014). "California Attorney General Kamala Harris targets transnational organized crime". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on August 16, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Mason, Melanie (February 19, 2014). "Atty. Gen. Harris announces trip to Mexico to address gang issue". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "States' Attorneys General to Powwow with Mexican Counterparts". SCV News. March 17, 2014. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Mehta, Seema (January 13, 2015). "Kamala Harris launches U.S. Senate bid, begins raising money". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2015. Kane, Will (November 7, 2016). "Why Is the Most Groundbreaking Senate Race Ever So Uninspiring?". POLITICO Magazine. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. Cadelago, Christopher (February 27, 2016). "Kamala Harris receives California Democratic Party endorsement". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Willon, Phil (May 23, 2016). "California Gov. Jerry Brown backs Kamala Harris for U.S. Senate". Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "United States Senator (primary results)" (PDF). California Secretary of State. July 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 26, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "Kamala Harris wins U.S. Senate primary". Los Angeles Times. June 7, 2016. Archived from the original on March 4, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Myers, John (June 8, 2016). "Two Democrats will face off for California's U.S. Senate seat, marking first time a Republican will not be in contention". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 4, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Willon, Phil (July 19, 2016). "Obama, Biden endorse Kamala Harris for U.S. Senate". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. "Live California election results". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 9, 2016. Retrieved November 9, 2016. Willon, Phil (November 10, 2016). "Newly elected Kamala Harris vows to defy Trump on immigration". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Willon, Phil (December 1, 2016). "Essential Politics November archives". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on December 17, 2016. Retrieved December 20, 2016. Merica, Dan (January 30, 2017). "Trump signs executive order to keep out 'radical Islamic terrorists'". Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Ting, Eric (January 8, 2019). "Kamala Harris says John Kelly got mad when she called him at home during the travel ban". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "Sen. Kamala Harris speaks out against Betsy DeVos as part of Democrats' 24-hour blitz on Senate floor". Los Angeles Times. February 6, 2017. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "Sen. Kamala Harris: 'You Deserve An Attorney General Who Recognizes The Full Human Quality Of All People'". newsone.com. February 8, 2017. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved April 22, 2020. Cockerham, Sean (March 2, 2017). "Kamala Harris calls on attorney general to resign over contacts with the Russians". Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Adam Liptak; Matt Flegenheimer (April 8, 2017). "Neil Gorsuch Confirmed by Senate as Supreme Court Justice". The New York Times. p. A1. Archived from the original on April 29, 2019. Retrieved April 15, 2017. "Sen. Kamala Harris visits troops, refugee camp in Middle East". ABC News. April 17, 2017. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 16, 2019. Jalonick, Mary Clare (June 7, 2017). "Harris Reminded to Be Respectful During Intel Hearing". U.S. News & World Report. Washington, D.C. Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Finnegan, Michael (June 14, 2017). "Sen. Kamala Harris leaves Sessions 'nervous' in interrogation over his refusal to disclose conversations with Trump". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 4, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Agence France-Presse (November 7, 2020). "Kamala Harris: America's first woman vice president". France 24. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved December 5, 2020. Ansari, M. K. (June 8, 2017). "The Silencing Of Kamala Harris During The Senate Hearing Was Sexist: Why do people take issue when a woman asks direct questions?". HuffPost. New York. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Tolan, Casey (December 6, 2017). "Harris, Feinstein call on Al Franken to resign after sexual harassment allegations". San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on August 16, 2020. Weigel, David (January 9, 2018). "Democrats add Harris, Booker to Senate Judiciary Committee". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved May 12, 2020. Campoy, Ana (January 16, 2018). "Trump's DHS chief perfectly recalls his praise for Norway—but not "shithole"". Quartz. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2020. Richardson, Davis (January 16, 2018). "Cory Booker and Kamala Harris Grill Kirstjen Nielsen Over Trump's Racial Remarks". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on January 13, 2021. Retrieved September 22, 2020. Bacon, John (May 16, 2018). "Homeland Security chief defends policy that separates families entering U.S. illegally". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. Sloss, Jason (June 22, 2018). "'Utter despair': Sen. Harris visits migrant mothers separated from children in San Diego". Fox 5 San Diego. Archived from the original on November 10, 2018. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Byrne, Trapper (June 18, 2018). "Kamala Harris says DHS chief should resign over immigrant family separations". Advocate. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 8, 2020. "Lawmakers reflect on Selma beyond Bloody Sunday". WCBI. CBS News. March 7, 2018. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021. Retrieved December 23, 2020. Zhou, Li (September 6, 2018). "Kamala Harris's mysterious Kasowitz question during the Kavanaugh hearings, explained". Vox. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved May 4, 2020. Ring, Trudy (October 10, 2018). "FBI Head Stonewalls as Kamala Harris Grills Him on Kavanaugh Probe". Advocate. Archived from the original on November 10, 2018. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Stanton, Sam; McGough, Mike; Yoon-Hendricks, Alex (October 26, 2018). "Suspicious package in Sacramento addressed to Sen. Kamala Harris, sources say". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on June 30, 2020. Retrieved May 15, 2020. Zaveri, Mihir (December 20, 2018). "Senate Unanimously Passes Bill Making Lynching a Federal Crime". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 20, 2018. Retrieved February 6, 2018. "S.3178 – Justice for Victims of Lynching Act of 2018, 115th Congress (2017–2018)". Congress.gov. Archived from the original on March 11, 2020. Clark, Dartunorro (March 22, 2019). "'Release the report. Release the report. Release the report.' 2020 Dems demand Mueller report be made public". NBC News. Archived from the original on May 20, 2019. Retrieved July 4, 2020. Sullivan, Margaret (November 10, 2019). "Media beware: Impeachment hearings will be the trickiest test of covering Trump". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 10, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2019. Levine, Marianne (April 30, 2019). "Senate Dems call on DOJ watchdog to investigate Barr". Politico. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Barrett, Devlin; Zapotosky, Matt (April 30, 2019). "Mueller complained that Barr's letter did not capture 'context' of Trump probe". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 30, 2019. Retrieved May 16, 2020. Jarrett, Laura (May 2, 2019). "Barr defiant amid furor over his handling of Mueller report". CNN. Archived from the original on August 9, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Levin, Bess (May 1, 2019). "Kamala Harris Guts Barr Like a Fish, Leaves Him Flopping on the Deck". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on June 6, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Stracqualursi, Veronica (May 2, 2019). "Kamala Harris accuses Barr of not answering her question to avoid exposure to perjury". CNN. Archived from the original on July 30, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Shabad, Rebecca (May 1, 2019). "Barr defends himself amid calls for resignation, slights Mueller's 'snitty' letter". NBC News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. Levine, Marianne (May 3, 2019). "Harris urges DOJ watchdog to probe whether Trump asked Barr to investigate 'enemies'". Politico. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Sherman, Amy (May 1, 2019). "Kamala Harris says voter suppression kept Stacey Abrams, Andrew Gillum out of office. Really?". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on September 21, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2021. "Calls for UN probe of China forced birth control on Uighurs". The Associated Press. June 30, 2020. Archived from the original on December 10, 2021. Retrieved July 1, 2020. "Harris and Blumenthal Demand Special Counsel to Investigate Failure to Preserve Evidence Within DHS and ICE" (Press release). U.S. Senator Kamala Harris of California. November 1, 2019. Archived from the original on December 18, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2020. Davis, Georgia (August 11, 2020). "Joe Biden announces Kamala Harris as his running mate. Here is where she stands on LGBTQ issues". GLAAD. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2020. Mathias, Christopher (December 9, 2019). "Kamala Harris Leads Senators in Demanding 'Immediate Removal' Of Stephen Miller". HuffPost. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Adler, Madison (January 15, 2020). "Senate Judiciary Pauses Nominations for Impeachment Trial (1)". Bloomberg Law. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Weiss, Debra Cassens (January 16, 2020). "Sen. Kamala Harris calls for halt to advancement of judicial nominees; is it happening?". ABA Journal. Archived from the original on July 5, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. "How senators voted on Trump's impeachment". Politico. February 5, 2020. Archived from the original on February 5, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Hamilton, Dawchelle (September 10, 2017). "Rand Paul and Kamala Harris Team Up to Reform Bail Practices". NBC News. Archived from the original on March 23, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019. Matishak, Martin (March 22, 2018). "Lawmakers gather behind election security bill – at last". Politico. Archived from the original on March 26, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019. Hensley-Clancy, Molly (June 5, 2018). "Two Women Senators Will Introduce A New Bill About Workplace Harassment". BuzzFeedNews. Archived from the original on April 21, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019. Harris, Kamala (January 18, 2021). "Thank you, California". Medium.com. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2020. Ronayne, Kathleen (December 22, 2020). "Newsom taps California election chief Padilla for US Senate". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 22, 2020. Retrieved December 22, 2020. Myers, John (December 19, 2016). "Kamala Harris nabs national security, environment assignments in the U.S. Senate". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 14, 2020. Retrieved April 22, 2020. "Schumer Announces Updated Senate Democratic Committee Memberships for the 115th Congress, 2nd Session". democrats.senate.gov. January 9, 2018. Archived from the original on January 10, 2018. Retrieved January 10, 2018. "Members". Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus. Archived from the original on May 14, 2018. Retrieved May 17, 2018. "Membership". Congressional Black Caucus. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved March 7, 2018. Beckett, Lois (July 22, 2017). "Kamala Harris: young, black, female – and the Democrats' best bet for 2020?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2018. Hunt, Kasie (June 24, 2018). "Sen. Kamala Harris not ruling out 2020 White House run". NBC News. Archived from the original on August 31, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. Bradner, Eric (July 17, 2018). "Kamala Harris signs book deal amid 2020 speculation". Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved October 12, 2018. Reston, Maeve (January 21, 2019). "Kamala Harris to run for president in 2020". CNN. Archived from the original on January 21, 2019. Retrieved January 21, 2019. "Kamala Harris raises $1.5 million in first 24 hours". POLITICO. January 22, 2019. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved May 3, 2022. David Wright (January 22, 2019). "Kamala Harris touts $1.5 million haul in 24 hours after 2020 announcement". CNN. Archived from the original on January 23, 2019. Retrieved May 3, 2022. Beckett, Lois (January 27, 2019). "Kamala Harris kicks off 2020 campaign with hometown Oakland rally". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2019. Flegenheimer, Matt; Burns, Alexander (June 27, 2019). "Kamala Harris Makes the Case That Joe Biden Should Pass That Torch to Her". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Agiesta, Jennifer (July 1, 2019). "CNN Poll: Harris and Warren rise and Biden slides after first Democratic debates". CNN. Archived from the original on October 10, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Vagianos, Alanna (July 31, 2019). "Tulsi Gabbard Takes Kamala Harris To Task On Marijuana Prosecution Record". HuffPost. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Tolan, Casey (August 1, 2019). "Democratic debate: Fact-checking the attacks on Kamala Harris' criminal justice record". San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Silver, Nate (August 7, 2019). "Polls Since The Second Debate Show Kamala Harris Slipping". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on October 10, 2020. Retrieved August 25, 2019. Martin, Jonathan; Herndon, Alstead W.; Burns, Alexander (November 19, 2019). "How Kamala Harris's Campaign Unraveled". The New York Times. Washington, DC. Archived from the original on June 27, 2022. Retrieved June 27, 2022. Bacon Jr., Perry (October 8, 2019). "What Happened to the Kamala Harris Campaign?". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved December 3, 2019. Dolan, Maura (August 21, 2014). "California AG Kamala Harris to appeal ruling against death penalty". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 14, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. "Analysis | The Technology 202: Kamala Harris is already facing online attacks in her bid for the vice presidency". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved August 16, 2020. Zakrzewski, Cat (August 13, 2020). "Kamala Harris is already facing online attacks in her bid for the vice presidency". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020. Zhou, Li (July 25, 2019). "The #KHive, Kamala Harris's most devoted online supporters, explained". Vox. Archived from the original on October 14, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020. Bixby, Scott (August 12, 2020). "Kamala Harris Built a 'Digital Army' – Now She Gets to Use It". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on October 9, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020. Thomas, Alex (August 12, 2020). "What Is the K-Hive, Kamala Harris' Online Twitter Support?". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved August 16, 2020. Harris, Kamala (December 3, 2019). "I am suspending my campaign today". Medium. Archived from the original on October 10, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2019. Wootson Jr., Cleve R. "Sen. Kamala D. Harris endorses Joe Biden for president". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Caygle, Heather (May 12, 2019). "'A dream ticket': Black lawmakers pitch Biden-Harris to beat Trump". Politico. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2020. Timm, Jane C.; Gregorian, Dareh (March 10, 2020). "Clyburn calls for Democrats to 'shut this primary down' if Biden has big night". NBC News. Archived from the original on July 30, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. "Joe Biden commits to picking a woman as his running mate". Axios. March 16, 2020. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2020. Garofoli, Joe; Kopan, Tal (April 17, 2020). "Kamala Harris 'would be honored' to be Joe Biden's running mate". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2020. Caputo, Marc; Korecki, Natasha (May 31, 2020). "Minneapolis unrest shakes up VP shortlist". Politico. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2020. Leonhardt, David (June 12, 2020). "Kamala Harris, Front-runner (Again)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 12, 2020. Retrieved June 12, 2020. Zeleny, Jeff; Merica, Dan; Lee, MJ (June 26, 2020). "Nation's reckoning on race looms large over final month of Biden's running mate search". CNN. Archived from the original on October 9, 2020. Retrieved June 27, 2020. "Biden VP pick: Kamala Harris chosen as running mate". BBC News. August 11, 2020. Archived from the original on October 10, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2020. Ostermeier, Eric (January 23, 2019). "Will a Westerner Finally Land on a Democratic Presidential Ticket in 2020?". Smart Politics. Retrieved November 27, 2022. Blood, Michael R.; Riccardi, Nicholas (December 5, 2020). "Biden officially secures enough electors to become president". AP News. Retrieved December 22, 2020. Chowdhury, Shatabdi (December 16, 2020). ""We Did It, Joe": Top 10 Tweets Of 2020". NDTV. Retrieved December 16, 2020. Tensley, Brandon; Wright, Jasmine (November 7, 2020). "Harris bursts through another barrier, becoming the first female, first Black and first South Asian vice president-elect". CNN. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Horowitz, Juliana Menasce; Budiman, Abby (August 18, 2020). "Key findings about multiracial identity in the U.S. as Harris becomes vice presidential nominee". Pew Research Center. Retrieved November 8, 2020. McEvoy, Jemima (November 7, 2020). "Kamala Harris Makes History As First Female, Black, Asian American Vice President". Forbes. Retrieved November 13, 2020. Solender, Andrew (August 12, 2020). "Here Are The 'Firsts' Kamala Harris Represents With VP Candidacy". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 2, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Harris would not be the first person of color to serve as vice president. That honor belongs to Charles Curtis, President Herbert Hoover's No. 2. Hayes, Christal (January 20, 2021). "Democrats officially take control of Senate after Harris swears in Ossoff, Warnock and Padilla". USA Today. Washington. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Pramuk, Jacob (January 20, 2021). "Democrats take Senate majority, sealing control of the White House and Congress". CNBC. Segers, Grace (February 5, 2021). "Senate passes $1.9 trillion COVID relief resolution after all-night 'vote-a-rama'". CBS News. Singh, Maanvi; Greve, Joan E.; Belam, Martin; McKernan, Bethan; Levine, Sam (March 5, 2021). "Kamala Harris breaks Senate tie to begin Covid relief package debate – as it happened". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved March 5, 2021. Cohn, Alicia (December 31, 2017). "Pence became ultimate tie-breaker in 2017". The Hill. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "Votes to Break Ties in the Senate". senate.gov. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "Senate.gov: VPTies.pdf" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on May 2, 2017. Retrieved February 5, 2018. "Votes to Break Ties in the Senate". senate.gov. Retrieved December 5, 2023. Lebowitz, Megan; Thorp, Frank; Santaliz, Kate (December 5, 2023). "Vice President Harris breaks record for casting the most tie-breaking votes". NBC News. Retrieved December 5, 2023. Bice, Allie (April 25, 2021). "Harris says she had key role in Biden's Afghanistan withdrawal decision". Politico. Retrieved August 20, 2021. Rothkopf, David (December 17, 2021). "Kamala's Conundrum: She's Doing a Great Job But Her Story's Not Getting Out". The Daily Beast. Retrieved January 2, 2022. Lahut, Jake (March 25, 2021). "Biden is giving Kamala Harris the thorniest issue to oversee as VP: immigration". Business Insider. Retrieved March 27, 2021. Egan, Lauren (June 7, 2021). "Harris takes first steps onto world stage, into migration spotlight". NBC News. Rodriguez, Sabrina (June 7, 2021). "Harris' blunt message in Guatemala: 'Do not come' to U.S." Politico. Rogers, Katie (November 10, 2021). "Harris Meets Macron, Signaling a 'New Era' After Sub Snub, Both Say". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved January 2, 2022. Fossett, Katelyn. "What's going on with Kamala's poll numbers?". POLITICO. Retrieved January 31, 2023. Ting, Eric (November 8, 2021). "Kamala Harris has a comically bad approval rating, poll finds". SFGate. Retrieved January 31, 2023. Oshin, Olafimihan (June 26, 2023). "Poll: Kamala Harris sets record low for Vice President net favorability". The Hill. Retrieved June 26, 2023. Miller, Zeke (November 19, 2021). "Biden to have routine colonoscopy, transfer power to Harris". Bethesda, MD: Associated Press. Retrieved November 19, 2021. Feinberg, Andrew (November 19, 2021). "'First woman president': Kamala Harris makes history when she briefly assumes powers of presidency during Biden procedure". The Independent. Washington, DC. Retrieved November 19, 2021. Pengelly, Martin (November 19, 2021). "Kamala Harris takes on presidential role – briefly – as Biden has colonoscopy". The Guardian. Cadelago, Christopher; Lippman, Daniel; Daniels, Eugene (December 4, 2021). "'Not a healthy environment': Kamala Harris' office rife with dissent". Politico. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved June 27, 2022. Tomlinson, Hugh (March 17, 2022). "Fresh woe for Kamala Harris as another adviser quits". The Times. Wootson Jr., Cleve; Pager, Tyler (December 4, 2021). "A Kamala Harris staff exodus reignites questions about her leadership style — and her future ambitions". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved June 27, 2022. Wright, Jasmine; Vazquez, Maegan (December 2, 2021). "Symone Sanders, Harris' chief spokesperson, to leave White House". CNN. Retrieved December 2, 2021. Reber, Deborah (2015). In Their Shoes: Extraordinary Women Describe Their Amazing Careers. New York City: Simon Pulse. p. 37. ISBN 978-1-4814-2812-5. Archived from the original on October 23, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Zernike, Kate (May 18, 2008). "She Just Might Be President Someday". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 6, 2017. Retrieved November 16, 2018. Pelosi, Nancy (April 18, 2013). "Kamala Harris Jurist to watch, 48". Time. Archived from the original on April 20, 2013. Retrieved April 18, 2013. D'Souza, Shaad (September 23, 2020). "Megan Thee Stallion, The Weeknd, Halsey make TIME 100 list". The Fader. Retrieved December 5, 2021. Parsley, Aaron (September 15, 2021). "Bernie Sanders and Cindy McCain Write Tributes for Biden and Other Leaders on TIME 100 List". People. Retrieved December 5, 2021. "20/20 Award Winners". 2020 Club. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. "Joe Biden and Kamala Harris Are TIME's 2020 Person of the Year". Time. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Gross, Elana Lyn; Voytko, Lisette; McGrath, Maggie (June 2, 2021). "The New Golden Age". Forbes. Retrieved June 2, 2021. "Speakers, Honorary Degree Recipients: 2000 to present | USC". Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. "Past Recipients · Honorary Degrees". honorarydegrees.usc.edu. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Dalton, Autumn (May 3, 2017). "Howard University Commencement Honors Groundbreaking Women". Howard University News Service. Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2020. "Recipients of Honorary Degrees (By Year) – Office of the Secretary". Howard University. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2020. "Senator Kamala Harris Challenges Howard University Graduates to Forge a Way Forward". Howard Newsroom. May 13, 2017. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. "Kamala Harris Once Dated Talk Show Host Montel Williams". Inside Edition. August 8, 2019. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved August 8, 2020. Wright, Jasmine; Stracqualursi, Veronica (January 15, 2021). "Harris and Emhoff recall first date: 'It felt like we had known each other forever'". CNN. Retrieved January 18, 2021. "Douglas C. Emhoff". Venable LLP. Archived from the original on July 6, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2014. Siders, David (August 25, 2014). "Kamala Harris married in Santa Barbara ceremony". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on August 17, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Harris, Kamala (May 10, 2019). "Sen. Kamala Harris on Being 'Momala'". ELLE. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2019. "The Net Worth Of Every 2020 Presidential Candidate". Forbes. August 14, 2019. Archived from the original on August 23, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. Mwaura, Maina (October 28, 2020). "Kamala Harris talks about her own faith and how it might influence a Biden-Harris White House". Religion News Service. Retrieved November 9, 2020. Schor, Elana (August 12, 2020). "Harris brings Baptist, interfaith roots to Democratic ticket". Washington post. Retrieved August 13, 2020. "5 faith facts about Biden's veep pick, Kamala Harris – a Baptist with Hindu family". The Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. "Find A Church". ABCUSA. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. "America's black upper class and Black Lives Matter". The Economist. August 22, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Pitts, Myron B. "Myron B. Pitts: Sen. Kamala Harris, VP-elect, shines light on The Links". The Fayetteville Observer. Retrieved February 7, 2022. Shaban, Hamza (October 27, 2017). "Uber hires PepsiCo's Tony West as general counsel". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 28, 2017. Kratofil, Colleen (June 17, 2020). "Meet Meena Harris, the Designer and Activist Behind the Viral 'Phenomenally Black' T-Shirt". PEOPLE.com. Archived from the original on November 6, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Kamala Harris at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Library resources about Kamala Harris Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Official website Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress Appearances on C-SPAN Kamala Harris at IMDb  Kamala Harris at On the Issues Kamala Harris at PolitiFact Kamala Harris at Ballotpedia Profile at Vote Smart