Mark Andreas Sheppard is an English actor and musician. Sheppard is known for playing the demon/King of Hell Crowley on Supernatural and for his recurring roles as lawyer Romo Lampkin on the Battlestar Galactica reboot, Interpol investigator James Sterling on Leverage, and small-time crime lord Badger on Joss Whedon's Firefly. Mark Andreas Sheppard was born in London, England, the son of actor W. Morgan Sheppard and Regina Lisa (née Scherer) Sheppard. He is of Irish and German descent. Sheppard became a drummer as a teenager, buying his first drum kit in 1976, and spent many years recording and touring with artists including Robyn Hitchcock, the Television Personalities, the Finnish rock band Hanoi Rocks, and the Irish group Light a Big Fire. In 1985, Sheppard played drums on Light a Big Fire's second album, and was with them as the opening act for some stops on U2's 1987 The Joshua Tree Tour. He had stepped away from music when his abuse of drugs and alcohol took over his life, and stayed away after he regained sobriety and his acting career began to flourish. In the 2010s, while appearing in Supernatural, he would attend fan conventions with his cast mates; co-star Rob Benedict, whose band played at the conventions, convinced Sheppard to sit in on a song in front of 3,000 attendees, and Sheppard was back. By 2017 he had rejoined Robyn Hitchcock's band on tour. Sheppard's television work includes the following: the "Fire" episode of The X-Files, a year on the Jerry Bruckheimer action series Soldier of Fortune, guest-starring and recurring roles on The Practice, The Invisible Man, Special Unit 2, JAG,Star Trek: Voyager,The Chronicle, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, CSI: NY, Monk, and Las Vegas, among others. He played a demon named Arnon on an episode titled "Witches in Tights" on the TV series Charmed. He played Badger, a semi-comical cockney-style crime boss in the short-lived Joss Whedon show Firefly and later cast again in another Whedon show, Dollhouse as Paul Ballard's dismissive FBI superior. He appeared as a villain in season five of the Fox show 24 and as Patricia Arquette's reincarnated Jack the Ripper-style serial killer nemesis on Medium. He appeared as Romo Lampkin in seasons three and four of Battlestar Galactica, and had a recurring role as Manservant Neville in ABC Family's short-lived The Middleman. He has been seen as Anthony Anthros on Bionic Woman, as Sterling the nemesis character on Leverage, and as the King of Hell Crowley on Supernatural. He appeared in the pilot episode of White Collar as a villainous master forger and as the Director of the Ring criminal organisation in Chuck. He appeared in the SyFy series Warehouse 13 as Regent Benedict Valda. He appears in the 2011 Doctor Who episodes "The Impossible Astronaut" and "Day of the Moon" playing the character Canton Everett Delaware III. In October 2013, Sheppard returned to White Collar, reprising his 2009 role as master forger Curtis Hagen. His film credits include the Jim Sheridan film In the Name of the Father, starring opposite Daniel Day-Lewis and Emma Thompson as Guildford Four member Patrick Armstrong; the romantic comedy Lover's Knot; the Russian historical drama Out of the Cold; the thriller Unstoppable; and with Heather Graham and Jeremy Sisto in the dark independent, Broken. He also starred in Megalodon and New Alcatraz. Mark Sheppard directed his father, actor W. Morgan Sheppard. in the film Room 101, and co-starred with him in the psychological thriller Nether World, which the younger Sheppard also co-produced. The elder Sheppard played the older version of his son's character in the aforementioned Doctor Who and NCIS episodes. He voiced the role of protagonist Michael Ford in The Conduit, whose mentor, John Adams, was voiced by W. Morgan Sheppard. Sheppard was cast with his father (who died in 2019) as the same character on three occasions, each playing the character at different ages: Canton Everett Delaware III in the Doctor Who episode "The Impossible Astronaut"; War criminal Marcin Jerek a.k.a. "Mr. Pain" in the NCIS episode "Broken Bird"; and Captain Nemo in the 2010 film Jules Verne's Mysterious Island, which Mark also directed. In the Macgyver reboot episode, "Cigar Cutter", which first aired 14 April 2017, he plays an assassin who assumes the identity of murder victim "Dr. Zito", a role his father played in the original series, except "Dr. Zito" was the name of the killer. Since 2011, Mark Sheppard has been "The Voice" of BBC America promos and announcements. On 9 November 2015, Sheppard married Australian heiress Sarah Louise Fudge. In March 2016, their daughter, Isabella Rose, was born, and the couple held a wedding ceremony in November of that year in Malibu, California. On 1 December 2023, Sheppard suffered a total of six heart attacks at his home in Los Angeles. He needed to be resuscitated by first responders. Doctors discovered a complete blockage in his left anterior descending artery. "Mark Sheppard Biography". Retrieved 3 June 2023. "Light a Big Fire". Irish Punk and New Wave Discography. Archived from the original on 21 November 2008. Budofsky, Adam (August 2018). "Mark Sheppard of Robyn Hitchcock and His L.A. Squires". Modern Drummer. Vol. 24, no. 8. Archived from the original on 26 September 2020. Retrieved 3 June 2023. "Mark Sheppard Credits". Retrieved 3 June 2023. Rohan, Virginia (13 February 2006). "No Mr. Nice Guy". The Bergen County Record. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Dodd, Stacy (26 July 2007). "Players: Mark Sheppard". Daily Variety. Owen, Rob (26 September 2007). "TV Review: 'Bionic Woman' dark, but intriguing". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. "Casting Update: Mark Sheppard". Doctor Who News Page. 16 October 2010. Retrieved 25 March 2011. Martin, Dan (23 April 2011). "Doctor Who: The Impossible Astronaut – Series 32, episode 1". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 April 2011. ...the older Canton on the beach is actually Mark Sheppard's dad, William Morgan Sheppard. ""Zito Zives!" - MacGyver S01E21 News". TV.com. Retrieved 13 April 2018. "Mark Sheppard on Being a Voice for BBC America". BBC News. Retrieved 31 May 2020. Vulpo, Mike (20 November 2016). "Supernatural's Mark Sheppard Is Married! All the Details on His "Fantastic" Sunset Wedding". E! Online. Retrieved 15 March 2020. Jones, Callum (4 December 2023). "Supernatural star Mark Sheppard brought back to life after six 'massive' heart attacks". UNILAD. Retrieved 15 December 2023. Flemming, Tessa (4 December 2023). "Supernatural star Mark Sheppard recovering after six 'massive' heart attacks". ABC News (Australia) . Retrieved 4 December 2023. "Instagram". www.instagram.com. Retrieved 3 December 2023. Fowler, Matt (23 May 2014). "Supernatural: Mark Sheppard Promoted to Series Regular". IGN. Retrieved 17 August 2014. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mark Sheppard. Mark Sheppard at IMDb  Mark Sheppard discography at Discogs Mark Sheppard on Instagram