Better Call Saul is an American legal crime drama television series created by Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould for AMC. Part of the Breaking Bad franchise, it is a spin-off from Gilligan's previous series, Breaking Bad (2008–2013), to which it serves primarily as a prequel, with some scenes taking place during and after the events of Breaking Bad. Better Call Saul premiered on AMC on February 8, 2015, and ended on August 15, 2022, after six seasons consisting of 63 episodes. Set primarily in the early to mid 2000s in Albuquerque, New Mexico, several years before Breaking Bad, Better Call Saul examines the ethical decline of Jimmy McGill (Bob Odenkirk), an aspiring lawyer and former con artist who becomes the egocentric criminal-defense attorney Saul Goodman, and Mike Ehrmantraut (Jonathan Banks), a former corrupt police officer who becomes a fixer and enforcer for drug traffickers. Other main characters include Jimmy's romantic interest and colleague Kim Wexler (Rhea Seehorn), his brother and rival Chuck McGill (Michael McKean), Chuck's law partner Howard Hamlin (Patrick Fabian), drug dealer Nacho Varga (Michael Mando), drug lord Gus Fring (Giancarlo Esposito), and cartel enforcer Lalo Salamanca (Tony Dalton). In addition to the primary storyline, Better Call Saul includes black-and-white flashforwards set in 2010, after the events of Breaking Bad, which explore the consequences of Saul's eventual partnership with the drug lord Walter White (Bryan Cranston). Gilligan, who created and developed Breaking Bad, and Gould, who wrote the Breaking Bad episode "Better Call Saul", began considering a Saul Goodman spin-off in 2009. Because Saul's role in Breaking Bad had expanded beyond the writing staff's plans, Gilligan felt he could be explored further. He and Gould considered making a half-hour legal comedy featuring Saul and his various clients, but settled on an hour-long tragedy showing how he develops into the character seen in Breaking Bad. Better Call Saul's development began during the production of Breaking Bad's final season in 2013, with Gilligan and Gould serving as co-showrunners and numerous production staff returning. Odenkirk, Banks, and Esposito reprise their roles from Breaking Bad, as do many others in guest appearances. Gilligan left Better Call Saul early in the third season—making Gould the sole showrunner for the remainder of its run—though he returned to help write the final season. Better Call Saul received critical acclaim, with praise for its acting, characters, writing, direction, and cinematography. Many reviewers considered it a worthy successor to Breaking Bad—some deeming it superior to its predecessor—and one of the greatest television series of all time. It has garnered many awards and nominations, including two Peabody Awards, 53 Primetime and Creative Arts Emmy Awards, 19 Writers Guild of America Awards, 20 Critics' Choice Television Awards, nine Screen Actors Guild Awards, and six Golden Globe Awards nominations. At the time of its airing, the series premiere held the record for the highest-rated scripted series premiere in basic cable history. Better Call Saul is a spin-off of Breaking Bad, a popular crime drama television series that ran from 2008 to 2013. It is primarily a prequel that focuses on Jimmy McGill, a former con artist aiming to gain respectability as a public defender, and chronicles his gradual transformation into his eventual Breaking Bad persona of Saul Goodman, the flamboyant criminal lawyer with ties to the drug cartel. A majority of the show takes place over the six-year period prior to the events of Breaking Bad, spanning from approximately 2002 to 2008. Jimmy is inspired by his older brother Chuck McGill to leave his Chicago-area conman past, when he was known as "Slippin' Jimmy". He initially works in the mailroom at his brother's Albuquerque law firm, Hamlin, Hamlin & McGill (HHM), where managing partner Howard Hamlin becomes his nemesis. While at HHM Jimmy befriends Kim Wexler, a fellow mailroom employee who completes law school and becomes one of the firm's associates, and their friendship later turns romantic. Jimmy is motivated by Chuck's success to finish college and complete a Juris Doctor degree through a correspondence law school, the fictitious University of American Samoa. After attaining admission to the bar but being denied employment at HHM, Jimmy's pursuits focus on low-paying clients, including working as a public defender. He later begins to build a practice in elder law, which leads to a prolonged lawsuit against a nursing home chain he discovers is defrauding its clients. He and Chuck begin working together on a class-action suit, which Chuck quickly turns over to HHM, squeezing Jimmy out. Jimmy begins to unravel due to Chuck's constant belittling, sabotage, and vindictive behavior toward him. Jimmy's life and career begin to intersect with the illegal narcotics trade and feature characters and story arcs that continue into Breaking Bad. Among these arcs is the uneasy relationship between rival members of a drug cartel. On one side is Gus Fring, a fried chicken entrepreneur whose restaurant chain is a front business for his narcotics distribution. On the other are the Salamancas, a Mexican crime family who claim to have begun the drug trade in New Mexico. They are led by Hector Salamanca, and later by his nephew Lalo Salamanca. Those caught up in the conflict between Gus and the Salamancas include Ignacio "Nacho" Varga, a Salamanca associate who wants to protect his father from harm, and Mike Ehrmantraut, a former Philadelphia police officer who becomes a fixer for Gus but also has ties to Jimmy. As his interactions with criminals continue, Jimmy takes on the persona of the colorful Saul Goodman, and he starts to draw on his conman past while his work as an attorney goes from questionable to unethical to illegal. In addition to selected scenes that take place within the Breaking Bad timeline, the show includes flashforwards, shown in black and white, to events following Breaking Bad. Taking place in 2010, these flashforwards show Jimmy living as a fugitive under the identity of Gene Takavic, the manager of a Cinnabon store in Omaha, Nebraska. The flashforwards comprise the opening scenes of the first five season premieres, and make up nearly the entirety of the episodes towards the end of the series. Bob Odenkirk as Jimmy McGill / Saul Goodman / Gene Takavic, a lawyer and a former scam artist, who becomes involved with the criminal world. Jonathan Banks as Mike Ehrmantraut, a former Philadelphia police officer working as a parking lot attendant at the Albuquerque courthouse, and later a private investigator, bodyguard and "cleaner". Rhea Seehorn as Kim Wexler, a lawyer who became a close friend of Jimmy's as she worked her way through the ranks at the Hamlin, Hamlin & McGill (HHM) law firm. She becomes Jimmy's confidante and later the two develop a romantic relationship and marry. Patrick Fabian as Howard Hamlin, the managing partner at Hamlin, Hamlin & McGill, who appears to be Jimmy's nemesis until it becomes clear that he was acting under Chuck McGill's orders. Michael Mando as Nacho Varga, an intelligent, ambitious member of Hector Salamanca's drug ring who also works for his father's upholstery shop. Michael McKean as Chuck McGill (seasons 1–3; special guest seasons 4 and 6), Jimmy's elder brother and a founding partner of HHM who is confined to his home because of his electromagnetic hypersensitivity and expresses disdain for his brother's legal career. Giancarlo Esposito as Gus Fring (seasons 3–6), the owner of the fast food restaurant chain Los Pollos Hermanos, which is a front to distribute cocaine for the Mexican cartel, in uneasy cooperation with the Salamanca family. He nurses grudges against cartel boss Don Eladio and Salamanca patriarch Hector Salamanca. Fring wants to switch from cocaine to locally produced methamphetamine so he can end his dependence on the cartel. Tony Dalton as Lalo Salamanca (seasons 5–6; recurring season 4), Hector's charismatic and sociopathic nephew, who helps run the family drug business after Hector's stroke. He is the cousin of Tuco, Leonel, and Marco. Kerry Condon as Stacey Ehrmantraut, Mike's widowed daughter-in-law and the mother of Kaylee Ehrmantraut Faith Healey (season 1), Abigail Zoe Lewis (seasons 2–4) and Juliet Donenfeld (seasons 5–6) as Kaylee Ehrmantraut, Mike's granddaughter Eileen Fogarty as Mrs. Nguyen, owner of a nail salon which houses Jimmy's law office in its utility room Peter Diseth as Deputy District Attorney Bill Oakley Joe DeRosa as Dr. Caldera, a veterinarian with ties to the criminal underworld Dennis Boutsikaris as Rich Schweikart, a partner at Schweikart & Cokely Mark Proksch as Daniel "Pryce" Wormald, a drug company employee who begins supplying Nacho and hires Mike as security Brandon K. Hampton as Ernesto, Chuck's assistant who works at HHM Josh Fadem as Marshall/Joey Dixon ("Camera Guy"), one of the three University of New Mexico (UNM) film students who help Jimmy film various projects Julian Bonfiglio as Phil ("Sound Guy"), one of the three UNM film students Jimmy hires for various film projects Jeremy Shamos and Julie Ann Emery as Craig and Betsy Kettleman, a county treasurer and his wife, accused of embezzlement Steven Levine and Daniel Spenser Levine as Lars and Cal Lindholm, twin skateboarders and small-time scam artists Míriam Colón as Abuelita Salamanca, Tuco's grandmother and Hector's mother Barry Shabaka Henley as Detective Sanders, a Philadelphia cop who was formerly partnered with Mike on the force Mel Rodriguez as Marco Pasternak, Jimmy's best friend and partner-in-crime in Cicero, Illinois Clea DuVall as Dr. Cruz, a doctor who treats Chuck and suspects his electromagnetic hypersensitivity condition is psychosomatic Jean Effron as Irene Landry, an elderly client of Jimmy McGill overcharged by the Sandpiper Crossing elder care home Steven Ogg as Sobchak, a petty crook for hire Ed Begley Jr. as Clifford Main, managing partner at Davis & Main where Jimmy worked during season two Omar Maskati as Omar, Jimmy's assistant at Davis & Main Jessie Ennis as Erin Brill, a lawyer at Davis & Main who is ordered to shadow Jimmy Juan Carlos Cantu as Manuel Varga, Nacho's father, who owns an Albuquerque upholstery shop Vincent Fuentes as Arturo Colon, a criminal associate of Hector Salamanca Rex Linn as Kevin Wachtell, chairman of Mesa Verde Bank and Trust and a client of HHM and Kim Cara Pifko as Paige Novick, senior legal counsel for Mesa Verde Bank and Trust and a friend of Kim Ann Cusack as Rebecca Bois, Chuck's ex-wife Julie Pearl as Assistant District Attorney Suzanne Ericsen Manuel Uriza as Ximenez Lecerda, an associate of Hector Salamanca Hayley Holmes as Cheri ("Make-Up Girl"/"Drama Girl"), one of the three University of New Mexico film students Jimmy hires for various projects Kimberly Hebert Gregory as Assistant District Attorney Kyra Hay Harrison Thomas as Lyle, the dedicated assistant manager of Los Pollos Hermanos Tamara Tunie as Anita, a member of Mike and Stacey's support group Bonnie Bartlett as Helen, Irene's friend and member of the affected class in the Sandpiper lawsuit Don Harvey (seasons 4–5) and Pat Healy (season 6) as Jeff, a taxi cab driver in the present that recognizes Gene as Saul Goodman Rainer Bock as Werner Ziegler, an engineer hired by Gus to plan and oversee construction of his meth "superlab" Ben Bela Böhm as Kai, a rebellious member of the crew Werner Ziegler assembles for the construction of Gus's meth "superlab" Stefan Kapičić as Casper, a member of Werner Ziegler's team Poorna Jagannathan as Maureen Bruckner, a specialist from Johns Hopkins who flew to Albuquerque to treat Hector after Gus arranged for a "generous grant" Keiko Agena as Viola Goto, Kim Wexler's paralegal Max Bickelhaup as Buddy, Jeff's friend who later helps Gene with his schemes Sasha Feldman and Morgan Krantz as Sticky and Ron, two petty crooks who are among "Saul Goodman"'s first clients Barry Corbin as Everett Acker, an old man living on leased property belonging to Mesa Verde whom Kim has to evict to make way for the bank's new call center Lennie Loftin as Genidowski, a con man hired by Jimmy and Kim to pose as Howard's private investigator Sandrine Holt as Cheryl Hamlin, Howard's estranged wife John Posey as Rand Casimiro, a retired judge who is mediating the Sandpiper case John Ennis as Lenny, a grocery store employee hired by Jimmy and Kim to impersonate Casimiro Carol Burnett as Marion, Jeff's mother who takes a liking to Gene Kevin Sussman as Mr. Lingk, a rich man with cancer who is targeted by Gene Raymond Cruz as Tuco Salamanca, a ruthless, psychopathic drug distributor in the South Valley (seasons 1–2) Jim Beaver as Lawson, a black market weapons dealer in Albuquerque (season 2) Maximino Arciniega as Domingo "Krazy-8" Molina, one of Tuco's distributors (seasons 2–5) Mark Margolis as Hector Salamanca, Tuco's uncle and high-ranking member of the cartel (seasons 2–6) Debrianna Mansini as Fran, a waitress at Loyola's Diner (seasons 2 and 4) Daniel and Luis Moncada as Leonel and Marco Salamanca, Tuco's cousins and Hector's nephews who are hitmen for the cartel (seasons 2, 4–6) Tina Parker as Francesca Liddy, Jimmy's receptionist (seasons 3–4, 6) Jeremiah Bitsui as Victor, Gus's henchman (seasons 3–6) Ray Campbell as Tyrus Kitt, a henchman on Gus Fring's payroll (seasons 3–6) JB Blanc as Dr. Barry Goodman, a doctor on Gus Fring's payroll (seasons 3–5) Steven Bauer as Don Eladio Vuente, the head of a drug cartel (seasons 3, 5–6) Javier Grajeda as Juan Bolsa, a high-level member of the drug cartel (seasons 3–6) Lavell Crawford as Huell Babineaux, a professional pickpocket hired by Jimmy (seasons 3–6) Laura Fraser as Lydia Rodarte-Quayle, a Madrigal Electromotive executive and associate of Gus Fring (seasons 3–5) Eric Steinig as Nick, a member of Gus's security team, later managed by Mike (seasons 4–6) Franc Ross as Ira, a burglar Jimmy hires; in Breaking Bad, he is the owner of Vamonos Pest who appears in "Hazard Pay" (season 4) David Costabile as Gale Boetticher, a chemist who is consulted by Gus (season 4) Dean Norris as Hank Schrader, a DEA agent and Walter White's brother-in-law (season 5) Steven Michael Quezada as Steven Gomez, Hank's DEA partner and best friend (season 5) Nigel Gibbs as Tim Roberts, a detective with the Albuquerque Police Department (seasons 5–6) Bryan Cranston as Walter White, a middle-aged high school chemistry teacher who, during the events of Breaking Bad, becomes involved with the drug trade and enlists the services of Saul to help launder his money (season 6) Aaron Paul as Jesse Pinkman, a former student of Walter who, during the events of Breaking Bad, helps Walter with cooking meth (season 6) Betsy Brandt as Marie Schrader, Hank's widow (season 6) The character of Saul Goodman first appeared during Breaking Bad's second season, in an episode that was also titled "Better Call Saul". The character was originally intended to appear in only four episodes, but soon became much more developed than the staff had planned. He would eventually stay on the series and become central to its narrative. As Breaking Bad continued its run, the character would grow in popularity with the audience. Bob Odenkirk, who portrayed Saul Goodman, speculated this was because he is "the program's least hypocritical figure", and "is good at his job". Vince Gilligan, who created and developed Breaking Bad, and Peter Gould, who wrote the episode with Goodman's first appearance, considered a Saul Goodman spinoff as early as 2009. Gould noted that over the course of Breaking Bad, there were a lot of "what ifs” their team considered, such as if the show won a Primetime Emmy Award, or if people would buy "Los Pollos Hermanos" T-shirts. The staff did not expect these events to come to fruition, but after they did, they started considering a spin-off featuring Saul as a thought experiment. With the growth of Saul's character, the writers saw ways to explore the character further. While filming the Breaking Bad episode "Full Measure", Gilligan asked Odenkirk his thoughts on a spinoff. In July 2012, Gilligan publicly hinted at the idea, stating that he liked "the idea of a lawyer show in which the main lawyer will do anything it takes to stay out of court", including settling on the courthouse steps. In April 2013, Better Call Saul was confirmed to be in development by Gilligan and Gould. In July 2013, before the second half of Breaking Bad's final season aired, Gilligan said he and Gould were still working out ideas for the spin-off, but a deal had not yet been made. Netflix was one of many interested distributors, but ultimately a deal was made between AMC and the Breaking Bad production company Sony Pictures Television. As Sony and AMC began to commit to a spinoff, Gilligan and Gould worked on what it would be about. They initially considered making it a half-hour show where Saul would see various clients – celebrities in guest roles – in his strip mall office, similarly to Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist, but they had no idea how to write for this type of format. They eventually fell back to planning for hour-long episodes. Gilligan described Breaking Bad as being "25-percent humor, 75-percent drama", and speculated that they would reverse that for Better Call Saul. While the intent was to add more humor, the show remained heavy with dramatic elements, with Odenkirk calling the first season "85 percent drama, 15 percent comedy." Gilligan and Gould initially believed that Saul Goodman was insufficient to carry the show by himself, with Gilligan thinking the character was "great flavoring" for a show but not the substance. Eventually they came to realize that Saul, in the Breaking Bad timeframe, was a man who had come to accept himself, and recognized the potential of telling the story of how Saul got to be that person. While several of the characters are lawyers in the show, Gilligan and Gould did not want to write a legal show, but instead a crime show, but one that would necessitate some legal elements. To help in these areas, the writers spoke to real lawyers and spent time observing cases at Los Angeles Superior Court, observing that the bulk of the activity in these cases was downtime while waiting for others to complete actions. Gilligan and Gould began as co-showrunners for the series. Former Breaking Bad writers Thomas Schnauz and Gennifer Hutchison joined the writing staff, with Schnauz serving as co-executive producer and Hutchison as supervising producer. Also joining the initial writing staff were Bradley Paul and former Breaking Bad writer's assistant Gordon Smith. Having learned several lessons from Breaking Bad related to foreshadowing without writing the foresight, Gilligan and Gould gave themselves more flexibility in how Better Call Saul's plot would develop over its run. From the beginning they had no firm idea where it would end up outside the connection to Breaking Bad. For example, Gilligan and Gould had already committed to the Better Call Saul title in the beginning, so that in following this route, they believed they had to quickly get from Jimmy McGill to Saul Goodman, or they would otherwise disappoint their audience. However, as they wrote the show, they realized "we don't want to get to Saul Goodman … and that's the tragedy". Another example includes Rhea Seehorn's performance as Kim Wexler during the first season further slowing Jimmy's transition, and putting more focus on the Jimmy–Kim relationship for the remainder of the series. Gilligan compared this to the impact Aaron Paul's acting had on Breaking Bad's ultimate pacing. In writing for Better Call Saul, Gilligan and Gould recognized they were including overlaps with Breaking Bad, and had ideas of characters that they would include, such as Gus Fring, though on no set timetable within the show's development. Gilligan described the writing approach as if developing two separate shows, one that centered on Jimmy/Saul, Kim, Chuck, and Howard, and a second on the more familiar Breaking Bad characters like Mike and Gus. Where possible, they had written in minor Breaking Bad characters in smaller parts or as Easter eggs to fans, but Gilligan preferred to include such major Breaking Bad characters as Walter or Jesse only if this seemed unconstrained and satisfactory to both the production team and the audiences. Because of the closeness to the Breaking Bad storyline, a writer would be tasked at the start of each season to rewatch all 62 episodes of the show and verify that the scripts for the Better Call Saul season introduced no conflicts. As the show continued, the show's "brain trust" consisting of script coordinators Ariel Levine and Kathleen Williams-Foshee reviewed each script to help maintain the continuity with Breaking Bad, including tracking minor character traits and assuring small details from the previous show were kept correct if brought up again. Gilligan left the Better Call Saul writing staff early in the third season to focus on other projects, resulting in Gould becoming sole showrunner. This transition had been planned since the show's debut. Upon his departure, Gilligan expressed his hopes to return to the writers room during the show's final season. He remained involved in the fourth and fifth seasons, but had little to do with developing the show's contents during this period. Instead, Gilligan reduced his role to being a "director for hire", having directed an episode during each season when he was not on the writing staff. Gilligan went on to credit Gould for maintaining the series' high quality. Gould would bring Gilligan back to the writers room for the sixth and final season, calling it "wonderful to have him there, so we can finish this show that we started together." Bob Odenkirk confirmed he would reprise Saul Goodman in the starring role when the series was first announced, but his character would be introduced as lawyer Jimmy McGill. In January 2014, it was announced that Jonathan Banks would reprise his Breaking Bad role as Mike Ehrmantraut and be a series regular. New cast members included Michael McKean as McGill's elder brother Chuck. McKean previously guest-starred in an episode of Odenkirk's Mr. Show and Gilligan's X-Files episode "Dreamland". Rhea Seehorn auditioned and got the role of Kimberly "Kim" Wexler in April 2014, her character being described as "prestigious attorney ... whose hard life is complicated by her romantic entanglements with somebody else at the firm". In May 2014, Patrick Fabian was cast on the show as Howard Hamlin, a "Kennedy-esque lawyer who's winning at life". After impressing Gilligan and Gould with his audition tape and screen test, Michael Mando was cast as the "smart and calculating criminal" Ignacio "Nacho" Varga. Mando's character had been previously mentioned but not seen in the Breaking Bad episode "Better Call Saul". Going into the third season, Giancarlo Esposito was added to the main cast as Gus Fring, a drug kingpin who previously served as one of Breaking Bad's main antagonists. Esposito was previously a starring cast member in Breaking Bad for the same role. McKean would leave the series at season's end due to his character being written out, but would make appearances in the next season and the series finale. Tony Dalton made his first appearance as Lalo Salamanca in the fourth season, and would be promoted to the main cast for the fifth. Similar to Nacho, Lalo had been a character mentioned only by name in the same Breaking Bad episode "Better Call Saul". Before the second season, Gilligan confirmed that more of the prominent Breaking Bad characters would be making guest appearances on the spin-off, but remained vague on which ones were likely to be seen. By the next season, Gilligan said that the show had been on long enough that any reuse of Breaking Bad characters would require more than "just a cameo or an Alfred Hitchcock walkthrough", and that their appearances would need to be essential to the story. Breaking Bad lead actors Bryan Cranston and Aaron Paul regularly said they would be open to reprising their respective roles as Walter White and Jesse Pinkman on Better Call Saul. However, both maintained that they would appear only if Gilligan found a sufficiently good reason to bring them on the show. Paul mentioned the possibility of a cameo during the first season but this fell through. Both Cranston and Paul would eventually appear in the final season. Dean Norris, who was also a starring cast member on Breaking Bad, stated he could not be part of the earlier seasons, partly due to his involvement in the CBS series Under the Dome. However, he reprised his role as Hank Schrader as a guest star in the fifth season. Plans were initially made for Betsy Brandt to reprise her role as Hank's wife Marie Schrader in a cameo in the second season, but the writer's room objected, considering the idea to be distracting for audiences. Brandt would eventually reprise the role in the final season. Other Breaking Bad cast members spoke of the potential of being on Better Call Saul. Before the series began, Anna Gunn mentioned a "talk" with Gilligan over possible guest appearances as Skyler White. Bill Burr was set to return as Patrick Kuby in the fifth season, but scheduling fell through due to him needing to attend to a personal matter. After the series ended, Gould mentioned his desire to bring back the remaining Breaking Bad characters for the finale, but he and the writing staff could not find a proper way to have them fit into the story. Principal photography for Better Call Saul's six seasons took place from June 2, 2014, to February 9, 2022. Like its predecessor, Better Call Saul is set in and around Albuquerque, New Mexico, with filming primarily taking place at Albuquerque Studios. Gilligan directed the pilot. Additional filming was done in March 2022, after principal photography for the series ended, for the opening teaser of the season six episode "Point and Shoot". With several crew members but no cast members on hand, the scene was filmed in Leo Carrillo State Beach, California. This was the only time the series was filmed outside of New Mexico.: 1:00:01–1:01:29  Notable exterior locations include the Twisters restaurant used previously in Breaking Bad for Gus's Los Pollos Hermanos, a parking lot kiosk at the Albuquerque Convention Center for where Mike worked in the first few seasons, the Old Bernalillo County Courthouse as the local courthouse, and two nearby office buildings in the North Valley, including Northrop Grumman's, that collectively are used for the HHM office spaces. Jimmy's back office is located in an actual nail salon, which the producers accommodated by working with the owners. The Salamanca's restaurant is a real business in the South Valley that production modified slightly for the show, but which otherwise remained open. The scenes set in Omaha are filmed at Cottonwood Mall in Albuquerque; production worked with Cinnabon to bring in the period-specific equipment and service items for the segments, and the extras in the store during these scenes are Cinnabon employees. The New Mexico Film Office reported that the first four seasons of Better Call Saul brought over US$120 million into the state, and they have hired 1,600 crew for each season and a total of 11,300 extras. Better Call Saul employs Breaking Bad's signature time jumps. Notably, the opening episode for the first five seasons started with a black and white flash-forward to a period in the years after the finale of Breaking Bad. Here, Saul has been relocated to Omaha, Nebraska, as "Gene", a manager of a Cinnabon store, and remains paranoid about anyone discovering his past identity. This was foreshadowed in the penultimate episode of Breaking Bad, "Granite State", in which Saul tells Walter: "If I'm lucky, a month from now, best-case scenario, I'm managing a Cinnabon in Omaha." The show's director of photography was Arthur Albert for the first two seasons, and Marshall Adams starting with season 3. Additionally, Paul Donachie served as a cinematographer on episodes "Namaste" (2020), "Carrot and Stick" (2022) and "Hit and Run" (2022). Seasons 1 and 2 was filmed mainly on RED Dragon cameras. Starting with season 3, Panasonic VariCam Pure were incorporated due to their extra low-light sensitivity. This allowed the crew to shoot extra wide exterior shots at night as well as during the day, and to shoot on sets in near total darkness, such as nighttime in Chuck's unelectrified house. For scenes requiring to film from cramped spaces, a Panasonic Lumix GH4 camera was used. In season 4, three RED and two VariCam Pure cameras were used. For seasons 5 and 6, mostly Arri ALEXA LF was used. Each episode's title sequence features a different low-quality image that recalls Saul Goodman's days on Breaking Bad. This includes the inflatable Statue of Liberty balloon that sat atop Saul's office, a drawer of burner phones kept in his desk, and a bus stop bench that advertised his business. Gould and Gilligan were inspired by the poor quality of early VHS tapes and the notoriously low production values of 1980s public-access television, and from the fact that Saul Goodman's ads on Breaking Bad were done in a similar style. They intended for the title sequences to appear "purposefully shitty" in order to stand out from its contemporaries, which generally had increased visual quality and production standards. Some of the title sequences were put together from unused footage from Breaking Bad, but others were filmed specifically to create new ones. The title sequences were put together by assistant editor Curtis Thurber, and scored by Little Barrie guitarist Barrie Cadogan. When Cadogan was putting the music together, he was told the producers wanted a piece of music that would be cut abruptly at 15 seconds. As every season except for the last has ten episodes each, the title credits for every season's corresponding episode number would reuse the same image. However, beginning with the second season, each of the episode's title sequences would continue to decline in picture quality by intermittently flashing black and white, and continue to lose color with each passing season. This caused many to theorize that this symbolized Jimmy McGill's storyline gradually transitioning to that of his post-Breaking Bad alter-ego Gene Takavic, whose scenes were entirely in black and white. With the final season featuring thirteen episodes instead of the usual ten, the title sequences would take a new format. During "Nippy", the title sequence features Saul Goodman's "World's Greatest Lawyer" mug falling off his desk and shattering on the floor, as was typical during a season's tenth episode. However, the title image and music prematurely stops and is replaced by a blue screen, recreating the effects of a home video recording on a VCR, and then displayed the show's title and creator credits. This is also the first episode to take place entirely after the events of Breaking Bad. The remaining three title sequences retain the blue background, but briefly flash to an image previously unseen in the intro, with a distorted version of the theme song playing underneath. They then revert to the blue background again and display the title and creator credits. Before the show resumes, they again briefly flash to another new image that will be seen later on in the episodes. The complete series was issued on Blu-ray and DVD in region 1 on December 6, 2022. The set spanned 19 discs and included 70 hours of bonus features. Better Call Saul's episodes are split between two main timelines. The primary timeline begins in 2002, six years before the first episode of Breaking Bad. During this period, where a majority of the series takes place, Saul Goodman mainly practices as a lawyer in Albuquerque, New Mexico under his birthname Jimmy McGill. The secondary timeline takes place in 2010, following events of Breaking Bad's finale, where Saul has fled Albuquerque and hides in Omaha, Nebraska under the alias Gene Takavic. This later timeline would be shown only in the cold open in the first five season premieres, but would be fully explored in the last four episodes of the series. The first teaser trailer debuted on AMC on August 10, 2014, and confirmed its premiere date of February 2015. On November 20, 2014, AMC announced the series would have a two-night premiere; the first episode aired on Sunday, February 8, 2015, at 10:00 pm (ET), and then moved into its regular time slot the following night, airing new episodes Mondays at 10:00 pm until the season concluded on April 6, 2015. It was released on Blu-ray and DVD in region 1 on November 10, 2015; bonus features include audio commentaries for every episode, uncensored episodes, deleted scenes, gag reel, and several behind-the-scenes featurettes. A limited edition Blu-ray set was also released with 3D packaging and a postcard vinyl of the Better Call Saul theme song by Junior Brown. In 2002, Jimmy schemes to represent Craig Kettleman, accused of embezzlement, leading to encounters with psychotic drug lord Tuco Salamanca and his lieutenant Nacho. Jimmy also cares for his brother Chuck, who is housebound with electromagnetic hypersensitivity. While pursuing elder law, Jimmy learns of seniors being defrauded by the Sandpiper retirement community. As the class action lawsuit against Sandpiper grows, Chuck suggests giving it to his law firm, Hamlin, Hamlin & McGill. Jimmy receives a small of counsel fee and a share of any future settlement, but is blocked from participation. Jimmy learns Chuck sabotaged his legal career out of resentment. After the death of an old friend, Jimmy finds success when Davis & Main, another firm HHM brought in to assist with the Sandpiper case, offers to hire him. In 2010, Gene manages a Cinnabon by day, but in the evening reminisces about his life as Saul by watching a VHS tape of his old television advertisements. Prior to the series' launch, on June 19, 2014, AMC renewed the series for a second season of 13 episodes to premiere in early 2016, which was later reduced to 10 episodes. The season premiered on February 15, 2016, and concluded on April 18, 2016. It released on Blu-ray and DVD in region 1 on November 15, 2016; bonus features include audio commentaries for every episode and several behind-the-scenes featurettes. In 2002, Jimmy works as an associate at D&M, but quits after his ostentatious legal style doesn't mesh with the firm's corporate demeanor. Kim is demoted by Chuck's partner, Howard Hamlin, because of Jimmy's actions. She secures banking firm Mesa Verde as an HHM client, although Howard denies her credit. Kim quits HHM and opens a shared private practice with Jimmy. Jimmy sabotages Chuck's work for Mesa Verde, which drops HHM and hires Kim, but Chuck discovers this and tricks Jimmy into confessing. Nacho wants to hire Mike Ehrmantraut to kill Tuco, but Mike instead removes him from the Salamanca organization by engineering his imprisonment. Hector Salamanca, cartel elder and Tuco's uncle, confronts Mike. Mike attempts to assassinate Hector, but is mysteriously interrupted. In 2010, Gene accidentally locks himself in the dumpster room when closing out the Cinnabon for the night. Instead of alerting police, he spends the night waiting for the janitor to open the door. AMC announced on March 15, 2016, that Better Call Saul was renewed for a 10-episode third season, which premiered April 10, 2017, and concluded on June 19, 2017. It was released on Blu-ray and DVD in region 1 on January 16, 2018; bonus features include audio commentaries for every episode and several behind-the-scenes featurettes. In 2003, the results of the disciplinary hearing have Jimmy's law license suspended and Chuck's hypersensitivity condition is revealed to be psychosomatic. After Jimmy sabotages Chuck's insurance, Howard urges him to retire, but Chuck sues HHM in spite. Howard buys him out of the firm, leading Chuck to commit suicide. Gus prevents Hector's assassination, and Mike attacks Hector's trucks to steal $250,000 on Gus's orders. To launder the money, Gus arranges for Mike's hire as a contracted security consultant at Madrigal. Hector plans to take over the business of Nacho's father, so his son attempts to kill Hector by sabotaging his angina medication. Hector suffers a stroke during a confrontation with cartel lieutenant Juan Bolsa, which renders him comatose. In 2010, Gene points mall security guards towards a shoplifter during his lunch break. Later, a stressed Gene suddenly collapses during his work. Following the third season's end on June 27, 2017, AMC renewed the series for a 10-episode fourth season, which premiered on August 6, 2018, and concluded on October 8, 2018. It was released on Blu-ray and DVD in region 1 on May 7, 2019; bonus features include audio commentary for every episode and several behind-the-scenes featurettes. In 2003, Jimmy regains his outgoing demeanor after Howard shoulders the blame for Chuck's death. Jimmy manages a cell phone store but earns more by reselling prepaid phones to criminals. A year later, his law license reinstatement is denied over lack of remorse for Chuck. After faking mourning, he successfully appeals and practices as "Saul Goodman". Gus learns Nacho attempted to kill Hector and blackmails him into undermining the Salamancas. Mike escorts engineers who evaluate Gus's industrial laundry site as a potential underground meth lab. Gus hires Werner Ziegler to oversee construction, but Mike is ordered to kill Werner when he goes AWOL to spend time with his wife. Hector recovers from his stroke, but is mute and can only move his right index finger. His nephew, Lalo Salamanca, arrives to run Hector's business, and learns some details of Gus's construction project. In 2010, Gene is hospitalized after his collapse and later discharged. He becomes uneasy when a taxi driver with an Albuquerque Isotopes air freshener seems to recognize him. The series was renewed for a fifth season on July 28, 2018, just prior to the airing of the fourth season. The fifth season was not expected to air until 2020; according to AMC's Sarah Barnett, the delay was "driven by talent needs". The 10-episode fifth season would start airing with a special Sunday broadcast on February 23, 2020, with following episodes to air on Mondays until the season concluded on April 20, 2020. It was released on Blu-ray and DVD in region 1 on November 24, 2020; bonus features include cast and crew audio commentaries on every episode, deleted scenes, and various behind-the-scenes featurettes. In 2004, Jimmy's law practice as Saul Goodman draws him into Albuquerque's drug trade and he is conflicted when Howard offers him a position at HHM. Kim balances her Mesa Verde and pro bono work with her own feelings for Jimmy, and finds herself employing similar conman-style tactics. Jimmy and Kim later devise a plan to ruin Howard to settle the Sandpiper case. Lalo's presence in Albuquerque forces Gus to suspend construction of his meth lab. Nacho and Mike become pawns in the ongoing feud between the Salamancas and Gus. After Lalo is arrested for murder, he hires Jimmy to represent him and arrange bail, which almost kills Jimmy. After an unsuccessful attempt on Lalo's life by Gus's hired assassins after his release, Lalo deduces that Nacho has betrayed him. In 2010, during another lunch break, Gene is approached by the taxi driver, Jeff, and his friend Buddy. Jeff reveals he recognized Gene as Saul Goodman from when he previously lived in Albuquerque. Gene admits he is living with a secret identity. AMC renewed the series for a sixth season on January 16, 2020, with a scheduled premiere in 2021. Showrunner Peter Gould confirmed it would be the show's final season and consist of 13 episodes rather than the usual 10. Production experienced long delays due to COVID-19 and star Bob Odenkirk needing several weeks to fully recover from a heart attack he experienced on set. The sixth and final season was split into two halves; the first half premiered on April 18, 2022, and concluded on May 23, 2022, while the last half premiered on July 11, 2022, and concluded on August 15, 2022. The complete season was released on Blu-ray and DVD in region 1 on December 6, 2022; bonus features include cast and crew audio commentaries on every episode, deleted scenes, outtakes, and various behind-the-scenes featurettes. In 2004, Nacho attempts to flee from the Salamancas after the attempt on Lalo's life, but after Gus falsely implicates him, Nacho sacrifices himself in exchange for his father's safety. Jimmy and Kim smear Howard's reputation, thereby forcing a settlement of the Sandpiper case. Howard confronts them, but is murdered by Lalo. After forcing Kim to act as a diversion, Lalo ambushes Gus and accesses the construction site of Gus's meth lab. Gus kills Lalo with a hidden gun. Mike makes Howard's death appear as a suicide, and oversees the burial of Howard and Lalo beneath the lab. A traumatized Kim quits the law and divorces Jimmy. Some time later, Jimmy has fully transformed into Saul Goodman, foreshadowing the events of Breaking Bad four years later. In 2010, Gene approaches Jeff and Buddy with an offer to rob a department store. After reaching out to Kim, who now lives in Florida, Gene devises a scheme to obtain financial identification of rich single men at bars he can sell for profit. When the scheme goes wrong, Buddy quits the operation, Jeff is arrested, and Gene is eventually caught. He is extradited to Albuquerque for the trial and feigns testimony implicating Kim so she can be summoned to court. He confesses to Kim and those at the trial about his crimes during the events of Breaking Bad and Better Call Saul, getting an 86-year sentence. Jimmy is recognized as Saul in prison and gains popularity with the inmates. Kim visits him and they share a cigarette before parting again. Better Call Saul would air on cable network AMC. The series premiere drew in 4.4 million and 4 million in the 18–49 and 25–54 demographics, respectively, and received an overall viewership of 6.9 million. This was the record for the highest-rated scripted series premiere in basic cable history, until it was surpassed later the same year by another AMC series, Fear the Walking Dead. In December 2013, Netflix announced that the entire first season would be available for streaming in the U.S. after the airing of the first-season finale, and in Latin America and Europe each episode would be available a few days after the episode airs in the U.S. However, the first season was not released on Netflix in the U.S. until February 1, 2016. Internationally, episodes of the second season became available the day after they aired in the U.S. Netflix would be the exclusive video-on-demand provider for the series and made the content available in all its territories, except for Australia and New Zealand. In Australia, Better Call Saul premiered on the streaming service Stan on February 9, 2015, acting as the service's flagship program. In New Zealand, the show was exclusive to the video-on-demand service Lightbox before moving to Neon in 2020 when both services were merged. The episodes were available for viewing within three days of broadcast in the U.S. In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the series was acquired by Netflix on December 16, 2013, and the first episode premiered on February 9, 2015, with the second episode released the following day. Every subsequent episode was released each week thereafter. In Ireland, the series began airing on Irish TV network TG4 on October 18, 2022. In India, the series was broadcast on Colors Infinity within 24 hours of the U.S. broadcast. During the final season's run in 2022, each episode would be available to stream the day they premiered on AMC+, AMC's streaming service which first launched in June 2020. The sixth season premiere resulted in the biggest day of new subscriber sign-ups for AMC+, and by the mid-season finale episodic viewership on the streaming service rose by 61%. Upon the release of the series finale, the app experienced an outage, causing many users to be logged out. AMC later reported that first-day viewing numbers for the finale on AMC+ was four times as big as the season premiere, and called the series' final season the highest acquisition driver in the history of the streaming service. Better Call Saul received critical acclaim and is considered to be an outstanding example of how to successfully produce a prequel and spinoff work that defies expectations. Many critics have called Better Call Saul a worthy successor to Breaking Bad and some have even deemed it superior to its predecessor. In September 2019, The Guardian ranked the show at No. 48 on its list of the 100 best TV shows of the 21st century, describing it as "A supremely measured character piece that has steadily improved as its central tragedy has materialised." In 2021, Empire ranked Better Call Saul at No. 27 on their list of The 100 Greatest TV Shows of All Time. Also in 2021, it was voted the 23rd-best TV series of the 21st century by the BBC, as picked by 206 TV experts from around the world. In September 2022, Rolling Stone listed Better Call Saul as the 32nd greatest TV show of all time, in its updated list from 2016. The first season has a 97% approval rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, with an average rating of 8.1/10 based on 291 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "Better Call Saul is a quirky, dark character study that manages to stand on its own without being overshadowed by the series that spawned it." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a "generally favorable" score of 78 based on 43 reviews. The second season has a 97% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 8.7/10 based on 182 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "Better Call Saul continues to tighten its hold on viewers with a batch of episodes that inject a surge of dramatic energy while showcasing the charms of its talented lead." On Metacritic, it has a score of 85 out of 100, based on 18 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". The third season has a 98% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 8.75/10 based on 175 reviews. The website's critical consensus is, "Better Call Saul shows no signs of slipping in season 3, as the introduction of more familiar faces causes the inevitable transformation of its lead to pick up exciting speed." On Metacritic, it has a score of 87 out of 100, based on 18 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". The fourth season has a 99% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 8.9/10 based on 185 reviews. The website's critical consensus states, "Well-crafted and compelling as ever, Better Call Saul deftly balances the show it was and the one it will inevitably become." On Metacritic, it has a score of 87 out of 100, based on 16 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim". The fifth season has a 99% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 8.9/10 based on 185 reviews. The website's critical consensus is, "Grounded by Bob Odenkirk's endlessly nuanced, lived-in performance, Better Call Saul's fifth season is a darkly funny, vividly realized master class in tragedy." On Metacritic, it has a score of 92 out of 100 based on 16 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". The sixth season has a 99% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 9.4/10 based on 182 reviews. The website's critical consensus is, "Better Call Saul remains as masterfully in control as Jimmy McGill keeps insisting he is in this final season, where years of simmering storytelling come to a scintillating boil." On Metacritic, the season has a score of 94 out of 100 based on 20 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". After the airing of the series finale, Stuart Jeffries of The Guardian said that the series had surprisingly surpassed its predecessor in quality, saying: "Over six series, Better Call Saul evolved into a more profound and beautiful drama about human corruption than its predecessor. It mutated into something visually more sumptuous than Breaking Bad, while never, for a moment, losing its verbal dexterity and moral compass". Craig Elvy of Screen Rant also opined that the series was better than its predecessor, saying: "Jimmy McGill's spinoff leaves a very familiar legacy – sustained and enthusiastic praise from audiences and critics, capped by an ending that satisfies across the board." He went on to say: "When Better Call Saul began, many would've hoped the spinoff could either escape Breaking Bad's shadow, or somehow enhance Walt and Jesse's story with illuminating new details. Few dared dream Better Call Saul would achieve both, and the sheer ambition to create a spinoff that wholly embraces its predecessor whilst also existing in a totally different realm exemplifies why Better Call Saul has an ever-so-slight edge over Breaking Bad." Jeremy Urquhart of Collider made a comparison between the quality of both series, saying: "Breaking Bad succeeds as a crime-thriller tragedy with a fast-paced plot, and Better Call Saul works as a slower-paced, character-focused drama (with some dark comedy)". He said the list "doesn't aim to argue that one is better than the other. It's a matter of personal preference, but it's hard to deny that there are certain things Better Call Saul does better, but also some areas where it isn't quite as great as its parent show." Better Call Saul has received 53 Emmy Award nominations. It has received seven nominations for Outstanding Drama Series. Bob Odenkirk has received six nominations for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series. Jonathan Banks and Giancarlo Esposito have each been nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series; four times for Banks and twice for Esposito. Rhea Seehorn has been nominated twice for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series. Michael McKean was nominated for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series. The series has also received eight nominations for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series and one nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series. Better Call Saul has its own set of official multimedia spin-offs and related media within the Breaking Bad franchise. This includes a talk show, several web series and digital shorts, comic books, and an insider podcast. Jensen, Jeff (January 28, 2015). "Better Call Saul". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved April 1, 2015. Meslow, Scott (April 10, 2017). "Better Call Saul Is Finally Becoming Breaking Bad". GQ. Archived from the original on April 19, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2018. Lowry, Brian (January 21, 2015). "TV Review: 'Better Call Saul'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 11, 2015. Retrieved April 1, 2015. Thomas, Kaitlin (August 2, 2018). "Better Call Saul Has Evolved Into One of TV's Greatest Tragedies". TV Guide. Archived from the original on August 5, 2018. Retrieved August 5, 2018. Shore, Matt (September 5, 2018). "How 'Better Call Saul's Final Season Made Perfect Use of Black and White". Collider. Archived from the original on November 16, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2023. Heritage, Stuart (October 11, 2018). "'S'all good, man': How Better Call Saul became superior to Breaking Bad". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018. Kelly, Stephen (June 20, 2017). "The perfect prequel: how Better Call Saul left Breaking Bad in its dust". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 21, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Turner, Julia (April 18, 2016). "Better Call Saul Is Better Than Breaking Bad". Slate. Archived from the original on September 27, 2018. Retrieved September 25, 2018. Cornet, Roth (September 11, 2013). "Breaking Bad Spinoff Series Better Call Saul Confirmed". IGN. Archived from the original on September 13, 2013. Retrieved September 11, 2013. Dibdin, Emma (January 16, 2018). "'It Had Never Been Done on Television Before': The Oral History of Breaking Bad". Esquire. Archived from the original on July 17, 2019. Retrieved August 2, 2023. Hibberd, James (July 11, 2014). "'Better Call Saul': New photos, details from 'Breaking Bad' spin-off". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 24, 2015. Retrieved February 24, 2015. Snierson, Dan (July 17, 2018). "Better Call Saul to show scenes set during Breaking Bad". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 17, 2018. Retrieved July 17, 2018. Segal, David (March 23, 2015). "'Better Call Saul Recap: What Kind of Show Is This?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 13, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2021. Saporito, Jeff. "How has Bob Odenkirk interpreted and evolved his "Better Call Saul" character after "Breaking Bad"?". screenprism.com. Archived from the original on April 19, 2017. Retrieved April 19, 2017. Smith, Kyle (May 1, 2022). "Everybody Loves Bob". National Review. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2022. Talking Bad. Episode 3. August 25, 2013. AMC. Hiatt, Brian (March 16, 2015). "Bob Odenkirk on 'Saul' and 'Mr. Show''s Non-Reunion". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 24, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2019. Potts, Kimberly (November 26, 2013). "'Breaking Bad' Spinoff Scoop From the Man Who Created Saul Goodman". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on August 14, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2018. "Comic-Con Q&A: Vince Gilligan on 'Breaking Bad'". Deadline Hollywood. July 15, 2012. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved July 19, 2012. Andreeva, Nellie (September 11, 2013). "'Breaking Bad' Saul Goodman Spinoff A Go At AMC, Will Serve As Prequel To Original". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved September 13, 2013. Andreeva, Nellie (April 9, 2013). "AMC Eyes 'Breaking Bad' Spinoff Toplined By Bob Odenkirk". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 19, 2014. Retrieved April 9, 2013. Molloy, Tim (July 2, 2013). "Breaking Bad Creator Vince Gilligan: Saul Goodman Spinoff Moving 'Full Speed Ahead'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 9, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2013. Guthrie, Melissa; Rose, Lacey (September 18, 2013). "How AMC Almost Lost Breaking Bad Spinoff Better Call Saul to Netflix". The Hollywood Reporter. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on March 15, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2014. Sepinwall, Alan (August 3, 2018). "A Candid Conversation With Vince Gilligan on 'Better Call Saul'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 1, 2020. Retrieved February 29, 2020. Sandberg, Bryn Elise (October 27, 2014). "Bob Odenkirk on 'Better Call Saul': "It's Total Drama"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 18, 2018. Retrieved November 21, 2014. Todd vanDerWerff, Emily (February 3, 2015). "Better Call Saul's Vince Gilligan and Peter Gould on constructing the Breaking Bad spinoff". Vox. Archived from the original on April 7, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Kondolojy, Amanda (June 19, 2014). "'Better Call Saul' Renewed for Second Season by AMC; First Season Pushed Back to 2015". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 22, 2014. Retrieved June 19, 2014. Littleton, Cynthia (December 20, 2013). "'Breaking Bad' Writers Join 'Better Call Saul' Staff". Variety. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved January 12, 2014. Sepinwall, Alan (January 17, 2018). "Vince Gilligan On The Toughest Jams The 'Breaking Bad' Writers Put Walter White Into". Uproxx. Archived from the original on February 29, 2020. Retrieved February 29, 2020. Sepinwall, Alan (March 25, 2020). "How Rhea Seehorn Became the MVP of 'Better Call Saul'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 25, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Keveney, Bill (March 2, 2020). "Exclusive: Dean Norris on revisiting his 'Breaking Bad' character on 'Better Call Saul'". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2020. Uwgu, Reggie (August 18, 2022). "Meet the 'Better Call Saul' Staffers Who Kept Its Story Straight". The New York Times. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Birnbaum, Debra (April 5, 2017). "'Better Call Saul's' 'Breaking' Point: How It's Gearing Up for Gus Fring". Variety. Archived from the original on July 22, 2020. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Harding, Amanda (March 30, 2020). "Vince Gilligan Gets All the Credit for 'Better Call Saul' But Said He Has 'Very Little' to Do With the Show — It's All Peter Gould". Showbiz Cheatsheet. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Grant, Drew (October 4, 2018). "'Better Call Saul' 4x9 Recap: So Long, Farewell, Auf Wiedersehen, Adieu". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 19, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Schneider, Michael (April 6, 2020). "'Better Call Saul' Co-Creator Vince Gilligan on Directing the Most Challenging Episode of His Career". Variety. Archived from the original on April 7, 2020. Retrieved April 6, 2020. Schneider, Michael (April 21, 2020). "Better Call Saul Co-Creator Peter Gould on That Explosive Season Finale and How Kim May Be Breaking Bad". Variety. Archived from the original on April 22, 2020. Retrieved April 22, 2020. Kenneally, Tim (January 27, 2014). "'Breaking Bad' Prequel 'Better Call Saul' Enlists Jonathan Banks". TheWrap. Archived from the original on October 16, 2016. Retrieved January 27, 2014. Friedlander, Whitney (April 30, 2014). "Michael McKean Joins 'Breaking Bad' Prequel 'Better Call Saul'". Variety. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2014. Silman, Anna (April 6, 2015). "Michael McKean: "Better Call Saul" is about "the American escape hatch instead of the American dream"". Salon. Archived from the original on February 29, 2020. Retrieved April 3, 2016. Friedlander, Whitney (July 11, 2014). "'Better Call Saul': Cast, Timeline Details and New Photos". Variety. Archived from the original on July 12, 2014. Retrieved July 12, 2014. Aguilera, Leanne (May 8, 2014). "Breaking Bad Spinoff Casts Key Roles—See Who!". E! Online. Archived from the original on September 16, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2020. Gomez, Adrian (February 22, 2015). "'Better Call Saul's bad guy looks forward to season two". Albuquerque Journal. Archived from the original on April 10, 2019. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Real, Evan (June 20, 2018). "'Better Call Saul' and 'Breaking Bad' Overlap to Get "Bigger and Bigger" With Season 4". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 21, 2018. Retrieved June 21, 2018. Nemetz, Dave (January 14, 2017). "Better Call Saul Season 3: Yep, Giancarlo Esposito Will Be Breaking Bad". TVLine. Archived from the original on June 22, 2018. Retrieved June 21, 2018. Dwilson, Stephanie Dube (June 20, 2017). "'Better Call Saul': What Happened to Chuck in the Finale? [SPOILERS]". Heavy. Archived from the original on February 25, 2018. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Ramos, Dino-Ray (April 8, 2019). "'Better Call Saul' Adds Tony Dalton As Series Regular For Season 5". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 9, 2019. Retrieved April 8, 2019. Bernardino, Shiena (May 20, 2015). "'Better Call Saul' season 2 air date, spoilers, plot news: More 'Breaking Bad' appearances, major character to die next season?". Archived from the original on June 12, 2015. Retrieved May 25, 2015. Snierson, Dan (June 29, 2018). "Breaking Bad creator 'desperately' wants Walt and Jesse in Better Call Saul". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 30, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Atkinson, John (May 8, 2020). "Bryan Cranston & Aaron Paul are Ready To Return For Better Call Saul". Screen Rant. Saint-Laurent, Quebec, Canada. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved June 14, 2021. Pearson, Ryan (March 9, 2014). "Aaron Paul wants in, Dean Norris out for 'Better Call Saul,' the 'Breaking Bad' spinoff". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 22, 2017. Retrieved May 1, 2014. Whitney, Erin (June 13, 2014). "Aaron Paul Offers Two Different 'Better Call Saul' Scenarios For Jesse Pinkman". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on June 14, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2014. Shanfeld, Ethan (April 9, 2022). "'Better Call Saul': Bryan Cranston and Aaron Paul Will Guest Star in Final Season". Variety. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Dekel, Jonathan (July 3, 2014). "Dean Norris says appearance on Better Call Saul unlikely: CBS, exec Les Moonves 'won't let me do it'". The National Post. Archived from the original on July 7, 2014. Retrieved July 3, 2014. Snierson, Dan (January 16, 2020). "'Better Call Saul' season 5 to feature the late Robert Forster, Dean Norris". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 17, 2020. Retrieved January 17, 2020. Snierson, Dan (April 22, 2016). "'Breaking Bad' alum Betsy Brandt talks nixed Marie cameo on 'Better Call Saul'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 2, 2020. Retrieved June 12, 2021. Osborne, James (August 19, 2022). "Actually, Marie had the most important cameo in Better Call Saul's s finale". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on August 21, 2022. Retrieved August 21, 2022. Dos Santos, Kristin (May 13, 2014). "Anna Gunn Coming to Breaking Bad Spinoff? Star Reveals There's Been Talk—Plus, Why We're Dying Over Gracepoint!". E! Online. Archived from the original on November 29, 2015. Retrieved June 4, 2014. Sepinwall, Alan (August 1, 2022). "'Better Call Saul' Writer on Finally Entering the World of 'Breaking Bad'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 2, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Mullen, Amanda (September 27, 2021). "'Better Call Saul': Why Bill Burr Didn't Return for the 'Breaking Bad' Prequel". Showbiz Cheatsheet. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2021. Sepinwall, Alan (August 15, 2022). "Better Call Saul Creator Explains the Series Finale". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 16, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Snierson, Dan (August 16, 2022). "Better Call Saul co-creator on Jimmy's shocking move in the finale — and that Jimmy-Kim reunion". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 16, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. O'Neal, Sean (June 3, 2014). "It's time to begin overanalyzing the first Better Call Saul set photos". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on February 11, 2015. Retrieved June 4, 2014. Walsh, Savannah (February 11, 2022). "Bob Odenkirk Says Goodbye to Better Call Saul: "Honored to Have Been Part of It"". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on February 11, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Davids, Brian (July 13, 2022). "How Better Call Saul Writer-EP Gordon Smith Brought a 13-Year-Old Breaking Bad Story to a Close". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 16, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Christine (June 2, 2014). "'Breaking Bad' prequel 'Better Call Saul' begins filming in Albuquerque, NM today!". On Location Vacations. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved June 4, 2014. Gomez, Adrian (April 8, 2019). "'Better Call Saul' begins filming season 5 in ABQ". Albuquerque Journal. Archived from the original on April 14, 2019. Retrieved November 16, 2019. McCaleb, Chris; Dixon, Kelley; Gilligan, Vince; Dalton, Tony; Smith, Gordon; Porter, Dave (July 12, 2022). "608 Better Call Saul Insider" (Podcast). AMC. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Snierson, Dan (March 9, 2020). "Go behind the scenes of Better Call Saul's iconic Albuquerque locations". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 11, 2020. Retrieved March 10, 2020. Gomez, Adrian (February 22, 2020). "ABQ still stars in AMC's 'Better Call Saul'". Albuquerque Journal. Archived from the original on February 23, 2020. Retrieved February 24, 2020. Snierson, Dan (December 31, 2013). "'Breaking Bad' creator Vince Gilligan on the finale, 'Better Call Saul' and his acting debut on 'Community'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved April 4, 2014. We think, by and large, this show will be a prequel, but the wonderful thing about the fractured chronology we employed on Breaking Bad for many years is the audience will not be thrown by us jumping around in time. So it's possible that we may indeed do that, and we'll see the past and perhaps the future. Couch, Aaron (February 15, 2015). "'Better Call Saul': See 'Breaking Bad' Easter Eggs You Missed". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved January 25, 2021. Galas, Marjorie (April 14, 2015). "Colorist Ted Brady Discusses His Work On "Better Call Saul"". Creative Content Wire. Archived from the original on March 25, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2022. Bryant, Adam (May 3, 2022). "Better Call Saul Q&A – How Rhea Seehorn Found Characters' Vulnerabilities in Her TV Directorial Debut". AMC. Retrieved May 8, 2022. Blair, Iain (May 25, 2016). "Breaking The Law". HD Video Pro. Archived from the original on August 14, 2022. Retrieved May 7, 2022. "Better Call Saul (2015)". ShotOnWhat?. September 30, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2022. "Lighting The Night In Albuquerque". Codex. Retrieved May 7, 2022. Blair, Iain (May 30, 2019). "Showrunner and EP Peter Gould on AMC's Better Call Saul". postPerspective. Retrieved May 7, 2022. Rachael Bosley (June 26, 2017). "Better Call Saul: Darkness Gains Dimension". American Cinematographer. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Having the ability to shoot at ISO 5,000 opened a whole new world for us," says Gilligan. Better Call Saul - You Think You Know TV?. ScreenCrush. May 20, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2022 – via YouTube. Director of Photography Arthur Albert would shoot with Panasonic.. Gould, Peter [@petergould] (April 7, 2020). "We are an Arri LF show for season 5" (Tweet). Archived from the original on April 7, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2022 – via Twitter. Better Call Saul Insider Podcast 509 - Bad Choice Road (5x09). AMC. April 14, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2022 – via YouTube. "Better Call Saul Season 5 Cinematography (with Marshall Adams ASC)". Go Creative Show. BC Media Productions. March 10, 2020. (at 35:22). Retrieved June 2, 2022. Sepinwall, Alan (January 17, 2018). "'Better Call Saul' creators on the 'purposely sh–ty' opening title sequence". Uproxx. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Better Call Saul Q&A - Barrie Cadogan (Main Title Theme Composer)". AMC.com. April 28, 2022. Archived from the original on May 3, 2022. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Adams, Erik; Teti, John; Murray, Noel (February 22, 2016). "The new credits canon: 20 recent TV title sequences as brilliant as their shows". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Anderson, Lauren (July 18, 2021). "'Better Call Saul' Fans Notice a Major Hint in the Show's Title Sequence". Showbiz Cheatsheet. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Sepinwall, Alan (July 25, 2022). "Better Call Saul Recap: Gene Takovic and the Great Cinnabon Heist". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2022. Sepinwall, Alan (August 8, 2022). "'Better Call Saul' Recap: Better Call Kim". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 9, 2022. Retrieved August 9, 2022. Hullender, Tatiana (September 7, 2022). "Better Call Saul Season 6 Blu-ray Release Date Revealed". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 7, 2022. Retrieved September 7, 2022. "Better Call Saul – The Complete Series Releasing On Blu-ray With Over 70 Hours Of Special Features". HD Report. LinksThat. November 21, 2022. Archived from the original on December 22, 2022. Retrieved March 12, 2023. Nelson, Keith (August 8, 2022). "Better Call Saul Season 6 Has Merged With The Breaking Bad Timeline". Men's Health. Archived from the original on October 13, 2022. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Parkel, Inga (May 29, 2022). "Better Call Saul: How long before Breaking Bad is the prequel set?". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 14, 2022. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Bojalad, Alec (July 27, 2022). "Better Call Saul: How Nebraska Football Clarifies the Gene Timeline". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on February 8, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Nemetz, Dave (July 10, 2022). "Better Call Saul: A Close Look of Every 'Gene in Omaha' Flash-Forward So Far". TVLine. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Sepinwall, Alan (August 1, 2022). "Better Call Saul Recap: It's Breaking Bad Time". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 2, 2022. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Hooton, Christopher (August 11, 2014). "Better Call Saul: First teaser trailer shows younger Saul, confirms release date". The Independent. Archived from the original on December 8, 2017. Retrieved August 11, 2014. Roots, Kimberly (November 20, 2014). "Better Call Saul Gets Two-Night February Premiere on AMC". TVLine. Archived from the original on November 23, 2014. Retrieved November 20, 2014. Lambert, David (September 22, 2015). "Better Call Saul – Sony's Official Press Release for 'Season 1' on DVD and Blu-ray". TVShowsOnDVD.com. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved September 23, 2015. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (November 17, 2015). "'Better Call Saul' Season 2 Order Reduced from 13 Episodes". ScreenCrush. Townsquare Media, Inc. Archived from the original on May 4, 2017. Retrieved February 16, 2016. Porter, Rick (November 16, 2015). "'Better Call Saul' returns to AMC in February". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved November 16, 2015. Lambert, David (September 20, 2016). "Better Call Saul – Blu-rays, DVDs for 'Season 2': Date, Cost, Packaging, Extras!". TVShowsOnDVD.com. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved January 15, 2017. Snierson, Dan (March 15, 2016). "Better Call Saul renewed for season 3 by AMC". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 17, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Schwindt, Oriana (January 14, 2017). "AMC Sets Premiere Dates for 'Better Call Saul,' 'Into the Badlands'". Variety. Archived from the original on January 15, 2017. Retrieved January 14, 2017. Lambert, David (November 27, 2017). "Better Call Saul – 'Season 3' DVDs, Blu-rays: Street Date Confirmed, Front and Rear Package Art". TVShowsOnDVD.com. Archived from the original on January 17, 2018. Retrieved January 16, 2018. Snierson, Dan (June 27, 2017). "Better Call Saul renewed for season 4". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved June 27, 2017. Snierson, Dan (May 31, 2018). "Better Call Saul: Here's your season 4 first look, premiere date". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 2, 2018. Retrieved May 31, 2018. Snierson, Dan (May 6, 2019). "Watch the Better Call Saul cast lose it in season 4 gag reel". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 15, 2020. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Otterson, Joe (July 28, 2018). "'Better Call Saul,' 'Fear the Walking Dead,' 'McMafia' Renewed at AMC". Variety. Archived from the original on August 15, 2018. Retrieved July 28, 2018. Adalian, Josef (April 5, 2019). "Why AMC Networks Is Betting So Heavily on Killing Eve". Vulture. Archived from the original on April 9, 2019. Retrieved April 5, 2019. Blistein, Jon (November 20, 2019). "'Better Call Saul' Cooks Up Clever Cinnabon Spot for Season Five Premiere". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 2, 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2019. Foran-McHale, Katie (November 19, 2020). "New on DVD Nov. 24: Look who's breaking bad in 'Better Call Saul: Season Five'". The Providence Journal. Archived from the original on November 22, 2020. Retrieved November 22, 2020. Thorne, Will (January 16, 2020). "'Better Call Saul' Renewed for 6th and Final Season at AMC". Variety. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020. Porter, Rick (January 16, 2020). "'Better Call Saul' Ending With Season 6 on AMC". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 17, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020. Goldsmith, Jill (February 26, 2021). "AMC Networks' Better Call Saul To Return In Q1 Of 2022". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 26, 2021. Retrieved February 26, 2021. Hipes, Patrick (September 8, 2021). "Bob Odenkirk Back At Work On 'Better Call Saul' After Heart Attack". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 8, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2021. Porter, Rick (February 10, 2022). "'Better Call Saul' Sets Final Season Premiere Date". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 11, 2022. Retrieved February 10, 2022. Kondolojy, Amanda (February 9, 2015). "'The Walking Dead' Returns to 15.6 Million Viewers + 'Better Call Saul' is Biggest Series Premiere in Cable History". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. Retrieved February 9, 2015. Patten, Dominic (August 24, 2015). "'Fear The Walking Dead' Debut Ratings Draw 10.1M Viewers, Shatters Cable Records". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2015. Spangler, Todd (December 16, 2013). "Netflix to Stream 'Better Call Saul' After AMC Airs 'Breaking Bad' Spinoff in 2014". Variety. Archived from the original on January 29, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2016. Travers, Ben (February 1, 2016). "7 New Netflix Shows to Binge Watch in February 2016 (And the Best Episodes of Each)". IndieWire. Archived from the original on March 29, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2019. McHenry, Jackson (January 29, 2016). "What's New on Netflix: February 2016". Vulture. Archived from the original on March 29, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2019. Robinson, Joanna (February 1, 2016). "Netflix to Stream Episodes of Better Call Saul Internationally the Day After They Air [Updated]". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2016. "Stan launches on Australia Day". TV Tonight. January 23, 2015. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved January 23, 2015. "Video streaming service Stan to launch on Australia Day". Mumbrella. January 22, 2015. Archived from the original on August 3, 2015. Retrieved January 24, 2015. "Breaking Bad spin-off Better Call Saul coming to Lightbox". The New Zealand Herald. November 27, 2014. Archived from the original on June 21, 2015. Retrieved June 21, 2015. "Neon and Lightbox officially merged and here's absolutely everything Kiwis can watch". The Hits. Archived from the original on December 30, 2021. Retrieved December 30, 2021. "The court is in session: Better Call Saul on Lightbox". Scoop. January 29, 2015. Archived from the original on June 21, 2015. Retrieved June 21, 2015. Munn, Patrick (December 16, 2013). "Netflix UK & Ireland Inks SPT Deal For Exclusive Rights To 'Breaking Bad' Spin-Off 'Better Call Saul'". TV Wise. Archived from the original on May 3, 2015. Retrieved January 28, 2015. Munn, Patrick (January 27, 2015). "Netflix UK Unveils Trailer For 'Breaking Bad' Spin-Off 'Better Call Saul'". TV Wise. Archived from the original on May 2, 2015. Retrieved January 28, 2015. "Better Call Saul - Irish TV Guide". On TV Tonight. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 19, 2022. Bansal, Shilpa (February 16, 2016). "'Better Call Saul' Season 2 India Premiere: Where to watch Episode 1 'Switch' on TV tonight [Spoilers]". International Business Times. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved April 7, 2016. Bonomolo, Cameron (April 19, 2022). "Better Call Saul Season 6 Premiere Sets Records for AMC and AMC+". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 23, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2022. Hilliard, Wesley (October 1, 2020). "AMC+ launches on Apple TV Channels for $8.99 per month". Apple Insider. Archived from the original on June 28, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2022. Lafayette, Jon (May 31, 2022). "'Better Call Saul' Driving Subscriptions for AMC Plus". Broadcasting & Cable. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2022. Timothy, Adams (August 15, 2022). "Better Call Saul Series Finale Crashes AMC+". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 16, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Maas, Jennifer (August 22, 2022). "Better Call Saul Series Finale Viewership More Than Quadruples From Season 6 Premiere on AMC+". Variety. Archived from the original on August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 22, 2022. "Better Call Saul: Season 1". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on October 29, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2019. "Better Call Saul: Season 1". Metacritic. Archived from the original on February 18, 2020. Retrieved February 9, 2015. "Better Call Saul: Season 2". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on October 17, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2018. "Better Call Saul: Season 2". Metacritic. Archived from the original on July 19, 2019. Retrieved February 11, 2016. "Better Call Saul: Season 3". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on May 15, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2019. "Better Call Saul: Season 3". Metacritic. Archived from the original on December 17, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2017. "Better Call Saul: Season 4". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on December 5, 2019. Retrieved August 16, 2018. "Better Call Saul: Season 4". Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2018. Retrieved August 10, 2018. "Better Call Saul: Season 5". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved October 11, 2020. "Better Call Saul: Season 5". Metacritic. Archived from the original on February 7, 2020. Retrieved March 27, 2020. "Better Call Saul: Season 6". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved April 14, 2022. "Better Call Saul: Season 6". Metacritic. Retrieved April 5, 2022. Connolly, Kelly (February 6, 2020). "Better Call Saul Review: Jimmy Becomes Saul Goodman in a Fantastically Devastating Season 5". TV Guide. Archived from the original on February 6, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2020. Abbott, Kate; Davies, Hannah; Mumford, Gwilym; Harrison, Phil; Seale, Jack (September 16, 2019). "The 100 best TV shows of the 21st century". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 1, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "The 100 Greatest TV Shows of All Time". Empire. March 24, 2021. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved April 15, 2021. "The 100 greatest TV series of the 21st Century". BBC. October 18, 2021. Retrieved November 1, 2021. Sepinwall, Alan (September 26, 2022). "The 100 Greatest TV Shows of All Time". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Jeffries, Stuart (August 16, 2022). "'More profound than Breaking Bad': goodbye Better Call Saul, the show like nothing else on TV". The Guardian. Retrieved November 1, 2022. Elvy, Craig (September 27, 2022). "Yes, Better Call Saul Is Better Than Breaking Bad". Screen Rant. Retrieved November 1, 2022. Urquhart, Jeremy (November 2, 2022). "5 Ways 'Better Call Saul' Bettered 'Breaking Bad' (& 5 Ways It Didn't)". Collider. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Kondolojy, Amanda (February 10, 2015). "Sunday Cable Ratings: 'The Walking Dead' Tops Night + 'Better Call Saul', 'Talking Dead', 'The Real Housewives of Atlanta' & More". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. Retrieved February 10, 2015. Kondolojy, Amanda (April 7, 2015). "Monday Cable Ratings: 'Monday Night Raw' Tops Night + 'Love & Hip Hop', 'Better Call Saul', 'Black Ink Crew' & More". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. "Better Call Saul: Season One Ratings". TV Series Finale. April 7, 2015. Archived from the original on February 11, 2015. Retrieved July 26, 2017. Welch, Alex (February 17, 2016). "Monday cable ratings: 'WWE Raw' stays steady, 'Better Call Saul' premieres low". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on February 19, 2016. Retrieved February 17, 2016. Welch, Alex (April 19, 2016). "Monday cable ratings: 'Better Call Saul' finale holds steady, NBA Playoffs soar". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on April 20, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2016. "Better Call Saul: Season Two Ratings". TV Series Finale. April 19, 2016. Archived from the original on February 22, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2017. Welch, Alex (April 11, 2017). "Monday cable ratings: 'Better Call Saul' premieres low, 'Love & Hip Hop' ticks up". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on April 12, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Welch, Alex (June 20, 2017). "Monday cable ratings: 'Better Call Saul' season finale ticks up". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 21, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2017. "Better Call Saul: Season Three Ratings". TV Series Finale. June 27, 2017. Retrieved July 26, 2017. Welch, Alex (August 7, 2018). "Monday cable ratings: 'Better Call Saul' returns down, 'WWE Raw' slips". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on August 8, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2018. Welch, Alex (October 9, 2018). "Monday cable ratings: 'Better Call Saul' finale holds steady, 'Love & Hip Hop: Hollywood' dips". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on October 10, 2018. Retrieved October 9, 2018. "Better Call Saul: Season Four Ratings". TV Series Finale. October 9, 2018. Retrieved October 10, 2018. Metcalf, Mitch (February 25, 2020). "Updated: ShowBuzzDaily's Top 150 Sunday Cable Originals & Network Finals: 2.23.2020". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on February 25, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2020. Metcalf, Mitch (April 21, 2020). "Updated: ShowBuzzDaily's Top 150 Monday Cable Originals & Network Finals: 4.20.2020". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on April 21, 2020. Retrieved April 21, 2020. "Better Call Saul: Season Five Ratings". TV Series Finale. April 21, 2020. Retrieved April 21, 2020. Metcalf, Mitch (April 19, 2022). "ShowBuzzDaily's Monday 4.18.2022 Top 150 Cable Originals & Network Finals Updated". ShowBuzzDaily. Archived from the original on April 19, 2022. Retrieved April 19, 2022. Salem, Mitch (May 24, 2022). "ShowBuzzDaily's Monday 5.23.2022 Top 150 Cable Originals & Network Finals Updated". ShowBuzzDaily. Retrieved May 24, 2022. "Better Call Saul: Season Six Ratings". TV Series Finale. August 16, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Salem, Mitch (July 12, 2022). "ShowBuzzDaily's Monday 7.11.2022 Top 150 Cable Originals & Network Finals Updated". ShowBuzzDaily. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Salem, Mitch (August 16, 2022). "ShowBuzzDaily's Monday 8.15.2022 Top 150 Cable Originals & Network Finals Updated". ShowBuzzDaily. Retrieved August 16, 2022. "Better Call Saul". Emmys.com. Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved December 12, 2020. Petski, Denise (February 12, 2016). "'Talking Saul' To Follow 'Better Call Saul's Premiere And Season Finale On AMC". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 13, 2016. Retrieved February 12, 2016. Maas, Jennifer (February 10, 2022). "Better Call Saul Final Season Gets Premiere Dates for Both Halves". Variety. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved February 10, 2022. Gonzalez, Sandra (February 4, 2015). "AMC unveils 'Better Call Saul' digital comic book ahead of series premiere". Mashable. Archived from the original on May 9, 2016. Retrieved May 9, 2016. "Better Call Saul Insider Podcast". Apple. Archived from the original on October 14, 2020. Retrieved October 8, 2020. Better Call Saul at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Travel information from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata Better Call Saul – official site at AMC Better Call Saul on Netflix Better Call Saul at IMDb