The DC Extended Universe (DCEU) is an American media franchise and shared universe centered on a series of superhero films produced by DC Studios and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. It is based on characters that appear in American comic books published by DC Comics. The DCEU also includes comic books, short films, novels, and video games. Like the original DC Universe in comic books, the DCEU is established by crossing over common plot elements, settings, cast, and characters. Warner Bros. began trying to bring various DC Comics superheroes together in films in 2002, when Wolfgang Petersen was to direct a crossover of the Superman and Batman film franchises. A planned Justice League film was put on hold in 2008. Initial universe plans were scrapped after the critical and commercial disappointment of the 2011 film Green Lantern. Warner Bros. finally established its shared universe with the 2013 film Man of Steel, a reboot of the Superman film series, and 2016's Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, which also served as a reboot of the Batman film series. This was followed by 13 films and Peacemaker, a television series for Max. The DCEU's 15th and final film, Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom, was released on December 22, 2023. The DCEU is the eighth-highest-grossing film franchise and the fourth-highest-grossing superhero film franchise, having grossed more than $7 billion at the global box office. The highest-grossing DC Comics-based film is Aquaman (2018), which earned more than $1.15 billion worldwide. However, eight of the 15 theatrically released films failed to break even theatrically, being considered box-office bombs. Reception to the franchise was generally mixed among critics and fans. A new, rebooted franchise of films and television series, DC Universe (DCU), is planned by James Gunn and Peter Safran, who were appointed DC Studios' co-chairmen and co-CEOs in a late-2022 restructuring. Certain DCEU characters, such as Peacemaker, Amanda Waller and Blue Beetle, will be transitioned to the DCU, while the second season of Peacemaker will take place in the new universe. Upon announcement of the film series, the universe was commonly called the "DC Cinematic Universe" (DCCU) by fans and the media, in keeping with the naming convention of the already established Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). Keith Staskiewicz, writing for Entertainment Weekly, jokingly coined the term "DC Extended Universe" (DCEU) in an article about Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice on July 1, 2015. This term and the abbreviation DCEU quickly spread among the press and fans who took it as the official name of the franchise over the following years. According to Vulture writer Abraham Riesman, DC confirmed to him in September 2017 that the term was not used internally and they did not consider it official. In 2016, as part of DC Films Presents: Dawn of the Justice League, both Geoff Johns and Kevin Smith referred to the franchise's name as being the "Justice League Universe". During the DC Films panel at San Diego Comic-Con 2018, a video banner displayed the words "Welcome to the Worlds of DC", after showcasing some upcoming films. As a result, some media outlets interpreted this as DC officially naming their shared film universe as the "Worlds of DC", but in March 2020, Jim Lee referred to the franchise as the DC Extended Universe at C2E2. The franchise was officially titled DC Extended Universe when the WarnerMedia streaming service HBO Max launched the following May. Following the appointment of Peter Safran and James Gunn as heads of DC Studios, Warner Bros. Discovery (created from the merger between WarnerMedia and Discovery, Inc.) referred to DC's film and television series as part of the "DC Universe" (DCU), which some media outlets interpreted as a rebranding of the DCEU. In 2002, Wolfgang Petersen was set to direct a Batman vs. Superman film from a script by Akiva Goldsman, but the project was shelved by Warner Bros. to focus on individual Superman and Batman projects. In 2008, a planned Justice League film directed by George Miller and titled Justice League: Mortal was placed on indefinite hold after it failed to secure tax breaks for filming in Australia. Man of Steel, a reboot of the Superman film series released in 2013, was intended to launch a shared universe if successful. Following the film's release, Warner Bros. announced a follow-up entitled Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016), establishing the DCEU. A slate of 11 DCEU films were then announced in 2014. In 2016, Warner Bros. established DC Films after Batman v Superman did not meet Warner Bros.' box office expectations and received negative responses from fans and critics for its dark tone. The division, led by Geoff Johns and Jon Berg, was to oversee production and form a cohesive creative direction for the DCEU. After the failure of Justice League (2017), Johns and Berg were replaced by Walter Hamada in 2018. The DCEU expanded to television with the release of Peacemaker (2022–present) on HBO Max. Discovery Inc. completed its acquisition of DC and Warner Bros. parent company WarnerMedia in 2022, forming a new company named Warner Bros. Discovery (WBD) with David Zaslav as CEO. Zaslav sought to overhaul the DCEU, and began searching for a creative leader akin to Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige to lead DC's film and television projects. James Gunn and Peter Safran were subsequently announced as the co-chairmen and CEOs of DC Studios, the successor to DC Films. In 2023, the duo unveiled their slate of ten DC projects which were to be part of the DC Universe (DCU), a soft reboot and spiritual successor to the DCEU. Kal-El / Clark Kent, who arrived on Earth years ago as an infant from Krypton, struggles with why he was sent to Earth. Raised by his adoptive parents, Jonathan and Martha Kent, Clark adopts the persona "Superman", and learns if his abilities are meant to maintain peace or conquer the world. During story discussions for The Dark Knight Rises (2012), David S. Goyer told Christopher Nolan his idea regarding how to present Superman in a modern context. Impressed with Goyer's concept, Nolan pitched the idea to the studio, who hired Nolan to produce and Goyer to write based on the financial and critical success of The Dark Knight (2008). In October 2010, Zack Snyder was hired to direct the film, and Henry Cavill was cast as Clark Kent / Superman in January 2011. Principal photography began in August 2011. Man of Steel was released in North America on June 14, 2013. Gotham City-based vigilante Batman travels to Metropolis to preemptively combat Superman, fearing what would happen if the latter is kept unchecked, while another threat endangers humankind. By June 2013, Warner Bros. were fast-tracking a sequel to Man of Steel, with Snyder and Goyer returning as director and writer, respectively. Nolan was involved in an advisory role as executive producer. The sequel included Batman in a main role, and serves as a reboot of the Batman film series. Cavill, Amy Adams, Diane Lane, and Laurence Fishburne reprised their Man of Steel roles, while Ben Affleck was cast as Bruce Wayne / Batman. Chris Terrio was hired to rewrite Goyer's script. Originally scheduled to be released in July 2015, the release date was changed to May 6, 2016, to give the filmmakers "time to realize fully their vision, given the complex visual nature of the story". The film's title was revealed to be Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. Initial filming occurred on October 19, 2013, at East Los Angeles College, before full principal photography began in May 2014 and concluded that December. Production took place in Detroit, Illinois, New Mexico, Africa and the South Pacific. After another date change, the film was released in North America on March 25, 2016. Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice is set 18 months after the events of Man of Steel. The film introduces Gal Gadot as Diana Prince / Wonder Woman, Ezra Miller as Barry Allen / The Flash, Jason Momoa as Arthur Curry / Aquaman, Ray Fisher as Victor Stone / Cyborg, and Joe Morton as Dr. Silas Stone. Steppenwolf, who serves as the main antagonist in Justice League (2017), was introduced through a brief scene not included in the film's theatrical release but instead revealed online by Warner Bros. on March 28, before being included in the Ultimate Edition home video release. After Superman's death, a secret government agency recruits imprisoned supervillains to execute dangerous black ops missions and rescue the world from a powerful threat, in exchange for clemency. In February 2009, prior to the development of the DCEU, Warner Bros. was developing a Suicide Squad film, with Dan Lin producing and Justin Marks writing the script. Warner Bros. announced Suicide Squad in October 2014, with David Ayer as director, also serving as screenwriter. The main cast included Will Smith, Margot Robbie, Jared Leto, Jai Courtney, Jay Hernandez, Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje, Karen Fukuhara, Cara Delevingne, Viola Davis, and Joel Kinnaman. Principal photography took place from April to August 2015 in Toronto. Suicide Squad was released in North America on August 5, 2016. Suicide Squad is set after the events of Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. Affleck and Miller reprise their roles as Bruce Wayne / Batman and Barry Allen / The Flash from that film. In a mid-credits scene, Amanda Waller (portrayed by Davis) meets Wayne in a restaurant and hands him a dossier containing information on future members of the Justice League. Diana of Themyscira, an Amazon warrior who is also the demigoddess daughter of the god Zeus, uses her talents and abilities to help humanity during World War I. In December 2013, Gal Gadot was cast as Diana Prince / Wonder Woman and signed a three-picture deal which included a solo film. The film was announced in October 2014, and Michelle MacLaren was confirmed to direct from a screenplay by Jason Fuchs the next month. MacLaren left the project the following year in April due to creative differences, and Patty Jenkins was hired to replace her. Filming occurred from November 2015 to May 2016 and took place in the United Kingdom, France and Italy. Wonder Woman was released in North America on June 2, 2017. Motivated by Superman's death at the hands of Doomsday, Batman and Wonder Woman assemble a team of metahumans to stop the threat of Steppenwolf, who is in search of three Mother Boxes scattered across Earth. By June 2013, Goyer was set to write Justice League as part of a three-film deal he signed for Man of Steel. Snyder was confirmed to return as director in April 2014, and the film was announced in October as Justice League Part One. In 2016, Chris Terrio was revealed to have written the script, and the title was changed to simply Justice League by June. Affleck, Cavill, Gadot, Momoa, Miller, and Fisher reprised their respective roles from previous films. Filming took place from April to October 2016 at Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden in England, as well as locations around London and in Iceland. In May 2017, Snyder stepped down from his duties on the film due to his daughter's death; Joss Whedon filled his position on post-production, with additional scenes being written and directed by him. Though Whedon was not officially credited for his role as post-production director, he completed enough additional work for a screenwriting credit on the film. Justice League was released worldwide on November 17, 2017. Reprising their roles from previous films are Jeremy Irons as Alfred Pennyworth, Diane Lane as Martha Kent, Amy Adams as Lois Lane, Jesse Eisenberg as Lex Luthor, Connie Nielsen as Hippolyta, Robin Wright as Antiope, and Joe Morton as Silas Stone. Justice League also introduces J. K. Simmons as James Gordon, Amber Heard as Mera, and Billy Crudup as Henry Allen, with Joe Manganiello appearing as Slade Wilson / Deathstroke in a post-credits scene. The divisive reaction to the theatrical cut of Justice League, with Snyder leaving directorial duties and the final cut of the film in the hands of Whedon, led to a fan-driven campaign for a "Snyder Cut" of the film. Arguments were made that Snyder's vision would be more cohesive to the previous films. In March 2019, Snyder confirmed his original cut does exist, and stated that it was up to Warner Bros. to release it. Warner Bros. remained silent regarding the matter, though Variety reported in November that Warner Bros. was unlikely to release Snyder's version of Justice League, with one studio insider describing it as "a pipe dream". Snyder announced in May 2020 that HBO Max would be releasing his cut of Justice League on their service on March 18, 2021. Initially conceived as a four-part miniseries, it was ultimately released as a four-hour film, twice the length of the theatrical version. Snyder stated this version is intended to not affect the future of the DCEU continuity, but that it takes place in a slightly alternate universe. The new cut cost an estimated $70 million to complete, primarily for visual effects and additional photography. Some actors returned to their roles for the additional photography. Work on the cut was completed in January 2021. Characters in the film who did not appear in the theatrical version include the Joker (with Jared Leto reprising the role from Suicide Squad), General Swanwick / Martian Manhunter (with Harry Lennix reprising the role from Man of Steel and Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice), Darkseid (portrayed by Ray Porter), DeSaad (portrayed by Peter Guinness), Nuidis Vulko (portrayed by Willem Dafoe), Iris West (portrayed by Kiersey Clemons), Ryan Choi (portrayed by Zheng Kai), a Green Lantern, as well as Granny Goodness. Arthur Curry, a half-Atlantean assistant lighthouse keeper, sets out to lead the underwater kingdom of Atlantis against his half-brother, King Orm, who seeks to unite the seven underwater kingdoms against the surface world. Jason Momoa was cast as Arthur Curry / Aquaman in June 2014. By August, Will Beall and Kurt Johnstad were writing competing scripts for the character's solo film. Aquaman was announced in October. James Wan was hired as director the following year, as well as to oversee the screenplay by Johnstad. David Leslie Johnson was later brought to write a new script. Beall returned to write the script, based on a story treatment by Wan and Geoff Johns. Johnson worked on a rewrite of Beall's script with Wan and producer Peter Safran. Principal photography began in May 2017 in Queensland, Australia and wrapped that October. Aquaman was released in North America on December 21, 2018. Aquaman is set after the events of Justice League, though critics have noticed numerous inconsistencies between the two theatrically released films. Furthermore, Momoa claimed that the film takes place after "Zack's cut", with the ending of that version of the film directly tying into the events of Aquaman. Heard reprises her role as Mera from Justice League, while Dafoe is introduced as Nuidis Vulko. By speaking "Shazam", Billy Batson, a 14-year-old foster child, can turn into an adult superhero, courtesy of an ancient wizard. He attempts to master his powers and defeat the evil forces controlled by Dr. Thaddeus Sivana. In August 2014, Dwayne Johnson announced his attachment to a project about the superhero Shazam, formerly known as Captain Marvel. Johnson was revealed to be portraying the antihero Black Adam, Shazam's nemesis in the film, with Darren Lemke set to write the script in September. In October, Warner Bros. announced Shazam as a film in its upcoming slate. By January 2017, Henry Gayden was working on the script. In July, David F. Sandberg was hired to direct Shazam!. Johnson was dropped from the project, instead starring in a Black Adam solo film. By October, Zachary Levi was cast as Shazam, and in November, Asher Angel was cast as Shazam's child-age alter ego, Billy Batson. Principal photography began in January 2018 and wrapped that May, with most of the filming taking place at Pinewood Toronto Studios, among other locations around Toronto. Shazam! was released in North America on April 5, 2019. Shazam! is set after the events of Justice League. Superman makes a cameo appearance at the end of the film, but his face is not shown as Henry Cavill was unable to reprise the role due to scheduling conflicts. The villain Mister Mind is introduced in a mid-credits scene. When Cassandra Cain, a young girl, comes across a diamond belonging to crime lord Black Mask, Harley Quinn joins forces with Black Canary, Huntress, and Renee Montoya to help protect her. By November 2016, a film based on the female superhero team Birds of Prey was in development, with Christina Hodson signed on as screenwriter. By April 2018, Warner Bros. selected Cathy Yan as director, with Margot Robbie reprising her role as Harley Quinn from Suicide Squad.Robbie also acted as producer alongside Sue Kroll and Bryan Unkeless. The film is the first theatrical R-rated installment in the DCEU and has a smaller budget than most of the other films. In addition to Robbie's starring role, the cast also includes Mary Elizabeth Winstead, Jurnee Smollett-Bell, Rosie Perez, and Ella Jay Basco. The full title of the film was revealed as Birds of Prey (and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn) by Robbie. Principal photography commenced in January 2019 in Los Angeles and lasted until April. Birds of Prey held its world premiere in London on January 29, 2020, and was later released in North America on February 7. Birds of Prey is set after the events of Suicide Squad. Diana Prince comes into conflict with the Soviet Union during the Cold War in the 1980s and finds two formidable foes in the form of Maxwell Lord and Cheetah. By June 2017, Geoff Johns and Patty Jenkins had begun work on the story treatment for a Wonder Woman sequel. In July, Johns was working on the script, and the sequel was officially announced at San Diego Comic-Con, with Gadot reprising the lead role. In September, Jenkins signed a deal to return as director, and brought on David Callaham to pen the script with her and Johns. Production began in June 2018 and concluded that December. Filming locations included the District of Columbia, Northern Virginia, Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden in the United Kingdom and the islands of Tenerife and Fuerteventura in Spain. Wonder Woman 1984 was released in the United States on HBO Max and in theaters simultaneously on December 25, 2020. In a mid-credits scene, Lynda Carter, who starred as Wonder Woman in a 1970s television series, is introduced as Asteria, a legendary Amazon warrior who possessed ancient golden armor that Gadot's Wonder Woman wears in the film. Amanda Waller sends a new Task Force X, consisting of both old and new members, on a mission to destroy a Nazi-era laboratory containing experiments. In March 2016, a Suicide Squad sequel was announced to be in development, with Ayer returning as director. Adam Cozad was hired to write the script by March 2017. By July, a new story treatment was written by Zak Penn. In September, Gavin O'Connor was hired as director and writer after Ayer dropped out. O'Connor completed the script with David Bar Katz and Todd Stashwick by September 2018. The next month, O'Connor left the project as Warner Bros. believed the script was too similar to Birds of Prey. In 2019, the film was re-titled The Suicide Squad, with James Gunn directing, from a new script he wrote. Gunn chose the project over various other films Warner Bros. had in development, including a Superman film. In March, Idris Elba joined the cast. He was initially hired to replace Smith as Deadshot, who dropped out due to scheduling conflicts, but was later decided that Elba would play a new character so Smith could return in the future. Robbie, Kinnaman, Courtney, and Davis reprise their roles from Suicide Squad. Production began in September 2019 at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Atlanta, with additional filming following in Panama, and concluded in February 2020. The Suicide Squad began its international release on July 30, 2021, in the United Kingdom, and was released theatrically and on the streaming platform HBO Max in the United States on August 5. Nearly 5,000 years after he was bestowed with the powers of the Egyptian gods and imprisoned, Black Adam is freed from his tomb, ready to unleash his form of justice on the modern world. In September 2014, after being considered to play Shazam and Lobo, Dwayne Johnson was cast as Black Adam, a central villain of DC's Shazam franchise. The character was intended to be introduced in Shazam!, but Johnson convinced the film's production studios to divide the narrative to focus on Black Adam's origin, with Black Adam and Shazam instead set to cross paths in a future film. Adam Sztykiel was hired as screenwriter. Jaume Collet-Serra was hired as director in June 2019, with Johnson, Beau Flynn, Hiram Garcia, and Dany Garcia attached as producers. By September 2020, Rory Haines and Sohrab Noshirvani had written a new draft of the script. Filming began in April 2021 and wrapped that July. Black Adam was released in the United States on October 21, 2022. The film features the Justice Society of America, consisting of Aldis Hodge as Hawkman, Noah Centineo as Atom Smasher, Quintessa Swindell as Cyclone, and Pierce Brosnan as Doctor Fate. Reprising their roles from previous DCEU media are Davis as Amanda Waller, Djimon Hounsou as the wizard Shazam, and Jennifer Holland as Emilia Harcourt, with Henry Cavill appearing as Kal-El / Clark Kent / Superman in a mid-credits scene. Billy Batson and his foster siblings, who transform into superheroes by saying "Shazam!", are forced to get back into action and fight the Daughters of Atlas, who want to use a weapon that could destroy the world. A sequel to Shazam! entered development in April 2019, with Henry Gayden returning as writer. David F. Sandberg and Peter Safran returned as director and producer, respectively, and Chris Morgan was hired as an additional screenwriter. Zachary Levi reprises his role as the titular superhero, as most of the adult and child cast in the Shazam Family. At DC FanDome in August 2020, the film's title was announced as Shazam! Fury of the Gods. Filming began in May 2021 in Atlanta and concluded that August. Shazam! Fury of the Gods was released in the United States on March 17, 2023. In January 2023, co-CEOs of DC Studios James Gunn and Peter Safran stated that Shazam! Fury of the Gods will lead right into the events of The Flash. Barry Allen travels back in time to prevent his mother's murder, which brings unintended consequences. By July 2013, Greg Berlanti was developing a film that centered around Barry Allen / The Flash, and drafted a script alongside Geoff Johns, Chris Brancato, Michael Green, and Marc Guggenheim. In October 2014, Warner Bros. announced The Flash with a scheduled 2018 release date, and that Ezra Miller was cast in the starring role. A new story treatment was being written by Phil Lord and Christopher Miller the following year in April. Over the next two years, Seth Grahame-Smith and Rick Famuyiwa had individually dropped out as director due to creative differences with the studio. Joby Harold was hired to do a page-one rewrite of the script in January 2017, which previously had drafts written by Grahame-Smith and Famuyiwa. In July, the title for the film was changed to Flashpoint, based on the comic book storyline of the same name. Dan Mazeau was brought on as co-writer. In March 2018, John Francis Daley and Jonathan Goldstein were hired to co-direct. In 2019, following creative differences with the co-directors' work on the script, Miller was hired to co-write a new draft in collaboration with Grant Morrison. By July, Daley and Goldstein had left the project, while Andy Muschietti and Christina Hodson were hired to replace them as director and screenwriter, respectively. Barbara Muschietti and Michael Disco serve as producers. Filming began in April 2021, at Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden in Hertfordshire, England, and wrapped that October. The Flash was released on June 16, 2023. The Flash explores the multiverse concept using the Speed Force and features multiple superheroes, including Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne / Batman (reprising his role from the 1989 film Batman and its 1992 sequel Batman Returns) and Sasha Calle as Supergirl. Ben Affleck also reprises his role as the DCEU version of Bruce Wayne / Batman. The film also "restarts" the DCEU, according to Barbara Muschietti. Michael Shannon and Antje Traue reprise their roles as General Zod and Faora-Ul, respectively, from Man of Steel, with Ron Livingston replacing Billy Crudup in the role of Henry Allen, Barry's father, who appeared in Justice League and its director's cut, and Kiersey Clemons returning as Iris West from the latter cut. In January 2023, co-CEOs of DC Studios James Gunn and Peter Safran stated that The Flash will "reset" the DC Universe and lead right into the events of Blue Beetle, Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom, and their future slate of films given the subtitle of: "Chapter 1: Gods and Monsters". Gunn later explained that The Flash will change some aspects and characters, but not every aspect of the franchise that came before. After Jaime Reyes graduates from college and returns to his hometown Palmera City, he is chosen to become a symbiotic host to the Scarab, an ancient alien biotechnological relic that grants him a powerful exoskeleton armor, turning him into the superhero Blue Beetle. In November 2018, a film centered on the Jaime Reyes incarnation of Blue Beetle was in development, with a script written by Gareth Dunnet-Alcocer. By February 2021, Angel Manuel Soto signed on as director, and Xolo Maridueña was cast as the titular character in August. John Rickard and Zev Foreman serve as producers. Principal photography commenced in May in Atlanta, and wrapped on July 18, 2022, in Puerto Rico. Initially developed as an HBO Max exclusive film, Blue Beetle was later changed to a theatrical release, and was released on August 18, 2023. In January 2023, co-CEOs of DC Studios James Gunn and Peter Safran stated that Blue Beetle directly follows the events of The Flash, where much of the franchise will be "reset" in such a way that Blue Beetle will be "totally disconnected (from everything that came before) and can be a part of the DCU". Four years after the events of the first film, Arthur Curry / Aquaman is forced to protect Atlantis and his loved ones from devastation after an ancient power is unleashed by David Kane / Black Manta obtaining the cursed Black Trident. To achieve this, he seeks help from an unlikely ally, his brother Orm. In January 2019, Warner Bros. confirmed development of an Aquaman sequel, with intentions for James Wan to return as director. In addition to starring, Momoa has a larger creative role in the sequel; together with his writing partner Thomas Pa'a Sibbett, he pitched their idea for the sequel to Warner Bros. and co-wrote the first story treatment. In February, David Leslie Johnson-McGoldrick signed on as screenwriter; he completed the script alongside Wan. Producer Peter Safran said that the film will explore the other Seven Kingdoms of Atlantis. The title was announced as Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom. Filming occurred from June 2021 to January 2022 in the United Kingdom, Hawaii and Los Angeles. Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom was released on December 22, 2023. In January 2023, co-CEOs of DC Studios James Gunn and Peter Safran stated that Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom will take place following the "reset" of the timeline of the DC film by The Flash, and that it will be directly followed by the slate of projects given the subtitle of: "Chapter 1: Gods and Monsters", mentioning the "true start" to occur in 2025. Task Force X member Christopher Smith / Peacemaker is sent on a black-ops mission to target "butterflies", individuals possessed by parasitic, insect-like creatures invading the human race. By September 2020, a television series spin-off of The Suicide Squad centered on Peacemaker was in development for HBO Max. James Gunn served as an executive producer alongside Peter Safran, wrote its eight episodes and directed several of them. John Cena reprises his role as Peacemaker from the film. Filming began in Vancouver, Canada in January 2021 and concluded that July. The first three episodes of Peacemaker were released on January 13, 2022, with subsequent episodes releasing weekly until February 17. Soon after the series ended, the series was renewed for a second season, with Gunn set to write and direct every episode. The first season of Peacemaker is set five months after the events of The Suicide Squad, with Steve Agee and Jennifer Holland reprising their respective roles as John Economos and Emilia Harcourt from that film. Viola Davis, Jason Momoa, and Ezra Miller also make uncredited appearances as their respective DCEU roles of Amanda Waller, Arthur Curry / Aquaman, and Barry Allen / Flash, with Superman and Wonder Woman also appearing portrayed by stand-ins, with their faces obscured by the darkness. The series contains references to the wider DC universe, including confirmation that Bat-Mite, Doll Man, Matter-Eater Lad, Kite Man, and Green Arrow exist in the DCEU. Additionally, a newspaper headline detailing the Intergang can be briefly seen, ahead of their debut in Black Adam. After the second season was ordered following the positive reactions garnered by the series, with the show's creator James Gunn confirmed to write and direct all planned episodes, and John Cena set to reprise the title role, Gunn stated that the new season would explore the greater ramifications from the aftermath of the first season's events. Following the surprise cancellation of the HBO Max film Batgirl in August 2022, Gunn reaffirmed that Peacemaker's second season was "safe" and would continue development. Later in the same month he stated that filming was scheduled to begin in 2023, but in January 2023 Gunn said that the second season was delayed as he was busy working on other projects. Over the years, many projects that were at one point supposed to be part of the DCEU have either been moved into a different continuity, outright canceled, or unreleased. Following the end of the DCEU and reboot into the DCU, various projects that were in development have been shelved though they may be repurposed for the new continuity: The Amazons : In December 2019, Patty Jenkins announced a Wonder Woman spin-off film, focusing on the titular race of Themyscira. Jenkins was intended to serve as a producer, while it was later revealed that she and Geoff Johns had written the story, with a plot that was set chronologically between Wonder Woman 1984 and the planned third movie. A similar project was later announced as a part of the DC Universe, titled Paradise Lost. Batgirl : In March 2017, Joss Whedon was hired to write, direct and produce a film centered around Barbara Gordon / Batgirl. Production was scheduled to commence in 2018, but Whedon stepped down in February. In April, Christina Hodson was hired as the screenwriter for Batgirl, which she would begin writing after completing work on The Flash. In May 2021, Adil El Arbi and Bilall Fallah were hired as the film's co-directors, with Kristin Burr serving as producer. In July, Leslie Grace was cast in the titular role. Principal photography began in Glasgow in November 2021, and wrapped by the end of March 2022. Batgirl was scheduled to be released sometime in 2022 on HBO Max, though it was reportedly being reconsidered for theatrical release by Warner Bros. Discovery by April. That August, Warner Bros. Discovery canceled the plans to release the film on HBO Max or theatrically following poor test screenings. The film was deemed not "big" enough for the big screen yet too expensive to be released on HBO Max. Despite the project's cancellation, the studio still hoped to work with Arbi, Fallah and Grace on other DC projects. In January 2023, co-CEO of DC Studios Peter Safran commented that Zaslav had made the right decision with canceling the project, while providing positive statements regarding its creative team he stated that it was "not releasable". Safran elaborated that "it would not have been able to compete in the theatrical marketplace; it was built for the small screen". The studio however looks to reintroduce the character elsewhere in the franchise, while also intending to work with Arbi and Fallah in the future. Ben Affleck's The Batman : In July 2015, Ben Affleck was in negotiations to direct, produce, star in, and co-write (with Geoff Johns) a Batman film. Affleck was confirmed as the film's director at the San Diego Comic-Con 2016. Affleck stepped down as director in January 2017, and Matt Reeves was hired to direct and co-produce the film the next month. Under Reeves, the film shifted focus towards a younger and inexperienced iteration of the character, with the filmmaker focusing on noir and detective fiction aspects from the comics. Affleck eventually left the project altogether and was replaced by Robert Pattinson as Batman, allowing the film to drop its connections to the DCEU and establishing a separate universe. The franchise that followed was later referred to by Reeves as the BatVerse, and was confirmed to be a part of the DC Elseworlds banner. Batman Beyond : In December 2022, it was reported that a Batman Beyond film starring Michael Keaton was in development, with a script by Christina Hodson. The plot would have involved an aged Bruce Wayne, continuing the plot threads from his appearance in The Flash, and would have included Catwoman. Development on the film was shelved after Gunn and Safran were appointed as co-heads of DC Studios. In January 2023, Gunn and Safran said that there is potential for a future multiverse project in which they may incorporate Keaton's incarnation of Batman. Untitled Black Adam sequel: In April 2017, Johnson stated that DC Films planned on Black Adam and Shazam appearing in a future film together. In October 2022, Johnson confirmed future plans for Black Adam to fight Superman in the DCEU, and reaffirmed plans for the character to crossover with Shazam. That month, producers Hiram Garcia and Beau Flynn stated that the sequel was in development, with plans to fast-track production on the project. Johnson publicly revealed that December that the character would not be a part of the initial slate of projects lined up for the new DC film universe under Gunn and Safran. He added that both DC Studios and his production company Seven Bucks Productions would continue collaborating in the future, and that the studio intended to "continue exploring the most valuable ways Black Adam can be utilized in future DC multiverse chapters". Black Canary : By August 2021, an HBO Max-exclusive film centered around Dinah Lance / Black Canary entered development with Jurnee Smollett reprising her role from Birds of Prey, Misha Green writing the script, and Sue Kroll producing. In June 2022, the script was continuing to be written. Booster Gold : In September 2015, a buddy cop film centered around Mike Carter / Booster Gold and Ted Kord / Blue Beetle was announced to be in development with Greg Berlanti attached as producer. In May 2016, Zack Stentz was hired to write the script, while Berlanti expressed interest in directing the project. The script had been completed by March 2018. In November 2022, after co-CEO of DC Studios James Gunn had conducted a poll on his social media asking fans which characters they would like to see included in the franchise moving forward, the filmmaker confirmed that the most requested was Booster Gold; noting that DC Studios intends to follow what the audience is wanting. In January 2023, it was announced that a similar project would be developed for the upcoming DC Universe franchise, in the form of a titular television series. Creature Commandos : In January 2021, Gunn announced that he was developing ideas for more spin-off installments of The Suicide Squad, while Warner Bros. officially confirmed that there would be additional DC projects created by Gunn in August of the same year. In January 2022, Gunn confirmed he was developing another television series intended for HBO Max, while stating that the tone would be more serious than his previous work. By June of the same year, the filmmaker announced that he will serve as writer and director for the show and confirmed that characters from Peacemaker will feature into the plot; while stating that the show is separate from the Amanda Waller series he had previously announced in January 2021. In January 2023, Gunn stated that he continued to write the series; later it was revealed that the project was Creature Commandos. The series ultimately became an animated show, and continued developement positioned as a part of the upcoming DC Universe franchise. Untitled Crisis on Infinite Earths film: In August 2022, when the Warner Bros. Discovery merger was completed and Walter Hamada began preparations to leave his role as President of DC Films, it was reported that prior to these events Warner Bros. had been developing a project based on Crisis on Infinite Earths. The plot would have similarly incorporated the multiverse and iterations of the main characters from alternate realities. Following Hamada's departure from the studios, the project's future realization is dependent on Gunn and Safran's plans for the franchise. Cyborg : In April 2014, Ray Fisher was cast as Victor Stone / Cyborg, and Warner Bros. announced a film centered around the character was in development the following October. Joe Morton was set to reprise his role as Dr. Silas Stone. Morton commented that there were discussions to include scenes involving Cyborg that were cut during post-production on the theatrical release of Justice League. Cyborg was scheduled to be released on April 3, 2020 before being delayed. In April 2020, developments continued; though by 2021, amidst a dispute between the actor and Warner Bros. Pictures regarding an investigation in the reshoot process on Justice League, Fisher stated that he would not play the role in any film that had Hamada's involvement. DC Films responded that they would recast the role. In March, Fisher said that though he is not opposed to reprising the role in future DCEU films, he would prefer Cyborg to be directed by either Snyder or Rick Famuyiwa. In February 2022, when discussing the Justice League's appearance in the final episode of Peacemaker, Gunn revealed that Cyborg did not feature in the scene due to the studio's "future" plans with the character. In October 2023 however, it was reported that no cast members from Justice League would reprise their roles in the DC Universe. Deadshot : By December 2016, a film centered around Floyd Lawton / Deadshot was in development, with Will Smith reprising his role from Suicide Squad. In February 2019, Smith left due to scheduling conflicts, and by April the character was written out of The Suicide Squad to allow Smith an opportunity to return in a future film. By April 2022, production on the film was delayed in favor of other projects due to the production payroll figures that Smith had requested. Deathstroke : In October 2017, a film centered around Slade Wilson / Deathstroke was announced to be in development with Gareth Evans attached as screenwriter and director from a story by Joe Manganiello, who was also set to reprise his role from Justice League. The project was greenlit after Evans impressed executives with his pitch. By April 2020, Evans was no longer in negotiations to work on the project, while the filmmaker described the story as a "dark" and "unforgiving" origin story, similar in style to Korean noir films. In March 2021 after numerous delays, Manganiello stated that Deathstroke had been canceled because Warner Bros. did not consider it a priority. The project was brought back into discussions with the possibility of a revival for Gunn and Safran's future plans of the DCEU in December 2022. In February 2024, Manganiello revealed that he had written a screenplay during this time, before Gunn later convinced him to let the project and role go due to the soft-reboot occurring with the DC Universe franchise. Despite this, Jim Lee approached Manganiello to create a graphic novel series based on his unproduced script. Untitled The Flash sequel: By October 2022, the script for a sequel to The Flash had already been completed by David Leslie Johnson-McGoldrick, with Warner Bros. anticipating a successful box office run for The Flash . The script was stated to included Keaton's iteration of Batman and Calle's Supergirl. The studio was not expected to retain Miller for future films because of the actor's various controversies and legal issues, although some Warner Bros. executives were open to continuing to work with Miller. Later that month, DC Studios co-CEOs James Gunn and Peter Safran said that until a decision was made there was potential for Miller to reprise the role in the upcoming DC Universe franchise. Gunn confirmed that The Flash would reset the continuity of the DCEU and alongside Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom, would lead into the DCU's first feature film titled Superman (2025). In June, Muschietti expressed interest in featuring Eobard Thawne / Reverse-Flash, a character who was only hinted at in the first movie, as an antagonist for a sequel. Though it was believed that a sequel could happen if the film could achieve financial success, financial underperformance and the announcement that no actors from the Snyder's Justice League would reprise their roles, ended chances of a sequel being realized. Green Lantern : Originally, the 2011 Green Lantern film was planned to be the first film in a shared DC cinematic universe, but its planned sequels were canceled in September 2011 and the film was eventually left out of continuity due to its critical and financial disappointment. The film was later retroactively established to be set within the multiverse of DC media, designated as Earth-12 in the Arrowverse crossover event "Crisis on Infinite Earths". Green Lantern Corps : A film centered around the Green Lantern Corps, was originally announced to be in development in October 2014. In January 2017, David S. Goyer and Justin Rhodes were hired to write the screenplay, based on a story written by Goyer and Geoff Johns, with Goyer intended to also serve as producer. The plot was stated to feature various members of the titular team, with Hal Jordan and John Stewart planned to be the lead characters; while Warner Bros. described the film as "Lethal Weapon in space". By June 2018, Geoff Johns was hired to do a rewrite on the script in addition to serving as producer, stating that the script at that time was influenced by his work on the New 52 Green Lantern comics. In July 2019, Christopher McQuarrie stated that he had worked on a pitch over a year prior, where the story would have connected to the Man of Steel sequel that was also in development, explaining that he had since moved on to other projects due to what he perceived as no further movement by Warner Bros. to proactively develop the film. By November 2019, Johns was expected to deliver his script to Warner Bros. before the end of the year. During the development of Zack Snyder's Justice League, John Stewart / Green Lantern was removed from the film due to the studio already having other plans for character. Green Lantern Corps was originally scheduled for a July 24, 2020 release, though it was later delayed and scheduled for a tentative release in Warner Bros. Pictures 2022–2023 schedule. A similar project was later announced as a part of the upcoming DC Universe franchise titled, Lanterns. Gotham City Sirens : A film based on the Gotham City Sirens (a team consisting of Harley Quinn, Catwoman, and Poison Ivy) was in development by December 2016, with Ayer signed on as director and co-producer from a script by Geneva Robertson-Dworet. Robbie and Leto were set to reprise their roles of Quinn and the Joker from Suicide Squad, with Robbie also taking the role of an executive producer. The film's development was later postponed in favor of Birds of Prey. In January 2020, Ayer confirmed that the project was still in development, while Robbie stated that Birds of Prey took priority, as she chose to first to introduce audiences to other lesser-known characters; while also saying that she was still "pushing" forward with Gotham City Sirens, and expressed hopes of exploring the dynamics of the characters on screen. In 2022, Robbie revealed that there were plans for the character to return in the franchise, and stated that she was continuing to advocate for a romantic relationship to be portrayed between Quinn and Ivy. Harley Quinn vs. The Joker : By July 2017, a film featuring Harley Quinn and the Joker was in development with the working title of Harley Quinn vs. the Joker, scheduled to begin production after the completion of The Suicide Squad. Glenn Ficarra and John Requa were hired as co-writers, co-directors, and co-producers. In September 2018, the script was completed and submitted to Warner Bros. with principal photography intended to commence after the release of Birds of Prey. The film was canceled by February 2019, however. Hourman : In March 2021, a film centered around the character of Hourman was announced as being in development, after a similar project had previously been considered in 2013 for a television series on The CW. Written by Gavin James and Neil Widener, the project was intended to continue plans of expanding the franchise with lesser-known characters. John Constantine : In February 2021, a television series focusing on John Constantine entered development at HBO Max. The series, featuring a young Constantine in contemporary London, was planned to be horror-oriented and would tie in with Justice League Dark. Guy Bolton was hired to write the pilot, while J. J. Abrams was attached as an executive producer. The creatives involved were determined to have a diverse cast pool, and looked to the non-white actors for the lead role. By August 2022, production was tentatively scheduled to commence in early-2023. In September of the same year after four episodes of the series were written, the show was no longer moving forward at HBO Max, in favor of the studio's intentions of developing a sequel movie to Constantine (2005). In October however, the series was confirmed to still be in development and was being shopped around to other streaming services. Untitled Joker film: In June 2018, a film featuring the Joker entered development with Jared Leto attached as an executive producer in addition to reprising his titular role as the Joker. Though Leto was also initially involved with hiring the film's production crew, the film had been canceled by February of the following year; though a film set within another universe was released in 2019, and was later designated a part of the DC Elseworlds franchise. Untitled Justice League sequel: In October 2014, Justice League Part Two was announced, with Snyder returning as director. Deborah Snyder later revealed that Justice League would not be one film split into two parts. The film was scheduled to be released on June 14, 2019, but production was pushed back to accommodate The Batman. Joss Whedon, the director of Justice League's reshoots, would eventually rework one of the film's post-credit scenes to tease the Injustice League as villains of a possible sequel. In October 2017, J. K. Simmons stated that work on the script was in-progress, while in December, Variety reported that there were "no immediate plans" for Snyder to return as director. By 2019, Warner Bros. had prioritized standalone films over the project. WarnerMedia CEO Ann Sarnoff stated in March 2021 that Zack Snyder's Justice League was considered "a storytelling cul-de-sac" by the studio, with no sequels planned. In August, producer Charles Roven confirmed the studio's interest in a Justice League sequel, but added that it was still "a number of years away". A sequel was once again under consideration while De Luca and Abdy were in charge of DC Films, before Gunn and Safran took over. Justice League Dark : In January 2013, Guillermo del Toro began developing a film centered on the Justice League Dark and submitted a script in November the next year, but was no longer attached by June 2015. In August 2016, Doug Liman joined to direct with the title Dark Universe, alongside Scott Rudin producing and Michael Gilio rewriting the script. Liman left the following May due to scheduling conflicts. In mid-2017, it was retitled Justice League Dark with Gerard Johnstone polishing the script. By April 2020, the project was redeveloped as a series for HBO Max, with J. J. Abrams serving as an executive producer. Justice League Dark was intended to premiere after the individual team members were introduced in their own series, with the studios involved inspired to a similar approach as Marvel Television's Netflix series individually premiering before crossing over in The Defenders (2017). By February 2023, the series was no longer moving forward. Krypton : In October 2014, Man of Steel writer David S. Goyer was announced to be developing a television series focused on the planet Krypton. During the development, Goyer revealed that the series would use unused concepts for the planet that were created for Man of Steel. In early marketing materials for the series and the first teaser that debuted at the 2017 San Diego Comic-Con, the Superman logo designed for the DCEU films was used to represent the House of El, implying that the series would have been a direct prequel to Man of Steel. During the casting process, the production crew sought an actor who resembled a young Henry Cavill to portray Seg-El, Superman's grandfather, while Goyer stated that the series was planned to take place 200 years prior to the events of Man of Steel. Ultimately, all connections to Man of Steel were dropped by the series' release in March 2018. Executive producer Cameron Welsh later described the series as "adjacent" to both the DCEU and the Arrowverse. Lobo : In September 2009, a film centered around Lobo was in development. Guy Ritchie and Brad Peyton were attached to direct at different times, while Dwayne Johnson was originally intended to star. After various iterations, in 2016, Jason Fuchs was hired as screenwriter. By February 2018, Michael Bay was attached to direct. Fuchs rewrote the script at Bay's request so the budget could be considerably lowered. In November 2022, Jason Momoa revealed that under the direction of Gunn and Safran, a project that he categorized as a "dream come true" was in development, which included his favorite comic book character. The project was later reported to be Lobo. In January 2023, Gunn and Safran addressed Momoa's involvement with future adaptations of the character, while stating that the actor would not portray two characters in the franchise. Madame X : In June 2021, a series focusing on Madame Xanadu entered development at HBO Max. Angela Robinson was attached to write and executive produce the series along with J.J. Abrams. The series was planned to tie in with Justice League Dark. By September 2022, the project was dropped by HBO Max and was being shopped around to other streaming services. Untitled Man of Steel sequel: By October 2014, a sequel to Man of Steel was in development, with Henry Cavill set to reprise his role. Matthew Vaughn had discussions with the studio to direct the film in 2017, but after two years, the talks with Warner Bros. ended in March and Vaughn left the film. Shortly after in July, Christopher McQuarrie said that he and Cavill had pitched a sequel idea to Warner Bros. over a year prior, with the plot having ties to Green Lantern Corps, but he moved on to other projects due to what he perceived as no movement on the films. Later, Michael B. Jordan had pitched his own take on the character, but was not ready to commit due to an already busy schedule. By November, Warner Bros. had entered negotiations with J. J. Abrams about taking control of the project. The film was no longer in active development by May 2020, but Cavill entered negotiations to reprise the role in a different film. Snyder later stated that his plans for the plot had included Brainiac and the Kryptonians who were banished to the Phantom Zone at the end of Man of Steel. In 2022, after Cavill reprised his role in Black Adam, a film centered around his iteration of Superman was back in active development, intended to serve as the first film focusing solely on the character since Man of Steel. Charles Roven was hired as producer at that time, with a story pitch written by Steven Knight. The studio was actively searching for a director. Cavill confirmed in October that he would reprise the role in multiple future installments. However, that December, while De Luca and Abdy had worked closely with Cavill to announce his return as Superman, Gunn and Safran instead opted to develop a film with the character at a younger age. Cavill confirmed that he would no longer play Superman. Gunn and Safran optioned to move ahead with Superman as a part of the upcoming DC Universe franchise instead. The Metal Men : In April 2007, a film centered around the Metal Men entered development with Eric Champnella as screenwriter; Lauren Shuler Donner and Jack Leslie also joined as producers. In May 2012, Barry Sonnenfeld entered negotiations with Warner Bros. to direct the film and was hired the next month. DC Entertainment president Diane Nelson reiterated in 2013 the company's intentions to make the film. The development was in limbo for several years until October 2021, when Sonnenfeld revealed that the film's story was still being written. In November 2022, Gunn confirmed that he and Safran had plans for the team in the future of the franchise. New Gods : In March 2018, Ava DuVernay signed on to direct a film centered around the New Gods. Initially with a script written by Kario Salem, Tom King was later brought to co-write the film with DuVernay. Darkseid was planned to be the main antagonist of the film, and the Female Furies were set to appear. The fourth draft of the script was ongoing in 2020. In December, DuVernay said that the COVID-19 pandemic had given her and King time to dig into "the mind and musings of Jack Kirby". New Gods was canceled in April 2021, though Warner Bros. stated that it could be revived in the future. According to The Hollywood Reporter, the project faced difficulties due to Darkseid's role in Zack Snyder's Justice League, and Warner Bros. wanted time to pass before the character appeared again. Later, DuVernay revealed that Mister Miracle, Big Barda, Granny Goodness, and Highfather would have appeared in the film. Nightwing : By February 2017, a film centered around Dick Grayson / Nightwing was in development, with Chris McKay and Bill Dubuque signed on as director and screenwriter, respectively. Although the script was nearing its final draft, McKay said in June 2021 that the project was delayed due to DC having "other priorities", but also reaffirmed his intentions to still make the film. He also said that the film could possibly be reworked to remove its connections to the DCEU continuity. In August 2023, the project was canceled. Untitled Black Manta film: In February 2019, Warner Bros. announced a horror-themed spin-off from Aquaman focusing on the villainous Trench kingdom. Safran and James Wan were set to produce, with Noah Gardner and Aidan Fitzgerald writing the script. The film was planned to have a lower production budget than other DCEU films. The film was expected to be released before Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom. In April 2021, the project was canceled, though Warner Bros. said that it may be revived in the future. In October, Wan revealed that the initially announced name of The Trench was a working title, to misdirect the audience that the movie was secretly a Black Manta film. Plastic Man : By December 2018, a comedy-action adventure film based on Plastic Man was in development with Amanda Idoko hired to write the script. In December 2020, Cat Vasko was hired to do a rewrite of Idoko's screenplay, with the project reworked to be a female-centered film. Static Shock : At DC FanDome held in August 2020, a live-action film centered around Static was revealed to be in development, with Michael B. Jordan joining the production team as a producer alongside Reginald Hudlin in October. Walter Hamada described the film as a project that could be developed as an HBO Max-exclusive film. In March 2021, Randy McKinnon was hired as screenwriter. Supergirl : In August 2018, a film centered around Kara Zor-El / Supergirl, was announced to be in development with Oren Uziel penning the script. In February 2021, Sasha Calle was officially cast in the role, with the character scheduled to first appear in The Flash. The film was scheduled for Warner Bros. Pictures 2022–2023 release slate. A similar project was later announced as a part of the upcoming DC Universe franchise titled, Supergirl: Woman of Tomorrow; which will star Milly Alcock in the titular role, and adapt a script written by Ana Nogueira. Untitled Val-Zod television series: By July 2021, a limited series centered around Val-Zod was in development for HBO Max. Michael B. Jordan was set to produce the series and also potentially star, while Darnell Metayer and Josh Peters were attached to write. Jordan previously pitched a feature film centered around an African-American Superman, only to place development on hold due to his busy production schedule. Waller : In January 2021, Gunn announced that he was developing additional spin-off installments to The Suicide Squad alongside Warner Bros. Entertainment. In February of 2022, the filmmaker confirmed that he is continuing to work on expanding the franchise with various projects in development. By May of the same year, it was revealed that a spin-off continuation television series of Peacemaker was in development, which will center around the character of Amanda Waller. Viola Davis was announced to be reprising her role from other DCEU media, in addition to serving as an executive producer on the show. Christal Henry will serve as writer, in addition to executive producing alongside James Gunn and Peter Safran. The project was later repositioned as a part of the upcoming DC Universe franchise. The Wonder Twins : In February 2022, a film centered around Zan and Jayne / the Wonder Twins entered development for HBO Max. Adam Sztykiel was slated to make his directorial debut and write the screenplay, with Marty Bowen and Wyck Godfrey serving as producers. By that April, KJ Apa and Isabel May were cast in the lead roles of Zan and Jayna, respectively. Principal photography was scheduled to commence in Atlanta, Georgia in July, but the project was canceled in May following WarnerMedia's merge with Discovery Inc. and the creation of Warner Bros. Discovery. The CEO of the newly formed conglomerate, David Zaslav, felt that the film's estimated $75 million-plus budget would not bolster enough of a return as a straight-to-streaming release. Additionally, Zaslav has a directive mandate that DC Films will first focus on theatrical releases, with internal criticism also stating that the project was conceived in a style deemed "too niche". Untitled Wonder Woman 1984 sequel: After principal photography on Wonder Woman 1984 was completed, director and co-writer Patty Jenkins said that the plot for a third Wonder Woman film had been written. She revealed that the story arc for Wonder Woman was planned over three films, with the third taking place in the present. Jenkins and Gadot planned to work on other projects before proceeding with the sequel. In 2020, Jenkins said she had stories written for two more Wonder Woman films completed. Two days after 1984 was released, a third film was officially greenlit by Warner Bros. Pictures. Jenkins was set to return as director, with a script she wrote, while Gadot was planned to reprise her role as the titular heroine. In October 2021, Gadot stated that Lynda Carter would reprise her role as Asteria from 1984. A year later, Jenkins revealed that the script for the film was completed, while also stating that she had tentative plans for further installments. Filming was expected to begin in mid-2023, but in December the third film was revealed to be no longer moving forward because the script conflicted with the current plans for the DCEU formulated by Gunn and Safran. Zatanna : By November 2018, Warner Bros. was considering developing a film based on Zatanna. In March 2021, an AT&T investor presentation revealed that a Zatanna project was in development as an HBO Max-exclusive film, and Emerald Fennell was hired as screenwriter later that month. The film was to be produced by J. J. Abrams. By October 2022, the film was initially scrapped at HBO Max, but later began being shopped around to other streaming services. In October 2014, Geoff Johns explained that DC's approach to their films and television series would be different from Marvel Studios' cinematic universe, stating that their film universe and TV universes would be kept separate within a multiverse to allow "everyone to make the best possible product, to tell the best story, to do the best world". This divide lasted until January 2020, when the DCEU was retroactively established to have connections to The CW's Arrowverse continuity via an expansion of the multiverse concept, during Part 4 of the "Crisis on Infinite Earths" crossover. Ezra Miller reprised their role as Barry Allen in a cameo appearance alongside Grant Gustin's version of the character. During their conversation, Miller's Barry gets the idea to call himself "The Flash" from his alternate self and mentions "Victor". Despite their cameo, the episode did not confirm the designated Earth for the DCEU characters. Miller's cameo opened up more possibilities for crossovers between DC films and the Arrowverse. President of DC Films, Walter Hamada, revealed that prior to "Crisis on Infinite Earths", DC had been structured in a way that the television division had to clear the use of characters with the film division. Now, the company could "really lean into this idea of [the multiverse] and acknowledge the fact there can be a Flash on TV and one in the movies, and you don't have to pick one or the other, and they both exist in this multiverse". Arrowverse creator and executive producer Greg Berlanti agreed, feeling that "moving forward, there's more opportunity to do more things like this", and was open to more film characters appearing in the Arrowverse. In August 2020, Hamada announced plans to develop a multiverse inspired by the comics. In doing so, the studio also stated that all past, present, and future projects are a part of the same unified multiverse. The Flash director Andy Muschietti further explained that all previous adaptations of DC Comics were a part of the multiverse: "...all the cinematic iterations that we've seen before are valid... all that you've seen exists, and everything that you will see exists, in the same unified multiverse". In 2023, the DCEU version of Shazam made a cameo appearance through archival footage in the Titans season 4 episode "Dude, Where's My Gar?". In the DCEU, the events of the films rarely explicitly make their exact years known. Man of Steel takes place after the events of Wonder Woman and Wonder Woman 1984, which are set in 1918 and 1984, respectively. Wonder Woman also has bookend scenes set in the present after the events of Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. The events of Batman v Superman occur 18 months after the events of Man of Steel, which follows the consequences and the emergence of aliens and metahumans such as Superman. The film concludes with the death of Superman, which is emphasized in Suicide Squad and Justice League, taking place approximately one and two years later, respectively. Jason Momoa confirmed that Aquaman takes place right after Zack Snyder's Justice League. Aquaman is followed by Shazam!, which occurs during the Christmas season of 2018. The events of Birds of Prey are set in 2020. Shazam! Fury of the Gods is set about two years after its predecessor, but at least in 2021, because Billy Batson was fourteen in Shazam! while in Shazam! Fury of the Gods is seventeen years old. The Suicide Squad is confirmed to take place in 2021. Peacemaker is set five months after the events of The Suicide Squad. In an episode of Peacemaker a newspaper page can be seen talking about the upheavals happening in Kahndaq caused by the Intergang from which it can be inferred that the events of Black Adam happen shortly after Peacemaker. Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom is set four years after the first Aquaman. The Flash is set in 2023 and 2013 of an alternative timeline where Michael Keaton is Batman. Blue Beetle is the final film in the DCEU timeline, but Xolo Maridueña will reprise his role in the DCU. List indicator(s) This section includes characters who have appeared in three or more separate character franchises. An empty, dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film.  A indicates an appearance through archival footage or audio.  C indicates a cameo role.  E indicates an appearance not included in the theatrical cut.  G indicates a guest appearance in the season.  P indicates an appearance in onscreen photographs.  S indicates an appearance through use of special effects.  U indicates an uncredited appearance. The franchise has won an Academy Award, nominated for three Annie Awards, seven Critics' Choice Movie Awards (winning two), 13 Critics' Choice Super Awards (winning two), 12 Golden Raspberry (winning four), five Grammy Awards, two Hugo Awards (winning one), three Golden Reel Awards, 14 MTV Movie & TV Awards (winning two), one Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Award, 35 Saturn Awards (winning one), and eight Visual Effects Society Awards, among others. In January 2023, Gunn and Safran announced the initial ten installments for the DC Universe, which make up a portion of the slate subtitled "Chapter 1: Gods and Monsters". They included the films Superman (2025), The Authority, The Brave and the Bold, Supergirl: Woman of Tomorrow and Swamp Thing, as well as the television series Waller, Creature Commandos, Lanterns, Paradise Lost, and Booster Gold. The duo were open to DCEU actors such as Miller, Gadot, Momoa and Levi reprising their respective roles, though Gunn clarified that Superman would serve as the start of the new continuity, with the DCU being able to change events from the DCEU, with the DCEU properties serving "like a rough memory of what happens in the DCU". The Flash film would be used to reset some aspects of the universe heading into the DCU. In October 2023, Variety reported that no cast members from Man of Steel, Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, or Justice League would reprise their roles in the DCU. Film portal United States portal Speculative fiction portal List of films based on DC Comics publications List of television series based on DC Comics publications Development of the DC Extended Universe DC Animated Universe DC Universe Animated Original Movies DC Animated Movie Universe Tomorrowverse Arrowverse DC Universe Snyder was the director during principal photography, but was replaced by Joss Whedon during post-production. Snyder retained directorial credit for the finished film, though reports have indicated Whedon reshot a majority of the film. Consequently, Snyder released a director's cut in 2021. This release debuted concurrently in theaters and on HBO Max. The extended director's cut of Justice League (2017) The release is an HBO Max-exclusive film. The Writers Guild of America West also credits individually: Rebecca Drysdale, Rick Famuyiwa, Seth Grahame-Smith, Geoff Johns, Phil Lord, Chris Miller, Ezra Miller, Grant Morrison, and Adam Sztykiel for writing additional literary materials although they are not accredited on-screen. These actors serve as body doubles in non-speaking roles where their faces are not shown. Barr, Merrill (April 9, 2014). "Will Warner Brothers & DC Ever Catch Up To Marvel Television After Last Night's 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'?". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 11, 2014. Retrieved March 29, 2018. "DC Cinematic Universe Launched From Small Screen? – It's A Wrap!". Yahoo!. August 12, 2013. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved May 25, 2014. Franich, Darren (August 14, 2014). "Entertainment Geekly: Your thoughts on the DC Cinematic Universe". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 19, 2015. Retrieved May 8, 2017. Staskiewicz, Keith (July 1, 2015). "First look at "Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice" on EW's cover". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 17, 2017. Retrieved December 17, 2017. Auger, Andrew (September 29, 2017). "DC Extended Universe Isn't the Official Name of DC's Movie Universe". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on December 29, 2017. Retrieved December 16, 2017. Nathan, Ian. "They Are Legend". Empire (September 2015). Bauer Media Group: 77–89 (80 for cited material). Owens, Jeremy (July 26, 2015). "'Batman V Superman' Empire Cover Revealed; Zack Snyder On The DCEU". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 29, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2015. Leadbeater, Alex (September 30, 2017). "What Should The DCEU Be Called Now?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 2, 2017. Retrieved December 17, 2017. Shaw-Williams, Hannah (July 21, 2018). "The DC Extended Universe Labelled "Worlds of DC" At Comic-Con [Updated]". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 21, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. Hughes, Mark (July 22, 2018). "'Aquaman' Trailer Shows Great Chance For Revival Of DC Movies". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 22, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. Lovett, Jamie (March 1, 2020). "DC's Jim Lee Praises Upcoming DCEU Movies: Amazing Batman Movie, Killer The Suicide Squad". ComicBook.com. Retrieved May 27, 2020. Dumaraog, Ana (May 27, 2020). "DC Extended Universe Name Finally Official". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 29, 2020. Retrieved May 29, 2020. Outlaw, Kofi (October 25, 2022). "Warner Bros. Confirms "DC Universe" As Official Name of DCEU". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 31, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2022. Schaefer, Sandy (December 7, 2022). "The DC Extended Universe Is No More, Long Live The DC Universe". /Film. Archived from the original on January 25, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Lund, Anthony (October 26, 2022). "DCEU Becomes The DCU as Part of Warner Bros. Rebranding". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on December 17, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Dominguez, Noah (October 26, 2022). "The 'DCEU' Is Dead – James Gunn Is Building the DC Universe". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on November 7, 2022. Retrieved November 6, 2022. Ahmed, Tufayel (March 27, 2016). "The story of how 'Batman vs. Superman' almost happened 15 years ago". Newsweek. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Retrieved May 10, 2017. Hughes, David (2003). Tales From Development Hell. Titan Books. pp. 205–8. ISBN 978-1-84023-691-0. Jacks, Brian (March 15, 2010). "Exclusive: Christian Bale Met For Superman Role In Wolfgang Petersen's 'Batman Vs. Superman'". MTV News. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2011. Garrett, Diane (September 20, 2007). "George Miller to lead "Justice League"". Variety. Archived from the original on June 15, 2018. Retrieved September 20, 2007. Fleming, Michael; Garrett, Diane (January 16, 2008). "Warner pulls plug on "Justice League"". Variety. Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved May 10, 2017. Breznican, Anthony (April 11, 2013). "'Man of Steel' will open door for more DC Comics superhero movies". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Connelly, Brendon (June 13, 2013). "David Goyer Tells Me How Man Of Steel Will "Cause" The Justice League Movie". Bleeding Cool. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved May 9, 2017. Dyce, Andrew (April 11, 2013). "Man of Steel Will Launch DC Shared Universe". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 12, 2013. Retrieved August 20, 2016. Sperling, Nicole (July 20, 2013). "Comic-Con 2013: 'Superman & Batman' movie will follow "Man of Steel"". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2013. Funich, Darren (July 20, 2013). "Warner Bros. reveals plans for a Batman/Superman film". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved May 25, 2017. Franich, Darren (October 15, 2014). "Warner Bros. announces 10 DC movies, including "Wonder Woman"". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2017. Kit, Borys (May 6, 2016). "Ben Affleck Elevated to 'Justice League' Executive Producer". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2016. Kit, Borys (May 17, 2016). "'Batman v. Superman' Fallout: Warner Bros. Shakes Up Executive Roles (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Lincoln, Ross (May 17, 2016). "Warner Bros Responding To Fans & Critics With DC Films Shakeup". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2016. Lang, Brent (January 4, 2018). "Warner Bros. Taps Walter Hamada to Oversee DC Films Production (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on January 4, 2018. Retrieved March 29, 2018. White, Peter (September 23, 2020). "'The Suicide Squad' TV Spinoff "Peacemaker" Starring John Cena From James Gunn Ordered By HBO Max". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved September 23, 2020. Lang, Brent; Donnelly, Matt (April 14, 2022). "Warner Bros. Discovery Exploring Overhaul of DC Entertainment (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on February 3, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Otterson, Joe (October 25, 2022). "James Gunn, Peter Safran to Lead DC Studios for Warner Bros. Discovery". Variety. Archived from the original on January 30, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Vary, Adam B. (January 31, 2023). "New DC Universe Unveils First 10 Projects: 'Superman: Legacy' in 2025, Batman & Robin Movie, Green Lantern Series, Wonder Woman Prequel and More". Variety. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Strauss, Bob (November 15, 2017). "Joss Whedon brought "own flavor" to "Justice League" after Zack Snyder left". Los Angeles Daily News. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Kit, Borys (May 20, 2020). "'It Will Be an Entirely New Thing': Zack Snyder's $20M-Plus "Justice League" Cut Plans Revealed". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 1, 2020. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Rubin, Rebecca B. (November 18, 2020). "Wonder Woman 1984 to Debut Both on HBO Max and in Theaters". Variety. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved November 18, 2020. Rubin, Rebecca; Donnelly, Matt (December 3, 2020). "Warner Bros. to Debut Entire 2021 Film Slate, Including "Dune" and 'Matrix 4', Both on HBO Max and In Theaters". Variety. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2020. "The Flash". Writers Guild of America West. Retrieved May 7, 2022. Goldberg, Matt (August 17, 2011). "Plot Synopsis for Man of Steel". Collider. Archived from the original on September 29, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2015. Oldham, Stuart (June 4, 2010). "Nolan: No Joker in next "Batman"". Variety. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved June 2, 2017. Boucher, Geoff (March 10, 2010). "Christopher Nolan takes flight with Superman: "We have a fantastic story"". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 21, 2014. Retrieved June 2, 2017. Finke, Nikki; Fleming, Mike (February 9, 2010). "It's A Bird! It's A Plane! It's Chris Nolan! He'll Mentor Superman 3.0 And Prep 3rd Batman". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 27, 2014. Retrieved December 3, 2010. Schuker, Lauren A. E. (August 22, 2008). "Warner Bets on Fewer, Bigger Movies". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved October 22, 2008. Fleming, Michael (October 4, 2010). "SCOOP: Zack Snyder Directing Superman". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 5, 2010. Retrieved October 4, 2010. Bierly, Mandi (January 30, 2011). "Superman found: "Tudors" star Henry Cavill cast". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Merrion, Paul (July 28, 2011). "Superman flying into Chicago in August for filming". Crain's Chicago Business. Archived from the original on August 18, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011. Kilday, Gregg (July 21, 2011). "Zack Snyder's Superman Movie "Man of Steel" Moved to June 14, 2013". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 24, 2011. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Chitwood, Adam (June 9, 2015). "Batman vs. Superman Synopsis Revealed". Collider. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved July 28, 2015. Finke, Nikki (June 10, 2013). "'Man Of Steel' Sequel Underway With Zack Snyder And David S. Goyer". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved September 8, 2014. Franich, Darren (January 27, 2016). "Batman v Superman: Zack Snyder asked Christopher Nolan for permission". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017. Ford, Jessica; Kit, Borys (June 16, 2014). "Jason Momoa to Play Aquaman in 'Batman v. Superman: Dawn of Justice'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 23, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Schillaci, Sophie (August 22, 2013). "Ben Affleck Is Batman for "Man of Steel" Sequel". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 23, 2013. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Siegel, Tatiana (December 18, 2013). "Batman-Superman Film Enlists "Argo" Writer (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 4, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Duke, Alan (January 18, 2014). "Batman-meets-Superman movie delayed a year; Peter Pan flies into its slot". CNN. Archived from the original on March 27, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (May 21, 2014). "Warner Bros. Unveils Title of New Batman-Superman Film". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 23, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Acuna, Kirsten (October 15, 2013). "The 'Batman Vs. Superman' Movie Is Filming This Weekend At A College Campus In LA". Business Insider. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved June 2, 2017. Gettell, Oliver (May 21, 2014). "'Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice' starts shooting in Detroit". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 3, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2017. Chitwood, Adam (December 5, 2014). "Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice Wraps Filming". Collider. Archived from the original on December 9, 2014. Retrieved January 19, 2022. Gomez, Adrian (December 10, 2014). "Batman v Superman: It's a wrap in New Mexico". Albuquerque Journal. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2017. "'Batman V. Superman' Moves Release Date Again As Warner Bros Sets DC Game Plan". Deadline Hollywood. August 6, 2014. Archived from the original on June 22, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Turan, Kenneth (March 23, 2016). "'Batman v Superman,' with Ben Affleck and Henry Cavill, is a gritty superhero showdown". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 23, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2017. Kroll, Justin (December 4, 2013). "Gal Gadot to Play Wonder Woman in 'Batman vs. Superman'". Variety. Archived from the original on December 5, 2013. Retrieved December 4, 2013. Kroll, Justin (October 15, 2014). "'The Flash' Movie to Star Ezra Miller in 2018". Variety. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Kroll, Justin (April 24, 2014). "Ray Fisher to Play Cyborg In "Batman-Superman" (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 11, 2014. Retrieved April 24, 2014. Breznican, Anthony (March 28, 2016). "Batman v Superman Cyborg scene explained — spoilers". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2018. Breznican, Anthony (March 28, 2016). "Batman v Superman deleted scene features new villain — spoiler alert". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 9, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2017. Valentine, Evan (July 3, 2016). "'Batman v Superman': Theatrical Cut v Extended Cut – New Scenes Revealed in Detail". Collider. Archived from the original on May 1, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2017. "New "Suicide Squad" Plot Synopsis Reveals New Details About the Supervillain Movie". ScreenCrush. December 15, 2015. Archived from the original on December 17, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2018. McNary, Dave (February 26, 2009). "Warner Bros. sets up "Suicide Squad"". Variety. Archived from the original on July 11, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Kit, Borys (December 2, 2014). "It's Official: "Suicide Squad" to Star Will Smith, Jared Leto, Margot Robbie and More". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 23, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Stedman, Alex (May 3, 2015). "'Suicide Squad': David Ayer Tweets First Photo of Cast in Costume". Variety. Archived from the original on May 6, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Foutch, Haleigh (April 13, 2015). "Suicide Squad Begins Filming". Collider. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved July 20, 2019. Kroll, Justin (August 28, 2015). "'Suicide Squad': David Ayer Tweets Cast and Crew Photo on Final Day of Production". Variety. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Vlessing, Etan (December 1, 2014). "David Ayer's "Suicide Squad" to Shoot in Toronto For Warner Bros". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 2, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Ford, Rebecca (April 6, 2016). "Warner Bros. Pushes "Jungle Book" to 2018, "Wonder Woman" Gets New Date". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved March 1, 2022. McMillan, Graeme (August 9, 2016). "It's All Too Much: "Suicide Squad" and the Way DC Movies Connect Together". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 1, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. McMillan, Graeme (August 8, 2016). "The Comic Book Background Behind 'Suicide Squad's' Mid-Credits Scene". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 15, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kroll, Justin (January 23, 2014). "'Wonder Woman' Gal Gadot Signs Three-Picture Deal with Warner Bros". Variety. Archived from the original on January 23, 2014. Retrieved January 23, 2014. Kit, Borys (November 24, 2014). "Michelle MacLaren Signs to Develop and Direct "Wonder Woman" Movie (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 25, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kit, Borys (December 4, 2014). "'Wonder Woman' Movie Lassoes "Pan" Writer (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 7, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kit, Borys (April 13, 2015). "'Wonder Woman' Movie Loses Director Michelle MacLaren (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 31, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kit, Borys (April 15, 2015). "'Wonder Woman' Finds A Director (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 24, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Derschowitz, Jessica (November 21, 2015). "Wonder Woman movie: First photo of Gal Gadot, cast details revealed". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 21, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Holub, Christian (May 9, 2016). "Wonder Woman: Gal Gadot celebrates film wrapping". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 12, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2022. McNary, Dave (June 21, 2016). "'Justice League': New Details Emerge About DC's Superhero Movie". Variety. Archived from the original on June 22, 2016. Retrieved May 9, 2017. Stedman, Alex (April 27, 2014). "Zack Snyder to Direct "Justice League" Movie". Variety. Archived from the original on September 14, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2014. Fritz, Ben (March 11, 2016). "Inside Chris Terrio's Vision for Batman, Superman and "Justice League"". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 11, 2016. Retrieved June 5, 2017. McMillan, Graeme (June 6, 2016). "'Justice League' Movie Gets Title Clarified". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 31, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Romano, Nick (March 23, 2017). "Justice League teaser poster calls to "unite" the DC heroes". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 26, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2017. Woerner, Meredith (June 2, 2017). "What it's like to be a real-life Amazon on the set of "Wonder Woman"". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 7, 2017. Retrieved June 7, 2017. Nielsen: And [Wright and I] got to do more in "Justice League" as well. Rougeau, Michael; Elfring, Mat (August 24, 2017). "How Justice League Will Make You Care About Cyborg". GameSpot. Archived from the original on April 5, 2018. Retrieved April 4, 2018. Breznican, Anthony (February 21, 2016). "Justice League begins shooting April 11". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 2, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Romano, Nick (October 15, 2016). "Justice League: Ben Affleck, Jason Momoa celebrate at wrap party". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 26, 2017. Retrieved June 27, 2017. Kit, Borys (May 22, 2017). "Zack Snyder Steps Down From "Justice League" to Deal With Family Tragedy". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Stowe, Dusty (August 29, 2017). "Justice League: Joss Whedon Officially Getting Co-Writing Credit". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 30, 2017. Retrieved September 11, 2017. Ford, Rebecca (March 7, 2016). "Justice League' Adds J.K. Simmons as Commissioner Gordon (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 8, 2016. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kile, Meredith B. (March 17, 2016). "Exclusive: Amber Heard Confirms Her "Aquaman" Role in "Justice League", Dishes on "Interesting" Mera Costume". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Couch, Aaron (March 25, 2017). "'Justice League' Trailer: The Moments That Deserve a Closer Look". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 10, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Staley, Brandon (November 18, 2017). "Do Justice League's Post-Credits Tease a Sequel — Or Something Else?". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved December 16, 2017. Colbert, Stephen M. (July 8, 2018). "Justice League: The Snyder Cut Movement Explained". Screen Rant. p. 1. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved November 6, 2018. Colbert, Stephen M. (March 28, 2019). "Zack Snyder Confirms A Snyder Cut Of Justice League Exists". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 15, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2019. Lang, Brent; Kroll, Justin (November 26, 2019). "DC Films Plots Future With Superman, Green Lantern and R-Rated Movies (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on August 21, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2019. Donnelly, Matt (May 20, 2020). "Zack Snyder Will Release the "Snyder Cut" of "Justice League" on HBO Max". Variety. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Ilyas, Xavier (January 17, 2021). "Zack Snyder's Justice League Will Release As A Movie, Not A TV Show". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Curran, Brad (January 26, 2021). "Justice League: How Zack Snyder's Cut is So Much Longer Than Whedon's". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021. Retrieved January 4, 2022. Burwick, Kevin (July 20, 2020). "Zack Snyder's Justice League Is Separate from the DC Cinematic Universe Continuity". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Brooks, Nicholas (March 17, 2021). "How Much Did Zack Snyder's Justice League Cost to Complete?". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 18, 2021. Retrieved January 4, 2022. Sneider, Jeff (October 23, 2020). "Exclusive: 'Zack Snyder's Justice League' Reshoots Add Joe Manganiello's Deathstroke". Collider. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Labonte, Rachel (March 30, 2021). "Zack Snyder Directed Justice League's Martian Manhunter Scene Over Zoom". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 30, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Lovett, Jamie (January 30, 2021). "Zack Snyder's Justice League Is Officially Complete". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 9, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Acuna, Kirsten (March 18, 2021). "'Zack Snyder's Justice League' has a cameo fans have been waiting years to see. Here's how it came together". Insider. Archived from the original on April 1, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021. Kit, Borys (October 21, 2020). "Jared Leto to Play Joker in Zack Snyder's "Justice League" (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Wojnar, Zak (May 23, 2020). "Justice League Snyder Cut's Darkseid Actor Confirmed". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 13, 2020. Retrieved April 9, 2021. Wong, Justin (August 23, 2020). "Justice League: The Snyder Cut Trailer's NEW Villain, Explained". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 31, 2020. Retrieved April 9, 2021. Caruso, Nick (August 22, 2020). "Zack Snyder's Justice League Trailer: First Look at Director's Cut Features New Villains, Iris West — Watch". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved April 9, 2021. Harrington, Delia (August 23, 2020). "Justice League The Snyder Cut Restores Kiersey Clemons' Iris West". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved April 9, 2021. Melendez, Marcos (March 19, 2021). "Zack Snyder Reveals "Justice League" Atom Spinoff Movie Idea He Pitched WB". Collider. Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved April 9, 2021. Grebey, James (March 18, 2021). "Every Single Easter Egg in Zack Snyder's Justice League". Vulture. Archived from the original on April 18, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Kit, Borys (August 12, 2014). "'Aquaman' Movie Hooks Two Writers (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 14, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Fleming, Mike Jr. (June 3, 2015). "James Wan Sets "Aquaman" Deal To Direct Jason Momoa In DC Warners Pic". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 3, 2015. Retrieved June 3, 2015. Kit, Borys (November 12, 2015). "Aquaman Hooks New Writer (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 13, 2015. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kit, Borys (July 22, 2016). "'Aquaman' Movie Hooks "Gangster Squad" Writer". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 11, 2016. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Busch, Anita (June 26, 2017). "The Conjuring 3 Summoned By New Line Cinema, David Leslie Johnson Hired To Script". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 29, 2017. Retrieved October 31, 2017. "Production is Underway on Warner Bros. Pictures' Super Hero Action Adventure "Aquaman"". Business Wire. May 3, 2017. Archived from the original on May 23, 2017. Retrieved May 3, 2017. Romano, Nick (October 21, 2017). "Aquaman stars Jason Momoa, Amber Heard celebrate the end of filming". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 22, 2017. Retrieved July 20, 2019. Hipes, Patrick (March 16, 2017). "'Aquaman' Swims To Christmas 2018 Date Where 'Avatar 2' Was". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 16, 2017. Retrieved March 16, 2017. Gonzalez, Umberto; Owen, Phil (December 31, 2018). "Does "Aquaman" Connect to "Justice League" or Just Ignore It?". TheWrap. Archived from the original on January 1, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2019. Curran, Brad (August 1, 2020). "Justice League: Every Aquaman Connection Cut From The Theatrical Release". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Vejvoda, Jim (August 25, 2017). "Aquaman: Willem Dafoe on Vulko's costume and his character's "good look"". IGN. Archived from the original on April 7, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2018. Auty, Dan (February 7, 2018). "DC's Shazam: Plot Revealed In New Synopsis". GameSpot. Archived from the original on March 28, 2018. Retrieved March 28, 2018. McNary, Dave (August 19, 2014). "Dwayne Johnson Says He'll Play Role in "Shazam"". Variety. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved December 4, 2014. Kroll, Justin (September 3, 2014). "Dwayne Johnson to Play Black Adam in New Line's "Shazam", Darren Lemke To Script (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on September 5, 2014. Retrieved May 5, 2017. Kit, Borys (January 19, 2017). "Dwayne Johnson's DC Villain Black Adam Getting His Own Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 1, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kit, Borys (July 20, 2017). "'Shazam!' Is Next DC Movie to Shoot (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Errico, Marcus (July 21, 2017). "Dwayne Johnson Won't Be in DC's 'Shazam!' Movie". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. Kit, Borys (October 27, 2017). "DC's 'Shazam!' to Star Zachary Levi (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 28, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kit, Borys (November 6, 2017). "'Shazam!' Finds Its Billy Batson with "Andi Mack" Actor". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Drum, Nicole (September 18, 2017). "'Shazam!' to Start Filming Next Spring". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 30, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Erao, Matthew (January 29, 2018). "DC's Shazam! Movie Officially Starts Filming". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 29, 2018. Retrieved July 20, 2019. Staley, Brandon (May 11, 2018). "DC's Shazam! Wraps Filming". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved July 20, 2019. Vlessing, Etan (December 12, 2017). "Pinewood Toronto to Double Production Space as Hollywood Takes City to Full Capacity". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 13, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Couto, Anthony (October 21, 2017). "Shazam! Director Confirms April 2019 Release Date". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 22, 2017. Retrieved October 21, 2017. McCluskey, Megan (April 5, 2019). "How Shazam! Fits Into the DC Extended Universe Timeline". Time. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2019. Travis, Ben (April 11, 2019). "Shazam! Cameo Was Altered Due To Scheduling Conflicts". Empire. Retrieved December 18, 2021. Owen, Phil; Lincoln, Ross A. (April 13, 2019). "'Shazam' Mid-Credits Scene Explained". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 14, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2019. Drum, Nicole (August 6, 2018). "'Birds of Prey' Synopsis Reportedly Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 26, 2018). "'Birds Of Prey' Cast: Mary Elizabeth Winstead Wins Role Of Huntress; Jurnee Smollett-Bell Is Black Canary". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 27, 2018. Retrieved September 26, 2018. Gonzalez, Umberto (November 11, 2016). "Harley Quinn-Birds of Prey Movie's Screenwriter Revealed (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 20, 2017. Retrieved December 16, 2017. Fleming, Mike Jr. (April 17, 2018). "Cathy Yan Is Warner Bros' Choice To Direct Margot Robbie In Next Harley Quinn Film". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 17, 2018. Retrieved April 17, 2018. Cooper, Freda (July 6, 2018). "Exclusive: Margot Robbie confirms January production start for Birds of Prey, will have "much smaller budget" than other DC movies". FlickeringMyth. Retrieved August 9, 2018. Gonzalez, Umberto (October 3, 2018). "'Birds of Prey': Rosie Perez Cast as Renee Montoya in Superheroine Movie (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on October 4, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 26, 2018). "'Birds Of Prey' Cast: Mary Elizabeth Winstead Wins Role Of Huntress; Jurnee Smollett-Bell Is Black Canary". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 27, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. Gonzalez, Umberto (July 16, 2018). "'Birds of Prey' Revealed: Margot Robbie Film Will Feature Black Canary, Huntress, Cassandra Cain, Renee Montoya (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 16, 2018. Retrieved August 9, 2018. Couch, Aaron; McMillan, Graeme (November 20, 2018). "Margot Robbie Reveals Full "Birds of Prey" Title: "The Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 20, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Dumaraog, Ana (January 15, 2019). "Birds of Prey's Cassandra Cain Actress Says Filming Has Begun". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved January 15, 2019. Boucher, Geoff (January 28, 2019). "Harley Quinn's Makeover: See Margot Robbie's New "Birds of Prey" Look In Trailer & Set Photo". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 28, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019. Dela Paz, Maggie (April 15, 2019). "Birds of Prey Wraps Production". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on April 16, 2019. Retrieved April 15, 2019. Couch, Aaron (September 24, 2018). "Margot Robbie's "Birds of Prey" Gets 2020 Release Date". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 25, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Mancuso, Vinnie (August 15, 2020). "How "Birds of Prey" Fits Into the Increasingly-Complicated DCEU Timeline & Why It Works So Well". Collider. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Watercutter, Angela (December 9, 2019). "The First Wonder Woman 1984 Trailer Is Here". Wired. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Nyren, Erin (June 20, 2017). "Patty Jenkins Developing "Wonder Woman" Sequel (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 20, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2017. Errico, Marcus (July 21, 2017). "'Wonder Woman 2' Script Being "Worked On Right Now"". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Truitt, Brian (July 22, 2017). "Comic-Con: Ben Affleck confirms he's staying on as Batman in DC films". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Kroll, Justin (September 11, 2017). "Patty Jenkins Closes Deal to Direct "Wonder Woman" Sequel (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved September 11, 2017. Kit, Borys (September 13, 2017). "'The Expendables' Writer Joins Patty Jenkins, Geoff Johns to Write 'Wonder Woman 2' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Cebulski, Bryan (December 23, 2018). "Wonder Woman 1984 Wraps Filming". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on December 24, 2018. Retrieved January 19, 2022. "Cameras Roll on Warner Bros. Pictures' 'Wonder Woman 1984'". Business Wire. June 13, 2018. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved June 13, 2018. Ritman, Alex (February 19, 2018). "5 London Studios Hollywood Loves". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 27, 2018. Retrieved February 27, 2018. "Tenerife will be one of the filming locations for the next Wonder Woman movie". April 20, 2018. Archived from the original on June 13, 2019. Retrieved May 14, 2018. Monserrat, David (May 19, 2018). "El rodaje de "Wonder Woman" desembarca a finales del verano". Canarias7 (in Spanish). Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Rubin, Rebecca (September 11, 2020). "'Wonder Woman 1984' Release Date Pushed to Christmas". Variety. Archived from the original on September 11, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Erbland, Kate (December 25, 2020). "'Wonder Woman 1984' Post-Credits Scene, Explained: What It Means for the DCEU". IndieWire. Archived from the original on December 25, 2020. Retrieved December 18, 2021. Kroll, Justin (March 2, 2016). "Will Smith, David Ayer Reteaming on Max Landis Spec "Bright"". Variety. Archived from the original on September 29, 2016. Retrieved May 7, 2017. Kit, Borys (March 15, 2017). "'Suicide Squad 2' Lands "Legend of Tarzan" Writer (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 9, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kit, Borys (July 11, 2017). "'Suicide Squad 2': "The Shallows" Helmer Frontrunner to Direct". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 13, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Galuppo, Mia; Kit, Borys (September 6, 2017). "Gavin O'Connor to Direct 'Suicide Squad 2'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 13, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kroll, Justin (September 6, 2017). "'Suicide Squad 2': Gavin O'Connor to Write and Direct Sequel". Variety. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved June 1, 2019. Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (June 8, 2018). "'Suicide Squad 2' Gets New Writers". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 10, 2018. Retrieved June 8, 2018. Mithaiwala, Mansoor (September 15, 2018). "Suicide Squad 2 Writer Confirms Script is Finished". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved August 3, 2019. Mancuso, Vinnie (October 9, 2018). "Here's Why Gavin O'Connor Is No Longer Directing 'Suicide Squad 2'". Collider. Archived from the original on November 21, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. Kit, Borys (January 30, 2019). "James Gunn in Talks to Direct Suicide Squad Sequel (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 31, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kaye, Don (February 4, 2019). "Report: Before The Suicide Squad, James Gunn was offered Superman". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on February 28, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2019. Kit, Borys (March 6, 2019). "Idris Elba in Talks to Replace Will Smith in "Suicide Squad" Sequel (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 7, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kroll, Justin (April 5, 2019). "'Suicide Squad': Deadshot Removed From Sequel as Idris Elba Moves to New Character (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved April 5, 2019. Whitbrook, James (September 13, 2019). "Say Hello to the Very Disposable Stars of The Suicide Squad". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Schmidt, JK (September 20, 2019). "James Gunn Reveals The Suicide Squad Begins Filming". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 21, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 3, 2019). "'Doctor Who's Peter Capaldi Joining James Gunn's 'The Suicide Squad'; Is 'SNL's Pete Davidson Next?". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 3, 2019. Retrieved September 3, 2019. Davis, Brandon (September 13, 2019). "James Gunn's The Suicide Squad to Begin Filming in Atlanta, Head to Panama". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Chitwood, Adam (February 29, 2020). "'The Suicide Squad' Wraps Filming as James Gunn Shares Heartbreaking Note". Collider. Archived from the original on February 29, 2020. Retrieved January 19, 2022. Chitwood, Adam (August 4, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Will Be Streaming on HBO Max Earlier Than Expected". Collider. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Hickson, Colin (December 22, 2021). "Black Adam Synopsis Promises to Unleash "Unique" Justice on the DCEU". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on December 22, 2021. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Langshaw, Mark (July 16, 2012). "'Lobo' casting rumours are true, confirms Dwayne Johnson". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 16, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. Bell, Crystal (April 10, 2017). "The Rock teases his villainous turn as DC's Black Adam". MTV. Archived from the original on October 16, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. Sneider, Jeff (October 31, 2017). ""Undateable" Creator Adam Sztykiel to Write Dwayne Johnson's "Black Adam" Movie for DC, New Line (Exclusive)". Tracking-board.com. Archived from the original on March 24, 2018. Retrieved March 29, 2018. Kroll, Justin (June 7, 2019). "Jaume Collet-Serra Eyed to Direct DC's "Black Adam" Starring Dwayne Johnson". Variety. Archived from the original on June 7, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2019. Katz, Brandon (June 7, 2019). "Exclusive: Jaume Collet-Serra In Talks to Direct Dwayne Johnson's "Black Adam"". Observer. Archived from the original on June 7, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2019. Kit, Borys; Galuppo, Mia (September 25, 2020). "'Black Adam': Aldis Hodge in Talks to Play Hawkman in New Line's DC Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 25, 2020. Retrieved September 25, 2020. Albers, Caitlin (April 10, 2021). "'Black Adam' Begins Filming as Dwayne Johnson Reveals First Set Photo". Collider. Archived from the original on April 10, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2021. Melendez, Marcos (July 16, 2021). "'Black Adam' Has Officially Wrapped Filming, Dwayne Johnson Reveals". Collider. Archived from the original on July 19, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 28, 2021). "Dwayne Johnson Unveils "Black Adam" Summer 2022 Release Date During NCAA Tourney Game". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 10, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Baxter, Joseph (January 27, 2021). "Aldis Hodge Says Playing Hawkman in Black Adam is Still a Responsibility for Representation". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Kit, Borys (July 16, 2020). "Noah Centineo Joins Dwayne Johnson in New Line DC Movie "Black Adam" (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved July 16, 2020. Kit, Borys (December 14, 2020). "'Black Adam' Finds Its Cyclone with "Trinkets" Star Quintessa Swindell (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Kit, Borys (March 24, 2021). "'Black Adam': Pierce Brosnan to Play DC Hero Dr. Fate Opposite Dwayne Johnson (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Hood, Cooper (July 23, 2022). "Black Adam Brings Back The Suicide Squad's Amanda Waller". Screen Rant. Retrieved July 24, 2022. Klissmman, Daniel (October 12, 2022). "Major PEACEMAKER Character Confirmed To Appear In BLACK ADAM – SPOILERS". Comic Book Movie. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Entertainment Tonight [@etnow] (October 13, 2022). "Dwayne Johnson just has *this* to say to Henry Cavill after getting Superman to return to the DCEU in #BlackAdam: "Welcome home". 🙌" (Tweet). Retrieved October 23, 2022 – via Twitter. Dominguez, Noah (October 12, 2022). "Dwayne Johnson Appears to Spoil a MASSIVE DCEU Return in Black Adam". Comic Book Resource. Archived from the original on October 23, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 18, 2023). "'Shazam! Fury Of The Gods' Doesn't Fly With Moviegoers At $30M Opening: Here's Why – Saturday Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Bui, Hoai-Tran (August 22, 2020). "'Shazam' Sequel Will Be Titled "Shazam: Fury Of The Gods" [DC FanDome]". /Film. Retrieved December 18, 2021. Leston, Ryan (January 11, 2022). "Shazam 2 Will Feature "More Adult Humor" And "More Adult Stakes"". IGN. Retrieved May 7, 2022. Cohn, Paulette (April 15, 2019). "Hawaii Five-0's Michelle Borth on How She Danced Her Way into Her Role in Shazam!". Parade. Archived from the original on April 16, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2019. Holmes, Adam (December 11, 2021). "Shazam! Fury Of The Gods: An Updated Cast List". Cinemablend.com. Retrieved December 18, 2021. Ramos, Dino-Ray (August 22, 2020). "'Shazam!': Zachary Levi And Cast Reveal Title Of Sequel, Remain Tight-Lipped On Details – DC FanDome". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 18, 2021. Jirak, Jamie (May 27, 2021). "Shazam: Fury of the Gods! Star Zachary Levi Celebrates Start of Filming, Says He's "Overcome with Gratitude"". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 28, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Schwedtfeger, Conner (August 31, 2021). "Shazam 2 Director Confirms Filming Has Wrapped With New Set Photo". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 24, 2022). "'Aquaman 2' Heads To Christmas 2023, "Shazam: Fury Of The Gods" Goes To March; HBO Max Pics "House Party" & "Evil Dead Rise" Going Theatrical – Warner Bros. Release Date Changes". Deadline Hollywood. Beedle, Tim (January 31, 2023). "James Gunn and Peter Safran on Building a New DC Universe". DC Comics. Archived from the original on February 10, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Kit, Borys (October 2, 2020). "Billy Crudup in Talks to Join "The Flash" (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 2, 2020. Retrieved October 2, 2020. Goldberg, Lesley (July 30, 2013). "'Flash' Series From "Arrow" Producers in the Works at CW". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 6, 2014. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Clark, Noelene; Villarreal, Yvonne (July 30, 2013). "Flash May Get His Own Show On CW; Arrow Will Introduce DC Hero". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 1, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2019. Busch, Anita (April 9, 2015). "'The Flash' Movie: "Lego" Guys Phil Lord & Christopher Miller Building Warner Bros Pic". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 22, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2015. Kit, Borys (April 29, 2016). "The "Flash" Movie Loses Its Director (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 5, 2017. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Kit, Borys (October 31, 2016). "'The Flash' Movie Loses "Dope" Director Rick Famuyiwa (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 1, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2016. Kroll, Justin (January 25, 2017). "Joby Harold to Do Page-One Rewrite of "The Flash" Script (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2017. McMillan, Graeme (July 22, 2017). "New "Flash" Movie Title Suggests It Could Shake Up the DC Universe". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Kit, Borys (April 3, 2018). "'Flash' Movie Writer Dan Mazeau Tackling Ernie Cline's "Armada"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 3, 2018. Retrieved August 13, 2019. Muncy, Julie (March 4, 2018). "Flashpoint Has Closed the Deal on Two Directors". io9. Archived from the original on March 30, 2018. Retrieved March 29, 2018. Schaefer, Sandy (February 20, 2018). "Flashpoint & Batgirl Movies Look to Follow Wonder Woman 2". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 4, 2018. Retrieved March 13, 2018. Kit, Borys (March 15, 2019). "'Flash' Shocker: Ezra Miller Writing Script in Bid to Stay On as Star (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 16, 2019. Retrieved March 16, 2019. Kit, Borys (July 2, 2019). "'Flash' Shocker: "It" Director Andy Muschietti in Talks to Tackle DC Movie (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 18, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 16, 2021). "Andy Muschietti & Barbara Muschietti Form Production Company Double Dream". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Perry, Spencer (February 15, 2021). "The Flash Movie Producer Shares New Behind-the-Scenes Photo Ahead of Production". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved February 18, 2021. Perine, Aaron (October 8, 2021). "The Flash Movie – Another Major Part Of Production Has Wrapped". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved October 8, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 5, 2022). "'The Flash' Moves Up A Week In June 2023, Warners Adds 'Mummies' To Next Year's Slate". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 5, 2022. Retrieved December 5, 2022. Dumaraog, Ana (February 24, 2019). "The Flash Movie Creates "Speedster Multiverse", Says Ezra Miller". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on February 25, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2019. Anderson, Jenna (September 12, 2020). "The Flash Movie Restarts Everything, Features a Lot of DC Characters". ComicBook.com. Retrieved December 22, 2021. Gonzales, Umberto (June 22, 2020). "Batman Returns! Michael Keaton to Play Bruce Wayne in "The Flash"". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. Breznican, Anthony (August 20, 2020). "Ben Affleck Will Return as Batman in The Flash". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on August 20, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 19, 2021). "DC Universe's New Supergirl Is "Young And The Restless" Actress Sasha Calle; Will Make Debut In Upcoming "Flash" Film". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 31, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Klein, Brennan (December 22, 2021). "Michael Shannon Appears on "The Flash" Movie Cast List". Collider. Archived from the original on December 22, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2021. Kroll, Justin (March 24, 2021). "'The Flash': Ron Livingston Replaces Billy Crudup as Barry Allen's Father In New DC Film". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Kit, Borys (March 12, 2021). "'Flash' Movie: Spanish Actress Maribel Verdu to Play Barry Allen's Mother (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Siegel, Tatiana (March 11, 2021). "Kiersey Clemons to Star in "The Flash" Movie (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 31, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Beedle, Tim (January 31, 2023). "The Next Generation of DC Movies and TV Has Arrived..." DC Comics. Archived from the original on February 10, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Barnhardt, Adam (February 1, 2023). "DC Studios' James Gunn Teases How The Flash Resets DC Universe". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 3, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Gonzalez, Umberto (November 29, 2018). "DC and WB Developing Jaime Reyes "Blue Beetle" Latino Superhero Movie". TheWrap. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Gonzalez, Umberto (February 23, 2021). "'Blue Beetle': Angel Manuel Soto to Direct Film About DC Comics' Latino Superhero (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on February 23, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Vlessing, Etan (August 2, 2021). "'Cobra Kai' Star Xolo Maridueña in Talks to Lead DC's "Blue Beetle"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 3, 2023). "Warner Bros Springs First Trailer For DC's 'Blue Beetle'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Behbakht, Andy (May 25, 2022). "Blue Beetle Movie Set Photos Reveal First Look At DC Superhero Costume". Screen Rant. Retrieved June 3, 2022. Melendez, Marcos (July 18, 2022). "DC Comics' "Blue Beetle" Wraps Production in Puerto Rico". Collider. Archived from the original on July 18, 2022. Retrieved July 18, 2022. Faughnder, Ryan (June 8, 2021). "Theaters or HBO Max? Warner Bros. movie plans take shape as Discovery merger looms". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 28, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Gonzalez, Umberto (December 16, 2021). "Warner Bros. Sets "Blue Beetle" Release in August 2023". TheWrap. Retrieved December 16, 2021. Boucher, Geoff (January 25, 2019). "'Aquaman' Sequel: James Wan Seeking Seaworthy Script As First Film Makes DC History". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 26, 2019. Retrieved January 31, 2019. Cramer, Alex; Bjornson, Greta (April 5, 2022). "Jason Momoa Says New Show Is His Own 'Braveheart or Last of the Mohicans'". People. Archived from the original on November 19, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Chand, Neeraj (May 22, 2021). "Aquaman 2 Script Got a Helping Hand from Star Jason Momoa". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Oller, Jacob (October 19, 2018). "Jason Momoa has already pitched his plan for Aquaman 2 to Warner Bros". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on October 19, 2018. Retrieved December 8, 2018. Syme, Rachel (October 16, 2019). "Jason Momoa Is King of the Wild Things". Esquire. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 11, 2019). "'Aquaman 2' Being Penned By David Leslie Johnson-McGoldrick". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 12, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2019. Kizu, Kyle (March 5, 2019). "'Aquaman' Producer on Spinoff and the Wait for a Sequel". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 6, 2019. Retrieved March 6, 2019. Couch, Aaron (June 10, 2021). "'Aquaman 2' Is Titled "The Lost Kingdom"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 2, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. Ferme, Antonio (June 28, 2021). "'Aquaman 2', 'John Wick 4' and More Major Blockbusters Begin Filming, Signaling Production Revival". Variety. Archived from the original on July 3, 2021. Retrieved June 28, 2021. Dominguez, Noah (January 12, 2022). "Aquaman: James Wan Celebrates Last Day of Filming Sequel With Momoa, Wilson". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on January 13, 2022. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Murphy, J. Kim (October 27, 2023). "Aquaman 2 Bumped Two Days, Robert De Niro's Wise Guys Renamed Alto Knights in Move to November 2024". Variety. Archived from the original on October 27, 2023. Retrieved October 27, 2023. Anthony D'Alessandro (January 31, 2023). "James Gunn & Peter Safran Unveil Big DC Plan With New Movies For Batman & Robin, 'Swamp Thing', 'The Authority'; 'Lanterns' TV Series & More". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 17, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 16, 2022). "'Peacemaker' Renewed For Season 2 By HBO Max". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Bonomolo, Cameron (January 13, 2022). "Peacemaker: What Is Project Butterfly?". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 13, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Schmidt, JK (January 15, 2021). "The Suicide Squad Spinoff Peacemaker Begins Filming With James Gunn". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Labonte, Rachel (July 12, 2021). "Peacemaker Filming Has Wrapped For Robert Patrick, Danielle Brooks & More". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 15, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Goldberg, Lesley (February 10, 2021). "HBO and HBO Max Chief Details "Game of Thrones" Expansion Plans". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved February 12, 2021. Ryan, Danielle (January 13, 2022). "Where Peacemaker Fits In The Suicide Squad Timeline". /Film. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 29, 2020). "'The Suicide Squad' HBO Max Spinoff Series "Peacemaker" Adds Steve Agee". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved October 29, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 11, 2020). "'Peacemaker': Robert Patrick, Jennifer Holland & Chris Conrad Also Join HBO Max "Suicide Squad" Spinoff Series". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved November 11, 2020. Silverio, Ben F. (January 13, 2022). "Why That Big Cameo In Peacemaker Episode 1 Is So Important". /Film. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Fowler, Matt (February 18, 2022). "Every New DC Movie Universe Character According to Peacemaker". IGN. Archived from the original on October 5, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Dominguez, Noah (January 22, 2022). "Peacemaker Fan Spots Black Adam Easter Egg". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved December 19, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 17, 2022). "'Peacemaker' Season One Finale: James Gunn On Christopher Smith's Alternative Ending & "Repercussions" For DC Hero In Season 2". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 9, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Haring, Bruce (August 3, 2022). "'Peacemaker' Season 2 Appears Safe, James Gunn Says, Even As Warner Bros. Discovery Cost-Cuts Loom". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 9, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Haring, Bruce (August 3, 2022). "James Gunn Reveals When Peacemaker Season 2 Begins Filming". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 9, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Manfredi, Lucas; Gonzalez, Umberto (January 31, 2023). "'Peacemaker' Season 2 Delayed, but James Gunn Says Viola Davis' 'Waller' Series Will Include 'Team Peacemaker'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on February 2, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Arrant, Chris (December 9, 2019). "Jenkins Developing Wonder Woman Spin-Off for the Amazons - Report". Newsarama. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Chitwood, Adam (December 9, 2019). "Patty Jenkins Already Knows the Story to 'Wonder Woman 3', But Fans Will Have to Wait". Collider. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Shepherd, Jack; Maytum, Matt (April 29, 2020). "Patty Jenkins on Wonder Woman 3 and The Amazonians spin-off: "There's an arc that I have in mind"". Total Film. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Vary, Adam B. (January 31, 2023). "New DC Universe Unveils First 10 Projects: 'Superman: Legacy' in 2025, Batman & Robin Movie, Green Lantern Series, Wonder Woman Prequel and More". Variety. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved March 4, 2024. McNary, Dave (March 30, 2017). "'Batgirl' Movie: Joss Whedon to Direct Standalone Film". Variety. Archived from the original on June 6, 2017. Retrieved March 30, 2017. IGN (July 21, 2017). San Diego Comic Con 2017: Exclusive Access & Interviews – IGN Live. YouTube. Event occurs at 52:59. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Kit, Borys (February 22, 2018). "Joss Whedon Exits "Batgirl" Movie (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 13, 2018. Retrieved April 4, 2018. Kit, Borys (April 9, 2018). "'Batgirl' Movie Back On, Now With "Bumblebee" Writer (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 26, 2018. Retrieved April 9, 2018. Lang, Brent; Kroll, Justin (November 26, 2019). "DC Films Plots Future With Superman, Green Lantern and R-Rated Movies (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on November 26, 2019. Retrieved November 26, 2019. Kit, Borys (May 19, 2021). "'Bad Boys for Life' Filmmakers to Direct "Batgirl" Movie for Warner Bros. (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 19, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Kroll, Justin (July 21, 2021). "'Batgirl': Leslie Grace Lands Role Of Barbara Gordon In New Warner Bros. & DC Film". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Treese, Tyler (November 30, 2021). "Batgirl Set Photo Reveals HBO Max Film Has Begun Shooting". Comingsoon.net. Archived from the original on November 30, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Anderson, Jenna (March 31, 2022). "Batgirl Star Leslie Grace Announces Filming Has Wrapped". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 1, 2022. Retrieved April 1, 2022. Kit, Borys; Galuppo, Mia (July 29, 2021). "'Batgirl' Movie: J. K. Simmons in Talks to Return to Batman Universe as Commissioner Gordon (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 1, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Burlingame, Russ (April 25, 2022). "Batgirl Reportedly Being Considered for Theatrical Release Due to HBO Max and Warner Media Changes". comicbook.com. Gonzalez, Umberto (August 2, 2022). "'Batgirl' Won't Fly: Warner Bros. Discovery Has No Plans to Release Nearly Finished $90 Million Film". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 2, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Earl, William (January 31, 2023). "Shelving Batgirl Was the Right Decision, Says New DC Studios Head Peter Safran: 'It Would Have Hurt DC'". Variety. Retrieved January 31, 2023. Kroll, Justin (July 9, 2015). "'Batman': Ben Affleck in Talks to Star in, Co-Write, Possibly Direct Standalone Movie". Variety. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Thielman, Sam (July 23, 2016). "Justice League, Wonder Woman and a pair of Batmen storm Comic-Con". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 6, 2020. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Justin, Kroll (January 31, 2017). "Ben Affleck Will Not Direct "The Batman" (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on July 1, 2021. Retrieved January 31, 2017. Fleming, Mike Jr. (February 23, 2017). "As You Read Here, Matt Reeves Is New "Batman" Director". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Liu, Narayan (August 22, 2020). "Pattinson's Batman Confirmed to Exist on a Separate Earth from the Established DCEU". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Vito Oddo, Marco (January 12, 2023). "Matt Reeves to Meet With James Gunn & Peter Safran for "BatVerse"". Collider. Retrieved March 6, 2024. Sharf, Zack (January 31, 2023). "'The Batman Part II' Sets 2025 Release Date as Part of Newly Branded 'DC Elseworlds' Projects". Variety. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2024. Couch, Aaron & Borys Kit (December 9, 2022). "Heat Vision: December 9, 2022". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 10, 2022. Nebens, Richard (December 9, 2022). "Michael Keaton's Batman Reboot Reportedly Killed at Warner Bros". The Direct. Retrieved December 10, 2022. Massoto, Erick (January 31, 2023). "James Gunn Says There Are "Possibilities" for Michael Keaton's Batman". Collider. Retrieved January 31, 2023. Bell, Crystal (April 10, 2017). "The Rock teases his villainous turn as DC's Black Adam". MTV. Archived from the original on October 16, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. Anderson, Jenna (October 12, 2022). "Black Adam's Dwayne Johnson Speaks Out on Possible Superman Showdown in Future DC Film (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Hargrave, Sam (October 14, 2022). "Warner Bros. Is Finally Crossing Over Shazam & Black Adam, Says DC Star". The Direct. Retrieved October 15, 2022. "Black Adam 2: Producers Reveal Sequel Plans, Release Date Timeline (Exclusive)". D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 20, 2022). "Dwayne Johnson Says 'Black Adam' Won't Be Part Of DC's New First Chapter". Deadline. Retrieved December 20, 2022. Sneider, Jeff (August 20, 2021). "'Black Canary' Movie in the Works at HBO Max From Writer Misha Green; Jurnee Smollett to Reprise Role". Collider. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2021. Ridgely, Charlie (June 14, 2022). "Birds of Prey Star Jurnee Smollett Opens Up About Black Canary's Exciting Solo Project". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 9, 2022. Retrieved December 9, 2022. Allen, Clark (September 17, 2015). "{Exclusive} Warner Bros. Developing Booster Gold/Blue Beetle Movie With Greg Berlanti Helming". Tracking Board. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Rose, Lacey (May 12, 2016). "TV Producer of the Year Greg Berlanti: "I Still Fight About Everything"". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Donnelly, Matt (March 9, 2018). "Greg Berlanti Says DC Films' 'Booster Gold' Movie Still in the Works at Warner Bros". The Wrap. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Hood, Cooper (November 28, 2022). "James Gunn Reveals Surprising DC Hero Fans Most Want To See". Screen Rant. Retrieved March 4, 2024. O'Rourke, Ryan (January 31, 2023). "'Booster Gold' Live-Action Series Announced for DCU". Collider. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Perine, Aaron (January 31, 2021). "The Suicide Squad Director James Gunn Has More Spinoff Ideas Beyond Peacemaker". ComicBook.com. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Couch, Aaron (August 4, 2021). "Margot Robbie and "The Suicide Squad" Team Reflect on Script "No One Could Pull" Off But James Gunn". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 4, 2024. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Patten, Dominic (January 27, 2022). "James Gunn Eyeing Second "Suicide Squad" Spinoff Series For HBO Max, Says "Peacemaker" Has "Really Good Chance" For Season 2". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Perez, Rodrigo (June 6, 2022). "James Gunn Says He's Involved In Multiple DC Projects Plus A Spinoff Show That "Blends" Characters From 'Peacemaker'". The Playlist. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Mitovich, Matt Webb (January 5, 2023). "James Gunn Teases an 'Unannounced DC TV Show' He Is Busy Writing". TV Line. Retrieved March 4, 2024. "Chapter 1: Gods and Monsters / DC Studios". DC YouTube. DC Studios. January 31, 2023. Retrieved March 4, 2024. ...I've written all the episodes... Anderson, Jenna (August 10, 2022). "DC Films Plans Reportedly Included a Crisis on Infinite Earths Movie Event Before Warner Bros. Merger". ComicBook.com. Retrieved December 10, 2022. Nebens, Richard (December 9, 2022). "DC's Massive Event Movie Plans for Henry Cavill's Superman Return Revealed". The Direct. Retrieved December 10, 2022. Vespe, Eric (December 9, 2022). "Man Of Steel 2 And A Crisis On Infinite Earths Plan Were In Development Before New DC Management Came In". Slash Film. Retrieved December 10, 2022. Anderson, Jenna (December 9, 2022). "Planned DC Crisis Movie Would Have Starred Henry Cavill's Superman". ComicBook.com. Retrieved December 10, 2022. Franich, Darren (October 15, 2014). "Warner Bros. announces 10 DC movies, including 'Wonder Woman'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Vejoda, Jim (August 10, 2017). "Justice League: Adjusting the tone of the Cyborg character was part of the reshoots". IGN. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved April 4, 2018. Topel, Fred (August 6, 2018). "'Justice League' Actor Joe Morton Shot More Cyborg Scenes That Could End Up in "Cyborg" [Exclusive]". /Film. Archived from the original on August 7, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Warner Bros.' DC Comics Movie Slate Fully Revealed!". ComingSoon.net. October 15, 2014. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved December 21, 2018. Chitwood, Adam (December 18, 2018). "Here's a Full List of Upcoming DC Movies: From 'Shazam!' to "Joker"". Collider. Archived from the original on November 16, 2017. Retrieved December 31, 2018. Lovett, Jamie (April 5, 2020). "Justice League Actor Ray Fisher Reveals What He Wants to See From Cyborg in the Future". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 30, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Masters, Kim (April 6, 2021). "Ray Fisher Opens Up About "Justice League", Joss Whedon and Warners: "I Don't Believe Some of These People Are Fit for Leadership"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Booth, Kaitlyn (December 30, 2020). "Ray Fisher Says He Won't Work With DC President of Films Walter Hamada". Bleeding Cool News. Archived from the original on December 30, 2020. Retrieved December 30, 2020. Perine, Aaron (January 13, 2021). "The Flash: Ray Fisher Says Warner Bros. Officially Moving on From Cyborg in Scathing Essay About DC Boss". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 1, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2021. Gonzalez, Umberto (January 6, 2021). "Cyborg Cameo Written Out of 'The Flash'; Role Played by Ray Fisher Won't Be Recast". TheWrap. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved January 6, 2021. Perine, Aaron (January 15, 2021). "Ray Fisher Says He'd Return as Cyborg for Zack Snyder's Justice League 2". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 5, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Schaefer, Sandy (March 25, 2021). "Ray Fisher Wants Former Flash Director Rick Famuyiwa to Helm a Cyborg Movie". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 15, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Holmes, Adam (February 21, 2022). "The Cryptic Reason James Gunn Had For Leaving Batman And Cyborg Out Of The Peacemaker Finale". CinemaBlend. Retrieved November 13, 2022. Siegel, Tatiana (October 10, 2023). "Aquaman 2 Flooded With Drama: Jason Momoa Allegedly Drunk on Set, Amber Heard Scenes Cut, Elon Musk's Letter to WB and More". Variety. Archived from the original on October 10, 2023. Retrieved October 10, 2023. Kit, Borys (December 13, 2016). "David Ayer, Margot Robbie Reteam for All-Female DC Villains Movie "Gotham City Sirens" (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 13, 2017. Retrieved May 9, 2017. Flood, Alex (September 26, 2018). "Will Smith confirms talks for Suicide Squad spin-off movie for Deadshot". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 27, 2019). "Will Smith Will Not Return As Deadshot In James Gunn's 'Suicide Squad 2'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 28, 2019. Retrieved February 27, 2019. Siegel, Tatiana (April 6, 2022). "Ezra Miller Arrest Prompts Emergency Warner Bros. Meeting About Star's Future". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 15, 2022. Anderson, Jenna (March 10, 2021). "Joe Manganiello Explains Why Deathstroke Solo Film Was Scrapped". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 28, 2021. Retrieved March 10, 2021. Gonzalez, Umberto (October 25, 2017). "'The Raid' Vet Gareth Evans in Talks to Direct DC Comics "Deathstroke" Film (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on October 25, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Crump, Andy (October 11, 2018). "How "The Raid" Filmmaker Gareth Evans Is Challenging Himself With New Genres". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 12, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Cavanaugh, Patrick (October 3, 2018). "'The Raid' Director Clarifies "Deathstroke" Reports, Praises Joe Manganiello". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 3, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2022. May, Rebecca April (April 29, 2020). "Gareth Evans reveals pitch for his "lean, visceral" Deathstroke movie that never happened (exclusive)". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Burlingame, Russ (February 21, 2024). "Joe Manganiello Teases Surprising New Deathstroke Plans After Advice From James Gunn (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Retrieved February 21, 2024. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Kroll, Justin (December 8, 2022). "DC Disruption Has Town Jittery: What's Next For 'Man Of Steel' & Other Sequels After 'Wonder Woman 3' Jolt". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 10, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Siegel, Tatiana (June 3, 2023). "Here Comes The Flash: A Low-Profile Ezra Miller, the 'Secret Ending' Warners Is Trying to Preserve and a Sequel Script on Ice". Variety. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Masters, Kim; McClintock, Pamela (August 11, 2022). "Warner Bros. Weighing Fate of The Flash as Its Ezra Miller Problem Grows". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 11, 2022. Retrieved August 11, 2022. Siegel, Tatiana (January 4, 2023). "Secret Meetings, Tequila and Black Adam vs. Superman: How Dwayne Johnson's Bid for DC Power Flamed Out". Variety. Archived from the original on January 4, 2023. Retrieved January 4, 2023. Lussier, Germain (January 31, 2023). "James Gunn DC Slate Q&A: Flash, Aquaman, Crossover, More". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Barfield, Charles (May 30, 2023). "The Flash: Director Andy Muschietti Says No One Else Can Replace Ezra Miller If There's A Sequel". The Playlist. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Freitag, Lee (June 18, 2023). "The Flash Director Confirms Reverse-Flash Killed Barry Allen's Mom in the DCU". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 19, 2023. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Gonzalez, Umberto (June 13, 2023). "The Flash Sequel on the Table Despite DC Reboot". TheWrap. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved June 14, 2023. Carras, Christi (June 18, 2023). "The Flash fizzles at the box office amid Ezra Miller controversy, studio woes". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on June 18, 2023. Retrieved June 21, 2023. Bahr, Lindsey (June 18, 2023). "Pixar's first rom-com Elemental, Ezra Miller's The Flash both disappoint at box office". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 18, 2023. Retrieved June 21, 2023. Kelley, Aidan (June 19, 2023). "The Flash Budget Breakdown: How The Film Became the Biggest Flop in Movie History". Collider. Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved July 15, 2023. Siegel, Tatiana (October 10, 2023). "Aquaman 2 Flooded With Drama: Jason Momoa Allegedly Drunk on Set, Amber Heard Scenes Cut, Elon Musk's Letter to WB and More". Variety. Archived from the original on October 10, 2023. Retrieved October 10, 2023. Nakashima, Ryan (September 17, 2011). "Hollywood balks at big budget movies as DVDs drop". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Retrieved August 27, 2021. McMillion, Graeme (March 22, 2016). "'Green Lantern' Revisited: The Last Time Warner Bros. Tried to Launch a Comic Book Universe". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 3, 2021. Francisco, Eric (January 15, 2020). "A guide to the new Arrowverse multiverse after "Crisis on Infinite Earths"". Inverse. Archived from the original on January 17, 2020. Retrieved August 27, 2021. Albert, Brian (July 11, 2015). "Comic Con 2015: Green Lantern Corps Movie Announced". IGN. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Fleming, Mike Jr. (January 12, 2017). "Warner Bros Sets David Goyer, Justin Rhodes For Green Lantern Corps". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 12, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Ridgely, Charlie (June 11, 2018). "'Green Lantern Corps' Confirmed to Feature Hal Jordan and John Stewart". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Barnett, Brian (January 9, 2018). "Green Lantern Corps. 'Still in the Works' Despite DCEU Shakeup, David Goyer Says". IGN. Archived from the original on January 10, 2018. Retrieved March 2, 2023. Lang, Brent (June 11, 2018). "Geoff Johns Exiting as DC Entertainment President and Chief Creative Officer". Variety. Archived from the original on June 11, 2018. Retrieved March 2, 2024. El-Mahmoud, Sarah (July 5, 2019). "Looks Like Christopher McQuarrie Pitched Both Superman And Green Lantern Movies To DC". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 5, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Breznican, Anthony (March 18, 2021). "Zack Snyder Explains That Enigmatic Justice League Ending". Vanity Fair. Retrieved April 1, 2021. "Ava DuVernay's 'New Gods,' James Wan's 'The Trench' DC Movies Not Moving Forward at Warner Bros". The Hollywood Reporter. April 1, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Freeman, Molly (August 22, 2017). "Joker Expected in Suicide Squad 2 & Gotham City Sirens". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. Foutch, Haleigh (May 8, 2018). "The Harley Quinn Spinoff Might Be an "R-Rated Girl Gang Film", Says Margot Robbie". Collider. Archived from the original on June 11, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. Topel, Fred (January 8, 2020). "'Gotham City Sirens' on Hold, 'Bright 2' Still in the Works Says David Ayer [TCA 2020]". /Film. Archived from the original on January 8, 2020. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Knight, Rosie (January 24, 2020). "Margot Robbie's Five-Year Fight To Make Birds Of Prey". Nerdist. Archived from the original on January 25, 2020. Retrieved January 28, 2020. Zachary, Brandon (January 27, 2020). "Birds of Prey Stars Reveal the DC Characters They Want to Interact With". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on January 28, 2020. Retrieved January 28, 2020. Boone, John (August 2, 2021). "Margot Robbie Reacts to Leslie Grace's Casting as Batgirl (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Jirak, Jamie (December 5, 2022). "Margot Robbie Has "Been Pushing" Hard For a Harley Quinn and Poison Ivy Romance (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 25, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Keyes, Rob (July 21, 2017). "Warner Bros. is Developing Harley Quinn vs The Joker Spinoff". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 25, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. Kit, Borys (August 23, 2017). "Joker and Harley Quinn Movie Coming from "Crazy Stupid Love" Filmmakers (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. Stowe, Dusty (September 19, 2017). "Margot Robbie Praises Joker & Harley Quinn Movie Directors". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 12, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. Wakeman, Gregory (September 20, 2018). "The Joker and Harley Quinn spin-off's writers talk us through their "deranged" mash-up of "Bad Santa" and "This Is Us"". Metro New York. Archived from the original on September 26, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. Hughes, Mark (February 13, 2019). "Why The Future Of DCEU Movies Looks Brighter Than Ever (Updated)". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved April 2, 2021. Kroll, Justin (March 16, 2021). "Warner Bros, DC Films And Chernin Teaming On 'Hourman' Film With Gavin James And Neil Widener Writing The Script". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 29, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Woerner, Meredith (September 16, 2022). "Keanu Reeves Returns for "Constantine" Sequel, HBO Max's TV Reboot Dead Along With "Madame X"". Variety. Archived from the original on September 16, 2022. Retrieved September 16, 2022. Otterson, Joe (February 17, 2021). "'Constantine' Series in the Works at HBO Max". Variety. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved May 8, 2021. Couch, Aaron (February 17, 2021). "J.J. Abrams Bringing "Constantine" Series to HBO Max". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved May 8, 2021. Mike Fleming Jr.; Peter White; Anthony D'Alessandro (August 7, 2022). "The Dish: Amid Layoffs, How David Zaslav Might Deal With J.J. Abrams' Bad Robot, DC's Walter Hamada & New Warner Bros. Pictures Chiefs Mike De Luca & Pam Abdy". Deadline. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Drum, Nicole (August 7, 2022). "J.J. Abrams' Constantine Series Gets Promising Update". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Graham-Lowery, Nathan (August 13, 2022). "HBO Max Constantine Show Eyeing Early 2023 Filming Start Date". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 18, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Kit, Borys (October 17, 2022). "DC at a Turning Point: James Gunn Pitches Secret Movie, Dwayne Johnson Flexes His Superman Power (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Kroll, Justin (June 5, 2018). "Jared Leto's Joker Is Getting His Own Movie (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 11, 2018. Coggan, Devan (June 21, 2016). "Justice League just one movie, producer says". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved June 6, 2017. Kit, Borys (December 9, 2016). "Zack Snyder Firming Up Post-'Justice League' Plans with "The Last Photograph"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2016. Alter, Ethan (December 8, 2020). "Joe Manganiello reveals new details about Ben Affleck's abandoned "Batman" movie: "It was really cool, really dark and really hard"". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. McGloin, Matt (October 20, 2017). "Justice League 2 In Development". CosmicBookNews. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved March 29, 2018. Lang, Brent (December 7, 2017). "DC Shake-Up After Justice League Stumbles (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on December 7, 2017. Retrieved November 22, 2019. Faughnder, Ryan (February 27, 2019). "Warner Bros.' Kevin Tsujihara talks AT&T, self-driving Batman cars and the DC universe". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 1, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2019. Barnes, Brooks (December 27, 2020). "Managing Movie Superheroes Is About to Get a Lot More Complicated". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2021. Retrieved December 29, 2020. Couch, Aaron (August 6, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Producer Charles Roven Recalls Pairing David Ayer with Christopher Nolan's Editor". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Kit, Borys (December 8, 2022). "Patty Jenkins' 'Wonder Woman 3' Not Moving Forward as DC Movies Hit Turning Point (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 8, 2022. Collura, John (January 7, 2013). "Guillermo del Toro Talks Dark Universe, His DC Comics Supernatural Heroes Movie". IGN. Archived from the original on September 20, 2013. Retrieved July 3, 2013. Hughes, Mark (November 25, 2014). "Exclusive – "Justice League: Dark" Script In Studio Hands Today". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 25, 2014. Retrieved November 25, 2014. Kit, Borys (June 29, 2015). "Warner Bros. Moves "Sandman" to New Line as Part of DC Comics Shuffle". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. Kroll, Justin (August 24, 2016). "Doug Liman to Direct "Dark Universe" for DC, Warner Bros. (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on December 2, 2016. Retrieved August 24, 2016. Kroll, Justin (May 23, 2017). "Doug Liman Parts Ways With Justice League Dark Movie (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on May 24, 2017. Retrieved May 23, 2017. Fleming, Mike Jr. (August 29, 2017). "Warner Bros Gets Gerard Johnstone To Polish "Justice League Dark" Script As Helmer Search Continues". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 30, 2017. Retrieved October 14, 2017. Goldberg, Lesley (April 16, 2020). "J.J. Abrams Sets 3 HBO Max Shows: Justice League Dark, "The Shining" Spinoff, "Duster"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Porter, Rick (February 16, 2023). "'Duster' Series from J.J. Abrams a Go at HBO Max". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. In April 2020, Duster was one of three Bad Robot projects announced for the yet-to-launch HBO Max, along with The Shining offshoot Overlook and a Justice League Dark project. The latter two have since been scrapped... Foutch, Haleigh (October 22, 2015). "Man Of Steel Writer David Goyer, Attached To New TV Show. Its Name? "Krypton"". Collider. Archived from the original on July 2, 2020. Retrieved January 19, 2022. Johnston, Rich (October 27, 2014). "'Krypton': David S. Goyer Offers Update on Superman Prequel Series". Bleeding Cool. Archived from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2022. Orquiola, John (April 19, 2017). "Is Syfy's Krypton Series a Man of Steel Prequel?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 20, 2017. Retrieved August 27, 2021. Raymond, Nicholas (March 19, 2018). "Krypton Isn't In The DCEU – But Was It Originally Meant To Be?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 19, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2021. Goffe, Nadira (April 6, 2021). "Geoff Johns Blocked Regé-Jean Page Playing Superman's Grandfather In Krypton". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 20, 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021. "David Goyer Says Krypton Takes Place 200 Years Before Man Of Steel". Comic Book. September 6, 2017. Archived from the original on July 30, 2020. Retrieved October 13, 2021. Jeffery, Mogan (March 19, 2018). "Here's how Krypton fits into the DC Extended Universe". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 3, 2021. Fleming, Mike (September 2, 2009). "Guy Ritchie locked for "Lobo"". Variety. Archived from the original on October 17, 2015. Retrieved September 2, 2009. Fleming, Mike Jr. (April 20, 2012). "Warner Bros Sets Brad Peyton To Helm "Lobo", The DC Comics Alien Bounty Hunter". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 28, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2018. Carter, Jeff (May 18, 2015). "Former "Lobo" Movie Director Explains Why Film Stalled". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 16, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. Sneider, Jeff (March 16, 2016). "Warner Bros' "Lobo" Lands "Wonder Woman" Writer Jason Fuchs". TheWrap. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved March 29, 2018. Kit, Borys (February 8, 2018). "Warner Bros. Wants Michael Bay for "Lobo" — But at the Right Budget". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 8, 2018. Retrieved April 9, 2018. Shart, Zack (November 8, 2022). "Jason Momoa 'Excited' by James Gunn Taking Over DC Universe: 'One of My Dreams' Will Come True Under His Watch". Variety. Archived from the original on November 23, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Freitag, Lee (November 10, 2022). "Exclusive: Jason Momoa Reacts to Lobo Rumors, Says Fans Will Love His Secret DC Project". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on January 23, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Echebiri, Makuochi (November 10, 2022). "Jason Momoa Sparks Rumors of Lobo Coming to the DCEU". Collider. Archived from the original on January 23, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Adams, Timothy (November 9, 2022). "Jason Momoa Addresses If His DC Dream and James Gunn Posting Lobo Are Connected (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Goldberg, Lesley (June 25, 2021). "J.J. Abrams, Angela Robinson Bringing DC Comics' "Madame X" to TV at HBO Max". Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 21, 2021. Retrieved July 1, 2021. Fleming, Mike Jr. (September 16, 2022). "Warner Bros Sets 'Constantine' Sequel; Keanu Reeves & Francis Lawrence To Reunite, Akiva Goldsman Scripting & Producing With Bad Robot's JJ Abrams & Hannah Minghella". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 2, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Cardona, Ian (June 16, 2018). "Is Henry Cavill Preparing to Play Superman Again (Pretty Soon)?". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019. Retrieved July 20, 2019. Lyus, Jon (September 15, 2017). "Exclusive: Matthew Vaughn confirms talks for the next Superman film". HeyUGuys. Archived from the original on September 16, 2017. Retrieved May 16, 2018. Han, Karen (May 30, 2019). "Rocketman producer Matthew Vaughn explains what his Man of Steel 2 may have looked like". Polygon. Archived from the original on May 30, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019. El-Mahmoud, Sarah (July 5, 2019). "Looks Like Christopher McQuarrie Pitched Both Superman And Green Lantern Movies To DC". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 5, 2019. Retrieved July 18, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 27, 2020). "We Haven't Seen the Last of Henry Cavill's Man of Steel". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 4, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2020. Italiano, Eric (May 10, 2021). "Interview: Zack Snyder Is Ready For What's Next". BroBible. Archived from the original on June 14, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. McArdle, Tommy (October 24, 2022). "Henry Cavill Confirms He Will Return as Superman: 'Very Small Taste of Things to Come'". People. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Donnelly, Matt (December 14, 2022). "James Gunn Writing New 'Superman' Film; Henry Cavill Will Not Return, but Eyed to Play Different DC Character". Variety.com. Retrieved December 14, 2022. Kit, Borys (April 4, 2007). "Warners forges "Metal Men"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 4, 2021. Retrieved December 12, 2021. Wilding, Josh (May 21, 2012). "EXCLUSIVE: Barry Sonnenfeld In Talks With Warner Bros. To Helm A Comic Book Movie". Comic Book Movie. Archived from the original on May 23, 2012. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Brodesser-Akner, Claude (June 21, 2012). "Exclusive: Barry Sonnenfeld's Secret Comic-Book Movie Is ..." Vulture. Archived from the original on September 25, 2021. Retrieved October 12, 2021. Kit, Borys (July 17, 2013). "DC Entertainment Chief Reveals What's Next for Superman, Wonder Woman and 5 Superheroes Who Deserve Movies (Q&A)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved October 12, 2021. Wilding, Josh (October 12, 2021). "THE ADDAMS FAMILY Director Barry Sonnenfeld Confirms DC's METAL MEN Is In Active Development (Exclusive)". ComicBookMovie. Archived from the original on October 13, 2021. Retrieved October 12, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 10, 2022). "Warner Bros Discovery Boss David Zaslav Holds Town Hall With New DC Heads James Gunn & Peter Safran About New Cohesive Universe". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Damore, Meagan (June 19, 2019). "Justice League's Darkseid Teases Character Voice in Support of Snyder Cut". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Behbakht, Andy (April 5, 2021). "New Gods: Every Confirmed Character That Would Have Appeared". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Wiese, Jason (March 8, 2021). "DC's New Gods: What's Going On With The Ava DuVernay Movie". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on April 4, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (April 1, 2021). "Ava DuVernay's "New Gods", James Wan's "The Trench" DC Movies Not Moving Forward at Warner Bros. (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 9, 2021. Retrieved August 5, 2021. Anderson, Jenna (April 1, 2021). "Ava DuVernay Comments on Warner Bros. Canceling New Gods". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 17, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021. Ford, Rebecca (February 23, 2017). "Warner Bros. Plotting Live-Action "Nightwing" Movie With "Lego Batman Movie" Director (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 15, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2018. Dumarang, Ana (February 9, 2018). "Nightwing Movie Script Will Be Finished Soon". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 6, 2018. Retrieved March 13, 2018. O'Connell, Sean (June 9, 2021). "DC's Nightwing Director Has An Exciting Update Dick Grayson Fans Will Love". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on June 20, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2021. Beach, Nicholas (August 22, 2023). "Another Highly-Anticipated DC Project Officially Dead At Warner Bros". Game Rant. Retrieved August 22, 2023. Kit, Borys (February 8, 2019). "'Aquaman' Spinoff "The Trench" in the Works (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 9, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Hussaini, Syed Fahadullah (October 25, 2021). "Canceled Aquaman Spinoff Was A Secret Black Manta Movie Reveals James Wan". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 25, 2021. Retrieved October 25, 2021. Kit, Borys (December 7, 2018). "Plastic Man Movie in the Works at Warner Bros. (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 8, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2019. Kit, Borys (December 4, 2020). "Cat Vasko to Pen Female-Centric Plastic Man Movie (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 25, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 22, 2020). "Reginald Hudlin Says "Static Shock" Movie In Development – DC Fandome". Deadline. Kit, Borys (October 16, 2020). "Michael B. Jordan, Outlier Society to Produce DC Movie "Static Shock" (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 15, 2021. Retrieved October 16, 2020. Kit, Borys (March 25, 2021). "'Static Shock' Movie Enlists "Safety" Writer Randy McKinnon (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Fleming, Mike Jr. (August 6, 2018). "'Supergirl' Movie On Drawing Board For Warner Bros/DC; Oren Uziel Scripting". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Galuppo, Mia; McMillan, Graeme (August 6, 2018). "'Supergirl' Movie in the Works with '22 Jump Street' Writer". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Busch, Anita (August 13, 2018). "Female Director Scorecard: Warner Bros Lining Up Its Superheroes". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 14, 2018. Retrieved March 2, 2024. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 19, 2021). "DC Universe's New Supergirl Is 'Young And The Restless' Actress Sasha Calle; Will Make Debut In Upcoming 'Flash' Film". Deadline. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Kit, Borys (November 14, 2023). "DC Movie 'Supergirl: Woman of Tomorrow' Finds Its Writer in Ana Nogueira (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Couch, Aaron & Borys Kit (January 29, 2024). "Supergirl Found: Milly Alcock to Play Heroine in James Gunn's DC Movies". The Hollywood Reporter. Sneider, Jeff (July 23, 2021). "Exclusive: Michael B. Jordan Developing His Own Black Superman Project for HBO Max". Collider. Archived from the original on July 30, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 26, 2021). "Michael B. Jordan's "Val Zod" Superhero Project Lands Darnell Metayer & Josh Peters To Adapt For HBO Max". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 17, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (February 16, 2022). "HBO Max Chief "Feeling Good" About Season 2 Of 'Peacemaker', Addresses Potential New 'Suicide Squad' Spinoff Series From James Gunn". Deadline. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Otterson, Joe (May 3, 2022). "Viola Davis in Talks to Star as Amanda Waller in 'Peacemaker' Spinoff Series at HBO Max". Variety. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Kit, Borys (February 14, 2022). "'Wonder Twins' DC Movie in the Works With Adam Sztykiel to Write, Direct (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 15, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 15, 2022). "'The Wonder Twins' HBO Max Movie Powers Activate With KJ Apa & Isabel May". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 15, 2022. Kit, Borys (May 18, 2022). "DC Movie "Wonder Twins" Shut Down by Warner Bros". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 18, 2022. Flint, Joe (May 18, 2022). "There's a New Media Mogul Tearing Up Hollywood: "Zas Is Not Particularly Patient"". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 18, 2022. Couch, Aaron (January 26, 2019). "Director Patty Jenkins: 'Wonder Woman 3' Will Be a "Contemporary Story"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 27, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Press, Joy (January 23, 2019). "Wonder Woman Director Patty Jenkins on Her New TV Drama I Am the Night". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved July 20, 2019. Chitwood, Adam (December 9, 2019). "Patty Jenkins Already Knows the Story to 'Wonder Woman 3', But Fans Will Have to Wait". Collider. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Retrieved December 9, 2019. Ramos, Dino-Ray (December 9, 2019). "'Wonder Woman 1984's Gal Gadot & Patty Jenkins Talk Superhero Movie's Cultural Impact And Future Of Franchise: "We Have It All Mapped Out" – CCXP". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Retrieved December 9, 2019. Greenblatt, Leah (December 24, 2020). "Patty Jenkins on Wonder Woman 1984, her path as a director, and the franchise's future". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Retrieved December 24, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 27, 2020). "'Wonder Woman 3' Being Fast-Tracked Following Sequel's Current $85M WW To Date; Patty Jenkins & Gal Gadot Will Be Back". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 29, 2021. Retrieved December 29, 2020. Jirak, Jamie (October 21, 2021). "Wonder Woman 3 Star Gal Gadot Is Excited to Finally Work With Lynda Carter". ComicBook. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Gardner, Chris (November 7, 2021). "Gal Gadot on Lynda Carter Joining Next 'Wonder Woman': "It's Even Better This Time"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 7, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Fink, Richard (October 7, 2022). "Wonder Woman 3 Script Is Complete, Says Patty Jenkins". Screen Rant. Retrieved October 10, 2022. Kim, Brendan (January 4, 2022). "Wonder Woman 3 Could Start Filming Next Year, Says Gal Gadot". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 5, 2022. Retrieved January 5, 2022. Walsh, Savannah (December 14, 2022). "Wonder Woman Director Patty Jenkins Denies Quitting: "I Never Walked Away"". Vanity Fair. Retrieved December 15, 2022. Boucher, Geoff (November 30, 2018). "Spider-Women, Captain Marvel & Harley Quinn: Females Fly In The Face Of Old Hollywood Perceptions". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2021. Mancuso, Vinnie (March 12, 2021). "'Batgirl' and "Zatanna" Projects Confirmed for HBO Max by Warner Bros". Collider. Archived from the original on April 12, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca (March 22, 2021). "DC Films Taps "Promising Young Woman" Director Emerald Fennell to Write Zatanna Superhero Movie (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 5, 2021. Retrieved March 22, 2021. Wieselman, Jarett (October 23, 2014). "The Man At The Center Of DC's TV Multiverse". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on July 21, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Behbakht, Andy (January 25, 2020). "Crisis Reveals Ezra Miller's DCEU Flash Name Is Inspired By Meeting Grant Gustin's Arrowverse Flash". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2020. Dowling, Amber (January 15, 2020). "'Crisis on Infinite Earths' Finale Recap: Ezra Miller, Beebo Cameo in a Battle to Save the Multiverse". Variety. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2020. Ausiello, Michael (January 15, 2020). "'Crisis on Infinite Earths' Surprise Crossover Cameo Connects DC's TV and Movie Universes". TVLine. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2020. Agard, Chancellor (August 22, 2020). "Greg Berlanti says pandemic will have an impact on the next Arrowverse crossover". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 24, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. McMillian, Graeme (August 22, 2020). "DC's Flash Meeting Opens Door to More TV, Movie Crossovers". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Titans Cameo Proves DC Really Didn't Care About Shazam 2". Screen Rant. Dyce, Andrew (April 7, 2019). "DCEU Complete Movie Timeline (From Man of Steel To Shazam)". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 21, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2019. Chitwood, Adam (December 24, 2020). "How to Watch the DC Movies in Order (Chronologically and by Release Date)". Collider. Archived from the original on February 14, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. "The Confusing Timeline of the DC Extended Universe, Explained". Inverse. April 7, 2019. Archived from the original on July 13, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2019. Odman, Sydney (March 20, 2023). "'Shazam! Fury of the Gods' Writers Talk 'Fast' Joke, New DC Leadership and That Major Cameo". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. Retrieved June 6, 2023. Labonte, Rachel (April 18, 2020). "The Suicide Squad Takes Place After The Events Of Birds Of Prey". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 10, 2021. Retrieved September 13, 2020. Oddo, Marco Vitto (October 20, 2022). "How Does Black Adam Connect to 'The Suicide Squad' and 'Peacemaker'?". Collider. Archived from the original on November 7, 2022. Retrieved June 6, 2023. "Aquaman 2 is set four years after its predecessor". Retrieved March 12, 2024. "Why The Flash Goes To The Michael Keaton Batman Timeline". Retrieved March 12, 2024.. "James Gunn Clarifies What Counts As DCU Canon And Which DCEU Actors Are Staying". Retrieved March 12, 2024.. Edwards, Molly (February 17, 2022). "Peacemaker finale brings in some major, "awesome" DC cameos". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved February 17, 2022. Outlaw, Kofi (September 6, 2017). "Suicide Squad Ending Credits Scene Explained". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 27, 2020. Retrieved April 1, 2021. "The Flash Cameos: All the Batmen and Supermen, Plus That Post-Credits Scene Explained". variety.com. June 16, 2023. Retrieved June 16, 2023. "'The Suicide Squad' HBO Max Spinoff Series 'Peacemaker' Adds Steve Agee". Deadline Hollywood. October 29, 2020. Retrieved March 19, 2023. "James Gunn Fires Back At Shazam 2 Casting Criticisms". Screen Rant. March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 19, 2023. "Joel Kinnaman to Replace Tom Hardy as Rick Flagg in WB's 'Suicide Squad'". February 13, 2015. "'Birds of Prey' has a blink-and-you'll-miss-it nod to 'Suicide Squad' that could tell us more about the movie's sequel". Business Insider. "The Flash Fans Unearth a Major Suicide Squad Cameo". July 21, 2023. Witiw, John (September 6, 2019). "Shazam BTS Photo Reveals Superman's Face". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on January 29, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. "The Flash Cameos: All the Batmen and Supermen, Plus That Post-Credits Scene Explained". variety.com. June 16, 2023. Retrieved June 16, 2023. Graham-Lowery, Nathan (February 21, 2022). "Peacemaker Finale Superman Costume Shown In BTS Image". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on February 21, 2022. Retrieved February 21, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 11, 2020). "'Peacemaker': Robert Patrick, Jennifer Holland & Chris Conrad Also Join HBO Max 'Suicide Squad' Spinoff Series". "Jennifer Holland's Emilia Harcourt and Mark Strong's Dr. Sivana Will Appear in "Shazam! Fury of the Gods"". March 15, 2023. Hedash, Kara (April 1, 2021). "Birds of Prey: Who Plays Joker In The Harley Quinn Movie". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on February 29, 2020. Woburn, Daniel (March 31, 2020). "The Suicide Squad Footage Reused In Birds of Prey". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021. Vary, Adam B. (February 18, 2021). "'Zack Snyder's Justice League' Actor Harry Lennix on Playing Martian Manhunter and the Joss Whedon Scandal". Variety. Archived from the original on October 21, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Lussier, Germain (July 8, 2011). "Harry Lennix Is A General In "Man Of Steel"". /Film. Archived from the original on December 25, 2015. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Jagernauth, Kevin (October 9, 2014). "General Swanwick Says Ben Affleck Might Be A Better Batman Than Christian Bale Because He's American". The Playlist. Archived from the original on April 1, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Jensen, Jeff (March 17, 2011). "Kevin Costner officially cast in Zack Snyder's "Superman" reboot". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2017. Eisenberg, Eric (April 3, 2016). "How Batman v Superman: Dawn Of Justice Worked In That Special Man Of Steel Cameo". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Brew, Simon; Howard, Kirsten (October 10, 2018). "When Movie Sequels Use Photos of the Original's Stars". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Kit, Borys (March 2, 2011). "Diane Lane to Play 'Superman's' Mom Martha Kent". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Yuan, Annie (March 27, 2011). "Amy Adams Cast as Lois Lane in Zack Snyder's "Superman"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 18, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Jesse Eisenberg and Jeremy Irons Join the Cast of Warner Bros. Pictures' Untitled Superman/Batman Film from Director Zack Snyder" (Press release). Burbank, California: Warner Bros. Pictures. Business Wire. January 31, 2014. Archived from the original on January 30, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021. Anderton, Ethan (May 1, 2016). "'Justice League' Is Bringing Back Jeremy Irons as Alfred to Help Batman Round Up the Team". /Film. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2021. Defore, John (October 18, 2022). "Epic New Flash Footage Welcomes Back Another Snyderverse Star". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on May 23, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Travis, Emlyn (March 11, 2023). "Shazam! director reacts to new ad's huge DCU cameo spoiler: 'Maybe don't be online or watch TV'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 12, 2023. Retrieved March 12, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Nancy (April 25, 2023). "'The Flash' Dazzles Exhibitors at CinemaCon: 'Emotional ... Some People Crying ... The Movie Will Have Legs'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 20, 2023. Bonomolo, Cameron (February 19, 2022). "Peacemaker Finale Behind the Scenes Reveals Gal Gadot's Wonder Woman Double". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 20, 2022. Retrieved February 20, 2022. Outlaw, Kofi (June 16, 2023). "The Flash: DC Fans Wonder Why Ben Affleck Isn't Credited in the Film". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved June 26, 2023. Fleming, Mike Jr. (April 10, 2011). "Toldja! Michael Shannon Gets Villain Role In Superman Movie". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2017. Orange, B. Alan (April 2, 2016). "Batman v Superman Featurette Shows How Zod's Body Was Made". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on January 13, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021. "Man of Steel". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved February 7, 2018. "Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved February 7, 2018. "Suicide Squad". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved February 7, 2018. "Wonder Woman". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved February 7, 2018. "Justice League". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved April 6, 2019. Justice League production budget: "'Justice League': Warner Bros. CEO Reportedly Mandated a Runtime Under 2 Hours". Collider. November 6, 2017. Archived from the original on November 8, 2017. Retrieved November 9, 2017. "Aquaman". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved February 27, 2020. Aquaman production budget: D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 28, 2019). "James Wan's $1B+ "Aquaman" Became DC's Lifeboat After "Justice League" Debacle: No. 5 In 2018 Most Valuable Blockbuster Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 6, 2019. "Shazam!". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved February 27, 2020. "Birds of Prey". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved March 28, 2020. "Wonder Woman 1984". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved March 26, 2023. "The Suicide Squad". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved October 2, 2021. "Black Adam". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved December 25, 2022. "Shazam! Fury of the Gods". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved June 25, 2023. "The Flash". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved June 16, 2023. "Blue Beetle". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved August 21, 2023. "Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Movie Franchises and Brands Index". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 20, 2013. Retrieved July 18, 2019. "DC Extended Universe Index". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved December 28, 2018. "Man of Steel". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Man of Steel". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Finke, Nikki (June 16, 2013). "'Man Of Steel' Soars To $200.3M Worldwide In First 4 Days As #1: Record June Domestic Opening Of $128.7M, International $71.6M". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 15, 2014. Retrieved June 17, 2013. "Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 28, 2016). "How "Batman V Superman" Will Turn A Profit Despite Critical Kryptonite". Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Suicide Squad". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Suicide Squad". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 8, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Posts Best R-Rated Opening During Pandemic With $26.5M, But Worst For Franchise: Here's Why". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved August 8, 2021. "Wonder Woman". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Wonder Woman". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 27, 2020). "'Wonder Woman 1984' Hits $16.7M At Domestic B.O. In Face Of HBO Max Release; Record For Pandemic, But −84% Lower Than First Pic's Opening". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 28, 2020. Retrieved December 27, 2020. "Justice League". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Justice League". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 19, 2017). "'Justice League' Encounters Kryptonite at the B.O. With $93M+ Opening: Why The DC Movie Weakened – Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 20, 2017. Retrieved November 28, 2017. "Aquaman". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Aquaman". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 26, 2018). "'Aquaman' Unwraps $22M+ On Christmas For $105M+ Cume; 'Holmes & Watson' Opens To $6M+; "Vice" $4M+". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 26, 2018. "Shazam!". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Shazam!". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Anthony D'Alessandro (April 7, 2019). "'Shazam!' Shoots To Super $53M+ Opening, $56M+ With Previews; "Pet Sematary" Purrs $25M – Sunday AM B.O. Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved April 7, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Nancy (April 5, 2019). "'Shazam!' Striking Lightning With $49M; "Pet Sematary" Digging Up $23M+ – Midday Box Office". Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Birds of Prey". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Birds of Prey". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Wonder Woman 1984". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved August 16, 2023. "Wonder Woman 1984". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Zack Snyder's Justice League". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved August 16, 2023. "Zack Snyder's Justice League". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved October 26, 2022. "The Suicide Squad". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved August 16, 2023. "The Suicide Squad". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Black Adam". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 14, 2023. "Black Adam". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved October 29, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 21, 2022). ""Black Adam" Zaps $7.6M In Thursday Night Previews". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Shazam! Fury of the Gods". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved February 17, 2024. "Shazam! Fury of the Gods". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved March 22, 2023. "The Flash". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved January 27, 2024. "The Flash". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved August 28, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 15, 2023). "'The Flash' Falls Down With $55M 3-Day Opening: Here's Why". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Blue Beetle". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved January 27, 2024. "Blue Beetle". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved November 30, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 15, 2023). "'Blue Beetle' Bites $3.3M, 'Strays' Woofs $1.1M – Thursday Night Box Office Previews". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 18, 2023. "Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved March 20, 2024. "Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved January 10, 2024. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 23, 2023). "Warner Bros Owning Christmas 4-Day Box Office With Aquaman 2 $43M & Wonka $30M+; Illumination's Migration At $18M, Iron Claw Highest A24 CinemaScore With A- & More – Saturday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 23, 2023. Retrieved December 22, 2023. "Peacemaker: Season 1". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved February 18, 2023. "Peacemaker: Season 1". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Bacle, Ariana (February 26, 2017). "Oscars 2017: See the Full List of Winners". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 11, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "Annie Awards 2014: Complete list of winners and nominees". Los Angeles Times. February 1, 2014. Archived from the original on February 4, 2014. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (March 12, 2022). "The Mitchells vs. the Machines Wins Big at Annie Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 13, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (February 26, 2023). "'Guillermo Del Toro's Pinocchio' Wins Five Trophies Including the Top Prize at the 50th Annie Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 26, 2023. Retrieved February 26, 2023. "Critics' Choice Awards: The Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. January 16, 2014. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "'La La Land' Wins Best Picture at Critics' Choice Awards (Complete List)". Variety. December 11, 2016. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "Critics' Choice Awards winners 2018: Full list". Entertainment Weekly. January 11, 2018. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Ramos, Dino-Ray (March 8, 2021). "Critics Choice Awards: 'Nomadland', 'The Crown' Among Top Honorees – Complete Winners List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 3, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Hammond, Pete (November 19, 2020). "'Palm Springs', 'Lovecraft Country' Top Movie And Series Nominations For Inaugural Critics Choice Super Awards; Netflix Lands 35 Nods". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Ramos, Dino-Ray (January 10, 2021). "Critics Choice Super Awards Full Winners List: 'Palm Springs', 'Soul', 'The Boys' Among Top Honorees". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 11, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Davis, Clayton (February 22, 2022). "Critics Choice Super Awards: 'Spider-Man', 'Justice League' Among Film Nominees; 'Evil', 'Midnight Mass' Lead TV". Variety. Archived from the original on April 8, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Hipes, Patrick (February 22, 2023). "'The Batman' Leads Nominations For The Critics Choice Super Awards". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 22, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. "Razzie Awards 2017: Full list of nominations led by 'Zoolander 2' Goldderby". The Hollywood Reporter. January 23, 2017. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Lewis, Hilary (April 24, 2021). "Razzie Awards: Sia's 'Music' Wins 3 as Rudy Giuliani Nabs Two for 'Borat' Cameo". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 21, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Hipes, Patrick (December 6, 2016). "Grammys: 'Suicide Squad' & Amy Schumer Lead Hollywood Noms". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Liptak, Andrew (August 20, 2018). "Here are the winners of the 2018 Hugo Awards". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 20, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2022. Simons, Dean (December 21, 2021). "Duffy & Jennings' THE PARABLE OF THE SOWER adaptation among the 2021 Hugo Award winners". Comics Beat. Archived from the original on December 1, 2022. Retrieved September 19, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (February 18, 2018). "Golden Reel Awards: Oscar Nominees 'Blade Runner 2049', 'Dunkirk' Among Sound Editor Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (February 17, 2019). "'Bohemian Rhapsody' Wins Pair of Trophies at Sound Editors' Golden Reel Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Pedersen, Erik (March 1, 2021). "Sound Editors Nominate 'Wonder Woman', 'Sound Of Metal', 'Tenet' & Others For Golden Reel Awards – Full List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Selby, Jenn (April 14, 2014). "MTV Movie Awards: Hunger Games Catching Fire sweeps board". The Independent. Archived from the original on October 8, 2017. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Hooton, Christopher (May 8, 2017). "MTV Movie and TV Awards 2017: Winners list in full from first genderless ceremony". The Independent. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Kaplan, Ilana (June 19, 2018). "MTV Movie & TV Awards 2018 winners: Stranger Things and Black Panther dominate". The Independent. Archived from the original on June 19, 2018. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Yang, Rachel (May 14, 2019). "Avengers, Game of Thrones & RBG Lead MTV Movie & TV Awards Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on May 15, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Nordyke, Kimberly (May 16, 2021). "MTV Movie & TV Awards Under Way at In-Person Ceremony (Updating Live)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Nordyke, Kimberly (June 5, 2022). "MTV Movie & TV Awards: 'Spider-Man: No Way Home', 'Euphoria' Top Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "2022 Creative Arts Emmys: See full winners list". Entertainment Weekly. September 4, 2022. Archived from the original on September 5, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2022. Johns, Nikara (February 26, 2014). "'Gravity', 'The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug' Lead Saturn Awards Noms". Variety. Archived from the original on March 1, 2014. Retrieved July 10, 2022. McNary, Dave (March 2, 2017). "Saturn Awards Nominations 2017: 'Rogue One', 'Walking Dead' Lead". Variety. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved July 10, 2022. McNary, Dave (March 15, 2018). "'Black Panther', 'Walking Dead' Rule Saturn Awards Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Hammond, Pete (July 15, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame', 'Game Of Thrones' Lead Saturn Award Nominations". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 13, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Hipes, Patrick (March 4, 2021). "Saturn Awards Nominations: 'Star Wars: Rise Of Skywalker', 'Tenet', 'Walking Dead', 'Outlander' Lead List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 7, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Tinoco, Armando (August 12, 2022). "Saturn Awards Nominations: 'The Batman', 'Nightmare Alley', 'Spider-Man', 'Better Call Saul' Top List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Pond, Steve (January 14, 2014). "'Gravity' Soars in Visual Effects Society Nominations". TheWrap. Archived from the original on May 4, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Tapley, Kristopher (January 15, 2019). "'Avengers', 'Lost in Space', 'Ready Player One' Lead Visual Effects Society Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Hipes, Patrick (January 18, 2022). "VES Awards Nominations Led By 'Dune', 'Encanto', 'Loki'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (February 16, 2023). "'Avatar 2' Sweeps Visual Effects Society Awards Feature Competition". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved February 25, 2023. "Man of Steel Soundtrack". Hans-zimmer.com. Archived from the original on June 14, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2013. Whitman, Frank (April 30, 2013). Man of Steel: The Early Years: Junior Novel. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0062236043. "Man of Steel: Novelization". Titan Books. Archived from the original on December 30, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2016. Stangis, Jason (September 30, 2015). "Feeling the Force of Star Wars Day at Santa Monica Library". Santa Monica Mirror. Archived from the original on September 29, 2015. Retrieved September 30, 2015. "Suicide Squad: The Official Movie Novelization". Titan Books. Archived from the original on April 28, 2017. Retrieved May 8, 2017. "Wonder Woman: The Junior Novel". HarperCollins. Archived from the original on February 26, 2017. Retrieved February 26, 2017. "Wonder Woman: The Official Movie Novelization". Titan Books. Archived from the original on June 10, 2017. Retrieved May 8, 2017. "Aquaman: The Junior Novel". HarperCollins. Archived from the original on March 10, 2019. Retrieved January 21, 2020. "Aquaman Is Getting an In-Universe Prequel Novel". Bleeding Cool. August 2, 2018. Archived from the original on August 2, 2018. Retrieved August 2, 2018. "Shazam!: The Junior Novel". HarperCollins. Archived from the original on January 1, 2019. Retrieved January 1, 2019. "Shazam!: Freddy's Guide to Super Hero-ing". HarperCollins. Archived from the original on January 1, 2019. Retrieved January 1, 2019. "Wonder Woman 1984: The Junior Novel". HarperCollins. "Wonder Woman 1984: Truth, Love & Wonder". Retrieved July 8, 2020. Burlingame, Russ (May 18, 2013). "Geoff Johns, Sterling Gates Contributed to Man of Steel Comic". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 22, 2015. Retrieved July 22, 2015. Whitbrook, James (February 4, 2016). "Everything You Need to Know Going into Batman v Superman, According to Dr Pepper". io9. Archived from the original on February 6, 2016. Retrieved February 4, 2016. "Read The Batman Vs. Superman General Mills Prequel Comics". Cosmic Book News. February 28, 2016. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Retrieved March 14, 2016. Yaws, Jay (February 22, 2016). "Doritos One-Shot: Batman v Superman – Upstairs/Downstairs #1 review". Batman News. Archived from the original on February 24, 2016. Retrieved February 22, 2016. Mueller, Matthew (June 6, 2016). "New Suicide Squad Prequel Comic Reveals Violent Joker". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 14, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Yaws, Jay (October 24, 2017). "Warner Bros. and DC Comics team up with Mercedes-Benz for digital "Justice League" comic". Batman News. Archived from the original on November 10, 2017. Retrieved November 10, 2017. "Wonder Woman 1984: Museum Mayhem". DC Comics. Retrieved November 6, 2020. Ratcliffe, Amy (September 21, 2021). "DC Comics Brings Wonder Woman and Serena Williams Together in New Comic". Nerdist. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "Prelude comics to Black Adam about the Justice Society of America". Retrieved October 13, 2022. Nash, Anthony (January 20, 2022). "The Flash Is Getting A Prequel Comic Book Series". ComingSoon. Retrieved January 20, 2022. "Shazam! Fury of the Gods Special: Shazamily Matters #1". February 28, 2022. Retrieved March 20, 2023. "Shazam! Thundercrack Lights Up the Gridiron". March 1, 2023. Retrieved April 28, 2023. "Aquaman and The Lost Kingdom Special #1 Review: A Rare Example of Quality in a Movie Tie-In". October 31, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "Aquaman Introduces a Terrifying Comic Villain to DCEU Continuity Ahead of Lost Kingdom". Screen Rant. November 9, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2023. Bhatia, Gurman (June 14, 2013). "Man Of Steel official game now available for iPhone, iPad, Android". NDTV. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2018. Calimlim, Aldrin (April 19, 2013). "Unlock The Man Of Steel's Superpowers With This New App From Kellogg's". Appadvice.com. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2018. "Batman Vs Superman : Who Will Win – Official Movie Game". Batmanvsuperman.com. Warner Bros. Archived from the original on November 19, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2018. "Suicide Squad: Special Ops – Official Film Game – August 5, 2016". Warner Bros. Archived from the original on November 14, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2018. "Wonder Woman: Rise of the Warrior – Official Film Game – August 5, 2016". Warner Bros. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2018. "Justice League VR: The Complete Experience". Steam. Warner Bros. Archived from the original on April 14, 2019. Retrieved April 26, 2019. Lussier, Germain (January 31, 2023). "James Gunn's New DC Slate: Your Burning Questions Answered". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. DC Extended Universe at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata DC Films on Facebook DC Comics Movies DC Extended Universe Wiki Portals:  Film  United States  Speculative fiction  Comics