The Baltic Center for Investigative Journalism Re:Baltica (Latvian: Baltijas pētnieciskās žurnālistikas centrs Re:Baltica) is a Latvia-based non-profit organization founded in 2011. It is based in Riga. Re:Baltica focuses on in-depth investigations of important issues in the Baltic region, such as corruption, money laundering, entrepreneurship, health, human rights and disinformation. Reports are published on their website in Latvian, English and Russian. Re:Baltica produces work for free and encourages other media organizations to publish their work. Re:Baltica reports and journalists have been quoted on Al Jazeera, The Washington Post, Financial Times, Meduza, BuzzFeed News and other international media outlets. Re:Baltica is a member of the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project, Global Investigative Journalism Network. Inga Spriņģe, an investigative journalist and one of the two founders of Re: Baltica, is a member of the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists network. In 2019, Re:Baltica launched the fact-checking and social media research lab Re:Check. Its goal is to verify the truthfulness of claims by significant public figures, deconstruct lies and research communication trends on social networks. Re:Check in a member of the International Fact-Checking Network (IFCN). As of 2019,[update] Re:Check in an official Facebook fact-checking partner. Re:Baltica is the recipient of several prizes, including the Greste Baltic Freedom of Speech Awards in 2018. Funding comes from three main sources: Internal revenue from teaching, moderating events, research and scripting documentaries Competitive grants, mostly from the institutions based in EU/NATO countries, for example, International Press Institute and Calouste Gulbenkian foundation. Donations, a list of whom is attached to the annual reports. In 2022, 60% from internal revenue, 32% – from grants, and 8% of funding came from donations. The main sources of income (those exceeding 1% of Re:Baltica's total income) were IJ4EU, All Media Latvia, Meta, Media Defense Legal Initiative, Free Press Unlimited, Calouste Gulbenkian foundation, small donations from individuals and legal entities. "Par mums | Re:Baltica" (in Latvian). Retrieved 2022-05-31. Al Jazeera, What does the future hold for non-citizens of the Baltic states? The Washington Post, Europe has been working to expose Russian meddling for years Financial Times, Latvia: a banking scandal on the Baltic Meduza, Following an investigative report by BuzzFeed and others, a network of pro-Kremlin news outlets in the Baltic states suddenly admits to being run by the Russian state "A Network Of Russian-Language News Sites Is Secretly Owned By Kremlin, Investigation Finds". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved 2019-05-02. Organised Crime and Corruption Reporting Project, OCCRP Network Members Global Investigative Journalism Network, Our Members "ICIJ Journalists". ICIJ. Retrieved 2019-05-02. "Re:Baltica launches fact-checking and social media research lab Re:Check | Re:Baltica". 2022-07-05. Archived from the original on 2022-07-05. Retrieved 2022-07-05. "Re:Check becomes Facebook's official fact checking partner | Re:Baltica". 2022-07-05. Archived from the original on 2022-07-05. Retrieved 2022-07-05. Greste Baltic Freedom of Speech Awards presented in Rīga, Latvian Public Broadcasting, November 6, 2018 Re:Baltica (in Latvian, English, and Russian)