Seattle Sounders FC is an American professional men's soccer club based in Seattle, Washington, United States. The Sounders compete in Major League Soccer (MLS) as a member of the Western Conference. The club was established on November 13, 2007, and began play in 2009 as an MLS expansion team. The Sounders are a phoenix club, replacing the second-division franchise that played in the American Professional Soccer League (APSL), A-League, and USL First Division (USL-1) from 1994 to 2008, and carrying the same name as the original Sounders franchise that competed in the North American Soccer League (NASL) from 1974 to 1983. The club's majority owner is Adrian Hanauer, and its minority owners are the estate of Paul Allen, Drew Carey, and 14 families from the Seattle area. Former USL-1 Sounders coach and assistant coach Brian Schmetzer took over as head coach in July 2016 after the departure of Sigi Schmid. The Sounders play their home league matches at Lumen Field, with a reduced capacity of 37,722 seats for most matches. Along with several organized groups, a 53-member marching band called "Sound Wave" supports the club at each home match. Seattle has longstanding rivalries with fellow Pacific Northwest clubs Portland Timbers and Vancouver Whitecaps FC, with whom it competes for the Cascadia Cup. The Sounders played their inaugural match on March 19, 2009, winning 3–0 over the New York Red Bulls. Seattle has been among the league's most successful teams, winning the U.S. Open Cup four times, the Supporters' Shield in 2014, and the MLS Cup in 2016 and 2019. From its MLS inception until 2022, the team qualified for the MLS Cup Playoffs—formerly the longest record in league history—and competed in the CONCACAF Champions League seven times, becoming the first MLS team to win the modern version of the competition in 2022. The Sounders were the first MLS team to participate in the FIFA Club World Cup. The team set a new MLS record for average attendance in each of its first five seasons. The Sounders are ranked as one of the most valuable franchises in North America. Its players have included former US international Clint Dempsey, top goal scorer Fredy Montero, as well as long-time captain Osvaldo Alonso, and all-time assist leader Nicolás Lodeiro. The Sounders also operate a players' academy and the lower-division Tacoma Defiance, which have produced homegrown players, including forward Jordan Morris and defender DeAndre Yedlin. Even before the first cities in the United States were chosen to host Major League Soccer teams, Seattle was considered a viable location for a professional team. In 1994, as the U.S. was preparing to host the FIFA World Cup, more than 30 cities were pursuing the rights to an MLS team, Seattle being among them. However, despite the strong soccer fan base in Seattle, the absence of a soccer-only stadium was a drawback to establishing an MLS team. Cities seeking consideration for an inaugural MLS team were also expected to secure 10,000 assurances from fans for season tickets. By the June 3, 1994, deadline for MLS team bids, Seattle's soccer organizers had secured fewer than 1,500 such assurances. These low numbers were a result of competition between the ticket campaign for the MLS expansion team and for the American Professional Soccer League (APSL) Sounders expansion team. In a June 14, 1994, announcement, Seattle was not included among the first seven cities to be awarded an MLS team. Five more teams were to be announced later in the year, and to improve their chances this time, the city's soccer organizers began working with the University of Washington to secure use of Husky Stadium as an interim stadium while they pursued the construction of a permanent soccer-specific facility. In November 1994, the start of the first MLS season was postponed until 1996, and it was noted that the absence of an "adequate grass-field facility" in the area and the presence of the new APSL Seattle Sounders team had thwarted Seattle's MLS bid. In the end, Seattle was not among the cities chosen to establish a team during the first season of MLS. In 1996, as Seattle Seahawks owner Paul Allen worked with the city to build a new football stadium for his team, the potential of an MLS expansion team that could be a co-tenant helped drive public support for the effort. Many of the state's voters supported the referendum to construct Seahawks Stadium because it was also expected to be a professional soccer venue. While the stadium problem was being resolved, a new issue emerged. By 2000, MLS was moving away from league-operated teams to investor-operated teams, so wealthy individuals would need to step forward for Seattle to obtain an MLS expansion team. In 2003, Seattle was again listed as a possibility for an MLS expansion team when the ten-team league announced plans to expand into new markets. In 2004, MLS commissioner Don Garber indicated that Seattle had been "very close" to receiving the expansion team ultimately awarded to Salt Lake. Adrian Hanauer, then-owner of the United Soccer League's (USL) Sounders (formerly the APSL Sounders), was in discussions with MLS about an estimated payment of $1 million to secure rights to a Seattle franchise for 2006. However, when Seattle was passed over again in 2006, Hanauer announced that he would not be able to secure an expansion team without the help of more investors willing to cover the increasing MLS franchise fees which had grown beyond $10 million. In 2007, Hanauer teamed up with Hollywood producer Joe Roth to make another bid for MLS expansion into Seattle, at a cost of $30 million. Paul Allen, whose First and Goal company operated Qwest Field (now Lumen Field), joined the ownership group that same year, making the bid the most promising yet for Seattle. The group competed with two rival bids for the rights to an MLS team in Seattle that had been launched by California-based investors. In a press conference at the Columbia Center on November 13, 2007, it announced that Seattle had been awarded an MLS expansion team that would be owned by Hanauer, Roth, Allen, and TV personality Drew Carey. The announcement marked the return of top-level soccer to Seattle for the first time since the dissolution of its North American Soccer League (NASL) team in 1983. The announcement also meant that the Seattle Sounders of the USL First Division would play its final season the year before the new MLS franchise was formed. "Seattle Sounders FC" was announced as the team name on April 7, 2008, along with the team logo, colors and badge design, in a presentation held at the Space Needle. All 22,000 season ticket packages offered by the club for its inaugural season were sold, giving them the most season ticket holders in MLS. Sigi Schmid was introduced as the club's first head coach on December 16, 2008, after leaving the Columbus Crew following their MLS Cup victory. Seattle Sounders FC entered MLS as the league's 15th team and played its first home match on March 19, 2009, in front of a sold-out crowd of 32,523, defeating the New York Red Bulls 3–0. During the pre-match ceremonies, the first Golden Scarf was awarded to MLS Commissioner Don Garber. Seattle was the first MLS expansion team to win its first three matches, and they did so with a shutout in each. The club set a state record for attendance at a soccer match on August 5, 2009, when 66,848 attended a friendly match with FC Barcelona, a record which was later broken when they hosted Manchester United in front of 67,052 fans, and later in the 2019 MLS Cup against Toronto FC with 69,274 in attendance. On September 2, 2009, the Sounders became the second MLS expansion team in league history (Chicago was the first) to win the U.S. Open Cup tournament in its first season. They did so by defeating D.C. United 2–1 on the road at RFK Stadium. In winning the U.S. Open Cup tournament, they qualified for the preliminary round of the 2010–11 CONCACAF Champions League. On October 17, 2009, the Sounders became the third MLS expansion team in league history to qualify for the playoffs in its first season. They clinched a playoff berth with a come-from-behind victory over the Kansas City Wizards 3–2 at Kansas City. Seattle finished the regular season with a record of 12 wins, 7 losses, and 11 draws. The club set a new MLS record for average attendance with 30,943 fans per match. Its inaugural season came to an end in the 2009 MLS Cup Playoffs with a loss in the conference semifinals to the Houston Dynamo by a 1–0 aggregate score in a two-legged series. During the 2009 season, all 15 Sounders MLS regular season home matches, its home playoff match, and its four home U.S. Open Cup matches (played at Starfire Sports Complex) were sold out. Before the first match of the Sounders' second season, the club increased the number of season ticket holders to 32,000. The first match of the season was played at Qwest Field, with Seattle hosting a new MLS expansion team, the Philadelphia Union. The Sounders won 2–0 on goals from Brad Evans and Fredy Montero. However, Seattle followed the win by losing 8 of its next 14 matches. In the latter half of the regular season, Seattle reversed its fortune. The team won 10 of its last 15 matches, and clinched a playoff berth for the second consecutive year with a 2–1 win on October 10, 2010, at Kansas City. They finished the season with 14 wins, 10 losses, and 6 ties. In the playoffs, the Sounders were eliminated in the conference semifinals by the Los Angeles Galaxy on a 3–1 aggregate score. The club broke its own single-season attendance record, averaging 36,173 fans per match, and again sold out every league match. The Sounders also competed in two additional competitions during the 2010 season – the CONCACAF Champions League and the U.S. Open Cup. In the Champions League, Seattle progressed through the preliminary round, beating Isidro Metapán 2–1 on aggregate, but was eliminated in the group stage. In the U.S. Open Cup, Seattle won matches at Portland and at home against the Los Angeles Galaxy and Chivas USA before reaching the final, which they hosted at Qwest Field against the Columbus Crew. On October 5, 2010, Seattle won the U.S. Open Cup final, 2–1, becoming the first team since 1983 to repeat as U.S. Open Cup champions. The final was played in front of a U.S. Open Cup record crowd of 31,311, and the victory ensured Seattle's return to the Champions League in 2011. The Sounders began the 2011 season by hosting the opening match of the MLS season for the third straight year, losing 1–0 to the Los Angeles Galaxy. The season also saw the entrance of the Portland Timbers and Vancouver Whitecaps FC into MLS, allowing for the revival of the Cascadia Cup; the Sounders won the cup with an unbeaten record against both clubs. On April 22, 2011, in a match against the Colorado Rapids, Seattle's star midfielder Steve Zakuani suffered a broken leg in a challenge by the Rapids' Brian Mullan, which ended his season. Despite setbacks and a slow start to the season (the club won just 3 of its first 10 matches), the Sounders went on to finish the season with the second-best record in the league at 18 wins, 9 draws, 7 losses, and qualified for the playoffs for a third consecutive year. On October 4, 2011, Seattle won its third consecutive U.S. Open Cup, becoming the first club to do so in 42 years, as they defeated the Chicago Fire 2–0 in front of another tournament record crowd of 35,615 at CenturyLink Field. In the MLS playoffs, Seattle lost its Western Conference semifinal series 3–2 on aggregate to Real Salt Lake. The club lost the first leg 3–0 in Salt Lake, and could only net two goals in the second leg at home. Sounders midfielder Mauro Rosales was recognized by the league as the 2011 Newcomer of the Year. In 2011, Seattle again broke its own league record for average attendance at 38,496. On October 15, 2011, the club hosted the third-largest crowd ever for a single MLS match, as 64,140 people attended the final regular season home match against the San Jose Earthquakes, billed as a sendoff for goalkeeper Kasey Keller. In the 2011–12 CONCACAF Champions League, Seattle became only the second MLS team in history to win a competitive match in Mexico, defeating CF Monterrey 1–0 on August 23, 2011. The club finished second in its group and advanced to the quarterfinals, losing 7–3 on aggregate to eventual runners-up Santos Laguna after taking a 2–1 lead at home and losing 6–1 in Mexico. Seattle opened the 2012 season with a run of five straight wins in April and May, but fell into a month-long, nine-match winless streak in June. The winless streak ended in a match on July 7, which saw the return of Steve Zakuani from rehabilitation, against the Colorado Rapids. Seattle reached the U.S. Open Cup Final for the fourth consecutive year, becoming the first team to do so since 1937, but lost to Sporting Kansas City in a penalty shootout after a 1–1 draw. In Champions League group play, the team advanced to the knockout round with four straight wins, each including a goal from Sammy Ochoa. The Sounders finished third in the Western Conference and qualified for the playoffs, where they advanced out of the first round for the first time in the team's history. In the Conference Championship, Seattle fell 3–0 to Los Angeles in the first leg and came within one goal of tying the series on aggregate, winning the second leg 2–1 but losing 4–2 on aggregate after conceding an away goal. The 2012 season ended without a major trophy for the Sounders, for the first time in their MLS history, and the team failed to qualify for the 2013–14 CONCACAF Champions League. The top scorer in league play was 28-year-old striker Eddie Johnson, who scored 14 goals in his first season with the club; he earned Comeback Player of the Year honors for his performance, which came after an unsuccessful stint with multiple European clubs. During the 2013 preseason, the Sounders signed their first homegrown player, right back DeAndre Yedlin, veteran defender Djimi Traoré, and forward Obafemi Martins, who paid his release clause to his Spanish club. Longtime forward Fredy Montero left Seattle on loan to Colombian club Millonarios F.C. in January and, by July, was loaned to Sporting CP in Portugal with an option to buy; Montero was sold permanently to Sporting in 2014. The Sounders began the 2013 season with the knockout round of the 2012–13 Champions League, facing Mexican club Tigres UANL in the quarterfinals. After losing 1–0 in the away leg and conceding an away goal in the return leg, the Sounders scored three unanswered goals in the second half to win 3–1 and advance to the semifinals. With the win, the Sounders became the first MLS team to eliminate a Mexican team in the knockout stage of CONCACAF Champions League. Seattle once again played Santos Laguna in the semifinal, but failed to advance after losing 1–0 at home and drawing 1–1 in Torreón. The Sounders continued their five-year streak of setting a new MLS average attendance record, reaching 44,038 in 2013. The Sounders began the MLS season with a run of five matches without a win, the worst start in the team's history, due to injuries to key players. The Sounders failed to advance in the U.S. Open Cup after losing to second-division Tampa Bay Rowdies in the third round, marking the end of the team's seven-year streak of appearances in the later rounds. As players returned to the team, Seattle improved to a six-win, four-loss record in 14 matches by late June. In August 2013, the Sounders completed the signing of U.S. national team captain Clint Dempsey from Tottenham Hotspur for $9 million, the largest transfer deal in the league's history, and a record salary of $32 million over four years. The team's continued run of wins put them into Supporters' Shield contention in September, coming within one point of the league-leading Red Bulls, but fell to fourth place in the conference after a run of four straight losses in October. The Sounders beat the Colorado Rapids 2–0 in the knockout round, and drew rivals Portland in the conference semifinal. Seattle fell 2–1 to the Timbers in the home leg and were defeated 3–2 in Portland, knocking the Sounders out in a performance that failed to live up to expectations. The Sounders continued to break the MLS average attendance record for the fourth and fifth consecutive year in 2012 and 2013, with an average of 43,144 and 44,038, respectively. The higher attendances were helped by the opening of additional sections in the Hawks' Nest, as well as the opening of the upper deck of CenturyLink Field for select regular matches. The August 25, 2013, home match against the Portland Timbers drew a crowd of 67,385, the second-largest standalone attendance in league history. After a disappointing 2013 season, the Sounders replaced starting goalkeeper Michael Gspurning with Toronto's Stefan Frei. Several veteran players, including Eddie Johnson, Patrick Ianni, Jhon Kennedy Hurtado, Mauro Rosales, and Steve Zakuani, left the club as part of a major restructure; Brad Evans was named as club captain. Marco Pappa, an experienced MLS player and Guatemalan international, was added to the team. Homegrown player DeAndre Yedlin was transferred to Tottenham Hotspur but was loaned back to Seattle until the end of the MLS season. The Sounders advanced to the 2014 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Final and defeated the Philadelphia Union in extra time, to win their fourth trophy of the tournament. On October 25, 2014, the final game of the 2014 regular season, the Sounders defeated the LA Galaxy 2–0 to secure and win their first Supporters' Shield. Entering the playoffs as the top seed, Seattle defeated FC Dallas on the away goals rule and advanced to the Western Conference Championship to face the LA Galaxy once again. The Sounders tied the Galaxy on aggregate score but lost on the away goals rule after losing 1–0 away and winning 2–1 at home. LA would go on to win the MLS Cup. Former Real Salt Lake general manager Garth Lagerwey was hired by the club in January 2015, replacing Adrian Hanauer. Seattle was unable to repeat their successes in the 2014 season. The season started with several key wins that saw the team at the top of the Western Conference by June. During a 2015 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup match against the Portland Timbers on June 16, however, Obafemi Martins left the game with a groin injury and Clint Dempsey was suspended after tearing a referee's pocketbook, though he would be called away for the 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup. The injury and suspension of the team's main attacking duo led to poor performances over the summer, with Seattle winning only one match in nine games. By late August, Martins had recovered and led the team to an eight-match unbeaten streak to secure a playoff spot, finishing fourth in the Western Conference. The Sounders had also successfully topped their group in the 2015–16 CONCACAF Champions League, beating the Vancouver Whitecaps and Club Deportivo Olimpia, with two wins, one draw, and one loss. Paraguayan international Nelson Haedo Valdez was signed as the club's newest designated player, and was joined by fellow international signings Andreas Ivanschitz and Román Torres in August 2015; Erik Friberg also returned to the club after his stint in Europe. During the playoff's opening knockout round, the Sounders defeated the LA Galaxy 3–2, ending a "curse" for the club, who had lost to LA in each of the three previous playoff matchups. The playoff run would end in the next round, the Western Conference semifinals against FC Dallas, during a penalty shootout after both teams were tied on aggregate score after extra time in Frisco, Texas. In November 2015, Adrian Hanauer was made majority owner of the club, succeeding Joe Roth. The club set a new attendance record during the 2015 season, with an average attendance of 44,247. Prior to the 2016 season, Obafemi Martins abruptly left the club to sign with Shanghai Greenland Shenhua F.C. in the Chinese Super League, a move that would hamper the Sounders' offense during the season. The move was mitigated somewhat by the signing of homegrown product Jordan Morris. Lagerwey also traded Marco Pappa and Lamar Neagle to other clubs in the offseason. During the first half of the 2016 season, the Sounders failed to meet expectations, placing near the bottom of the league with 6 wins, 12 losses, and 2 draws. Following a 3–0 loss on July 24 to Sporting Kansas City, in which the Sounders had only one shot, Schmid left the club on mutual terms and was replaced by long-time assistant coach Brian Schmetzer. The same day, the club announced their signing of Uruguayan midfielder Nicolás Lodeiro on a designated player contract, as well as the return of former designated player Álvaro Fernández. Despite the sluggish start as well as the loss of midfielder Clint Dempsey, who was forced in August to stop playing after evaluations for an irregular heartbeat, the Sounders rose from ninth place to fourth place in the Western Conference and qualified for the 2016 MLS Cup Playoffs, with eight wins, two losses, and four draws. Schmetzer was named as permanent head coach as a result. At the end of the regular season, Jordan Morris was named the MLS Rookie of the Year after scoring the most goals of any American rookie in MLS (12), and Nicolás Lodeiro was named MLS Newcomer of the Year for his 4 goals and 8 assists in 13 appearances. The Sounders advanced from the Knockout Round of the playoffs through a 1–0 win over Sporting Kansas City, and beat FC Dallas 4–2 on aggregate to return to the Conference Final. The Sounders then defeated the Colorado Rapids 3–1 on aggregate in the final, clinching a spot in their first-ever MLS Cup. On December 10, 2016, the Sounders defeated Toronto FC 5–4 in a penalty shootout, to win MLS Cup 2016, their first MLS championship in franchise history, going the whole match without a shot on goal. The team's performance was called a "cinderella season" and hailed as one of the most dramatic MLS seasons to date. The Sounders began their title defense with the signings of two academy graduates and several veteran players from MLS and abroad. Dempsey also returned from his hiatus and scored in his first match before being called up to the U.S. national team for World Cup qualification. The season began with only five wins in the first 17 matches, but was followed by a 13-match unbeaten streak and additional wins to clinch a second-place spot in the Western Conference. In the playoffs, the Sounders beat the Vancouver Whitecaps and Houston Dynamo to win the Western Conference and return to the MLS Cup, once again facing Toronto at BMO Field. Seattle lost 2–0 to Toronto, who clinched the first domestic treble in MLS history. Seattle began the 2018 season with a run to the quarterfinals of the CONCACAF Champions League, where they lost 3–1 on aggregate to eventual champions C.D. Guadalajara. During the Round of 16, Jordan Morris injured his ACL and was deemed unfit to play for the rest of the season. Without Morris and several injured starting players, the Sounders lost nine of their first 15 matches and were placed bottom of the Western Conference by June. The club signed a new Designated Player, Peruvian forward Raúl Ruidíaz, that month and began a long unbeaten streak that resulted in a playoff position in late August. On September 1, the club broke the MLS record for most consecutive wins in the post-shootout era, having won eight consecutive matches. They then extended that win streak to nine games as they beat Vancouver 2–1 on September 15, before eventually losing to the Philadelphia Union on September 19. The Sounders finished second in the Western Conference with 18 wins, 11 losses, and 5 draws. With 14 wins in the final 16 matches of the season, the Sounders completed the best half season in league history. Minority owner Paul Allen died from complications related to non-Hodgkin lymphoma on October 15, 2018, leaving his stake in the Sounders to an estate executed by his sister Jody Allen. Seattle then faced the Portland Timbers in the Conference Semifinals, losing the away leg 2–1 and winning the home leg 3–2 to tie the series on aggregate after extra time. In the ensuing penalty shootout, Portland won 4–2; the home leg is considered to be one of the best playoff matches in league history due to its dramatic finish. The 2019 season began with the loss of team captain and inaugural season player Osvaldo Alonso, who was released into free agency and signed with Minnesota United FC before the season began. Defender Chad Marshall, who had joined in 2014, announced his retirement from professional soccer on May 22, leaving unexpectedly mid-way through the season. Despite the loss of these two players, in addition to the suspension of Román Torres for ten matches for testing positive for a performance-enhancing substance in August, the Sounders finished 2nd in the Western Conference and 4th in the overall league table. They qualified for a berth in the 2020 CONCACAF Champions League and earned a record 11th appearance in the MLS Cup Playoffs, which would use single-elimination matches for the first time in league history. The Sounders defeated FC Dallas 4–3 in the first round with a hat-trick from Jordan Morris, who had been named MLS Comeback Player of the Year following his return from an ACL tear. The team then won against Real Salt Lake at home and traveled away to play in the Conference Finals against Supporters' Shield winners Los Angeles FC, where they won 3–1. Seattle hosted the MLS Cup final against Toronto FC, playing them for the third time in four years, and won 3–1 to clinch their second championship. The match drew an attendance of 69,274, setting records for the team and any sporting event at CenturyLink Field. Seattle opened the 2020 season with the CONCACAF Champions League, where they lost in the round of 16 to C.D. Olimpia in a penalty shootout after a 4–4 aggregate draw. The Sounders played two regular season matches at home before MLS suspended all activities on March 12, 2020, due to the worsening COVID-19 pandemic, which had been affecting the Seattle area for several weeks. The league returned in the MLS is Back Tournament, played in the Orlando area, and the Sounders earned a 1–1–1 record in group play. They advanced to the round of 16, where they lost 4–1 to Los Angeles FC. The team then resumed hosting matches with no spectators at CenturyLink Field (renamed Lumen Field near the end of the season) and primarily played against West Coast teams due to limited travel. The Sounders cancelled an away match against the LA Galaxy in August to join a multi-sport boycott to protest racial injustice. They later set a franchise record for largest margin of victory with a 7–1 home win against the San Jose Earthquakes on September 10. The team clinched their 12th consecutive playoff berth and finished second in the Western Conference. In the playoffs, the Sounders defeated Los Angeles FC and FC Dallas to host Minnesota United FC in the Western Conference Final. Minnesota took a 2–0 lead in the second half, but Seattle responded with three goals in the final 18 minutes to complete a comeback victory and secure a fourth MLS Cup appearance in five years. The Sounders faced the Columbus Crew in the 2020 MLS Cup final and lost 3–0 in front of 1,500 spectators at Mapfre Stadium on December 12—the latest calendar date to host a league match. Seattle opened the 2021 season with a 13-match unbeaten streak, setting a new MLS record in the process, despite missing Nicolas Lodeiro, Jordan Morris, Stefan Frei, and Raul Ruidiaz to long-term injuries. Manager Brian Schmetzer switched to a 3–5–2 formation that led to only eight conceded goals during the streak. The Sounders retained the Cascadia Cup with a 2–1–1 record, including a 6–2 away victory over the Portland Timbers. The team also won twice against Mexican clubs UANL and Santos Laguna in the 2021 Leagues Cup and advanced to the final, where they lost 3–2 to Club León in Las Vegas. Seattle maintained their first-place position in the Western Conference despite several losses in the summer, but fell into a winless streak over the final six matches of the season to finish second in the West. They qualified for the playoffs but were eliminated in the first round by Real Salt Lake in a penalty shootout. The team qualified for the 2022 CONCACAF Champions League as the best-performing MLS club without their own berth, replacing the slot reserved for the cancelled U.S. Open Cup. In the round of 16, the Sounders were held to a scoreless draw to F.C. Motagua in Honduras but defeated them 5–0 in the second leg at home. Seattle then faced Club León in a rematch of the Leagues Cup Final, winning 3–0 at home in the first leg and drawing 1–1 in the second leg to advance to the semifinals. The team played MLS Cup 2021 champions New York City FC in the semifinals, winning 3–1 at home in the first leg and drawing 1–1 in the second leg to advance 4–2 on aggregate. The Sounders advanced to their first Champions League final and faced Mexican club UNAM, who hosted the first leg. The two teams drew 2–2 and returned to Seattle, where the Sounders won 3–0 in front of 68,741, setting a competition attendance record. The Sounders became the first MLS club to win the CONCACAF Champions League with their 5–2 aggregate victory. As CONCACAF champions, Seattle became the first MLS club to participate in the FIFA Club World Cup. The Sounders entered the U.S. Open Cup in the Round of 32 and drew 2–2 with the San Jose Earthquakes. The ensuing penalty shootout took 11 rounds and was won 10–9 by San Jose. The club resumed league play, where they had fallen to 13th place in the Western Conference, and used rotated lineups to balance a congested schedule; by early July, they had improved to fourth in the West. Further injuries and players missing due to national team call-ups and suspensions caused the team to lose most of their matches over the following two months. With a loss to Sporting Kansas City on the penultimate matchday of the season, the Sounders were eliminated from playoff contention. This marked the first time the club had failed to qualify for the MLS Cup Playoffs and ended a 13-year streak—the longest active streak in MLS and second-longest in major North American sports. On November 22, 2022, Lagerwey departed the club after a seven-year tenure to assume the role of President and CEO at Atlanta United FC. The Sounders announced their appointment of Craig Waibel as the club's new general manager and Chief Soccer Officer on November 30. He had been hired by the club in 2021 to serve as sporting director. The team began their 2023 preseason in Seattle before a training camp in Marbella, Spain, to prepare for the 2022 FIFA Club World Cup in Morocco. The Sounders entered in the second round against Egypt's Al Ahly, the runners-up in the 2021–22 CAF Champions League, and lost 1–0 to a late goal. The club also qualified for the expanded 2025 edition of the tournament due to their 2022 CONCACAF Champions League title. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Seattle Sounders kits. The original badge design resembles a heraldic shield, and consists of two layers which represent "the partnership between the ownership, the community, the players and the fans". The logo incorporates the Space Needle, an internationally recognized Seattle landmark. The official team colors are Sounder Blue, signifying the waters of the Puget Sound; Rave Green, representing the forests of the Pacific Northwest; and Cascade Shale, representing the Cascade Range to the east of Seattle. Fans chose a name for the team in an online poll held between March 27 and 31, 2008. The initial list of possibilities – Seattle FC, Seattle Republic and Seattle Alliance – deliberately did not include Seattle Sounders in order to provide a fresh start. Despite the names having been selected through fan research and internal committees, the omission of the traditional Sounders name embittered many in the Seattle community. In response to the backlash, the team added a fourth write-in option for the team name, allowing for any name to be suggested on the ballot. Of the more than 14,500 votes received in choosing the new team name, 49% of the votes included some form of the name "Sounders". Upon announcing the name of the club, Hanauer acknowledged the significance of keeping with tradition: "The team playing at the highest level in our region has always been called Sounders. Starting with the NASL and then the USL 1st Division, we now have the chance to create a separate and distinct identity with the new MLS team." The NASL team was originally named in a public contest, with "Sounders" announced as the winner on January 22, 1974. The Sounders have usually played in a rave green primary jersey with varying colors and designs for their secondary and third kits. The club's third kits in early years used bright colors, such as "electricity yellow" and cyan, but were later replaced with more muted colors; they primarily saw use during non-league matches. A throwback kit was introduced as a secondary jersey in 2017 and features the NASL Sounders logo and a design inspired by white jerseys used by the pre-MLS incarnations of the team. The secondary jersey was changed in 2019 to a black-and-pink design inspired by a colorful sunset during a 2014 match against the Portland Timbers. It was followed in 2021 by a dark purple jersey with orange and yellow accents to evoke the style of Seattle musician Jimi Hendrix; the jersey was designed in partnership with his family and features Hendrix's signature. An updated secondary kit inspired by martial artist and actor Bruce Lee—who lived in Seattle and is buried in the city—was released in 2023, the 50th anniversary of his death. The jersey is primarily red with a stylized dragon on the front and includes yellow and black accents as well as the symbols of Jeet Kune Do and Lee's signature. A new logo and brand design was unveiled on September 26, 2023, ahead of the 2024 season—the club's 50th anniversary. It used colors and elements from previous Sounders logos around a simplified version of the shield, which contained the Space Needle and omitted all text except for 1974, the year of the club's founding. A set of secondary and tertiary logos were also added, including an orca, the "SFC" wordmark, and a carnation—which are traditionally given by Sounders players to fans at the end of the final home match of the season. An updated wordmark for the Sounders incorporates a wave-like element to reference the 1974 logo. The rebrand was developed by the club and design consultants through fan surveys and input from community members. The first home jersey under the rebrand, named the Anniversary Kit, was unveiled ahead of the 2024 season and features aqua pinstripes on a green background; several elements were inspired by jerseys from earlier incarnations of the Sounders. The team's ownership revealed the first Sounders jersey on May 28, 2008, and announced Microsoft as the team's sponsor in a five-year deal worth approximately $20 million. As part of the agreement, Xbox branding appeared on the front of the Sounders' jerseys and throughout the stadium, beginning with the Xbox 360 and Xbox Live and later replaced with the Xbox One (simply shown as "XBOX"). Despite hiring a consultant to explore other jersey partnerships in 2012, the Microsoft sponsorship was repeatedly extended with a one-year contract in 2013, for the following season, and 2014, lasting through the end of the 2016 season. The second extension came amid rumors that Emirates was interested in a sponsorship as part of their marketing campaign in Seattle. The jersey has been modified several times to include promotions for Xbox games, including Halo 5 and Gears of War 4. The Sounders contracted talent firm WME-IMG to explore new jersey sponsorship and other advertising opportunities in 2017, shortly before the expiration of the Microsoft contract. On January 17, 2019, the team announced that Seattle-based online retailer Zulily would become the jersey sponsor in a multiyear jersey deal at an undisclosed fee. Zulily also took over sponsorship of the NWSL's Seattle Reign, but naming rights to the pitch at CenturyLink Field was not part of the contract. The club's first sleeve patch sponsor, WaFd Bank, was announced in July 2020 ahead of the MLS is Back Tournament. In 2021, the Sounders announced a multi-year partnership with the Puyallup Tribe of Indians to sponsor the right sleeve on kits, with the Emerald Queen Casino on primary kits and the tribe's emblem on secondary kits. Providence Health & Services was announced as the club's new jersey sponsor at a Renton event on January 20, 2023. The 10-year sponsorship was brokered by Oak View Group and signed for an undisclosed amount. The choice of Providence as sponsor was criticized by fans and several organizations, including the Emerald City Supporters and the Sounders FC Alliance Council, due to the healthcare system's policies on abortion, transgender care, and treatment of low-income patients. Seattle Sounders FC plays home matches at Lumen Field in Seattle, also home to the Seattle Seahawks. Former Sounders minority owner, the late Paul Allen, was also the owner of the Seahawks, who have a 30-year lease on CenturyLink Field. Because of this relationship, the Sounders made use of Lumen Field without paying rent. In 2015, the team announced an extension of their lease with First & Goal Inc. for use of Lumen Field that would remain through the 2028 season. For Sounders matches, the field was called "The Xbox Pitch at CenturyLink Field" as part of the sponsorship deal with Microsoft from 2009 to 2018. The field was renamed in 2022 to the "Emerald Queen Casino Pitch at Lumen Field". Lumen Field is a 69,000-seat stadium designed for both teams. The Sounders artificially limit the stadium's capacity for MLS matches, with certain seating sections covered with tarpaulins to provide "a more intimate atmosphere". However, the club does open the entire stadium for international friendly matches and some league matches. The team's original business plan expected only 12,000 tickets per game. Based on high initial demand, capacity for the stadium was limited to 24,500 for the beginning of the inaugural 2009 season. However, owing to continued high demand, capacity has been increased multiple times, to 38,500 for the 2012 season and to 39,115 for the 2015 season and 37,722 in 2019. The Sounders have opened additional sections at Lumen Field for international friendlies, MLS Cup finals, and select regular season matches. The final home match of the 2011 season, coinciding with the retirement of goalkeeper Kasey Keller, drew 64,140 spectators and was the first Sounders regular season match to open the stadium to full capacity. The following season had three full-capacity matches, including a fixture against the Portland Timbers in October with 66,452 spectators, the second-largest stand-alone attendance in MLS history. The record was surpassed during the following year's home match against the Portland Timbers in August with 67,385 in attendance. The Sounders set their attendance record with MLS Cup 2019, which was played in front of 69,274 at Lumen Field—surpassing all other sporting events in the stadium's history. The 2020 season was suspended after two matches due to the COVID-19 pandemic, after which the Sounders played home matches behind closed doors. The following season saw capacity gradually increase from 7,000 in March to normal capacity in June, along with required proof of vaccination or a negative COVID-19 test to comply with state guidelines. The largest attendance during the pandemic era came during a doubleheader with OL Reign against their respective Portland opponents in August 2021, which drew 45,737 people for the MLS fixture. While the Sounders currently play on FieldTurf, Lumen Field has previously had temporary natural grass installed for international soccer events. In 2012, an updated FieldTurf surface was installed and certified by FIFA with a 2-star quality rating, the highest possible rating. If an MLS rule change requires natural grass playing surfaces, the field will be permanently replaced with natural grass. A new turf surface, based on the Revolution 360 brand developed by FieldTurf, was installed in early 2016 as part of the extended lease after noticeable wear on the former surface. The team's training facilities and offices were located at the Starfire Sports Complex in Tukwila from 2008 to 2024. Starfire is also used to host U.S. Open Cup matches due to its smaller size. Sounders representatives have said they prefer the more intimate atmosphere for smaller cup matches. Another alternate venue in the area is T-Mobile Park (formerly Safeco Field), a baseball stadium adjacent to Lumen Field; it was considered for a potential 2018 CONCACAF Champions League match if the Sounders had advanced to the semifinals due to a scheduling conflict with another event at Lumen Field. A new training facility, named the Sounders FC Center at Longacres, opened in February 2024 at an office park in Renton at the site of the former Longacres horse racetrack. It was announced in 2022 and features 300,000 square feet (28,000 m2) of office space, four training fields, and a public clubhouse. The Sounders FC Alliance was established at the request of minority owner Drew Carey, who was named its chairman. Based on the fan association at FC Barcelona, members of the Alliance have the ability to vote on the removal of the general manager and on other team decisions. Season ticket holders become automatic members, while non-season ticket holders may buy into the Alliance for a fee. Membership benefits include voting privileges, an invitation to the annual meeting and other team perks. Members may also be elected to the Sounders FC Alliance Council by receiving at least 25 nominations from other members on an annual basis. The first vote on retaining or replacing Sounders general manager Adrian Hanauer was held in late 2012. After 13,775 votes registered, Hanauer was retained by the Alliance. Carey also requested that the Sounders have their own marching band, the first of its kind in MLS. This led to the creation of Sound Wave, a 53-member marching band consisting of brass and marching percussion. The band plays music from multiple genres, such as Latin, rock and pop, and sits on the north end of Lumen Field. The March to the Match, in which fans march from Occidental Park to Lumen Field before each home match, has been accompanied by Sound Wave. The club's fight song is "Salute to the Olympians" by Henry Mancini, which had been adopted by the NASL Sounders in 1974 and later used by the USL Sounders. Besides the Alliance, there are four recognized, independent supporters groups for the Sounders. Emerald City Supporters (ECS), which formed in 2005 to support the USL Sounders, is the largest supporter group and sits in the south end of the stadium (nicknamed the "Brougham End") in sections 121–123. The Eastside Supporters, established in 2010 to recognize fans from the Eastside region, are located in section 150. Gorilla FC, an anti-fascist supporters group that fundraises for charitable causes in the Puget Sound region, is based in section 120. The North End Faithful sit in the north end of the stadium. The Seattle–Portland and Seattle–Vancouver rivalries formed among the respective NASL teams in the mid-1970s and carried on through to the USL and MLS. In 2004, the fan-based Cascadia Cup was created to formalize the competition between the Seattle, Portland, and Vancouver USL teams. The trophy is exchanged by the three teams' supporters groups and is based on the results of certain regular season matches. The Cascadia Cup was contested without Seattle for two seasons after the Sounders entered MLS in 2009, but Portland and Vancouver were awarded expansion teams that began play in 2011. The fan-created Heritage Cup competition with the San Jose Earthquakes began in the 2009 MLS season. MLS teams that carry on the names of their NASL predecessors are eligible to compete, but the Timbers and Whitecaps declined to participate. The winner is determined by league results over the final two matches in regular season play, followed by aggregate score if teams are tied. The rivalry cup's trophy was commissioned by the Soccer Silicon Valley Community Foundation and designed by a San Jose Earthquakes fan in collaboration with Sounders supporters. Although there is no official rivalry between the Sounders and Los Angeles Galaxy, the two teams have met several times in the MLS Cup Playoffs. The relationship between former head coaches Bruce Arena and Sigi Schmid, the two most successful in league history, also played a factor in the clubs' rivalry. Schmid later served as the Galaxy's head coach from 2017 to 2018, shortly after his departure from the Sounders. Seattle Sounders FC head coaches The ownership group of the club is composed of three owners and an ownership group composed of 17 families. The majority owner is Adrian Hanauer, the former owner of the now defunct USL-1 team Seattle Sounders. Independent minority owners include the estate of Paul Allen, Microsoft co-founder and owner of the Seattle Seahawks and Portland Trail Blazers, owned by Jody Allen; and Drew Carey, comedian and game show host. Hanauer and his mother Lenore Hanauer also became minority owners of Tacoma-based Reign FC in the National Women's Soccer League in January 2019, though there was no affiliation between the two clubs; their involvement with that club ended when OL Groupe purchased majority ownership of it the following year. Paul Allen's partnership allowed for the team to share certain resources with the Seahawks, including over half of the team's full-time staff, with merged ticket, marketing, and financial operations. This arrangement ended on April 30, 2014, with the Sounders becoming a fully independent business operation. Joe Roth was the majority owner from 2007 to 2015, when he ceded the role to Hanauer, who was replaced as general manager earlier that year. Roth departed the club's ownership group in 2019. He was replaced by Seattle Futbol Club LLC, formed by 11 families with ties to the Seattle area including former Microsoft executive Terry Myerson and his wife Katie Myerson, Russell Wilson, Ciara, Macklemore and Tricia Davis, Satya Nadella and Anu Nadella, Amy Hood and Max Kleinman, Joe Belfiore and Kristina Belfiore, S. Somasegar and Akila Somasegar, Chee Chew and Christine Chew, David Nathanson and Sabina Nathanson, Brian McAndrews and Elise Holschuh, and Mark Agne and Tomoko Agne. Myerson arranged for the investment through his connections and negotiations that took 15 months to complete. The expanded ownership group will have an executive board to decide on club matters. Peter Tomozawa and Donna LeDuc joined the new minority ownership group shortly afterwards, with Tomozawa taking over as president of business operations. In October 2020, Seattle Kraken team president Tod Leiweke and his wife, Tara, were announced as additional part-owners of the team. Retired baseball player Ken Griffey Jr. and his wife, Melissa, also joined the ownership group the following month. The team gained three additional part-owners in August 2023, comprising the families of Amazon executive Adam Selipsky, system integration consultant Rick Cantu, and real estate developer Jay Stein. Brian Schmetzer is the Sounders' current head coach. He was promoted to interim head coach from his role as assistant coach after Sigi Schmid parted ways with the club on mutual terms in July 2016. Schmetzer was made permanent head coach in November 2016, following the team's qualification for that year's playoffs. The club's assistant coaches are Preki, Freddy Juarez, and Andy Rose; until 2021, the other assistant coaches under Schmetzer were Gonzalo Pineda (now head coach of Atlanta United FC) and Djimi Traoré. Tom Dutra was hired in 2008 as the club's goalkeeper coach. Garth Lagerwey was hired from Real Salt Lake in January 2015 as the club's general manager and President of Soccer, replacing Adrian Hanauer. He left the club in November 2022 and was replaced by Craig Waibel, another former member of Real Salt Lake's staff. Prior to his appointment, Waibel was serving as the club's technical director, having replaced former MLS player and Everett native Chris Henderson in January 2021; Henderson had served in the role from January 24, 2009, until he left the club to join Inter Miami CF. Former Sounders defender Taylor Graham was hired as the club's Vice President of Business Operations in 2012, replacing longtime Seattle Seahawks executive Gary Wright. Tacoma native Hugh Weber was hired as the club's President of Business Operations in February 2023, replacing Tomozawa, who was named CEO of Seattle's organizing committee for the 2026 FIFA World Cup; Tomozawa kept his ownership stake in the club despite his departure from club operations. SportsBusiness Journal and SportsBusiness Daily recognized Seattle Sounders FC as the Professional Sports Team of the Year in 2009 because of the team's record-setting success in attendance, as well as making the playoffs in its inaugural season. Former Seahawks and Sounders CEO Tod Leiweke was recognized by the Puget Sound Business Journal as the newspaper's 2009 Executive of the Year. Gary Wright was named MLS Executive of the Year in 2009. In 2012, he was named Seattle Sports Star Executive of the Year. A 2015 study by Forbes ranked the Sounders number one in the league in terms of annual revenues ($50 million) and operating income ($10 million). Consequently, the Sounders were also ranked as the most valuable franchise ($245 million) in MLS – a 717% increase over the expansion fee it paid to join the league. The financial success of the team is driven in large part by their high attendance figures and local popularity. In 2019, the club announced that they would become carbon neutral by reducing emissions and purchasing offsets. They were the first professional soccer team in North America to make a commitment to carbon neutrality. The Sounders organization announced in 2014 that it would field a second-division reserve team in the United Soccer League, managed by the team and partially owned by members of a fan-owned group. The team, initially named Seattle Sounders FC 2 (S2), began play at the Starfire Sports Complex in 2015, under the management of former assistant coach Ezra Hendrickson. In 2017, the Sounders announced that the team would move to Cheney Stadium in Tacoma, with business operations transferred to the Tacoma Rainiers baseball club, ahead of a planned rebrand and soccer-specific stadium that had been planned to open in 2020. The team was renamed the Tacoma Defiance ahead of the 2019 season and began playing more matches in Tacoma. They moved to MLS Next Pro, a new reserve league for MLS teams, in 2022 following the end of the USL Championship's affiliation agreement. The Sounders established their affiliated academy team in 2010, and hired manager Dick McCormick and technical director Darren Sawatzky to develop local players. The academy fields teams in four age levels in the U.S. Soccer Development Academy system, and is affiliated with youth clubs in Washington, North Carolina, and Central California. Several academy products have been signed by the Sounders under the MLS Homegrown Player Rule, including DeAndre Yedlin, Sean Okoli, Jordan Morris, and Henry Wingo. In January 2012, the Sounders announced a partnership for the Tacoma Tide, an amateur team in the USL Premier Development League, to rebrand as Seattle Sounders FC U-23 and appoint Darren Sawatzky as head coach. This team would field former academy players during their summers off from university teams. This branding agreement was terminated by the Sounders in January 2020. The Sounders were also affiliated with an amateur women's team, Seattle Sounders Women, that played at Starfire Sports Complex. This branding agreement was also terminated by the Sounders in January 2020. A beach soccer team, also named the Sounders, was fielded for the 2011 and 2012 editions of the Mundialito de Clubes. Beginning with the 2023 season, all MLS matches will be streamed worldwide by Apple on MLS Season Pass with most matches behind a paywall and some available for free. The league-wide deal replaces existing television and streaming contracts, including local partnerships for the Sounders and national broadcasts on linear and cable television. From 2014 to 2022, television rights in English for regionally-broadcast matches were held by Fox owned-and-operated station KCPQ and sister station KZJO within the Seattle market. English television broadcasts were called by Keith Costigan alongside former Sounders goalkeeper Kasey Keller for color commentary and former Sounders midfielder Steve Zakuani for analysis. Previously, matches aired on KING-TV and KONG from 2009 to 2013. Matches were televised in Spanish on Univision station KUNS, anchored by Jaime Mendez with analysts Diego Arrioja and Jhon Kennedy Hurtado. In 2018, the team renewed its agreements with KCPQ and KZJO; in addition, the team announced a new streaming deal with YouTube TV for exclusive rights to stream the team's matches within Washington state. This replaced a previous syndication deal with Root Sports Northwest. In 2020, the team switched its streaming rights to Amazon Prime Video. On radio, Sounders matches are called in English on 950 KJR AM by Danny Jackson with analysis from Brad Evans. Prior to the 2023 season, the commentary crew included Matt Johnson with analysis from Wade Webber, Steve Zakuani, and Pete Fewing. The station also airs a weekly show dedicated to the Sounders on Tuesdays. KKMO (El Rey 1360 AM) broadcasts matches and a weekly show in Spanish with commentary from Mario Rodriguez, Carlos Tapia, and Felipe Maqueda. Former Seattle SuperSonics announcer Kevin Calabro and former U.S. soccer star Greg Vanney called the play-by-play for the local broadcasts during the Sounders' inaugural season in 2009. For the 2010 and 2011 seasons, they were replaced by former BBC cricket and general sport commentator Arlo White, who called English-language broadcasts without a partner. In 2012, White was hired by NBC Sports Network to be the voice of their soccer coverage. That led to BBC commentator Ross Fletcher becoming the club's television and radio play-by-play commentator beginning with the 2012 season, working alongside Kasey Keller as the color commentator. Fletcher left the club at the end of the 2015 season and was replaced by Keith Costigan. As of February 22, 2024 Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality. As of January 20, 2022[update] Individual Club Awards MLS Fair Play Award: 2017 CCL Fair Play Award: 2022 Notes Average attendance is calculated from league matches only and excludes matches played behind closed doors. Top goalscorer(s) includes all goals scored in MLS, the MLS Cup Playoffs, U.S. Open Cup, MLS is Back Tournament, Leagues Cup, CONCACAF Champions League, FIFA Club World Cup, and other competitive matches. The 2020 season was shortened due to the COVID-19 pandemic; league standings were determined using points per game due to an uneven number of matches played. The three group stage matches during the MLS is Back Tournament counted towards regular season standings, while knockout stage matches did not. The 2020 and 2021 editions of the U.S. Open Cup were canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Attendance figures for the 2020 season do not reflect matches played without spectators due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The figures were calculated from the two home matches played in March 2020 that drew 40,126 and 33,080 spectators. From March to July 2021, seating capacity at Lumen Field was restricted due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As of November 26, 2023 Includes goal in MLS is Back Tournament knockout stage Bold signifies a current Sounders player Bold signifies a current Sounders player The Major League Soccer (MLS) club was formed in 2007 and began play in 2009. Previous incarnations of the club competed from 1974 to 1983 in the North American Soccer League and from 1994 to 2008 in various second division leagues. Expandable to 69,000. "CenturyLink Field". SoundersFC.com. MLS Digital. Archived from the original on April 15, 2019. Retrieved April 16, 2019. Farrey, Tom (June 15, 1994). "Seattle Misses First MLS Cut – But Bid Isn't Dead". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. Farrey, Tom (January 28, 1994). "Big Soccer Surprise: 38,000 To See Match". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. Farrey, Tom (February 4, 1994). "Key Need For Soccer: A Stadium". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. "Soccer Ticket Pledges Exceed 1,300". The Seattle Times. June 4, 1994. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. Farrey, Tom (February 24, 1994). "Soccer League Rejects Sounders' Plan; Two Will Compete To Sell Season Tickets". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. Farrey, Tom (July 17, 1994). "Seattle Gets Boost in Bid For Team – Husky Stadium Might Be MLS Site". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. "Major League Soccer Postponed Until 1996". The Seattle Times. November 16, 1994. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. "U.S. Pro Soccer To Become Reality in March Of '96". Deseret News. June 7, 1995. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Almond, Elliott (May 11, 1996). "Want A Stadium For Football? Try A Little Soccer". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. Sherwin, Bob (May 10, 2000). "MLS team in Seattle no sure bet". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. "Garber says MLS plans to add teams". The Seattle Times. October 19, 2002. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (July 15, 2004). "Seattle at 'top of list' for MLS team in 2006". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. Massey, Matt (April 16, 2005). "Seattle's chances for MLS team take a hit". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2009. Mahoney, Ridge (July 28, 2009). "Sounders bring MLS success in Seattle". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 4, 2009. Retrieved December 5, 2009. Smith, Craig (October 11, 2007). "Gooooal? City may soon have franchise". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved March 20, 2012. Gaschk, Matthew (May 2, 2007). "Seattle back on MLS burner". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved December 21, 2022. Booth, Tim (August 8, 2007). "Several groups contending for MLS expansion in Seattle". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 21, 2022. Gaschk, Matthew (November 13, 2007). "MLS officially adds Seattle". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved June 2, 2023. Stone, Larry (November 10, 2007). "Big-time soccer coming in 2009". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved February 18, 2012. "It's official: Seattle to get MLS team in 2009". The Seattle Times. November 14, 2007. Archived from the original on November 14, 2007. Retrieved March 20, 2012. Moroney, Laurence (November 13, 2007). "MLS announces expansion in Seattle". Major League Soccer. Archived from the original on February 12, 2015. Retrieved March 20, 2012. Gaschk, Matthew (April 7, 2008). "Sounders FC by fans' acclamation". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved July 19, 2009. Yardley, William (March 31, 2009). "New Soccer Team Stokes Seattle's Passion". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved April 6, 2009. "Sounders FC Sells Out Home Opener" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. March 2, 2009. Archived from the original on March 5, 2009. Retrieved March 3, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (December 16, 2008). "Sigi Schmid becomes Sounders FC's first coach". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 17, 2008. Retrieved December 16, 2008. Gaschk, Matt (March 19, 2009). "Sounders FC win inaugural game". Sounders FC. Archived from the original on April 6, 2010. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Romero, José Miguel (March 24, 2009). "Sounders FC fans' passion bowls over commissioner". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 30, 2009. Retrieved May 3, 2009. "Keller ejected as Sounders FC lose for first time". The Seattle Times. April 11, 2009. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved May 25, 2009. Winner, Andrew (August 5, 2009). "Messi Leads FC Barcelona to Friendly Win over Sounders FC". Major League Soccer. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Mayers, Joshua (July 20, 2011). "Manchester United schools Sounders FC 7–0 before record crowd". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved July 22, 2011. "Seattle Sounders FC Become Second MLS Expansion Team to Claim U.S. Open Cup Crown". United States Soccer Federation. September 2, 2009. Archived from the original on September 5, 2009. Retrieved September 3, 2009. Gaschk, Matt (October 17, 2009). "Sounders Clinch Playoff Berth With 3–2 Win". Sounders FC. Archived from the original on February 17, 2012. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Johns, Greg (January 27, 2010). "Sounders explain why season tickets capped at 32,000". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Fallas, Bernardo (November 8, 2009). "Dynamo advance to Western final vs. Galaxy". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Romero, José Miguel (November 4, 2009). "Sounders success story, by the numbers". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 8, 2009. Retrieved November 10, 2009. Johns, Greg (January 27, 2010). "Sounders explain why season tickets capped at 32,000". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on January 31, 2010. Retrieved October 11, 2010. Mayers, Joshua (October 9, 2010). "Sounders clinch a playoff berth with second-half surge". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2010. Mayers, Joshua (November 7, 2010). "Sounders FC ousted from MLS playoffs". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved December 15, 2010. Winner, Andrew (October 17, 2010). "Fans motivate Seattle to 2–1 win over Chivas". Archived from the original on September 7, 2012. Retrieved October 18, 2010. Mayers, Joshua (October 14, 2010). "Sounders FC release Chivas USA preview & broadcast info". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved October 18, 2010. Mayers, Joshua (September 29, 2010). "Fucito's 2 goals boost Sounders past Marathon, 2–0". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 22, 2011. Retrieved October 11, 2010. Goff, Steven (October 6, 2010). "Nyassi is nice: Seattle Sounders defeat Columbus Crew, 2–1, to repeat as U.S. Open Cup champions". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 6, 2010. Retrieved October 11, 2010. Booth, Tim (October 6, 2010). "Nyassi scores twice, Seattle beats Columbus 2–1". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 6, 2013. Retrieved February 18, 2012. "Seattle claims first berth in 2011–2012 CCL". CONCACAF Web Site. October 5, 2010. Archived from the original on October 9, 2010. Retrieved October 7, 2010. Mayers, Joshua (December 10, 2010). "For the third-straight year, Sounders FC to host stand-alone opener to kick off MLS season". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2012. "Juninho scores as L.A. beats Seattle 1–0". The Seattle Times. March 15, 2011. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2012. Mayers, Joshua (May 14, 2011). "Passionate fans keep Cascadia Cup alive and well". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (September 25, 2011). "Fredy Montero scores twice as Seattle claims Cascadia Cup". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. "Sounders' Zakuani has fractured tibia, fibula". USA Today. April 23, 2011. Archived from the original on April 27, 2011. Retrieved April 24, 2011. Mayers, Joshua (October 28, 2011). "Give Sounders FC advantage entering Game 1". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on October 28, 2011. Retrieved January 14, 2012. "Seattle Sounders Win Third Consecutive Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup in Front of Record Crowd". US Soccer. October 5, 2011. Archived from the original on January 21, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2012. Mayers, Joshua (November 2, 2011). "Sounders win, come close, but won't move on in playoffs". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2012. Mayers, Joshua (November 15, 2011). "Mauro Rosales named MLS Newcomer of the Year". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2012. Ruiz, Don (October 31, 2011). "Sounders on pace for eighth-largest MLS playoff crowd?". The Tacoma News Tribune. Archived from the original on January 16, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2012. "Sounders FC pulls off historic win in Mexico, beating Monterrey, 1–0". The Seattle Times. August 23, 2011. Archived from the original on January 14, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2012. Mayers, Joshua (March 14, 2012). "Sounders FC routed, 6–1, by Santos Laguna". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (October 18, 2011). "Sounders lose 2–1 in group finale but advance to CONCACAF quarterfinals". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 22, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2012. Mayers, Joshua (May 13, 2012). "Sounders FC's win streak comes to end with 1–0 loss to Real Salt Lake". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (July 8, 2012). "Sounders snap their winless streak". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 28, 2018. Retrieved November 26, 2017. "Sporting Kansas City, Seattle Sounders FC Advance to 2012 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Final". US Soccer Federation. July 11, 2012. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Brewer, Jerry (August 9, 2012). "Sounders' quest for fourth U.S. Open Cup ends in penalty-kick loss". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Oshan, Jeremiah (October 25, 2012). "CCL: Estrada, Ochoa prove a dynamite duo for Sounders". MLSsoccer.com. Archived from the original on December 28, 2018. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (November 9, 2012). "Sounders beat Real Salt Lake 1–0, advance in playoffs for first time". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (November 19, 2012). "Sounders FC comes up short against Galaxy". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (November 20, 2012). "Sounders will get to work shaping 2013 roster". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Boyle, John (November 27, 2012). "Sounders forward Eddie Johnson named MLS Comeback Player of the Year". The Everett Herald. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. "Sounders FC Signs First Homegrown Player" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. January 11, 2013. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2017. "Sounders FC Signs Djimi Traore". Seattle Sounders FC. February 23, 2013. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2017. Okeleji, Oluwashina (March 12, 2013). "Obafemi Martins relieved to complete Seattle transfer". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on December 26, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (January 21, 2013). "Sounders officially loan Montero to Colombian champion Millonarios". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2017. "Portuguese club Sporting CP complete transfer of former Seattle Sounders forward Fredy Montero". MLSsoccer.com. January 30, 2014. Archived from the original on February 20, 2019. Retrieved December 3, 2017. Parker, Graham (March 13, 2013). "Traoré screamer helps Sounders to historic comeback against Tigres". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (April 10, 2013). "Seattle Sounders eliminated from CONCACAF Champions League by Santos Laguna". The Seattle Times. p. C3. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2017. Matt Gaschk (October 25, 2013). "Attendance numbers continue to impress for Sounders". Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved March 19, 2019. Mayers, Joshua (April 17, 2013). "Sounders hope history of rebounds repeats itself". The Seattle Times. p. C2. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (May 31, 2013). "Sounders left speechless with recent tough losses". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (June 22, 2013). "Sounders hoping to continue turnaround at Real Salt Lake". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Straus, Brian (August 2, 2013). "Shocking transfer has Dempsey headed to Seattle Sounders". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on August 6, 2013. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (September 23, 2013). "Supporters' Shield well within Sounders' reach in final stretch". The Seattle Times. p. C2. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (October 21, 2013). "Sounders clinch a playoff berth thanks to help from Galaxy". The Seattle Times. p. C2. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (October 29, 2013). "Playoffs mean new start for Sounders". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Moschetti, Mark (October 31, 2013). "Sounders survive, advance in playoffs". The Spokesman-Review. Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Mayers, Joshua (November 8, 2013). "Sounders' season of title hopes ends in playoff defeat to Portland". The Seattle Times. p. C4. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Gaschk, Matt (October 29, 2013). "Seattle breaks attendance record for fifth straight season". Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on July 5, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2017. "Sounders' Hawks Nest tickets go on sale". The Seattle Times. November 17, 2011. p. C7. Gaschk, Matt (September 11, 2013). "Another massive crowd expected at CenturyLink Field on Friday". Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2017. "Eddie Johnson gives Sounders 1–0 win over Timbers". USA Today. Associated Press. August 26, 2013. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Pentz, Matt (November 20, 2014). "How Sigi Schmid saved his job and moved the Sounders forward". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2016. "Tottenham confirm signing of DeAndre Yedlin on four-year contract". The Guardian. August 13, 2014. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Bird, Liviu (October 25, 2014). "Pappa's brace carries Sounders to Supporters' Shield win over Galaxy". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on September 14, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Lilgenwall, Ari (December 18, 2014). "2014 in Review: Seattle Sounders enjoy historic season, but fall just short of reaching MLS Cup". MLSsoccer.com. Archived from the original on December 27, 2014. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Kamrani, Christopher (January 6, 2015). "As expected, Garth Lagerwey named GM of Seattle Sounders". The Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Parchman, Will (November 11, 2015). "2015 in Review: Sounders FC began season with a bang". SoundersFC.com. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Blue, Molly (June 19, 2015). "Seattle Sounders meltdown vs. Portland Timbers: What's next for Clint Dempsey?". The Oregonian. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Scott, Nate (June 19, 2015). "MLS hits Clint Dempsey with a 3-game suspension for ripping ref's notebook". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. "Seattle Sounders, LA Galaxy through to CCL knockout round". ESPN FC. Associated Press. September 23, 2015. Archived from the original on September 4, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Ruiz, Don (August 15, 2015). "Sounders to sport new look against Orlando". The News Tribune. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Pentz, Matt (July 22, 2015). "Sounders happy with immediate impact from Erik Friberg". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Cohen, Stephen (October 28, 2015). "Sounders exorcise playoff demons, move past Galaxy in thrilling knockout round victory". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. McCarthy, Kyle (November 8, 2015). "FC Dallas oust Sounders on penalties to reach West final". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Liljenwall, Ari (December 15, 2015). "2015 MLS Year in Review: Seattle Sounders". MLSsoccer.com. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Pentz, Matt (November 12, 2015). "Adrian Hanauer is the new majority owner of the Seattle Sounders". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. "MLS sets new attendance records, Seattle hold highest average in league". MLSsoccer.com. October 26, 2015. Archived from the original on October 28, 2015. Retrieved July 26, 2016. "Obafemi Martins leaves MLS for Chinese Super League". BBC Sport. February 18, 2016. Archived from the original on May 11, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Pentz, Matt (January 21, 2016). "Seattle Sounders officially unveil Jordan Morris as Homegrown Player signing". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Baxter, Kevin (July 23, 2016). "Seattle running out of patience with Schmid and floundering Sounders". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. McDowell, Sam (July 24, 2016). "Sounders limited to one shot in 3–0 loss at Sporting Kansas City". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on July 27, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Pentz, Matt (July 26, 2016). "Sounders part ways with longtime coach Sigi Schmid". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on August 11, 2019. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Straus, Brian (July 26, 2016). "Little choice for Seattle Sounders to oust Sigi Schmid, change course". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on July 27, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Pentz, Matt (July 27, 2016). "Sounders sign Uruguayan attacking midfielder Nicolas Lodeiro to Designated Player contract". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on July 30, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. Pentz, Matt (July 30, 2016). "New signings Nicolas Lodeiro and Alvaro Fernandez both available for Sounders against Galaxy on Sunday". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. Pentz, September 27, 2016. "Sounders forward Clint Dempsey ruled out for the remainder of this season". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 29, 2017. Retrieved February 4, 2017.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Pentz, Matt (November 2, 2016). "Sounders remove interim tag, hire coach Brian Schmetzer on a full-time basis". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 4, 2016. Retrieved November 2, 2016. Pentz, Matt (November 10, 2016). "Sounders forward Jordan Morris named MLS Rookie of the Year". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved February 4, 2017. Pentz, Matt (November 21, 2016). "Sounders midfielder Nicolas Lodeiro named MLS Newcomer of the Year". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on February 5, 2017. Retrieved February 4, 2017. Rosano, Nicholas (October 28, 2016). "Seattle Sounders 1, Sporting KC 0 | 2016 MLS Cup Playoffs Match Recap". MLSSoccer.com. Archived from the original on May 7, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2017. Rodriguez, Alicia (November 6, 2016). "FC Dallas 2, Seattle Sounders 1 | 2016 MLS Cup Playoffs Match Recap". MLSSoccer.com. Archived from the original on May 7, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2017. Rosano, Nicholas (November 27, 2016). "Seattle Sounders reach first MLS Cup with win over Colorado Rapids". MLSSoccer.com. Archived from the original on November 28, 2016. Retrieved November 27, 2016. Stejskal, Sam (December 10, 2016). "Seattle Sounders defeat Toronto FC in shootout to win MLS Cup 2016". MLS. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved December 11, 2016. Murray, Caitlin (December 14, 2016). "There's never been a comeback like the Seattle Sounders' in MLS". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2017. Miles, Todd (December 1, 2017). "3 biggest reasons the Sounders are back in the MLS Cup". The News Tribune. Tacoma, Washington. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2018. Baker, Geoff (March 4, 2017). "Clint Dempsey scores in return to lineup, but Sounders drop season opener". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on March 25, 2018. Retrieved March 24, 2018. Baker, Geoff (August 11, 2017). "Sounders enter first-place showdown with Sporting KC healthy and riding 7-game unbeaten streak". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 2, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2018. Smith, Brennan (September 23, 2017). "Sounders' 13-match unbeaten streak comes to end with 2–0 loss to Real Salt Lake". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 2, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2018. "Defending MLS champion Seattle Sounders claim No. 2 playoff seed in West". USA Today. Associated Press. October 22, 2017. Archived from the original on December 2, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2018. Mahoney, Ridge (December 8, 2017). "MLS Cup Preview: Title game matches up tactics and toughness". Soccer America. Archived from the original on March 25, 2018. Retrieved March 24, 2018. Parker, Graham (December 9, 2017). "Jozy Altidore has last laugh to seal MLS Cup glory for Toronto FC". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 13, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2018. Baker, Geoff (February 26, 2018). "Sounders striker Jordan Morris out for the season with ACL injury". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on August 19, 2018. Retrieved August 18, 2018. Baker, Geoff (August 14, 2018). "Forget the playoffs, Sounders now have a shot at a first-round bye". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on August 19, 2018. Retrieved August 18, 2018. Baker, Geoff (August 18, 2018). "Sounders move into playoff territory with record rout of Galaxy". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on August 19, 2018. Retrieved August 18, 2018. Liljenwall, Ari (September 19, 2018). "Amazed at nine-game winning streak, Sounders not ready to talk history yet". Major League Soccer. Major League Soccer. Retrieved January 15, 2019.[dead link] Baker, Geoff (October 28, 2018). "Decision Day drama rockets Sounders into MLS playoff bye, win over San Jose". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on October 30, 2019. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Booth, Tim (October 16, 2018). "Future of Paul Allen's sports holdings remains unclear". The Spokesman-Review. Archived from the original on November 10, 2018. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Baker, Geoff (November 8, 2018). "Cascadia classic: Sounders' season ends on penalty kicks in wild loss to Timbers". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 10, 2018. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Creditor, Avi (November 9, 2018). "Timbers Outlast Rival Sounders in PKs to Advance After MLS Playoff Classic". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Baker, Geoff (January 10, 2019). "Sounders captain and original 2009 member Osvaldo Alonso signs with Minnesota United FC". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 14, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2019. Evans, Jayda (May 22, 2019). "Sounders defender Chad Marshall announces retirement, ending 16-year MLS career". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on August 18, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2019. Evans, Jayda (August 2, 2019). "Sounders defender Roman Torres suspended 10 games for violating MLS substance-abuse policy". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 6, 2019. Retrieved August 14, 2019. Creditor, Avi (October 7, 2019). "MLS Playoff Power Rankings: Separating MLS Cup Contenders From the Pack". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on October 16, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2019. Quillen, Ian (October 25, 2019). "How MLS teams can qualify for the 2020 Concacaf Champions League". MLSsoccer.com. Archived from the original on August 29, 2019. Retrieved October 25, 2019. Iniguez, Alex (October 22, 2019). "Sounders forward Jordan Morris named MLS Comeback Player of the Year". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (October 23, 2019). "Sounders beat Salt Lake 2–0, have shot at another MLS Western Conference championship". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 1, 2019. Retrieved April 20, 2022. "Seattle Sounders upset MLS-best Los Angeles FC to earn third trip to MLS Cup in four years". USA Today. Associated Press. October 30, 2019. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Petterson, Joel (November 10, 2019). "Seattle Beats Toronto to Win M.L.S. Cup". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 11, 2019. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (February 27, 2020). "Sounders stunned in CONCACAF Champions League, losing in penalty shootout to visiting CD Olimpia". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on February 29, 2020. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (March 12, 2020). "Due to coronavirus concerns, Sounders cancel all operations at practice facility after MLS season suspension". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (July 27, 2020). "Mistakes by Sounders make it easier for LAFC to knock them out of MLS is Back tournament". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Calkins, Matt (August 30, 2020). "No fans doesn't mean Sounders still won't put on good show, and it takes nothing from the victory". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (July 24, 2021). "Will Sounders rely on teen lineup against Sporting Kansas City?". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (August 26, 2020). "Sounders opt to sit out Wednesday's match against Galaxy in protest of racial injustice". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. "Sounders set club record with 7-1 rout of Earthquakes". USA Today. Associated Press. September 11, 2020. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (November 8, 2020). "Sounders secure No. 2 playoff seed with 4-1 drubbing of San Jose". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (December 1, 2020). "Sounders fight past FC Dallas to reach Western Conference title match". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (December 7, 2020). "Sound the Alarms! Sounders FC mounts incredible rally to win Western Conference title 3-2". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Das, Andrew (December 12, 2020). "Columbus Wins M.L.S. Cup, the Final Stop on a Journey to Stay Put". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 23, 2021. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Doyle, Matthew (December 8, 2021). "What the 2021 MLS season meant for Seattle Sounders FC". MLSsoccer.com. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Mondello, Joseph (November 7, 2021). "Seattle Sounders draw Vancouver Whitecaps on the road in final match of 2021 MLS regular season". SoundersFC.com. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (August 15, 2021). "Sounders tie record most goals in history of derby in victory vs. Timbers". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (September 22, 2021). "Sounders can't hold lead against Club Leon of Mexico, lose Leagues Cup final 3-2". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (November 23, 2021). "Sounders' struggles extend to playoffs, as they fall to Real Salt Lake on penalty kicks". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (February 16, 2022). "Sounders return to CONCACAF play, hoping for better result this time". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (February 24, 2022). "Sounders advance to CONCACAF Champions League quarterfinals by blasting F.C. Motagua". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 14, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Liljenwall, Ari (March 17, 2022). "Recap: Club León 1, Seattle Sounders FC 1 (1-4 aggregate: SEA advance to semifinals)". MLSsoccer.com. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Evans, Jayda (April 13, 2022). "Sounders advance to their first CCL final — and a draw was enough". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 14, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Creditor, Avi (May 4, 2022). "Seattle Ends MLS's CCL Futility, Routs Pumas to Win Concacaf's Title". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on May 5, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Mather, Victor (May 5, 2022). "The Sounders Qualified for the Club World Cup. No One Knows When It Is". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 15, 2022. Retrieved May 5, 2022. Evans, Jayda (May 11, 2022). "Sounders can't find any tournament magic in U.S. Open Cup, fall to San Jose in shootout". The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 4, 2022. "Short-handed Sounders blank Toronto FC, 2-0". ESPN.com. Reuters. July 2, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Evans, Jayda (September 26, 2022). "CCL title makes 2022 a success even if MLS playoffs are missed, Sounders say". The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Evans, Jayda (October 2, 2022). "Sounders' 13-year playoff streak comes to end after loss in Kansas City". The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Evans, Jayda (November 22, 2022). "Sounders president and CEO Garth Lagerwey leaving to join Atlanta United". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 22, 2022. Baker, Geoff (November 30, 2022). "Sounders promote Craig Waibel to GM, replacing Garth Lagerwey". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 4, 2022. Evans, Jayda (February 4, 2023). "Sounders show they belong but fall just short in Club World Cup loss to Al Ahly". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Dunbar, Graham (March 14, 2023). "FIFA expands 2026 World Cup again, with Toronto and Vancouver hosting extra matches". CBC Sports. Associated Press. Retrieved March 14, 2023. "Badge and Colors Fact Sheet". Seattle Sounders FC. April 4, 2008. Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved April 7, 2008. MacDonald, Frank (April 9, 2008). "Sounders FC Rings True". Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved December 5, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (March 21, 2008). "NW Briefs: List narrows for Seattle Major League Soccer team names". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on March 24, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. Gaschk, Matthew (March 25, 2008). "Sounders name isn't dead yet". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved March 27, 2008. "Seattle Sounders FC Selected as Team Name" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. April 7, 2008. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved July 19, 2009. Marcus, Jeffrey (April 7, 2008). "Introducing, the Seattle Sounders". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 5, 2008. Retrieved November 14, 2009. "Sounders is the new name, soccer's the name of the game". The Seattle Times. January 22, 1974. p. D3. "Sounders FC unveils new primary Rave Green kit for 2018-2019 seasons" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. February 5, 2018. Retrieved November 1, 2022. Borg, Simon (March 3, 2014). "Jersey Week 2014: Seattle Sounders go a different direction with new black third kits". MLSsoccer.com. Retrieved November 1, 2022. Mayers, Joshua (November 18, 2011). "Sounders FC unveils new third uniform". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 1, 2022. "Sounders FC unveils new "Nightfall" secondary kit for 2019" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. February 25, 2019. Retrieved November 1, 2022. Evans, Jayda (March 25, 2021). "Sounders unveil secondary purple jersey inspired by Jimi Hendrix". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 1, 2022. Evans, Jayda (February 15, 2023). "Take a look at the Sounders' new secondary 'Bruce Lee kits'". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 27, 2023. Evans, Jayda (September 26, 2023). "Here's a look at the Sounders' new crest and colors". The Seattle Times. Retrieved September 26, 2023. Rosenblatt, Ryan (September 27, 2023). "Sounders rebrand celebrates history instead of erasing past". ESPN. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Ostlund-Foss, Tim (September 26, 2023). "Sounders' new visual identity embraces past, looks to future". Sounder at Heart. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Lazo, Jessica (September 26, 2023). "Behind The Design: The making of our new visual identity". SoundersFC.com. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Evans, Jayda (February 15, 2024). "Take a look at the Sounders' new 'Anniversary Kit'". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 15, 2024. Futterman, Matthew (May 28, 2008). "Soccer's Sounders Get a Microsoft Kick". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on August 22, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2009. "Sounders FC Announce Sponsorship with Microsoft and Xbox 360" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. May 28, 2008. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved July 19, 2009. "Sounders FC Hires CAA Sports" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. August 15, 2012. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Mayers, Joshua (September 11, 2013). "Sounders extended jersey sponsorship with Xbox through 2014 season". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Soper, Taylor (December 18, 2014). "Microsoft Xbox extends Sounders jersey sponsorship through 2016". GeekWire. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Gates, Dominic (March 2, 2012). "Emirates eager for updated 777, more visibility here". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Ruiz, Don (September 29, 2015). "Sounders abandon rave look for LA". The Olympian. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Baker, Geoff (October 23, 2016). "Are the Sounders putting on a sporting event, or a live Xbox infomercial?". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Baker, Geoff (August 7, 2017). "Sounders hire talent firm to help in search for naming-rights partner". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Baker, Geoff (January 17, 2019). "Sounders, Reign ink new jersey sponsorship deals with Seattle-based online retailer Zulily". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 17, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Rodriguez, Alicia (January 17, 2019). "Seattle Sounders jerseys to be sponsored by online retailer Zulily". MLSsoccer.com. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 17, 2019. "Sounders FC announces WaFd Bank as jersey sleeve patch partner for 2020 season" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. July 8, 2020. Archived from the original on July 15, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Sounders FC Communications (March 23, 2021). "Sounders FC and the Puyallup Tribe of Indians' Emerald Queen Casino announce new multi-year partnership between the Rave Green and iconic Coast Salish people" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021. Retrieved March 23, 2021. Evans, Jayda (January 20, 2023). "Sounders announce partnership with Providence Swedish. Here's a look at the new jerseys". The Seattle Times. Retrieved January 20, 2023. Silverman, Alex (January 20, 2023). "SBJ Unpacks: Sounders land Providence as new jersey sponsor". Sports Business Journal. Retrieved January 23, 2023. Evans, Jayda (January 24, 2023). "Sounders partnership with Providence draws ire of fans". The Seattle Times. Retrieved January 24, 2023. "MLS awards Seattle expansion team for 2009". Major League Soccer. November 17, 2007. Archived from the original on April 26, 2014. Retrieved March 20, 2012. Bruscas, Angelo (July 18, 2002). "Seahawks owner believes stadium will help drive team to higher level". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved June 21, 2009. Dudley, Brier (September 25, 1998). "Seahawks Sign Lease For 30 Years at New Stadium". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved February 19, 2011. "Splashy Sounders set to kick off in Seattle". ESPN. January 22, 2009. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved February 19, 2011. Pentz, Matt (March 16, 2015). "Sounders announce CenturyLink Field lease extension through 2028 season". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on February 5, 2020. Retrieved March 24, 2019. Romero, José Miguel (May 29, 2008). "Microsoft launches deal with MLS, Sounders FC". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 17, 2008. Retrieved May 31, 2009. Shefte, Kate (September 7, 2022). "Sounders, Emerald Queen Casino announce naming-rights deal for Lumen Field pitch". The Seattle Times. Retrieved September 11, 2022. Ruiz, Don (June 27, 2009). "Qwest seating increased for hot-selling Sounders". The News Tribune. Archived from the original on January 5, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2009. "Friendly and 4-Match Ticket Package" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. March 26, 2012. Archived from the original on March 30, 2012. Retrieved May 8, 2012. McIntyre, Doug (May 16, 2012). "Reigning in Seattle". ESPN The Magazine. Archived from the original on May 18, 2012. Retrieved May 18, 2012. Romero, José Miguel (January 7, 2010). "Keeping Sounders FC together is key to long-range success". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 30, 2010. Retrieved February 4, 2010. Mayers, Joshua (November 16, 2011). "Hawks Nest will be open in '12, season tickets on sale Thurs". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2011. "Seattle Sounders agree to 10-year extension that keeps them at CenturyLink Field through 2028". mlssoccer.com. March 16, 2015. Archived from the original on March 19, 2015. Retrieved March 18, 2015. Gaschk, Matt (September 11, 2013). "Another massive crowd expected at CenturyLink Field on Friday". SoundersFC.com. Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2022. Mayers, Joshua (October 8, 2012). "Sounders don't disappoint record crowd, beating Portland 3-0". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on May 31, 2019. Retrieved March 11, 2022. Liebeskind, Josh (August 26, 2013). "Dempsey's Arrival Has Sounders Crowd at Fever Pitch". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 12, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2022. Evans, Jayda (November 11, 2019). "Minor controversy aside, Sounders still packed CenturyLink, drew huge TV numbers and won the MLS Cup". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 21, 2019. Retrieved March 11, 2022. Evans, Jayda (March 11, 2022). "With state mask mandate lifting, Saturday marks a new normal for Sounders and Seattle sports". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on March 12, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2022. Evans, Jayda (August 29, 2021). "Sounders get close, but not in the back of the net in loss to rival Timbers". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on March 12, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "Qwest Field goes Au Naturel" (Press release). Seattle Seahawks. March 19, 2003. Archived from the original on March 27, 2009. Retrieved March 20, 2012. Romero, José Miguel (August 25, 2009). "Qwest Field pulls off quick turnaround between Sounders FC and Seahawks games". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on August 27, 2009. Retrieved November 11, 2009. Mayers, Joshua (May 4, 2012). "CenturyLink turf passes FIFA 2-Star testing". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 8, 2012.[permanent dead link] "PSA Frequently Asked Questions". Washington State Public Stadium Authority. Archived from the original on July 23, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Pentz, Matt (February 19, 2016). "Seahawks, Sounders announce new FieldTurf installation at CenturyLink Field". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on March 25, 2019. Retrieved March 24, 2019. Evans, Jayda (February 12, 2024). "Sounders bid bittersweet farewell to Starfire training facility: 'It's been a good home for us'". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Romero, José Miguel (August 24, 2008). "Sounders FC developing headquarters, practice facility at Starfire". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 30, 2009. Retrieved June 21, 2009. Johns, Greg (May 7, 2009). "Colorado coach miffed at Sounders' playing facility". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on May 31, 2009. Retrieved March 15, 2011. Baker, Geoff (March 14, 2018). "Had Sounders advanced over Chivas, they would have been forced to play Champions League semi at Safeco Field". The Seattle Times. Retrieved June 2, 2023. Evans, Jayda (February 13, 2024). "Sounders unveil new 'state-of-the-art' training facility. Here's a first look". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Evans, Jayda (February 16, 2022). "Sounders FC unveils plans for new training facility and team headquarters at Longacres in Renton". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on February 16, 2022. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Gaschk, Matthew (May 16, 2008). "Sounders FC owner caters to fans". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on March 10, 2012. Retrieved May 19, 2008. Matt Gaschk (December 13, 2012). "Sounders FC Announce Results of Landmark General Manager Vote". Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014. Retrieved March 24, 2014. Romero, José (December 5, 2009). "Keeping it official". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved December 14, 2009. "The Band". Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on March 18, 2009. Retrieved March 1, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (May 30, 2009). "Golden Scarf presentation". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2016. Retrieved November 30, 2009. "March to the Match". Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on March 25, 2010. Retrieved November 11, 2009. Falk, David (January 8, 2012). ""Salute to Olympians" by Henry Mancini is Sounders traditional 'Fight Song'". GoalWA.net. Retrieved January 1, 2023. Beard, Curt (July 24, 1994). "Sounders sizzle into first". The Seattle Times. p. C3. "Sounders FC Supporter Groups". Seattle Sounders FC. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Evans, Jayda (September 15, 2019). "Sounders supporters group walks out to protest ejection of leader for displaying Iron Front flag". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Evans, Jayda (August 4, 2019). "Fans marching to Sounders match hear curses from people who pledge allegiance to Proud Boys". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Liljenwall, Ari (February 28, 2017). "2017 MLS supporters' group field guide: Seattle Sounders FC". MLSsoccer.com. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Guzman, Monica (March 18, 2009). "The Sounders and Gorilla FC: New club, old sport". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on March 21, 2009. Retrieved December 14, 2009. "Know Your Sounders FC Supporter Groups Pt. 4". Seattle Met. April 28, 2009. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "Soccer fans creating Cascadia Cup". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. March 31, 2004. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved October 15, 2009. Baker, Geoff (March 21, 2018). "Cascadia Cup representatives say Sounders-Timbers match on May 13 won't count in competition standings". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on July 2, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2018. "Sounders FC get a rival – Portland awarded MLS franchise". KOMO-TV. March 20, 2009. Archived from the original on October 4, 2011. Retrieved May 25, 2009. Wahl, Grant (May 23, 2011). "A Pacific Passion Play". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on May 19, 2011. Retrieved June 11, 2011. Almond, Elliott (July 31, 2014). "Earthquakes have 5-year deal with 49ers to play at Levi's". The Mercury News. Retrieved January 18, 2023. Pisani, Jake (July 24, 2018). "Feature: What is the Heritage Cup between the Quakes & Sounders FC?". San Jose Earthquakes. Retrieved January 18, 2023. Ruiz, Don (April 2, 2011). "Soccer City USA? It's San Jose, silly". The News Tribune. Retrieved January 18, 2023. "Sounders FC, LA Galaxy to add another chapter to postseason history". SoundersFC.com. October 26, 2015. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Parker, Graham (July 7, 2016). "Bruce Arena and Sigi Schmid molded modern MLS coaching landscape". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Baker, Geoff (July 29, 2017). "Sigi Schmid returns to pitch, coaches Galaxy to scoreless draw against Sounders". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2018. "Carey signs on to invest in Seattle expansion team". ESPN. November 12, 2007. Archived from the original on November 15, 2007. Retrieved November 13, 2007. Hammond, Andrew (January 30, 2019). "Seattle Reign moving to Cheney Stadium, and the S2 team is changing its name". The News Tribune. Archived from the original on July 11, 2019. Retrieved March 18, 2019. "Reign FC Has Entered into Exclusive Negotiations to Sell the Club to OL Groupe" (Press release). Reign FC. November 25, 2019. Archived from the original on December 19, 2019. Retrieved November 25, 2019. Mayers, Joshua (April 29, 2014). "Sounders FC nearly completes independent business transition from Seahawks". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Pentz, Matt (November 12, 2015). "Adrian Hanauer is the new majority owner of the Seattle Sounders". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 3, 2015. Retrieved November 12, 2015. "Sounders FC opens new chapter in club history, as 11 families with deep Seattle roots join Rave Green Ownership group" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. August 13, 2019. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2019. Evans, Jayda (August 13, 2019). "Russell Wilson, Ciara, Macklemore, Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella and more join Sounders ownership". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on August 13, 2019. Retrieved August 13, 2019. Evans, Jayda (August 21, 2019). "Sounders announce Peter Tomozawa as president of business operations". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved September 2, 2020. Bakers, Geoff (October 5, 2020). "Kraken CEO Tod Leiweke and his wife, Tara, join Sounders ownership group". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2020. Evans, Jayda (November 17, 2020). "Mariners legend Ken Griffey Jr. to join Seattle Sounders ownership group". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved November 17, 2020. Evans, Jayda (August 16, 2023). "Sounders expand ownership group with three partner families". The Seattle Times. Retrieved August 16, 2023. Milles, Todd (November 2, 2016). "Sounders waste no more time, make Schmetzer permanent head coach". The News Tribune. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2018. Evans, Jayda (September 1, 2021). "Sounders announce Freddy Juarez as new assistant coach". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2021. Evans, Jayda (January 24, 2022). "Former Sounders player Andy Rose 'over the moon' to now be a Sounders assistant coach". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on February 16, 2022. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Evans, Jayda (August 13, 2021). "Sounders notebook: Brian Schmetzer looking to fill coaching vacancies soon; Nouhou returns to training". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. "Tom Dutra Named Goalkeeper Coach" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. December 29, 2008. Archived from the original on March 18, 2009. Retrieved November 11, 2009. "Technical Staff". Seattle Sounders FC. February 15, 2014. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. "Seattle Hires Henderson as Technical Director" (Press release). Sounders FC. January 24, 2008. Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Evans, Jayda (April 1, 2021). "Sounders formally announce Craig Waibel as new VP and sporting director". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 20, 2021. Retrieved April 2, 2021. Mayers, Joshua (March 27, 2012). "Furlough day (Tuesday links)". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 9, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. "Longtime Seahawks VP moves to MLS team". Puget Sound Business Journal. March 24, 2008. Archived from the original on March 28, 2009. Retrieved March 30, 2008. Evans, Jayda (February 16, 2023). "Notebook: Sounders' brass address Providence criticism; Bruce Lee kit sales reach $50,000". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 17, 2023. Silverman, Alex (February 16, 2023). "New Sounders President of Business Operations Hugh Weber to lead club's growth strategy". Sports Business Journal. Retrieved February 16, 2023. "Peter Tomozawa moves from Sounders executive to SEA 2026 CEO". The Seattle Times. February 13, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Erb, George (May 20, 2010). "Sounders named pro sports team of the year". Puget Sound Business Journal. Archived from the original on May 24, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "Seattle Sounders FC recognized as the 2010 professional sports team of the year". Seattle Sounders FC. May 20, 2010. Archived from the original on September 14, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2011. Erb, George (December 2, 2009). "Leiweke named PSBJ Executive of the Year". Puget Sound Business Journal. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved February 6, 2011. Mayers, Joshua (January 15, 2012). "Sounders' Gary Wright named Seattle sports executive of year". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved January 30, 2012. Condotta, Bob (January 25, 2012). "Keller, Polk, Vandersloot win Seattle Sports Star of Year awards". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved January 30, 2012. Smith, Chris (August 19, 2015). "Major League Soccer's Most Valuable Teams". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 20, 2015. Retrieved August 22, 2015. Boehm, Charles (February 14, 2019). "Seattle Sounders become North America's 1st carbon-neutral pro soccer team". MLSsoccer.com. Retrieved November 18, 2022. "Sounders FC Unveils Second Team Sounders FC 2". SoundersFC.com (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. October 14, 2014. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved September 24, 2015. Lester, Justin (March 21, 2015). "Sounders FC 2 debuts with thrilling 4–2 victory over Sacramento Republic FC". Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved September 24, 2015. Baker, Geoff (May 6, 2017). "Sounders and Rainiers baseball team reach deal on soccer-specific stadium in Tacoma to host USL team". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Miles, Todd (November 1, 2017). "Sounders 2 coming to Tacoma 2 years early – and to Cheney Stadium". The News Tribune. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Baker, Geoff (January 30, 2019). "Sounders' second-division squad rebrands as Tacoma Defiance". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 31, 2019. Retrieved March 18, 2019. Evans, Jayda (December 19, 2021). "OL Reign's departure to Seattle leaves Defiance's future in Tacoma a question mark". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 26, 2023. "Sounders FC Youth Academy Teams to Join U.S. Soccer Development". Seattle Sounders FC. February 5, 2010. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Mondello, Joseph (November 22, 2017). "Acadmey Snapshot: Young Seattle Sounders thriving in early USSDA season". Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on November 23, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. "Seattle Sounders extend their youth network with more affiliations". Seattle Sounders FC. June 24, 2016. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. "Seattle Sounders FC agrees to youth affiliation with Central California Aztecs". Seattle Sounders FC. June 23, 2016. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. "Seattle Sounders sign Henry Wingo and Seyi Adekoya as Homegrown Players". Seattle Sounders FC. January 18, 2017. Archived from the original on May 17, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. "Sounders FC Aligns With U-23 PDL Franchise". Seattle Sounders FC. January 25, 2013. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Billings, Jon (June 12, 2014). "Jordan Morris returns, active for Sounders U-23". The News Tribune. Archived from the original on June 30, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. "Sounders U23 to re-brand". Seattle Sounders U-23. January 11, 2020. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Tesfatsion, Master (August 9, 2012). "U.S. goes for Olympic gold as women's pro soccer fails to catch on at home". The Seattle Times. p. C1. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. "Sounders Women to re-brand". Sounders Women. January 11, 2020. Archived from the original on January 22, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Mayers, Joshua (February 22, 2011). "Sounders FC to field team at Beach Soccer Club World Cup". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on October 27, 2018. Retrieved October 30, 2022. "Al Ahli take on giants". Khaleej Times. May 6, 2012. Retrieved October 30, 2022. "Major League Soccer package on Apple TV to launch on Feb. 1". USA Today. Associated Press. November 16, 2022. Retrieved November 24, 2022. "Television Broadcasts". Seattle Sounders FC. February 28, 2014. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Clark, Dave (December 9, 2013). "Sounders moving local broadcasts to Fox's Q13". Sounder at Heart. SB Nation. Archived from the original on February 21, 2019. Retrieved February 20, 2019. "Sounders FC announces new broadcast talent, regional broadcast details" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. February 10, 2016. Archived from the original on September 30, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. "Sounders FC announces complete regional broadcast lineup for 2019" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. February 20, 2019. Archived from the original on February 21, 2019. Retrieved February 20, 2019. Spangler, Todd (February 28, 2018). "YouTube TV Nabs Exclusive Streaming Rights to Seattle Sounders Games, Its Second MLS Deal". Variety. Archived from the original on May 5, 2018. Retrieved March 25, 2018. Holt, Kris (August 18, 2020). "Amazon Prime will stream select Sounders matches". Engadget. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved August 18, 2020. Evans, Jayda (February 23, 2023). "Sounders broadcasts are changing in 2023. Here's how to watch and what to know before the MLS season". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 5, 2023. "Radio Programming". Seattle Sounders FC. February 14, 2014. Archived from the original on July 29, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Pentz, Matt (February 10, 2016). "Seattle Sounders unveil new play-by-play announcers, release regional broadcast details". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Brewer, Jerry (July 22, 2008). "Sounders find voice: Kevin Calabro". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved July 22, 2008. Romero, José Miguel (April 27, 2009). "Games through June 28 sold out, and if Sounders FC wins tomorrow". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on May 1, 2009. Retrieved November 6, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (February 9, 2010). "BBC vet Arlo White, 36, to succeed Kevin Calabro as the Sounders play-by-play broadcaster". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 10, 2010. Mayers, Joshua (January 10, 2012). "Sounders hire announcers Ross Fletcher, Kasey Keller". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved January 21, 2012. Pentz, Matt (October 22, 2015). "Seattle Sounders broadcaster Ross Fletcher to leave club at the end of this season". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Oshan, Jeremiah (February 12, 2016). "Trying to understand the frustration around Sounders new announcers". Sounder at Heart. SB Nation. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. "Roster". Seattle Sounders FC. Retrieved February 22, 2024. "Sounders FC Front Office". Seattle Sounders FC. Archived from the original on June 17, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2021. "Trophies by MLS club". MLSsoccer.com. January 1, 2018. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved January 30, 2019. "2023 Fact and Record Book". Major League Soccer. February 2023. p. 27. Archived from the original on March 14, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2023. "Supporters' Shield Standings". MLSsoccer.com. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Major League Soccer (2023), pp. 31–44. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMajor_League_Soccer2023 (help) Major League Soccer (2023), p. 175. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMajor_League_Soccer2023 (help) Major League Soccer (2023), pp. 179–182. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMajor_League_Soccer2023 (help) "Squad: Seattle Sounders FC". Soccerway. Opta Sports. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Kennedy, Paul (September 15, 2017). "Atlanta United sets sights on U.S. pro soccer record". Soccer America. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Kennedy, Paul (October 23, 2017). "Crowd Count: MLS tops 22,000 mark for first time". Soccer America. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Kennedy, Paul (October 29, 2018). "Behind the numbers: MLS average attendance down, but ticket revenues jump almost 10 percent". Soccer America. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Kennedy, Paul (October 8, 2019). "MLS average attendance falls, ticket revenues increase again". Soccer America. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Mather, Victor (October 29, 2020). "In M.L.S., the Pandemic Changes the Playoff Math". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020. Retrieved March 16, 2023. "2020 Major League Soccer regular season: Points-per-game standings". ESPN. November 8, 2020. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2023. "MLS is Back Tournament Competition Guidelines". Major League Soccer. June 10, 2020. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Straus, Brian (July 20, 2021). "U.S. Soccer Cancels Open Cup for Second Straight Year, Sets 2022 Plan". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2023. "MLS All-Star Game, Leagues Cup and Campeones Cup canceled for 2020". MLSsoccer.com. May 19, 2020. Archived from the original on November 23, 2022. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Major League Soccer (2023), p. 170. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMajor_League_Soccer2023 (help) Evans, Jayda (March 12, 2020). "Due to coronavirus concerns, Sounders cancel all operations at practice facility after MLS season suspension". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Jude, Adam (March 11, 2021). "Mariners, Sounders, OL Reign approved to welcome fans back to home games after COVID-19 shutdown". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Suggs, Donnell (January 7, 2022). "Heading into 2022, Atlanta United outdrawing even popular European clubs". Atlanta Business Chronicle. Archived from the original on January 7, 2022. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Evans, Jayda (June 24, 2021). "Sounders announce plans to fully reopen fan seating capacity at Lumen Field beginning July 7". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Kennedy, Paul (October 13, 2022). "Crowd Count: MLS attendance tops 10 million for first time". Soccer America. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved March 16, 2023. "Seattle Sounders FC Performance Stats – 2023–24". ESPN. Retrieved November 27, 2023. "2022 FIFA Club World Cup – Seattle Sounders FC: Fixtures". FIFA. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Kennedy, Paul (October 22, 2023). "MLS breaks attendance record". Soccer America. Retrieved November 27, 2023. Major League Soccer (2023), p. 236. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFMajor_League_Soccer2023 (help) "Sounders FC Re-Signs Forward Fredy Montero" (Press release). Seattle Sounders FC. December 14, 2022. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2023. "Player Stats: Seattle Sounders FC". Major League Soccer. Retrieved December 11, 2023. "Squad: Seattle Sounders FC". Soccerway. Opta Sports. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Seattle Sounders FC. Official website Portals:  Association football  United States