The 2016 World Cup of Hockey (abbreviated WCH2016) was an international ice hockey tournament. It was the third installment of the National Hockey League (NHL)-sanctioned competition, 12 years after the second World Cup of Hockey in 2004. It was held from September 17 to September 29 at Air Canada Centre in Toronto, Ontario. Canada won the championship, defeating Team Europe in the best-of-three final. The teams were officially announced on September 10, 2015, by the International Ice Hockey Federation. The teams were:  Canada (24-and-over players) — host  Czech Republic  Finland  Russia  Sweden  United States (24-and-over players) Europe (Players from European nations not already represented in the tournament.) North America (23-and-under players) The national anthem for each team playing was played before the start of each game. However, there were two exceptions: no anthem was played for Team Europe because of the team's multiple national representatives, while both "The Star-Spangled Banner" and "O Canada" were played before games Team North America played. Team Europe players wore badges with their respective nations' flags on their jerseys. Each team's roster was limited to twenty skaters (forwards and defencemen) and three goaltenders. All eight participating teams submitted their initial roster of sixteen players on March 2, 2016. Each one of the national teams' players wore a customized jersey manufactured by Adidas. In contrast to previous World Cups, all contests in the 2016 World Cup were held at the same site. All games are Eastern Daylight Time (UTC−04:00). Start date: September 8, 2016. Source: National Hockey League All games are Eastern Daylight Time (UTC−04:00). Source: National Hockey League Rules for classification: If two teams tie, then the result of their game breaks the tie. Source: National Hockey League Rules for classification: If two teams tie, then the result of their game breaks the tie. All times are local, Eastern Daylight Time (UTC−04:00). The final was played in a best-of-three format. List depicts skaters sorted by points, then goals. Source: WCH2016 Only goaltenders who played greater than or equal to one-third of the team's minutes are included. Source: WCH2016 In Canada, Rogers Communications held broadcast rights to the tournament; the tournament was aired by Sportsnet in English and TVA Sports in French. Similarly to its sub-licensing agreement for Hockey Night in Canada, the semi-finals and finals were simulcast by CBC Television. Although it was initially reported that Rogers was allowed to match competing bids for the rights (such as by Bell Media and ESPN's TSN) per its holding of exclusive national media rights to the NHL in Canada, NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman denied that there was such a rule, and that the bidding process was "competitive". In the United States, the tournament was broadcast by ESPN and ESPN Deportes in English and Spanish, respectively; NBC Sports, the national rightsholder of the NHL in the United States, passed on the tournament due to scheduling conflicts with various events being broadcast by its networks in that period of time. ESPN also broadcast the tournament for the Spanish-speaking Latin American countries, the Commonwealth Caribbean, the Pacific Rim and Brazil. In Russia, the tournament was broadcast by Channel One and Match TV. In Finland, the tournament was broadcast by Viasat Sport and Nelonen. In Sweden, Denmark and Norway, the tournament was broadcast by Viasat Sport. In the Czech Republic, the tournament and exhibition games were broadcast by public channel ČT Sport and in Slovakia by Markíza. In Germany, the tournament was broadcast by Sport 1. In Poland, the tournament was broadcast by public channel TVP Sport.[citation needed] The broadcasts incorporated the use of technology by British firm Supponor to allow for the digital replacement of advertising on the rink boards on selected camera shots. These allowed a single advertiser at a time to brand the entire board, localization of advertising in different media markets, and other customized graphics to be substituted onto the boards. Advertisements are replaced when cameras shots are switched to minimize distractions. The NHL selected seven of their referees and seven linesmen to officiate the tournament. Ice hockey portal Canada portal 2016 IIHF World Championship 1996 World Cup of Hockey 2004 World Cup of Hockey National Hockey League International Ice Hockey Federation World Cup of Hockey 2016 http://www.wch2016.com official website "NHL, NHLPA, IIHF launch World Cup". iihf.com. International Ice Hockey Federation. September 10, 2015. Retrieved September 10, 2015. "World Cup of Hockey Need-to-Know: Tournament rules - Sportsnet.ca". Matt Higgins (September 18, 2016). "With No Flag, Team Europe's Players Rally Around Themselves at World Cup of Hockey". The New York Times. Retrieved January 3, 2021. "Jerseys unveiled for World Cup of Hockey". NHL.com. March 3, 2016. Retrieved September 24, 2016. "2016 World Cup of Hockey schedule announced". nhl.com. NHL Public Relations. September 9, 2015. Retrieved September 10, 2015. "Sportsnet announces World Cup of Hockey broadcast schedule". Sportsnet.ca. Retrieved September 24, 2016. "World Cup of Hockey: Watch semis and final on CBC Sports". CBC Sports. Retrieved September 24, 2016. "Why NHL chose ESPN, Sportsnet for World Cup of Hockey". Yahoo! Sports. Yahoo! Canada Inc. Retrieved July 29, 2015. "Sportsnet acquires rights to World Cup of Hockey". Sportsnet.ca. Rogers Digital Media. Retrieved July 29, 2015. "NHL hopes to score with virtual advertisements on rink boards". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved September 24, 2016. "Referees and Linesmen Announced for 2016 World Cup of Hockey". Scouting the Refs. Retrieved September 21, 2016. Official website 2016 World Cup of Hockey Schedule & Results on ESPN