Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. (Korean: 삼성전자; Hanja: 三星電子; RR: Samseong Jeonja; lit. Tristar Electronics; sometimes shortened to SEC and stylized as SΛMSUNG) is a South Korean multinational major appliance and consumer electronics corporation headquartered in Yeongtong-gu, Suwon, South Korea. It is currently the pinnacle of the Samsung chaebol, accounting for 70% of the group's revenue in 2012. Samsung Electronics has played a key role in the group's corporate governance due to cross ownership. Samsung Electronics has assembly plants and sales networks in 74 countries and employs more than 270,000 people. It is majority-owned by foreign investors. As of 2019,[update] Samsung Electronics is the world's second-largest technology company by revenue, and its market capitalization stood at US$520.65 billion, the 12th largest in the world. Samsung has been the world's largest manufacturer of mobile phones and smartphones since 2011, and is best known for its Samsung Galaxy brand. It has developed 5G-capable smartphones, including the Galaxy S23 and foldable phones, including the Galaxy Z Fold 5. The company is a major vendor of tablet computers, particularly its Android-powered Samsung Galaxy Tab collection, and is regarded for developing the phablet market with the Samsung Galaxy Note family of devices. Samsung has also been the world's largest television manufacturer since 2006. The company is a major manufacturer of electronic components such as lithium-ion batteries, semiconductors, image sensors, camera modules, and displays for clients such as Apple, Sony, HTC, and Nokia. It is also the world's largest semiconductor memory manufacturer and, from 2017 to 2018, had been the largest semiconductor company in the world, briefly dethroning Intel, the decades-long champion. In 2012, Kwon Oh-hyun was appointed the company's CEO. He announced in October 2017 that he would resign in March 2018, citing an "unprecedented crisis". The company had three CEOs (Ki Nam Kim, Hyun Suk Kim, and Dong-Jin Koh) from March 2018 until December 2021, when the business units were reorganized and they were replaced by Kyung Kye-Hyun and Han Jong-hee. It has also had a separate regional CEO, HC Hong, who led the business in Southwest Asia since 2015 and then moved to Latin America in 2020. Samsung Electric Industries was established as an industrial part of Samsung Group on 19 January 1969 in Suwon, South Korea. At the time, Samsung Group was known to the South Korean public as a trading company specialized in fertilizers and sweeteners. Despite the lack of technology and resources, falling shorter even than the domestic competitors, Samsung Group improved its footing in the manufacturing industry by cooperating with the Japanese companies, a decision that led to a significant amount of anti-Japanese public outcry and huge backlashes from the competitors fearing the outright subordination of the industry by the Japanese. The strategy was able to take off only after the government and Samsung declared that the company would exclusively focus on exports. Toshio Iue, the founder of Sanyo, played a role as an advisor to Lee Byung-chul, Samsung's founder, who was a novice in the electronics business. In December of the same year, Samsung Electric established a joint venture named Samsung-Sanyo Electric with Sanyo and Sumitomo Corporation. This is the direct predecessor of today's Samsung Electronics. The joint venture's early products were electronic and electrical appliances including televisions, calculators, refrigerators, air conditioners, and washing machines. In 1970, Samsung established the joint venture Samsung-NEC with Japan's NEC Corporation and Sumitomo Corporation to manufacture home appliances and audiovisual devices. Samsung-NEC later became Samsung SDI, the group's display and battery business unit. In 1973, Samsung and Sanyo created Samsung-Sanyo Parts, the predecessor of Samsung Electro-Mechanics. By 1981, Samsung Electric had manufactured over 10 million black-and-white televisions. In 1974, Samsung Group expanded into the semiconductor business by acquiring Korea Semiconductor, which was on the verge of bankruptcy while building one of the first chip-making facilities in the country at the time. Soon after, Korea Telecommunications, an electronic switching system producer and a Samsung Group company, took over the semiconductor business and became Samsung Semiconductor & Communications. In February 1983, Lee, along with the board of the Samsung industry and corporation agreement and help by sponsoring the event, made an announcement later dubbed the "Tokyo declaration", in which he declared that Samsung intended to become a dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) vendor. One year later, Samsung announced that it had successfully developed a 64 kb DRAM, reducing the technological gap between the companies from first-world countries and the young electronics maker from more than a decade to approximately four years. In the process, Samsung used technologies imported from Micron Technology of the U.S for the development of DRAM and Sharp Corporation of Japan for its SRAM and ROM. In 1988, Samsung Electric Industries merged with Samsung Semiconductor & Communications to form Samsung Electronics, as before that, they had not been one company and had not been a leading corporation together, but they were not rivals, as they had been in talks for a time until they finally merged. In the 1980s and early 1990s, Samsung sold personal computers under the Leading Technology brand. However, the equipment was manufactured by Samsung, and the FCC filings from this period typically refer to Samsung products. In 1988, Samsung Electronics launched its first mobile phone in the South Korean market. Sales were initially poor, and by the early 1990s, Motorola held a market share of over 60 percent in the country's mobile phone market compared to just 10 percent for Samsung. Samsung's mobile phone division also struggled with poor quality and inferior products until the mid-1990s, and exit from the sector was a frequent topic of discussion within the company. Lee Kun-Hee decided that Samsung needed to change its strategy. The company shelved the production of many under-selling product lines and instead pursued a process of designing and manufacturing components and investing in new technologies for other companies. In addition, Samsung outlined a 10-year plan to shrug off its image as a "budget brand" and to challenge Sony as the world's largest consumer electronics manufacturer. It was hoped that, in this way, Samsung would gain an understanding of how products are made and give a technological lead sometime in the future. This patient vertical integration strategy of manufacturing components has borne fruit for Samsung in the late 2000s. A complementary brand leadership strategy was also initiated by chairman Lee when he declared 1996 to be the "Year of Design Revolution" at Samsung. His objective was to build Samsung design capabilities as a competitive asset and transform the company into a global brand-design leader. However, this effort required major changes in corporate culture, processes, and systems. By integrating a comprehensive design management system and strategy into the corporate culture, Samsung was successful in developing an award-winning product design portfolio by the late 1990s, resulting in significant brand equity growth. As Samsung shifted away from consumer markets, the company devised a plan to sponsor major sporting events. One such sponsorship was for the 1998 Winter Olympics held in Nagano, Japan. As a chaebol, Samsung Group wielded wealth that allowed the company to invest and develop new technology rather than build products at a level that would not have a detrimental impact on Samsung's finances. Samsung had a number of technological breakthroughs, particularly in the field of memory which are commonplace in most electrical products today. This includes the world's first 64MB DRAM in 1992, 256 MB DRAM in 1994, and 1GB DRAM in 1996. In 2004, Samsung developed the world's first 8GB NAND flash memory chip, and a manufacturing deal was struck with Apple in 2005. A deal to supply Apple with memory chips was sealed in 2005, and Samsung remains a key supplier of Apple components as of October 2013, manufacturing the A7 processors inside the iPhone 5S model. From 2000 to 2003, Samsung posted net earnings higher than five-percent; this was at a time when 16 out of the 30 top South Korean companies ceased operating in the wake of the unprecedented crisis. In 2005, Samsung Electronics surpassed its Japanese rival Sony for the first time to become the world's twentieth-largest and most popular consumer brand, as measured by Interbrand. In 2007, Samsung Electronics became the world's second-largest smartphone manufacturer, overtaking Motorola for the first time. In 2009, Samsung achieved total revenues of US$117.4 billion, overtaking Hewlett-Packard to become the world's largest technology company measured by sales. In 2009 and 2010, the US and EU fined the company, along with eight other memory chip manufacturers, for its part in a price-fixing scheme that occurred between 1999 and 2002. Other companies fined included Infineon Technologies, Elpida Memory, and Micron Technology. In December 2010, the EU granted immunity to Samsung Electronics for acting as an informant during the investigation (LG Display, AU Optronics, Chimei InnoLux, Chunghwa Picture Tubes, and HannStar Display were implicated as a result of the company's intelligence). Despite its consistent expansion, Samsung, along with its chairman Lee Kun-hee, has developed a reputation for insecurity regarding its financial stability and the potential for future crises to arise. After returning from a temporary retirement period in March 2010, Kun-hee stated that "Samsung Electronics' future is not guaranteed because most of our flagship products will be obsolete in 10 years from now." The company has set an ambitious goal of reaching $400 billion in annual revenues within ten years. The company has 24 research-and-development centers around the world, and since the early 2000s and in Vision 2020, Samsung has emphasized technical research and development. In April 2011, Samsung Electronics sold its HDD commercial operations to Seagate Technology for approximately US$1.4 billion. The payment was composed of 45.2 million Seagate shares (9.6 percent of shares), worth US$687.5 million, and a cash sum for the remainder. In May 2013, Samsung announced that it had finally managed to test speed-enhanced fifth generation (5G) technology successfully. In April 2013, Samsung Electronics' new entry into its Galaxy S series smartphone range, the Galaxy S4 was made available for retail. Released as the upgrade of the best-selling Galaxy S III, the S4 was sold in some international markets with the company's Exynos processor. In July 2013, Samsung Electronics forecasted weaker than expected profits for its April to June quarter. While analysts expected around 10.1 trillion won, Samsung Electronics estimated an operating profit of ₩9.5 trillion (equivalent to ₩9.98 trillion or US$8.83 billion in 2017). During the same month, Samsung acquired the media streaming device manufacturer Boxee for a reported $30 million. Samsung's mobile business chief Shin Jong-Kyun stated to the Korea Times on 11 September 2013 that Samsung Electronics will further develop its presence in China to strengthen its market position in relation to Apple. The Samsung executive also confirmed that a 64-bit smartphone handset will be released to match the ARM-based A7 processor of Apple's iPhone 5S model that was released in September 2013. Due to smartphone sales—especially sales of lower-priced handsets in markets such as India and China—Samsung achieved record earnings in the third quarter of 2013. The operating profit for this period rose to about ₩10.1 trillion (equivalent to ₩10.61 trillion or US$9.38 billion in 2017), a figure that was boosted by memory chip sales to customers such as Apple, Inc. On 14 October 2013, Samsung Electronics publicly apologized for using refurbished components from cheaper desktop computers to fix higher-end products, after the corporation's unethical business practices were exposed on the previous day by MBC TV's current affairs magazine, 2580. In February 2014, Barnes & Noble announced a new Nook color tablet would be released in 2014. In June 2014, Barnes & Noble announced it would be teaming up with Samsung – one of the leaders in Android-based tablets – to develop co-branded color tablets titled the Samsung Galaxy Tab 4 Nook; the devices will feature Samsung's hardware, including a 7-inch display, and customized Nook software from Barnes & Noble. The first Galaxy Tab 4 Nook will begin selling in the US in August 2014, with Nook focusing on the software and content, and Samsung focusing on the hardware. The product specs posted by Samsung indicate that, in contrast to the premium quality enhanced eReaders launched in 2012 (the NOOK HD and HD+, which "had screens and CPUs comparable to the best mid-level and premium tablets), the more budget-like features of the Samsung Galaxy Tab 4 Nook will be designed for a lower market tier (Android 4.4.2 KitKat on a 1.2 GHz quad-core Snapdragon CPU with 1.5GB RAM, Wifi, and Bluetooth, in addition to a 1.2MP front-facing camera and a 3MP rear camera, screen resolution of 1280 x 800, and a $199 retail price; roughly $80 more than comparable tablets that don't carry a Samsung brand)." Samsung provided sponsorship for the 86th Academy Awards ceremony (held on 4 March 2014) and, due to the use of the Samsung Galaxy Note smartphone product by host Ellen DeGeneres in a group selfie photograph that became an online viral phenomenon, the corporation donated US$3 million to two charitable organizations selected by DeGeneres. The official Samsung statement explained: "... we wanted to make a donation to Ellen's charities of choice: St Jude's and the Humane Society. Samsung will donate 1.5 million dollars to each charity." On 17 April 2014, Samsung announced it was discontinuing its ebook store effective 1 July 2014 and had partnered with Amazon to introduce the Kindle for Samsung app, that will permit Galaxy device users using Android 4.0 and up to buy and read content from Amazon's catalog of periodicals and ebooks, and free book service, Samsung Book Deals, that will allow users of the co-branded app to choose one free ebook monthly from a selection provided by Amazon. In reporting on Barnes & Noble's 5 June 2014 announcement that the bookseller would be teaming up with Samsung to develop Nook tablets, the Associated Press noted: "Barnes & Noble says it will continue to make and sell its $99 Nook Glowlight [sic] e-readers and provide customer support." "The company also says it is moving its Nook employees out of its Palo Alto, Calif., offices to save money. Employees are expected to move to a smaller space in nearby Santa Clara, Calif., by July." In Q1 2015, Samsung's profit dropped 39% to USD4.35 billion due to heavier smartphone competition from Apple's iPhone 6 and 6 Plus, as well as a slew of Android competitors. In August 2014, Samsung announced that they had reached an agreement to acquire SmartThings. The acquisition was seen as a move by Samsung to move into the internet of things space. On 27 March 2015, Samsung announced that they sold their headquarters in Roppongi T-Cube to Mitsui Fudosan with staff already relocated to Iidabashi. In May 2015, Samsung announced a partnership with IKEA, in accordance with the Wireless Power Consortium, to co-develop furniture that would allow Qi inductive charging at the Mobile World Congress. In June, Samsung established a dedicated LFD business, Samsung Display Solutions, catering to the company's SMART range of LED products. The company's SMART range of LED displays include Signage, Hospitality Display, TV, LED, Cloud Display, and Accessories. The company caters to the following industries: Retail, Corporate, Hospitality, and Transportation. On 16 June 2016, Samsung Electronics announced that it agreed to acquire cloud-computing company Joyent. They stated that the acquisition allowed Samsung to grow its cloud-based services for its smartphones and Internet-connected devices. On 14 November 2016, Samsung Electronics announced an agreement to buy American automotive equipment manufacturer Harman International Industries for US$8 billion. On 10 March 2017, the acquisition was completed. On 6 April 2017, Samsung Electronics reported that financials were up for the company in the quarter. The year prior, "memory chips and flexible displays accounted for about 68% of Samsung's operating profit in the final quarter of 2016, a change from previous years when the smartphone business was the main contributor." On 2 May 2017, Samsung has been given permission from the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, and Transport of Korea to start testing a self-driving car technology. According to the Korea Herald, the company will be using a customized Hyundai car for the tests. In May 2019, for the first time in Europe, 8K demonstration content was received via satellite without the need for a separate external receiver or decoder using a Samsung TV. At the 2019 SES Industry Days conference at Betzdorf, Luxembourg broadcast quality 8K content (with a resolution of 7680x4320 pixels at 50 frames/s) was encoded using a Spin Digital HEVC encoder (at a data rate of 70 Mbit/s), uplinked to a single 33 MHz transponder on SES' Astra 28.2°E satellites and the downlink received and displayed on a Samsung 82in Q950RB production model TV. In May 2020, Lee Jae-yong, the executive chairman of Samsung Electronics, stated that his children would not inherit large leadership positions in the company, which would overturn the chaebol system in this division of Samsung. Samsung proposed a $17 billion plan to build a chip-making factory in either Arizona, Texas, or New York in 2021. The plan is in part a result of the United States allocating billions of dollars to grow domestic chip manufacturing as part of the National Defence Authorization Act passed in January to reduce the country's reliance on Taiwan, China, and South Korea. The plant would employ around 1,900 people and would be in operation by October 2022. On 24 November 2021, Samsung announced that it would build a new semiconductor manufacturing facility in Taylor, Texas. The plant is estimated to be a $17 billion investment and will help boost the production of advanced logic semiconductors, reportedly as advanced as 3 nanometers. On 7 December 2021, Samsung Electronics announced the merger of the mobile and consumer electronics divisions. The company also replaced the leaders of its three business units. Kyung Kye-Hyun will become the CEO of Samsung's powerhouse components business while Han Jong-hee will become the new CEO of the combined mobile and consumer electronics business. In late January 2022, Samsung Electronics posted its highest fourth-quarter profit since before the COVID-19 pandemic, largely because of strong chip sales amid the global semiconductor shortage and a small increase in mobile phone sales. Samsung's operating profit topped $11.5 billion, up 53% from the 2021 fourth-quarter, with the company's chip business responsible for nearly two-thirds of the total profit. In March 2022, amid Russian invasion of Ukraine Samsung pledged $5 million to the Ukrainian Red Cross Society and other charities in addition to $1 million worth of personal electronics donated to the people of Ukraine. On 4 March 2022, Samsung suspended the shipments of all its products to Russia because of the Russian aggression toward Ukraine. Samsung plans to invest about 300 trillion won (US$230.8 billion; £189.6 billion) in five chip plants over 20 years, supporting the South Korean government's efforts to create a semiconductor manufacturing center in the country. In 2024, Samsung demonstrated an artificial intelligence (AI) smart home robot called Ballie. Ballie is a round helper on wheels that has a projector for a face. The robot can help out at home by turning on smart appliances, beaming video calls and workout clips on to walls, and keeping an eye on pets while you are out. It also uses AI to learn your habits and offer more personalization. Samsung has launched a partnership with British Gas, integrating their services into the SmartThings app to reduce energy consumption. British Gas will in turn incorporate Samsung heat pumps into its offerings for British households as part of efforts to support reaching net zero targets by 2050. On 20 May 2022, President Biden met with South Korean President Yoon Suk-yeol at the Samsung Electronics' semiconductor complex in Pyeongtaek, South Korea. The two leaders spoke of the importance of the semiconductor industry and on strengthening the technological innovations between the two countries. In mid-November 2021, Samsung Electronics was ranked second in the 'Best Global Brands' by YouGov a market research firm, after placing fourth in the 2020 ranking. In June 2022, PricewaterhouseCoopers ranked Samsung Electronics 22nd on their global top 100 companies by market capitalization. The company slid seven notches from the 2021 rankings due to global inflation, the war in Ukraine, and global monetary tightening. Samsung Electronics logo, used from late 1969 until replaced in 1979 Samsung Electronics logo, used from late 1980 until replaced in 1992 Samsung Electronics logo, used from late 1993 until replaced in 2013 Samsung's wordmark and current logo of Samsung Electronics, in use since 2013 The company focuses on four areas: digital media, semiconductors, telecommunication networks, and LCD digital appliances. The digital-media business area covers computer devices such as laptop computers and laser printers; digital displays such as televisions and computer monitors; consumer entertainment devices such as DVD players, MP3 players, and digital camcorders; home appliances such as refrigerators, air conditioners, air purifiers, washing machines, microwave ovens, vacuum cleaners and robot vacuum cleaners. The semiconductor-business area includes semiconductor chips such as SDRAM, SRAM, NAND flash memory; smart cards; mobile application development, mobile application processors; mobile TV receivers; RF transceivers; CMOS Image sensors, Smart Card IC, MP3 IC, DVD/Blu-ray Disc/HD DVD Player SOC, and multi-chip package (MCP). The telecommunication-network-business area includes multi-service DSLAMs and fax machines; cellular devices such as mobile phones, PDA phones, and hybrid devices called mobile intelligent terminals (MITs); and satellite receivers. The LCD business area focuses on producing TFT-LCD and organic light-emitting diode (OLED) panels for laptops, desktop monitors, and televisions. Samsung Print was established in 2009 as a separate entity to focus on B2B sales and released a broad range of multifunctional devices, printers, and more. As of 2018, Samsung sold its printing business to HP. Samsung Electronics produces LCD and LED panels, mobile phones, memory chips, NAND flash, solid-state drives, televisions, digital cinemas screen, and laptops and many more products. The company previously produced hard-drives and printers. Samsung consistently invests in innovation. In 2021, the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)'s annual World Intellectual Property Indicators report ranked Samsung's number of patent applications published under the PCT System as 2nd in the world, with 3,093 patent applications being published during 2020. This position is up from their previous ranking as 3rd in 2019 with 2,334 applications. By 2004 Samsung was the world's-largest manufacturer of OLEDs, with a 40 percent market share worldwide and as of 2018 has a 98% share of the global AMOLED market. The company generated $100.2 million out of the total $475 million revenues in the global OLED market in 2006. As of 2006, it held more than 600 American patents and more than 2,800 international patents, making it the largest owner of AMOLED technology patents. Samsung's current AMOLED smartphones use its Super AMOLED trademark, with the Samsung Wave S8500 and Samsung i9000 Galaxy S being launched in June 2010. In January 2011, it announced its Super AMOLED Plus displays – which offer several advances over the older Super AMOLED displays – real stripe matrix (50 percent more sub pixels), thinner form factor, brighter image and an 18 percent reduction in energy consumption. In October 2007, Samsung introducing a ten-millimeter thick, 40-inch LCD television panel, followed in October 2008 by the world's first 7.9-mm panel. Samsung developed panels for 24-inch LCD monitors (3.5 mm) and 12.1-inch laptops (1.64 mm). In 2009, Samsung succeeded in developing a panel for forty-inch LED televisions, with a thickness of 3.9 millimeters (0.15 inch). Dubbed the "Needle Slim", the panel is as thick (or thin) as two coins put together. This is about a twelfth of the conventional LCD panel whose thickness is approximately 50 millimeters (1.97 inches). While reducing the thickness substantially, the company maintained the performance of previous models, including Full HD 1080p resolution, 120 Hz refresh rate, and 5000:1 contrast ratio. On 6 September 2013, Samsung launched its 55-inch curved OLED TV (model KE55S9C) in the United Kingdom with John Lewis. In October 2013, Samsung disseminated a press release for its curved display technology with the Galaxy Round smartphone model. The press release described the product as the "world's first commercialized full HD Super AMOLED flexible display". The manufacturer explains that users can check information such as time and battery life when the home screen is off, and can receive information from the screen by tilting the device. In 2020, Samsung Display said it was exiting the LCD business. Samsung's mobile cell business began with a car phone in 1984, while its first handheld mobile phone called the SH-100 was made in 1988. It expanded to other markets during the 1990s. Its first smartphone was the Samsung SPH-i300 in 2001. During the early 2000s Samsung popularised the clamshell ("flip phone") design, and the SGH-T100 was the first ever "true color" mobile phone and the firm's first to sell over 10 million handsets. In the mid-2000s the SGH-D500 popularised the slider form factor, and later slider products such as the E250 were hits. In 2006 Samsung's X820 with a depth of 6.9 mm was the thinnest phone, and for many years its successor U100 would remain the skinniest at just 5.9 mm. In 2007 it launched the slate style touchscreen phone F700 which would precede its increasingly relevant touch phones such as Tocco and Omnia. Samsung overtook declining Motorola to become the world's second largest mobile phone marker during 2007. Presently, Samsung's flagship mobile handset line is the Samsung Galaxy S series of smartphones, which many consider a direct competitor of the Apple iPhone. It was initially launched in Singapore, Malaysia and South Korea in June 2010, followed by the United States in July. It sold more than one million units within the first 45 days on sale in the United States. While many other handset manufacturers focused on one or two operating systems, Samsung for a time used several of them: Symbian, Windows Phone, Linux-based LiMo, and Samsung's proprietary TouchWiz, Bada and Tizen. By 2013 Samsung had dropped all operating systems except Android phone and Windows Phone. That year Samsung released at least 43 Android phones or tablets and two Windows Phones. At the end of the third quarter of 2010, the company had surpassed the 70 million unit mark in shipped phones, giving it a global market share of 22 percent, trailing Nokia by 12 percent. Overall, the company sold 280 million mobile phones in 2010, corresponding to a market share of 20.2 percent. The company overtook Apple in worldwide smartphone sales during the third quarter 2011, with a total market share of 23.8 percent, compared to Apple's 14.6 percent share. Samsung became the world's largest smartphone manufacturer in 2012, with the sales of 95 million in the first quarter. During the third quarter of 2013, Samsung's smartphone sales improved in emerging markets such as India and the Middle East, where cheaper handsets were most popular. As of October 2013, the company offers 40 smartphone models on its US website. In 2019, Samsung announced that it has ended production of mobile phones in China, due to lack of Chinese demand. As of 2019 Samsung employs over 200,000 employees in the Hanoi-area of Vietnam to produce Smartphones, while offscouring some manufacturing to China and manufacturing large portions of its phones in India. In May 2022, Samsung Electronics announced the company had expanded the Samsung Knox enterprise mobile security platform with the introduction of Samsung Knox Guard. It allows companies to quickly make phones unusable to potentially deter theft and reduce risk of fraud and data breaches. Samsung Electronics has been the world's largest memory chip manufacturer since 1993, and the largest semiconductor company since 2017. Samsung Semiconductor division manufactures various semiconductor devices, including semiconductor nodes, MOSFET transistors, integrated circuit chips, and semiconductor memory. Since the early 1990s, Samsung Electronics has commercially introduced a number of new memory technologies. They commercially introduced SDRAM (synchronous dynamic random-access memory) in 1992, and later DDR SDRAM (double data rate SDRAM) and GDDR (graphics DDR) SGRAM (synchronous graphics RAM) in 1998. In 2009, Samsung started mass-producing 30 nm-class NAND flash memory, and in 2010 succeeded in mass-producing 30 nm class DRAM and 20 nm class NAND flash, both of which were for the first time in the world. They also commercially introduced TLC (triple-level cell) NAND flash memory in 2010, V-NAND flash in 2013, LPDDR4 SDRAM in 2013, HBM2 in 2016, GDDR6 in January 2018, and LPDDR5 in June 2018. Another area where the company has had significant business in for years is the foundry segment. It had begun investment in the foundry business since 2006, and positioned it as one of the strategic pillars for semiconductor growth. Since then, Samsung has been a leader in semiconductor device fabrication. Samsung began mass-production of a 20 nm class semiconductor manufacturing process in 2010, followed by a 10 nm class FinFET process in 2013, and 7 nm FinFET nodes in 2018. They also began production of the first 5 nm nodes in late 2018, with plans to introduce 3 nm GAAFET nodes by 2021. According to market research firm Gartner, during the second quarter of 2010, Samsung Electronics took the top position in the DRAM segment due to brisk sales of the item on the world market. Gartner analysts said in their report, "Samsung cemented its leading position by taking a 35-percent market share. All the other suppliers had minimal change in their shares." The company took the top slot in the ranking, followed by Hynix, Elpida, and Micron, said Gartner. In 2010, market researcher IC Insights predicted that Samsung would become the world's-biggest semiconductor chip supplier by 2014, surpassing Intel. For the ten-year period from 1999 to 2009, Samsung's compound annual growth rate in semiconductor revenues was 13.5 percent, compared with 3.4 percent for Intel. For 2015, IC Insights and Gartner announced that Samsung was the fourth largest chip manufacturer in the world. Samsung eventually surpassed Intel to become the world's largest semiconductor company in 2017. By the second quarter of 2020 the company had planned to start mass production of 5 nm chips using Extreme ultraviolet lithography (EUV) and aimed to become a leader in EUV process use. On 30 November 2021, it was announced that the company would be producing new auto chips for Volkswagen vehicles. The logic chips will be used in entertainment systems to provide 5G telecommunications to meet the increased demand for high-definition video while traveling. The Xi'an China facility, which has been running since 2014 and it produces approximately 40 percent of Samsung Electronics NAND flash memory chips. In 2016, Samsung also launched to market a 15.36TB SSD with a price tag of US$10,000 using a SAS interface, using a 2.5-inch form factor but with the thickness of 3.5-inch drives. This was the first time a commercially available SSD had more capacity than the largest currently available HDD. In 2018, Samsung introduced to market a 30.72 TB SSD using a SAS interface. Samsung introduced an M.2 NVMe SSD with read speeds of 3500 MB/s and write speeds of 3300 MB/s in the same year. In 2019, Samsung introduced SSDs capable of 8GB/s sequential read and write speeds and 1.5 million IOPS, capable of moving data from damaged chips to undamaged chips, to allow the SSD to continue working normally, albeit at a lower capacity. Samsung's consumer SSD lineup currently consists of the 980 PRO, 970 PRO, 970 EVO plus, 970 EVO, 960 PRO, 960 EVO, 950 PRO, 860 QVO, 860 PRO, 860 EVO, 850 PRO, 850 EVO, and the 750 EVO. The SSDs models beginning with a 9 use an NVM Express interface and the rest use a Serial ATA interface. Samsung also produces consumer portable SSDs using a USB-C USB 3.1 Gen 2 connector. The drives offer read speeds of 1,050MB/s and write speeds of 1,000MB/s and are available as 500GB, 1TB and 2TB models. Like many other SSD producers, Samsung's SSDs use NAND flash memory produced by Samsung Electronics. In the area of storage media, in 2009 Samsung achieved a ten percent world market share, driven by the introduction of a new hard disk drive capable of storing 250Gb per 2.5-inch disk. In 2010, the company started marketing the 320Gb-per-disk HDD, the largest in the industry. In addition, it was focusing more on selling external hard disk drives. Following financial losses, the hard disk division was sold to Seagate in 2011 in return for a 9.6% ownership stake in Seagate. In 2009, Samsung sold around 31 million flat-panel televisions, enabling to it to maintain the world's largest market share for a fourth consecutive year. Samsung launched its first full HD 3D LED television in March 2010. Samsung had showcased the product at the 2010 International Consumer Electronics Show (CES 2010) held in Las Vegas. Samsung sold more than one million 3D televisions within six months of its launch. This is the figure close to what many market researchers forecast for the year's worldwide 3D television sales (1.23 million units). It also debuted the 3D Home Theater (HT-C6950W) that allows the user to enjoy 3D image and surround sound at the same time. With the launch of 3D Home Theater, Samsung became the first company in the industry to have the full line of 3D offerings, including 3D television, 3D Blu-ray player, 3D content, and 3D glasses. In 2007, Samsung introduced the "Internet TV", enabling the viewer to receive information from the Internet while at the same time watching conventional television programming. Samsung later developed "Smart LED TV" (now renamed to "Samsung Smart TV"), which additionally supports downloaded smart television apps. In 2008, the company launched the Power Infolink service, followed in 2009 by a whole new Internet@TV. In 2010, it started marketing the 3D television while unveiling the upgraded Internet@TV 2010, which offers free (or for-fee) download of applications from its Samsung Apps Store, in addition to existing services such as news, weather, stock market, YouTube videos, and movies. Samsung Apps offers for-fee premium services in a few countries including Korea and the United States. The services will be custom-tailored for each region. Samsung plans to offer family-oriented applications such as health care programs and digital picture frames as well as games. Samsung's range of smart TVs include the apps ITV Player and motion controlled games such as Angry Birds. Since 2015, Samsung's proprietary FAST streaming service Samsung TV Plus was pre-installed to the smart TVs. The company started as a budget display monitor brand in the 1980s, producing cathode ray tube (CRT) monitors for computers, from which it then evolved. By the end of the decade, Samsung had become the world's largest monitor manufacturer, selling over 8 million monitors by 1989. During the 1990s to the 2000s, Samsung started producing LCD monitors using TFT technology to which it still emphasizes on the budget market against the competition while at the same time starting to also focus on catering to the middle and upper markets through partnership with brands such as NEC and Sony via a joint venture. As it grew and became more advanced, it later on acquired the joint venture corporations to form the current Samsung OLED and S-LCD Corporation respectively from its former joint venture partners. As of 2015, Samsung smart televisions and smart monitors run an operating system customized from the open-source Linux-based Tizen OS. Given Samsung's high market share in the smart television market, approximately 20% of smart televisions sold worldwide in 2018 run Tizen. In 2019, Samsung announced that they will be bringing the Apple TV app (formally iTunes Movies and TV Shows app) and AirPlay 2 support to its 2019 and 2018 smart TVs (via firmware update). Samsung's Odyssey gaming monitors are designed for professional gamers and gaming enthusiasts. As of 2022, the Odyssey range consists of 4 main series, each with different resolutions, refresh rates and aspect ratios. At the CES 2022, Samsung showed the Odyssey Neo G8, the world's first 4K monitor with a refresh rate of 240 Hz. It features a 32-inch mini LED 1000R curved display with 1,196 local dimming zones that supports HDR with a peak brightness of up to 2,000 nits, and is G-Sync- and FreeSync-certified. It was released on 6 June, 2022, for an MSRP of $1,500. In the past, Samsung produced printers for both consumers and business use, including mono-laser printers, color laser printers, multifunction printers, and enterprise-use high-speed digital multi-function printer models. They exited the printer business and sold their printer division to HP in Fall 2017. In 2010, the company introduced the world's smallest mono-laser printer ML-1660 and color laser multifunction printer CLX-3185. In 2017, Samsung acquired Harman International. Harman makes earbuds under many brand names such as AKG, AMX, Becker, Crown, Harman Kardon, Infinity, JBL, Lexicon, dbx, DigiTech, Mark Levinson, Martin, Revel, Soundcraft, Studer, Arcam, Bang & Olufsen and BSS Audio. Samsung has introduced several models of digital cameras and camcorders including the WB550 camera, the ST550 dual-LCD-mounted camera, and the HMX-H106 (64GB SSD-mounted full HD camcorder). In 2014, the company took the second place in the mirrorless camera segment. Since then, the company has focused more on higher-priced items. In 2010, the company launched the NX10, the next-generation interchangeable lens camera. Samsung entered the MP3 player (digital audio player, DAP) market in 1999 with its Yepp line. In the initial years the company struggled to gain a foothold because of emerging Korean startups iRiver, Cowon and Mpio. However by 2006, it had gained a significant share in the domestic market as well as Russia and parts of the Middle East, South East Asia and Europe. It was also starting to increase penetration in the U.S. (albeit significantly lower than the market leader, Apple). Samsung launched the world's-smallest DivX MP3 player, the R1, in 2009. In 2014, the company announced that it was exiting the laptop market in Europe. In 2015, Samsung announced a proposal for a constellation of 4600 satellites orbiting Earth at 1,400 kilometers (900 mi) altitude that could bring 200 gigabytes per month of internet data to "each of the world's 5 billion people". The proposal has not yet advanced to full development. If built, such a constellation would compete with previously-announced satellite constellations currently under development by OneWeb and SpaceX.[needs update] On 13 July 2017, an LED screen for digital cinema developed by Samsung Electronics with GDC Technology Limited was publicly demonstrated on one screen at Lotte Cinema World Tower in Seoul. Samsung runs Samsung Experience Store retail locations throughout the world. These locations primarily sell Samsung Galaxy devices, though they can feature other Samsung-owned brands as well. Samsung has various service stores throughout all of South Korea, which have showcases of various Samsung products available for purchase, and also have repair centers for those items. It also has stores dedicated to the installation of large household appliances such as TVs, dishwashers, and refrigerators. It also has stores just for the sale and repair of its memory products, such as the SSDs. These stores do not feature Samsung's own Samsung Experience Store name and branding. In December 2010, Samsung switched its management system from a single CEO-system under Choi Gee-sung to a two-person management team with Choi Gee-sung, CEO and vice chairman, and Lee Jae-Yong, chief operating officer and president. In June 2012, Samsung appointed Kwon Oh-Hyun as CEO of the company. Samsung also reorganized its overseas marketing bases in line with changes in the market, including a combined Britain/Continental Europe regional subsidiary, and a combined China/Taiwan regional subsidiary. In 2012, Samsung appointed director of mobile products, J. K. Shin, to president/CEO of Samsung Electronics for Mobile Consumer Products. The company added a new digital imaging business division in 2010, and consists of eight divisions, including the existing display, IT solutions, consumer electronics, wireless, networking, semiconductor, and LCD divisions. It merged consumer electronics and air conditioners in 2010 under the consumer electronics business division. The set-top boxes business was merged with the Visual Display Business division. The company's 2023 reorganization was as follows: Among the eight divisions, the network division and the digital imaging division experienced new appointments, while the remaining divisions were maintained in accordance with their results. Executive Chairman: Lee Jae-yong Vice chairman and co-CEO of Samsung Electronics' device experience division: Han Jong Hee Co-CEO of the device solutions division: Kyung Kye-hyun vice chairman and head of the Future Business Planning division: Jun Young-hyun The following are the names of the board of directors' members: Around 44% of Samsung Electronics' shares are held by the general public, around 38% are held by institutions, and insiders held around 4% of shares. The largest shareholders in early 2024 were: Samsung Life Insurance (7.6%) National Pension Service (6.46%) BlackRock (4.83%) Samsung C&T Corporation (4.4%) The Vanguard Group (3.03%) Norges Bank (1.76%) Hong Ra-hee (1.45%) Lee Jae-yong (1.45%) Samsung Fire & Marine Insurance (1.31%) Fidelity Investments (1.27%) JP Morgan Asset Management (1%) Samsung Asset Management (0.91%) Lee Boo-jin (0.78%) Capital Research and Management Company (0.77%) Lee Seo-hyun (0.7%) Despite recent litigation activity, Samsung and Apple have been described as frenemies who share a love-hate relationship. Samsung is a major supplier for Apple – first providing memory for the early iPod devices in 2005, and Apple is a key customer for Samsung – in 2012 its component sales were thought to be worth in the region of $8 billion revenue to Samsung – to the point where Apple CEO Tim Cook originally opposed litigation against Samsung wary of the company's critical component supply chain for Apple. In April 2011, Apple Inc. announced that it was suing Samsung over the design of its Galaxy range of mobile phones. The lawsuit was filed on 15 April 2011 and alleges that Samsung infringed on Apple's trademarks and patents of the iPhone and iPad. Samsung issued a counterclaim against Apple of patent infringement. In August 2011, at The Regional Court of Düsseldorf, Apple was granted a preliminary injunction against the sale and marketing of the Samsung Galaxy Tab 10.1 across the whole of Europe excluding the Netherlands. The ban has been temporarily lifted in the European Union, with the exclusion of Germany, while it is investigated whether or not the original injunction was appropriate. On 31 August 2012, the Tokyo District Court ruled Samsung Electronics' mobile devices did not violate an Apple patent. The case only addressed Apple's patent that allows mobile devices and personal computers to synchronize or share data with each other and is not comparable with the U.S. court case ruled on 24 August. On 18 October 2012, the U.K. High Court ruled that Samsung did not infringe Apple's design patents. Apple was forced to issue a court-ordered apology to Samsung on its official U.K. website. Best Buy and Samsung joined together to create the Samsung Experience Shop, a store that allows customers to test the company's products, and get training in mobile products they already own. In summer 2013, more than 1,400 Best Buy and Best Buy Mobile stores have established the Samsung Experience Shop. About 460 square feet of space are dedicated for the SES, with the company's placement at Best Buy's entrance, as well as its sign visible in any part of the store. The purpose of the Samsung Experience Shop is to make Samsung's products, i.e. the Galaxy, more accessible to customers. The first Samsung Experience Shops began appearing across Best Buy locations in the United States in May 2013. In May 2014, Best Buy announced its plans to add 500 new Samsung Entertainment Experience Shops. While the previous Samsung Experience locations focused primarily on showcasing and providing support for Samsung's Galaxy smartphones, cameras, and tablets, these new locations will showcase and support the company's home theater products. Unlike the Samsung Experience Shop, the Samsung Entertainment Experience will be run by Samsung trained Best Buy associates. The new centers are expected to finish being made in the US by January 2015. In the early 1990s, Samsung began considering the importance of physical design in its products. When chairman Lee declared 1996 'The Year of Design Revolution', a comprehensive global design program was initiated with the goal of design being a strategic asset and competitive advantage for the company. Located in the company's high-rise headquarters in Gangnam (south of Seoul) the corporate design center includes more than 900 full-time designers. In 1971 there were only a few designers in the whole company, whose number rose to 1,600 by 2015. In addition to the corporate design center in Seoul, there are design centers located in Tokyo, San Francisco and London. The company overhauls its design over a two-year cycle. For the first year, it scrutinizes design trends of the world, followed by product strategies. It then maps out new design plans during the second year. Since 2006, it has won as many as 210 awards from international design institutions. It received the iF (International Forum) and IDEA design awards. Working with partners, Samsung was the winner in eight categories in the 2009 IDEA awards, hence receiving the most awards. In the 2010 iF Material Awards, the company won the Gold Award for five of its products including the external hard disk drive. The iF Material Awards are given by the International Forum Design GmbH of Hannover, a design award for design materials and process technologies. In 2010, the German company selected a total of 42 products in the areas of home appliance, furniture, and industrial design. Samsung won the awards in five categories including external hard disk, full-touch screen phone, "side-by-side" refrigerator, compact digital camera, and laser printer toner. All Samsung mobile phones and MP3 players introduced on the market after April 2010 are free from polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and brominated flame retardants (BFRs). The company is listed in Greenpeace's Guide to Greener Electronics, which rates electronics companies on policies and practices to reduce their impact on the climate, produce greener products, and make their operations more sustainable. In November 2011, Samsung was ranked seventh out of 15 leading electronics manufacturers with a score of 4.1/10. In the newly re-launched guide, Samsung moved down two places (occupying fifth position in October 2010), but scored maximum points for providing verified data and its greenhouse gas emissions. It also scored well for its Sustainable Operations, with the guide praising its relatively good e-waste take-back programme and information. However, the company was criticized for not setting an ambitious target to increase its use of renewable energy and for belonging to a trade association which has commented against energy efficiency standards. In June 2004, Samsung was one of the first major electronics companies to publicly commit to eliminate PVC and BFRs from new models of all their products. However, the company failed to meet its deadlines to be PVC- and BFRs-free, and published new phase out dates. In March 2010, Greenpeace activists protested at the company's Benelux headquarters for what they called Samsung's "broken promises". The company has been awarded as one of global top-ten companies in the Carbon Disclosure Leadership Index (CDLI). It was the only Asian company among top ten companies. In addition, the company is listed in Dow Jones Sustainability Index (DJSI). The company's achievement ratio of products approaching the Global Ecolabel level ("Good Eco-Products" within the company) is 11 percentage points above the 2010 goal (80 percent). In the first half of 2010, Samsung earned the Global Ecolabel for its 2,134 models, thereby becoming the world's number-one company in terms of the number of products meeting Global Ecolabel standards. The company is also improving its effort to recover and recycle electronic wastes. The number of wastes salvaged throughout 60 countries during 2009 was as much as 240,000 tons. The "Samsung Recycling Direct" program, the company's voluntary recycling program under way in the United States, was expanded to Canada. In 2008, the company was praised for its recycling effort by the U.S. advocacy group Electronics Take Back Coalition as the "best eco-friendly recycling program". In 2023, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) awarded the company its 10th consecutive Sustainable Excellence Award in the manufacturer's category. Many employees working in Samsung's semiconductor facilities have developed various forms of cancers.[citation needed] Initially, Samsung denied being responsible for the illnesses. Although Samsung is known to disfavor trade unions, these sick workers organized in the group SHARPS (Supporters for the Health And Rights of People in the Semiconductor Industry). The crowdfunded film Another Promise was produced in 2013 to depict the fight for compensation of the victims, as well as the documentary The Empire of Shame. In May 2014, Samsung offered an apology and compensation to workers who became ill. The company subsequently did not follow all the recommendations of a specially appointed mediation committee, paid several families outside of a scheme to be agreed on and required them to drop all further charges, prompting SHARPS to continue legal and public action. The quarrel was mostly resolved upon a public apology issued by Samsung in November 2018. In December 2010, the European Commission fined six LCD panel producers, including Samsung, a total of €648 million for operating as a cartel. The company received a full reduction of the potential fine for being the first firm to assist EU anti-trust authorities. On 19 October 2011, Samsung was fined €145.73 million for being part of a price cartel of ten companies for DRAMs, which lasted from 1 July 1998 to 15 June 2002. Like most of the other members of the cartel, the company received a 10% reduction for acknowledging the facts to investigators. Samsung had to pay 90% of their share of the settlement, but Micron avoided payment as a result of having initially revealed the case to investigators. Micron remains the only company that avoided all payments from reduction under the settlement notice. In Canada, the price fix was investigated in 2002. A recession started to occur that year, and the price fix ended. However, in 2014, the Canadian government reopened the case and investigated silently after the EU's success. Sufficient evidence was found and presented to Samsung and two other manufacturers during a class action lawsuit hearing. The companies agreed upon a $120 million agreement, with $40 million as a fine, and $80 million to be paid back to Canadian citizens who purchased a computer, printer, MP3 player, gaming console or camera between April 1999 and June 2002. On 15 April 2011, Apple sued Samsung in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, alleging that several of Samsung's Android phones and tablets, including the Nexus S, Epic 4G, Galaxy S 4G, and Galaxy Tab, infringed on Apple's intellectual property: its patents, trademarks, user interface and style. Apple's complaint included specific federal claims for patent infringement, false designation of origin, unfair competition, and trademark infringement, as well as state-level claims for unfair competition, common law trademark infringement, and unjust enrichment. On 24 August 2012, the jury returned a verdict largely favorable to Apple. It found that Samsung had willfully infringed on Apple's design and utility patents, and had also diluted Apple's trade dresses related to the iPhone. The jury awarded Apple $1.049 billion in damages and Samsung zero damages in its countersuit. The jury found that Samsung infringed Apple's patents on iPhone's "Bounce-Back Effect" (US Patent No.7,469,381), "On-screen Navigation" (US Patent No.7,844,915), and "Tap To Zoom" (US Patent No.7,864,163), and design patents that cover iPhone's features such as the "home button, rounded corners and tapered edges" (US D593087) and "On-Screen Icons" (US D604305). Despite their phones' popularity, numerous explosions of them have been reported. A Swiss teenager was left with second and third degree burns on her thigh due to her Galaxy S3's explosion, followed by two more Galaxy S3 explosions in Switzerland and Ireland. A South Korean student's Galaxy S2 battery exploded in 2012. Samsung's Galaxy S4 also led to several accidents. A house in Hong Kong was allegedly set on fire by an S4 in July 2013, followed by minor S4 burn incidents in Pakistan and Russia. A minor fire was also reported in Newbury, United Kingdom in October 2013. Some users of the phone have also reported swelling batteries and overheating; Samsung has offered affected customers new batteries, free of charge. In December 2013, a Canadian uploaded a YouTube video describing his S4 combusting. Samsung then asked the uploader to sign a legal document requiring him to remove the video, remain silent about the agreement, and surrender any future claims against the company to receive a replacement. No further response from Samsung was received afterwards. There were a few more reported Galaxy S4 explosions in India and the UAE. On 31 August 2016, it was reported that Samsung was delaying shipments of the Galaxy Note 7 in some regions to perform "additional tests being conducted for product quality"; this came alongside user reports of batteries exploding while charging. On 2 September, Samsung suspended sales of the Note 7 and announced a worldwide "product exchange program" in which customers would be able to exchange their Note 7 for another Note 7, a Galaxy S7, or an S7 Edge (the price difference being refunded). They would also receive a gift card from a participating carrier. On 1 September, the company released a statement saying it had received 35 reports of battery failure, which, according to an unnamed Samsung official, "account for less than 0.2 percent of the entire volume sold". Although it has been referred to as a product recall by the media, it was not an official government-issued recall by an organization such as the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), and only a voluntary measure. The CPSC did issue an official recall notice on 15 September 2016, and stated that Samsung received at least 92 reports of the batteries overheating in the U.S., including 26 reports of burns and 55 reports of property damage. After some replacement Note 7 phones also caught fire, Samsung announced on 11 October 2016 that it would permanently end production of the Note 7 in the interest of customer safety. However, Samsung was hoping to recover from the lost sales from the Note 7 with the introduction of new colors such as the Blue Coral and Black Pearl color for the Galaxy S7 edge. On 14 October 2016, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration and the Department of Transportation's Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration banned the Note 7 from being taken aboard any airline flight, even if powered off. Qantas, Virgin Australia and Singapore Airlines also banned the carriage of Note 7s on their aircraft with effect from midnight on 15 October. Mexico's largest airlines Aeromexico, Interjet, Volaris and VivaAerobus all banned the handset. On 4 November 2016, Samsung recalled 2.8 million top-load washing machines sold at home appliance stores between 2011 and 2016 because the machine's top could unexpectedly detach from the chassis during use due to excessive vibration. In 2015, users on the website Reddit began reporting that some Samsung Smart TVs would display advertisements for Pepsi products during movies when viewed through the Plex application. Plex denied responsibility for the ads and Samsung told blog Gigaom that they were investigating the matter. In March 2016, soccer star Pelé filed a lawsuit against Samsung in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, seeking $30 million in damages, claiming violations under the Lanham Act for false endorsement and a state law claim for violation of his right of publicity. The suit alleged that, at one point, Samsung and Pelé came close to entering into a licensing agreement for Pelé to appear in a Samsung advertising campaign; Samsung abruptly pulled out of the negotiations. The October 2015 Samsung ad in question included a partial face shot of a man who allegedly "very closely resembles" Pelé, and also a superimposed ultra-high-definition television screen next to the image of the man featuring a "modified bicycle or scissors-kick", perfected and famously used by Pelé. In December 2016, Samsung forced an update to their Smart TV line, which resulted in advertisements being displayed in menus on the updated devices. On 1 April 2013, several documents were shown on TaiwanSamsungLeaks.org saying that the advertising company OpenTide (Taiwan) and its parent company Samsung were hiring students to attack its competitors by spreading harmful comments and biased opinions/reviews about the products of other phone manufacturers, such as Sony and HTC, in several famous forums and websites in Taiwan to improve its brand image. Hacker "0xb", the uploader of the documents, said that they were intercepted from an email between OpenTide and Samsung. Four days later, the Taiwan division of Samsung Electronics made an announcement stating it would "stop all online marketing strategies which involves publishing and replying in online forums". It was widely reported by the Taiwanese media. Taiwan later fined Samsung Electronics for the smear campaign. "Articles of incorporation". Samsung. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. "SAMSUNG ELECTRONICS CO., LTD. (A005930) – Company". www.marketscreener.com. Retrieved 8 December 2021. Samsung Electronics Financial Statements (PDF), Samsung Electronics, 15 February 2023, archived (PDF) from the original on 26 March 2019, retrieved 17 February 2023 "Samsung Global Strategy Group 2013" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 5 March 2014. Kim, Gil; Keon Han; Minseok Sinn; Hyung Cho; Ray Kim (18 June 2014). "Korea Market Strategy – How to untangle Samsung group's ownership?". Credit Suisse. p. 36. Archived from the original on 5 February 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2015. "Fast Facts: Samsung Global Newsroom". Samsung Electronics. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "Ownership Structure │ Stock │ Investor Relations │ Samsung Global". Samsung global. "Foreign ownership of Samsung Electronics Reaches All-time High of 57.33%". Businesskorea. 8 May 2019. 박, 상수 (12 January 2020). "Samsung Electronics ranks 18th worldwide in market cap". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved 10 June 2020. "Smartphone market shares by vendor 2009-2023". Albanesius, Chloe (27 January 2012). "Samsung Beats Apple as 2011's No.1 Smartphone Maker". PC Magazine. Archived from the original on 13 September 2013. Retrieved 2 June 2012. "Samsung overtakes Apple as world's most profitable mobile phone maker". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 January 2016. Retrieved 8 December 2013. "Samsung gains tablet market share as Apple lead narrows". BBC News. 1 February 2013. Archived from the original on 28 September 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2013. "Samsung To Add LCD Cell Lines in Tangjeong". EETimes. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Apple spent nearly $5.7 billion on Samsung parts in 2010, faces 'strong' response to its patent suit". Engadget. 19 April 2011. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2013. "HTC ditches Samsung components for other suppliers, à la Apple". TechRadar. 10 October 2012. Archived from the original on 8 May 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2013. "50 Things You Didn't Know About Samsung It's also been the world's largest supplier of memory chips over the past 20 years..." Complex. Archived from the original on 29 April 2017. Retrieved 19 June 2017. Vanian, Jonathan. "Samsung Dethrones Intel As World's Biggest Chip Maker". Fortune. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. "Oh-Hyun Kwon: Executive Profile & Biography". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved 3 November 2017. "Ownership Structure". Samsung Electronics. Archived from the original on 21 November 2015. Retrieved 22 November 2015. "Samsung CEO Kwon Oh-hyun to resign citing 'unprecedented crisis'". The Verge. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2017. "CEO | Executives | Company". Samsung India. Archived from the original on 5 July 2019. Retrieved 5 July 2019. "Executive Team | Executives | Company". Samsung India. Archived from the original on 5 July 2019. Retrieved 5 July 2019. Sohn, Jiyoung (7 December 2021). "Samsung Replaces CEOs, Merges Mobile and Consumer Electronics Businesses". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 7 December 2021. "Samsung names new CEOs, to merge mobile, consumer electronics units". CNBC. 7 December 2021. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2021. "Samsung's HC Hong, who got India on global smartphone map, begins new role". mint. 24 January 2020. Retrieved 14 June 2021. "Samsung Moves India Chief HC Hong To Latin America". BW Businessworld. 25 January 2020. Retrieved 14 June 2021. Ians (24 January 2020). "Samsung's HC Hong who put India on world map begins new chapter". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Archived from the original on 24 January 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2021. "History – Corporate Profile – About Samsung – Samsung". Archived from the original on 2 March 2018. Retrieved 10 July 2011. "삼성전자의 태동, 외국기술과의 합작". 28 April 2008. Archived from the original on 4 November 2018. Retrieved 4 November 2018. "삼성 반도체사업 40년, 도전과 창조의 역사". 삼성반도체이야기 (in Korean). 6 April 2012. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 10 June 2020. "The Korean system of innovation and the semiconductor industry:a governance perspective" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 May 2018. Retrieved 4 November 2018. "연혁 | 회사소개 | Samsung 대한민국" (in Korean). Samsung sec. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018. Retrieved 22 April 2018. ID, FCC. "FCC ID A3LCEA455 Monitor. by Samsung Electronics Co Ltd". FCC ID. Michell, Tony (2010). Samsung Electronics: And the Struggle For Leadership of the Electronics Industry. John Wiley & Sons. p. 153. ISBN 978-0-470-82266-1. "Koreans Seen Buying More U.S. Concerns". The New York Times. 21 July 1995. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012. Retrieved 6 September 2012. Burrows, Peter (16 November 2009). "Moto Droid off to a Good Start. But Is It Good Enough?". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on 21 January 2013. Retrieved 3 January 2013. Chung, K.; Hardy, T.; So, S. Strategic Realization: Building Fundamental Design Values. Archived 16 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Design Management Journal. Winter 2000, pp.65–9. Nussbaum, B., "The Hungriest Tiger", Business Week, 2 June 1997, p.99 Delaney, M.; Hardy, T.; McFarland, J.; Yoon, G., ″Global Localization″, Innovation, Summer 2002, pp.46–9 "Samsung Extends Sponsorship of Olympic Games until 2016". Sportbusiness. 24 April 2007. Archived from the original on 17 September 2011. Retrieved 23 November 2010. "Samsung: The next big bet". 1 October 2011. Archived from the original on 19 May 2013. Retrieved 9 May 2013. "Samsung – Company History – 1992–1996". Samsung. Archived from the original on 3 July 2013. Retrieved 9 May 2013. "Apple supplier Samsung's rise is Steve Jobs' worst nightmare come true". gadgets.ndtv.com. 10 February 2013. Archived from the original on 20 March 2013. Retrieved 9 May 2013. Jungah Lee; Lulu Yilun Chen (4 October 2013). "Samsung's Record Pressures Rivals as HTC Posts Loss". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 5 October 2013. "The Growing Giant: How Samsung Electronics Got Its Appetite". Knowledge SMU. 3 October 2010. Archived from the original on 19 August 2011. Retrieved 26 November 2010. "From Obscure Company to Electronics Giant". The Korea Herald. 2 November 2009. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 26 November 2010. "Samsung Surpasses Sony for the First Time, Taking over the No. 20 Spot" (PDF). Interbrand. 21 July 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 July 2011. Retrieved 16 June 2010. "Motorola's Pain Is Samsung's Gain". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. 26 December 2007. Archived from the original on 22 January 2010. Retrieved 16 June 2010. "The New 'Big Blue'". The Korea Times. 29 January 2010. Archived from the original on 1 February 2010. Retrieved 14 March 2010. "Samsung Agrees To Plead Guilty and To Pay $300 Million Criminal Fine for Role in Price Fixing Conspiracy". U.S. Department of Justice. Archived from the original on 1 June 2009. Retrieved 24 May 2009. Pimentel, Benjamin (14 October 2005). "Samsung Fixed Chip Prices. Korean Manufacturer To Pay $300 Million Fine for Its Role in Scam". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 24 May 2009. "Price-Fixing Costs Samsung $300M". InternetNews.com. 13 October 2005. Archived from the original on 14 November 2007. Retrieved 24 May 2009. Flynn, Laurie J. (23 March 2006). "3 To Plead Guilty in Samsung Price-Fixing Case". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 24 May 2009. "EU Fines Samsung Elec, Others for Chip Price-Fixing". Finanznachrichten.de. 19 May 2010. Archived from the original on 30 November 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2010. "Joaquín Almunia Vice President of the European Commission Responsible for Competition Policy Press Conference on LCD Cartel, Visa and French Chemists' Association Decisions Press Conference Brussels", 8 December 2010 Archived 11 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine. "LCD Makers Under Fire" Archived 11 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine. IEEE Spectrum. "Lee Kun-hee Returns to Samsung". Taipei Times. 25 March 2010. Archived from the original on 9 August 2010. Retrieved 23 November 2010. Mukherjee, Supantha (19 April 2011). "Seagate buys Samsung hard disk unit". Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 May 2017. Retrieved 1 July 2017. "초고화질 영화 1초내 전송…삼성전자 '5G 기술' 첫 개발". 국제신문. Archived from the original on 22 April 2018. Retrieved 22 April 2018. David Pierce (24 April 2013). "Samsung Galaxy S4 review". The Verge. Vox Media, Inc. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2013. "Samsung issues weaker than expected profit forecast". BBC. 5 July 2013. Archived from the original on 7 July 2013. Retrieved 7 July 2013. 1906 to 1911: Williamson J. (1999), Nominal Wage, Cost of Living, Real Wage and Land Rent Data for Korea 1906-1939 1912 to 1939: Mizoguchi, T. (1972). Consumer Prices and Real Wages in Taiwan and Korea Under Japanese Rule. Hitotsubashi Journal of Economics, 13(1), 40-56. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Afterwards, consumer price index from Statistics Korea. Consumer Price Index by year. Retrieved 3 April 2018 "Samsung buys set top box maker Boxee". Archived from the original on 4 July 2013. Retrieved 3 July 2013. Kim Yoo-chul (11 September 2013). "Samsung to expand China business". The Korea Times. Archived from the original on 12 September 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2013. Tae-hoon, Lee (14 October 2013). "Samsung admits to using used PC parts". The Korea Observer. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 16 October 2013. ChrisWelch (26 February 2014). "Not dead yet: Barnes & Noble will release new Nook tablet this year". The Verge. Archived from the original on 13 February 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2017. Reisinger, Don. "Samsung, Barnes & Noble team up on tablet design (The arrival of the Galaxy Tab 4 Nook effectively ends Barnes & Noble's ill-fated foray into hardware design. But what's in it for Samsung?)". CNET. Archived from the original on 6 June 2014. Retrieved 6 June 2014. "Barnes & Noble enlists Samsung for Nook tablet". USA Today. Associated Press. 5 June 2014. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2017. "Samsung and Barnes & Noble Announce Partnership to Create Co-Branded Tablets: Samsung Galaxy Tab 4 NOOK Combines Leading Samsung Tablet Technology with the Award-Winning NOOK® Reading Experience". BUSINESS WIRE. NEW YORK & RIDGEFIELD PARK, N.J. 5 June 2014. Archived from the original on 5 June 2014. Retrieved 6 June 2014. Hoffelder, Nate (5 June 2014). "Samsung Scores New eBook Coup – Will Develop Co-Branded Samsung Galaxy Tab 4 Nook Tablet". The Digital Reader. Archived from the original on 8 June 2014. Retrieved 6 June 2014. Jordan Crook (4 March 2014). "And The Oscar Goes To… Samsung, Jennifer Lawrence, And Selfies". TechCrunch. AOL Inc. Archived from the original on 4 March 2014. Retrieved 5 March 2014. Ha, Anthony (4 March 2014). "Samsung To Donate $3M To Charities Chosen By Ellen, Says It Was Included "Organically" In Her Oscar Selfie". TechCrunch. AOL Inc. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014. Retrieved 5 March 2014. Lunden, Ingrid (17 April 2014). "Samsung and Amazon Team Up For Custom Galaxy Kindle E-Book App". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on 6 July 2017. Retrieved 25 June 2017. "Samsung's Q1 Profit Drops 39% Due To Heavier Smartphone Competition". 28 April 2015. Retrieved 25 June 2017.[dead link] Clark, Don (14 August 2014). "Samsung reaches Deal to Buy Startup SmartThings". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 17 August 2014. Retrieved 18 August 2014. "Samsung snaps up SmartThings, embracing Internet of Things". CNET. 14 August 2014. Archived from the original on 16 August 2014. Ogura, Kentaro (27 March 2015). "Samsung to sell former Japanese headquarters". Nikkei Asia. Retrieved 14 September 2021. "IKEA and Samsung launch embedded wireless charging range". Reuters. 5 March 2015. Archived from the original on 21 November 2016. Retrieved 21 November 2016. "Samsung Display Solutions". Archived from the original on 9 June 2016. Retrieved 15 June 2016. "Samsung will acquire cloud-computing company Joyent". 16 June 2016. Archived from the original on 17 June 2016. Retrieved 17 June 2016. Russell, Jon (14 November 2016). "Samsung is buying Harman for $8B to further its connected car push". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on 15 November 2016. Retrieved 14 November 2016. "Samsung Electronics Completes Acquisition of HARMAN". news.samsung.com. Archived from the original on 12 March 2017. Retrieved 11 March 2017. Junga-a, Song (6 April 2017). "Samsung heads for best profits in three years on surging chip sales". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 9 April 2017. Retrieved 9 April 2017. "Samsung self-driving car trial in South Korea approved". 2 May 2017. Archived from the original on 3 May 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017. Pham, Sherisse (2 May 2017). "Samsung just got approval to start testing a self-driving car". CNN. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017. Chung-un, Cho (1 May 2017). "Samsung denies re-entry to auto market despite autonomous car push". The Korea Herald. Archived from the original on 3 May 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017. SES showcases 8K content over satellite[permanent dead link] Broadband TV News. 14 May 2019. Retrieved 4 June 2019 Jaewon, Kim (6 May 2020). "Samsung chief rules out children inheriting control of chaebol". Nikkei Asia. Retrieved 19 May 2023. Washington, Asa Fitch in San Francisco and Kate O’Keeffe in (10 June 2020). "Lawmakers Propose Spending Billions to Strengthen U.S. Chip Industry". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 23 January 2021. Koh, Elizabeth Findell, Asa Fitch and Elizabeth (23 January 2021). "Samsung Eyes Investing Up to $17 Billion in New U.S. Chip Plant". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 23 January 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Tracy, Phillip (24 November 2021). "Samsung Is Building a $17 Billion Chip Plant in Texas to Fix This Whole Supply Chain Thing". Gizmodo. Retrieved 28 November 2021. Sohn, Jiyoung (7 December 2021). "Samsung Replaces CEOs, Merges Mobile and Consumer Electronics Businesses". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 7 December 2021. Byford, Sam (27 January 2022). "Samsung sets revenue records with stronger product sales". The Verge. Retrieved 27 January 2022. "Samsung призупинив поставки телефонів і чипів до росії та виділив $6 млн гумдопомоги Україні". ДОУ (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 7 March 2022. "Samsung Suspends Its Shipments to Russia". WSJ. Retrieved 7 March 2022. "Samsung to invest in South Korea mega chip-making plan". BBC. 15 March 2023. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "Samsung shows off AI smart home robot called Ballie". The Standart. 10 January 2024. Archived from the original on 11 January 2024. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "British Gas partners with Samsung on smart home energy saving scheme". The Standart. 29 January 2024. Archived from the original on 29 January 2024. Retrieved 7 February 2024. Groppe, Maureen; Chambers, Francesca (20 May 2022). "Biden tours Samsung plant in South Korea, advocates for legislation to boost chip making". USA Today. Retrieved 21 May 2022. Staff Writer (18 November 2021). "Samsung Electronics ranks second in 'Best Global Brands' following Google". Big News Network. ANI. Retrieved 21 November 2021. Young-sil (13 June 2022). "Samsung Electronics Ranked 22nd among Global Top 100 by Market Cap". Business Korea. Retrieved 13 June 2022. Samsung 1993 Archived 21 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Corporatebrandmatrix.com (19 May 2007). Retrieved 19 March 2013. "Our Businesses – About Samsung". Samsung. Archived from the original on 11 February 2010. Retrieved 14 March 2010. "Robot Vacuums | Robot Vacuum Cleaners". Samsung uk. Retrieved 22 July 2023. "Samsung Electronics Co Ltd – Company Profile and News – Bloomberg Markets". Bloomberg L.P. "Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.: Shareholders Board Members Managers and Company Profile | KR7005930003 | MarketScreener". www.marketscreener.com. Retrieved 9 March 2024. Fernandes, Louella (8 June 2009). "Samsung Launches New Channel MPS Tools". Quocirca. Archived from the original on 23 September 2016. Retrieved 28 April 2016. "Samsung Archives". My Mobile WebSite. Archived from the original on 14 October 2022. Retrieved 14 October 2022. "World Intellectual Property Indicators 2021" (PDF). WIPO. Retrieved 30 November 2021. World Intellectual Property Organization (2020). World Intellectual Property Indicators 2020. World IP Indicators (WIPI). World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). doi:10.34667/tind.42184. ISBN 9789280532012. Retrieved 26 August 2021. {{cite book}}: |website= ignored (help) "Samsung SDI – The World's Largest OLED Display Maker". Oled-info.com. Archived from the original on 22 June 2009. Retrieved 17 August 2009. "Samsung, LG in Legal Fight over Brain Drain". The Korea Times. 17 July 2010. Archived from the original on 21 July 2010. Retrieved 30 July 2010. "Frost & Sullivan Recognizes Samsung SDI for Market Leadership in the OLED Display Market". 17 July 2008. Archived from the original on 22 May 2009. Retrieved 17 August 2009 – via Find Articles. "Samsung Super AMOLED Plus display announced". Archived from the original on 9 January 2011. Retrieved 6 January 2011. "Experts Advise: LED TV Is Not Necessarily Choose the Thinner the Better-LED TV, Samsung Electronics". ArticleKingPro. Archived from the original on 21 November 2010. Retrieved 16 November 2010. "Samsung Electronics LCD". IT TIMES. 13 October 2009. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 16 November 2010. "New Samsung 3.9mm LED TV Panel Is World's Thinnest". I4U. 28 October 2009. Archived from the original on 28 January 2011. Retrieved 16 November 2010. Lane, Alex (6 September 2013). "John Lewis TV Gallery video: 4K and OLED from Samsung, Sony, LG and Panasonic". Recombu. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 26 September 2013. Crook, Jordan (8 October 2013). "That Curved Display Smartphone From Samsung Is Real: Meet The Galaxy Round". TechCrunch. AOL Inc. Archived from the original on 11 October 2013. Retrieved 10 October 2013. "Samsung Display is getting out of the LCD business". 31 March 2020. Retrieved 15 August 2020. Newsis (27 January 2019). "MP3폰·TV폰·손목시계폰 '세계 최초'...'스마트폰 1등' 삼성의 휴대폰史". mobile.newsis.com (in Korean). Retrieved 18 July 2023. "As good as it gets?". The Economist. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 18 July 2023. "휴대폰의 역사 36년, 가장 뛰어난 디자인의 휴대폰 25선 모음". ㅍㅍㅅㅅ (in Korean). 21 May 2020. Retrieved 18 July 2023. "Three phones that changed the world, and three phones that didn't – Mobile Gazette – Mobile Phone News". www.mobilegazette.com. Retrieved 18 July 2023. "[삼성전자 45년, 제품 혁신의 역사를 돌아보다 1편] 휴대폰". news.samsung.com (in Korean). Retrieved 18 July 2023. Wray, Richard (13 February 2007). "Revealed – world's skinniest phone". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 18 July 2023. Week, Marketing (22 November 2007). "Bigger than Sony". Marketing Week. Retrieved 18 July 2023. "Top iPhone Alternatives". CNET Asia. 12 August 2010. Archived from the original on 12 November 2010. Retrieved 16 November 2010. Vikas SN (28 May 2010). "Samsung Galaxy S To Arrive in Singapore First". MobileKnots. Archived from the original on 6 May 2011. Retrieved 28 November 2010. "First Impressions: Samsung Galaxy S". Soyacincau. 28 June 2011. Archived from the original on 3 January 2012. Retrieved 28 November 2011. "Bizplace.co.kr" 슈퍼 스마트폰 '갤럭시S' 전국 판매 돌입 [Super smartphone 'Galaxy S' goes on sale nationwide]. BIZPlace (in Korean). 24 June 2010. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 28 November 2011. "Samsung: 1 Million Galaxy S Smartphones in 45 Days in the US". Fortune. 29 August 2010. Archived from the original on 31 January 2014. Woyke, Elizabeth (25 March 2010). "Samsung Playing All Sides to Win". Forbes. Archived from the original on 28 October 2010. Retrieved 11 September 2017. "Phone Finder results". Archived from the original on 5 February 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2013. Applelinks iOS News Reader – Monday, 1 November 2010 Archived 2 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Applelinks.com (1 November 2010). Retrieved 26 July 2013. "Apple Joins Top Five Mobile Phone Vendors as Worldwide Market Grows Nearly 15% in Third Quarter, According to IDC" (Press release). IDC. 28 October 2010. Archived from the original on 4 June 2013. Retrieved 11 July 2013. "Nokia, LG Lose While ZTE, Apple Gain Q4 2010 Market Share". mobileburn.com. 28 January 2011. Archived from the original on 14 July 2011. Retrieved 19 February 2011. Staff (28 October 2011). "Samsung Overtakes Apple in Smartphone Sales". Archived 19 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. "Apple's new iPhone to have larger screen: Sources". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 16 May 2012. Retrieved 16 May 2012. "More Samsung and LG phones will be made in China in 2020". 30 October 2019. "Samsung Electronics ends mobile phone production in China". Reuters. 2 October 2019. Archived from the original on 2 October 2019. Retrieved 2 October 2019. "Samsung closes its last Chinese manufacturing plant as sales plummet". www.techspot.com. 6 October 2019. "Samsung is done building smartphones in China". Engadget. 2 October 2019. "Samsung admits defeat in China's vast smartphone market". CNN. 4 October 2019. "Samsung Introduces Knox Guard for Enterprises: Another Layer of Device Security". Samsung Newsroom U.S. 25 May 2022. Retrieved 26 May 2022. "Samsung Electronics Tops the Memory Market for the 9th Straight Year". Samsung. 19 April 2002. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. Manners, David (14 November 2018). "Top Ten (+5) Semiconductor Companies 2018". Electronics Weekly. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 15 June 2019. "History". Samsung Electronics. Samsung. Archived from the original on 19 June 2019. Retrieved 19 June 2019. "KM48SL2000-7 Datasheet". Samsung. August 1992. Archived from the original on 20 June 2019. Retrieved 19 June 2019. "Electronic Design". Electronic Design. 41 (15–21). Hayden Publishing Company. 1993. The first commercial synchronous DRAM, the Samsung 16-Mbit KM48SL2000, employs a single-bank architecture that lets system designers easily transition from asynchronous to synchronous systems. "Samsung Electronics Develops First 128Mb SDRAM with DDR/SDR Manufacturing Option". Samsung Electronics. Samsung. 10 February 1999. Archived from the original on 24 June 2019. Retrieved 23 June 2019. "Samsung Electronics Comes Out with Super-Fast 16M DDR SGRAMs". Samsung Electronics. Samsung. 17 September 1998. Archived from the original on 24 June 2019. Retrieved 23 June 2019. "Samsung Remains Top DRAM Maker Amid Dramatic Market Growth". Dow Jones. 9 January 2010. Archived from the original on 21 November 2010. Retrieved 23 November 2010. "Samsung Develops Most Advanced Green DDR3 DRAM". Semiconductor Packaging News. 3 February 2010. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015. "Samsung Introduces World's First 3D V-NAND Based SSD for Enterprise Applications | Samsung Semiconductor Global Website". samsung.com. Archived from the original on 28 August 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. Clarke, Peter. "Samsung Confirms 24 Layers in 3D NAND". EETimes. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Samsung Electronics Starts Mass Production of Industry First 3-bit 3D V-NAND Flash Memory". news.samsung.com. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Samsung V-NAND technology" (PDF). Samsung Electronics. September 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 March 2016. Retrieved 27 March 2016. "Samsung Begins Mass Producing World's Fastest DRAM – Based on Newest High Bandwidth Memory (HBM) Interface". news.samsung.com. Archived from the original on 21 June 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Samsung announces mass production of next-generation HBM2 memory – ExtremeTech". 19 January 2016. Archived from the original on 14 July 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Samsung Electronics Starts Producing Industry's First 16-Gigabit GDDR6 for Advanced Graphics Systems". Samsung. 18 January 2018. Archived from the original on 20 June 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2019. Killian, Zak (18 January 2018). "Samsung fires up its foundries for mass production of GDDR6 memory". Tech Report. Archived from the original on 19 January 2018. Retrieved 18 January 2018. "Samsung Begins Producing The Fastest GDDR6 Memory in the World". Wccftech. 18 January 2018. Archived from the original on 3 July 2019. Retrieved 16 July 2019. Smith, Ryan. "Samsung Announces First LPDDR5 DRAM Chip, Targets 6.4Gbps Data Rates & 30% Reduced Power". Archived from the original on 17 July 2018. Retrieved 17 July 2018. ""We Wouldn't Launch a New Business Unless We Knew We Could Win"---Jeong-ki (Jay) Min". Samsung日 NE Asia. August 2010. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013. "Samsung Mass Producing 128Gb 3-bit MLC NAND Flash". Tom's Hardware. 11 April 2013. Archived from the original on 21 June 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2019. Shilov, Anton. "Samsung Completes Development of 5nm EUV Process Technology". anandtech.com. Archived from the original on 20 April 2019. Retrieved 31 May 2019. Armasu, Lucian (11 January 2019), "Samsung Plans Mass Production of 3nm GAAFET Chips in 2021", Tom's Hardware "Samsung Extends Lead in DRAM Rankings". EE Times. 9 August 2010. Archived from the original on 16 August 2010. Retrieved 23 November 2010. "Samsung To Overtake Intel as No. 1 Chip Company in 2014". Electronics Weekly/EE Times. 26 August 2010. Archived from the original on 11 November 2010. Retrieved 23 November 2010. "Top 20 Semi Manufacturers from IC Insights". Electronics Weekly/EE Times. 30 July 2010. Archived from the original on 9 October 2010. Retrieved 23 November 2010. By David Steele, Android Headlines. "Samsung Now Fourth Largest Chipset Manufacturer Globally Archived 10 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine." 9 May 2016. 12 May 2016. "SAMSUNG FIRST QUARTER RESULTS AND FUTURE PLANS". Relevant Research. 2 May 2020. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2010. Staff Writer (30 November 2021). "Samsung to supply new advanced auto chip to Volkswagen". CNBC. Reuters. Retrieved 1 December 2021. Byung-wook, Kim (29 December 2021). "Samsung Electronics cuts chip production in Xian due to lockdown". The Korea Herald. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Samsung's massive 15TB SSD can be yours – for about $10K – Computerworld". Computerworld. "Samsung 15.36TB MZ-ILS15T0 PM1633a 15TB Enterprise Class SAS 2.5" SSD". scan.co.uk. Shilov, Anton. "Samsung 30.72 TB SSDs: Mass Production of PM1643 Begins". anandtech.com. "Samsung SSD 970 EVO Plus | Samsung V-NAND Consumer SSD". Samsung Semiconductor. Robinson, Cliff (10 August 2019). "Samsung PM1733 PCIe Gen4 NVMe SSDs for the PRE". Shilov, Anton. "Samsung Preps PM1733 PCIe 4.0 Enterprise SSDs For AMD's "Rome" EPYC Processors". anandtech.com. Liu 2019-08-09T14:54:02Z, Zhiye (9 August 2019). "Samsung Launches PM1733 PCIe 4.0 SSD: Up To 8 GB/s and 30TB". Tom's Hardware.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Enterprise SSD prices to rise over 10% in Q3, Samsung Electronics to gain". Business Standard India. 5 June 2021. "Samsung Solid State Drives". Samsung Electronics America. Retrieved 15 February 2020. "Samsung Releases Portable SSD T7 Touch – the New Standard in Speed and Security for External Storage Devices". news.samsung.com. Retrieved 16 February 2020. "Samsung Lets You Store 500 Movies on a Laptop Hard Drive". VentureBeat. 7 April 2010. Archived from the original on 15 November 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2017. Hollister, Sean (20 December 2011). "Seagate now officially owns Samsung's hard drive business". The Verge. Retrieved 16 February 2020. "KOREA: LG, Samsung Aim Upmarket To Reinforce Their TV Market Lead". What Hi-Fi? Sound and Vision. 24 August 2010. Archived from the original on 24 October 2010. Retrieved 16 November 2010. "CES 2010: Samsung Reveals 0.3-Inch Thin Flagship LED HDTV; As Thick as a Pencil with Touchscreen Remote". ZDNet. 7 January 2010. Archived from the original on 11 March 2011. "Samsung 3D TV Sells More Than 1 Million Units". MK Business News. 31 August 2010. Archived from the original on 21 January 2012. Retrieved 16 November 2010. "Samsung Introduce the World's First 3D Home Theater in Korea with the HT-C6950W". AkihabaraNews. 12 May 2010. Archived from the original on 15 May 2010. Retrieved 16 November 2010. "The Wonder of Samsung Smart TVs" Archived 9 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine. "Samsung Unveils First Ever Application Store". Samsung. 7 January 2010. Archived from the original on 10 August 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "삼성전자, IFA2012서 신규 스마트 TV앱 대거 공개 | SAMSUNG NEWSROOM". SAMSUNG NEWSROOM (in Korean). 3 September 2012. Archived from the original on 23 April 2018. Retrieved 22 April 2018. "What is Samsung TV Plus? The free streaming platform explained". Trusted Reviews. 31 January 2023. Retrieved 16 August 2023. "InfoWorld". InfoWorld. Vol. 11, no. 45–51. InfoWorld Pub. 1989. p. 47. All of which have gone a long way toward making Samsung the world's largest monitor maker, with over 8 million units sold. "Samsung and NEC set up joint display venture". 6 December 2020. Retrieved 7 April 2021. "Samsung buys Sony's entire stake in LCD joint venture". BBC News. December 2011. Retrieved 26 December 2011. Goode, Lauren (2 January 2015). "Samsung Will Put Tizen in Its Televisions. What the Heck Does That Mean?". Vox.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2019. Retrieved 16 October 2019. Alt URL "Samsung's Tizen OS dominates global smart TV market". FierceVideo. 25 March 2019. Archived from the original on 23 August 2019. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Samsung smart TVs to get iTunes Movies and TV Shows app and AirPlay 2 support". HardwareZone.com.sg. n.d. Retrieved 28 March 2020. K., Balakumar (3 January 2022). "Samsung shows off new monitors - including world's first 4K 240Hz gaming monitor". TechRadar. Retrieved 9 March 2024. Shaik, Asif Iqbal (3 January 2022). "Samsung's new lineup includes world's first 4K 240Hz gaming monitor". SamMobile. Retrieved 9 March 2024. Eberle, Christian (19 December 2022). "Samsung Odyssey Neo G8 Review: A New Level Of Extreme". Tom's Hardware. Retrieved 10 March 2024. Porter, Jon (23 May 2022). "Samsung's 240Hz 4K Mini LED 32-inch monitor goes on sale for $1,500". The Verge. Retrieved 9 March 2024. "Samsung's First 4K Gaming Monitor With 240Hz Refresh Rate Arrives June 6". PCMag UK. 23 May 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2024. "HP completes purchase of Samsung printer business". CNBC. 1 November 2017. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019. Retrieved 3 April 2019. "Samsung Electronics Completes Acquisition of HARMAN". news.samsung.com. Archived from the original on 12 March 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2019. Matthew, By (3 September 2014). "Sony, Samsung Dominating Digital Camera Market while Canon, Nikon Struggle". BusinessKorea. Retrieved 15 August 2021. "Mobile-review.com MP3-players – Global markets". mobile-review.com. Archived from the original on 25 November 2006. Retrieved 22 May 2022. Wingfield, Nick (21 August 2006). "SanDisk Raises Music-Player Stakes". The Wall Street Journal. "2009 Samsung Annual Report" (PDF). Samsung. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved 29 November 2010. "Samsung exits laptop market including Chromebooks" Archived 29 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine, PC Advisor, 23 September 2014 Gershgorn, Dave (17 August 2015). "Samsung Wants To Blanket The Earth in Satellite Internet". Popular Science. Archived from the original on 20 August 2015. Retrieved 21 August 2015. Khan, Farooq (2015). "Mobile Internet from the Heavens". arXiv:1508.02383 [cs.NI]. "Does the Future of Digital Cinema Mean the End of Motion Picture Projectors?". The Hollywood Reporter. 29 March 2017. Pennington, Adrian (2017). "The next big thing in cinema technology could be LED screens". ScreenDaily. "Samsung Debuts World's First Cinema LED Display – Samsung Newsroom". 12 July 2017. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 15 July 2017. DoGyeom, Woo. "홈페이지 < 삼성전자서비스". samsungsvc.co.kr (in Korean). Archived from the original on 5 July 2019. Retrieved 5 July 2019. "Samsung names Kwon Oh-hyun as new CEO". The Times of India. 7 June 2012. "Samsung Executives Dyeing Hair Black". 16 January 2011. Archived from the original on 3 April 2016. Retrieved 21 March 2016. "Samsung retains top CEOs, launches unit to prepare for future". The Korea Times. 27 November 2023. Retrieved 11 January 2024. "Board of Director │ Governance │ Investor Relations │ Samsung Global". Samsung global. Retrieved 11 January 2024. "Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. Insider Trading & Ownership Structure". Simply Wall St. Retrieved 9 March 2024. "SMD Enjoys Soaring Demand for AMOLED Panel". Maeil Business Newspaper. 1 July 2010. Archived from the original on 21 January 2012. Retrieved 26 November 2010. "Samsung's Share of Global DRAM Market Exceeds 40%". Taiwan Economic News. 8 November 2010. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014. "(Samsung's share grows while Apple's declines in Q3 smartphone market)". InfoWorld. 29 October 2013. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 3 December 2013. "Large-Size TFT Shipments and Revenues Fell as Supply Chain Sought Inventory Reductions in 3Q10". DigiTimes. 12 November 2010. Archived from the original on 28 July 2013. Retrieved 26 November 2010. "Samsung Takes The Second Place in Rechargeable Battery Market, Following Sanyo, in the First Quarter of 2010". Solar&Energy. 20 May 2010. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 26 November 2010. "Solid-state drive (SSD) supplier quarterly market share 2014–2018 | Statistic". Statista. Archived from the original on 5 July 2019. Retrieved 5 July 2019. "Seagate Still Number One in Global HDD Shipments". TechSpot. 23 March 2010. Archived from the original on 27 March 2010. Retrieved 26 November 2010. "Samsung Devours TV Market Share". SmartHouse. 18 February 2010. Archived from the original on 7 September 2012. "Samsung Sees Hybrid Camera Mkt Growing 10-Fold by 2015". Reuters. 14 September 2010. Archived from the original on 7 December 2010. Retrieved 1 July 2017. "Sony, Apple, Dell Are Samsung's Big Buyers". The Korea Times. 16 June 2010. Archived from the original on 15 January 2011. Retrieved 26 October 2010. "Insight: Apple and Samsung, frenemies for life". Reuters. 10 February 2013. Archived from the original on 4 May 2013. Retrieved 9 May 2013. "Apple CEO Tim Cook Never Wanted to Sue Samsung". IGN. 11 February 2013. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 9 May 2013. "Apple sues Samsung for 'copying' iPhones and iPad". BBC. 19 April 2011. Archived from the original on 19 April 2011. Retrieved 21 April 2011. "Samsung Sues Apple After Accusations of 'Copying'". BBC News. 22 April 2011. Archived from the original on 26 April 2011. Retrieved 26 April 2011. Richmond, Shane (9 August 2011). "Samsung Galaxy Tab 10.1 Blocked in Europe". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 21 August 2011. Retrieved 21 August 2011. "Samsung Galaxy Tab Ban Is on Hold". BBC News. 16 August 2011. Archived from the original on 26 October 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018. "Samsung wins over Apple in Japan patent case". Reuters. 31 August 2012. Archived from the original on 2 September 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2012. Whittaker, Zack (8 November 2012). "Apple quietly pulls apology-hiding code from U.K. site". CNET. Archived from the original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 11 July 2013. Palenchar, Joseph. "Analysts See Potential in Samsung, Best Buy Tie-Up". No. 28. TWICE. Belz, Adam (2 May 2014). "Best Buy Signs New Store-within-a-store Deals with Samsung, Sony". San Jose Mercury News. "How Samsung Became a Design Powerhouse". Harvard Business Review. 1 September 2015. ISSN 0017-8012. Retrieved 10 June 2021. Dr. K.J. Freeze and Prof. Dr. K.W. Chung (2008): Design Strategy at Samsung Electronics: Becoming a Top-Tier Company, Design Management Institute, Boston, USA (page 6) "Samsung – Competitive Analysis – Law Essays". LawAspect.com. 13 March 2020. Retrieved 10 June 2021. Nussbaum, Bruce (1 August 2009). "Samsung Beats Apple in the IDEA/BusinessWeek Design Awards". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on 12 November 2012. Retrieved 10 July 2013. "Samsung Products Win iF Awards". Korea JoongAng Daily. 26 April 2010. Archived from the original on 26 November 2010. Retrieved 28 November 2010. "Policy on target substances – Chemical Management – Environment – Sustainability – About Samsung". Samsung Electronics. Archived from the original on 14 August 2010. Retrieved 2 August 2010. "Guide to Greener Electronics – Greenpeace International". Archived from the original on 12 November 2011. Retrieved 16 November 2011. "Management of target substances – Chemical Management – Environment – Sustainability – About Samsung – Samsung". Archived from the original on 24 April 2010. Retrieved 2 August 2010. "Calling out Samsung for toxic failure – Greenpeace International". Archived from the original on 27 July 2010. Retrieved 2 August 2010. "Who's Greener, Samsung or LG?". Business and Technology Report. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 13 January 2010. "Samsung Sustainability Initiatives: What's Working?". The Daily Energy Report. Archived from the original on 30 May 2012. Retrieved 29 May 2012. "Samsung Leads in Green Management". The Korea Times. 26 July 2010. Archived from the original on 17 July 2012. Retrieved 26 July 2010. "Enviros Applaud Samsung for New Free National Recycling Program". Electronics TakeBack Coalition. Archived from the original on 7 October 2009. Retrieved 8 September 2008. SamMobile; Naresh, Sagar (29 March 2023). "Samsung receives two crowns at the 2023 ENERGY STAR Awards in the US". SamMobile. Retrieved 10 July 2023. "IndustriALL Executives condemn Samsung for union busting". IndustriALL. 5 December 2013. Archived from the original on 6 June 2014. Retrieved 3 June 2014. "About the victims". SHARPS. 10 April 2010. Archived from the original on 19 May 2014. Retrieved 3 June 2014. "Samsung offers apology and compensation to workers who got leukemia". The Verge. 14 May 2014. Archived from the original on 2 March 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2017. "Samsung Finally Apologizes To Workers Who Got Cancer While Making Chips". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 6 June 2014. Retrieved 3 June 2014. "Samsung Hands Out Hush Money to Occupational Disease Victims". Stop Samsung – No More Deaths!. 23 October 2015. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016. "Samsung admits fault over illnesses and deaths of workers". CBS News. 23 November 2018. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2019. "Antitrust: Commission fines six LCD panel producers €648 million for price fixing cartel". European Commission. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 18 April 2013. "Antitrust: Commission fines DRAM producers € 331 million for price cartel; reaches first settlement in a cartel case". European Commission. Archived from the original on 7 July 2010. Retrieved 22 April 2012. "Canadian DRAM Class Action". Archived from the original on 15 September 2015. Retrieved 20 September 2019. Kane, Yukari Iwatani; Sherr, Ian (19 April 2011). "Apple: Samsung Copied Design". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 13 December 2014. Retrieved 11 August 2012. "Apple Inc. v. Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd. et al". United States District Court, Northern District of California. Archived from the original on 29 July 2012. Retrieved 11 August 2012. Patel, Nilay (19 April 2011). "Apple sues Samsung: a complete lawsuit analysis". The Verge. Archived from the original on 1 August 2012. Retrieved 11 August 2012. Lowensohn, Josh (24 August 2012). "Jury awards Apple more than $1B, finds Samsung infringed". CNET. Retrieved 24 August 2012. Burnett, Ed, The verdict is in: Samsung vs. Apple Archived 3 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine, ZDNet, 25 August 2012. Retrieved 23 October 2012. Téléphonie mobile: Samsung prend l'explosion d'un de ses Galaxy "très au sérieux" – Faits Divers Archived 27 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine. lematin.ch. Retrieved 8 December 2013. Nair, Drishya (11 July 2013). "Samsung Galaxy S3 Explosion in Swiss Teenager's Pocket Leaves Her Thigh Numb". International Business Times UK. Archived from the original on 15 July 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2018. Kleinman, Alexis (10 July 2013). "Galaxy S3 Explodes, Injuring Woman: Report". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 23 September 2013. Retrieved 23 September 2013. "Galaxy S3 Reportedly Explodes, Samsung Investigating". HuffPost. 22 June 2012. Archived from the original on 3 October 2013. Retrieved 23 September 2013. "三星Galaxy手機電池爆炸 南韓學生屁股開花". 26 March 2012. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 20 September 2019. Drew Guarini (29 July 2013). "Exploding Samsung Galaxy S4 Allegedly Starts Fire, Destroys House". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 25 January 2014. Retrieved 5 January 2014. Axee (April 2013). "Another Samsung Galaxy S4 found burned at the bottom during charging". AxeeTech. Archived from the original on 18 December 2013. Retrieved 5 January 2014. "ЭКСКЛЮЗИВ. В РОССИИ ЗАФИКСИРОВАН СЛУЧАЙ ВОЗГОРАНИЯ SAMSUNG GALAXY S4" (in Russian and English). mail.ru. 11 December 2013. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Retrieved 5 January 2014. "'Exploding phone' sets pram on fire". Oxford Mail. 9 October 2013. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 5 January 2014. P., Daniel (16 October 2013). "Samsung acknowledges Galaxy S4 swelling battery issue, offers free replacements". PhoneArena. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 25 November 2013. "Samsung Launches Galaxy S4 Battery Trade-In Program". CCM. Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. Retrieved 5 January 2014. Wygand, Richard. "samsung galaxy s4 caught fire proof for samsung". YouTube. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 13 December 2013. Wygand, Richard (8 December 2013). "et tu, samsung? (Legal document received from Samsung)". Archived from the original on 14 December 2013. Retrieved 13 December 2013. Wygand, Richard. "samsung galaxy s4 catches on fire samsung wants silence". YouTube. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 13 December 2013. "Samsung S4 is Dangerous to Life". 9 November 2013. Archived from the original on 2 January 2014. "Galaxy S4 in the UAE bursts while charging, owner unhurt (thankfully)". VR-Zone. 10 July 2013. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Retrieved 5 January 2014. "Samsung Announces 'Product Exchange Program' For Galaxy Note 7 – But Don't Call It A Recall". The Consumerist. Consumer Reports. 2 September 2016. Archived from the original on 3 September 2016. Retrieved 3 September 2016. Samsung delays shipments of Galaxy Note 7 for quality control testing Archived 3 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine, 31 August 2016. The Guardian. Retrieved 1 September 2016 "Samsung recalls Galaxy Note 7 worldwide due to exploding battery fears". The Verge. 2 September 2016. Archived from the original on 3 September 2016. Retrieved 2 September 2016. "[Statement] Samsung Will Replace Current Note7 with New One". Samsung. 2 September 2016. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 17 September 2016. "Consumer Reports: Samsung Should Officially Recall the Galaxy Note7". Consumer Reports. 2 September 2016. Archived from the original on 4 September 2016. Retrieved 3 September 2016. "Government Issues Official Recall of Samsung Galaxy Note 7". Forbes. 16 September 2016. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 17 September 2016. Bart, Jansen (5 October 2016). "Smoking, popping Samsung Galaxy Note 7 prompts Southwest evacuation". USA Today. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016. Retrieved 5 October 2016. Golson, Jordan (8 October 2016). "Another replacement Galaxy Note 7 has reportedly caught fire". The Verge. Archived from the original on 9 October 2016. Retrieved 9 October 2016. Vincent, James (11 October 2016). "The Galaxy Note 7 is dead". The Verge. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2016. "Samsung permanently stops Galaxy Note 7 production". BBC News. 11 October 2016. Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2016. New Galaxy Leaks Reveal Samsung's Shiny Challenge To The iPhone 7. Archived 8 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 24 November 2016. Golson, Jordan (14 October 2016). "The Galaxy Note 7 will be banned from all US airline flights". The Verge. Archived from the original on 15 October 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2016. Etherington, Darrell (14 October 2016). "U.S. Department of Transportation bans Galaxy Note 7 from all flights". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on 15 October 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2016. "Samsung Galaxy Note 7: Qantas, Virgin and Singapore Airlines ban phone from flights". ABC News. 15 October 2016. Archived from the original on 15 October 2016. Retrieved 15 October 2016. "¿Tienes un Galaxy Note 7? Aerolíneas mexicanas prohíben volar con él". elfinanciero.com.mx. 17 October 2016. Archived from the original on 19 October 2016. Retrieved 18 October 2016. Samsung Recalls Top-Load Washing Machines Due to Risk of Impact Injuries Archived 4 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, 4 November 2016 Puga, Lauren (12 February 2015). "Pepsi Ads Seen in Personal Videos on Samsung Smart TVs". IGN. Archived from the original on 18 February 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Pelé IP Ownership LLC v. Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., No. 16-03354 (N.D. Ill. amended complaint filed May 25, 2016)". Archived from the original on 8 August 2016. Retrieved 23 June 2016. Batterman, L. Robert (23 June 2016). "Soccer Legend Pelé Calls for a Yellow Card against Samsung". The National Law Review. Proskauer Rose LLP. Archived from the original on 26 June 2016. Retrieved 23 June 2016. "Samsung Smart TVs Force Ads Onto Menu Screen". 21 December 2016. Archived from the original on 22 December 2016. Retrieved 21 December 2016. "2013/4/1 論壇打手事蹟 ─ 2012" (in Chinese). taiwansamsungleaks.org. Archived from the original on 1 April 2013. Retrieved 15 September 2013. "台灣三星動了！對於最近TaiwanSamsungLeaks網站的爆料發出四點回應聲明". 癮科技 Cool3c. 5 April 2013. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. "聘工讀生上網護航 三星挨轟 ｜ 蘋果新聞網 ｜ 蘋果日報". 蘋果新聞網. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013. "行銷手段挨轟 三星：停止論壇操作 – 自由電子報 即時新聞". Archived from the original on 19 April 2013. Retrieved 15 September 2013. ETtoday 新聞雲 (6 April 2013). "網路行銷惹爭議！ 台灣三星：尊重評論並停止論壇操作". ETtoday 東森新聞雲. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 15 September 2013. zdnet (25 October 2013). "Samsung fined $340K in Taiwan for smearing rivals". ZDNet. Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved 9 November 2013. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Samsung Electronics. Official website Samsung Electronics official global blog Samsung Members Community Companies portal South Korea portal