GMM Grammy Public Company Limited (Thai: จีเอ็มเอ็ม แกรมมี่ or stylized as G"MM' Grammy) is the largest media conglomerate entertainment company in Thailand. Grammy top artists include Bird Thongchai, Silly Fools, Loso, Tai Orathai, Bie Sukrit, Tata Young, Mos Patiparn, Bodyslam, Getsunova, Joey Boy,... In addition to its music business, the company is involved in concert production, artist management, film and television production and publishing. In 2023, GMM Grammy has joined hands with RS Group, another famous Thai music label to establish a joint venture called Across The Universe. The company has twelve music subsidiaries: Genie Records – Pop/rock records Grammy Gold – Thai country records (luk thung) Grammy Big – Compilation records Sanamluang Music – Indie records White Music – Pop records GMMTV RECORDS – Pop/ost records One Music – Pop/ost records Genelab – Pop/rock records Thaidol Music – Thai northeast country records (Mor lam) White Fox – Pop idol records GNEST – Pop idol records YGMM – Pop idol records GMMTV RECORDS is under GMM Channel Digital TV department and One Music are under GMM One Digital TV department. Manufacturing and distribution comes under MGA Co. Ltd., while the Imagine record store chain is a company-owned retailer. Music publishing is handled by GMM Music Publishing International Co., Ltd., while GMM Grammy licensed karaoke music and equipment is handled by Clean Karaoke. Current artists in the GMM Grammy label include (incomplete list): Past artists in the GMM Grammy label include (incomplete list): GMM Grammy has conducted business in the film industry through various subsidiary studios: Grammy Film (1995–2000), GMM Pictures (2002–2004), GMM Tai Hub (GTH, 2004–2015), and GDH 559 (2016–present). Grammy Film and GMM Pictures were wholly owned subsidiaries, while GTH was formed in 2004 as a joint venture with Tai Entertainment and Hub Ho Hin Bangkok, following their successful 2003 co-production My Girl. GMM Grammy owns a 51% stake in GDH 559, which was formed in 2016 as GTH's successor following disagreements which led to the departure of Tai Entertainment. GMM Z Co., Ltd. is a subsidiary of GMM Grammy that produces and distributes satellite television set-top boxes airing free-to-air channels and its own content. It formerly operated Z PAY TV, a pay television platform offering premium and exclusive content such as German Bundesliga, UEFA Euro 2012, and channels from FOX International Channels before it was sold to CTH. GMM Grammy has 2 digital television channels: One 31 Channel 31 (high definition) GMM 25 Channel 25 (standard definition) Production marques, studios which produce lakorns, TV series, TV shows, game shows and variety shows, including: A-Time Media CHANGE 2561 (with Adelfos Co Ltd and Saithip Montrikul Na Audhaya) GMM Channel (Owner of GMM 25) GDH 559 GMMTV GMM Bravo Me Mi Ti Nadao Bangkok The One Enterprise (Owner of One 31, merged from GMM One TV, Exact, and Scenario) Atime Media, a subsidiary of GMM Grammy, operates the following stations: Chill FM Online EFM 94 Green Wave 106.5 FM Hot 91.5 (disbanded in 2013) Magazines produced by GMM Grammy include: Image – Fashion, beauty, society news. Madame Figaro Magazine – Fashion and beauty "targeting sophisticated and highly educated women who do not need 'how to'". Her World – The Thai edition of the popular Singaporean women's magazine. Maxim – The Thai edition of the popular lad mag. Attitude – The Thai edition of the British gay lifestyle magazine. In Magazine – Fashion and Entertainment GMM Grammy has partial stakes in the Bangkok Post and the Matichon Group, which publishes several Thai-language dailies, including Matichon and Khao Sod. Se-Education PLC – A chain of university bookstores. Media of Thailand List of record labels: 0-9 "Companies/Securities in Focus: GRAMMY : GMM GRAMMY PUBLIC COMPANY LIMITED". set.or.th. Stock Exchange of Thailand. Retrieved 27 April 2020. "Annual Report 2018 GMM Grammy Public Company Limited" (PDF). p. 26. Retrieved 27 April 2020. Jason Tan (27 March 2018). "'Thai wave' in showbiz poised for big splash in China". Nikkei Asian Review. Retrieved 27 April 2020. GMM Grammy – the largest media conglomerate on the Stock Exchange of Thailand Nanat Suchiva (22 July 2017). "Mr Expo reflects on the big event". Bangkok Post. Retrieved 27 April 2020. Soon after, Mr Kriengkrai agreed to sell a 50% stake in Index to GMM Grammy Plc, Thailand's largest entertainment company. Sarah Newell (24 March 2016). "This Thailand Tycoon's Private Palace Is a Pool-Filled Oasis". Bloomberg News. Retrieved 27 April 2020. Paiboon, the 66-year-old chairman of GMM Grammy, Thailand's largest media company... “GRAMMY x RS” ร่วมทุนตั้งกิจการร่วมค้า “อะครอส เดอะ ยูนิเวิร์ส” ลุยธุรกิจเพลง "Major shareholders – Investor Relations – G"MM' GRAMMY". grammy.listedcompany.com. GMM Grammy. Retrieved 6 December 2022. "GMM pumping B20m into Change 2561". Bangkok Post. Official website GMMTV GDH559 – GDH 559. ฟังเพลง – GMM Grammy's Entertainment Web Portal. GMM Grammy at the Stock Exchange of Thailand.