Stuart Little is a mixed live-action and animated American film franchise based on the 1945 children's novel Stuart Little by E. B. White. The films are produced by Franklin / Waterman Productions and released by Columbia Pictures. The franchise follows the adventures of Stuart Little, an orphan mouse who is adopted into a human family and embarks on life-changing adventures. Stuart (voiced by Michael J. Fox) is an anthropomorphic mouse who is adopted into a human family. His new parents, (Geena Davis, Hugh Laurie) are thrilled with him, but everyone else is not. Through a series of adventures he eventually gains the love of his big brother George, (Jonathan Lipnicki), acceptance by the extended Little family, and even the grudging tolerance of the family cat Snowbell (voiced by Nathan Lane), who is a member of an alley cat Mafia-like gang that wants to kill Stuart. In the sequel, Stuart (voiced by Michael J Fox) and his brother George (Jonathan Lipnicki) are attending school together, but his mother (Geena Davis) doesn't seem to think Stuart is capable of taking care of himself. Later, Stuart meets a bird named Margalo (voiced by Melanie Griffith) who he unintentionally saves from an evil Falcon (voiced by James Woods) and eventually becomes smitten with. But one day when Margalo is nowhere to be found, Stuart and Snowbell (voiced by Nathan Lane) team up to go and find her. In the third film, Stuart (voiced by Michael J. Fox) and his family are spending their summer vacation in a cabin near the fictional Lake Garland. Stuart signs up to be a lake-scout in an attempt to prove to his mother (voiced by Geena Davis) that he doesn't need to be watched over all the time. Soon, Stuart meets a new friend: a skunk named Reeko (voiced by Wayne Brady) whom he quickly befriends. But when a ferocious puma named the Beast (voiced by Virginia Madsen) hatches a plot to eat Snowbell (voiced by Kevin Schon), Stuart must gather up all his courage to save him. It was reported by the Tracking Board and Zimbio that a new Stuart Little film was in development by Sony Pictures Animation and Red Wagon Productions with Douglas Wick and Lucy Fisher returning as the producers. Similar to the first two films, it will feature a combination of live-action and computer animation. The reboot will not be a sequel to the previous films and is said to be in the vein of a John Hughes film. It has been stated that the film will be a more faithful adaptation of the E.B. White novel than the previous films, and was originally set to be released in either 2018 or 2019. As of 2023, the film's status remains unknown. On October 3, 2023, it was announced an animated series reboot of Stuart Little is currently in the works at Sony Pictures Television Kids. Various video games based on Stuart Little were produced, but were mostly based on the films. Stuart Little: Big City Adventures based on the 1999 film, was released for Microsoft Windows in 1999. Stuart Little: The Journey Home based on the 1999 film, was released exclusively for the Game Boy Color in 2001. A game based on Stuart Little 2 was released for the PlayStation, Game Boy Advance, and Microsoft Windows in 2002. A third game, entitled Stuart Little 3: Big Photo Adventure was released exclusively for the PlayStation 2 in 2005, although it is not related to the film Stuart Little 3: Call of the Wild. List indicator(s) A dark gray cell indicates the character was not featured in that installment. A V indicates a performance through voice-over work. "Stuart Little is Getting A Remake". CinemaBlend.com. August 2, 2015. "A 'Stuart Little' Live Action Reboot Is In The Works Under Sony Pictures And Red Wagon Ent". kpopstarz.com. August 3, 2015. "Stuart Little Remake Planned at Sony". MovieWeb.com. August 3, 2015. "MIPJunior & MIPCOM: New Toons from Sony Kids, Blue Ant, MIAM! & Monster, Plus More 'Fireman Sam' & 'Polly Pocket'". www.animationmagazine.net. "Stuart Little". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Stuart Little". www.metacritic.com. Retrieved 2023-10-18. "Stuart Little 2 - Rotten Tomatoes". www.rottentomatoes.com. 2002-07-19. Retrieved 2023-10-18. "Stuart Little 2". www.metacritic.com. Retrieved 2023-10-18. "Stuart Little 3: Call of the Wild". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Stuart Little at IMDb Stuart Little 2 at IMDb Stuart Little 3: Call of the Wild at IMDb