Tom & Jerry (released as Tom & Jerry: The Movie in the United Kingdom) is a 2021 American live-action/animated slapstick comedy film based on the cartoon characters Tom and Jerry created by William Hanna and Joseph Barbera, produced by Warner Animation Group and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. It is the second theatrical film based on the characters, following Tom and Jerry: The Movie (1992). The film is directed by Tim Story and written by Kevin Costello. It stars Chloë Grace Moretz, Michael Peña, Colin Jost, Rob Delaney, Pallavi Sharda, Jordan Bolger, Patsy Ferran, and Ken Jeong in live-action roles, with Nicky Jam, Bobby Cannavale, and Lil Rel Howery in voice roles. The titular duo are voiced by William Hanna via archival recordings, with additional vocals from Kaiji Tang and André Sogliuzzo (though the characters are listed as themselves in the credits). Set in a world co-populated by humans and cartoon animals, the film follows Tom enlisted to catch Jerry, whose presence threatens New York City's fanciest hotel and its planned high-profile Indian-themed wedding. Warner Bros. executives wanted the film to "be what Tom and Jerry is", as "the studio understands how much of its history is rooted in these iconic characters". From a live-action film in 2009, to an animated film in 2015, and to a hybrid film combining live-action and animation in 2018, the film was in development hell, as Warner Bros. tried finding a writer "to pen the right take on the characters". The film also draws inspiration from silent comedies, such as Charlie Chaplin films, as reference for the filmmakers to explore a lot of humor and storytelling associated with silent characters. Other cited influences for the film's story include Home Alone 2: Lost in New York and Dunston Checks In. Many elements from the original cartoons were featured in the film, such as their sound effects, Tom being a jazz pianist, Tom's Rube Goldberg mouse trap, Jerry's heartbeat, Jerry's theft of food and items, and some of William Hanna's voice tracks for the titular duo. The film pays homage to many classic Tom and Jerry shorts, including Mouse Trouble (1944), Mouse in Manhattan (1945), and The Cat Concerto (1947). Tom & Jerry was theatrically released by Warner Bros. Pictures in the United States on February 26, 2021, alongside a one-month streaming release on HBO Max. The film had grossed $136.5 million worldwide, on a $50‒79 million production budget. It received generally negative reviews from critics, who criticized the screenplay for its human cast and lack of ambition, while some praised its blend of animation and live-action, performances, score, entertainment value, nostalgic tone, and faithfulness to the source material. The film was later a success on Netflix. Tom Cat, who dreams of being a jazz pianist, moves to New York and buskes in Central Park, while Jerry Mouse is in search of a new home. After Tom's piano is destroyed in an altercation, he chases Jerry, but accidentally tackles a young woman named Kayla Forester, causing her to lose her job. Down on her luck, Kayla wants to prove her talents and looks for a position at New York's fanciest hotel, the Royal Gate, where Jerry moves in and Tom fails to break in. Kayla, with a stolen resume, is hired to help plan a high-profile wedding and gets a tour of the hotel, while Jerry's usual antics involve stealing food and items to ramp up his new home, and Tom plans more strategies to enter the hotel and capture Jerry. Local celebrities Preeta Mehta and her fiancé Ben are greeted, as they arrive, along with their pets Spike and Toots. All, except for Spike, are unaware of Jerry stealing from Preeta's handbag. As the couple and their pets are escorted to their room, Jerry's presence is revealed, which puts the wedding and the hotel at risk. Kayla offers to catch Jerry, but fails and realizes that he will be hard to catch. After many failed attempts, Tom successfully enters the hotel, and his ensuing chase after Jerry wrecks a hotel room. Due to noise complaints, Kayla comes to check, but she befriends Tom, due to their shared goal of catching Jerry. The hotel's owner and general manager Mr. Dubros hires Tom to exterminate Jerry, while Tom and Kayla's boss Terence threatens to fire them if Tom cannot catch Jerry. After more failed attempts, Tom designs an elaborate mouse trap that gets Jerry out of the hotel. Meanwhile, Kayla helps with the wedding plans and learns that Preeta's engagement ring is missing. Jerry returns, to clash with Tom on the piano, and reveals to Kayla that he had Preeta's ring and agrees to give it back to her if she lets him live in the hotel. Before Kayla can agree, Terence returns from walking Spike and notices Tom looking for Jerry hiding in Kayla's coat pocket, creating a scene that causes Spike, Tom, and Jerry's chase to destroy the hotel's lobby. Terence is suspended, while Kayla is promoted to event manager, for returning Preeta's ring. Kayla tells Tom and Jerry that they will have to get along and spend the next day bonding if they want to stay in the hotel, to which they reluctantly agree. While Kayla takes care of the hotel and manages the wedding with the crew, Tom and Jerry explore the city, but are imprisoned at a pound, after inadvertently committing fan interference on a baseball game. A vengeful Terence separately visits Tom and Jerry and feeds them lies about what they said about each other behind their backs, inciting them to a battle at the ceremony that throws the wedding into carnage and destroys the rest of the hotel. After Kayla comes clean and leaves in humiliation, Terence evicts Tom, and Preeta renounces the wedding. A sorrowful Tom and Jerry put their differences aside, and convince Kayla and the hotel crew, including a skeptical Terence, to salvage the wedding. The pair lure Preeta and Toots to Central Park, where the wedding is held. Kayla promises to Preeta that Tom and Jerry have atoned for their behavior, and Ben apologizes to Preeta for his extensive expenses, in light of impressing her dad. Kayla and the stolen resume's owner reconcile with each other and get jobs at the hotel, while Tom becomes a jazz pianist and plays the piano for Toots, with Jerry joining the party until a mishap causes them to fight again. In the post-credit scene, Ben receives a bill for both weddings. Chloë Grace Moretz as Kayla Judith Forester, a young inexperienced wedding planner of the Royal Gate Hotel who enlists Tom to catch Jerry. Like the humans in the cartoons, she enlists Tom's help to get rid of Jerry and promises to reward Tom (here being the hotel's pianist), if he succeeds in catching Jerry. Michael Peña as Terence Mendoza, a mean deputy general manager of the Royal Gate Hotel, and the boss of Tom and Kayla. Like the humans in the cartoons, he threatens to evict Tom, if he ends up causing destruction and fails to catch Jerry. Colin Jost as Ben, the groom of the Royal Gate Hotel's planned wedding and Spike's owner. Pet Peeve was also the first cartoon to showcase Spike having an owner. Rob Delaney as Mr. Henry Dubros, a wealthy, friendly general manager and owner of the Royal Gate Hotel. Pallavi Sharda as Preeta Mehta, the bride of the Royal Gate Hotel's planned wedding, and Toots' owner. Puss n' Toots also revealed that Toots has an owner. Jordan Bolger as Cameron, a bartender at the Royal Gate Hotel. Patsy Ferran as Joy the Bell Girl, a socially awkward Royal Gate Hotel bellhop. Ken Jeong as Chef Jackie, a chef and baker of the Royal Gate Hotel who hates mice. Paolo Bonolis as Wedding guest. Ozuna as Assistant hotel staff. Tom as Himself, an adult, persistent and accident-prone blue/gray bicolor cat who is enlisted by Kayla to get Jerry out of the Royal Gate Hotel. He does not have a speaking role, but T-Pain voices his natural singing that mimics Ray Charles, with archived vocals from William Hanna, and additional vocals by Kaiji Tang. Jerry as Himself, a young, cheeky and clever brown house mouse who moves in at the Royal Gate Hotel. He does not have a speaking role, but his vocals are archived from Hanna, with additional vocals by André Sogliuzzo. Bobby Cannavale as Spike, Ben's muscular, brutish, yet goofy gray American bulldog who is the stereotypical dumb brute that clashes with Tom. Nicky Jam as Butch, a disgruntled black cat who leads an alley cat gang and teases Tom. The Plastic Cup Boyz as the Alley Cats, an alley cat gang led by Butch that claim to live on the Royal Gate Hotel's alley: Joey Wells as Lightning. Harry Ratchford as Topsy. Na'im Lynn as Meathead. Spank Horton as Ash. Lil Rel Howery as Angel/Devil Tom, Tom's shoulder angel and shoulder devil. Utkarsh Ambudkar as Real Estate Rat, a rat who works as a real estate agent. Tim Story as Pigeon Announcer, a singing pigeon. Jeff Bergman as Droopy. (uncredited cameo) Droopy also makes another cameo appearance, via a billboard in the background, during the film's opening sequence. Other Tom and Jerry characters who appear in non-speaking roles include Toots, Preeta's shy fluffy cat and love interest for Tom, Goldie, the Royal Gate Hotel's goldfish, and Clyde, a large cat in Butch's gang. On January 22, 2009, Warner Bros. Pictures announced plans for a new Tom and Jerry theatrical film, as a live-action/CGI hybrid film produced by Dan Lin with a script written by Eric Gravning, following the success of Alvin and the Chipmunks. It would have followed Tom and Jerry's origins over a Chicago backdrop, where they reluctantly work together to get back home. On April 6, 2015, plans shifted to a CGI-animated film produced by Warner Animation Group, with a script written by Bryan Schulz and Cornelius Uliano, who co-wrote The Peanuts Movie with Craig Schulz. It was about a young family who moves into a New England country house inhabited by Jerry and adopts Tom to get rid of him. The duo would team up to protect the family and their house from an outside threat, and learn the meaning of family and friendship. Cate Adams and Jesse Ehrman, who remains an executive producer on the final film, were set to oversee it. Tom and Jerry: Cowboy Up! recycled parts of the script. On October 15, 2018, Warner Animation Group hired Tim Story to direct a Tom and Jerry film set as "an eye-popping blend of classic animation and live-action", inspired by Who Framed Roger Rabbit's technique. It would begin filming in 2019, with a script written by Kevin Costello that was pitched in 2017 and purely influenced from the original cartoons. When in discussions with Warner Bros. executives about what he was interested in directing next, Story "immediately mentioned his admiration for the characters and how he'd love tackling that property", after they brought the film as an option. Story memorized the original cartoons growing up, and claimed that it was his dream project to direct a Tom and Jerry film. While Costello's idea was to place the cat and mouse in a fancy New York hotel set to plan an Indian wedding, as "a much bigger canvas" for the duo and their antics than their usual average-sized house. The fancy hotel backdrop and the setting in New York City, where some of the old shorts were set, also gave the creative team more opportunities to expand Tom and Jerry's world and shenanigans. That, and the expanded opportunities for the animators to animate more animals in the classic Tom and Jerry style and animation, were also why the Indian wedding was in the script. Director Tim Story, producer Chris DeFaria, and writer Kevin Costello all agreed to use the old shorts, even pictures of them taped in the production office, as reference material for the film, which the studio gave them access to. In addition to the original Tom and Jerry theatrical shorts and Who Framed Roger Rabbit, the film pays tribute to silent cinema. During production, Story also ran through the classic shorts from memory, re-visited the franchise's history, and re-watched some Charlie Chaplin, for more inspiration in the film's humor and storytelling with silent characters. Story was against the idea of making Tom and Jerry fluently talk, because they only sparingly spoke in the original cartoons and that their charm comes from their non-verbal behavior, activities and interactions. Story compared Tom and Jerry's relationship to a sibling rivalry, where despite their mayhem and hatred for each other, they would sometimes need each other and put their differences aside to save the day, which adapts that core theme from the cartoons into the movie. He hoped the film will appeal to longtime fans and a new generation of audiences, and quotes "Fingers crossed, if they [William Hanna and Joseph Barbera] are looking from above, they'll be proud of what we made". Warner Bros. played a part in supervising the film, ensuring it stays as true to the source material's original roots as possible, which includes ensuring it does not tone down the cartoon violence. Working on Tom and Jerry was a hugely exciting and intimidating experience. There's a reason these characters are still so popular, 81 years later, all over the world, and I wanted to be extremely careful to honor that. Tom and Jerry had to be themselves, look like themselves, not talk like themselves, and obviously, engage in absurd, gleeful, over-the-top cartoon violence. I had so much fun going through the old shorts, trying to break everything down on a character level, and finding ways to recontextualize classic elements in a way that felt nostalgic but new. — Kevin Costello In March 2019, it was reported that Zoey Deutch and Olivia Cooke were frontrunners for the lead live-action role of Kayla, "who teams up with Tom to stop the pesky Jerry from ruining an important event for herself". Additionally, Jennifer Lawrence, Camila Cabello, Yara Shahidi, Kelly Marie Tran, Becky G and Isabela Moner were all in consideration for the role. In April, Chloë Grace Moretz was in final negotiations to star in the film. Moretz described Kayla as "a lot like Jerry" and as "a girl who gunned for what she wanted to achieve but realizes that time and honesty is what will prevail in the end", as well as "a total goofball", the latter aspect which allowed Moretz to "lean into who [she is] in real life". She said Kayla is "a little unlikeable with some of the decisions she makes", yet she still wanted the character to feel likeable. Moretz was inspired in her performance by Bob Hoskins' performance as Eddie Valiant in Who Framed Roger Rabbit, as well as by actresses Sandra Bullock, Jennifer Aniston, Lucille Ball, and Meg Ryan. Moretz, an avid fan of the source material, says the film "really does harken back to the Tom and Jerry we love". When she was first given the script, she was openly anxious about the film and worried that a more modern take on the characters would not work. She ended up being proud of the film's faithfulness to the material and characters, and felt it is a great way to introduce them to a new generation of audiences. Later that month, in March 2019, it was reported that Peter Dinklage was considered for the role of Terrance, Kayla's boss and the human antagonist of the film. In May 2019, Michael Peña joined the cast in the role Dinklage was eyed for. Colin Jost, Ken Jeong, Rob Delaney, Jordan Bolger and Pallavi Sharda were added to the cast in July. Patsy Ferran was revealed to be part of the cast in September 2019. Besides Moretz, Peña, Jost, Jeong, Delaney, Bolger, Sharda and Ferran have all grown up with Tom and Jerry, and were thrilled to take their roles. According to director Tim Story, "Everybody knew exactly what this movie is about. Everybody knew those characters. Everybody was starting with a shared knowledge of these characters and kind of got what the movie should be". In November 2020, Nicky Jam and Lil Rel Howery revealed that they have been cast in the film in voice roles. On December 2, 2020, Jam revealed that he will be the voice of Butch Cat in the film. Principal photography began in July 2019 at Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden in Hertfordshire, England. The film was shot by cinematographer Alan Stewart, on the Sony VENICE cinema cameras and Panavision Primo 70 and Primo Artiste Lenses. Animators were present during filming, allowing cast members to improvise, while puppeteers handled figures of the animated characters that were designed to match their exact size, which helped the filmmakers with framing and helped the animators with lighting and other cues. This resulted in a seamless integration of animation and live-action. Filming ended in September 2019, before the industry's temporary shutdown in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. For the film's production design, production designer James Hambidge went for a color palette that would avoid causing the animated characters' colors to clash with it. Hambidge, director Tim Story, and cinematographer Alan Stewart also ensured the film looks "bright, poppy and upbeat" yet colorful and realistic, "in keeping with the original cartoons", and avoided making it look drab and dark. Story also avoided putting the characters in the human world. He acknowledges that Tom and Jerry were set in a realistic yet colorful universe, where their cartoony rules co-exist with humans who also have their own set of rules to live by, and aimed to bring their world to life. Who Framed Roger Rabbit was also acknowledged as inspiration for the film's live-action worldbuilding interaction with cartoon characters. When shooting the film, Stewart also took inspiration from the 1945 short “Mouse in Manhattan”, to recreate how it was more realistically-shot than the usual Tom and Jerry cartoon (which Story knows were usually shot in a rather flat, profile way), for the film's setting in Manhattan. As we were talking before about design, there's a homage to the older world that we wanted to bring. There's a famous short where Jerry goes to Manhattan – I think it's called "Mouse in Manhattan" — and he goes to Manhattan, and he sees New York for the first time and the skyscrapers. We wanted to be sure that we were able to kind of recreate the sense of that. — Tim Story, in an interview to Below the Line Both visual effects and animation services were provided by Framestore, who took inspiration from the original cartoons' world and animation, and films like Who Framed Roger Rabbit and Mary Poppins, for the movie's blend of classic animation and live-action. Framestore hired 3D animators with experience in 2D animation, to animate the characters. Despite being 3D models, the animators aimed to replicate 2D and created classic 2D tools for their weight, rendering, shading, outlines, line of action, smear frames, inbetweening, onion skinning, motion blur, and squash and stretch. This technique is often confused with cel shading, an animation technique where cartoon rendering makes 3D computer graphics appear flat and mimic a cartoon style, but it's actually a new form of animation that director Tim Story referred as "2D-plus animation". Story felt that keeping their classic 2D look and feel into the art direction and character animation for the film respected their beloved, iconic cartoon state, and emphasized how "people would have a real nostalgia experience with the film", by doing so. Producer Chris DeFaria also highlighted that "Tom and Jerry are really cute; their designs were really an achievement in animation. The purity of form, how expressive they can be", and wanted the film to keep that spirit alive. To maintain the original '1940s-’1950s Tom and Jerry theatrical shorts' 2D-animated character designs, art style, movements, and expressions, the team used the classic shorts and many reference images throughout the production office. Animation director Michael Eames looked back on the original Tom and Jerry shorts' classic 2D art style and animation. Eames also hired 2D sketch viz artists, to design classic poses and expressions of the characters in 2D, as a guide for the 3D animators. This helped the animators incorporate the classic 2D art style and animation from the original Tom and Jerry cartoons into the film, and it helped them refine and sculpt the 2D character shapes and details that they could not achieve in the animation process. Animation work was done remotely during the pandemic, with the filmmakers doing creative exploration on certain shots, and finalizing material through production groups. Additional animation work was done to some of the backgrounds, like shading the vibrant sky with 2D animation and saturating the colors. The film's cast, such as Chloë Grace Moretz, also applauded the creative decision to keep the characters as close to their classic 2D finish as possible without adapting them "into computer-generated modern characters, because that's not who they are." One of the first questions was what were they expecting them to look like? I was a big fan of those cartoons, and there's been other films in success that have also tried a different approach in terms of look, 3D, sometimes making them basically real inside the world and still just a cartoon look to them. But I was really interested in making sure that these characters look like the original material. By doing that, I think people would have a real nostalgia experience with the film, so that was important. — Tim Story, in an interview to Below the Line On July 22, 2020, it was announced that Tim Story's recurring collaborator and music composer Christopher Lennertz will compose the film's score. The album was released by WaterTower Music on February 12, having 30 tracks. The soundtrack also has some songs made for the film by various artists, including Allen "BizKit" Arthur's song "Showoff" in his jazz saxophonist roots. Wanting to capture the feel of the original cartoons' orchestral music (and usual use of jazz music), Story and Lennertz revisited them as reference and inspiration, for the film's music, but added some more genres (such as Indian music and some hip-hop which was largely jazz-based) into the mix, to be inclusive to more cultures in every generation possible. An exclusive Tom and Jerry theme tune also played in the movie's end credits, while a short version of it is also available on the soundtrack. More music inspiration from the original cartoons involves the film's portrayal of Tom as a jazz pianist, such as Tom playing jazz pianist Eric Reed's piece "Soft Shoe", when busking in Central Park. The movie also has a scene where Tom sings the Ray Charles song "Don't You Know?" to impress Toots, which Story confirms was "consistent with the ’40s and ’50s cartoons." For the film's sound design, Story was able to get the rights to archive many sound effects from the MGM Cartoon library, such as William Hanna's high-pitched screams for Tom, Jerry's musical laughs, and the impacts of the characters being hit, which were edited by Peter S. Elliot (another recurring collaborator of Tim Story) to sound beefier. Wanting to stay as faithful to the original Tom and Jerry theatrical shorts as possible, Story promised that "audiences will hear the sound effects they're used to, as Tom and Jerry chase after each other and destroy everything in their path." Tom & Jerry was released in the United States on February 26, 2021, by Warner Bros. Pictures, in theaters and for a month streaming on HBO Max. The movie coincidentally released on Tex Avery's birthdate; the movie has cameos of one of Avery's characters, Droopy, in an animal shelter and on a Joker parody billboard. It is the first film to officially debut the new Warner Animation Group logo to match with the new shield that Warner Bros. debuted in November 2019. It was originally scheduled to be released on April 16, 2021, but was pushed up to December 23, 2020. The film was then pushed back to March 5, 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, before moving up a week in order to avoid competition with Disney's Raya and the Last Dragon. Samba TV estimated that 1.2 million U.S. households streamed the film over its opening weekend on HBO Max. By the end of its first month, the film was watched in over 2.6 million U.S. households. On March 8, 2021, some HBO Max viewers who attempted to watch the film were accidentally shown Zack Snyder's Justice League, a movie which was supposed to release 10 days later. HBO Max quickly fixed the issue within two hours. On September 1, 2020, it was announced that Australian toy company Moose Toys made a deal with Warner Bros. to make merchandise for the film. On October 28, 2020, it was announced that an animatronic float of the titular duo will appear in the 94th Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade, to promote the film. On February 20, 2021, Warner Bros. released two new shorts onto HBO Max titled Tom and Jerry Special Shorts to honor the 81st anniversary of Tom and Jerry, as well as to promote the film. These shorts share the same animation style and come from the same crew of HBO Max's new Looney Tunes Cartoons, also produced by Warner Bros. Animation.[better source needed] The shorts were removed a month later for unknown reasons, but were brought back on July 8, 2021. The film's writer, Kevin Costello, has seen the shorts and acclaimed them. On March 6, 2021, Rob Delaney had been the star guest Announcer for Ant & Dec's Saturday Night Takeaway, whereas the titular characters made an appearance themselves with Tom Jones. The film was available for rent on April 16, while Warner Bros. Home Entertainment released it on DVD, Blu-ray, and digital on May 18, 2021. Tom & Jerry grossed $46.5 million in the United States and Canada, and $90 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $136.5 million. In the United States and Canada, the film grossed $4 million from 2,479 theaters on its first day of release. It went on to debut to $14.1 million, the second-best opening weekend of the pandemic behind Warner Bros.'s December release Wonder Woman 1984 ($16.7 million). The opening weekend audiences were 51% female and 46% under the age of 17, while 35% was Hispanic, 33% Caucasian, 21% African American, and 11% Asian. David Gross, who runs the movie consulting firm Franchise Entertainment Research, said of the figure: "With half of theaters still closed, the pandemic still a threat, and Tom & Jerry available at home, this is a very good opening." In its second weekend the film grossed $6.6 million and in its third made $4 million, finishing second behind newcomer Raya and the Last Dragon both times. The film was initially released in seven international markets, grossing $1.45 million; Singapore led with $457,000. By its second weekend of international release the film was playing in 16 markets, including debuting at number one in Brazil ($746,000) and Mexico ($395,000). Several publications reported that Tom & Jerry received mostly negative reviews, upon release. According to Screen Rant writer Adam Bentz, early reviews for the film reportedly noted its entertainment value for families and nostalgic appeal for adult audiences, but criticized the script for its human cast and lack of ambition. The hybrid live-action/animation style got mixed reactions. On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 30% based on 130 reviews, with an average rating of 4.7/10. The site's critics consensus reads, "It isn't the worst of the long-squabbling duo's feature-length adventures, but Tom & Jerry is disappointingly short on the anarchic spirit of their classic shorts." On Metacritic, the film a has weighted average score of 32 out of 100 based on 20 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported 79% of audience members gave it a positive score, with 60% saying they would recommend it. The Hollywood Reporter's John DeFore said that audiences should just "rewatch Roger Rabbit instead" and wrote: "Tim Story's Tom & Jerry is five to ten minutes of action that might have worked in one of the cartoon duo's shorts, surrounded by an inordinate amount of unimaginative, unfunny human-based conflict." Kevin Maher of The Times gave the film a score of 1 out of 5 stars, writing: "nothing will prepare you for the tone-deaf nature of this live-action abomination that inserts our cartoon protagonists, Who Framed Roger Rabbit-style, into a crass Manhattan misadventure about a celebrity wedding gone awry." Clarisse Loughrey of The Independent gave the film a score of 1 out of 5 stars, describing it as "the cinematic equivalent of a sausage casing stuffed with mystery meat", though she praised Moretz's performance. Benjamin Lee of The Guardian gave the film a score of 2 out of 5 stars, writing: "While there's little to truly loathe in Fantastic Four and Ride Along director Tim Story's frantic new take on Tom & Jerry, there's also an equal lack of anything to truly love; this is a serviceable, if entirely forgettable attempt to relaunch an old property for a new audience." Tom & Jerry received some positive reviews, among other critics. Matt Fowler of IGN gave the film a score of 6/10, and wrote: "Tom & Jerry is a sufficient family offering with a cool cast, a sparkling soundtrack, and occasional fun. It's too bad that Tom and Jerry often feel like afterthoughts in their own film and that there wasn't much more for them to do other than serve the story of others." Charlotte O'Sullivan of the Evening Standard gave the film a score of 3 out of 5 stars, and wrote: "Ignore catty reviews that present this caper as soulless. Though horribly flawed, its internal organs are in the right place." Matthew Bond of Daily Mail gave the film a score of 3 out of 5 stars, writing "they’ve retained their mute, indestructible, 2-D animated personas and the end result is much funnier than expected." Brooke Price at The Banner, who also mentions the film's production as a reference, praised the film and found it entertaining, nostalgic, beautifully-animated and blended with live-action, and faithful to the source material. Peter Debruge of Variety was also positive on the film and said: "Truth be told, the movie's a pretty faithful extension of the frenemies' long-running feud — basically, the two cannot peacefully coexist under the same roof — and as such, we should be grateful to director Tim Story (Shaft) and screenwriter Kevin Costello (Brigsby Bear) for not dropping a two-ton anvil on our nostalgia, the way so many big-studio toonsploitation projects have in recent years." The movie was also nominated for the "Best VFX in Feature Film" award, at the 2021 Australian Effects & Animation Festival. Tom and Jerry in New York is an HBO Max original animated series produced by Warner Bros. Animation (outsourced by Renegade Animation, the team behind the 2014 Cartoon Network TV series The Tom and Jerry Show) that is a follow-up to the film, which follows Tom and Jerry as new residents of the Royal Gate Hotel, with their usual antics and mayhem to follow them all over the hotel, across Manhattan, New York City and going beyond. It was released on July 1, 2021. Text was copied from Tom and Jerry (2021 film) at Tom&Jerry Wiki, which is released under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 2.0 (Unported) (CC-BY-SA 3.0) license. "TOM AND JERRY". British Columbia Film Classification Office. February 8, 2021. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. "Collections Search | Tom & Jerry". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2022. "Tom & Jerry (2021) - Financial Information". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved June 11, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 28, 2021). "Warner Bros' 'Tom & Jerry' Runs Up Second-Best Opening During Pandemic With $13.7M". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 28, 2021. "Tom & Jerry (2021)". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Warner Bros. UK & Ireland (November 17, 2020). Tom & Jerry The Movie – Official Trailer. YouTube. Google LLC. Event occurs at 2:01. "Tom and Jerry". Writers Guild of America. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved October 26, 2020. "Director Series: Tim Story Shifts to Animated Hybrid for Tom & Jerry". February 24, 2021. "WB Hiring Chris Columbus and Tim Story To Develop New Scooby-Doo and Tom and Jerry Movies". Pearson, Ben (April 26, 2019). "WB's 'Tom and Jerry' Movie Lures Chloë Grace Moretz as Its Human Star". Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved November 18, 2020. Seddon, Gem (April 8, 2015). "New Animated Tom And Jerry Movie In The Works At Warner Bros". We Got This Covered.[better source needed] "Warner Bros. prepara nuovo film "Tom & Jerry"". DiCarlo Coratelli. "Director Tim Story brings a tale of Tom & Jerry to big and small screens". "'Tom & Jerry: The Movie' set visit: Chloë Grace Moretz reveals Roger Rabbit influence on the film (exclusive)". January 8, 2021. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021. "'Tom & Jerry (2021)' review by Kevin Costello - Letterboxd". "Frenemies in the Big City: 'Tom and Jerry' Director Tim Story & Team Discuss the New Hybrid Pic". "Tom & Jerry's Critically Panned Live-Action Movie Gets Second Life On Netflix 3 Years Later". Screen Rant. Nick Bythrow. Retrieved February 7, 2024. "T-Pain thrilled about role in new film 'Tom and Jerry'". March 2021. @KaijiTang (March 26, 2021). "Got permission to tell this funny story. I did the scratch track for this movie as Tom. Thought it was one and done. Come to find out, they put me in Additional Voices cause a lot of our track made it in! That's me you're hearing falling off buildings and tearing up hotel rooms" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Kaiji Tang on Twitter". "André Sogliuzzo on Twitter: "Though he doesn't say much, I am proud to announce I was able to voice in some small way, Jerry: The second most iconic mouse in all of animation! Now wreaking havoc in Tom & Jerry on HBO Max!"". Twitter. Retrieved March 21, 2021. "Tom & Jerry's Bizarre Joaquin Phoenix Joker Easter Egg Explained". "'Tom And Jerry' Headed To Big Screen As Live-Action/CGI Film". MTV. "Warner Bros Exec Dan Lin Talks 'Tom and Jerry' and 'Bone'". December 23, 2009. Barrett, Annie (January 22, 2009). "'Tom and Jerry': The film franchise?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2020. "{TB Exclusive} Warner Bros. Preparing For a New "Tom and Jerry" Feature Film". The Tracking Board. April 6, 2015. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "Tom and Jerry". Production List | Film & Television Industry Alliance. May 13, 2019. "Tom And Jerry Live-Action Movie Will Begin Production In Summer 2019, Plot Details". January 24, 2019. "Tom And Jerry Live-Action Movie Will Begin Production In Summer 2019". January 24, 2019. Seddon, Gem (April 8, 2015). "New Animated Tom And Jerry Movie In The Works At Warner Bros". We Got This Covered.[better source needed] "Warner Bros. prepara nuovo film "Tom & Jerry"". DiCarlo Coratelli. "Tom And Jerry". "Tom and Jerry – An eye-popping blend of classic animation and live action". February 25, 2021. Kroll, Justin (October 15, 2018). "'Tom and Jerry,' 'Scooby-Doo' Movies Land Top Filmmaking Talent at Warner Animation (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on January 8, 2020. Retrieved October 16, 2018. Fowler, Matt (February 23, 2021). "Tom and Jerry Director on the Film's Roger Rabbit Influences". IGN. Steven Weintraub (March 2021). "Director Tim Story on 'Tom and Jerry' and Why He Paid Homage to Tim Burton's 'Batman'". Collider. Costello, Kevin. "After pitching a take on Tom & Jerry to Warner Bros in 2017 ("What if Tom & Jerry tried to kill each other?"), they asked for my email address, which is ktgcostello@gmail.com. I explained the T was for my middle name, Tom, after my grandfather, and the G was for my other middle name, Gerald, after my other grandfather. Tom and Jerry are literally (basically) my middle names. And I think that's at least part of why they let me work on this movie. Papa Jerry is an author and journalist I've always looked up to and was so enthusiastic and supportive when I moved to LA to pursue this as a career. Papa Tom was a comedy and classic-cartoon obsessive whose brain would explode to see my name on this poster alongside William Hanna and Joseph Barbera. Tried really hard to honor the legacy of these three equally iconic duos :)". Instagram. ktgcostello. Retrieved December 23, 2020. "Tom & Jerry Director Reveals Film's Biggest Influences". Kroll, Justin (October 15, 2018). "'Tom and Jerry,' 'Scooby-Doo' Movies Land Top Filmmaking Talent at Warner Animation (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on January 8, 2020. Retrieved October 16, 2018. Bhavani, Divya Kala (February 11, 2021). "'Tom & Jerry' director Tim Story on the pressure and liberation around the cartoon series' iconism". The Hindu. Ramin Zahed (February 3, 2021). "Frenemies in the Big City: 'Tom and Jerry' Director Tim Story & Team Discuss the New Hybrid Pic". AnimationMagazine.com. Kay-b (February 24, 2021). "Interview: Director Tim Story brings TOM AND JERRY to life - The Beat". The Beat. "Edmond woman delighted by son's success as writer of new 'Tom and Jerry' movie". February 27, 2021. "Interview: Director Tim Story Talks Tom and Jerry". That's It LA. February 26, 2021. "The Story Process: Director Tim Story's 'Tom and Jerry' Brings 80-year-old Cartoon Icons Into Today". "Interview: Director Tim Story Talks Tom and Jerry". "Behind the Production of Tom and Jerry". February 16, 2021. "Tom and Jerry – an eye-popping blend of classic animation and live action". February 25, 2021. Bhavani, Divya Kala (February 11, 2021). "'Tom & Jerry' director Tim Story on the pressure and liberation around the cartoon series' iconism". The Hindu. Ramin Zahed (February 3, 2021). "Frenemies in the Big City: 'Tom and Jerry' Director Tim Story & Team Discuss the New Hybrid Pic". AnimationMagazine.com. Jackson Murphy (February 22, 2021). "Interview: Director Tim Story On His New Hybrid "Tom & Jerry" Movie – Animation Scoop". Animationscoop.com. "Tim Story on the Feuding Characters in His 'Tom & Jerry' Reboot: 'It's Not War; It's Sibling Rivalry'". Variety. Matt Donnelly. "Fun Facts About Tom & Jerry: The Movie 2021 From Director Tim Story". February 13, 2021. "Veteran Director Tim Story on the "Fun Game" of Creating Animation Hybrid Film 'Tom & Jerry'". The Hollywood Reporter. February 25, 2021. Shuler, Skyler (March 8, 2019). "Exclusive: Warner Bros. Interested In Zoey Deutch And Olivia Cooke For A Role In The Live-Action 'TOM and JERRY' Film". That Hashtag Show. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved March 10, 2019. Sneider, Jeff (April 26, 2019). "Exclusive: Chloë Grace Moretz to Star in WB's 'Tom and Jerry' Movie". Collider. Collider, Inc. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved September 9, 2019. Fernandez, Alexis (November 17, 2020). "Tom and Jerry First Look! Chloë Grace Moretz on Playing a 'Goofball' Opposite the Iconic Duo". People. New York City: Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on November 22, 2020. Retrieved November 18, 2020. "Tom and Jerry First Look! Chloë Grace Moretz on Playing a 'Goofball' Opposite the Iconic Duo". People. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021. "Cat-and-mouse hijinks return in new 'Tom & Jerry' movie". February 23, 2021. "Chloë Grace Moretz loved getting to be 'a goof and a ham' in 'Tom & Jerry The Movie' (exclusive)". March 24, 2021. "Tim Story's 'Tom and Jerry' Eyeing Peter Dinklage For Antagonist Role". March 26, 2019. Archived from the original on June 23, 2020. Retrieved March 27, 2019. N'Duka, Amanda (May 21, 2019). "Michael Peña Joins Hybrid 'Tom & Jerry' Movie At Warner Bros". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Business Media, LLC. Archived from the original on August 30, 2019. Retrieved September 9, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 2, 2019). "'Saturday Night Live's Colin Jost Joins Warner Bros.' 'Tom And Jerry'". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Business Media, LLC. Archived from the original on November 30, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2020. Couch, Aaron (July 30, 2019). "Warner Bros.' 'Tom and Jerry' Adds Ken Jeong and Rob Delaney". The Hollywood Reporter. MRC Media and Info. Archived from the original on July 30, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2019. "Alessandro Nivola, Gemma Arterton Head Killer Cast For BBC One/FX 3-Part Adaptation Of Rumer Godden Steamy Lit Classic 'Black Narcissus'". September 13, 2019. Archived from the original on September 13, 2019. Retrieved September 13, 2019. "Behind the Production of Tom and Jerry". February 16, 2021. "Colin Jost Talks 'Tom and Jerry'". "BATV Meets: Interview with Pallavi Sharda on 'Tom and Jerry: The Movie'". March 13, 2021. Nicky Jam [@NickyJamPR] (November 18, 2020). "I'm excited to announce that I will be one of the voices bringing the #TomAndJerryMovie to the big screen. Watch the trailer now – coming to theaters 2021! https://t.co/ttf2VGKnt1" (Tweet). Archived from the original on April 18, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2021 – via Twitter. Lil Rel Howery [@LilRel4] (November 17, 2020). "I'm very excited to be one of the voices bringing Tom & Jerry to the big screen. Such a huge fan of Tom & Jerry it's surreal to be part of this movie... The trailer drops tomorrow! #TomAndJerryMovie https://t.co/7pejemuz2s" (Tweet). Retrieved July 12, 2021 – via Twitter. "Nicky Jam reveló qué personaje interpretará en Tom y Jerry, la película". Spoiler - Bolavip (in Spanish). December 10, 2021. "'Tom and Jerry' Enlists Cinematographer Alan Stewart ('Aladdin,' 'Toff Guys')". GWW. February 20, 2019. Archived from the original on July 23, 2019. Retrieved March 10, 2019. "The Legendary Rivalry - Tom and Jerry, Shot on Sony VENICE Paired With Panavision Primo 70 and Primo Artiste Lenses". Y.M.Cinema - News & Insights on Digital Cinema. February 28, 2021. Retrieved February 28, 2021. "Life-size foam puppets helped bring 'Tom & Jerry' to the big screen". New York Post. Reed Tucker. Retrieved February 26, 2021. "'Tom & Jerry' reimagines the classic". Sweney, Mark (May 19, 2020). "How coronavirus has animated one section of the film industry". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2020. "Alan Stewart BSC / Tom and Jerry". "Behind the Production of Tom and Jerry". "Tom and Jerry do NOT talk: theblerdgurl interview with Tim Story and Chloe Moretz". theblerdgurl. "Frenemies in the Big City: 'Tom and Jerry' Director Tim Story & Team Discuss the New Hybrid Pic". "Alan Stewart BSC / Tom and Jerry". "Frenemies in the Big City: 'Tom and Jerry' Director Tim Story & Team Discuss the New Hybrid Pic". "Tom and Jerry (2021) | Chloë Grace Moretz, Director Tim Story & Colin Jost with Kiyra Lynn". YouTube. Hollywood First Look. "Frenemies in the Big City: 'Tom and Jerry' Director Tim Story & Team Discuss the New Hybrid Pic". "Tom & Jerry - Framestore". October 12, 2021. "Tom & Jerry Trailer - Framestore". November 17, 2020. "Cartoon Brew Podcast: Tim Story On How He Introduced Tom & Jerry To A Live-Action World". February 26, 2021. "Frenemies in the Big City: 'Tom and Jerry' Director Tim Story & Team Discuss the New Hybrid Pic". "Tom & Jerry The Movie Behind-The-Scenes Featurette Explains Why the Characters Remained 2D". February 20, 2021. "'Tom & Jerry' Featurette: Why Tom and Jerry Had to Retain Their 2D Looks in a 3D World". February 17, 2021. "The 'Tom & Jerry' Feature Team Proves Filmmakers Can Get Creative in Global Lockdown". IndieWire. April 10, 2020. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2020. "Frenemies in the Big City: 'Tom and Jerry' Director Tim Story & Team Discuss the New Hybrid Pic". "Quarantine Chronicles: How Animators On The Upcoming 'Tom And Jerry' Feature Are Staying Connected". May 8, 2020. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved December 12, 2020. "Interview: Director Tim Story Talks Tom and Jerry". "Frenemies in the Big City: 'Tom and Jerry' Director Tim Story & Team Discuss the New Hybrid Pic". D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 8, 2020). "How Animated Pics Like 'Tom & Jerry', 'SpongeBob Movie', 'Sing 2', Skydance's 'Luck' & More Are Working Through The COVID-19 Crisis". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Business Media, LLC. Archived from the original on May 13, 2020. Retrieved June 25, 2020. "Tom & Jerry interview Chloe Grace". YouTube. "Tom and Jerry do NOT talk: theblerdgurl interview with Tim Story and Chloe Moretz". theblerdgurl. "Christopher Lennertz to Score Tim Story's 'Tom & Jerry'". Film Music Reporter. July 22, 2020. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2020. WaterTower Music (February 12, 2021). Tom & Jerry Official Soundtrack. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved February 26, 2021 – via YouTube. "Bizkit- Showoff ft. Yung6ix Lyric Video". "End Credits (Tom and Jerry) - Christopher Lennertz". YouTube. "Tom and Jerry - Christopher Lennertz". YouTube. "7 Fun Facts About Tom & Jerry The Movie 2021". The Cactus Chronicles. "Tom and Jerry do NOT talk: theblerdgurl interview with Tim Story and Chloe Moretz". theblerdgurl. Rubin, Rebecca (December 14, 2020). "Warner Bros. Shifts 'Mortal Kombat,' 'Tom and Jerry' Release Dates". Variety. Archived from the original on December 15, 2020. Retrieved December 15, 2020. Haselton, Todd (December 3, 2020). "Warner Bros. will launch every 2021 movie on HBO Max at the same time they hit theaters". CNBC. Archived from the original on December 3, 2020. Retrieved December 3, 2020. Debruge, Peter (February 26, 2021). "'Tom & Jerry' Review: The Cat-and-Mouse Rivals Wage Big-Screen Battle in This Low-Concept Outing". Variety. Retrieved April 1, 2022. "Warner Bros celebrates 100 years with a logo refresh". Creative Bloq. November 14, 2019. Welk, Brian (March 12, 2019). "'Sesame Street' and 'Tom and Jerry' Films Set for Early 2021". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved April 6, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 25, 2019). "'Tom & Jerry' Jumps To Christmas 2020, 'The Witches' Inches Up A Week Next Fall". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Business Media, LLC. Archived from the original on October 25, 2019. Retrieved January 24, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 12, 2020). "'Matrix 4' Moves To 2022, 'Godzilla Vs. Kong' Stomps To 2021 & More: Warner Bros. Release Date Change Friday". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 30, 2020. Retrieved June 12, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 2, 2021). "Hulu's 'The United States Vs. Billie Holiday' Tops Streamer's Weekend Movies Amid Star Andra Day's Golden Globes Win". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 2, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (January 3, 2022). "With Tentpoles Bound To Surge The 2022 Box Office, The Great Theatrical-Streaming Day & Date Experiment Goes Out Like A Dud In 2021". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Vary, Adam B. (March 8, 2021). "Snyder Cut of 'Justice League' Accidentally Posts Early for Some HBO Max Users". Variety. Retrieved March 9, 2021. Hutchins, Robert (September 1, 2020). "Moose Toys named toy partner for Warner Bros' Space Jam: A New Legacy and Tom & Jerry live action movie". Toy News. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved September 2, 2020. "The Chase Is On! Infamous Cat-and-Mouse Rivals Tom & Jerry Partner With Macy's on a Zany Animatronic Float to Celebrate Their New Movie and the 94th Annual Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade®". Business Wire. October 28, 2020. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved October 29, 2020. Cartoon Crave [@thecartooncrave] (February 20, 2021). "'Tom and Jerry Special Shorts' is now available on HBO Max https://t.co/ZbxnyxNG74" (Tweet). Archived from the original on May 15, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2021 – via Twitter. Tom & Jerry Special Shorts Released on HBO Max (Review!) | Cartoon News. Retrieved March 1, 2021. "New 'Tom and Jerry' Shorts Are Streaming on HBO Max". Rotoscopers. February 21, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2021. @thecartooncrave (March 29, 2021). "HBO Max has recently removed 'Tom and Jerry Special Shorts'" (Tweet) – via Twitter. @KevinTCostello (February 21, 2021). "These Shorts Are So Good!!!!" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Tom Jones leaves Saturday Night Takeaway fans baffled with odd personal item". March 7, 2021. "Tom Jones shows incredible vocals as he sings with Tom and Jerry on Saturday Night Takeaway - video". Tom & Jerry (2021), retrieved April 30, 2021 "Tom and Jerry DVD Release Date May 18, 2021". DVDs Release Dates. Retrieved April 30, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca (February 28, 2021). "Box Office: 'Tom and Jerry' Opens to Surprisingly Strong $13.7 Million, Giving Movie Theaters Hope". Variety. Retrieved February 28, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 7, 2021). "'Raya And The Last Dragon' Lacks Fire With $8.6M Debut As Pic Hits Disney+ & NYC Reopens: Why The Industry Is Worried – Sunday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 7, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 14, 2021). "'Raya And The Last Dragon' Takes $5.5M Second Weekend B.O. As Exhibition Slowly Repairs – Sunday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 14, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (February 14, 2021). "'Detective Chinatown 3' Tops 'Avengers: Endgame' For Biggest Opening Weekend Ever In A Single Market With $397M & IMAX Crushes Records; Performance Perks Up Hollywood Hope". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 22, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (February 21, 2021). "Chinese New Year Pics 'Hi, Mom' & 'Detective Chinatown 3' Top $600M Each As Middle Kingdom Exceeds $2B In 2021 – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 22, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2021. "Tom & Jerry's Critically Panned Live-Action Movie Gets Second Life On Netflix 3 Years Later". Screen Rant. Nick Bythrow. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Adam Bentz (February 26, 2021). "Tom & Jerry Reviews Criticize Human Characters & Bad Writing". Screen Rant. Retrieved April 1, 2022. "Tom & Jerry (2021)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 22, 2022. "Tom & Jerry Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 1, 2022. DeFore, John (February 26, 2021). "'Tom & Jerry': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 26, 2021. Maher, Kevin. "Tom & Jerry: The Movie review — a live-action abomination". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Loughrey, Clarisse (March 26, 2021). "Tom & Jerry The Movie is interminably odd and unamusing – review". The Independent. Archived from the original on June 21, 2022. Retrieved August 29, 2021. Lee, Benjamin (March 26, 2021). "Tom & Jerry The Movie review – sanitised relaunch of the cat and mouse combatants". The Guardian. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Fowler, Matt (February 26, 2021). "Tom & Jerry Review". IGN. Retrieved February 28, 2021. O'Sullivan, Charlotte (March 26, 2021). "Tom & Jerry: The Movie - Mildly amusing mayhem to occupy the kids". Evening Standard. Retrieved August 13, 2021. "What you need to know about Tom & Jerry: The Movie is that the cartoon duo have been parachuted into modern-day, live-action New York, that they've retained their mute, indestructible, 2-D animated personas and that the end result is much funnier than expected". Daily Mail. Matthew Bond. Retrieved March 27, 2021. "The Longest Cat Game of Cat and Mouse". May 7, 2021. "2021 EDA Awards Nominees". AWFJ. December 18, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021. Lenker, Maureen Lee (October 27, 2021). "Here are the nominees for the 2021 People's Choice Awards". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. Lewis, Hilary (February 7, 2022). "Razzies: Filmed Version of 'Diana' Stage Musical Tops 2022 Nominees". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 7, 2022. Erik Pedersen (March 9, 2022). "Kids' Choice Awards Nominations Set; Miranda Cosgrove & Rob Gronkowski To Host Show". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Tom & Jerry - Framestore". October 12, 2021. "AEAF 2021 Announces Winners and Finalists". aeaf.tv. "'Tom and Jerry in New York' Animated Sequel Series Coming to HBO Max". Collider. June 12, 2021. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tom and Jerry (2021 film). Official website Official website at warnerbros.com Tom and Jerry at IMDb Tom and Jerry at AllMovie