Rob Benedict (born September 21, 1970) is an American actor and writer. His near 30 year career includes more than 90 television and movie credits. He is best known for his work on the television series Supernatural, Threshold, Felicity and the comedy film Waiting.... He is also the lead singer/songwriter of the Los Angeles based band Louden Swain. Benedict was born in Columbia, Missouri. He graduated from Northwestern University with a Bachelor's degree in Performance Studies. In the WB series Felicity he appeared as Felicity Porter's dorm mate, Richard Coad. In CBS's Threshold Benedict played physicist Lucas Pegg, member of a secret government team investigating the first contact with an extraterrestrial species. In seasons 4, 5, 10, 11, 14 and 15 of Supernatural he played a writer, Chuck Shurley, previously thought to be a prophet of the lord but later revealed to be God, who eventually becomes the series main antagonist. On Lucifer, he recurred as baddie Vincent LeMec. Other credits include Sydney Bristow's short CIA partner, Brodien on Alias. Additional early television series credits include Birds of Prey and Come to Papa, with guest appearances on NCIS, CSI, Monk, Medium, Chicago Hope, NYPD Blue, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Snoops, Burn Notice, and Beverly Hills, 90210. Other Recurring characters include roles in Bosch, NCIS: New Orleans, Masters of Sex, Fox's Touch, Franklin & Bash, the digital series Susanna with Anna Paquin, and he was the irreverent power agent Jeremy Berger in the Starz Original comedy series Head Case. His feature film credits include A Little Help, with Jenna Fischer, State of Play with Russell Crowe. In 2005 he starred as Calvin in the cult comedy Waiting... with Ryan Reynolds, and later revised the role in the sequel Still Waiting... Other films include Kicking & Screaming, with Will Ferrell, Group Sex, Say Goodnight with Aaron Paul, Two Days, with Paul Rudd, The First $20 Million Is Always the Hardest, starring Rosario Dawson, and Not Another Teen Movie. In 2018, he had a starring role in the horror film 30 Miles from Nowhere, with Carrie Preston, Clearmind, and Connescence with Kevin Bacon. Benedict has also done some voice acting work, most notably voicing the character Vin, in the video games Jak II and Jak 3. He co-wrote and starred in the independent short film Lifetripper, which made its debut at the LA Short Film Festival. He also co-wrote and played Miles Davis-Davidson in the Unauthorized Hangover 2 Documentary, which was featured on the DVD of The Hangover Part II. In 2013 he wrote, produced and starred in the 30 minute short film The Sidekick, which starred Jordan Peele, Lizzy Caplan, Ike Barinholtz, Ron Livingston and Jason Ritter. In 2017, he wrote, produced and starred in the 10 episode series Kings of Con with friend and fellow actor Richard Speight Jr. The series first aired on Comic-ConHQ. It is set behind the scenes at fan conventions, based loosely on their real-life experiences at conventions. He started a podcast on 27 March 2020 along with friend and fellow actor Richard Speight Jr., called ...And my Guest is Richard Speight. It ran for 10 episodes, ending on 5 August 2020. In September 2020, the two started a new podcast called Kings of Con: The Podcast, after their short series by the same name. The two also present a podcast called Supernatural: Then and Now, where they discuss Supernatural. Benedict is the frontman and guitar player in the Los Angeles band Louden Swain, which has released eight albums. "Comic-Con HQ". Comic-Con HQ. Retrieved October 27, 2016. Grant, Stacey (May 21, 2015). "This "Supernatural" Taylor Swift Parody Is The Video Fans Didn't Know They Needed". Buzzfeed.com. Retrieved December 19, 2016. Prudom, Laura (November 15, 2016). "Watch the first 2 episodes of 'Kings of Con,' a love letter to fans from the stars of 'Supernatural'". Mashable.com. Retrieved July 9, 2017. Mitovich, Matt Webb (June 26, 2020). "Lucifer Season 5: Supernatural's Own God, Rob Benedict, Will Guest-Star". TVLine. Cordero, Rosy (December 1, 2022). "'The Boys': Rosemarie DeWitt, Rob Benedict & Elliot Knight Board Season 4; Simon Pegg Sets Return". Deadline. Retrieved December 2, 2023. Rob Benedict at IMDb  Rob Benedict at AllMovie Louden Swain CBS Threshold – Rob Benedict webpage Interview Rob Benedict with www.mycoven.com Nov. 2011